LOVE FOR MONEY: OR, THE Boarding School.

A COMEDY.

As it is Acted at The Theater Royal.

Written by Mr. DVRFEY.

LONDON: Printed for I. Hindmarsh at the Golden-Ball against the
Royal Exchange, Abel Roper at the Mitre in Fleetstreet, and are to be sold by
Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall. 1691.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
SIR Rowland Rakehell A covetous mercenary vicious swearing atheistical Old
Fellow, Uncle to Amorous, who by cheating an Infant Orphan to whom he was
Guardian, possessed an Estate of 3000 l. a Year. By Mr. Underhill. Jack
Amorous, a witty Extravagant of the Town, generous and well natured, but so
extremely given to Women, that he keeps a Jilt, and has spent his Estate upon
her. Mr. Mountfort. Will. Merriton, A witty modest well-bred Gentleman, though of
small fortune, a great Iover of Learning, and skilled in Philosophy, Poetry and
Music. Mr. Hodson. Old Merriton, his Father, an honest, Religious,
conscientious Gentleman, that privately placed Mirtilla in a Boarding-School,
and maintains her unknown to Sir Rowland. Mr. Freeman. Nedd Bragg alias Captain
Bouncer, an impudent lying Town Sharper of infamous Birth and no Merit, yet
being kept by Lady Addleplot, wears rich Clothes, keeps high Company, and
passes for a Captain. Mr. Powell. Old Zachary Bragg Father to Ned, an ignorant
old blunt peevish Granadeer of King William's Army, that by his stupid
bluntness always shames his Son in Company, and hectors him into an allowance.
M. Bright. Deputy Nicompoop, Deputy of a Ward, a softly sneaking uxorious
Citizen, Husband to Lady Addleplot, and ridiculously fond of her and the Romp
his Daughter. Mr. Dogget. Monsieur Le Brat, An impertinent, noisie, singing,
dancing, prating French Fop, perpetually gabling in Company, and crying up the
Actions of the French King. Mr. Bowen. A Singing Master. Mr. Kirkham. A Dancing
Master. Mr. Bowman. A Presbyterian Parson. Mr. Peire.
WOMEN.
Lady Addleplot, A Lusty flaunting imperious Lady, a highflown Stickler against
the Government, and always railing at it, in talking of Politics. -- Mr.
Anthony Leigh. Lady Siroddle, her Companion, a Papist and Grumbler. Mrs.
Richardson. Mirtilla, The Orphan, witty, modest, and virtuous, kept privately
at a Boarding School by O. Merriton, and true Heiress of 3000 l. a year. Mrs
Bracegirdle. Miss Ienny, Daughter to Lady Addleplot. Miss Molly, Daughter to
Nicompoop -- two tawdry hoyden overgrown Romps. of the Boarding School. Mrs.
Knight, Mrs Davis. Betty Iiltall, A cunning, singing, weeping, wheedling,
toying, chattering, Mercenary Town Jilt, kept by Amorous, that imposes upon
him, and preaches fondness merely for interest. Mrs. Butler. Crowstich, Teacher
to the Boarding School. Mrs. Cory. Tearshift, Woman to Lady Addleplot. Mrs.
Osborn. Oyley, Woman to Iihall. Mrs, Leigh.
Constable, Musicians, Guards, Mob, Footmen, and Attendants. The Scene CHELSEY,
by the River. The time 36. hours. To the Right Honorable. Charles Lord
Viscount Lansdown,
Count of the Sacred Roman Empire, Baron Glanvile of Kilkhampton, Lord
Lieutenant of the Counties of Devon and Cornwall, and Governor of the Royal
Citadel and Town of Plymouth.
My LORD,
THO the Favor my generous and worthy Friends have done me in vindicating this
COMEDY against the ridiculous Malice of a prejudic^d Party be very
considerable, and I ought to be extremely well satisfied with my present good
Fortune, yet is not my Contentment perfect, till I am so happy to lay it to
your Feet; and by your unquestioned Merit, Judgment and noble Patronage, secure
the Credit of these printed Sheets in the reading, as the Applause of the
Impartial, and Judicious, have already done in the Presentation.

The Character your Lordship leaves amongst all Persons of Honor and Worth,
has encouraged my Ambition to aspire to this honor; and though the Trifle which
I humbly Dedicate to you, has not merit enough to defend me from being thought
too presuming, yet the dutious Desire and Zeal I have to serve your Lordship,
and express my Gratitude for your abundant Favors all manner of ways, will I Am
sure, by your generous Nature, that never frowned on an addressing Author, nor
discouraged Wit, though in its meanest quality, be received as I intend it. I
have too long had the Honor and Happiness to know your Lordship to be Ignorant
of your great Modesty, when you are obliged to hear any thing relating to your
own Praise; and I most humbly beg you to believe, that I have not so much of
the Authors common Quality, and which we see so generally used in all
Dedications, that I do pretend to flatter Merit like Yours, or offend your Eyes
with an Encomium upon your Virtues, which perhaps no Poet has Wit or Skill
enough to do you Justice in, and which your uncommon Modesty, and admired
Humility I Am sure would discourage in us if we could.

The Panegyrical Part then of a Dedication, which I confess I cannot for fear
to think reasonable here, because I know it would be just in a manner quite
laid aside, for what can I say in your Praise that our little World here does
not already know, your Early Courage and Bravery of Soul, has made its Course
like the Sun, and in relation to Europe, has almost extended it self as far,
especially where Honor was to be got, or any glorious Action was going
forward; and as I believe it is impossible for any Person to give a better
account of the Sieges of Vienna or Buda then your self, you omitting no
Enterprise that could either signalize your Courage, or satisfy your Curiosity
so it is as obvious to the World, that the Great Leopaldus by the glorious
Spread Eagle, so royally bestowed and nobly added to your Household Coat,
sufficiently gave a Testimony that nothing but extraordinary Worth could be
capable of gaining such an Honor.

This my Lord is so poor a Diminution of so extensive a Merit, that I Am afraid
I shall rather be accused of Injustice than Flattery: for saying any thing in
your Praise could not be done without saying much more than this, especially
should I consider like a right Author, that the Muses are as much obliged to
you for your generous Encouragement and Protection, as your Country is for
Loyalty, Love and Resolution.

To be Patron both of Arts and Arms is a Title my Lord worthy of you, and which
the Actions of your Life daily demonstrate, that you will more and more
deserve, for whilst the Sons of Mars admire your Experience in War, and the
Sons of Apollo your acquirements of Wit and Iudgm^nt, no Name can appear fairer
in the Book of Fame, nor no Worth better deserve to have a Subscription there.

And as I cannot, my Noble Lord, but think it very reasonable for extraordinary
Persons to be rewarded with Blessings as extraordinary; so I cannot enough
express my hearts entire Joy, that the very Best that Heaven can bestow is
lately fallen upon you, in the possession of so much Virtue and Beauty, which
to her lasting Fame is so gloriously exalted, that even Sacred Majesty, our
never enough Renowned Royal Mistress (than whom none is more Learned in the
Eternal Volumes of Goodness,) is full of her Aplause, and that this extremest
Happiness which now you possess, may Crown your Days and Nights to all Eternity
is the unfeigned and real wish of

My LORD, Your Lordships most humble and most Devoted T. DVRFEY.

PREFACE
IF I were now half flustred with Drinking, and designed to be malicious, as
some of my back Friends were the first day this Play was Acted, I could make as
ridiculous a description of their Behavior in the Pit, as my Comic Characters
make of others upon the Stage; but prejudice taking no effect and I owning my
self sober, resolve to desist from any Acts of Hostility in that kind; and
could wish that my hissing Antagonists of the Nimble Craft had as ingeniously
borne a little comical Diversion where no Reflection was singular, and which my
courtesy and good nature took such care not to expose in any particular
person, rather than by a noisie exploding of what the Judges of Wit allow
deserved it not, do themselves that Injury which I never intended, by rendering
themselves fit to be laughed at, for seeming to be netled at what they might
reasonably find, if they had been pleased to consider it, could never give
them occasion.

I confess, if what has been m^litiously told to some Persons of Honor (Judges
of Sense and Gratitude) to whom I Have the happiness to be known, were true, viz.
That I lived at a Boarding School near London all last Summer, and in return of
their hospitable Civility, writ this Play ungratefully to expose 'em, I could
not defend my self from being really as guilty as they must naturally think me*
but my Stars were so happy to give an occasion of satisfying these noble
persons to the contrary before the Play was acted; and I now think it
reasonable to inform the Reader, and the Town in general, that I never was
obliged more than for common Courtesies (en passant) to any of 'em, which I may
fairly say I have equally returned, and without Reflection upon their House
keeping, in spite of Revolutions, have always been so lucky not to have the
necessity of being troublesome to them for maintenance, or accept of any
Courtesy which I could not, or did not, return.

And tho after the poor and envious Injury of endeavoring to explode a thing
right or wrong, I ought to be proud of my Conquest, which has done me the
favor of showing not only the power, but number of my Friends, and totally at
their own Weapon routed my Enemies, yet will I not expose my self by an
unnecessary boast, nor side with them in their opinion that this Comedy was
written purposely to reflect on a particular Family to whom I had a prejudice,
for I utterly disown any such thing; for had prejudice excited me, I might have
fixed my Characters accordingly, and given some occasion to 'em to be
exasperated, which I Am sure my Comedy has not done, all the Scenes being
general, and no Character nor D^e^s shown particularly; nor can any Poet be
blamed for showing this new humor of a School, when even our Senate House, na^
the Church, have been contented to suffer themselves to be the Subject of our
Comical Diversions* and as to the painted Scene which some cavil at, it might
have been York as well as Chelsy, if the Beauty of the Place had not given me
occasion to fix there.

And now to show that even our little Railery in Plays* tho intended merely for
mirth only, yet have power to disturb even the Men and Women of the greatest
Sense, who are byass^d by other people who mischeivously resolve to place the
Reflection upon the wrong persons, it has been to my amazement told me, that
some Words in the beginning of Lady Addleplot's part, reflect upon a certain
noble person now in distress, whom by all that is sacred I am and ever was so
far from reflecting on, or doing the least unmanner'd Injury in that kind, that
I Am sorry from my Soul for his Misfortune; and if they please to consider of
the time when this Play was written, being in June last, they will find it is
impossible for him, amongst all mankind, to be the Subject of that Scene, which
touches no particular, nor person of Quality, but common Ruffians in general.

As to the Comedy it self, the Success it has had is so well known, that I need
give no Further relation, only I must acknowledge my self sensibly obliged both
to the Patentees and Sharers for dressing it so well, and to all the Actors in
general for their extraordinary performance: And as Comedy, tho never so good,
lessens it self to the Reader wanting its taking Ornament of Action; so if this
chance to meet with moderate liking from the Judicious, and those that have so
generally appeared my Friends, I shall beg leave to make use of a Couplet of
the late famous Earl of Rochester, and say If but some few whom I omit to name
Approve my sense, I count their Censure, Fame.


PROLOGUE.
WHen Critics come resolved to damn a Muse,
What Wit can please, what Prologue can excuse?
It Is vain endeavor to unblind their eyes;
Of such inveterate force is prejudice,
Poor harmless Plays can draw a party's hate
As if 'twere Revolution of a State:
And with such force your Batteries are engaged,
As if you took the Stage for Mons, besieged.
If in a character a Fool we show,
It Is ten to one it angers some Town Beau;
Or if some boyst 'rous Females Rampant Tricks
That Cuckolds Husbands, and talks Politics,
As Lees part now -- that straight must needs abuse
Some Stickler in the Ladies Coffee House,
Though no Reflection is intended here,
And I dare swear the Poet never was there.
Or if we show the humors of a School
Offending none, Still some will play the Fool;
Some dancing Critic, in despite of Wit,
Shall swear, we do it to offend his Kitt,
And rashly his dull City friend possess,
That our Romps here -- are meant his Babes of Grace;
Though all true Judges no Reflection find,
And nothing but diversion is designed.
The Poet thinks then, finding that this is true,
Implores the assistance of the generous few,
Assuring them they shall diverted be
If the Malcontents will let 'em hear and see:
You all can judge of Plays as well as they
Party as wise, and sure pretend we may
To be as strong too at this time of day.
Thus low then he addresses to you all,
Your favor can his doom proscribed recall
And it is by you that he must stand or fall.
He has done nothing h^re to make 'em foes,
No Worth nor no Opinion does expose,
But only harmless Comic humor shows.
As to the Ladies.
He says, he would not, nor he dares not wrong 'em
There are no Romps nor rampant Wives among 'em,
Nor Jilts; -- yet in some hole should there be one
That will make Lee's or Iiltall's part her own,
Her Hiss beyond applause he must prefer,
A Clap would now more pernicious be from her.
EPILOGUE,
By Mr. Mountford and Mrs. Butler.
Butl. Do You hear me Mr, Mountford, pray come back,
Do You know what I Have done here?

Mount. Yes played a Crack

Butl. A Crack, what is that?

Mount. pish, leave your bantring stuff.
I Am sure you know what the word means well enough.

Butl. No I, unless, it is those that hunt rich Heirs
At Covent Garden Church at Morning Prayers.

Mount. ^ray'ers Child, no, no, your true bred ^racks never pray,
Their Talent's exercised another way.
In short thou have abused a ^eneration
Of female Vipers in a common Station.

Butl. That is I have abused Sir, half the Nation.
Nay some perhaps that take the thing to heart; I think I was bewitched to act
the part.

Mount. Pray what have you done more to show their follics,
Than I have d^ne t'expose the Keeping ^ulli^s?
The Satyr in my part makes Equal Sport as the poet thinks,

Butl. Ay the Devil take him for it.
When one Dutch Lover in a keeping way
One month is better than a twelvemonths play,

Mount. Is it so faith?

Butl. Yes, as I make 'em pay.

Mount. Well, here are other things to make amends,
Mirtilla's part, must get him Female friends.
A rampant Wise is well exposed to view,
And not ill drawn a Sneaking Cuckold too.

Butl. I cannot imagine where that Satyr hooks,
I can find no such Cuckold here by's looks;

Mount. Yes fifty in that upper Row Gadzooks.
Rich Goldsmiths, Mercers, Tailors, Brewers, Bakers

Butl. And what are these?

[Pointing to the Pit. Mount. Oh these are Cuckold-makers
Who over that Tribe still bear* pre-eminence, For you must know there is as
much difference
Between the Horner and the hen-peck'd drudge, As is between a Tipstaff and a
Judge.

Butl. Well, these abusive Jests will never do, The Audience hates 'em;

Mount. That Is a sign they are true.

Butl. 'Dslife it is enough to cry the Playhouse down,
Lee's part and mine abuses half the Town.

Moun. Good Satyr's no abuse,

Butl. Not where the lash is felt:
Faith Mounford you are a Coxcomb:

Mount. You're a Iilt.

Butl. Made so here, only by a ^oets pen;
Send him his part, I Will never play't again.
[Throws away the Part, and Exit. Mountford to the Audience. This is a Trick,
and done, or I m a Chouse, To get a greater pension from the House;
I therefore on the Authors part appear, To beg excuse for the Entertainment
here:
And now I from my Wife so^e time can borrow, I Will swinge her -- but I Will make
her play't to morrow.

Love for Money: OR, THE BOARDING-SCHOOL.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter Young Merriton and Amorous. Merr HA, ha, ha, ha, thou art the
pleasant'st Fellow --


Amor. Nay, prithee suspend thy damned critical Censure till I have told thee
the Plot, and then if thou laugh'st at me;


Merr. I shall have cause, has --


Amor. No gad not unless strength of Judgment, exquisite Wit, admirable
Contrivance, and the rest of the noble Ingredients that qualify a brain for
things extraordinary, can give cause.


Merr. Very well Sir, we shall judge of that presently; proceed.


Amor. Art thou solid then? is thy face set?


Merr. Not a line out of order, as grave as a Country Vicar expounding at
Catechize: When do you begin?


Amor. Thus then, I need not tell thee, to prolong the story, the
Extravagancies of my ungovernable Minority, thy self always being a spectator
of 'em, 'tho' no friend to 'em, nor need I expose my own passionate
Inclinations for that delicious Creature Woman, whose sweet dear bewitching Sex
I still cannot repent adoring, though it has been the utter ruin of my Fortunes,
my dear Betty whom I now live withal, charming me as much in this my worst and
lowest Ebb, as when I was a Flutterer at the Court with Coach and Six and gaudy
Equipage.


Merr. Prithee take my counsel Friend, and do not doze and slumber over thy
ruin: I lately came thou know from the University, and* for self
satisfaction must confess, a great part of my study there was Woman, that dear
damned tempting Sex as thou have called 'em; I made Remarks from Rules of
Physiognomy, studied Complections, knew whether Black or fair were true or
false, all Female Pinaccs, and how much Love would freight 'em; even blinded my
own with poring on black Eyes, to find their subtle motions; and for Noses, I
knew all Natures from the high Roman Arch, to the sharp little turn-up Nose
that stands as if 'twere set in the face to hang one's Hat on.


Amor. Very well Sir, and what does your learned Worship infer from this?


Merr. Now I come to thee; this skill, amongst the rest of that Soul-gaining
tribe, has taught me to observe thy Betty, thy dearest Charmer as thou fondly
call'st her, and though fond love mustle her faults from thee, I can perceive,
and plainly, her jiltish Actions, and must take the freedom of a friend to tell
thee, she is false and does abuse thy Love.


Amor. Impossible! her gratitude would secure me from such a baseness, if I had
no merit to deserve her; which begging excuse of your severity, I shall not
altogether believe Sir; besides, her beauty and agreeable behavior make such a
large impression on my heart, all other joy is pal'd and unpalla^able, like
Wine uncovered to the Summer Air. She Is all that Luxury could wish to please it.

I look abroad, and see the young, soft, fair,
Then turn me round, and find 'em all in her.

Merr. Nay, if you are upon your Raptures I have done with you.


Amor. Besides, I have given her frequently lusty sums of gold the more to
endear her to me, and that I Am sure is the Lovers best proof of his Affection.


Merr. Yes faith, and the worst of his discretion.


Amor. Discretion! why thou talk like a Shopkeeper weighing of s^ap; a
manager of sense by drams and ounces; Discretion is a spurious Brat begot
between solid Dullness and sophisticated Reason; a staple Commodity for cheating
in Trade, upon the Royal Exchange; a virtue in Country Graziers that would
fell Horses or buy Sheep; the dull Companion of bob-tail'd Chaplains newly come
from the College, for whom Discretion is as good an Epethite, as Circumspection
is for one that squints; but amongst the Beaux Esprits and men of sense, is,
was, and ever will be, the jest of Conversation, and the scandal of good
Company.


Merr. Handsomely troll'd off in faith; and this you steadfastly believe?


Amor. Most conscientiously; I have known your discreet person wear his Cravat
three inches from his neck, wipe his nose on his sleeve, act the Mute in witty
Company three hours together, cram himself with other Peoples Jests to vent'em
dully as his own at home* get his Cookmaid with Child in the Kitchen, and every
night in the Parlour expound against Whoring, with a Pox to him.


Merr. But did thou ever hear he settled three hundred pounds a year upon
her, as thou have on Betty? hah. Prithee was not that want of discretion? were
thou not a Cully for that?


Amor. Not at all; no damn him, a Cully is a dull senseless Rogue bubled and
tricked out of his Estate by subtlety. I can own my self an Extravagant, but no
Cully; what she has I gave her as a quantum meruit for her Love, and not
through imposition on her part; she did endear my generous Faculty, but cheated
me of nothing; and there is as much difference between Timon of Athens
Generosity, and Sir Timothy Bashsops lavish Folly, as between the Courage of a
brave Officer bred in a Camp and a sneaking Captain of a Country Militia.


Merr. Well, well, but thou forget'st the Plot all this while.


Amor. I beg thy pardon: To gain then another Estate to make amends for what I
have^ squandered away, Betty and I, being newly returned from Flanders where we
made shift to melt the last 2000 l. are involved in a Design, and such a one,
that were Nick Machiavel alive he would be ashamed of his Insufficiency, and thou
only, as my dearest friend, I have thought fit to trust in it.


Merr. Come on then, let us hear.


Amor. Thou shall and what will make thee wonder, know then, that though I have
lately bragged of my own Abilities, it is to thy Father that I am principally
obliged.


Merr. My Father! prithee how?


Amor. Thou have heard no doubt, of old Sir Rowland Rakehell a rich Uncle I
have here in Chelsey.


Merr. Pox, every body has heard of him, there is not such another drunken,
r^aring, wicked, debauched old Dog in the whole Parish: I hear he was tried for
his life once for for making away a young Orphan Helress to whom he was
Guardian, whose Estate he now enjoys of three thousand pounds a year.


Amor. He was so, and but for subornation of witnesses, and money, had mounted
for it: well, he is to do my business however, and in this manner; thy Father,
to whom I am faith most infinitely obliged, had it seems, such a near
acquaintance with that young Orphan's deceased Parents, that he can give
account of every passage between 'em, the very particulars of the Will, the
most remarkable Jewels left, and each other thing of moment committed before
their death to the charge of my confounded Uncle.


Merr. Very well Sir, and what of this?


Amor. Why this will produce the best Plot in the world; for instructed by him
who knows all their concerns, it is contrived to dress up my Betty as if she
came from the Indies, to which place it is said the other was kidnap'd, and top
her upon my Uncle instead of the true Orphan.


Merr. But can my Father give any noted demonstration?


Amor. To every point, and so substantially (for else 'twere an empty
Undertaking) that it will put the old Hell-hound into such a fright, that he will
be glad to part with a good round Settlement to me, to secure the rest: what
think thou?


Merr. Faith it looks with a good face I confess.


Amor. I therefore have agreed to place her at a Boarding School that the (...)
look the more grave.


Merr. I shall be the better able to assist thee, having an admirable (...)
there.


Amor. Have thou? gad that is rare, what is it a pretty Whore?


Merr. A Whore! the Devil's in thee thou think all Women are of that sort.


Amor. That sort, ay, and the best sort too; that is an Article of my Creed
faith.


Merr. Thou art a lewd Fellow, and can not relish an Intrigue of honor.


Amor. Not well faith, though I had lately like to have engaged in such a
business with a pretty young Tit since I came over, and in that very School
thou talk of too, had not thy wise Father, who gad I believe has studied my
Constitution, diverted me to pursue this Plot upon my Uncle; and faith I
confess I was willing enough to leave it off, for an Intrigne of honor is in
my sense just like a tedious Fox chase, a man is forced to ride a long dirty
race out of the way for a purchase neither worth his time nor his trouble;
however, I Will be thy good Genius for once, and prophecy thou shall prosper:
for if Wit, Poetry, Music, and all the noble Qualities that build up true
perfection in a man are capable of winning her, she is thine.


Merr. Oh Sir, no flattery to your friend; yet I must own, tho Poetry be a drug
to the dull part of the unthinking World, it is to her a Jewel worth her
prizing; she is skilled in Books friend, a rarity in Women, especially bred in a
Boarding School; she has all her Sexes graces without their frailty, Modesty
without their Affectation, wit without their Mischief, and Love without their
Levity; then for Beauty, she has enough to make a Man an Atheist, believing
there could be no greater Heaven.


Amor. Now who is in Rapture?


Merr. Oh it is impossible I should avoid it when she is the Subject.


Amor. How now, who have we here?


Enter Le Prate, singing and adjusting himself fantastically. Le Prate sings.]
Dans nous Bois Silvandre Escria. Merr. A pox on him, I know him already by his
damned tone; it is one Monsieur le Prate, a singing, dancing, talking fluttering
Nothing, a Fellow whose chief discourse is always in bragging of the mighty
Actions of the French King, for which he is loudly cried up by all that party:
he is a great Intrigner too, but then it is the French way, that is, he never
brings it to any effect; but above all, such an eternal Tongue pad, that the
clack on it never ceases, no not in his sleep; in short, he is right Frenchman in
his nicest qulaity; and now am I wishing for Morose's Nightcaps only to defend
my Ears against him, for I see he has us in the Wind.


Amor. Gad have but patience, and thou shall hear me gabble with him; I have as
good a knack at bauling as he.


Merr. So, I am likely to be well entertained.


Le Prat. Tholl, loll, loll -- Ah Messires come vous portezvous, Well let me
never be appee in de possession of de fair Angel dat I adore, if I have not a
bin sick for the sight of my dear Monsieur Merriton, he is de life de soul of
Conversation, a bon Companee, all de rest dat I meet are dull efford, flat,
Scoundrels, not fit for a man of parts to sprinkle the dew of Wit upon. I tell
you vat, I just now came from London from de, how you call it, de house of de
Parliament, de place vere de greata people make a deLaw, and de Gospel too begar
I tink, just by de great Shursh yonder, and dear de first ting I hear vas a dam
Rascal Sloven out at de Elbow talk politic and settling de Nation vid anoder
Blockhead who swear so loud dat de ver wind of de oath blew off a reverend
Bishops hat begar dat vas going to serve his Country in de oder house, den
after when I came into de great Hall below, dear one confounded Lawyer teize me
two whole hour vid simple story lessening de vast and immortal glory of de
great and renowned Monarch of France begar. -- A plague wat Conversation is
dis? what son of whore dear be in de world, hah deer Merriton? hah Monsieur,
vat you tink, hah?


Amor. Why gad for my part I think the Lawyer was in the right, and that your
great and monstrous Monarch that you talk of, will be pared less, and brought
into shape very shortly.


Le Prat. Zoon, vat you say le grand Roy de France pared less? how you mean
Monsieur? vat is pare less? Zoon I no understand you.


Merr. So, the Wind rises, now for the storm.


Amor. Shid mauld, Monsieur, some of the brood of old English Harry the Fifth
are yet alive, who unable to bear Insolences so disgraceful to their ancient
glory, shall unite together, and fight, baffle, rout and confound --


Le Prat. The great Monarch of France?


[hastily. Amor. Lop off his fluttering pride and ill got grandeur, and pare
him for their use like a Cork for a bottle.


Le Prat. Who, the great Monarch of France?


[fiercely. Amor. I see him tumbling already, he is going with a Vengeance,
lost, irrecoverably gone.


Le Prat. Zoon who, the great Monarch of France?


[more fiercely. Amor. The great Monarch of France? Ay the great Monarch of
France. What a poxd'ye take him for a Devil, and think that no body can cope
with him?


Le Prat. Yes begar, you will find him too grand a Devil for you to conjure,
ha, ha, ha. Le grand Roy de France going down, it make a me smile; but you
English have such sine faculty of bragging, dear is no Nation under the Sun,
dat compare wi^h your true Englishmen, for dat the French sneer, and make
grimace, the Dutch belch, the Spaniard strut, the German huff, the Danes tope,
and the Englishmen only brag, brag, brag, and do noting begar, ha, ha, ha, my
dear Monsieur Merriton, vat say you?


Merr. I beg your pardon, faith nothing not I Sir: I think you have said enough
for us both.


Amor. Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Le Prat. You laugh, ver good, you have ver good diversion; you tinke this
grand Diable as you call him is going down too; but vat if I tell you he is
rather coming up, up here into your Country, and vat if he bring one hundred
towsand little Devil with huge long horn to butt at you, vat den, vat den.


Amo. Why then we'll cull an Army of Cuckolds out of the City to butt at him
again, we have as many horns as he or else the Devil's in it.


Le Prat. Very well, do, do, abuse the City, do, anger 'em, and make 'em keep
up their Wives, and call in the money they have lent, make them refuse to raise
the Regiments they promised, do.


Amor. No faith, I Am resolved to speak well of 'em, in certain hope that those
very Regiments shall be the first to rouse your great French Dragon out of his
den; they are all swinging Warriors, I tell you that besides.


Le Prat. Besides? but hark ye, but hark ye.


Amor. Nay nay, hark you, I say there is another stratagem.


Le Prat. Zoon hear a me speak, morblea^ hear a me speak, I say dat --


Amor. I say that the Common Council of London have within this two days made
an order. --


Le Prat. I say that de policy of France have thought fit


[speaking both together. Merr. So, so, hallooe, hallooe, ten Crowns to one on
the French Tarrier.


[Apart. Amor. Politically, judiciously, wisely for the safety of the people.


Le Prat. Zoon will you not give me leave? I tell you dat de best --


Amor. Tell me nothing, the best at a stratagem in the whole World is --


Le Prat. Is the French King, begar, there I got before you.


Amor. The French King, a pox, we shall starve him in one six months longer,
the loss of his Wine Trade has almost broke his heart already, that one Law has
undone him.


Le Prat. Yes begar, just as much as de other Law for selling Wine at sixpence
de quart did the Vintners, morblea^ he know ver well how much you English care
for de Law, or de Gospel either: on my Consiense I was particularly designed by
Providence to confront and rally the Vices of your Country: I perceive every
day so many filthy Crime, fulsome follies, damd Extravagance, and ungenerous
Action, that dear Merriton I cannot forbear telling thee as my bosome-Friend,
that I cannot help being extremely fatigued and disturbed and am begar
eternally --


Merr. Eternally prating, a pox take thee, and I am the unlucky Dog doomed to
be worried, -- buz -- in short, Amorous and I have some business together,
therefore prithee let me beg thee to be so civil as to leave us.


Le Prat. Leave us, dat is very fine, dear be a touch now of right English
breeding, they never distinguish a man of parts from the nasty Vulgar; foh I
hate ill manners like a Toad, but times will turn, the French are coming do you
hear, that is my comfort: five hundred Sail, and a thousand Fireships, they are
coming ma foy.


Merr. Well, get thee gone and let 'em come and be damned.


[R^ent. and Ex. Le Prat. A thousand Fireships, Zoon there will be a blaze.


Merr. Prithee oblige us and go -- Dear Le Prate be so civil.


Amor. The Rogue has made me sweat like a Hos^es in the dog days.


[aside. Le Prat. Why then all Raillery apart morbleau I cannot be civil if I
would, not stir one foot from dis place, for I Have appointed Music this instant
to meet me here to serenade a Lady that lodges just there at the corner of that
house, ah, and see here they come Messires sortbein venu.


Enter Musicians. Amor. This Lady he speaks of is my Betty, that window there
belongs to her Apartment, she has told me indeed of a fiding Fool that often
addressed himself this way, and now I find it is this Coxcomb.


Merr. Art thou not jealous?


Amor. What of such a thing? prithee have a better opinion of me and her too;
I Am satisfied she knows him for a Fool.


Merr. And perhaps likes him the better; Women have stranged Appetites, a man
of sense, as a good standing dish, may go down a little a (...), but a Fool is
generally their beloved second course and desert, Trash and (...) suits their
longing.


Amor. To convince thee of the contrary in her, (...) is instructing aside here
and thou shall see how she will use him.


[(...)* Merr. With all my heart, for I confess I am yet an Insidel.


[(...)* SONG.
As soon as day began to peep
And little twinkling stars withdrew,
Begar me could no longer sleep,
Dear charming Devil for you;
But from my weary tumbled Bed
Must early rouse my pensive head,
My passion to pursue,
To come with Fiddle, Song, and Voice,
To bid good morr, to your bright Eyes
Me love so much morbleau.
Second movement.
With sitting up late at your Window or Gate,
With howling and squawling I Am grown a mere Cat,
And all that your grace I may win:
I scratch and I purr at your cruel heart's door,
And mew, mew, mew, to come in.
II.
Sometime that ugly Witch despair
Make me believe you frown
And tempt me which is ver severe,
To hang my self or drown.
But though me dare with Rival sight,
And watch your door whole Winter night,
Yet me no care to swing.
De Voice, de Fiddle, and de Song
To say I love, and say how strong,
Begar is must de better Ting.
With sitting, etc.
Enter Oyley. Le Prat. Oh, I see she has sent for me: Tres humble serviture
sweet Mistress Oyley.


[Combs his Peruke, etc. Oyley. Sir, my Lady wonders you are not ashamed to
make this noise to disturb the neighbors: she bid me tell you too, that she
admires you should think that pitiful fidling and piping should win a Lady of
her Beauty and Quality; so first desiring a Cessation of Cat-guts, she implores
your absence. -- The Fool has been here twice a piping without a penny of money
in's Pocket, which I can assure him will not take with us.

[Exit.
Le Prat. Not fidling and piping win a Lady? A plague of your damned English
Brutality: Zoon there is no other way in France to win de Lady, but dat; a Lady
there, shall as soon take a Gentleman with a good Pipe as a good Patrimony; but
here, noting will do but money, money, a plague take her. Gazoone I must get
some and present her, for I love her damnably, and I see dear is no oder way;
along Messires.


[Ex. Le Prate and Music. Amor. Now, did not I tell thee how she would use him; I
know she hates all mankind but me.


Merr. Still I say be wary, for according to the Poet
Show me a man of sense in all the Roll
That some one Woman has not made a Fool.
Here she comes, my Company will be of no use now; besides, I Have a Billet to
write to my own dear Angel. Adieu.

[ Exit Merriton.
[Enter Jiltall and Oyley; Amorous runs and embraces her. Amor. My dearest
Comfort!


Iilt. My Jewel -- My dear Iackey, why did you rise so early this morning
Sirrah, hah?


Amor. I had business Child; but I have been laughing this half hour at Mrs.
Oyley's message to that serenading French Puppy: ah my sweet life, every hour
brings me more and more into my Debt.


Iilt. And so ye dear Rogue you have been Eves-dropping, have you? Indeed
Iackey I will not allow that: what cannot your Mistress have a spare Gallant to her
self a little, but you must be peeping, you little pretty honey dear dog you?


[Claps his Cheek. Oyley. Now is there something to be got out of him I Am sure,
by this fondness; -- ah wit of Man, where art thou?


[aside Amor. Would I had never seen it, for I am grown so jealous o'th sudden,
and my heart does so swell; go, go, get ye gone, I don't love ye, you shant kiss
me no more, you have got a French Flapdraggon now.


Iilt. I Will sit you as well anon at night, for I Will tie your hands to the
Bed-posts; when you are asleep I Am resolved you shall play no more tricks with
me.


Amor. Nor you shant wake me no more if you go to that, with sprawling over me,
pretending to put out the Candle.


Iiltal. Do you hear Oyley, did you ever hear such a confident little dear honey
lying Rogue, there is for you Sirrah.


[Slaps him. Amor. And there is for you Hussy, and that, and that, [Flings his
Gloves. Mrs. Oyley, pray stand' by a little and see fair Play, and you shall
see how I Will maul her, I Will smother her immediately.


Iiltal. Oh, a Truce, a Truce, I Will play no more, but I Will pummell you at Night
Sirrah, you shall not think to carry't off thus, you shant, you dear, dear, dear,
sweet damned Dog you.


[Claps his Cheeks and Kisses him. Oyley. Ah sweet damned Cunning, how I Love
thee, this must be upon some mighty Matter, for this is better acted then
ordinary.


[aside. Iiltal. But leaving off fooling, for I Am so fond of this Puppy, that I
can scarce mind any other Business; how goes our Plot, Iacky, when is this
nasty Uncle of thine to be fleeced, when am I to act the Indian Heiress, and
take my Voyage from Bantam, ah you dear little Pimp you.


Amor. What, you expect a new Addition to your Settlement, do you Hussy, but
I Will prevent those vain Hopes, I will Black Eyes, for I wont tell a Word.


Iiltal. Choose Churl, you shant Kiss the Honny-Mole upon my Duddy this Month
then I Am resolved.


Amor. Ah dear, Dear Mole, come I will, I will tell rather then be punished so,
I Will discover any thing.


Iiltal. Quickly then, for if once I swear, begin and seriously.


Amor. Why then, in good earnest you are to go to your new Lodgings to night.


Iiltal. At the Boarding School.


Amor. The same I have agreed with the Governess, and have also found out a
Roguish Lawyer of my Acquaintance with a Conscience and Confidence suitable to
the Business, who is to be ready to begin the Process; we have got a Sunburned
Sailer or two likewise to swear he was hired to carry her over and put the
better face upon the Matter.


Iiltal. And I Will warrant you for acting my part, give me but my Cue and you
shall see me do it like any Player.


Amor. If I should get a thousand Pounds a Year by this Trick now would not you
want a Croshet of Diamonds, a Neck-lace of Pearl, nor no such Triffle, hah, for
I find you will take pains and act your part very dilligently.


Iiltal. Indeed my dear sweet pretty Puppy-face, not for that, but only because
Child I know a thousand Guinnys would do thee good, thou knows my dear dog, I
was never fond of Money, besides Iacky I have Croshet and Neck-lace already, I
confess Love if I had a pair of Pendants as my Lord Keepwells Mistress has.


Oyley. Oh, now it is out.


[aside. Iiltal. I Think they would become me as well, but my Sweet Honey Sugar
Candy Rogue, I can be contented without, I Will ask nothing Dearest.


[Strokes and Kisses him. Oyley Finely acted I swear, ah, where is the wit of a
Man now; I say still, there is not a s^roke of that soft hand but will cost him
fifty Guinnys.


[aside. Amor. Thou needst not ask, that may command so absolutely, I Will tell
thee more when I possess it, in the mean time be sure to get ready against
Seven in the Evening to take Coach, I le go put on my Disguise and find out my
Uncle, who is either damning himself at the Magpy-Tavern, or at my Lady
Addleplots just by it, there I Will break the matter to him, and dear Fortune
stand but propitious now, and then my sweet pretty charming Black Eyes, and I
will Live and Laugh, and Love to perpetuity.

[ Exit Amor.
Iilt. And if thou failst in it, thou shall be served just as the Mony-less
Mounsieur was before thee: Oyley, how do thou like my managing of this fond
Puppv.


Oyley. Troth Madam I have been admiring you, and think you have played a
better Scene than is to be seen upon the Stage, but pray give me leave to ask
you a question, do you not love Mr. Amorous at all?


Iilt. No Faith not I, but I love his Money which I find this Plot is likely
to bring -- he has already settled three hundred pounds a year upon me, I love
that well enough.


Oyley. And yet you call him Dear, and Sweet and Honey.


Iilt. Words, words only -- mere Springs to catch Woodcocks; I never call a
Fellow Dear and Sweet, and Honey, but I think him a Dog, a Cully, and a Rascal.


Oyley. If you think so ill of him who is a witty man, and whose only fault is
too much fondness, how will you entertain the impertinent Frenchman that I know
intends you another visit.


Iilt. Why if he comes with money you shall admit him; Love for money ever while
you live wench.


Oyley. What, that nauseous chattering Fool?


Iilt. Ay, ay, any Fool in Europe that has money, learn this of me, as they
that first debauch us, do it for their own pleasure without any consideration
of our Ruin; so we that are debauched ought to value to Merit equal to our
Interest: If a Fool comes larded with Guinnys, and a Wit empty, the Fool is
like to be preferred for all the tothers Tropes and Figures, besides a Wit
plays cautiously, and upon the square, when a Fool sets deep without
consideration, and therefore to me is the more meritorious by half.

For what is the worth of any thing,
But so much money as 'twill bring.
As a famous Author has it.

Oyley. Now you talk of Money here comes Mr* Deputy Nicompoop, the sneaking
rich Goldsmiths that married the famous stickler against the Government, the
Lady Addlepot.


Enter Nicom and Brag. Iilt. I have heard of her, her House is the very
Common-Shoar into which all the Malcontents oth' Town drain themselves, she
pretends to rail at the Times for Conscience sake; but it is really on no other
score but her own Vanity, for the glory of being thought a notable Woman,
out-weighs all her other reasons whatever: that fluttering Fellow there goes
for her Kinsman, but is really her Gallant, and kept by her under her Husbands
nose; so she finishes her Character at her Cuckolds cost, and by her management
of him, teaches the true Doctrine of Passive Obedience.


Oyley. Bless me, how fine is he; I see these grumbling Ladies keep high,
however they mislike the Government,


[Exeunt. Nicom. Nay, but seriously, Captain, and Son in Law that must be, I
was strangely ashamed to have an impudent Fellow, a ragged red-coat Rogue to
talk at that rate.


Y. Brag. By the Sun and Moon, and all the Planets had I heard him, his Soul
had paid for his Sawciness, the Sun should have shon through him ere he had
spoke five words; but prithee honest Father in Law that must be what did the
Rascal say? hah.


Nicom. Say, why seriously I think the Fellow was mad, he had the impudence to
say that he was your Father, and that your right name was Bragg, and that you
were the wickedest Rake-hell in Town seriously, and then he called you a
hundred Pimps one after another.


Bragg. Intolerable Rascal.


Nicom* He said he would kick you seriously.


Bragg. Dog. --


Nicom. And when you went into the Coach with my Lady my Wife, if I had not
stopped him, on my Conscience he would have come in after you.


Bragg. I Will have the Rogue whipped from Charing Cross to Chatham for this.


Nicom. Nay seriously the Fellow ought to be punished, that is the truth on it,
he was as saucy as if he had been your Father, indeed -- well god-buy, I must
wait upon my Lady my Wife, to beg leave of her to let me meet some Friends at a
Bowl of Punch this Afternoon.


Bragg. Do so, and do you hear Cousin, tell her that I Will be with her Ladyship
presently.


Nicom. Ay, but you wont make have; prithee dear Captain make have now,
seriously she likes your Company mightily, she says you are the finest Man, and
the fittest Husband for my Daughter Moll in the world, well, will you make have?


Bragg. I will, I will, I Will but take the other turn and be with her.


Nicom. Seriously you will oblige me extremely then, for I long to be at the Punch
Bowl.

[ Exit Nicompoop.
Bragg. How rarely do my Lady and I manage this Fellow, she has kept me this
two Years, and I think one of the Princes of Italy scarce appears in better
Equipage. I am naturally impudent, and though I was formerly of the Black-Guard,
yet now being kept well, and assisted by good Rigging, dare thrust my self
daily amongst People of Quality, and pass for a Captain amongst 'em; the
misfortune is, that I have a peevish ragged damned old Father, a poor Granadier
who is eternally disgracing me before Company, 'twas he I know b^ the Style
that gave the late Character of me to my Cuckold, and see as the Devil will
have it, here he comes, the old Rogue has been dogging me I ^ay my Life.


Enter Old Bragg, and goes round him staring at him. Old Bragg. Your Servant
Sir.


Y. Bragg. Yours Sir.


Old Bragg. Do you know me Sir.


Y. Bragg. Yes, yes, I know you well enough.


Old Bragg. Cons what a deal of Gold-lace the Son of a Whore has got on's Coat;
do you hear, a word with you Friend, am not I your Father Sir.


Y. Bragg. You had best ask my Mother, she knows better then I, but what if you
are Sir.


Old Bragg. Where Is your Hat then you Dog, Rascal where is your Reverence
Sirrah, what are you too good?


[Strikes off his Hat. Y. Bragg. My Hat's too good to be speil'd Sir, and the
Feather in^^ (...) a Guinny.


Old Brag. Did it so Sir, and must you wear a (...) in your H^t cost a Guinny,
and let your Father be reduced to a single (...), come, come, disb^rse,
disburse, if you would save your bones disburse, and (...), Money, Money, Money,
come.


Y. Bragg. What a plague you wont Rob me, (...) you, sure you know the Law.


Old Bragg. The Law, here is a Rogue for you, he is for hanging his Father, he;
but I'il Law you presently, here is Law for you you Dog, -- Sirrah di^^urse and
quickly -- or


[Draws. Y. Bragg. This old heathen will make no more of spitting now, than if
I were a Rat, and the Devil a penny have I in my Pocket to give him, what a
plague shall I do.


Old Bragg. You have a Rampant Lady I hear you Rogue to uphold your
Prodigality; you can feast upon Wine and Venison, when I was fain to dine
yesterday with an honest Dutch Trooper a Friend of mine upon a pickled Herring
you dog; but come Sirrah, since you are kept with a Pox to ye, let us see what
Wages her Ladyship affords, lets see the Cod come.


Y. Bragg. I Have nere a Sowse upon my faith Sir.


Old Bragg. How, nere a Sowse, what then you do my Ladys Drudgery for nothing,
do you Sirrah, a fine Trade indeed, a hopeful Employ, had not you better have
staid with the blacksmith where I put you to Prentice, you prodigal Villain.


Y. Bragg. No I thank you, faith I Have an easier Forge to work at, and better
Company.


Old Bragg. Come I Will try what Company you keep presently, I Will give you the
Test Faith, I Will part with the best part of my Dinner to treat you for once:
come Sirrah, here is King William's Health,


[Pulls out a brandy-Bottle and drinks. Y. Bragg. O Lord, indeed Sir I never
dare drink any Brandy.


Old Bragg. Sirrah drink, and quickly, or by this bottle I Will cut your throat.


Y. Bragg. D'sheart Sir you will undo me, my Lady will smell me, an^ she hates
the smell of Brandy as she hates the Devil.


Old Bragg. You lie you dog, there is nere a Lady of her party but has a Bottle
by her bedside every night: what a plague, do you think I ha'nt heard of their
cold Tea.


Y. Bragg. 'Dsheart how should he hear of the Ladies cold Tea? it is the
greatest (...) Court, by this Light.


Old Bragg. Come, come, the Health, the Health.


Y. Bragg. Why then here is the Kings Health, I Will top upon him as our Party
use, with a mental Reservation, -- Come the Kings Health Sir.


[aside. Old Bragg. What King? What King, Sirrah? speak the words.


Y. Br. sings. Sir, I drank to the King, and I took it off clean,
And he is but a Fop that asks what King I mean.

Old Bragg. A Fop, very well Sir; in troth you are in the right, and to quip me
better to be one, I think this Hat and Feather would not be amiss, this Peruke
likewise is proper, this Coat and Sword likewise.


[ Old Bragg takes away his Hat and Feather, and Sword and Coat. Y. Bragg.
'Dsdeath what do you mean Sir?


Old Bragg. To make money of 'em, and drink the Kings Health you Rogue.


Y. Bragg. Nay, Father.


Old Bragg. Sirrah, stir a foot after me and I Will run my Sword in your Guts
Zooks I Have a great mind to the Breeches too; I could flea a Rebel methinks as I
would an Eel: but come, this shall serve at present; but do you hear Sirrah, get
money is your pocket against the next time to relieve your old Father, or I Will
have no more mercy on thee than a she Tiger has of a Traveller when her Cubs
have had nothing foo dinner.

[ Exit Old Bragg.
Y. Bragg. So, a very pretty business this; thus am I served by this old Rascal
whenever I refuse him money; nay nor is this all, for the disgraces I suffer by
him vex me more by half, -- Meeting me talking with a great Lord in the street
the other day, Sirrah says he, lend me eighteen pence, for my Stockings want
footing and my Shoos have lost both their heels; my Lord star'd at him like a
stuck Pig, and he as much at my Lord, till having dispatched him I was fain to
recover all by swearing he was a crazed old Edgehill Officer, that I kept upon
Charity. Well this will not do, I must study some redress, though I want Courage to
beat the old Scoundrel; but first to my Lady, to whom I must tell some damned
lie or other for a new Hat and Peruke; one hour's soft Indearment I know will
quip me again.

Tho to the Royal Aid she will naught disburse,
To me she never fails to draw her purse.

The End of the first Act.
ACT II. SCENE I.
Enter Old Merriton and Young Merriton. Old Merr. OH Will, well met; when were
you last at the Boarding School?


To. Merr. Yesterday, Sir.


Old Merr. Then you must give me leave to guess your business there; nay I Will
not question you, but only let you see a Fathers Eye guided by his indulgence
still most observes when it seems least to do so: what think you of Mirtilla?
come speak freely.


To. Merr. Sir, to dissemble is a Courtiers Vice, that never intends to do the
thing he promised: I Will speak my thought as free as Air, I think her the
brightest Jewel of her Sex, her Virtues set in her Beauty are unparalleled;
and like the Jewel of great Tuscany, too rich for all the neighboring Kings to
buy.


Old Merr. Thou speak my thoughts; do love her, prithee tell me.


To. Merr. Alas Sir, be not pleased to hear my Follies; my Will you know is
bounded in your Pleasure, on your Commands depends my love or liking; besides,
tho dressed in Beauty, Wit, and Innocence, I hear she is an Orphan, and
unknown, not fit for me to love that cannot raise her to what her worth
deserves.


Old Merr. She may be known hereafter; and not to baulk your fancy Sir, I give
you leave to exercise your liking, and if you think fit license you to love her.


To. Merr. Which I could do, and faithfully, but must grieve that my small
fortune --


Old Merr. Do not upbraid me Son; if my distresses have like clouds hung over
me, and so involved thee in my sad Misfortunes, believe me it is no fault of
mine but fates; that thou deserve more I must needs confess; for tho my Son
thou art to Virtue nearer, Arts still have been thy aim, Wit, Honor, Justice,
Philosophy, soft Music, with all the train of noble Sciences.


To. Merr. Good Sir no more, you need not show too nearly how much I am
indebted to your goodness.


Old Merr. Thou art not in my debt, but rather I in thine; the trust I had in
the last Reign deceiving me, beggering my hopes, makes me but half a Father: I
deserved well, and loyal Faith expressed, but Ruin was the word, and I amongst
the rest.


To. Merr. Divert the Subject, I beseech you Sir.


Old Merr. To the purpose then -- When did thou see young Amorous?


To. Merr. Today Sir, who told me he was much beholden t'you for a late Plot
upon his sordid Uncle.


Old Merr. It Is true, for I must own I hate that vicious Fellow more than
Cowardice, tho for some private reasons I seem to indulge his Humor; more of
that hereafter; I know you are for the Boarding School this Afternoon, to see
the Fair forlorn; well, give her my Love, she will make thee not less welcome
for it I Am sure. -- Adieu.

[ Exit. Y. Merr. Old Merr. solus. I have maintained her there this many years
unknown to any, and will proceed till fate make ripe my project; young Amorous
was framing an Intrigue till I discovered, and diverted him with a specious
Plot upon his Uncle to amend his Fortunes; she is not of that mean desert she
seems, nor my Son's Love so weak as he pretends it is, Time must ripen all. Here
comes Sir Rowland as merry as Wealth and Wickedness can make him, -- my first
game is with him, I shall go near to dash his jollity.


Enter Rakehell. Rake. Hoh, Devotion, art thou there with a pox to thee, and
without a Prayer Book in thy hand too, that is a wonder faith, for thou art as
rarely seen out of a Church as I am out of a Tavern; pox on thee, what a dull
scandalous life do thou lead? thou art swilling thy belly full of Small-beer
Devotion every morning, whilst I am sanctifying mine with Sherry, Sugar, and
Nutmeg, you old Church Puppy you.


Old Merr. Oh rare Sir Rowland.


Rake. Right old Vrim and Thummim, and oh rare Sir Rowland it shall be; I
intend to have it for an Epitaph upon my Tomb as well as Ben. Johnson, for I
shall have a Name for the best of his qualities. I can drink Sack as well as
he, tho I cannot write so well in the praise on it.


Old Merr. To have a name for drinking Sack only, is a wretched Trophy at our
years Sr Rowland, methinks you and I should study to be dignified by our
Virtues.


Rake. Virtue! here is a hypocritical old Dog; Gadzookes name a word more of
Vertuo to me, and I Will draw upon thee; speak a syllable to me of Religion,
Morality, Godliness, or any of your canting stuff and I^ll run my Sword in your
guts, you old orthodox Thief you.


Old Merr. Nay, if you are so hot Sir --


Rake. Talk of Virtue to me the blood of the Rakehells, you old Pew Pimp; a
starving notion that all the World laughs at, and which the wiser part of it
always abhorred: prithee ask the young Cocking Athiest how he got his rich
Widow with 6000l. a year, and see whether he answers Virtue, or the illiterate
Dunce that can scarce spell his own name, whether he got his Place at Court by
Virtue; the sweaty splayfoot City Putt, whether he came to be Lord Mayor by
Virtue; ask how the Laundress came to be a Lady, or the lawless Pettifogger a
Judge, and see if Virtue be the cause on it, ye old Church Weesel, ha, ha, ha.


Old Merr. I think in Reason we ought to believe it the cause, whatever you may
imagine.


Rake. Reason! the Devil take him, he is got next door to Virtue again already:
why I tell thee, like an incorrigible Sot as thou art, that Reason has nothing
to do in the business, neither the course of all humane Affairs depend on
Destiny. Reason and Virtue are as useless drugs as Learning and Poetry; the
first is disgraced by Knaves, the last ruined by Fools, and there is Morality
for thee, thou old Hassock.


Old Merr. Though this be a profligate Rascal, yet he is in the right in that.


[aside* Rake. Ha, ha, ha, besides, I cannot forbear laughing faith, to think,
for all thy praying and mumbling, what a damned Hypocrite thou art; Here do I
enjoy an Estate of three thousand a year by having a young Orphan that was my
Ward, kidnab'd to the Indies; and thou, for the sake of two hundred a year,
got'st it done for me; there was Virtue, ha, ha, there was Virtue.


Old Merr. Well Sir you need not upbraid me however: You have small Reason if
you knew all.


[aside. Rake. Well, well, I will not upbraid thee, ha, ha; I will not upbraid thee;
for to tell thee the truth, I think thy Virtue and mine have much the same
weight, that is in short we are Rogues both, and so let us like Politicians keep
one another Counsel.


Old Merr. You may guess, that for my own part I have no great mind to be
hanged for any Discovery of my own; but i have a secret to tell you that somewhat
troubles me.


Rake. A secret! prithee what is it old Bellarmine, come let us hear it.


Old Merr. Why it is credibly reported, that your Nephew Mr. Amorous, that went
to travel lately, after having mortgaged the rest of his Estate to you, has
unluckily in the Indies met with this very Orphan, made a discovery from one of
the Ships Crew that is since dead, and has now brought her (...) with him to
claim her Right.


Rake. 'Dsheart thou art not in earnest old Psalm Book a^?


Old Merr. It Is most certa^nly so, Sir, I saw one of his (...) half an hour ago
in the Street.


Rake. 'Oons we must be Impudent, and swear bloudily, we must (...)-mouthed:
hah old Avy Mary, we have possession, they shall Law and Claw too before they
get it: -- how now; Enter a Footman forreignly dressed. Who would you speak
with friend?


Foot. Ko zowl mon dingos Bashterosh vin draggozeen Ilander gin flounce van
dander Scopen.


Rake. Scopen, ay you may Scopen and Slopen long enough with a pox t'you,
before I understand ye, this Rogue has got the language of the Devil, and on my
Conscience is come to teach it us instead of our Dutch, do understand him,
old Surplice, I know thou have been a Traveller.


Old M. 'Dslife, very well, Sir, he tells ye in the Morisque tongue that your
Nephew is in the garden, and desires to speak with you.


Rake. Gadzooks I shall murder the Dog, I shall never have patience.


Old M* Oh Sir, hear what he says whatever you do: I Will stand behind that
hedge there, and make remarks -- Collimosh Zwingle gowse Scopen awlin --


[to Footman. Foot. You Will, you will --

[Exit making an awkardreverence.
Rake. You Will, you will, the Devil you will ye -- Belzebubs own darling dialect, by this
light.


Old M. He comes Sir; I Will retire --

[Exit Old Mer.
Rake, Now must I set my face and fleer upon him just like a Court depender
upon a great Lord that has newly worm'd him out of his Office, and is too
powerful for him to beat, that is Salute him Civilly, and all the while
heartily wish him damned.


Enter Amorous dressed like an Indian. Amor. Dear Uncle I am heartily Sorry
that my occasions could let me no sooner wait on ye since I came to England,
but assure your self my Duty has often made me heartily wish to see ye --
hanged I mean


[aside. Rake. Oh it is very well, it is very well good Nephew; why faith I did
not Expect ye so soon, I did not think you could have made your Tour of India
and the Mogulls Country in twice the time, in my opinion you have made too much
have home -- with a pox to you


[aside. Amor. I had stayed longer indeed, had I not returned to do you a small
piece of service, which Sir you shall presently know, and what an honor and
tenderness dear Uncle I have for you -- I mean for your money, ye old Dogbolt --


[aside. Rake. To do me service, Nephew, prithee let us hear how the Son of a
Whore looks in that habit, as (...) he were engendered by a Succubus upon an
Indian Witch. -- [aside] Come good Nephew, prithee let us hear -- (...).


Amor. Then in short, Sir, I came home thus suddenly to clear your Reputation.


Rake. My Reputation, ha, ha, ha! -- what in'th Indies, prithee Cousen don't
make me think you are mad, 'oons I never cared for it here man, and do think I
value it in the Mogulls Country -- besides I know my reputation here is as
secure as any man's.


Am. Ah Sir, would you could make it out.


Rake. So I will Sir. I have three thousand pounds a year fool; -- that is
reputation. Set that upon the Exchange against any man's honesty, and see which
will buy most Cuthinelo.


Amo. Sir, you have not a groat a year.


Rake. Hey-day, the fellow's possessed, some Indian Devil has bewitched him.


Am. Oh you will find it otherwise Sir, in short then to keep ye no longer in
suspense, the Orphan Heiress daughter to Sr. William Wealthy committed to your
charge, and so strangely lost about 9. years since, was lately discovered in
the Indies by a Sea-Captain upon his deathbed, to whom she was sold, and is
now returned with me, with intention to Claim her Estate in your possession.


Rake. Pshaw pshaw, what witnesses Nephew, what witnesses?


Amo. Oh the Devil and all, Sir, the Captains kinsman, several of the Ships
Crew that carried her over, besides a Convincing sign, a Ruby that hung about
her Neck with her Fathers Coat of Arms upon it.


Old Merit pe^ping] So now the old Rascal sweats, work on, work on my Plot,
thus far it goes rarely --


[aside. Rake. Would she had been Choked with the string on it before she had
come hither to discover her pedigree, d'^heart I shall be hanged for Kidnapping
--


[aside Amor. Come Sir, I see you a little disturbed, therefore as I said
before, to let you see what a kindness I have for your Credit, perhaps upon
some reasonable Considerations, I may put you in a way Sir --


Rake. Hold, hold, let me see her first, and then talk of Considerations, I
must be Cunning with the Rogue, there may be a trick in it.


[aside Amor. That you shall Sir to morrow, without fail, and be thoroughly
Convinced of all, and what further service I can do ye.


Rake. Very well, and with secresy good Nephew do you here, you know your Uncles
Honor is as your own, and so farewell for this time, but proof must clear all:
for my part I own nothing, if it be thy fortune to oblige me, I Will be as ready
to prefer thee, -- [upon the Gallows -- [aside] So honest Nephew adieu till to
morrow: Ah Plague on your Indian voyage, I would I could get somebody to murder
the Dog. --

[aside] [ Exit Rakehell.
Enter Old Meriton. Amor. Ha, ha, ha, ha, who is here my Genius, my best friend
--


Old M. 'Twas acted rarely.


Amor. Did ye hear us.


Old M. Most distinctly, and doubt not but the Consequence will be as pleasant:
away, away, I know he is upon the hunt for me, and he must not see us together;
Is not this better now then hankering after a silly moneyless Orphan with a
white face, and nothing in her purse, hah.


Old M. That Is well, but hark I hear him coming, away, away.
[ Ex. Amorous. Thus your great Wit that long renoun'd does pass,
Is often by a greater made an Ass.
Re-enter Rakehell hastily. Well Sir what news?


Rake. Why all the news that I know is, that thou art to be hanged like an
Ignorant praying Kid-napping Rascal as thou art.


Old M. Hanged Sir.


Rake. Yes hanged Sir, and a pox on thee, nothing vexes me but I am to keep
that Apoeriphall face of thine Company; all is out, we are discovered with a
vengeance, this is your trusting your Sea-Captain with a murrain to you, you may
remember dog-fish, that I advised ye to knock her in the head like a discreet
person as I was.


Old M. Faith I could not in Conscience kill the pretty Creature, that is the
truth on it.


Rake. A Plague of your Conscience, must I be hanged for your confounded
Conscience must I? you had conscience enough to swallow two hundred pound a
year for Kid-napping, never keckt at that you old pew-pimping Rascal.


Old M. Nay then, since you provoke me, know, the Rascal is in the inside of
your own hide, and ye lie, I never received a groat on such a damned attempt.


R^ke. What art mad, where is it then? a pox where is it.


Old M. Managed till the deceiver I deceive
And thou art hanged by a strong Rope, I weave.
[Exit
Rake. What a Devil does he mean? gad I believe the grave fools brain's cracked
through mere fear, as it generally happens to these sober praying Coxcombs with
Clodded brains and no Genius, the Rogue has a hang upon me, I must not fall out
with him; however I Will send for him presently to the Tavern, and if I can make
him Drunk, there leave all fates transactions for to morrow

And with full Bumpers Tope away all sorrow.
[Exit.
Enter Nicompoop meeting Tearshift. Nicom. Oh Mrs. Tearshift your humble
servant, pray where may I find my Lady my Wife? I have been looking all about
the Garden and han't the honor to meet her seriously.


Tear. Oh rare Mr. Deputy there is Rods in piss for you in faith.


Nicom. Nay prithee dear Mrs. Terashift don't fright me now, seriously I stayed
but half an hour longer then I promis't, I hope my Lady my wife is not angry,
for I could not help it seriously.


Tear. Oh fie, your Gills look as red as a Turkey-Cocks, you are as fluster'd
as a Non-Con-Preacher at a Sisters wedding. She Will be in a violent passion when
she sees ye, and you know (like a silly man as you are) you are nothing in her
hands when she is in a passion.


Nicom. That Is true seriously, but have I no friend with her, that can hold her
tack, and rail against the Government whilst I go and Cool a little.


Tear. Yes there is the Captain with her as it happens, well, take it from me
you are extremely obliged to that man, he has held her tack upon your account
more then once to my knowledge.


Nicom. Ah the Captain's a very honest Gentleman.


Tear. See yonder they are coming down the walk together: Come, come in, and
wash your face and hands, and Comb your head, and smug up your self a little.


Nicom. With all my heart dear Mrs. Tearshift, for if she should fall into a
passion I were a lost man seriously.

[Exit in have.
Enter young Bragg new Equipt and Lady Addleplot dressed Flauntingly 2.
Footmen. La. Addle. Captain -- Y. Bragg: -- Madam.


La. Addle. Did you visit all our Loyal friends in Newgate this morning
according to my order?


Y. Bragg. Yes Madam, I was there a great while, I sat at the Treason-table
there above an hour, they are all pretty hearty, they eat and drink well Madam,
onl^ a little lousy, some of them.


La. Addle.. Ay that is nothing, Loyallty and Lice are Concomitant; and did you
take care to present my humble service to that worthy person that bid the
Government kiss his britch -- and tell him that I would do my self the honor
to sup with him to night.


Y. Bragg. Yes Madam, and for which he humbly thanked your Ladyship, but sends
ye word that he is to be Engaged.


La. Addle. What, he is crowded by our party I warrant.


Y. Bragg. No faith Madam, he was Crowded another way, for he was just going
into the Cart to be hanged.


La. Addle. Codsoe, that was engaging him indeed -- and did they hang that
brave fellow? well there will a time come I hope -- when we shall hang in our
turn too. Enter Tearshift. how now Tearshift who is that within there?


Tear. Mr. Deputy Madam, who being rashly coming before with a dirty face and
hands, I repremanded and turned back to mundyfy.


La. Addle. Let him be locked into the Garret, de^e hear as formerly, and
allowed no meat till my order: what? the Brute is fluster'd I warrant.


Tear. He has drank a little too much indeed Madam.


La. Addle. He shall not eat these three days; fogh the very thought of him gives
me the vapors; prithee give me my Spirit of Hartshorne; Captain your Arm a
little, stand up strongly ye fribling fool; of my Conscience the fellow begins
to bend in the hams already.


Y. Bragg. Who I Madam, gad you are mistaken, I Am as strong as a horse.


La. Addle. Ye lie yefool, a horse, ye lie ye Jackanapes, you showed your
strength finely last night when you were Robbed and lost your Hat and Peruke.


Y. Bragg. What man could do I did, but to have eight Rogues upon me at once,
Madam, was a little hard.


Tear. Indeed Madam the Captain got well off as he did, for had they stripped
him, Lord bless us, they might have damaged his outworks Extremely.


L. Addle. Well Sir you see I have quip'd ye again, and pray let me find your
Services answerable; all Ladies of my humor require to be served well.


Y. Bragg. I am thy Adonis my bright Citheraea, always ready and perpetually
devoted to thy command.


Tear. And well said Captain in troth.


L. Addle. Well Sir, there is something t'encourage ye, and I give you leave to
frequent the Coffee-house [gives a purse] and Tavern now and then, provided you
rail stiffly against the Government, and are sure to cry up me.


[ Brag kisses her hand. Y. Bragg. Madam, that is every day my whole business,
you are thought the very heart of the grumbling faction, and the greatest
Pollitician in the Town; The famous Lady Addleplots name is in every ones mouth
from the Secretary of State down to the Seller of Pippins.


Tear. Your Ladyship is thought a most admirable States-woman I must needs say.


L. Addle. Nay I thank my Stars the Ladies stick close to me, the good women
are most of 'em of my side, I thank 'em, especially the merry griggs that will
drink a Bottle, all those are most Conscienciously Loyal, and do great good,
besides I expect a swinging Rising in Kent suddenly, and then we shall fegue
these Rebels: -- my Lady Stroddle and I intend to go and head 'em, we have
bought our Fuzees and Jack-boots already,


Tear. Oh Madam, here is the fine French Gentleman coming, that is such rare
Company, that sings and dances and will let no one talk but himself.


Enter Le Prate and Nicompoop. Bragg. And with him, Mr. ^eputy new-wash'd and
Tallow'd; Lord, how Matrimony looks, Madam.


Le Prate. Madam, I vas Impatient till I vas come to kiss your Ladyships fair
hand.


L. Addle. Your Servant good Monsieur.


Le Prate. Your Servant Sire, and your most humble, pret Metresse Tear the
sheet, Madam, I must beg your Ladyships pardon, dat I have oblige a my self to
make reconsiliation between your Ladyship and Monsient Nicompoop here, who is
very sorry for disappointing your Ladyship and desire me to Intercede for him.


L. Addle. He Is a pitiful fumbling fellow, it is impossible for him to do
otherwise then disappoint a Lady.


[Get ye into the Garret, to Nicompoop. Le Prate. Nay, Madam I beseech your
Lady ship.


L. Addle. Alas Monsieur you are Ignorant of his Crime, I had at least Six
hundred Letters to finish, and should have sent him to as many places with 'em,
and to have a Sot to dare to baulk me in State Affairs, Sir I Will make him know
that I Will have the blood of him that shall baulk me --


[into the Garret I say. [ to Nicom. Nicom. Lord, she is bloody angry, what
shall I do?


Le Prate. Dat is very great fault, but dear Madam hear a me speak.


L. Addle. A little fribbling Cit that I have married, and affronted my own
Quality to do him honor, to dare to be absent when I had business for him.


Le Prate. I beseesh your Ladyship, look he is dear upon his knee.


L. Addle. A frigid fop, that I have taken as much pains withal to make a man,
as ever my first husband Sr. Arthur Addleplot did to make me a woman --


[strikes her Fan on her hand passionately. Nicom. Ah dear Captain, you have an
Interest in her, here is an Oriential Pearl, pray try if that will qualify.


Bragg. Madam, the penitent offender offers Tribute, a Mediator from the Indies
kisses your fare hand.


L. Addle. Ay, the fool Imagines this will do now, and truly I think pearls are
good against the Spleen, -- but a careless fellow -- d'slife to neglect my
Negotiation, I can hardly pass it over; but for your sake Cousen for once I
deign to accept his Trifle, but if ever he boulk me again, if there be a
Cuckold in the Nation, you understand me Friend.


N^com. I do, I do, and am overjoyed that we are friends seriously.


Tear. This was managed rarely well; I vow my Lady's a woman of admirable parts.


Le Prate. So dis is ver well, all friends, all friends, and Mousieur let me
tell you enter nous it will be ver reasonable for you hereafter to watch her
Ladyships (...) better, you have de ver great honor in her Conversation I tell
you dat.


N^com. I have so seriously, and could even weep for Joy that we are reconciled.


Le Prat. She Is the grand wit of all our Party, and so admired in France, dat I
believe our great Monarch will in a little time make her President of his
Council (...).


L. Addle. Oh deer Monsieur, indeed you honor me too much, but I know you have
all the Secret from the Party, and pray what news last night Mon^sieur? when
shall we have some sport? when will the French fleet come to an Anchor? ha.


Le Prat. Ah garzoon, I forgot to tell your Ladyship, dey are come already.


L. Addle. Are they come. Cods^oe that is rare; I Will have a Bonefire as big as a
Steeple, have they Landed? hah.


Le Prat. Morbleau twenty towsand at least, brave valiant fellows, with
resolution like Lions. Dey have scare all de Country round, they have burn two
^refown of de Ancient Lofty Noble Thatch Cottage Morbleau dat ever was seen.


L. Addle. Rare news; Tearshift get ready my Jack-boots.


Le Prat. Dey have attaque de Enimys Intrenchement, and have taken two or three
hundred of the boldest fattest bravest --


L. Addle. Prisoners, humh, prisoners.


Le Prat. Sheep, Madam, sheep, my Countrymen allways take more sheep den
Prisoner, dey are of better use, by mush.


Enter Tearshift. Tear. Madam, here is a Messenger come from the
Boarding-School, to Invite your Ladyship to the Ball, and to see your Ladyships
Daughter dance her new Chacoone.


L. Addle. Oh with all my heart, come Gentlemen w^'l all go; this news has made
me so pleasant, codsoe I could dance my self.


Nicom. And there we shall see my Daughter Moll dance too, who though she does
not dance so well Cousen, as her Ladyships Daughter, yet though I say it.


Brag. Who? that is my wife that must be.


Nicom. As my Lady my Wife pleases Cousen. Moll has 6000l.


Brag. Ay that is well enough.


Le Prat. Come Madam, allons;


[Goes to take Lady Addleplots hand Brag. Will your Ladyship please to walk?


[and Brag. takes her away from him. Le Prat. Pox on your damned English
breeding.


L. Addle. Two hundred sheep: well I swear this French Monarch is a prodigious
Conqueror.


[Exeunt. SCENE II.
The Boarding-School discovers Semibrief Teaching Miss Molly to Sing: Then
Enter Young Merriton, Coopee, and Jenny dressed in a Bib and Apron, a Pri^t Song
in one hand, and a great piece of Bread and Butter in the other. Coopee. Take
heed your Actions don't discover ye -- [ to Young Merriton. you are taken here
for a Dancing Master.


Y. Merr. I Will warrant ye, and if thou can but bring me into the dear
Creatures Apartment all my remaining time of life shall study to requite the
obligation.


Coopee. Not a word more, let me alone, follow me:


[Exeunt. Semib. The Song I Will teach in the afternoon, in the mean time Miss
practice the Trill: come -- au ha au ha ah au au ah --


[Trills. Molly. Aw aw aw aw aw --


[Trills awkardly. Semib. A plague; what with your mouth full of bread and
butter? -- for shame empty your Chops Miss there is a Trill for the Devil, see
me here au ha au ha au --


Molly. Aw aw aw aw -- hum! --


[bites another piece. Semib. So, she has got her mouth full again, well Miss
Molly, but that I love ye very well, I assure ye I would not endure this: pray
lay by the bread and butter and practice the Trill, I Will step into the next
room and teach a little, and be here again presently: --

[Exit.
Molly. Aw aw aw aw aw aw hum hum --


[trills and bites together* Here Coopee Reenters and Sings this Song to the
Minute that he is dancing with Jenny. (1)
Make your Honors Miss, tholl loll loll,
Now to me Child, tholl loll loll.
Aerie and easy now, tholl loll loll
Very well done Miss, tholl loll loll
Raise up your Body Child, tholl loll
Then you in time will rise: hoh, tholl, la.
(2)
Hold up your head Miss, tholl loll loll
Wipe your Nose Child, tholl loll
When I press on ye, tholl loll loll
Fall back easy Miss, tholl loll loll
Keep out your toes too, tholl loll loll
Then you will learn presently, hoh, th^ll la.
(3)
Bear your hips Swimmingly, tholl loll loll
Keep your Eyes languishing, tholl loll loll
Zoons where is your Ears now? tholl loll loll
Leave off your Ierking, tholl loll loll
Keep your knees open, tholl loll loll
Else you will never do: hoh tholl la.
(4)
If you will love me Miss, tholl loll loll loll
You shall dance rarely Child, tholl loll loll,
You are a Fortun^ Miss, tholl loll loll
And must be Married Child, tholl loll loll
Give me your Money Miss, tholl loll loll
Then I will give you my, hoh tholl la.
Ienny. Oh dear Mr. Coopee indeed I love you very well, and will do any thing
you would have, but pray let me go now, for I Am so hungry --


[Runs out. Coopy. The Poor little Tit's as coming as heart can wish, I Am
resolved to snap her, for I hear she is a fortune and worth while.


Enter Crowstich. Crow. Jane, let the Buck-basket be got ready for the
foul-cloaths, de'e hear, and bid the Landress take care to mend all the shifts;
these great Ramping-girles do so tear their Linen, it almost makes me wild.


Coopee. Your Servant Mrs Crowstich.


Crow, How de'e Mr. Coopee, and de'e hear bid the Cook-maid Cut a hundred and
fifty pieces of bread and butter round the Loaf; these Hoyden tits have
plague'e Stomachs.


Coopee. What is it breakfast time with 'em already then?


Crow. Always at nine a Clock, and they watch the hour as warily -- as a Parson
does his Glass-when he is tired with preaching; this is their bread and
butter-days, and each of 'em has a full half yard by measure, of which if there
were but an Inch wanting, the greedy things will cry they are starved, and
complain to their parents.


Molly. Aw aw aw aw aw aw aw hum --


[trills, bites, and romps about. Crow. There Is one now, I vow and swear Mr.
Coopee I am quite tired with that Romp there. Coming down Stairs this morning,
what do you think I saw, I protest that great Bear there getting a stride upon
John the Gardeners back as he was sto^pping down to gather a Sallet.


Coopee. Ha ha ha ha --

[ Exit Coopee.
[ Molly Romps about. Molly. What if I did? what ^^en? what need you care? pray
-- aw aw^.


Crow. But in faith gentlewoman, you shall be well slashed for it, the Governess
has a Clawing Rod a making: --


[Claps her hand and Exit. Molly. Aw aw aw aw aw aw --


[makes mouths at her. Enter Jenny with a large piece of Bread and butter.
Ienny. Oh Sister, what did John Gardner do to you pray? oh law, oh law --


Molly. What Is that to you long Nose, oh law oh law.


Ienny. My Governess will order ye she vows, and I Will tell my Mother on ye I Am
resolved, she will be here this afternoon.


Molly. And I Will tell my Father then how you peeped upon Mr. Coopee the other day
when he was going a Swimming.


[Romps and pushes her. Ienny. Ay tell tell Snotty-nose, what care I, my mother
can order you, and my father both pray; besides [pushes her] hussy you peeped
as well as I that you did, so you did.


Molly. Go, go baby, and make dirt-pyes again, my father says I shall have a
husband shortly pray.


Ienny. You, -- my mother will bring me a tall huge husband home next week and
methinks I long for a tall huge husband, and I am to leave off my Bib and Apron
too.


[bites her bread and butter Ienny. The Maids will not lie with you, you do I know
what a bed.


Molly. Oh law, that is a great l^e, and I Will tear your Eyes out.


Ienny. Hussy I Will pull your head off


[throws her bread and butter. Molly. You shall not think to tell such Lies on me
to make Mr. Semibrief hate me, I Will tear ye alive first.


[they pull and hawl one another. Enter Crowstich with a great Rod. Crow. Rare
work indeed, come Gentlewoman the Governess would speak with ye.


Molly. Oh oh oh --


[howls out [leads her out Ienny. So, I Am glad on it i'vads, she will be lashed
Swingingly.


[Romps off another way. ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Young Merriton, Mirtilla and Coopee. Coopee. I Will go and act a Centry
without, and if any body comes this way, shoot off my piece and give ye warning.


Y. Merr. Ah dear Rogue I Am obliged to thee for ever.


[ Exit Coopee. Mirtill. The reverence I have to the very Name of my worthy
Foster-Father Mr. Merriton, to whom you say you are related, and to whose
virtue I stand Indebted, for all the Comforts of this life makes me submit my
self with more willingness to this your Importunity, else Sir believe me, I
should think this lonely Visit very improper, and not at all Concurring with my
honor.


Y. Merr. Your honor is a thing, I would defend against a World of Enemies,
then think not Sweet that I would willingly do any thing to blast it, I know
this private Visit may be censured, but not whilst it is a Secret, as it is now,
I had no other way to express my Love, and not to have done it would have made
me Miserable.


Mirtill. You Imagine Sir that my Soul is Musical, and therefore treat me with
that tunefull word; but build not Sir, too much upon my weakness, for though my
heart is tender and unartfull, and Love a bait most proper to deceive me, yet
Virtue is a guard.


Y. Merr. There needs no guard Sweet Angel against a Love so honorable as
mine, the World is full of Treachery, and our Sex are brooding mischiefs daily
against yours, but I alas am of another Mould, my Soul by fate was designed for
your Slave, my heart still moves the narrow constant Road, in hopes in yours
to find at last it is heaven.


Mirtill. Oh that bewitching tongue would charm a Saint. you are not of the
humor of the Town then:


[aside. [to him Y. Merit. I hate the Town and the vain Crowd are in it, the
Biased Court and Mercenary City where gorged with Ignorance and Luxury, Wit is
disgraced, the Sciences despised, and modest Merit mourns in Rag's it is
fortune, it is the Epitome of the nauseous world whose Vices I with such
fell-hate pursue, that I love nothing near the Town but you.


Mirttill. In loving me you doubly wrong your self, I have Sir not power to
make return.


Y. Mer. Your heart is sure your own.


Mirtill. Most certainly: but where I give a heart I Will give a Fortune, and
that alas my Niggard Stars deny me, yet think not that I neglect an honest
Love; for to slight Merit were a baseness in me; no, you shall find worth has a
Friend of me, and shares my best acknowledgements and praise: you are a Man
complete by Heaven and Nature, most qualified with Wit and rarest Arts, which
from my Soul I always loved and honored, and therefore she that gains ye must
be happy, but I whilst s^inted by Injurious fate, can bring no equal value,
therefore m^st think ye a Jewel much too Rich for me to wear.


Y. Mer. How near to Heaven is my present Joy, from that sweet mouth to hear my
self thus praised; Oh thou dear source of all my worldly blessings, Eternal
Rapture charms me from thy tongue, and whilst I hear thee I am deify'd, to
loose thee were Damnation so Infallible, I question whether there could be a
greater.


[kneels and Embraces her. Mirtill. ^ay Rise Sir, or you will make me dye with
blushing.


Y. Merr. Ah make me happy then, and give consent.


Mirtill. To what?


Y. Merr. To Marriage, to perform, sweet Angel that blessed work thou were
Created for.


Mirtill. Ah, Poverty and Marriage never suit.


Y. Merr. Thou have all Craesus Treasure in thy Virtues, and I in gaining thee
shall be far Rich.


Mirtill. You think (...) now, but when wants make me troublesome then you will
upbraid and Chide me.


Y. Merr. Ah never, never, can I chide my Genius for making my days happy.


Mirtill. I can be Constant Sir, therefore have patience, fortune may change
and give to one or the other the Power to oblige.


Y. Merr. A cursed Fortune, still to Justice blind,
Averse to Merit, but to Idiots kind:
Thou Misers Darling, and trifle of the Brave,
Niggard to the Poor, but to the Rich a Slave:
How nicely happy all Mankind would be,
Thou Nauseous Common-Whore, were not for thee.
How now --

Enter Coopee hastily. Coop. Come, come, give him your hand quickly, here is
Crowstich the Teacher coming, you must dance for your Liberty now Sir.


Enter Crowstich with a Night-rayle. Crow. Madam, pray does this Implement
belong to you or to Miss Scatterwater, yonder Laundry Wench will face me dow^,
that -- Bless me, who is here [ sees Mer.] how now Mr. Semibrief-wh^'s that
there in the Ladys quarters?


[fold^ up the shift hastily. Coop. A Brother Hop-Merchant of mine Mrs^ (...)
that I brought here to help to teach a little, having a lame leg.


^Me^ halts and dances awkerdly. Crow. Come, come, you will be wanted now in the
Dancing-Room, there is my Lady Addleplot come already, and a great deal of good
Company.


Coop. Odsoe we must make have then, for there is to be singing besides the
Entertainment of a young Indian Lady: A new Boarder that is to Dance


Mirtill. Sir, you will remember to teach me the new Chacune.


[smiling on Merit. Y. Mer. Any thing that is mine Madam.


Exeunt SCENE II.
The Dancing-Room. In the Front appears several of the Boarders as Seated for
the Ball, and on the side of the Stage others sitting as Spectators; among the
rest L. Addleplot, Tearshift: L. Stroddle, and other Ladies, and on the middle
of the Stage Le Prate, Y. Bragg, and Semibrief. Le Prat. Ah Iernie vat a filthy
place is this when compare vid our School in France, no Decorum, no Ornament,
no Fresco, begar metink it stink a like a de Kitchen of de Lord Mawor -- or the
hold of a Ship begar.


Semib. Ah Sir, our Noses are not so Nice here in England.


Le Prat. Dat is as much as say you are all Sloven in England, gazoon your
Jantee French Dancing Master, all we^r persume and cover them all over vid rare
Pulvile to take away de nauscous ill Air. Ugh -- ugh, -- oh fogh it is
Intolerable.


Enter Crowstich with Miss Jenny holding a Waxwork Baby in a Glass. Mirtill, Y.
Merriton, and Coopee -- Miss Jenny asks Blessing. L. Addle. Bless ye, Bless my
good Child, and make her a good woman, and the mother of many Children: I think
she is grown since I saw her last Mrs Crowstich.


Crow. Mightily Madam, mightily, would she would grow in grace as much.


L. Addle. Lord save her pretty Moppet, hold up your head Ienny, and go and
make a Courtesy to my Lady Stroddle: --


L. Strod. Your servant pretty Miss: -- Indeed Madam, [Kisses her] as your
Ladyship says she is grown extremely, Miss, you are almost fit for a husband
already; hah Child.


Miss Ien. Hoh hoh hoh hoh --


[laughs and makes a Courtesy ridiculously. Crow. Fie Miss Ienny where are your
hands now? have I not told ye, you must remember to put 'em thus always; when
you make a Courtesy?


[Misse Courtesys again. L. Addle. That Is my good Girl, Mounsieur Le Prat and
Cozen Bounter you don't see Miss and her fine work here.


Le Prat. Madam, I beg your Ladyships pardon, and I am your most Obedient Slave
pret Miss. --


[Kisses her, and she Courtesys. Y. Brag. Dear Sweet Pretty Creature yours: --


[Kisses her. L. Strod. Well I vow Madam these Nudities are very Ingenious; the
Child is Extravagantly well bred.


Le Prat. Monsieur Coopee a word with you.


[ Prat goes aside and makes motions as if dancing. Semibr Here comes the
the other Romp that I told ye was so fond of me, I have hopes of getting her, for
they say she is a swinging fortune.


[ Enter Nicompoop and Molly. Y. Mer. Which on my Conscience will be no hard
matter for thee to Compass.


Semibr. I hope so, I Will try: --


Nicom. Come Molly wipe thy eyes Child, I Will take thee away from 'em to morrow,
they shall whip thee no more seriously --


[weeps. Molly. Ugh ugh ugh ugh --


[Sobs and makes faces. Nicom. Go and ask my Lady my Wife blessing, and then
come to me again, de'e hear Molly: -- that is a good girl.


Y. Brag. This is my wife that is to be, if my Lady can bubble the old Cuckold
to give consent: d'sheart [ Molly goes and asks blessing and then what shall I
do with it it is a mere Baby.


[rises up and runs to her Father. L. Addle. Fogh, my Lady Stroddle, did your
Ladyship ever see such a Nauseous thing? it is so like the Father.


L. Stroddle. Her face has Mr. Deputys Clumsie Cut indeed Madam:


Le Prat. All dis, Monsieur Coopee I can show you in less time den one half
hour -- tah tah -- I have two tree hundre of de most admirable French step --
hark you me I will tell a you in four words.


Coopee. Four words Sir, you hove spoke above four thousand in less than a
minute. I can hear no more, I must beg your pardon, I must go teach.


[goes out from him. Le Prat. Monsieur Merriton, did you ever see such a dam
English Puppy? I tell you vat Sir:


[ Le Prat makes motions as in Y. Merriton. And briefly too, Sir or else --


[Earnest discourse. Y. Brag. And did the Governess whip her, say ye Sir? Why
this is barbarous, but yet I see she is pretty brisk for all her Jerking.


Nicom. Brisk, nay, the Girl is mettle to the back seriously, but I Will take her
away to Morrow I Am resolved, they shall jerk no Child of mine, if it must be
done, I Will have the jerking her my self.


Y. Brag. Well said Mr. Deputy, 'ds' heart what a thing of a Spouse shall I
have?


Enter Coopee with Guittars. Ienny. Oh here is dear Mr. Coopee, -- Sir your most
humble Servant.


Coopee. Yours dear Miss, I have brought your Guittarr here, and harkee you will
be sure to be ready to morrow to get out as we have contrived


Ienny. Yes I warrant ye, and you shall see I Will do it so Cunningly.


[Aside. L. Addle. Oh Ienny has got her Guittarr, pray look upon her, Madam,
there is an Air, there is a shape, there is an Ingenious look, fogh the other
awker'd Romp makes me sick.


Le Prat. De deevil take a me if in the space of half an hour Monsieur
Merriton, I would not have tell a dat Ignorant English Puppy all dis, and hark
you I will tell you one ting more --


Y. Mer. No more Monsieur, not a word upon my faith, I am almost deaf already,
besides I must see the Dance.


[flings away from him. Le Prat. Dis is ver strange dey vill no hear me speak
begar.


Here the Romps perform a Ridiculous Dance with Guittarrs out of Tune. L.
Addle. Very fine, upon my honor, those Guittarrs agree with the dance
admirably -- hold up your head Ienny.


L. Stroddle. And gives 'em a delicate Air, Madam, oh it is extreme fine.


Y. Mer. The Divil it is, gad a half-tub Strung with Packthread is better
Music by half.


Enter Jiltal in an Indian habit, and Oyley. Le. Prat. Zoon who is dis I see my
dear Sweet pret Metresse Betty in disguise, I must know vat dis mean


[goes and whispers Oyley. Y. Meriton. Oh yonder is the Sham-Indian Heiress the
Rogue Amorous I see has dressed her rarely.


[Here Jiltal Dances.] [Then the Scene shuts out the rest. Le Prat. Iernie
Metresse Oyley you ravish me to tell me dat your Lady came in disguise to
entertain me.


Oyley. It Is most Certainly so Sir, you are most extremely in her favor, this
was a fit of Jealousy in her to find what Lady you hanker'd after: -- I find
the Fool has money now.


[Aside. Le Prat. Jealousy begar is as true a sign of Love as huffing is of
Cowardice, ah garzoon I languish, I dye, for her, dear Metresse Oyley can you
tink I may Enter de fort of her favor for one hundred Guinny.


Oyley. A 100. Guinnys, ay, any fort in Christendom Monsieur assure your self.


Le Prat. Begar here dey are den but where, how shall I kiss her fair hand Dear
Sweet Charming Metresse Oyley.


[shews a purse. Oyley. The Frenchmans as hot as if he were Bombing a fort in
good Earnest -- well, have patience a little Monsieur, and by and by -- I Will
bring you a Note --


[for your Money you French Fool [Aside. Le Prat. Aw I understand a you -- mum
--


L. Strod. The Captain has a great many taking Qualities I perceive Madam; Pray
Sir what Countryman are ye?


Y. Brag. If I should speak truth now, and tell her my Mother was a
Sinderwench, and that I was whelp'd in the Mews Dunghill, how my Lady will be
surpised [Aside.] Madam, my Native Country was Arabia Foelix, my Father was a
very near Relation to Prester John, The Bouncers of Africa are the Ancient'st
Family in the World, Madam, for my own part thirsting after Glory, I left my
Country to assist at the late memorable Seige of Buda, where I stood upon the
Breach just by the Governor at the Storming of the Town, I saw him fall, and
narrowly Escaped my self; after which action acquainting my self with a famous
English Officer, one Colonel Bragg, I came over hither, where I soon learnt
the Language, and had the honor to Ingratiate my self with her most noble
Ladyship.


Le Prat. Oh dat is certain de Bounsers be ver great Family in France too.


[ Oyley comes and gives Le Prat. a Note in an Orange. Y. Mer. The Liars indeed
are a great Family all the World over, now rather then not prate at all with
that French Fool, join with 'tother in his monstrous vanity.


[ to Coopee. Coop. If he is neither Singing, Dancing, nor Prating, you may
conclude a French Man dead at any time.


Enter Nicompoop and Molly crying Nicom. Oh Cozen, as I was standing at the
door, just now, who should come by but that old saucy Granadeer who had the
Impudence to affront ye so yesterday, I told him you are within here, and that
you would have him whipped, and seriously, what does the old Rascal do but gave
me a huge Box o'th Ear, called you a Thousand Sons of Whores, kicked Molly; beat
two of my Lady's Footmen that took my part, and is just now forcing his way in
hither seriously, o Lord!


Y. Brag. D'shert what shall I do, this is my old dog of a Father, now shall I
be disgraced for ever.


Enter Old Bragg fighting with two Footmen. Y. Merriton, and Le Prate part 'em.
Le Prat. Jernie -- vat is de meaning of dis sa, sa, vat a Plague do you do.


O. Brag. Let me go and I Will beat the Rogues into Paste.


Y. Mer. What Is the matter Friend?


O. Brag. Oh are you there Sirrah? [runs to Y. Brag. what you threaten to have
me Whipped de'e, you Prodigal Son of a Whore -- harkee dogbolt, who am I? hah!


Y. Brag. The Devil, I think, I Am sure you are as great a plague to me, [Aside.
I must face him down with Impudence; there is no way else -- what art thou mad
old fellow? who would thou speak with? ha!


O. Brag. Mad old fellow, here is an Impudent Rascal, what you have forgot me
Rogue, have ye? but I Will rub up your Memory presently: --


[offers to draw, Merit. holds him. Y. Mer. Why how now old Armor of proof
de'e know to whom you give this Language, the Gentleman's a Captain.


O. Brag. Why let him be a Colonel, he is my Son, and I Will call him as many
Rogues and Rascals as I please.


Y. Brag. Would I had been the Son of a Coach-horse.


[Aside. Y. Mer. Thy Son, ha ha ha, this is pleasant in faith; art thou the
stock of the Ancient family of the Bouncers of Africa ha ha ha ha ha. --


Le Prat. De fellow has not bin bred in France dat I Am sure.


Y. Brag. Hark'e Sir, I Am Courting a young Lady here that has six thousand
pound Fortune, follow my directions, and recover my Credit, and you shall have
half.


[ To Old Brag. O. Brag. Six Thousand Pounds --


Y. Brag. Every Farthing Sir; it is she yonder that stands by the old Gentleman.


O. Brag. And shall I have half, Neddey?


[Altering his Tone. Y. Brag. You shall; therefore own your self to be Colonel
Brag, an Acquaintance of mine at the Siege of Buda, and let me alone for the
rest.


O. Brag. Why, this is fair now Neddy? now you don't abuse and slight your old
Father, you are a good Boy -- Three Thousand Pounds! Gad Zooks! it is enough to
make me a Colonel indeed.


Y. Brag. Mind your Cue; Ha, ha, ha, ha: Come dear Colonel, it is enough now,
prithee leave off thy Joking, I see my Lady is surprised at it. Why, Madam, and
Gentlemen, this was nothing but a Jest all this while, this is my dear Friend
Colonel Brag that I met withal at Buda --


O. Brag. Yes, Madam, I am Colonel Brag, and as the Captain says, we me
together at Buda.


Y. Mer. Methinks your Habit is not very like a Colonel, Sir.


L. Prat. Jernie de ver, resemblance of de English nasty foot Granadeer.


Y. Brag. Oh, a Jest, a Jest, the Colonel has often these Frolicks to come a
broad in a Disguise; he has some Design in this now I warrant.


L. Addle. I warrant he is a Colonel o'th wrong side, by his beating my
Footmen; the Rebels all know my Livery, and have a spi^e at it; and therefore
pray tell him, Cozen, I care not for such Roysters Company.


Y. Brag. Sir, you would do well to humor my Lady a little in her way, she is a
great Stickler against the Government.


O. Brag. What, you would have me speak Treason, would you ye Rogue, and so hoist
my self to the Gallows before I Am aware.


Y. Brag. Would thou were hoisted there fifty Cubits high: Dsheart, this old
Scoundrel will discover all yet, I see by his awkward Carriage.


[Aside. L. Addle. A Filthy Beast! Come, Madam, let us leave him, and go and
give order for our Bonfire. Madam, are your Ladyship's Jack-Boots ready.


L. Strod. They were liquor'd this Morning, Madam; I Am ready in a Minute.


L. Addle. Mr. Alderman, Come, let us go; Cozen Bouncer, come you away too from
the Old Rebel, I have occasion to use ye.


Y. Brag. I Will wait on ye, Madam. Meet me at the Magpy-Tavern at Nine.


[To O. Brag.] [ Exeunt L. Addle. L. Strod. Thrum. Y* Brag. O. Brag. Enough,
I Will come -- Gentlemen, Good buy.

[ Exit O. Brag.
Y. Mer. Oh, your Servant good Colonel Musket, ha, ha, ha, I will know the
bottom of this Cheat I Am resolved, and to effect it thou shall go and invite
'em to a Glass of Wine with me to morrow.


Coopee. That old fellow is certainly a Counterfeit; but what is the other? Is he
really a Captain?


Y. Mer. No more than thou art a General: It Is the Common Title nowadays for
all the Bullies, Shop-lifts, Robbers, Pimps, Panders and Rakehels about the
Town; any tall Fellow that can but get a red Coat on's Back is dubbed a Captain
presently: But prithee let us go, whilst the Monsieur is busy yonder, for fear
he should thrust himself upon us; and dear Rogue, procure me but another
Meeting to Morrow with Mirtilla, and then I Am thine for ever.


Coopee. I Will do what I can, but you may thank your Dancing Faculty.


[ Exeunt Mer. and Coopee. Le Prat. Jernie, here be de very pret Fancy, a Sheny
Orange vid de Billet Doux wrap in it; ha, ha, ha, let a me see now vat it say?
Ha! -- It Is from my deer sweet Mrs. Betty, Begar -- I Will go into the Garden and
read it, for I see here comes more Company.

[Exit.
Enter Rakehel, Amorous, and Jiltall, in a Rage. Iiltal. Patience! Talk not to
me of Patience, Mr. Amorous, I will have Justice.


Amor. You shall, Madam, you shall.


Iiltal. I Will have him hanged, I Will make a Parliament business of it, I Will make
him an Example to all Villainous cheating Guardians; I Will mount him, tho it cost
me half the Estate.


Rakehel. This is a very Indian Devil.


Amor. It Is well she is ignorant who you are, Sir; for she has such a Devilish
Spirit, that, G^d, if she knew, she would go near to tare ye to pieces.


Rake. The very Issue of a Dragon; Gadzooks, I Am afraid to come near her.


Iiltal. Would I had the Villain here' I Would tare his Throat out with these
Fingers, I Would chop him into more pieces than ever Medaea did her Brother
Absirtus in Story: What say you, Sir? would not you help me to murder the
Villain, hah --


Rakehel. O yes, Madam,; I Would have a Leg or an Arm of the Rascal if he were here


[Trembling. Iiltal. A Treacherous bloody kidnabbing Villain, hah, Sir!


Rakehel. Oh, a Rogue, a Rogue, a very Rogue!


Iiltal. O^ that this Dagger were in his Hearts Blood.


Rakehel. He were right served if it were, Madam.


[Sbud how I tremble. Iiltal. But the Gallows shall perform the Work more
decently; therefore Mr. Amorous, if you have any Love for me, as you profess,
lose not a minut's time in the Prose^ution; you know the Witnesses are all
ready, and want nothing but a Summons; I think the Law cannot fail to do me
right in so notorious an Abuse; but if it should, I swear by Mars, Apollo,
Venus, Mercury, and all the Powers of Fire, Air, Earth and Water, rather than
let my Cause be left in the Lurch, I Will st^b him, tho I do it in the Church.

[Exit.
Rakehel. Ay, there I would give thee leave, for I never come into one; but
that is all one on my Conscience, this Fury will be the Death of me one way or
other.


Amor. Certainly, Sir; For to say Truth, she has often a mad Fit takes her, and
then she fears neither God, Man, nor the Devil; she got it with drinking
Brandies and Hot Waters in the Indies, Sir.


Rakehel. Well Cozen, I see I must depend upon thee -- What relief, hah?


Amor. Why, Sir, to show what a Value I have for ye, and what Care for your
Reputation, make up the Estate of Seven hundred a Year that I sold ye, a
Thousand, and settle it upon me, and I Will instantly marry her, and give you a
Discharge for all the rest.


Rakehel. Well, well, I Will do it Nephew, I Will do it, for I find, if I should
carry it against her by Law, I shall never carry my own Guts in quiet an hour
after; she will have her Dagger amongst 'em before I Am aware.


Amor. Ay Sir, besides the Disgrace of Kidnapping you know.


Rakehel. Ay, it is time; but Mum for that, good Nephew; thou know all Flesh
is frail, and 'twas a shrewd Temptation: Go, go, and get the Writings ready,
and I Will Seal to Morrow: But prithee when thou have Married her, keep her
within doors, for Gadzooks, I had rather eat a Fricassy of Souls with Beelzebub,
than meet her in my Dish again.

[Exit Rakehel.
Re-enter Jiltall. Iilt. Ha, ha, ha, ha -- Is he gone?


Amor. And most damnably frighted, what betwixt the shame of being taken for a
Kidnapper, and his own Cowardly Apprehensions of being Murdered, he is even out
of his Wits; the business is done, ye little Devil, the Writings are going to
be drawn for a Thousand a Year, and he is to Seal to Morrow.


Iiltal. Ah, dear Dog, I am glad on it for thy sake, I vads Iacky; and I think I
acted to the Life.


Amor. Rarely, Rarely, and thy Settlement shall fare never the worse for it; it
may chance to swell to Five Hundred a year now, ye dear Devil you.


[Kisses her. Iilt. No indeed sweet Blood, that is too much I Am afraid, you will
think I Am mercenary, Iacky; Mrs. Strikeup, Sir Thomas Rental's Mistress, it is
true, has Five Hundred a year; but for my part, my dear Honey, sweet
Puppy-face, thou art so Charming I can love thee without e're a Groat.


Amor. Ah! dear Betty, I love thee so entirely, that I think I can never do
enough for thee: Prithee let us go and be private a little, shall we?


Iilt. Not now, dear Iacky, there is the Governess and some other Boarders in my
Chamber, who expect me at supper, but to morrow my Honny-suckle Rogue I Will be
thine all day -- till when my little dear sweet Apes Face, adien -- Ah Sirrah,
I Am too fond of thee.


[Strokes and kisses him and Exit. Amor. Well, go thy ways, if all thy Charming
Sex had Souls like thee despising base Confinement and wore thy constant kind
endearing humor, in what a forlorn state were Matrimony! A Wife! why is not
she the best of Wives, that loves me, that pleases and indulges my desires, and
all still upon honor, without force, and this, dear Betty, is thy Character.

Marriage the product of Convenience is,
It Is Love with freedom brings the truest Bliss.

Enter Le Prat from the Garden. Le Prat. Ha, ha, ha, ha --


Amor. How now, what makes this French Puppy here grinning? so Monsieur, you
are very merry, I see.


Le Prat. Merry! ay begar, I have de ver good reason too if you knew all -- dis
Lettra dat you see here make me de most happy person in de whole World, begar.


Amor. A Letter! what from some young thing here I warrant, that is smitten with
thy airy parts; come prithee -- discover thou know I am thy Friend, art
stealing a Fortune here? hah --


Le Prat. Dam Fortune, she is a blind Bawd dat obliges none, but Fool begar; dis
Intreague is beyond all de Fortune in de World, which because you are de Man of
Honor I will communicate; you must know den dat here is great Beauty in
dis-Town dat goes by the name of Madam Iiltal.


Amor. Ha, Iiltal! --


Le Prat. A rare Creature, both for de Shape, de Wit, de Beauty, and every ting
dat is incomparable.


Amor. So, Sir.


Le Prat. Now you must know dat at intreaguing is de very soul of the French,
and my self being always great Admirer of dat Gallantry, I have endear my merit
so much in her Favor, by de Song, de Fiddle, de Present, and oder ting shall
be nameless, dat she came yesterday hither in an Indian habit to meet me.


Amor. To meet you --


Le Prat. Yes, begar, ha, ha, ha, vas not ver pretty frolic, hah, for you must
know dat we have sometime met together in order place before now.


Amor. Damnation! What does this Rascal mean [Aside.] This must be my Betty, it
can be no other -- So, Sir, and that Letter is from her, is it?


Le Prat. Just now sent to invite me to her private Chamber, where dear is de
Bed, and Couch, and Chair, and all oder convenience; ah, it is full of de most
tender obliging expression dat ever vas writ; dear, read, you shall find she
has great deal of Wit -- she is ver fine person, ma foy.


Amor. Hell take me if it be not her own Character! Oh patience!

[Reads the Letter. Your Merits, dear Sir, have so won upon my heart that I can
no longer defer your desire; therefore you may come, if you please, by the Back
Garden up Stairs into my Apartment; for I Am obliged to stay here to night upon
some urgent occasion; now is your time, and to endear ye more, know that I
intend to feign my self sick to a young passionate Fool that loves me and waits
for admittance, to possess the greater Pleasure of enjoying your sweet Company.


Le Prat. Ay, dat Fool, dat Fool, de turning away of dat fool dat wait, please
me most of all -- ha, ha, ha, vat tink you? Hah, is not she an Angel?


Amor. A down right Devil.


Le Prat. Deevle! who, who, Jernie, vat are you tinking on? Oh you are
surprised at her Wit are you? ha, ha, ha, vel begar, I believe she has the
richest brain in all England, ma foy, and is assurement the greatest.


Amor. Jilt in Europe, by Heaven! Oh -- Confound her, is all [ Stamps the Vows
and fondness come to this -- Ah dear Merriton now I confess my Blindness and
thy Judgment.


Le Prat. Hey! Vat a Diable is de matra? nay, nay, if you be mad, come give me
de Lettra, and let me go, for I long to be embracing de dear, dear ravishing
Creature dat stay for me.


Amor. Why then let me tell you, Monsieur Rantipol tanto, you shall not have
her Letter, nor shall you go to her neither.


Le Prat. Hey morbleau, vat time of the Moon is dis, -- vat you mean Monsieur!


Amor. Why I mean to signify to ye Monsieur, that this Charming Angel of yours
has been my Whore this seven years; I settled an Estate upon her in 87, carried
her to Flanders in 88, and spent two thousand pounds upon her in 89, brought
her over with me in 90, and now this present year find my self jilted and
resolve a Revenge, therefore consent to qui^ all pretensions to her instantly
or draw.


Le Prat. Draw, dis is very fine begar, I come heeder to make Love, and you
will force me to make War, but it never shall be say dat a Frenchman desert his
Mistress, or his Intreague -- Come on Monsieur, sa, sa.


[Leaps backward, and fences at a distance. Amor. A Plague, what you are
dancing a Galliard, are ye -- Come, I Will show ye an English step, Sir,


[Presses in, fights, and disarms him. Le Prat. Gazoon, vat dam Fortune is dis?
I have shame my Country -- begar dis is de first time dat ever de French were
foiled.


Amor. Oh, Sir, you are ill read in History I find; come, there is your Sword
again, you see I scorn to make you beg your Life; therefore in return of Honor,
fail not to meet me here to morrow at this time; I have business with ye --


Le Prat. Begar, you are ver brave Fellow, therefore I Will come; and dee hear
Monsieur, when ever our great Monarch come and conquer your Country, de Devil
take a me, but I will do as much for you.


Amor. Oh, I thank ye Sir.


Le Prat. Dis is ver brave Fellow, ma foy, but a Plague of his dam English step
for all dat.

[ Exit Le Prate.
Amor. And now to ruminate on my Revenge,
And right my self in this strange turn of Fortune;
For oh, I loved this Jilt beyond my Reason,
Wounded my heart afresh, and every night
Fancied I had the first sweet budding Nosegay,
When every Flower was common in the Market.
Suppose I poison, or I strangle her,
Why, I send her to the Devil, my self to the Gallows.
What satisfaction! Suppose I trade with some of her Aunts the Bawds, and get
the Pox, and give it her, why then the Venom of her own Nature will relieve it,
and I alone am wretched, or should I cut her into little Morsels, like a true
Serpent, every part would live, and every part would join again to sting me. No,
I have it, the Purse is the Whores mortal part, I Will stab her there.

Learn this by me, you that desert kind Wives,
And with this cursed Tribe debauch your Lives;
For Gold you gain a thousand Sweets and Dears,
But cease to pay, and then the Punk appears.
[Exit.
The End of the Third Act.
ACT. IV. Scene I. A Tavern.
Enter Y. Meriton, and Amorous. Y. Mer. TO laugh at thee is not like a Friend,
and to rail at her would be to no purpose: I only hope thou will value my
Judgment another time, and in the present Juncture make a good use of this
lucky discovery.


Amor. I warrant thee, thou shall as much value me for my discretion now, as
thou did formerly wonder at me for my strange stupidity, but yet by Heaven it
shocks my very Nature to think such barbarous ingratitude could injure such
true Love.


Y. Mer. That Love was rather a Disease in thee than otherwise; thou had a
Callenture, and thy strange madness muffled her jilting mischiefs from thy Eyes.


Amor. Damned Mercenary Whore.


Y. Mer. Oh fie! How can thou rail at a poor Creature for acting of her kind.
A Whore and Jilt are Boot and Spur, the one depends on the other, and it is
unreasonable to expect a separation; and if thou think thy Wit or Love could
make her constant, thou art weaker still; for a Whore has no Love but what
depends on Appetite; the coursest Food often goes down the best, and is just
like one invited to an excellent Treat, yet is not satisfied, nor thinks
himself well entertained, unless after all you let him take a nasty Pipe of
Tobacco.


Drawer within. Half a Flask in the King's Arms, Score.


Amor. How near the cursed Nature of the Devil is such a nauseous Creature?
Yet such there are I find.
Enter Drawer. Sir, there is a Gentleman below desires to speak with ye.

Y. Mer. Oh, it is Coopee; go and send him up, Sirrah.
[Exit Drawer. I employed him, Jack, about a pleasant Discovery of the Colonel
and Captain
I told thee of -- Well, what now Tom?

[ Enter Coopee. Coopee. They are coming, Sir; and 'twill make you laugh to see
in what a strange Romantic Dress the old sham-Colonel's in now; he looks just
like the old Picture of Giddeon in the Hangings, and struts as if he were newly
come from lapping at the River.


Y. Mer. I Am resolved to find out the Trick now; and if thou can get the
Romp and the Six Thousand Pounds, thou do thy self a Profit, me a Pleasure.


Amor. What, the Rogue is stealing one of the Kitlins from the Boarding-School,
is he?


Coopee. Faith, Sir, I think you have nicked it, for all she can do yet is to
Purr and Mew a little, she is not come to her Scratching. But there has a
plaguey Accident happened since I saw you last.


Y. Mer. What, Prithee? a discovery of any thing?


Coopee. All, all, Faith; and the business is this moment in Agitation; that
damned Witch Crowstich has told the Governess that I used to cram the Girl with
Almonds and Reasons, and when I taught her to Dance, kiss her between every
Step, upon which Mr. Deputy and my Lady are sent for this Afternoon; for my
part, I was discarded presently: but to show ye that I have played my Game very
well, just as I was going out of Door, the poor young Fool followed, and
pretending to give me a Song-Book, pinned this Note to the first leaf, ha, ha,
ha -- Here, you may read it if you can, for she does but just scrawl, and
spells worse than a Town-Whore in a Billet-doux.


Y. Mer. Reads the Letter: If you lofe me as you portend, and will marro me,
and let me go abroad to eat Cowsturd and Chesscock as often as I please, I will
lofe you butter than my Father, and will come to you out at the Balcondey in
the Iurdain at Eight a Clock just after we have Soopt. I am, sweet Mr. Coopee,
your true Friend, Jenny Addleplot. Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Amor. Ha, ha, ha, ha. One that never knew it, might Swear that Letter came
from a Boarding-School by the Lofe and Butter that is in it.


Y. Mer. So, why this goes very well, hah, and thou intendest to be at the
Balconey at the time appointed, do not.


Coopee. Most punctually: For I hear my Lady intends to match her to this
Coxcombly Captain that is coming hither, but I Will prevent her Faith, I Will about
it instantly.

[ Exit Coopee.
Y. Mer. Oh, here comes the Colonel -- Now for the Discovery.


Enter O. Brag. ridiculously dressed like an Antic Officer, and Y. Brag. with
him. Y. Brag. Now, Sir, besure you don't discredit your self, but remember you
are a Colonel still.


O. Brag. Sirrah, hold your Tongue, and leave off your saucy Instructions or as
I am a true Grauadeer --


Y. Brag. Or Lord, O Lord, a Granadeer already!


O. Brag. A true Colonel I mean, Sirrah, I will swinge you incessantly.


Y. Mer. Oh Colonel, your most humble Servant, and Captain yours; -- Pray know
my Friend here.


[They Salute. O. Brag. Gentlemen, I am your Worm to tread upon, the Lappet of
your Shoe, your Slave of Slaves, and shall be proud to serve you, whether in
the Celler, the Kitchen, or the Stable.


Y. Brag. So now he talks like a Groom, a Tapster, and Scullion -- I shall be
undone.


Y Mer. Oh, you debase your self too much, Colonel, for so great an Officer,
performing such an Action as yours at the Siege of Buda qualifies ye to be a
General to some great Monarch.


Amor. Pray, Colonel how is their Method of Fortification at Buda?


O. Brag. Buda, Sir?


Y. Brag. Ah, he is foundred already: Dsheart; Sir, own you have an ill Memory
presently, or you will spoil all.


[Aside. O. Brag. I Have a very ill Memory Gentlemen, I hope you will excuse me.


Y. Brag. Tell 'em you hurt your Brain by catching a great Cold with lying in
the Winter-Trenches in Hungary.


O. Brag. Why, when was I in Hungary, Sirrah? This Rogue crams so many Lies
into my Mouth together, that Gadzooks, it is a pain to me to know which I shall
get out first.


[Aside. Amor. You must needs be able to give a good Account of the famous
Transaction at Buda, Sir: Come, pray let us hear.


Y. Brag. Say yes, yes Sir, and I Will help ye out.


[Aside to O. Brag. O. Brag. Yes, yes Sir, at least the Captain here can, if I
cannot. Go and manage your Lie your self, ye Dog, I Am almost choked.


[Aside to Y Brag. Y. Brag. We were both drawn out, Gentlemen, in the
Detatchment that received the Assault; the Colonel here, I must needs say,
behaved himself more like a Lion than a Man. And for my own part, I escaped by
Miracle; I fought on Foot three Hours by the Clock, when above twelve Great
Fieldpieces played at me all the while as thick as Ha^l; I had the Honor to
Horse the King of Poland twice, lent my own Sword to the Duke of Bavaria when
he was in Distress; and at last, with a Clapper of a Bell, which a swinging
Turk that I had just before killed, had used instead of a Battle-Ax, fought
through their Vantguard, and came off safe in spite of 'em.


Y. Mer. A Clapper of a Bell! Why Captain, there are no Bells in Turkey.


Amor. No, Captain, no -- The Turks never use any Bells or Clappers neither.


Y. Brag. Ah plague of my heedless Nonsense, what shall I say now.


[Aside. O. Brag. Hold ye, Gentlemen, hold ye, I can make it out plain: Now
will I help the Rogue off at a dead list.


[Aside. Amor. What, that the Turks use Bells, Colonel Coddlebrain.


O. Brag. The Turks, No, no: But you must know that the Captain there was
formerly Prentice to a Blacksmith, and brought the Clapper to the Wars along
with him.


Y. Brag. frets and stamps. Y. Mer. Oh, that may be indeed -- Your Servant,
Noble Captain.


Amor. Much Good may'^ do ye with your Clapper, worthy Captain.


Y. Brag. Ah, Pox of your Plain-dealing -- I Am disgraced for ever now: What do
you mean by this Colonel, when was I Prentice to a Blacksmith, hah!


[Kicks him. O. Brag. When? Why, what a damned shallow Brain have thou: Why,
were not thou Prentice to Old George Grimble when I sold Brandy and Tobacco by
the Church-wall at Antwerp, just the Winter before I listed my self a Granadeer.


Y. Mer. A Granadeer!


Y. Brag. Ah the Devil! now all is out, and nothing can retrieve it.


Amor. No, no, a Granadeer: He listed himself a Colonel, I warrant; hah -- what
say thou?


O. Brag. Ay.


Y. Mer. Ay, a very fine Story you have made of this indeed, and I shall inform
my Lady presently of your great Merit and Extraction; and so my most Noble
Blacksmith Adien.


Amor. Your Servant, honest Granadeer.


O. Brag. Hold, Sir, though the Captain here be a kind of a Coward, or so, yet
you shall know that I have a Sword.


[Goes to draw. Y. Mer. And Dagger, I know it; all Granadeers have. Come, come,
it is in vain to be testy with us; there is Money for the Wine, you can'^ do less
than drink together when we are gone -- H^sh, not a word more.


Amor. Ha, ha, ha, ha.


[ Exeunt Mer. and Amor. O. Brag. and Y. Brag. stare at each other. Y. Brag.
Ah! plague of your Antwerp Occupation, here is 6000 l. lost now, and the best
Maintenance that ever Man had: Oh, I Am lost, ruined for ever! I shall never be
kept again, that touches the very Soul of me: Oh! What shall I do?


O. Brag. Why, take your Turkish Battle-Ax, and go to the Wars, Captain, you will
get Immortal Honor I know presently; and so here is my Service to ye, good
Captain Clapper.


[Drinks to him. Y. Brag. Nay, let it be some of the Brandy then that you sold
by the Church wall, good Colonel Granadeer: D'sheart, was the Devil in ye to
talk at that Rate?


O. Brag. What, Sirrah, I warrant you thought I had crammed a dozen or two of
Lies in the hinder part of my Jaw, as a Monkey does the overplus of his Dinner.
But, Sirrah, I Would have you know I was of too honest a Principle.


Y. Brag. Honest! Ay, that is it has made ye dine so often on pickled Herrings
and hard Cheese; Oh, what will become of me?


O. Brag. Come, come, Sirrah, take the Gentleman's Advice, and strip from that
fluttering Coat, and sell it, 'twill serve to make us merry a considerable
while; and since these Titular Captains are most of 'em Rogues, I Will provide
you a new Title, you shall serve the King and Queen, Sirrah, and be as I am, an
honest Granadeer.


Y. Brag. Lord, Sir, what do you mean? If my Lady should but hear I was in
Company where they but named the King and Queen, she would discard me for ever
-- And I have yet some small Hopes.


O. Brag. Sirrah, I Will have you hope no more hopes; but let my Lady be pox'd by
her whole Party, cramped with her Jack-boots, and choked with her cold Tea.
Come, come, strip, strip, I Will have the Coat off presently; that Lace will keep
us two Months at least, in Tobacco, Brandy, and Red Herrings.


Y. Brag. Oh the Devil, he is at his old Play again.


O Brag. Come, come; quick, quick; off with Hat, Peruke, and Coat; quick, I say.


Y. Brag. Quick! Ay, as quick as my Legs can carry me, [runs out] if you are at
that sport.


O. Brag. Say you so, Rascal? I Will be with ye presently Faith.


[runs after. SCENE II. The Boarding-School.
Enter Mirtilla with a Book in her hand. Mirtil. Reads. Embarked at last, and
sculk'd into the Hold;
My Flight was to my jealous Parents told;
As much too timorous they, as I too bold.
Ah dear, dear Ovid, how thy precious Wit,
Dressed in the glittering Robe of Charming Poetry,
Moves my soft Soul? -- When e're thou writest of Love,
Methinks my Heart melts with the Sacred Flame,
And even makes Virgin Innocence grow wanton:
For then dear Merriton I think on thee,
And every Thought begets an Ecstasy,
Almost too fierce for Virtue to endure:
Yet though I love thee, my Resolves are constant,
I Will sigh and mourn for thee my dearest Friend,
But can no more, till our hard Fortunes mend.

Enter Lady Addleplot, Crowstich, and L. Stroddle. L. Addle. You amaze me, Mrs.
Crowstich, with this Discovery: I thought it impossible the Girl should be so
wild.


Crow. It Is strange indeed, Madam, for one of her years; but your Ladyship
shall have the proof on it presently.


Mirtil. She here! To disturb my Contemplation: Horrid Creature! How shall I
avoid her?

[ Exit Mirtil.
L. Addle. The the other Dowdy indeed I always imagined indocible; but that Sir
Arthur's Offspring, a Child born of my own Body, Bone of my Bone, Flesh of my
Flesh, Vitals of my Vitals, that she should degenerate, I am amazed at it!


L. Strod To look so much below her self, as to fancy a little Dancing Master;
it is not adequate your Ladyships Blood that runs in her, I confess.


Enter Jenny. L. Addle. Whither were you going you great Romp? ha!


Ienny. Oh Pray Mam forgive me this time, and I Will never do so again.


Crow. Only to Mr. Coopee, Madam; this has been hatching a good while; the
the other too is as mad for Semibrief our Singing-Master; they were both found
Romping in the Garden with 'em last Night, but the Governess has turned them
away for it. Here she comes with her Father, I Have told him her* Tricks already.


Enter* Nicompoop, Molly, and Tearshift. Nicomp. Ah Madam, the Girls are both
undone seriously!


L. Addle. The Girls! I hope you don't couple your Tarrier there with Sir
Arthur's Breed, Jack Sauce! -- Ah Tearshift, it is evident now that filthy thing
there has quite spoiled Miss by Keeping her Company.


Tear. It Is certainly so, Madam, there is no comparison between the Childrens
Parts.


L. Addle. I'lle examine her my self. Hussy, speak the Truth, and escape the
Rod: What did you and that awkward Creature do with Coopee and Semibrief in the
Garden last Night?


Ienny. No hurt, truly, truly now.


L. Addle. What business had ye there? What was your Design? Come, don't ye lie.


Ienny. Why, we Eat, ugh, ugh; we eat a dozen of Custards there.


L. Addle. A dozen of Custards, very well.


Ienny. And about Fourteen Cheescakes.


Molly. There wan't Fourteen then, there was but Thirteen in all, and I have
one of them in my Pocket here.


[Pulls out a great Cheescake, and eats it. L. Addle. My Lady Stroddle, did ye
ever hear such a filthy Romp?


L. Stroddle. She has a little too much of the vulgar, I confess, Madam.


Nicom. Madam, I beseech your Ladyship to hear Molly tell what Word* passed
between 'em, and what that Impudent Singing-master said to her.


L. Addle. Prithee hold thy Tongue.


Nicom. Pray Madam, let me beg your Ladyship. Come Molly, leave chawing your
Cheescake, and tell my Lady, Child.


Molly. Why, he asked me --


Ienny. But pray Mother don't be angry with Mr. Coopee, for he is a mighty
pretty Man, and the best Caperer in all the Town.


[^eaps rampingly. Molly. And pray Father don't fall out with Mr Semibrief, for
he is a fine Man every inch of him, and the best Triller, aw, aw, au, au.


[Trils. Nicomp. The poor Fool wins upon me so with her pretty Carriage, that
seriously I can deny her nothing: Come and kiss me, Molly*


L. Addle. Fogh, how the Brute licks the Calf yonder. Well, Mrs. Crowstich,
though the Fellow has been saucy with her; it is not so far gone I see, but the
Girl may be reclaimed.


Crow. Ah Madam, this is not half her Fault; if this had been all I had born it
with some Patience; but, Madam, he has taught her to be a Rebel too.


L. Addle. Hah!


Crow. And made 'em drink Confusion to the French three times one after another
in Sillabub.


L. Addle. Degenerate Bastard? Is It possible! I had rather she had been choked.


Crow. Nay, and what is worst of all, the Villan made her sit on's Knee and sing
an impudent Ballad twice over in praise of King William.


L. Addle. A young Whore, gad I Will whip her presently before ye all.


[Runs to her and they interpose. Nicom. Nay, dear Lady, seriously, you will put
your self into such an heat. -- Hussy get ye gone


Ienny. I Have a trick for it yet, for I Will go and hide my self till night, and
then get out to Mr. Coopee at the Belcony.


[Runs off. Molly. And I Will get out at the Cellar-Window to Mr. Semibrief and
be gone from 'em all I Am resolved on it.


[Runs out. L. Addle. Away ye Coxcomb, or I Will give you as much; 'dslife a
young Jade to drink Confusion to the French; I shall hate Sillabub as long as I
live for it; but I Will claw her, I Will teach her to turn Rebel.

[Exit after her.
Nicom. Pray Mrs. Crowstich go and strive to pacify her, for she is in a
devilish humor seriously.


[Exeunt. Enter Young Merriton and Mirtilla. Mirtil. But to pass upon 'em thus
for a dancing Master and undiscovered, is a strange Riddle to me.


Y. Mer. It pleased Mrs. Crowstich to introduce me, who it seems, has some
friendly opinion of my qualification for my performance Yesterday; beside, what
can be strange to Love, who'd not change Shapes like Jove for such a Danae?


Mirtil. Who would not talk like you that had your Wit?


Y. Mer. Or who would live confined here, that had yours? once more think on my
Suit then dear Angel.


Mirtil. Nay, now you are unjust; did you not promise, provided I would suffer
ye to see me, to touch no more upon that jarring string?


Y. Mer. If that be jarring, there is then no Music; but Discord is the Soul
of Harmony. I own I promised ye, alas! but how? as men in Fevers promise not to
drink, yet have no Ease or Comfort till they break it; or as to modest Virgins
newly wedded and beg a Weeks Reprieve, we seem to promise, but how can that
e're bind the amorous Bridegroom, when there is necessity it should be broke?


Mirtil. Little should I depend upon your promise, when you had power, that can
infringe it now.


Y. Mer. All things of sense unanimously excuse me; I cannot look upon thee
without loving, nor love thee but I must renew my suit.


Mirtil. A Suit bent to the ruin of us both.


Y. Mer. No, rather to our Souls Eternal Comfort.


Mirtil. Oh Heaven! What Comfort can there be in Love, curbed and confined by
Poverty?


Y. Mer. We have no Poverty, whilst we love enough; the Dross of gilded Luxury
never can equal the Glittering Ore of our sublime Contentment. Thou have a Soul
I know disputes Fortune as much as vile unchastity or folly; a Soul that sits
in the middle of her Wheel with Wings still poyz'd, not mounting up, nor
falling, but in a constant Station fixed, can smile at those that climb, and
those that hurry down.


Mirtil. I have so, and I own I think as little of the vain noisy fluttering
World as you, the gaudy Fop or haughty thing of Title, the strutting Prelate,
or the Knave in Furs can laugh at too; nay I could be contented with the least
gift of Fate, if that were all.


Y. Mer. If that were all! What is there else, sweet Life?


Mirtil. It Is not for my own sake that I deny, but, Sir, for yours; if we were
married, perhaps I should love ye, nay love ye dearly; perhaps have Children
too, some half a dozen pretty smiling Blessings to cling around and help Life's
tedious Journey with the dear nonscence of their prattling Stories. But should
the freezing hand of Want afflict us, what should we do, but sit by our small
fire, Tears in our Eyes and throbing Griefs at Heart, to see our little Flock
of unfledged Cupids, shivering with Cold as wanting necessaries, who looking
wishly on us seemed to say, why would you marry thus to make us miserable?


Y. Mer. Thou talkst of Children, and I think of Heaven, when I conceit thou
art to be their Mother; oh I would learn to out-dig my Grandsire Adam, e're
thou should want the profits of the Earth, or my dear Children born of thy
sweet Body, their due or proper sustenance.


Mirtil. And what must I do then when you should dig? I know in Marriage we
must share the Troubles as well as Joys of him we are confined to; can I see
him that lies within my Arms so full of cares he has scarce time for Love, rise
early to provide for me and mine, and I not knit, or sow, or spin or something?
The laboring Husband that has a lazy Wife may not only suspect her Love, but
Virtue -- No, I Would never part from you in your ill Fortune, but will not be the
Cause to bring it on ye.


Y. Mer. You cannot be the Cause I have enough, though not what you deserve.


Mirtil. But I alas! have not enough for you.


Y. Mer. No matter, Heaven will prosper.


Mirtil. That I hope, and then my Tongue shall tell another story, till when
adieu; and yet I believe I value ye, and it is value keeps me from consenting.


Y. Mer. Come, come, it is plain you hate me; for if you did not, Fortune and
Wealth were Trifles.


Mirtil. Be ungrateful and think so still.


Y. Mer. I must and will by Heaven!


[Is going out, and Old Merriton meets him. O Mer. How now Son? Why in such
have? Come back again.


Mirtil. My Foster Father here, and in this unhappy Juncture! Oh Heaven! What
shall I say to excuse my self?


Y. Mer. Sir, I beseech ye give me leave, I Am ill of the sudden, and want a
little Air -- What makes he here? She said indeed she was beholding to him, but
how, Heaven knows: I Will observe more hereafter, this may be a Riddle worth
finding out.

[Exit.
Mirtil. Sir, I am afraid I have offended you, finding me thus discoursing with
your Kinsman in this suspicious manner.


O. Mer. To fear implies a Guilt; I know your Virtue, and you might have spared
that word; beside, he is my Son.


Mirtil. Your Son! Nay, then a Sisters Amity may well excuse this Freedom;
'twas Sir, your Interest first that introduced him; for any Blood of yours mere
Gratitude would prompt my throbing Heart to love and honor.


O. Mer. 'Twas warm discourse you had, the purple Signal that yet remains
displayed within your Cheeks, confirmed me that your Tongues have had a Battle,
and Love or War has fiercely been denounced. -- Pray let me know, and if I Have
interest in ye, as for past Cares I cannot doubt I have, give me a share in the
discovery.


Mirtil. Sir, I dare trust you with my secret Sins, much more then with my
little worldly Business: Know then, your Son has often been pleased to honor me
with passionate Expressions of his Love.


O. Mer. I thought so, pray proceed


Mirtil. Ah! then take all; I own I love him too, and now you have a secret
out, which nothing but your Commands could ever have forced from me; I love
him, Sir, yet knowing my Condition, modest regard of wronging him hereafter by
my ill Stars, made my poor famished Heart hold out, though within one short
hour of starving


[weeps. O. Mer. This is as I could ^ wish -- Come be not sad, the Stars have
better aspects than you think, and Fortunes giddy Wheel will soon turn round to
sea^ thee on the utmost Spoke with Honors.


Mirtil. Ah, do not mock my Wretchedness, dear Father!


O. Mer. Not for the World; come in with me and listen, for I will tell thee
wonders; the Minute is near and the blessed Hand of Providence to pass thee from
thy Labyrinth of Misfortunes holds out a Clue and guides thee on to Happiness.

In every Life, the Doom of Fate secures
One Hour to make it blessed, and this is yours.

[Exeunt. SCENE III.
Enter Amorous and Le Prate. Amor. Now Monsieur, you see what a Precipice I
freed ye from, and what Reasons I had for my late passionate resentment.


Le Prat. Monsieur, you have made it out dat you have de good reason, and I
perceive dat she be de ver dam Jilt, ma foy; and tho I have lost de little
Honor in de quarrel, I have save one hundred Guinea morbleau, vish make me ver
much amends: But Monsieur, pray observe, I will show you the finest French Song
here dat I learnt dis Morning, -- thol loll, loll.


[Sings. Amor. 'Dslife, no Song now, dear Le Prat, this is our very Minute of
Projection; I Have just sent for her, go, go, prithee step into that Closet, and
when I call, come and confront her.


Le. Prat. Vid all my Heart, and I will practice dis Song all de while dear for
fear I should fall asleep.

[Exit into the Closet.
Amor. And if there be a subtiler Devil than ordinary,
Used by grave Statesmen, or by jilting Whores,
Him I invoke t'assist me; here she comes.

[ Enter Jiltal and Oyley. Iilt. Why that French Fop should fail to come to my
Assignation is a Riddle to me, Oyley.


Oyley. And to me too, Madam. I Am sure I wound him upright, I wonder he did not
strike.


Iilt. Hush, here is the other Woodcock just fallen into the Plash; one at a Shoot
must serve, when there is but little Game: my dear, dear Iackey.


[Runs to him. Amor. Oh my sweet, sweet, sweet -- Devil!


[aside. Iilt. But why is my dear Honey, little Puppy-dog come before the hour?
hah --


Amor. My dear Life might assure her self, 'twas to do her good; to be short
then, you must know that my Uncle just now sent for me.


Iilt. So, dear Monkey, so, so.


[Hugs and clings to him. Amor. And sent me word: that upon condition, that I
would marry thee to morrow morning, he would feal my Settlement to Night, ha,
ha, ha, ha.


Iilt. Ha, ha, ha, ha, an old Fool, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Oyley. Ha, ha, ha, ha -- I must laugh too, but it is at him; Lord, who would be
a Man, to let a Woman abuse him thus?


[Aside. Amor. So dear Betty, thou know I had no reason to defer it, Child
there is a thousand pound a year coming, ye dear, sweet, pretty, melting,
charming -- confounded --


[aside. Iilt. I shall bite ye, Sirrah, I cannot forbear, I shall bite your
Nose off If you come near me: ah Iackey, Iackey, if ever you should leave me I
should dye, I should dye. --


[Squeaks in a strange tone, and clings to him. Amor. Ah! how the Devil has
turned her to do mischief; her trebble Violin is just now strung, and every Fop
that plays upon it is damned,


Le Prat. within. [Sings aloud Thol, loll, loll, and a bit of a French Song.
Iilt. How now? What Is that?


Oyley. The Devil sure, it can be nothing else.


Amor. A Plague on him! Now is that French Fool's Head so full of that new
Song, he has forgot where he is, and is singing our aloud. You need not go Mrs.
Oyley, it is one without that came with me to be Witness to the Marriage upon
occasion, or so.


Iilt. I vow, I was terribly frighted at the sound; I don't use to hear any
Man's Voice, but thine Iackey, so near my Bedchamber.


Amor. Kind Betty, -- No, a Pox take ye, I find they all used to come in.


[aside. Oyley. There Is an Oagle now, there is an Oagle, as well worth two
Guineas between Turk and Jew, as one shilling's worth another.


Iilt. And will you marry me to morrow morning then Iackey?


Amor. Will I! ah thou shall find, I Will do more for thee than that; come give
Mrs. Oyley the Key, and bid her fetch the Settlement out of the Cabinet
quickly, I suppose a Jointure of five hundred a year may do as well.


Iilt. I cannot give it her, I vow I cannot, I Am ashamed, -- I vow I am.


Amor. Oh fie! you must not trifle now, the Time wastes; Mrs. Oyley take it from
her.


Oyley. Pray, Madam, since the noble Squire will have it so --


Amor. That Bitch takes me for a Cully too, I find by her Squiring me. --
[Aside. Have got it? go, go, make have then.


Iilt. Indeed Iacky, I shall dye for thee.


[ Lauguishing. Amor. No, no Amor. Impossible. Iilt. I vow I shall.


[In a Tone. Iilt. I shall never live to be brought to Bed, I Am afraid I shall
have two this time -- I swear, I believe I shall.


Amor. So! here is Generation for ye! One Jointure has begot two Bastards in
half a quarter of an Hour.


[aside.] Jiltal puts her Fan before her Face. Enter Oyley with the Settlement.
Oyley. Here it is Sir, and Heavens bless ye for your Love to her.


Amor. Umph -- I think indeed this is my erring Scrawl.


Oyley. Yes indeed is it, I was witness to'r, it is your very hand, Sir.


Amor. You are also Witness to this then,


[ Tears the Settlement. What do you start Bawd! Iilt. Zoons, what does he mean?


[Putting her Fan aside. Amor. Oh, Madam! be not afrighted I beseech ye, it may
chance to make ye miscarry of your two Babes; there is what I know will please
ye -- it is your Jointure, Madam, your Ladyship understands the shorthand.


[Gives her the Letter. Iilt. My Letter to the Frenchman -- Oh Confusion! I Am
undone.


Amor. There is no Witness yet, but I Will call one; Allons Monsieur approach!


Enter Le Prate from the Closet. Le Prat. Sharming, and fair, and most
extraordinary your very most humble and obliged Serviture; Tholl, loll --


Oyley. D'slife, if this be true, I must into woollen stockins again.


[Amorous laughs. Le Prat. Madam, the Deevel take me, if I am not ver sorry --
^at --


Iilt. Hell take thee, burn the World, and perish Nature!


[Rages about. Amor. Faith, Madam, I confess I Have been your hindrance, the
Monsieur had a Hundred Guineas for ye, but that I told him my Whore took no
money. As for your Babes of Grace, if they chance to be born naked, and have
not back and breast on like Troop, I Will give ye something to buy Blankets, and
so adieu, thou Wretched --


Le Prat. Impudent.


[Dances up and down. Amor. Mercinary. Le Prat. Pockey.


[In another tone. Amor. Jilting. Le Prat. Common.


Amor. Senceless, and what is yet worse, Ungrateful Where, And Curse me Heaven,
if e're I love thee more.


[Exeunt. Oyley. Nay, you are right enough served, could you think to have an
intrigue with a Frenchman, but that all the Town should know it?


Iilt. Oh! That I were a Witch now for a minute, or knew the means to be so;
I Have heard of Bonds written with Blood and Charms, that have by that made
mischief prosperous, would some revengeful Power would tempt me once, hah!

Enter Old Rakehell. I Am wishing for the Devil, and here he comes as pat, as
he were sure to have my Soul beforehand; oh -- for a Female Plot now to
o'rereach this subtle Amorous, and make his Wit outwitted, the Omen appears
fair, let me Consider.


Rake. I Am sure I saw my Nephew come this way, but where to find him amongst
this Warren of Conney Burrows, is a Work past my Skill; I bolted into one of
their holes just now, and there were two or three young bouncing Girls stark
naked, going to wash themselves in a Tub; 'gad I thought I should have lost my
Eyesight, or at least been used like Acteon, but that as it happened there were
no Hounds about me. A plague on it, I cannot find the way down neither, and I am
damnably afraid of falling into that Indian Tigers Quarters again.


Iilt. I have it, go Oyley and tell him I Would speak with him, and thou dear
Devil of Female subtilty, if e're thou were our Sexes Benefactor, assist me now.


[ Oyley claps him on the back. Oyley. Sir, my Lady would speak with ye.


Rake. Oh! Gad's bud, I Am fallen into the Devil's paws, with seeking to avoid
'em; Oh pray young Gentlewoman inform your Lady that the Writings are ready,
I Will Seal to night, and it is no matter for speaking with her; alas, you know
she is mad.


Oyley. Mad, pray Sir, come nearer, and be undeceived. Mad, did you say?


Iilt. Sir Rowland, I could never have thought a man of your Sense could be so
grossly imposed upon, without perceiving it.


Rake. How Is this --


Iilt. Lord, Sir, you shun me as I were a Ghost, but I find this is your
Nephews Trick, and I cannot blame ye, he would have Tricked me too, Sir, had I
not watched him.


Rake She talks well now, but if this should be a calm fit of the Devil in her,
only to get time to put the Dagger into my guts, 'gad I Will keep my distance yet
for all her Coaksing.


Oyley. Now work but thy part Devil, we are made again:


[aside. Iilt. I had designed to send to ye this morning, Sir, to tell ye how
this base ungrateful Fellow, this Prodigal your Nephew has abused ye; nay, not
only you but me, by making me affront one of your merit; but, Sir, I ask you
now ten thousand Pardons.


Rake. This must be madness, for I can find no sense in it.


Iilt. I had at first, it is true, as it was reasonable, some ill thoughts of
ye, but now have much the better; his Plots are all unravelled, and by
substantial information now, I find 'twas he that fold me to the Indies.


Rake. It Was so, Madam, oh he is a damned Kidnabbing wicked Fellow, 'gad I Will
take heart and close in with her while the Fit lasts.


Iilt. 'Twas by his Plot I acted that mad part when last I saw ye, much against
my own good nature, but I have found his Villainies out since, how he designed
to gull me to a Marriage, and you out of a Settlement; it is plain now, and I
was sending too this very morning, to beg ye not to Seal.


Rake. Gadzooks, what is this I hear? Why hark ye, Madam, are not you really mad
then?


Iilt. Mad, indeed such injuries were enough to make me so; but, Sir, I hope my
Eyes will resolve that doubt; besides, if you doubt my sense, you shall hear me
sing a Song of my own making.


SONG.
ROyal and Fair, Great Willy's dear Blessing,
the Charging Regent of the Swains;
Heavy with Care, thus sadly Expressing
Her grief, sat weeping on the Plains:
Why did my Fate Exalt me so high,
If fading State must deprive me of Joy?
Since Willy is gone,
Ah! how vainly shines the Sun,
'Till Fates decree, the Winds and Sea
Waft, waft him to me.
II.
Large are my Flocks, and flowery my Pastures,
Worth Treasures vast of Silver and Gold;
Where Ravenous Wolves too, fain would be Masters,
Devour all my Lambs, and break down my Fold:
Willy whilst here, secured me from fear,
All the wild Herd stood in awe of my Dear;
But poor helpless I*
Mourning Sigh, and hourly Cry
Let Fates decree, the Winds and Sea
Waft Willy to me.
Rake. A most admirable Creature, and if I may be so bold, Madam, have you
never a Dagger under your Petticoats, nor nothing?


Tilt. Nothing that will hurt you, Sir: alas! that Dagger was given me by him
to Act my part with; Oh he has abused us both inhumanly, but we'll be even with
him now, Sir, shall we not?


Rake. Shall we not? 'gad, Madam, say but a word more, and I Will have him hanged
at your door before to morrow night; here is luck, I thought I had got a Devil,
'wons it is a Cherubin of Cherubins.


[Aside. Iilt. There Is time enough to punish him, but he shall see us laugh at
him first; give me your hand, will you be true to me, and revenge me on that
wicked fellow?


Rake. Most vigorously --


Iilt. And take me, and my whole Fortune for your pains.


Rake. Most thankfully --


[Kneels. Iilt. There Is Bargain made, then go and get a black Coat, I Will marry
ye immediately.


Rake. My Genius, my Soul, my Spirits, I have not breath enough to speak my
joy, Oh that I could fly now, my Legs cannot carry me half fast enough, now
would some honest Toping Priest would come fluttering like a Swallow down the
Chimney, I must try and get one presently, for fear she cool again.

See in the World how strangely things are carried, I thought I should be
hanged, and now am to be Married.

[Exit Laughing. [Jiltal Strutting. So now let the History my Annals grace,
Mine is the Wreath, and Matchivil's an Ass.

Oyley. Three thousand Pounds a year, in three short minutes your Wit has
gained; hah! hah! hah! 'd'slife I could leap out of my skin methinks.


Iilt. Besides that poor dull wretched fellow Amorous stripped out of all, in
spite of all his Cunning; this now is prosperous mischief, and I am proud to
see my Conquering Brain overcome Mankind.

Let each Miss-Keeper take this for a Rule,
to get one Young, and if he can, a Fool:
Whilst her Sense yields to his, the day^s his own,
But if he is once Outwitted, he is undone.

[Exeunt ACT V. Scene I. Chelsey.
Enter Old Meriton, and Boy. O. Mer. WHere did you leave Sir Rowland, Boy?


Boy. At an Alehouse, Sir, just by the Church, waiting for Mr. Stiffrump our
Parson, and he desires ye to go presently to his House, and order his Servants
to trick it up nearly, and provide a good Supper against Twelve a Clock, and
then he will come and impart to ye an Extraordinary Affair that has happened to
him.


O. Mer. Well, go, Sirrah, and tell him it shall be done, but there [Ex. Boy.
shall be other Guests there to eat it than he imagines; what he means by his
extraordinary Affairs, I know not; it is enough for me to have brought my own so
near to perfection. I have left the Lovers within, cooing like a pair of
Tur^les, having extremely surpised her with a discovery this Morning, that she
is worth Fifty Thousand Pounds: Here she comes, so embarrass'd still between
hope and fear, that she is even in pain to hear of her good Fortune -- Come,
come, Madam, are yet ready? Enter Young Merr^ton and Mirtilla. It begins to
grow late.


Mirt. Alas! Whither must I go? you have so surprised me with this strange
News, that did I not know you to be a Man of Honor, I should believe you spoke
it to abuse me.


O. Mer. Do You doubt my honesty? have I deserved this from ye?


Mirt. Oh! no, Sir. And pray be not angry for my diffidence; to fear is natural
to our Sex; besides, Sir, fifty Thousand Pounds is such a Sum methinks!


O. Mer. As great a Sum as it is, you still outweigh it -- And what I Have said
I Will justify. Give me your hand; you must now change your Lodging, as we go on
I Will tell ye more -- Come, Will.


[Exeunt. Y. Mer. 'SDeath, Fifty Thousand Pounds; why, it is worse than
Witchcraft to her; half that Sum shall convert any Woman in England into a
Peacock, and make her so proud of her own Tail, there would be no enduring her:
I warrant she thinks now that I Will crawl on my Hands and Feet to purchase her;
but she shall find she is deceived; -- Love may oblige me to a slavish Duty,
but Fortune never shall.

[Ex. Y. Mer.
Enter Coopee and Semibreif with a Ladder. Coop. Come, Brother Fortune-Stealer,
help along with the Ladder: I hope this will prove more lucky than our last
Plot; for methinks the Moon favors us very well. How goes the Night?


Semibr. The School-Bell has just rung Nine, the Chickens within are all going
to Roost, and as full I warrant of Bread and Butter, Milk, Posset, and Cawdle,
as a Woman in Childbed, that has but just three days lain in.


Coop. Oh, here is the Balcony, now for the Sign.


[Squeeks through a Catcall. Enter Miss Jenny above. Miss I. Whose there? Coop.
It Is I, dear Miss, it is I.


[Squeeks again. Miss I. Who, Mr. Cooppe?


Coop. The same, the same, my dear, sweet, little, pretty --


Miss I. Oh, Law, oh, Law; but how shall I g^t down to ye though?


Coop. Oh, easily, easily, my dear: Look here, I Have brought a Ladder for thee.


Semibr. So, so, I see you are in a pretty posture; I Will go now and see how
Affairs stand at the Cellar Window.

[ Exit Semibr.
Miss I. A Ladder! Oh good! What, and must I act Love with a Ladder then?


Coop. A Ladder! you must do any thing for your poor Hubby that is to be; have
you got the Packthread?


Miss I. Yes, I warrant ye; what do you think I would forget any thing? But will
you be sure to marry me to night then?


Coop. To night! presently, Child, as soon as ever thou get'st off the Ladder;
why, the Parson stays for thee.


Miss I. There it is then; I'vads he shall not stay for me; I Am better bred than
so, I warrant ye.


[Throws down the Packthread, and he ties it to the Rope. Coop. So, now put it
round the Bar of the Window, and then let me alone to hoist it up.


Miss I. There, Oh, Gemini, what a pretty trick is this -- But; dear Mr.
Coopee, when we are married, what must we do afterward, I wonder.


Coop. Afterward; why then we must go to Bed, my Dear,


Miss I. Go to bed! well, and I'vads that will be very pretty; but what must we
do after that pray, dear Mr. Coopee?


Coop. After that, why? --


Miss I. Ay, there is the thing now, Mr. Coopee; what must we do after that?


Coop.. Why, do but get upon the Ladder, and come down my Dear, I Will tell thee
presently.


Miss I. Will ye? well, and so I will I'vads; I Will be with ye in a twinkling.


[Is getting upon the Ladder, and Crowshik comes and takes hold of her. Crow.
Will ye so Gentlewoman.

Pray let me have an account of your Journey first.


Miss I. Oh law, what shall I do now?


[Sings to Coopee out of tune. Sings.] Go, go, Friend below, I Am taken, I Am
taken, Ye little Knave, get off, and save your Bacon, your Bacon. Crow. Here
are rare doings; what, you are going to be married, are ye? but I Will help yet
to a Husband in the Morning. A good Rod, Hussie, that shall act Love with ye,
better than the Fool below there.


Miss I. Well, well, I will have a Husband, I Am resolved on it, do what you can:
And if you offer to whip me, I Will tear your Eyes out, so I will.


Crow. Go, get ye in, ye great Ramp. I Will lock her into her Sister's Room below
Stairs, for to night, there is no Balcony there. 'D'slife, was there ever such a
contrivance? We shall have all our Girls st^le out of the School by Baskets
full, if this trade hold; but I Will prevent it to Morrow Get ye in Hussie.

[Ex. Crow.
Coop. Ah, plague of my damned luck: If this Devil had slaid but a minute
longer, I had got my Fortune upon my back, a lamping penniworth, by this time:
But now, as the Devil will have it, must leave my Dow, that I have so long
molded for my own Cake, to be mumbled by the Chops of another: Pox on it, we
used to be more prosperous in these Intreagues; and if any of these raw Tits
can bolt out of their Warren at any time, it is (...) to one but your Greyhound,
Dancing Master, or your Lurching Songster has the first snap at 'em. It Is a
poor loving Fool, this; and of my Conscience will be very constant to me; and if
we can but contrive another Assignation, then if I lose her --


Enter Semibrief hastily. Sembr. Hist, hist, Coopee, come along with me
presently.


Coop. Phoo, prithee let me alone, I am very unfit for another I^treague now. A
Pox on it, I have lost my own.


Semibr. Ye lie, ye lie, ye Rogue; she is su^er than ever; Crowshik has just now
locked her up into a low Room, where my little Butterprint was watching for me,
who as soon as ever she was gone, puts back the Lock, gets out, and they are
now both together yonder at teh Cellar Window.


Coop. Ha! what do thou say, both, what, my little Cakebread too!


Semibr. Ay, ay, ye Dog, come quickly, and let us help 'em out.


Coop. 'Dsheart, this was beyond expectation. Run, run, run, run.


[They run out. Enter young Bragg dressed like a Granadeer. Y. Brag. If I had not
run away from this old Dog Father of mine just now when he was drunk and fell
asleep, I had been detached in the Morning amongst the Granadeers, and shipped
for the Expedition in Ireland; my fine Rigging's all gone, he has damned, that
is burnt, the very Soul of my Coat, the Lace; and my Embroidered Breeches hang
out at a Broker's in Drury Lane; by this time, he has taken up with the Money
they yielded, a whole Firkin of Brandy, a Hogshead of Red Herrings, two dozen
of Tobacco, and half a hundred of Cheshire Cheese: For my part, I believe he is
turned Conjurer, and lays up Provision for some Famine or other that is to
come. If I should appear before my Lady in this Cap, with this Cipher upon it, I
were no more a Man of this world; she would fly upon me like a Cat in a Closet,
and the tokens of my Manhood would be in a very desperate Condition.


Re enter Coopee, and Semibreif, with Miss Jenny, and Molly muffled, they cross
the Stage hastily. Semibr. Come along, along, my dear, dear little Chicken.


Y. Brag. Ha, That Is Semibreif's voice; who are those with him?


Molly. Well, you tell me you will make me a Woman too night. But i'vads my heart
goes a pit a patt about it; for I Have been told a Maid goes through a great
deal of trouble before she comes to be a Woman; and if you should chance to
kill me --


Semibr. Kill thee; ha, ha, ha, never fear it, my Dear.


[ Jenny drops a Baby. Y. Brag. By Heaven, my little Boarding-School-Spouse
that should have been.


Ienny. Oh law, my Baby, my Baby -- I Have lost my Baby.


Coop. Ah, It Is no matter if thou had lost it, I Will get thee a better Baby my
Dear.


Y. Brag. It Is so, the Romps are both stole from the School to night; and I am
luckily the first discoverer. I Will dog 'em, and then run and inform my Lady;
this, with some swinging lie or other may chance to re-instate me in her
favor, and get me other Rigging. For to say truth, I Am damnably ashamed of
this; well, Fortune prosper, I have but small hopes.

[Exit.
SCENE II.
[A Room with Table and Bottles. Enter Lady Addleplott sitting, Lady Stroddle,
Nicompoop armed back and breast, and Le Prate in Jack Boots. L. Addle. SO, so,
the Rising's up, and I think we are all fitted: and since you have done me the
honor to choose me for your Colonel, you shall find me ready to push forward, I
warrant ye.


Le Prat. Madam, mine Horse is ready, let us go to night, begar.


Le Strod. Methinks Mr. Deputy looks very like an Officer too.


Nicom, Oh lack, no seriously, I make but an indifferent Figure: I profess I
never wore a Sword in my life before, but once at a Training: 'Od so, I Have
forgot my Scaberd.

[Exit.
L. Addle. An Officer! I vow, my Lady Stroddle, I Am ashamed of him; he will never
be fit for any thing but to carry the Match.


L. Strod. But, Madam, I don't see the Captain here all this while.


L. Addle. Ah, there is another: I beseech ye, Madam, don't name him; he is found
to be the greatest Rascal in Town, a poor beggarly Fellow; they say he was
formerly a Blacksmith; but what has made me utterly discard him, is, the
Villain has had the impudence to brag of Favors; and you know, Madam, if once
they do that --


L. Strod. Ah, that is insufferable; but really he was a lusty Fellow.


Enter Tearshift with Lady Addleplott's Rigging and Jack Boots, and a Paper in
her hand. Tearsh. Oh, Madam, here is your Ladyships Rigging, and the account of
the Kentish Rising: The Captain of the Party has sent ye the particulars.


L. Addle. Oh, that is good; I thought I should hear to night. Come let us peruse
it, and drink their healths, hum, hum.

[They sit down. An Impartial Account of the Mutineers that have risen since
Friday last. Very good. Imprimis. Of Officers and others, that deserted through
scruple in the last Reign, and have now deserted through another scruple in
this, Two Hundred and Threescore. Here Is a Pint Glass, their Healths, my Lady
Stroddle. Of Monks, Dominicans, Franciscan Friars, and Jesuits, that herd
amongst Quakers, Fanatics, Independents, and Fifth Monarchy Men, Fifty Nine.

Oh, fie, that is but few. L. Strod. Alas! Good Men, they have made hard shift,


L. Addle. Pray observe, Madam, of Loyal Tory Rory Whores in and about London
-- Ten Thousand -- 'Dslife, give me the Bottle.


L. Strod. Ah, blessing on their Hearts. Gad it is pity they should have that
scandalous name given 'em; the Creatures have always been very serviceable to
our Party


Le Prat. Ah, it is certain, de Whore do ver mush good in de turn of Government:
dey haunt dey haunt de Playhouse, and shatt, and make a de noyce, ah, begar,
they are ver serviceable.


L. Addle. Serviceable; ay, you would say so if you knew all: Why, they are the
chief Tools we work with; why, these Ten Thousand Whores now shall draw as many
Fools to 'em in a Months time, and that will make a considerable Army. We'll be
gone by break of day, Madam.


L. Strod. With all my heart, Madam. I Am ready at a minute. I hope we shall
have Mass open again some time or other


[Enter Old Brag, Drunk. O. Brag. A Son of a Whore to run away from his
Colors, almost before he was well Listed, 'oons I Will hang him my self, I Will
make him ride the Wooden-Horse twelve hours together, with a dozen of Muskets
tied to each Leg -- Let me see, this is the House I Am sure -- I Will make bold
to beat up her Ladyships Quarters for once, I know the Rogue is crept in here.


L. Addle. See the careless Baggage, this is your leaving the door open.


L. Strod. And when we are Caballing too, Oh fie Mrs. Tear-shift, this is a
great fault indeed, d'slife we shall be discovered.


L. Addle. Let me go my Lady Stroddle -- you shall see me lay the Rascal's Soul
at my foot the first push.


Le Prat. Ah! Madam, it must not be, I will demand de Combat my self, I will
Challenge him to morrow morning, I will bring you his heart for your Dinner,
instead of de French Capon, and his guts shall serve instead of de Sawsage
about it.


O. Brag. That must be the French Admiral by his bragging, ugh; and the Rogue
carries the Bastile about him; you take out my guts for Sawsages, Sirrah?
Sirrah you are the Son of a Whore, and I Will make a National Quarrel out.


Le Prat. Vell, Vell, I remember, Rascal, I remember.


[ O. Brag. Sings.] Remember ye Prigs what was formerly done. O. Brag. Where is
this Rascal got now? I Will ferret him out of your holes in faith, I Will find out
your Ladyships ugh by places, I Will have him if he be above ground.

[ Exit Old Brag.
L. Addle. Go, Tear-shift after him, and let my Footmen use him at their
discretion.


[ Enter Nicompoop, and Young Bragg. Nicom. Oh! Madam, here is the saddest-News
you ever heard. Your Ladyships fine Daughter Ienny, and my ungracious Molly are
both stole out to night from the Boarding-School, with Coopee and Semibrief.


L. Addle. Hah! what says the fellow?


Le Prat. Ha, ha, ha -- dis is de Captain, de Blacksmith, and now turned
Granadeer, begar.


Y. Brag. Madam, I hope your Ladyship will excuse my disguise, but what Mr.
Deputy says is very true, I dogged 'emmy self, and have told him wherethey are.


L. Addle. This ever comes of these plaguey Boarding-Schools, the Girls are
always snap'd up by some Piping or Capring Fellow or other, if they are worth
any thing -- Come my Lady Stroddle, my Bowels yearn for the Jade, however I
must go see whether she is undone or no.


Y. Brag. Ah! dear Madam, what must I expect from your Ladyships favor --


L. Addle. Who Is there? bid some body give the Blacksmith here a Tester, and
let him have my Custom for shooing my Coach-Horses -- Come Monsieur, come let us
go.


L. Strod. And pray let us make haste Colonel, for you know the Rising is of
greater concern to us than Children or Parents either.


Le Prat. Ah Morbleau, is it dear be de ver much difference?


[Exeunt. Y. Brag. Give the Blacksmith a Tester, it is so, she is in the right,
faith, for I have worked at the Forge many a time, 'till I have earned it very
dearly.

Enter Tearshift. Ah dear Mrs. Tearshift I Am undone, my Lady has quite thrown
me off, this old Scoundrel Father of mine has utterly ruined me.


Tearsh. Why then ye have the means now to be revenged on him, for yonder he
lies Drunk, and a sleep upon the Cellar stairs, and my Ladies Footmen are going
to dress him up like a Dominican Friar, and as soon as he wakes intend to
expose him to the Mob, I Am sorry I cannot stay to see the sport -- for I must
after my Lady.

[Exit.
Y. Brag. Gad. I Am glad of this however, for now will I be revenged of the Old
Dogbolt -- I Will go and enter my self amongst the Mob immediately, I Will be the
Foreman of his Jury 'faith --

[Exit.
SCENE III.
Enter O. Merriton, Y. Merriton, Mirtilla, Coopee, Semibreif, Molly, Jenny, and
Parson. O. Mer. NOw, Madam, I hope you are satisfied, I Will therefore leave ye
in Possession, and go and get a Guard for our further Assistance. Gentlemen
stand to your Post, you know your own Ladies are at stake.


Coop. Doubt not, Sir, we are very happy to meet you, to give us this
Protection.


Semi. We'll defend our Fortunes now we have got 'em, I Will, warrant ye Sir --
Come Domine, you are one of our Party.


[To the Parson, and Exeunt. O. Mer. It Is well, and I Will be with ye presently.

[Ex. O. Mer.
Mirtil. I hope, Sir, you will defend your Fortune too?


Y. Mer. My Fortune is not worth defending, Madam.


Mirtil. How, Sir, not worth defending -- is my price fallen then?


Y. Mer. Your price, ah no, I spoke of my own Fortune; your value, Madam, is
inestimable, young, fair, and witty, Fifty Thousand Pounds too, and much good
may it do you, I am not envious.


Mirtil. All which I freely give to your dispose, Sir.


Y. Mer. By no means, Madam, I am no Usurer; your wisdom will do better to
signify this to your Goldsmith, he will manage your full Baggs to an advantage,
for my own part I deal in Hearts, not Money.


Mirtil. My heart, Sir is yours, for now I can give it nobly, I Have wealth
enough.


Y. Mer. But I, alas, have not enough for you: I think 'twas once your saying.


Mirtil. And do you then refuse me for a Saying?


Y. Mer. The Rich require no love, they expect reverence, and you see I keep my
distance: When we were equal, then I loved ye dearly, I durst be bold then, now
you are above me.


Mirtil. I am not proud, Sir.


Y. Mer. Not to your own thinking, a Woman's pride is just like one that
squints, she seldom thinks she has the imperfection, because she never sees it.


Mirtil. Are not you proud now, to refuse a Blessing so strangely thrown upon
ye? pray consider, Sir, are you not damnably proud?


Y. Mer. I have a noble fullenness of Soul, not proud, I never was a Slave to
the Bawd Fortune, noy am I to be pufft up with her Benefits.


Mirtil. Must then your bravery of mind be shown to all the World but me, ah!
where is now the Love you once protested?


Y. Mer. Here in my breast, my heart is full of it; but, Madam, you would never
entertain it, you set my heart still on the score of Fortune, 'twas not to be
obliged to you but her; it is true, you argued prettily upon it, but too wise
reasoning, shows too little Love.


Mirtil. All Love without is madness.


Y. Mer. Rapture you mean, and in that Rapture, Heaven, it is the Soul's general
good enjoyed in common, as well by the naked Beggar, as the Monarch; Fortune's
a gift particular to Fools, to make amends for the Soul's gross defects, the
blind work of Predestination, what must be, must be.


Mirtil. I never yet did wish the Gifts of Fortune only to give 'em you.


Y. Mer. You should have given your self, in you was fortune, each precious
minute you deferred my happiness, was greater loss than Fortune could repay me,
now it is your Charity -- I take it basely, it is Fifty Thousand Pounds given as
an Alms.


Mirtil. You are shrewdly hurt, to take the Alms of Love thus warmly heaped in
Gold -- Come, come, you jest with me, you cannot leave me so.


Y. Mer. Not so, I Have yet some generous services to pay ye, when you are
settled, then I Will tell ye more.


Mirtil. And more I hope to the purpose.


Y. Mer. It may be so, mean time please to retire, here is Company coming* I
should be a fool indeed, if I should lose thee for all my seeming [ Exit
Mirtil. fullenness, I know she is fast, therefore play this game, that hereafter
she may not twit me with her benefits, Riches corrupt the Mind, some Women must
be served so.

Enter Amorous laughing, with a Scrivener. Here comes Amorous, whose merry tone
will be turned too very suddenly.

Ha! Jack, well met; thour't very merry, I see, by which I guess the World goes
well -- hah --


Amor. Beyond my expectation, faith. Dear Rogue, I have stripped Iiltall, taken
away her Settlemement, and torn it; and have now brought this honest Fellow
with Deeds here that give me a thousand a year, which my Uncle has this night
promised to Seal. Ha, ha, ha.


Y. Mer. So; why, thou wett wrapped in thy Mother's Smock, sure, for thy luck:
But prithee what is become of the Jilt now!


Amor. Why, thou will find her selling of Walnuts by the Fleet Ditch within
these two days; footing of Stockings is above her level; she has not left a
Ninepence to buy Materials.


Enter Jiltall richly dressed, with Oyley, and three Footmen with Lights. Y.
Mer. 'Dslife, prithee look, is not that she yonder?


Amor. No, that must be the Devil who has taken her likeness, and comes I
believe with a design upon my Person.


[Stands amazed Iilt. Methinks Oyley, the Coach is not easy enough, I Will have
the Cushions altered, and the Velvet finer; I Will have Six Horses too, I find
every tawdry Gentlewoman has a couple.


Oyley. It Is true, Madam; and methinks your Ladyships Liveries are not fine
enough neither.


Iilt. No, they have too much of the dull City Air; I Will make Sir Rowland
change 'em. I Will have my Pages Coat covered with Gold Lace, and lined with
Tissue.


Y. Mer. Is this she that was selling Walnuts by the Fleet Ditch?


Amor. Damn her, this can be nothing but bouncing; you shall see me go and
teize her about the Settlement.


Iilt. What makes Sir Rowland stay so long, Oyley?


Oyley. He Is only talking with Mr. Dogsears the Parson a little, Madam, he will
be with ye presently.


Amor. Hoh, old Acquaintance; what, I see thou keep'st up still, I see thou will not want Rigging whilst there is a Cully in the Town.


Iilt. What means the Fellow? Who is this Rascal, Oyley?


Oyley. Some pitiful Shaggrag or other, Madam, of Aisatia, that wants to be
kicked by your Ladyships Footmen.


Amor. Do I so, eternal Common-shoar? No, they will better serve for your
Bitchships Recreation in the Larder at night. But, Betty, prithee why so resty?
Lord, you Whores with Settlements are so Proud, ha, ha, ha.


Iilt. If I did know thee to be a Fool, and not worth a Groat, I would ruin
thee for that word. Hark ye, do you pretend to know me, Sirrah?


Amor. Cry ye Mercy, faith, may be I am bewitched and mistaken: but the Devil
take me, if you do not look as like to a confounded Jilt of my acquaintance as
one Thumb looks like another. Do hear, prithee, honest Fellow, who is that
Lady? ha!


[To a Footman. Foot. Who is it? why, it is my Lady Rakehell: Sir Rowland will
fleece your Coat, I can tell ye that, if he comes and sees ye saucy with her.


Amor. Lady Rakehell, and Sir Rowland, what a Devil does this mean!


Y. Mer. This cunning Jilt has counterplotted him, by Heaven; I find it.


Amor. Why, hark ye, Fubbs, prithee how came thy Name to be altered? ha.


Iilt. It Is a disgrace to me to tell thee; but since it is the only honor I
ever intend to do thee, know, Sirrah, I Am your Aunt, I am married to your
Uncle, Sirrah.


Amor. 'Oons, married to my Uncle!


Oyley. Ay, ay, married to your Uncle, Sirrah; what a Pox, will not the Fellow be
answered?


Amor. 'Dsheart, ye Jade, deny it again, and quickly, or I will have no more
mercy on thee than --


[Takes her by the Throat. Oyley. Help, help, Murder, Murder.


Enter Rakehell. Rake. What Is this I see, my Rascally Nephew abusing Mistress
Oyley? Sirrah, hands off, or I Will run my Sword in your Guts. What is your
meaning for this Rogue? ha!


Amor. Meaning, why, Sir, the impudent Queen would face me down that you were
married to Iiltall my quondam Whore there.


Rake. How, Sirrah, your Whore? Stand off, let me come to him, he shall never
speak again, by this Blade.


Iilt. Now for my last Game cunningly.

[Aside. No, dear Sir Rowland, for my sake spare him now, because it is our
Wedding day; it is true, he has been saucy, and wicked, ungracious, and
impudent, but let him escape for once, do dear, sweet, honey Sir Rowland, Alas!
you know the poor Fellow is crack-brain'd.


[She strokes and fawns on Sir Rowland. Amor. Or shall be presently, 'faith, if
this hold.

Well, Sir, to the discovery of that another time: Here the Scrivener has
brought the Deed you ordered; will you please to go in and Seal?


[Shews the Deed, and Rakehell strikes it out of his hand. Rake. Seal, 'oons ye
Blockhead, I Have married

The Heiress, what a Devil should I Seal?


Amor. Why to the Thousand Pounds a Year you promised me, what a plague have ye
forgot?


Rake. I Will not give thee a Groat, get the Pox, take the Highway, Rob, come to
the Gallows, and be damned, a fair riddance --


Iilt. Alas, if my dear-Husband here should Seal to the Settlement, in one of
your mad fits, Cousin, you would tear it some time or other.


Amor. A Pox Cousin ye, -- I Am resolved this Devil shall never carry it off so,
however; why then, Sir, I must tell ye, that you are cheated too, for she is no
more the right Heiress than I am, but, as I told ye before, my Cast off Wench,
and her Name is Iiltall --


Iilt. Ay, make him believe that if thou can, Fool [Aside to Amorous. Ha, ha,
ha, do you hear him, Sir, do you hear him;


Rake. Ay, ay -- A Pox on him, but I Will not endure this; I Will send the Dog to
Bedlam to morrow -- but come, my Dear -- Supper stays for us -- thou'^t welcome
now to thine own House -- Sirrah, go and get open the door.


[Footman goes to the Door, and young Merriton interposes. Y. Mer. Who would
you speak with, Friend?

Have you any business here --


Foot. Business here, Sir, yes that I have.


Y. Mer. To me then.


Foot. To you! I Have nothing to say to you, my Business is with the Porter.


Y. Mer. I am the Porter.


Rake. How, now, Sir, you the Porter, pray since when, I never entertained ye
that I remember?


Y. Mer. The Lady of the House has, that is enough, Sir.


Iilt. Who, I? what does he mean, I never entertained him, not I.


Y. Mer. You never did, indeed; alas, how should ye? you are not the Lady of
the House --


Rake. No, Sir, then I hope you will give me leave to be Lord on it, I hope I may
come in?


Y. Mer. Not a Foot further, Sir, my Lady has given orders to the contrary.


Rake. A pox on your Lady, what have I to do with her; 'oons must not I bring
my Wife into my own House for her?


Y. Mer. You may if you please, Sir, but this is none of it, this my Ladies
House.


Amor. I believe Merriton has contrived this trick for my sake; come dear Will,
shall I come in then, dear Rogue?


Y. Mer. Nor you neither, Sir, I must beg your pardon.


Amor. Pardon, prithee what do thou mean, is the Devil in thee?


Rake. Hey day! here is another madd Puppy -- the Town swarms with 'em now as
thick as Wasps in Summer; what hoa -- whose within there, Old Merriton --
Orthodox, Pew-pimp, where are ye in the Devil's Name?


Enter Old Merriton with Guard at distance. O. Mer. To one of my Names I
answer, what is your pleasure, Sir?


Rake. 'Oons, to go in, Sir -- and to carry in this sweet Lady, Sir, quick,
quick, ye old Homily, I Have wonders to tell thee, Rogue.


O. Mer. I have wonders to tell you, Sir Rowland.


Rake. A pox of thy wonders, thou have 'em all out of the Apo^rypha, I Will not
hear one of 'em before Supper; 'sbud, open the Door there.


Iilt. What can be the meaning of this?


O. Mer. You will not force, Sir, into a Ladies House without her leave?


Rake. A Ladies House -- ha, ha, ha, old Deutrinomy's mad too, or has the old
Hipocrite got a Whore into my House, and lovingly given her the Possession?


O. Mer. No, Sir, the Lady within is the right Owner of the House, Sir William
Wealthy's Daughter; she, you and I kidnab'd to the Indies, Sir, who has, to
tell you the truth, with my Assistance, now made hard shift to get back to
seize her own.


Rake. Ha, ha, ha -- it is so, he is Crazed, poor Religion is stark mad by this
light, the Owner within, ye lie, here she stands; speak, my Dear, art not thou
the true Heiress -- hah, prithee speak and confound the silly Fellow.


Iilt. Why then, if I must speak, not I, Faith, Sir, therefore look to your
self.


Rake. Not the Heiress, 'oons, what a Devil art thou then?


Oyley. A very good Gentlewoman, I assure ye, Sir Rowland --


Amor. I told ye once before, she is an old Acquaintance of mine, an admirable
Backsword-player; it is true, she is not worth a Groat, but she can knit well, or
make Buttons: will you Seal yet, Sir?


Rake. Oh the Devil, I am choused, abused, undone!


O. Mer. A mistake only in the Woman, Sir, here comes a Lady will clear all.

Enter Mirtilla. Your Guardian, Madam -- but perhaps you have forgot him.


Mirt. I have, but not his Vices, which I Will not reprove, because I Will leave
the Law to do it for me; in the mean time it is satisfaction for me that I dare
seize my own.


Amor. My little pretty Tit of the Boarding-School, by all that is good, this
subtle old Fellow, I find, has fooled me damnably.


Iilt. Her own Furies and Hell, am I then gulled at last?


Rake. 'Sbud draw, I Will make a forcible entry; I Will not be ^ool'd thus* Draw,
Nephew, and I will Seal.


Amor. Not I; draw to Newgate, to Tyburn, be Condemned, Carted, Halter'd,
Hoisted and Hanged, if you please, I Will not draw an inch, not I.


O. Mer. Oh, we are ready for ye, Sir; seize on him there, and secure him till
the Law determine further.

[Constable and Guard seize Rake. And now you are hampered, Sir, know that our
former Agreement of Spiritting away to the Indies this young Lady, the right
Heiress to Sir William Wealthy, was always odious to me, which I had then
discovered and secured her, had I not known your Crowded Coffers would have
out-talk'd my honesty, I therefore took this way, and seeming readily to pack
her off, conveyed her privately to a Boarding-School, where the two hundred
pounds a Year allowed me for that honorable Action, I have faithfully laid out
on her in Breeding, thus saved her from your mischievous Intentions, and well
rewarded in the grateful Action.


Rake. I have made a fine days work of this! not so much for losing three
thousand a year, as for marrying a three pil'd Whore, for an Heiress -- but
there is one comfort still, she is not like to get a Groat by me.


Iilt. If I had known that, I Would as soon have married the Hangman.


Amor. What does your Ladyship think of a Page now, covered with Gold-Lace, and
lined with Tissue.


Iilt. I Would poison him, as I would thee, and all the World.


Oyley. If I did not dream of Woollen Stockens last night, I Am no Christian.


Mirt. The House I stand possessed of, and the Writings, which give me Title as
my Father's Heir, all which, Sir, To old Mer.
being about to choose me a new Guardian, I have offered, nay, with my self, to
an ungrateful Man that has refused me.


O. Mer. And has he his Wits left?


[Frowning on his Son. Amor. Whoever, Madam, that stupid Creature is, you shall
find me more tractable, and if you please, you may remember, Madam --


[Brisking up to her, Y. Mer. interposes. Y. Mer. Oh, Sir! this is a Jem too
Rich to lose; and, as you say, he must be very stupid, that, kindly proffered
can deny to wear it -- I hope, I may succeed, Madam.


Mirt. I need not speak, my heart too much pleads for ye.


Amor. Pox, fopp'd again, the Devil's in my Fortune, hark'e, Sir, you have
choused me finely here,


[To old Mer. O. Mer. Only Wit outwitted, Jack, no chouce, I only diverted
thee a little, for my Son's sake; thou know Natural affection is unblameable.


Amor. Diverted me! a pretty Epithete, he has diverted me from fifty thousand
pounds, with a Pox to him; a fine diversion indeed -- A plague of my shallow
Pate.


O. Mer. Mr. Constable, there is your Warrant, go and secure Sir Rowland till
further order; Crimes of this Nature must not be winked at, nor can I refuse my
Evidence, and be honest.


Rake. Honest! a F^llow with a Face of thy Levitical Cut, honest! and a Rogue
that knows too, there is no such thing in Nature.


O. Mer. No.


Rake. No! does not the Forreigner cheat the Country, the Country cheat the
City, the City cheat the Courtier, the Courtier cheat the King, the Robber
cheat the Fur-Coat, the Fur-Coat cheat the Red-Coat, the Red-Coat cheat the
Petty-Coat, the Petty-Coat cheat the Black-Coat, and the Black-Coat cheat us
all! and yet thou pratest of Honesty, Honesty; prithee Cant, pray on, and be
damned, for that thou will come too for all thy Honesty; and so farewell.


[Is carried off. Amor. Godbuye, Uncle, here is my Settlement in a fine
Condition.


Y. Mer. Well Jack, thou shall be no loser by my Fortune, I know thy Ravenous
Uncle has sucked up a great part of thy Estate by means unjust, which we'll
return, and set thee up anew; see, B^tty smiles at that.


Amor. And shall we sawn, and stroke, and kiss, and spett at one another again?
Hah, my dear, dear, damned Crockadile, hah!


[Embracing her first, then frowns. Oyley. Plague on 'em, they laugh at us;
come away, Madam.


Iilt. I come; but I Am resolved I Will leave one swinging Curse behind me first.

May Whores lose, thee, and all thy Race, Salvation;
Breed want, the Pox, Murder, and Desolation;
And damn ye to the twentieth Generation.
[Exit.
Amor. Hah, hah, ha; Adieu Buttock; and Gad little did I think that ever I
should have had the Heart to have said so; but come, there is an end on it. How
now, who have we here, more House-warmers?


Enter L. Addleplott, L. Stroddle, Nicompoop, Le Prat, and Tearshift. L. Addle.
Where is this Wretch, this degenerate Creature, that is so eager for Man before
she is capable, this Cub of thirteen, with the Devil in her already? Where must
I find her? hah!


Nicom. This is the House, an't please your Ladyship.


L. Prat. Dis is de House begar of Sir Rowland Rakehell


Y. Mer. Begar you lie; and therefore stand further off: Hey, what a Plague,
do you come to besiege my House?


L. Prat. Your House, Morbleau? but dat is ver strange.


Y. Mer. Oh, Sir, strange and true! Therefore dance your distance.


L. Addle. I hope your are not accessory to the Childrens Rape, Sir?


Y. Mer. Not I, Faith; all your Ladyships Children have a better faculty
themselves than to want Accessaries.


L. Addle. Very well, Sir; you may chance to swing for this; for my Daughter is
an Heiress.


Y. Mer. Oh, I Will venture that; they are within there with two honest ingenious
young Fellows, who I think are Married to 'em; and for my part I could not
civilly deny 'em the protection of my House. See, I suppose they have heard
your voice, and are come of their own accord.


Enter Jenny, Molly, Coopee, Semibrief, and Parson. L. Addle. Ay, ay, there has
been some mischief done, I Am sure, for yonder is a Parson with 'em.


L. Addle. Do You know your Mother, Hussie? Come hither.


Ienny. Oh, but I will not tho, you will whip me.


Nicom. And have thou ungraciously taken Man without my leave, Molly?


Molly. Yes indeed have I, therefore hold your self contented.


Semibr. Ay, ay, well said, my Dear.


[Huggs her. Ienny. However, whereof I am married, pray, the Man asked Mr.
Coopee a Question, and he said ay; and then he asked me a Question, and I said
ay; and then we both joined hands together, and so we were married as fast as
any thing.


[ Coopee huggs her. L. Addle. You have not consummated the Jade, and therefore
I Will unmarry you again.


Parson. Verily they have done as became them Both, I was an eye witness.


L. Strod. An eye witness! there is a pimping fanatical Rogue for you now.


Molly. Ivads I like it very well, I wish I had been married sooner for my
part, for I begin to love Mr. Semibrief since we bedded, better than my bread
and butter by half.


L. Addle. This comes of putting Girls to a Boarding-School.


Nicom. Ay, they hop, and dance till they set their blood on fire, and then
they quench it with the next puddle they come at seriously.

Shout within.] A Rogue, a Friar, down with him, down with him.


Enter Old Bragg in a Friars habit, the Mobb after him, and Young Bragg as
their Captain. Old Bragg. Help, help, Murder, Murder, I Am pursued, I Am taken,
I Am killed, help, help.


Y. Bragg. Oh we'll bring you to life again presently, you old Scoundrel.


Mer. There Is Money for ye, I Will purchase his Liberty for once; and do you hear,
yonder is a better subject for you by half, my Lady there; now you have a rare
time to revenge your self, and seize on her and her Party; I know they are
hatching something against the Government.


Young Bragg. I Will do it, fall on friends -- By your leave, Madam, I must secure
you, you have done as much for me you know many a time: it is true, yours was a
fairer way, but we Politicians must not value Niceties of honor, we have an
Advantage, therefore I, the Blacksmith and Captain confine you Prisoner to the
State.


Mobb. And I the Chimney-sweeper a Lieutenant, justify him in it.


L. Addle. Nay I know the Government's afraid of me, I have been told as much;
but for thy own part, look to it that I don't meet thee hereafter, for if I do,
if there be a Capon in Christendom I Will make thee one; I Will teach you to disarm
the Colonel of the Ladies, you Limberham's Rascal you.


L. Strod. If ever we live to see good days again, look to your selves, Rebels.


Le Prat. Or twenty towsand French upon London Bridge, as Notredame assure us
-- den you shall see vat de French can do; den Mortbleau you shall se de great
Monarch --


Young Bragg. Ah, stop his mouth there, down with him, a French Rascal.


Nicom. Well, I hope we shall have peace for all this, for I am weary of my
Buff, seriously.


Old Bragg. And so am I of my Sables, here I Am sure 'dsdeath could they find no
other way to disgrace me, but to stink me with an old Fox Hide, and choke me up
in the fur of a Friar, now shall I stink of Popery for this Month at least,
which is a worse smell to me, then an Old Jew that is telling a Story, and has
just rellish'd his Mouth with a Clove of Garlic.


Old Merr. Come, Madam, your Supper is ready within, where you shall give me
leave to drink Prosperity to the King and Government, not forgetting some new
Consummations.


Amor. And if I do haphen to be drunk with toping thine and thy blessings
Health, there thou wilt be so kind, Friend, as to remember the mortgage in the
morning, hah --


Young Mer. Oh never doubt me, I Will not break my Word -- and now sweet Angel,
my Joys crowd thick about my heart, and long for vent, the approaching
happiness looks so like Heaven, that I methinks am ex^asied already.


Mirtil. Nor is my share of vast Content less Charming.

In Fortune's brightest Sphere of Bliss I move,
Enjoying Wealth enough, and him I Love.

[Exeunt omnes. FINIS.

