THE Young-Students-Library. CONTAINING, EXTRACTS and ABRIDGMENTS OF THE Most
Valuable Books PRINTED In England, and in the Foreign Journals, FROM THE Year
Sixty Five, to This Time. To which is Added, A New Essay upon all sorts of
Learning; WHEREIN The USE of the SCIENCES Is Distinctly Treated on.

By the Athenian Society.

ALSO, A Large ALPHABETICAL TABLE, COMPREHENDING The CONTENTS of this Volume.

And of All The Athenian Mercuries and Supplements, etc. Printed in the YEAR
1691.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven in the Poultry. Where is to be
had the Entire Set of Athenian Gazettes, and the Supplements to 'em for the
Year, 1691. bound up all together, ( with the Alphabetical Table to the Whole
Year) or else in Separate Volumes, (Or single Mercuries to this Time.) 1692.



behind ye. scenes sit mighty we
nor are we known nor will we be
the world and we exchanging thus
while we find chat for ym they work for us
dy'e see that lady ine ye mask.
we will tell ye what she comes to ask
tho an unconscionable task
it is how her lover fast to bind
false as her self false as ye faithless wind
that other brings her favorite flea
with golden fetters lock and key,
if t'has a sting our thoughts does crave
or only a tongue as other females have.
thinking our notions too ieiune
some take their aim at madam moon
some bring hard queryes which we crack
and throw the gazeing world ye kernels back
here is honest tarr who would his crown afford
were he paid off'ere he returns aboard
to know what he must ask in vain
when we shall beat ye french again
euclid where art tho 'twas before despaird
now may thou have thy circle squared
but art is long and thou most stay
nor Rome was built nor athens in a day
we know sr, but too well your case
some powrfull fachon right or wrong embrace
or starve and dye without a! place!
avoid you rowt of noisy fools
once more you are not in our rules
could we but please ye learned few
which send from far we coud dispense w. you
whither, lost wretches! whither would you run
by guilt or by unhappy love undon!
what need you perish or despair
if you would have aid an angel shows you where.
this querys quickly understood
he only asks-dye think his coffee good
yet would crowd in tho just by the door
or uowd heed take our letters in no more.
these dainty nutts j must not loose
nor burn my paws-b your leave dear puss!
jf those that put em there enq(...)
it was you not j that robbed ye fill
how sweet is interlopers hire
all englands rarityes are gath^ (...)
from unknown earth fire wa^^ (...)
thousands agree in such a gloria (...)
or else a moments work would (...)
with beak and talons j infest
those cuckoes that invade my (...)
and if minerva yet supply
my ancient gift in prophecy
all scab'd and old they in some
-- hollow tree shall dye
London Printed For John Dunton at ye. Raven in ye. Poultrey

THE Young-Students-Library. CONTAINING, EXTRACTS and ABRIDGMENTS OF THE Most
Valuable Books PRINTED In England, and in the Foreign Journals, FROM THE Year
Sixty Five, to This Time. To which is Added, A New Essay upon all sorts of
Learning; WHEREIN The USE of the SCIENCES Is Distinctly Treated on.

By the Athenian Society.

ALSO, A Large ALPHABETICAL TABLE, COMPREHENDING The CONTENTS of this Volume.

And of All The Athenian Mercuries and Supplements, etc. Printed in the YEAR
1691.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven in the Poultry. Where is to be
had the Entire Set of Athenian Gazettes, and the Supplements to 'em for the
Year, 1691. bound up all together, ( with the Alphabetical Table to the Whole
Year) or else in Separate Volumes, (Or single Mercuries to this Time.) 1692.

THE PREFACE.
THE Learned Grotius tells us in p. 34. of his Epistles, That the Athenians in
their Areopagum.
High Court forbad all Introductory Prefaces and Addresses, because they hated
Affected Ornaments, and what was not to purpose in their Discourses. We are as
willing to follow 'em as possible; and the Subject of this Book being
Abstracts, it would be very disproportionable to make a Tedious Preface to it:
We shall only tell the Reader, what he is to expect from this Work, and then
leave it to its sat.

The Catalogue whereof it is composed, was made by our Bookseller, and a
stranger to our Society, and was published to the World before we ever saw it,
or had the least notice of the Design. The Collections being not over regular,
neither as to the sorting them; nor (which is worse) as to the Subject Matter
it self: However, the Design appeared so serviceable to the Age, that
Subscriptions came very plentifully in; and the whole was put out to be
Translated.

When it came to be Revised by our Society, and some of us had engaged to
Write the Essay, and an Original Treatise on the Masore and punctuation of the
Hebrew Text, we found the Work very dangerous and difficult, especially in
these particulars.

1. Several things in Divinity were taken out of the Republic of Letters,
which passed through the hands of the French Divines, and where there were such
Doctrines laid down, as we thought very unsafe to publish in a Protestant
Nation; where it is impossible not to find some who are weak and unsettled in our
Religion.

2. Most of the Fathers that were promised, had met with the same fate, and
were so much Iesuitiz'd, that we knew no more of 'em but the Title, the rest
was what the Papal Interest was pleased to make 'em speak.

3. There were several Titles of Books in our Booksellers Catalogue, which were
found in the Catalogues of the Universal Bibliotheque, Journal des Scavans,
etc. which those Authors themselves had barely set down, and not made any
Abstract of 'em; So that 'twas impossible to Translate what was not, those
Authors having forgot them.

We have undertaken to redress these Mischiefs, and we hope in such a Method,
as the Age may rather be a gainer by the disappointment.

1. As to the first, we have prevail^d with our Bookseller, contrary to his
Interest, to expunge 'em entirely, and to make a better Catalogue in their
Room, as it was easy enough to do, in so fair a Field of Collections, amongst
40 or 50 Volumes, which he had to choose out of.

2. As to the Second, We have considered the Learned Dupin's Works, which are
here translated; as also Dr. Cave's Lives of the Fath^rs; which, with those
Fathers that were not Corrupted in these Translations, do altogether remedy
that Evil, and give a very handsome Account of what we found so miserably
mangled and corrupted by the Jesuits beyond Sea.

3. We could have no remedy, but to choose out other Subjects, which we hope
have exceeded those few that were thus promised, and we dare venture the
Judgment of the severest Critics upon it.

In fine the Reader is not at all a loser in the Exchange, either in the Number
or Quality of Books; for, as they may be assured we had no interest in
expunging some, and putting in others, which we could yet wish had been more;
so we should hardly put in worse than those we took out; having, perhaps, as
much Judgment in Books, as the first Single Collector, and our Bookseller --
But, to do our Bookseller Justice in this affair, we shall acquaint the World,
that he very readily offered to add ^en Sheets more, than the Proposals, for
the same Money, to wit, 130, instead of 120; and this after he had received a
deal of Subscription-Money, because he would have the Work Complete and
Perfect, and lay more than a Common Obligation upon his Subscribers; perhaps
there has not been another such an Instance to be found amongst those of his
Calling.

Our Bookseller has been extremely harassed about a Speedy Publication, which,
above all Men, he has least deserved; for there is no body more diligent, in his
Employ, than himself, as every body of his Acquaintance will acknowledge. There
were Six Presses at work; Mr. Rush-worth's Collections were in the Press at the
same time; and there were Six Weeks Frost which hindered the Printers; therefore
no Reasonable Person can suppose our Bookseller careless* in the Affair, or
responsible for things out of his Power.

We have also to Advertise, that the Author of the Hebrew Punctuation, has
retired into the Country, where his necessary business will take up a great
part of his time; yet whatever Letters, Objections, etc. shall be sent to him
about his Performance, if they be directed to our Bookseller, they will come to
his hands, and he will, notwithstanding his business, set apart so much time as
to maintain what he has advanced, and to Answer all Objections whatever.

The Reader is to expect one other Inconvenience, which was almost impossible
to be avoided; in having to do with six Presses, the Abstracts are not exactly
placed, Dupin's Works being divided, one Volume in one place, and another in
another; but the Table will rectify that Error, only in one place the Printer
has through a Mistake broken off in the midst of Bishop Ushers Works, p. 37.
and began another Subject, and what should have followed is transferred to page
65. which the Reader is desired to Correct, and make a note of Reference with
his Pen. And also instead of The (the Direction word in page 316) should be
Apostolici.

He that translated above an hundred of these Sheets, is a Frenchman, a
Stranger to us; and though we have revised all, we could not possibly give the
Style a new Air and turn, unless we had* wholly altered it, which would have
been so much labor, that we had better to have translated all over again;
However this we can say for the Translation, that its greatest Fault is, that
it keeps too n^ar the Original which the severest searcher after Truth will not
be sorry to find, for there is less Error in such a Translation, than in one
where an affected profuse Liberty is assumed.

And after all, we cannot promise that in this hasty Review, we have been rigid
enough in our Examination, only we hope there is nothing very Material, and if
so, a few small defects may easily be pardoned by the Ingenious, when they
reflect of what great Use this YOUNG STUDENTS LIBRARY will be to the World, of
which we shall now speak a word or two.

This Book is a kind of a Common Theater where every person may Act, or take
such Part as pleases him best, and what he does not like, he may pass over,
assuring himself that every ones Judgment not being like his, another may
choose what he mislikes, and so every one may be pleased in their Turns.

A Book of this Nature (provided every one follows the Rule just now laid down)
will solve the Common Complaint of Authors, viz. that it is impossible to please
every Body, for there is scarce any one that cannot find some Subjects here very
agreeable to his Judgment, which, if it alters, may be refurnisht, either by
something new, or perhaps by the very same things that displeased before. Only
here is one Inconvenience depends upon this Variety, to wit, The unsetling
people in their Judgments and Persuasions: To such we answer, That what we here
offer to the World, is rather a History of Books, than a Method for people to
fix their Judgments by. Here are several Subjects, and some such as are
diversely treated of, but this hinders not the profit of the Reader, since it is
universally granted, that Diversity and Opposition show the way to Truth: It
would be an endless Task to Comment upon every good Thing, that we find
abstracted to our Hand, or to expect that we should censure what we find
disagreeable to our Judgments: it is enough to expunge such things in Divinity
where Fundamentals are attaque'd by Libe^tines or Atheists, we think we ought
not to do it in any other Sciences, let 'em all find out truth after their own
manner, which when the Reader has fully considered, he may by their Errors
avoid Falsehood, and raise one new Model out of their best Materials.

These Treatises are not only pleasant as to their Variety, but useful for
their Brevity, there being the Substance and Value of a Considerable Part of a
good Library, brought within the Compass of this one Volume; which as it will
spare much Labor, a man being able to peruse here more of an Author in half an
hour, than in half a day in the Author himself, so it will save a great deal of
Expenses, to such as would be Master of the Knowledge of many Books, by laying
out a little Money, the performances of the Author (and Quality if known) being
here Epitomized, and such as would see more than o^^ Abstract may by the Title
be directed where to buy the Author himself.

That there can be no Convenience without its Inconvenience we are satisfied,
and it may be alleged that Compendia sunt Dispendia, but that this is an
Error, we dare appeal to the Encouragements that the Journal des Scavans, the
Republique des Lettres and the Universelle Bibliotheque, etc. (out of which
these Abstracts are Translated) have met with, from all the Men of Letters
beyond Sea. So that it must first be showed, that what has been so universally
approved by the Ingenious in other Nations, should not also meet with the same
Success here amongst us, when Translated into English, which to doubt would be
to question the Capacity, Spirit and penetrating Genius of our Nation.

In fine, We hope the Judicious Reader, will also pardon the Errata^s of the
Press, and with his own Pen Correct such Faults as may happen that way; we
having only had leisure to revise what went in, not what comes out of the
Press, though we hope there is nothing of an Error has escaped that is very Material

Directions to the Bookbinder.
PAste a small piece of paper over those three lines beginning with a Hand, at
the end of page 240 and place all the seven Alphabets as they lie in order,
beginning with A in the first Alphabet, and next place A in the second
Alphabet, and all the rest in the same order, for the placing A in the fourth
Alphabet first of all (though the Subject Matter of that part would more properly
come there) will make some persons apprehend the Book Imperfect.

AN ESSAY Upon all sorts of LEARNING, Written by the Athenian Society:
Of Learning in General.
HAppiness is the end of every Intelligent Being, for this we Court whatever
appears agreeable to us, some seek it in Riches and Preferments, some in
Gratifying their senses, but the Wise Man pursues it in such refined
speculations as are most becoming the Dignity of his Nature. He that knows most
comes nearest to the perfection of his Maker, and who can transcribe a fairer
Copy than he that imitates the Eternal Wisdom?

It Is the first question in Philosophy, whether a thing be or exist? because
'twoud be a fruitless Labor to search into the Nature of that which has no
Being, but the Universal consent of Humanity about the Inquiries after Wisdom
resolves this first Question. And it will not be altogether impertinent to examine
here the reasons of these Inquiries. That which puts in for pre-eminence
amongst the rest, is the Analogy betwixt the Power and Subject, the proportion
between the Mind and Science.

The spirit of man is continually upon the Wing, Visiting every Element and
examining (more or less) the Treasuries of Nature; Storing up from thence what
his inclination dictates, and if he fails in his Expectation he makes a second
Choice and so on.

Nor does this different Genius of Persons lessen the truth of our Maxim, as to
the Analogy betwixt the Mind and Science but rather confirm it, for though some
choose Evil or Ignorance, it is under the notion of Good or Science; for to
pursue Evil as Evil is impossible, it is a rape upon the very Will, and to Choose
Ign^rance as Ignorance is a Contradiction, for when a Man chooses to be ignorant
of such a Science, it is because he would discover some other good in the
absence of it; Nay even in self destruction where the Wretched promise
themselves an Ignorance of all their Evils it is not so much to avoid their
Evils as to discover some unknown rest in their Nonbeing. So unaccountably
desirous is Mankind of new discoveries (as Seneca observes) the happy are weary
of pleasure, and even seek out misery for a Change, and we must believe him a
Schismatic from Humane Nature, that disclaims a Propriety in some sort of
Knowledge and Learning.

It Would be a tedious and unprofitable task to make a particular Survey of the
infinite variety and different application of Humane Studies, and it is an
unhappy truth, that for the most part the Body comes in for a larger share than
the Mind, the accomplishments of this are postpon'd to the gratification of
that; because appearances have bribed so many Judgments from making a strict
examination, and amongst those few that pretend to enquiries, how small a
number can perfect the attempt without prejudices. Hence it is that true Honor
is baffled and outrival'd by dress, challenges Pageantry and Gay Retinues. True
nobility is the effect of a Pious and Learned Education; A noble Custom of the
Mind promises an happy Harvest of a flourishing Republic, it fixes Crowns by
Counsel, prevents and resolves the Riddles of Plots and Insurrections, it
procures the Love of wise Men, and the reverence of Fools, settles a reputation
that outbraves the ruins of Age, the Revolutions of Empires; in short it
teaches us to be Happy; since it is a friend to both the Mind and Body, and
secures an interest in both Worlds. A Doctor of the Civil Law who had more
Estate than Reason, had the honor of Knighthood conferred upon him by Sigismund
the Emperor, whereupon he began to value himself more, and his old acquaintance
less, the Emperor hearing of it, and meeting him at the Council of Constance he
publicly accosted him in these words, -- Fool who preferrest Knighthood before
Learning, the gingles of fame before the true worth of the Mind, I can coin a
thousand Knights in one Day, but not one Doctor in a thousand years; Who can be
proud of his debts, or any advantages which are not the effects of his own
Merit, but of Nature or Providence, without being ridiculous and attracting a
greater blemish than an Hereditary Estate can compensate? Would a Gentleman
deserve his Name and the gifts of Nature, his Study must be the Laws of
Nations, the foundations of Commonwealths, the Examples of such as by their
own virtue have ennobled mean Families and other such tasks as Learning and
Knowledge may suggest to him. How many feeble Families are degenerated into
contempt and baseness for want of such a Study, and how many now are, and have
been always mean and contemptible for being haters of thinking and eternal
Truants from the School of Learning and Virtue.

My Lord Verulam, whose observations have deservedly Uncharacterized him a wise
Man, tells us, That Learning is the perfection of Reason, the only Note of
distinction between Men and Beasts, delivering the Mind from Wilderness and
Barbarism, It is Religions Handmaid the great Honor and Accomplishment of a
Person or Nation, the most Universal and useful Interest that God vouchsafes
to the Sons of Men. Cato's distich deserves the Study of more than Schoolboys.

Instrue praeceptis animum nec discere cesses;
Nam sine Doctrina vita est quasi mortis Imago.
Which may be thus Englished.

In Learnings precepts spend thy utmost breath;
Life without Learning bears the stamp of Death.
Learning is of Universal extension, like the Sun it denis not its Rays and
benign influence to any one that will but open their eyes, other Treasures may
be Monopoliz'd and engrost, but this is increased by Communication and
diffusion, and the more a Man imparts the more he retains, and increases his
first store.

Thus far of Science or Learning in general, which rather than a Wise man would
be deprived of he would even steal it, from the Minutes of a necessary rest or
recreation; we shall now descend to particulars, but our short limits will
rather confine us to show the use and method of obtaining them than a full and
distinct Treatise of every head, and first of Divinity.

Divinity.
That there is a God, no person can doubt that will open his eyes, if we look
upon the Heavens, the regular motions of those vast Bodies, that determine
times and Seasons, every object about us, whether Brutes, Fishes, Fouls, Trees
or Minerals, each one endued with a Soul or Nature, not to be dissected by the
greatest Philosophers, but above all, when we look upon our selves, and
consider the wonderfulness of our Structure, the curiosity of our Frame, the
Ideas, reasonings and conclusions on the nature of our Souls, every one must be
forced to confess that disorder could never be reduced to such an Order, by a
blind motion of Atoms, or any thing else but an Intelligible Directer; We are
content you call it by what name you please as God, Nature, the Eternal Mind,
the Soul of the World, etc. Provided the Idea which you represent in such terms
be not unworthy the Idea that ought to had be of the Great Authors Nature, as
that he is Eternal, Wise, Just and Good, the Author of all Created Beings, who
as he has made all things for his own Glory, so he has given to all his
Creatures particular Laws of Nature, especially Man, the greatness of whose
Soul finds no proper Object but its Origin, and is therefore both capable of
the highest ends here, as also after-retributions: We cannot but conclude thus,
by mere natural Instinct, if we consider that to suppose a God, and not to
suppose him Just (besides his other Attributes) is to suppose a Contradiction,
for a God that is not able to punish such as offend him, or reward such as
please him, could not be able to make the World, but this he has done,
therefore he can do the other, and by consequence he must be Just, or in other
terms he must be God, to know and converse with whom is the highest and noblest
Study, and therefore preferable to all others, and is not only to be learned in
the Book of the Creature, or by natural Instinct, but also by his Written Word;
which we are thus assured to be his, and we are able to prove it not only from
the common Arguments that are brought, which could never yet be answered as the
fulfilling of Prephecies, the Testimony of Contemporary Authors, etc. But also
from the very principles of the most Acute and Subtle Atheists, that now do,
or ever have denied it. For if we should ask these Persons why they do any
common action of their Lives, as Talk, Confer, Eat, Sleep, etc. they will
answer for the gratification of their Opinions senses, etc. And if we ask 'em
why they seek such Gratification, they will answer, to be happy, So that in
short we find Happiness at the bottom of all designs, and that Humanity how
different soever in their sentiments or actions, agrees in this, they would be
happy, Now since all Mankind are Originally the same, are all partakers of the
same Essential Principles, viz. perception, Ratiocination, etc. And that they
all tend to one end, to wit, Happiness, it follows then that the best way to
this end is (originally) the most natural and agreeable to all that do partake
of this Humane Nature; What this best way is, we must examine by the same
methods that we do all other things viz. by the Means and by the end: 1. By the
Means: That must be the best apparently which promises best; for the best
Judgment we make of things is from their appearance; but if we examine Nature,
anatomize the Law Written upon our hearts, if we peruse the Volumes of the
ancient Philosophers, which we have been long acquainted with, or of those we
have lately discovered amongst the Brachmanes or Chinese; if we make a strict
enquiry into all their Rules and Lessons of Morality, we have a Compendium, an
Abstract of all together in the sacred Writ. For abstruseness of Notions the 1.
Genesis outvies the Egyptian dark Philosophy, for Elegancy of Style the Prophecy
of Isaiah, and the Epistle to the Hebrews far exceeding the Eloquent Orations
of a Cicero or Demosthenes; in short, there is nothing here, either promised or
threatend, commanded or forbidden, but what is Godlike and worthy its Divine
Original, nor can its opposers find any thing in it, but what is the necessary
effect of the Goodness, Justice, and Supremacy of its inspirer, so that very
ordinary capacities have an easy and plain method to greater Sense and Reason
^^an any of the Ancient Philosophers, whom the rude and barbarous World once
looked upon as Oracles.

II. The end of human actions; which being Happiness, it comes under the
distinction of this and the other World, all opposers of Scripture, can only
promise themselves an Interest in the present, and even there their pretensions
are infinitely below ours, as much as the pleasure of sense is excelled by that
of the Mind; nor are we debarred from a moderate use of the first, which gives
the highest Gust that can be had; but as to another Life our Atheist lays no
claim; So that that comes in ex abundanti, and is rather our whole, than any
thing added to this; and we have as certain demonstration of a future
retribution, and an after State, as the Atheist has of a present one; this is
but a dark and rude prospect of what the Sacred Writ describes at large, from
whence it appears that the Contents of it are of far greater concern than the
pretensions of any thing that was ever spoke or Writ by its opposers.

It Is a good argument that is that Truth, which has Happiness annexed to it, that
the injunctions of Scripture are such, is evident from the Atheists own
principles, and therefore to be embraced by 'em, whether of Divine Institution
or not. But we thus prove it of Divine Institution; It is delivered unto us,
and since it is delivered, it must be either, by God, Good spirits, or bad
ones, good Men or bad Men, or by Persons distracted, which properly come under
neither denomination; if by God, it is true, if by good Spirits they being not
prejudiced by Passion, Interest, Ignorance, etc. and acting dependantly, it
must also be true, ill Spirits could not give it, for Satan cannot be divided
against Satan, or act against his own interest with destroying his Kingdom; but
why speak we of Spirits, since their very essence is denied? which also secures
that point to us, for what has not a Being, cannot impose upon the World, that
neither good nor bad Men could deliver it of their own minds is plain, since
nothing can act beyond its power, but it is beyond the light of Nature or
acquired Reason, to Prophecy and deliver such mysterious Truths as humane
reason an't prey into, as the Incarnation of God, the Trinity in Unity, etc.
nor could it be the issue of any distracted brain, or accidental fortuitous
discovery spoken without thinking, since the effects of all promises and
threatenings are so regular and pertinent, and as certainly come to pass, for as
far as any one ever yet tried, whereas had they been of humane inventions they
would like Fortune-telling or the Rules of Astrology, sometimes hit, and
sometimes miss, Besides had Men been the Author, they would have had the fate
of other Writings, been lost, or barbarous, antiquated or refined in the
succession of so long a tract of time, and in going through so many hands,
Friends and Enemies, Fools and Wise; in short, should all Mankind join their
different sentiments and every rational Person amongst 'em give in their
answers to this question, suppose this Sacred Wri^ should be the Word of God;
What Testimonies, Authorities, Qualifications, etc. would be sufficient to fix
an undoubted persuasion in you that it is the Word of God. Certain we are that
the answer would not come up to half the demonstration that we now have, since
we have the utmost Authority that Nature is capable to give; nay the ordinary
course of Nature very often inverted to confound the infidelity of such persons
as questioned their own natural conclusions* and the Author of Nature at once,
as if 'twere his business to condescend and make new terms with his Creatures,
to keep his credit amongst 'em.

We could, if the shortness we have designed this Discourse would permit,
enlarge upon this Subject; but it is so well done to our hands, by several late
learned Divines, See Dr. Horneck, the Author of the whole Duty of Man, etc.
that our Deists have nothing to object but a little Buffoonery, Banter and
Ridicule, and it is pity to deny 'em the happiness they take in it, or any
other short lived Pleasure, which must necessarily arise from their Principles
which if it be not exactly the same with Post mortem nihil est, ipsaque mors
nihil,


Death it self is nothing, and after death there is nothing: Yet it is near akin
to it, for though they have not that Stoical Bravery to defy Death, I would say
to dare to think of it like Men, yet most of them have imbibed Descartes's
Principles, unwillingly assured of the Existence of their Soul or some unknown
Agent, which works upon their Animal Spirits, after some unintelligible dark
manner, and that it does not come under the common Notion of other Material
Substances, they are also certain, that the Body rather depends upon it, than
it upon the Body to a demonstration, and what is yet more disagreeable to 'em,
when they dare be guilty of thinking, is that as an after State of the Soul,
has been the Universally received Opinion even amongst such as were
unacquainted with no better Demonstration, than the Dictates of their natural
Light. So they cannot find out any Reasons against it so plausible as to escape
their own Ridicule, if offered by any body else, and if there be any thing of
an after-State, to make an Eternal unknown Plunge into it, must certainly be
surprising to such Persons as have no hope beyond this Life, no proper claim to
another, but what their own Doubts and Fears may give 'em a Title to, Men's
habet attonitus and furdo verbere caedit;


Fears not to be stifled, since they arise from a Principle, that depends not
upon the Will, no more than a Man's Shape or Species does.

But to leave this unhappy Subject, and if possible, to persuade a Retreat to
some of that numerous Crowd, that are about to list themselves into this
unthinking Fraternity: I would propose Learning and Study to 'em, and amongst
all others that of the BIBLE: Since it shows the most certain and secure way
for such as expect a greater Happiness than is in sensible Objects. A
Happiness, worthy the Dignity and Nature of Mankind, in short, such a Happiness
as Man was Created for, unless he himself frustrate his own End. I have already
made a short Comparison of the Sacred Writ with other moral Writings, which
appear but mean in respect of it. Not that I would deny a due value to others,
especially Divinity Books as Comments upon the Bible, and distinct Treatises,
whose Subject in general, is to remove all Obstructions of human Happiness, as
Prejudices, Error, etc. and to prepare the Mind for a search after Truth. In
order to this great End it will not be amiss to subjoyn this following
Catalogue, which will be of great use to such as love this Study.

DIVINITY.
POol's Synopsis Criticorum, and his other Works. Dr. Hammond on the New
Testament, with all his other Works. H. Grotius 's Commentary on the Old and
New Testament, and the rest of his Works. Eusebius his Ecclesiastical History.
T. vet. Biblia Sacra sive lib. Canonici priscae Judaeorum Ecclesiae a Deo
traditi; Latini recens ex Hebraeo facti, brevibusque Scholiis illustrati ab Im.
Tremelio and Fr. Iunio: Accesserunt libri qui vulgo dicuntur Apocr. lat.
redd^ti, and notis quibusdam aucti a Fr. Iunio, multi omnes quam ante emendata
Ed. and aucti locis innumeris quibus etiam Adjunximus N. T. lib. ex Sermon
Syro ab eodem Trimel. and ex Graeco a T. Beza in lat. verse. notisque itidem
illustratus. Bp. Andrews Sermons, etc. The Works of the whole Duty of Man. Dr.
Hookers Ecclesiastical Policy. Dr. Comber upon Liturgies. Bishop Burnets Works.
Bish. Stillingfleets Works. -- All the Fathers, as St. Ambrose, etc. Mr.
Leigh's Critica Sacra. Dr. Lightfoots works. Dr. Preston's works. Riveti
Controversia de Religione contra Papistas. The History of the General Councils.
Dr. Sherlocks works. Dr. Jeremy Tailors works. Bishop Ushers works. Jurieu's
Accomplishment of Prophesies. Dr. Barrows works. Dupins Bibliotheque. Altings
works. Episcopius his works. Bishop Bramhalls works in four Tomes, fol. Hales
Remains, in fol. Bishop Halls Contemplations upon the Remarkable Passages in
the Life of the Holy Jesus, fol.
Latin Books in Divinity.
Bail. summa Conciliorum omnium ordinata, aucta, illustrata ex Merlini Joveri,
Baronii, Binnii, Coriolani, Sirmondi, aliorumque Collectionibus ac Manuscriptis
aliquot seu Collegium Synodicum in sex Classes distributum, etc. in fol.
Beveregius (Guil.) Synodicon sive Pandectae Canonum S. S. Apostolorum and
Conciliorum ab Ecclesia Greca receptorum, necnon Canonicarum S. S. Patrum
Epistolarum una cum Scholiis antiquorum singulis eorum annexis and scriptis
aliis huc spectantibus, etc. Oxonii in fol. Bonacinae Martini Opera omnia in
tres Tomos distributa, etc. fol. Lugd. Coccei (Johannis) Opera omnia octo
voluminibus comprehensa, etc. Amstelodami, in fol. Cassidori (magni Aurelii)
Opera omnia in duos Tomos distributa, etc. Rothomagi, fol. Grotii (Hugonis)
Opera omnia Theologica in tres Tomos sed quatuor Volumina divisa, etc. Amstel.
fol. Haunaldi (Christop.) Theologiae speculativae scholasticis Praelectionibus
and Exercitiis accommodatae Libri quatuor partibus summae divi Thomae
respondentes, etc. Ingolst adii, fol. Vossii (Ger. Ioh.) de Theologia Gentili
and Phisiologia Christiana, sive de Origin and progressu Idololatriae deque
naturae mirandis, quibus homo adducitur ad Deum, in fol. Bocharti (Sam.)
Geographica Sacra, etc. in quart. Cotelerius, Ecclesiae Grecae monumenta, etc.
in quart. Kabbala denudata seu Doctrinae Hebraeorum transcendentalis, etc. 410.
Sulsbach.
History.
HISTORY has been called, by a great Man, Speculum Mundi: The Looking-Glass of
the World; It gives the best prospect into Humane Affairs, and makes us
familiar with the remotest Regions: by this we safely sit in our Closets, and
view the horrid Devastations of Countries, Tumults, Changes and Ruptures of
Commonwealths; The Reverse of Fortunes, the Religions, Politics and
Governments of Foreign Nations; by this we may consult what practices have
Established Kingdoms, what Laws have rendered any particular Nation more Safe,
happy and Civilized than its Neighbors; and, what has Contributed to the
Weakness and Overthrow of Bodies-Politick, and what has Facilitated its Rise
and Settlement; and, in a Prospect of the whole, a New Scheme may be drawn, for
future Ages to act by.

Longum iter per praecepta, breve and
Essicax per exempla.
Wisdom got by Experience is usually very Expensive, Tedious and Uncertain;
Several Experiences confirm ones Knowledge, and a Man's Life is too little to
make many in every Case; But if he finds them faithfully done to his hands, the
labor is saved, and he may grow wise at the expense of other Men's Studies. It
was Thales that said of History, Nil Mortem a vita differ; because the Life
of the Deceased depends upon the remembrance of the Living. Mr. Brathwait, in
his Nursery for Gentry, says; Would you be enabled for Company? no better
Medium than Knowledge in History. It would be a dispraise to advance an Elogy
upon this Study, which reconciles all times but futurity, renders all the
spacious Globe of the Inhabited World common and familiar to a Man that never
Traveled: We may see all Asia, Africa and America in England; all the
Confederate Countries in ones Closet: Encompass the World with Drake; make New
Discoveries with Columbus; Visit the Grand Seignior in the Seraglio; Converse
with Seneca and Cato; Consult with Alexander, Caesar and Pompey: In a word,
whatever Humanity has done that is Noble, Great and Surprising, either by
Action, or Suffering, may, by us, be done over again in the Theory; and if we
have Souls capable of Transcribing the bravest Copies, we may meet Instances
worth our Emulation. History is, as by some, called the World's Recorder; and,
according to my Lord Montague, we must confess, That no wise Man can be an
Experienced Statist, that was not frequent in History. Another tells us, That
to be acquainted with History, purchases more wisdom than the Strictest Rules
of Policy; for that the first do furnish us with Instances as well as Rules,
and, as it were, personates the Rule, drawing out more into full proportion:
History best suits the Solidest Heads; Whence we find, that Caesar made it his
Comment. We read, that King Alphonsus, by Reading Livy, and Ferdinand of
Sicily, by Reading Quintus Curtius, recovered their Health, when all the
Physical Doses they took proved ineffectual; but, whether it is Friendly to the
Body or not, it is not our business to determine: Sure we are, that it is
Friendly to the Mind, cultivates and informs it in what is very agreeable to
its Nature, we mean Knowledge, therein imitating its Divine Original.

History is the most admirable foundation for Politics; by this may be
discovered all that is necessary for a Kingdoms Safety and Peace; the Stratagems
of War; an account of the Management of the deepest Plots and Contrivances, and
the carrying on such Measures for every Public Affair, whether in respect to
Enemies or Allies, as the deepest Heads have ever yet practiced. And, as
History is so useful to such as are entrusted with the Charge of
Commonwealths, so it is not less necessary for the Settling and Establishment
of the Christian Religion. We find a Great part of the World Worship Inanimate
Beings; others Sacrifice to Devils, others propagate a Worship made up of the
most ridiculous Fables, as the Turks, etc. and many that profess the Christian
Religion, are so far degenerated from the Native Simplicity and Purity of it,
as that it is now another thing.

A Reasonable Creature, born into the World, and finding in himself a Principle
of Adoration of some Unknown Being, cannot forbear an Enquiry into Religion; but
when he finds so many Religions, so great a Diversity of Divine Worship, and
every Party willing to believe themselves in the Right, and condemning all the
rest of Mankind that are not of their Opinion: This is enough to surprise such
a Person; but, at the same time, he will make this necessary Consequence, after
a little thought and application of Mind: Certain I am that there is a God; and,
as certain, that this God ought to be Worshipped after such a manner, as is
most Suitable to his Nature, and the quality of the Worshipper: as to his
Nature, it is too fine and Spiritual to be pleased with any Adoration but what
is Spiritual; and as for Man, the Creature that is to pay this Homage and
Adoration, he is a Reasonable Being; and therefore it is also Necessary, that
the Worship he pays, be the most reasonable and perfect that his Nature will
admit of. Now a Man needs not go out of himself to consult what Reason is; he
has no more to do, than to see, what Religion is most agreeable to his Reason,
and most worthy the Dignity of his Nature (we speak here of unprejudiced
persons.) And then History will inform him what has been practiced; and show
him, that Christianity is the most noble, sincere, and pure Religion in the
World: but, in this we refer you to what we have already spoken upon the
foregoing Subject of Divinity.

There only remains to inform our Reader, That it is not only Books, but Maps,
Monuments, Bass-Reliefs, Medals, and all Ancient Descriptions, that mightily
strengthen and confirm History; therefore 'twou'd be very useful to read such
Authors, as have treated upon Medals, etc. In our Catalogue of Miscellanies,
especially the Iournal des Scavans, there are several of them. The following
Catalogue will be of great use in this Study.

HISTORY.
CHardin's Voyages into Persia, fol. Embassy of the Five Jesuits into Siam,
fol. Chaumont's Embassy into Siam, fol. Cornellis's Historical and
Geographical Memoirs of Morea, Negrepont, and the Maritime places unto
Thessalonica. Dapper's Description of Africa, in fol. Tavernier 's Travels, in
fol. Leti Historia Genevrina, in 5 Volumes, in Twelves. Mr. Amelot's History of
the Government of Venice. Ortelius Mercator. Cambden's Britannia. Caesar's
Commentaries. Philo-Judaeus. Cornelius Tacitus, fol. Daniel's History of
England, fol. Lord Bacon of Henry the 7 th. History of the Roman Empire. Livies
History, Elzevir's Edition with Notes. Supplementum Livianum Johannis. Florus
in Usum Dephini. Valerius Maximus. Utropius. Suetonius Tranquillus. Justinus
Historicus. Thucidides, Translated out of Greek, by Hobbs. Zenophon. Herodotus.
Diodorus Siculus, in fol. Sir William Temple's Memoirs. Dagoraeus VVhear, his
Method of Reading Histories. Burnet's History of the Reformation. Bishop
Abbot's brief Description of the World, in Twelves. Davilla's History of the
Civil Wars of France, fol. Guichardin's History of Italy, fol. History of
Ireland. Amour's Historical Account of the Roman State, etc. fol. Blome's
Britannia. Baker's Chronicles of the Kings of England, fol. Bacon's
Resuscitatio, fol. Caesar's Commentaries, fol. Heylin's Cosmography, fol.
Herbert's Life and Reign of King Henry the Eighth, fol. Howel's Institution of
General History, fol. History of Barbados, and the Caribbee- Islands, fol.
Lodges Translation of the History of Josephus, fol. Ogleby's History of China,
in 2 Vol. fol. -- History of Africa, fol. -- History of America, fol. --
History of Japan, fol. -- History of Asia, fol. Plutarch's Lives, Printed by
Sawbridge, fol. Rawleigh's History of the World, fol. Rushworth's Historical
Collections, all the Parts, fol. Rycaut's History of the Turkish Empire, fol.
Knowl's History of the Turks, fol. Spotswood's History of the Church of
Scotland, fol. Andrew's History of Scotland, fol. State of New England in
reference to the War with the Indians, in the years 1675, 1676, fol. The
English Atlas, in two Vol. fol. An Historical Relation of the Island of Ceylon
in the East Indies, fol. Cave's Ecclesiastici, or Lives of etc. fol. Wheeler's
Voyage into Greece, fol. The Travels of Monsieur Thevenot into the Levant, fol.
The Works of the famous Historian Salust.
Philosophy.
PHILOSOPHY may be considered under these two Heads, Natural and Moral: The
first of which, by Reason of the strange Alterations that have been made in it,
may be again Subdivided into Speculative and Experimental.

Speculative Philosophy was mostly the Study of the Ancients; not that they
were without some little of the Practick and Demonstration, especially in
Greece.

It would be too long to run through the several Orders and Practices of the
Eastern Philosophers, where we may properly say Mankind took its Original, that
is, discovered the ways of Living with safety, convenience and delight. The
Chaldeans and Assyrians made some small progress before the Eastern parts, but
it was so dark, mysterious and hieroglyphical, and so confined to a certain
sort of Men, that the World was but little the better for it; but for a fuller
Account of the Manner of its increase, the different Sects that patronized,
etc. We refer you to the Abstract of Stanlyes Lives of the Philosophers, which
you shall find in this Book; Our chief design in this Essay being to show the
Usefulness of it, and the readiest way to attain it.

But, first, we must consider, the distinction we have made of Speculative and
Experimental, and, as much as possible, Exclude the first, for an indefatigable
and laborious Search into Natural Experiments, they being only the Certain,
Sure Method to gather a true Body of Philosophy; for the Ancient Way of
clapping up an entire building of Sciences, upon pure Contemplation, may make
indeed an Admirable Fabric, but the Materials are such as can promise no
lasting one. Hence 'twas that our ever Famous ROYAL SOCIETY that Great
Enfranchizer of Experimental Truth and Knowledge assumed the Motto Nullius in
Verba.

The great Use then of Natural Philosophy, whose true Origin depends upon
Experiments, is manifold, one can scarce think of any Affair in a practical
Life, any Employ, Profession or Business whatever but may receive great
Advantages from it: Nor is the Usefulness of it in the private Government of
men's Minds less than its Advantages in respect of their public Practices.

This is very apparent, if we consider that our Mind has a great dependence
upon our Body's. Hence the Poets wish had a happy Conjunction in it Men's sana in
Corpore sano; the least disturbance to the Body, incapacitates the Mind from a
free and easy Speculation, an unfortunate Blow, sometimes, wholly takes away
the Use of Right Reasoning, and on the contrary, a healthful and sound Body
facilitates the Labors of the Mind: Now, no Man can be so insensible, as not
to see the vast Usefulness of this Science to the Body, and how properly it is
called Natural Philosophy, not to mention the great Delight and Satisfaction
the Mind receives in Theory of it, either by Converse or Reading.

But when we come to Practice, all the World agrees in a common Suffrage. All
the Mechanic Arts acknowledge the Usefulness, both in new Inventions and
Improvements of what things are already found out: Merchandise, the main Sinew
of Bodies Politic, ows its great Assistance to the Invention of the Compass,
and if Encouragement were given, no doubt but the Method of finding out a
Longitude at Sea might make this universal Correspondence of Nations more safe,
speedy, and by consequence more Advantageous, we being very well satisfied,
that such a Task is not impossible. But Experiments are not only confined to
the Sea abroad; All domestic Affairs have a very great share in this Study,
and the Benefits accrewing from it, as Instruments for the Help and greater
Perfection of the Senses than former Ages knew of, viz. Microscopes,
Otocoustions, etc. Engines and Devices for the speedier making of all
Manufactures. Now Methods of Improving Lands, restoring the Barrenness of Soil,
Management of Agriculture. The bettering of Corn, Fruit, etc. in short for the
greatest Advantages of a laborious Life, which Adams Transgression has
subjected his Posterity to.

As to Moral Philosophy, the well governing of Men's Lives and Manners, it has
been a Subject very nobly treated on by Cato, Seneca, Epicurus, Epictetus, and
several of the Ancient Philosophers. It Is a faint Essay to Christianity, and
those Precepts that have been laid down by those Great Men; are so far both
beyond the Knowledge and Practice of most Christians* that we doubt not but at
the day of Judgment, they will condemn them. We might add more, and say, we
doubt not but that they may easily be saved, and share of as great Degrees of
Glory as many Christians, To. 2.14. compared with v. 12. shows that Heathens
have a Law of Nature, which dictates the Notions of God, Justice, Temperance,
etc. and that they shall be judged (neither by the Precepts of Christianity, or
Law of Moses, but) by this Law, and if they sin against it, they shall perish
by it, Now it is plain, that the Antithesis holds, that if they act agreeably to
it, they shall be saved by it: Nor will that Text exclude 'em that says,
There Is no name under Heaven given, whereby we may be saved, but by the Name of
the Lord Jesus. For it is a plain Consequence, that if they believe on God, they
also believe virtually in Jesus Christ, who is of the same Essence or one God
with his Father, that this virtual Belief is that which will save Men, and not
the bare Nominal Letters that make up the Name of Jesus Christ, is plain from
the different Sounds and Expressions in different Nations: Besides, if we
believe on Emanuel, Shiloh, etc. it is the same thing; and this is yet plainer,
when we consider that some good Christians born deaf and dumb, have by outward
Signs and Motions received a very fair Idea or virtual Knowledge of Jesus
Christ, and have lived and died without ever hearing of the Name. Lastly,
without this virtual Power, all Children would certainly be damned, whether
baptized or not, which the Christian Church never yet believed since it was a
Church: But to leave this Digression, the Advantage and Use of Moral Philosophy
cannot want a high Recommendation, when we see it gives so lively a Prospect, of
all those Virtues and Qualifications that Christianity sets in a clearer Light.
That it is a fair Prodromus to Christianity, and prepares the Mind to receive it
as St. John the Baptist did the believing Jews to Receive Christ. The Morals of
Seneca say, qui poenitet peccasse pene est innocens, he that repents of having
done an ill thing, is not guilty of it: And thus the Sacred Oracles, he that
confesses and forsakes his sins shall find Mercy. It would be too tedious to
bring all the Parallels we find betwixt the Morals of the Wise Heathens and the
Precepts of Christianity, it is in part done in the following Pages, whither we
refer the Reader, as also to this following Catalogue for his Improvement in
Natural and Moral Philosophy.

PHILOSOPHY.
STanleys Lives of the Philosophers. The Transactions of the Royal Society, all
the Vol. Observations of the Royal Academy of Sciences at Paris. Experiments of
the Academy de Cimento in Germany. Sieur Leeuwenhoek's Treatis's. Mays History
of Animals. Lock of Human Understanding. Boyls Treatises, all of 'em. Rays
History of Plants. My Lord Bacons Works. Sr. Thomas Browns Works. Sr. Kenelm
Digby his Nature of Body's. Dr. More's Works of Cambridge. Des Carts Works,
all of 'em. Copernicus. Galilaeus. Gassendus. Perault. Mr. Regis 's Philosophy.
Rohault. Gadrois. Godine. Malbranch's Search after Truth, in two Vol. -- His
Metaphysics. Pliny's Natural History. Aristotle de Animalibus. Iournal de
Scavans. Republic of Letters. Universal Bibliotheque. Giornelli de Litterati.
LAW.
THis is a very fair Subject, and those that cannot find some Encomium upon it,
are either very ungrateful, or very stupid to be insensible of the Protection
of their Persons, Estates, Liberties every day, for if there was no Justice for
the oppressed, no Punishment for Murder, Violence, Theft, etc. no Person could
promise himself one days Freedom from such Evils.

If we should go to the Original of Laws, it is very probable that People were
civilized and reduced from their Barbarity by little and little, and made their
Laws according to the Incommodities of their Crimes, yet Vice being prolifick,
and restrained in a few Particulars, would still find out more ways of Action,
and exert it self in new Mischiefs, till they were also provided against. I
know not what to attribute it to, whether a common, or an extraordinary
Providence, that some Countries have been happier than others under very
irregular Laws, for Instance, Sparta had many strange Laws, and some even
contrary to good Manners, as the Toleration of Adultery, etc. and yet none of
its Neighbors flourisht like it for a very considerable time. Perhaps the
Reason was, that being all made by one Man, they had a sort of natural
Dependence upon one another, and one preserved the other, like a piece of
Building, all contrived by one Person, when as we see Streets and Towns, which
are the Projection of many Heads, so irregular and independent, as if they had
been the Design of Chance or unreasonable Creatures. However 'twas, we are
certain, that these Laws were generally very wisely contrived, if we consider
the Principles of Lycurgus the Legislator. Now if natural Policy could make
that Nation more happy than its Neighbors, what may we expect from Christian
Laws, which besides their own Simplicity and Purity, backed by the Advantages
which they have taken out of the Records of the Jewish State, have also the
Presidents of all Commonwealths, out of which they may choose what has been
most Advantageous, and avoid what has been any ways pernicious, and from
altogether lay down an exact Model for themselves, very just, reasonable and by
consequence Happy.

Now to give ones self up to this Study of Equity, and distributive Justice, as
it is very necessary for the Subject, so it is very honorable and profitable for
the Undertaker. How can we be ignorant of the Honor of the Law? when we find
God Almighty himself a Legislator, the very first Instituter of Laws. My Lord
Cook in his Reports says, that they (viz. Reports) Open the Windows of the Law,
showing the Beauty of it in the great Reason it stands on; breaking the Shell
of difficult Cases, so that the Kernel slips into ones hands. Another,
Pleadings are the most honorable, laudable and profitable things in the Law.
Perhaps the Ancient Custom of the Athenians might be grounded upon this: For
they put their Young Gentlemen to prefer Cases in the behalf of the People, or
pleading for the Poor. To be well Read in the Law, is not only a very great
Ornament to Gentlemen, but also a very necessary Qualification, since those
that have Estates should know how to defend and keep 'em, left by unwariness
and want of Knowledge in those Matters, they ruin themselves and Families;
besides such Gentlemen may be great Helps to their poor Neighbors and Tenants,
by reconciling their Differences, and helping to right the Innocent against the
Oppressor.

But it is not only Gentlemen, but all Persons whatever that have any Concern in
the World, are obliged to know the Law, at least in some measure in order to
the Management of their Affairs, as Contracts, Bonds, etc. And this Obligation
is proportionable to the weight of their Concerns* and the nature of their
Employ.

Besides all this, persons may possibly act so as to bring themselves under the
Censure of the Law (perhaps sometimes the severest) for want of the little
knowledge of it; wherefore it is very necessary for all young Persons to
frequent the Sessions, and the Bar, for instruction; whereby they may be able
to defend themselves against their own Ignorance and the malice of others. In
short the use of Law cannot be questioned by any Person who want not the use of
his Reason. Since without it we should only be proper company for Wolves and
Bears, I mean he that had the longest Sword would command the shorter, though
even this same Tyranny that would exalt a man above his fellow Creatures, would
also set him in so slippery a place that envy would certainly find him out, and
make him despicable by some means or other, to the meanest wretch he could
trample upon, whereas on the contrary Justice and Truth settle a State, and
make not only the Head but every particular Subject a happy Member of a
peaceful Body Politic.

For this Study you may make choice of the following Catalogue.

COMMON and STATVTE LAW BOOKS.
Note that F. signifies French. L. Latin, and the rest are English.

ANdersons Reports 2 parts. fol. F. Bracton, fol. L. Blunts Law Dictionary,
fol. Boltons office of a Justice, fol. Bulstrods Reports, fol. Browns Entrys
complete, fol. Cooks Entrys, fol. L. -- Comment upon Littleton, fol. Crooks
Reports 3 parts in fol. Daltons Office of Sheriffs, fol. Dyers Reports with 2
Tables, fol. L. Davenports Abridgment of Cooks Littleton, oct. Finches Law,
fol. L. Godolphin of Wills and Testaments, quarto. -- Abridgment of Eccles.
Laws, quarto. Huttons Reports, fol. Hesleys Reports, fol. Hoberts Reports, fol.
Hughs Grand Abridgment, 3 parts in quarto. Hales Pleas of the Crown, oct.
Jenkins Reports. Keebles Statutes at large, fol. Leys Reports, fol. Littletons
Tenures, French and English in twelves. Leonards Reports 4 parts by Hughs, fol.
Moors Reports, fol. F. Method of passing Bills in Parliament, quarto. Noys
Reports, fol. Placita Specialia, oct. Poultons Statutes at large, fol. Ploudens
Reports. Shepherds Works all. Spelmans Glossary, fol. L. Statutes of Ireland,
fol. Vaughans Reports, fol. Wingates Maxims, fol. Keebles assistance to
Justices of Peace, fol. Reports of diverse special Cases, argued and adjudged in
the Courts of Kings Bench, etc. collected by Tho. Sinderfin, with Tables, fol.
Reports of the Learned Sr. Edmund Saunders Knight, in 2. Vol. fol.
Physic and Surgery.
THis Practice is only of present use to such as are not well, but since no man
is exempt or priviledg'd from sickness and death, every one carrying his death
about him, which will be sometimes exerting its self in little Essays of
Mortality, I mean in Distempers and Irregularities of that frame of Nature,
which it will one day wholly ruin and lay in Ashes, since I say every one is
subject, one time or other, to disorders and Maladies in his Body, (for a Body
cannot be destroyed before it be disordered) it is a plain consequence that all
have occasion some time or other to repair the decays of Nature by Physic and
Surgery. To ask a sick man whether he would be well, is an unseasonable
ridicule; Nature has placed in every Being an abhorrence of destruction, and
this abhorrence necessarily puts the assaulted upon all possible means of
defending it self; Why do we eat when hungry, drink when thirsty, sleep when
weary, but to repair the defects of Nature; and if it is impossible not to
desire this, it is much more impossible not to see the ends of these defects, I
mean Death.

As man was first made out of the dust, so he has almost Universal Remedies
from the Earth whence he was taken; out of Herbs, Roots, Minerals, etc. are
made such Compositions, as cure Wounds, Bruises and other distempers; for
finding their old acquaintance man in the Application, they by a kind of
Natural friendship and cognation, with man's Body, join with him against the
Efforts of the distemper. The Earth is our common Mother as to our Bodies, and
nature succors her Children.

A skilful Physician does, as we may say, cooperate with God Almighty and is a
means to preserve what he Creates, If we search the Sacred Writ, we find the
use of Physicians recommended, and only censured where they are preferred to
God, as if they were not subordinate, and of the number of those Means which
God has ordained to preserve humane life, but purely independent, acting like
God himself. We also find Luke a Physician, a familiar of St. Paul's. If we
consult profane History, we meet with no Nation without some whose whole Study
and Employ is Physic: and some have been so very expert in this Art, that they
have boasted they could make themselves immortal, but their failure has
experienced the contrary; Tho we are very well satisfied that there is no set
time or limited period under the common course of Nature, to wit, 70 or 80
years, but that (ordinarily) remedies may be used to lengthen a man's Life till
then, or violences suffered to shorten it before, for there have never yet been
any reasons produced by the most Learned maintainers of Necessity to prove a
Man a mere Machine, which he must be if half they offer were true; we have not
room here to pursue this Digression, and besides we may have occasion to do it
elsewhere.

Chemistry and Alchimy especially the first, have made no small additions to
the advantages of this Study, indeed the last pretending mostly to the
separation and alteration of Metals has very ill luck in some of its pretenses,
though in most vain and extravagant search it has casually made many other useful
discoveries, and seems to be calculated to the Moral of a Fable we meet with in
Aesop, only it is subsequent to it. It Is the fable of the Husbandman, who
dying, bequeathed to his Son a vast Treasure of Gold, hid in his Vineyard, but
the certain place where it lay he had wholly forgot. The Son diligently
searches, turns over every place throughout the whole Vineyard, but finds
nothing worthy of his vast toil. Yet this labor accidentally had good effect
on the Vines, by the product of a very plentiful Harvest the following year.
Ld. Bacon.
Thus the search for Gold procures much advantage in fruitful Experiments both
of Nature and to the great use of Mankind, to such as prosecute this Study, the
following Catalogue is of use.

PHYSIC and CHYRVRGERT.
BArtholinus Anatomy translated into English by Nich. Culpepper, fol. Crollius
's Royal Chemistry in three Treatises, fol. Charras Royal Pharmacopoea, etc.
fol. Parey's Chirurgical Works together with three Tractates concerning Veins,
Arteries and Nerves, etc. fol. Riolanus 's Anatomy, etc. fol. Vestlingius
Anatomy of the Body of Man, etc. fol. Willis his Pharmaceutice Rationalis, fol.
Harveys Accomplished Physicians. Boyls Hydrostatical Paradoxes made out by new
Experiments, for the most part Physical, etc. large octav. Clarks Natural
History of Nitre. octav. Grews Phsological History of the Veget. oct. Harveys
Anatomical Exercises, etc. Boyls Skeptical Chemist, oct. Three Anatomick
Lectures concerning. 1. Motion of the Blood through the Veins and Arteries. 2.
The Organick Structure of the Heart. 3. The efficient causes of Pulsation, by
Walter Charleton. M. D. Collectanea Chymica, a Collection of Ten several
Treatises, etc. octav. Art of Physic made plain and easy, by D. Frambesarius,
Physician to LXIV. Translated into English. Observations of the Mineral Waters
of France, made in the Royal Academy of Sciences Translated into English,
twelves. Russels Physical Treatise. Le Medecin de soy meme, Done into English
by Dr. Chamberlain. Harveys Philosophia. Charletons
Physiologia-Gassendo-Epicuro Charltoniana. Ternary of Paradoxes. Botanologia,
the British Physician octav. With all the Modern French and Dutch.
For particular Treatises in Medicine.
Carolus Piso de morbis serosis. Eugalenus, Martinius, Sennertus, etc. De
Scorbutico. Sidenham de Febribus. Glisson de Rachitide. Willis de fermentatione
etc. febribus. Cattierus de Rheumatismo. Cole de Apoplex. Marcuccius de
Melancholia. Ichmazen de calculo. Cappelluhy de bubon. Guarenciers de Tabe
Anglicana. Rudius de pulsibus. Forestus de incert. Vrin. Iudic. Sanctorius and
Opicius de Med. Statica. Deodatus de Diaetetic.
Of Mathematics in GENERAL.
TO speak a little of Mathematics in General, before we come to treat of any
particular parts of that Subject; we suppose we cannot do better than to give a
short account of what has been already performed by the assistance of this Art,
that we may the better judge of the possibility of future Acquirements. We read
of many persons, which, in this Study, have trod so near upon the heels of
Nature, and dived into things so far above the apprehension of the Vulgar, that
they have been believed to be Necromancers, Magicians, etc. and what they have
done to be unlawful, and performed by Pliny tells us of one Cresin, who only
Manured a piece of Ground, which yielded him fruit in abundance, whilst his
Neighbors Lands were poor and barren; wherefore he was accused to have
Enchanted them; otherwise, said his Accusers, be could not raise such a
Revenue: Whereupon he produced his Carts, Oxen, and his various Implements of
Husbandry, and his whole Equipage of Tillage, in very good order, and said to
the Judges, Behold the Art, Magic and Charms of Cresin! whereupon he was
Acquaitted -- If, in Husbandry, a Common Employ of Life, there was such a
Mistake amongst Plebeians, What would these same Persons have thought, had thy
seen Torrienus his Wooden Sparrows fly about?
Conjuration and Witchcraft; although the fault lay in the Peoples Ignorance,
not in their Studies: But to the Instances we promised.

Regiomant anus his Wooden Eagle, and Iron Fly, mentioned by Petrus Ramus,
Hakew, Heylin, etc. must be admirably contrived, that there was so much
proportion, such Wheels, Springs, etc. as could so exactly Imitate Nature. The
First was said to fly out of the City of Noremberg, and meet the Emperor
Maximilian; and then returned again, waiting on him to the City Gates: The
Other, to wit, the Fly, would fly from the Artist's hand, round the Room, and
return to him again This Instance proves the feasibility of doing things of
great use; as that Action of Proclus the Mathematician, in the Reign of Zonar.
Tom. 3. p. 126.
Anastasius Dicorus, who made Burning-Glasses, with that Skill and Admirable
force, that he therewith Burnt, at a great distance, the Ships of the Mysians
and Thracians, that Blocked up the City of Constantinople -- We shall pass over
the Curiosities and Admirable Inventions, which are mentioned in the Duke of
Florences's Garden at Pratoline; as also those of the Gardens of Hippolitus d'
Este, Cardinal of Ferrara at Tivoli, near Rome, because they were more designed
for Pleasure, than real Use. For, our design is only to show the real Advantage
that may be drawn from Mathematics; though we are also certain, that the most
Surprising Pleasures in Nature depend upon it. The great Clock of Copernicus
was certainly a Curious Masterpiece, which showed the Circuitions of all the
Celestial Orbs, the distinction of Days, Months, Years, where the Zodiac did
explicate its Signs, the Changes of the Moon, her Conjunctions with the Sun;
every hour produced upon the Scene some Mystery of our Faith. As the first
Creation of Light, the Powerful Separation of the Elements, etc. What shall we
say of Fortes Feriae. Aca. p. 150.
Cornelius Van Drebble's Organ, that would make an Excellent Symphony it self,
if set in the Sunshine in the open Air? or of Galilaeo's, Imitating the Work
of the First Day; FIAT LUX: Let there be Light. Or of Granibergius his Statue,
that was made to speak; or, in fine, of that Hist. M. Arts, c. 7. p. 85.
Engine at Dantzick in Poland, which would Weave 4 or 5 Webs, all at a time,
without any Humane help; it Workt Night and Day; but it was suppressed, because
it would have ruined the poor people. These few Instances give a Rude Prospect
of what one may probably expect from a due Application of the Mind to the Study
of Mathematics, of which we shall speak more particularly, and first of
Arithmetic.

Arithmetic.
TO Number, is one of the Prerogatives that a Reasonable Creature has over
Beasts. It Is said, Wisdom II. God made all things in Number, Weight and
Measure. Number is a most sensible Exemplar of the Deity, of whom you cannot
conceive so many Perfections, but you may yet add more. This is only peculiar
to it, that we know the least Number, viz. 2. (for 1 is properly the Origin of
Numbers) but we can find no Number so great, that may not be made yet greater;
for if a Thousand Figures were writ down, and under them a Thousand more, and
multiplied the one by the other, the product would be more than the Sands of
the Sea, which multiplied again into its self, and that product used after the
same manner, and so on, the number would soon amount to such a Total, as would
take up an Age to tell the length of it in words; even though a Man never
slept, but always spoke. The Ancient Philosophers might well compare the
Essences of things to Number, since a Number is a Complete Total, and if it
lose any the least part of it self, it is no longer the same Number. Indeed we
cannot hold with the Ancient Pythagoreans and Platonists, that all things are
Composed of Number, even the Soul of Man; but we are certain, the proportions
resulting from 'em, are such, as may claim an Agreeable Converse with our
Reason.

To Number, Add, Subtract, Multiply, Divide, and find out proportions, as they
are very useful in the Common Affairs of Life* so they are Introductive to the
highest Demonstrations that our Senses can be capable of, for the bare Study of
this Art.

VVINDGATES Arithmetic, And KERSEY'S Algebra,
ARE Sufficient Guides; the First treats the most handsomely of Whole Numbers
and Fractions, both Decimal and Vulgar: and the Last Explains the Doctrine of
Algebra, or Cossie Numbers; the Nature of Roots, Powers, Equations, etc. in
short, every thing that may fully prepare you for the Study of Geometry.

Poetry.
Though some have been of opinion, that Nature frames a Poet, yet others will
contend, that Nature, without Art, makes at best but an imperfect one, or, as
Horace has it, Natura fieret laudabile Carmen, an Art
Quasitum est: Ego nec studium sine divite Vena
Necrude quid prosit video ingenium: Alterius sic
Altera possit opem res, and conjungit amice.


Art is like a sure guide, to direct Nature in an easy and uniform way, which
if we follow, we cannot possibly err. And there very often it happens, that an
Ignorant Person may, by the happiness of his Nature, produce something that is
fine, yet such a Nature would be brought to a much greater perfection by Art.

The name of Poet is derived from (...), which is to make or feign, so Poetry
may be said to be the Art of feigning, or imitation, for imitation is the
composing the Image of any thing. The Latins divide the Poets into four Orders,
or Classes, Epic or Heroic, Iambographers, or Writers of Iambics, Tragaedians
and Lyricks. The chief of the first are Homer among the Greeks, and Virgil
among the Latins, in the next Archilochus, in the third Sophocles and
Euripides, in the last, Pindar among the Greeks, and Horace among the Latins
Horace makes another Division of them, making six Classes of them in his Art of
Poetry; Heroics, Elegiacs, Lyrics, lambics, Tragaedians, Comedians. But these
divisions regarding only the subject, or kind of Verse, does not sufficiently
distinguish betwixt the Poets. Since several Poets have made use of several
sorts of Verse, and Subjects. Upon a Judicious consideration, any one will
conclude, there are but Three Orders of Poets, that is, Epic, Comic and Tragic.

Poetry is a kind of Painting, which represents the Mind, as that does the
Body; nay, it is excellent, in the describing the Body too, and all the Actions
of Human Life, as well as all the beauties of Nature, in a Lively Description.
Poetry was at first the Foundation of Religion, and Civility among the
Grecians; the first Philosophy the World was blessed with, was in Verse, it had
that influence on the Minds of Men, then fallen from their Primitive Reason
into the VVildest Barbarity, that, it soon brought them to Civility, and to
know the Dictates of Reason from that of fancy, and the ungoverned Sense,
Appetite, without respect to Justice, being the only rule of Men, till Orpheus
(if we believe the Mythologists) by the Harmony of his Verse, redeemed them
from that slavery. The Judicious Mr. Rimer is of opinion (with a great deal of
Reason) that Tragedy was at first the Liturgy of the Athenians. So that in the
first Ages of the World, Verse was so far esteemed, as not to be consecrated
even to the Honor of the Gods themselves; and it was with no little reluctance
the Priests suffered the Poets to direct it to a meaner use. But whatever was
the Origin of it, we are sure it was always in Esteem with the greatest and
most flourishing Nations, as Greece and Rome. 'Twou'd be to repeat that which
is known to every one, to tell the value the Athenians had for it; since Mr.
Rimer tells us, that Government laid out more in the Representations of their
Plays, than in their most Expensive Wars. Alexander was so great an Admirer of
it, that he envied the happiness of dead Achilles, for being praised by the Pen
of Homer. And Augustus, (in whose time Rome was most Flourishing) made Virgil
his Companion* though born of mean Parents; and no Nation that has flourished
in Poetry, ever held up its head after the decay of that.

But, to pass from the Praise to the Practice of Poetry; we advise the
Candidates for the Laurel, that they first consider the difficulty of being a
good Poet, since unless they rise to a Perfection in their kind, they reap but
Infamy, by exposing themselves, as ambitious of a thing they could not attain,
Mediocrity (as we have said) being intolerable in Poetry, however excusable in
other affairs. They must also consider, that to arrive to an Excellence, they
must take the right method (supposing they have, by Nature, a good Fund) first
they must think, and weigh with themselves, and their Friends of Judgment, what
their Talent is; for, one may be able to Write a VVitty, and Extraordinary
Song, who would be dull in a Work of a greater Fatigue: Mr. VValer got a
reputation, not by VVriting Much, but Well; and his little short Copies of
Verses are preferrable, in our opinion, to the Voluminous Poems of some others,
who would have their Performances swell into a Bulk, and deserve the Name of
Works, for their Bigness, not Intrinsic Value. We are pretty confident, it
would not have been for the disreputation of Sir William Davenant, it would
not have for the Disreputation of William Davenant, if the World had never seen
any thing of his, but his Gondibert, and the much more Excellent Shakespeare
would not have been less admired, if an abundance of these things which are
Printed for his, were omitted, Mr. Cowly is of this Opinion we are sure;
therefore our Advice is to a young Poet, that he never be ambitious of writing
much, a little Gold is worth a great heap of Lead, let him often make trial of
what his Shoulders are able to bear, before he launches into the Ocean of the
Critics, let him often Correct and Consult his Judicious Friend; it is Horace
his Advice to the Pisoes. To be a perfect Poet, a Man must be a general
Scholar, skilld both in the Tongues and Sciences, must be perfect in History
and Moral Philosophy, the latter of which is absolutely necessary, to give him
an insight into the Nature of the Passions, to move which is his chief Aim and
Business, nor can he draw a virtuous Character, unless he know what is the just
Composition of it. A Poet is to represent Mankind, at least the nobler Part,
which he can never do, if he be not thoroughly skilled in knowledge of it. Being
thus qualified, Diligence and Exercise will furnish you with Facility, in your
Compositions, and Reading the best Authors and Critics, as Casaubon, Scaliger,
etc. and for our English way of Writing (Plays we mean) Mr. Rimers Translations
of, Rapine and Examination of the Plays of the last Age, Mr. Drydens Essay on
Dramatick Poesy, and most of his Prefaces, L' Abbe Hedelius whole Art of the
Stage, My Lord Roscommons Translation of Horace, his Art of Poetry, etc. 'twill
be absolutely necessary for your perusal. Any farther particular Directions
here would be too long a Task for his place, since it is the business of these
several Treatises we mention, to perfect an Artist in this Kind: We shall only
therefore here place the Chief of the Latin and English Poets, which are to be
perused with great Care and Regard.

LATINS.
VIrgil. Horace. Ovid. Catullus. Tibullus. Lucan. Statius. Seneca. Terence.
Plautus. Silius Italicus. Iuvenal and Persius. Martial. Valerius Flaccus.
Claudian. Ausonius. Propertius. Casimir. Buchannan, etc.
ENGLISH.
CHancer. Spencer. Sheakspear. Johnson. Beaumont and Fletcher. Draiton. Daniel.
Sr. John Suckling. Sr. John Denham. Chasshaw. Cowley. Sr. William Davenant. Dr.
Donn. Mr. Dryden. Mr. Otway. Mr. Lee. Mrs. Behn. Mrs. Phillips.
Several Collections of Poems.

Painting.
PAinting is in that Esteem with the Ingenious of this Age, that it may seem
superfluous to trouble the Reader with Arguments to increase it, by setting
before them the Value the Ancients put upon Performances of this Nature: we
will not therefore Transcribe from Pliny, the vast Sums of Money which were
given by the Kings and Princes of Greece, and Rome, for Picture of the Prime
Masters; and indeed the Relations we find in Pliny, would seem almost
incredible, if it were not that we every day see those of our Modern Masters in
that Art sold for 1000, or 1500 Pounds apiece. Nor is it necessary to repeat
what we have formerly advanced concerning the first Invention of it, that being
so very Obscure, that the most that can be said, or gathered from Authors,
amounts only to a Probability. Nor will it be much to our purpose, to enumerate
the several Excellent Pieces this Art produced, when it Flourished in Greece,
though we confess it is not altogether unfit to be known to such as have any
desire to apply themselves to this Noble Study: which may be said to surpass
the Judgment of the Sense it self, by which we judge of it: for it persuades
the Eyes against the Evidence of themselves, that there is a Substance more
than really there is, raising a Flat, to a bulky Round, or other Figure: Nay,
presents the Eye with a Prospect of Miles in the Compass of a Hand, and that so
lively, that with a great deal of satisfaction, we dwell upon the View as if we
were satish'd there was more than a flat, thin Superficies that entertained us;
a great Master disputing in a Treatise of Painting and Statuary, which was to
be preferred, gives it to Painting; because a Statue has the Dimensions and Bulk
of a Man, but a Picture deceives the Eye, and makes that appear round, which is
plain and flat. Stone at most can give but the Features and Proportion, but
Picture gives also the Color. There are some that will have the Moderns far
Excel the Ancients in both. They compare the Statue of Daphne and Apollo, of
Michael Angelo with the Grecian Venus now at Florence, the Grand Duke having
given above thirty thousand Pounds for it, though by stealth got from Rome, they
tell you that the Venus of the Grecians has Admirable Proportion, but it is
still Stone, there is a stiffness, which shows it still to be an Image without
Life; but the Daphne of Michael Angelo appears to be Flesh and Blood; her
Breast sinking under the Fingers of Apollo, when he lays his Hand there. These
same Gentlemen will have it, that our Moderns far Excel the Ancients in
Picture; nay, some have been so grossly ignorant, as to pretend the Grecians
were mere Blockheads, to any of our Contemporary Artists, much more to Raphael,
Urbin, Titian, Rubens, etc. That a House or Sign Painter, with us Excelled
Apelles that drew the Mistress of Alexander; and Alexander himself. Though we can
never be of their Opinion, since we are sensible that it is built on a wrong
Bottom; because the Paintings of Greece are lost, they therefore conclude, from
a Daubing found in a Cave, that they were such Bunglers, which without doubt,
was rather the performance of some of the grosser and more ignorant Ages in the
World, when all Sciences were forgot, and Europe drowned in a general Darkness
and Barbarity. For though some allege against the Testimony of Pliny, because he
took too much of his Natural History upon trust, yet we can never admit that
enough to invalidate his Account of things, which required no more than the Eye
to judge of, being things that he daily conversed with in Rome, which he
abundantly declares, when he tells us the Pictures he mentions, were extant in
his time in the Temples of that City. The disadvantage the Ancients have is,
that we have our Pieces still extant, but theirs all lost. Painting is an Art,
that is not to be learned by those Methods that other Arts are, for Books will
afford very little help. The Directions of a Master, and a timely beginning,
are absolutely necessary, for if you once get an ill habit, and a vicious way
of Drawing, 'twill scarce ever be possible to recover it. The most gainful
Painting in this Nation, is drawing to the Life, which to be a Master in,
requires many years Practice. As it is said of Poetry, Poet a nascitur non sit,
so I may in some measure say of Painting, that he that will expect to be a
Master, must have a Genius naturally inclined to it, else so near a kin it is to
Poetry, he will be but an indifferent Man at it* though with this difference,
that a Painter that is not extraordinary, may live by his Trade, and have his
Pieces hung in the Company of the best; yet Mediocribus esse poetis non dii,
non homines, non concessere Columnae. But if a Gentleman has a mind for his
Diversion, to apply himself to Painting, Landskips, and Perspective, are the
most proper for him* the first being to be learned in a years time, to such a
degree of Perfection (if the Disciple have a Genius for Painting) that he would
be able to live by it, and by Consequence enough for any Gentleman's Diversion.
There are Books which Treat of Painting and Drawing, one of the best of which
is Sandersons, we have formerly seen a Book under the Name of Michael Angelo,
on the same Subject. There Is an Account of Painting lately published in fol.
Dedicated to their Majesty's, Mr. Writes Account of my Lord Castlemains Embassy
to Rome, Ars pictoria in fol. But instead of relying altogether on Books, we
refer you to the Choicest Catalogues of Picture you can meet with at Auctions,
which you may imitate.

Geometry,
THe Use of this admirable Science, is so general and so well known, that it
scarce requires a Discussion of it here; for who is ignorant, that all our most
Necessary as well as most Noble Arts and Sciences depend on it; as to the
First, there is none of the Mechanics can ever be brought to Perfection
without it, and so the second, as Painting and Architecture, etc. take their
Original from it. What could the Performers in the First do without it, in
drawing a Face, the several postures of the Body, and all manner of Buildings?
If they were ignorant of Proportion, Angles, Circles, Squares, etc. all their
Works would want Beauty, and themselves Satisfaction, when they come to view
the product of Fancy, and Guess where Certainty is required; So in Architecture
none can even merit the name of Master, without more than an ordinary Skill in
this Science. Besides, no Gentleman can be a Judge of the Performances of
either, without an Insight into Geometry. What is said of these two will also
reach Statuarists, and other Carvers: But to return to our Subject, The
Knowledge of a Point or a Line, (which is composed of a continued Chain of
Points) in its several Forms, as Right and Curve, to know a Superficies (which
is bounded by Lines, as a Line is by Points) the difference of Superficies,
viz. a plain Superficies that lies strait between its Lines and a curved one
that lies not within two Lines; besides the other Consideration of Superficies,
as a Unequal and Concave. To know the Quality of Angels, as right, obtuse and
acute Angles; of points that are the Bounds of Lines, as Lines are of a
Superficies, and a Superficies of a Body; of Circles, Diameters, Segments,
greater and lesser; of four square Figures, many square Figures; Of Triangles,
their several Lines; of Parallel Lines either Circular or Right, or any other
Form where the Lines are Equidistant. Of Erecting and letting fall
Perpendiculars; of drawing parallel Lines; of dividing Lines into two or more
equal or unequal Parts. Of cuting any Number of Parts from any Right Line
given. Of finding out all the Chords. Lines of a Circle, etc. Of having the
Segment of a Circle, to find out the Center, and consequently the whole, adding
several Circles into one. Of Substracting lesser Circles out of greater; in
short, all the Doctrine of Triangles too long to be here enumerated, the
Knowledge of all this I say, is absolutely necessary in most, if not all our
Mechanics. A Joyner cannot so much as cut out a Round Table, unless he
understand a Circle; or a Carpenter square a piece of Timber, unless he know by
the Rule of square Figures, when his Work is finished. The Watch and
Clock-makers would be at a loss, if it were not for this Science: But if we
ascend higher, no Builder can raise a Fabric without Geometry, or rather, not
regularly design one, the manual Operators in our common Buildings, very seldom
being Proficients in any Rule but that of Wood, or Brass, or Iron, which serves
them instead of Geometrical Problems; but if you come to the Nobler Structures*
what can any man do to the making of Pillars, Arches? to omit the rest of the
Ornaments of Building, and the Proportions and Beauty of the Design, without
Geometry? Nay, the Trade and Strength of the Nation depend on this, as
Navigation and Gunnery, which are never to be perfectly understood without it;
to these I may add Fortification, which has its Dependence on this Science, as
also Dyalling* Music, Astronomy, Surveying, etc. 'Twou'd be needless to say
any more of the Advantages of Geometry, here being enough to fire the Mind of
any ingenious Student, to a diligent enquiry into it.

'Twas the Beauty of Proportions, the Curiosity of Demonstrations, the
Excellency and Depth of this Study, that forced the Ingenious Dr. Barrow to
this Exstatick Expression in his Apollonius, O (...). But thou, O Lord, how
great a Geometrician art thou? Geometry has no Limits, since by the only Power
of Human Wit, one may find out an infinite number of Theorems. Thou beholdest
all Truths at once, without any Chain of Consequences, or the Tract of long
Demonstrations; in other things Man has no Certainty, but in Mathematics every
body agrees. It Is in this that Humanity can effect something Great and
Stupendous, etc. This adds he, is enough of it self to inflame me with the
Love of thee, and give me an Earnest Expectation of that happy Day, in which my
Spirit shall be delivered from the Prejudices of Darkness, in which I shall not
have only a certain Knowledge of all these Truths, but every thing else,
without the trouble of drawing Consequences. Such as design for this Study, may
make use of the following Catalogue.

GEOMETRY.
EUclides Elements. Barrows Works. Bettinus' s Works. Outreds (Will.)
Mathematical Recreations, Octav. Clavis Mathematica ( the Third Impression is
best) in Octav. Institutio Mathematica. Mr. Oughtreds Mathematical Tracts,
Oxford. Sr. Jonas Moors new System of Mathematics, in two parts, 4to. Newtons
Principia Mathematica. Of the unequality of natural Time, with its Reason and
Causes, together with the true Equation of Natural Days, etc. by John Smith,
Oav. Vietae Mathematica, in fol. Mr. Flamsteads Tables. Mr. Streets Astronomia
Carolina. Gunters Works. Mr. Hobbs his Mathematical Works.
Astronomy.
AStronomy is a Science, which teaches the Methods of Examining and Calculating
the Motions, Magnitudes, Conjunctions, Eclipses, Apogaeums, Perigaeums, etc. of
the Heavenly Bodies, by the Aid of Calculations, Glasses, Astrolabes,
Quadrants, etc. By this we may walk in the Air, and converse familiarly with
the most wonderful part of Gods Creation, man excepted. Atlas the Lybian
forsook the Society of Men, and retired to the highest Mountain in Africa,
which therefore bore his Name, that he might freely contemplate upon the Nature
and Motions of the Planets, and is therefore said to bear up the Heavens on his
Shoulders. The Poets have feigned the Moon to have been in Love with Endymion,
and the occasion of the Fable was this, he spent his time upon Rocks and
Mountains, in studying in the Nature of the Moon and Stars.

We are not at all surpised, to find so many great Men affect this Study, and
endeavor after the Knowledge of such things as raise so great an Admiration in
all that are ignorant of 'em. To see a regular Succession of Day and Night, a
constant return of Seasons; and such an harmonious Disposition and Order of
Nature must necessarily be a Noble Contemplation, and agreeable not only to the
Nature of Man, but also the Posture of his Body which is Erect, when other
Creatures are made to look downwards upon the Earth, according to the Poet.

Os homini sublime dedit, Coelumque tueri
Iussit, and Erectos ad Sydera tollere vultus.
There has been great Contention amongst the Learned of different Nations,
about the Origin of this Study, every one claiming an Interest in it (as
several Cities did about the Birth of Homer,) as the Babilonians, Egyptians,
Grecians, Scythians, etc. though Ptolomaeus is the first that has left any true
Monument about the Observations of Eclipses, etc. This Study is of great Use to
stir up in us a great Admiration and Praise of him, whose Wisdom and Power
created so many Worlds (if we may say so) or at least of Bodies, whose
Magnitude, and if we may believe our Telescopes, whose Nature is proper enough
for Habitation, several of the Planets; having been discovered to have their
Satellites attending them, and moving about their Orbs. Upon this Science
depends Navigation and Dialing, and without it, it is impossible they should be
maintained; so that the necessity of following this Study, is not at all
disputable by any one that is not an Enemy to those other useful Sciences: The
following Catalogue will facilitate the Work.

ASTRONOMY.
GAssendus his Astronomy. Sellers Atlas Coelestis. Copernican Sphere of twenty
Inches Diameter, etc. Concave Celestial Hemispheres fitted for the Pocket, etc.
A Treatise of Telescopes done out of French by Jos. Walker. The use of the
general Planisphere, called the Analemma, etc. by John Twesdon, in 4to.
Planispherium Novum and Accuratissimum, etc. by R. Baker, Octav. Riolanus.
Slucius de Mesolabia. Wings Astronomia Britannica.
Navigation.
MOnsieur Cassini and several Ingenious Virtuosi, are now in search after a
Method to find out Longitudes at Sea, which if once accomplished, this Art will
then arise to its utmost Perfection; The Lodestone and Compass, which is an
Admirable Invention, and so Advantageous to Navigation has not a little
Contributed toward it: This points the way to the skilful Mariner, when all
other Helps fail him. To whom we owe the Invention we are at loss: Dr. Gilbert
our Countryman, who has written a large Latin Treatise upon this Stone, is of
Opinion that Paulus Venetus brought the Invention of its Use from the Chinese,
Osorus attributes it to Gama, Goropius Becanus thinks his Countrymen the
Germans deserve it, in as much as the thirty two Points upon the Compass,
borrow the name from the Dutch in all Languages, Blondus will have its Origin
from Campania in Naples, in the Year 1300. Who ever found it out, We are
sensible of the Use of it, since by it we may safely venture into the Main
Ocean and sail the nearest way to any place, whereas the first Sailers were
fain to coast it along, not venturing out of sight of the shore.

Navigation may deservedly be placed amongst the greatest Benefits in this
World; It Is this that enriches Nations with Treasures, supports Kingdoms and
Empires, exchanges Commodities, which in their own Countries are but of little
Value, for such as are of great Use and Worth abroad, by this an universal
Correspondence may be held, and the most remote Regions may participate in
Traffic, may make an inspection into one another Laws and Politics, Trades,
Inventions, and what not? There Is no moral Good but the Knowledge of it may by
this means be communicated to the universal Race of Adam; Besides all this,
there is new Discoveries have been, and yet may be made. For such Colonies as
either suffer by multitude of Inhabitants, or lie under the Inconveniences of a
barren Soil, an unwholesome Air, etc. to remove into. In short, since Knowledge
conduces to a man's Happiness, and the more we know, the nearer we approach our
Original State in Paradise; this of Navigation and Travel give very fair
Opportunities toward it, and if so, we need add no more about the Usefulness
of Navigation, since from what we have said, it appears that Riches and
Learning do in a great measure depend upon it, especially the first, which of
it self is a sufficient spur to most men. Take the following Catalogue for the
Acquirement of this profitable Art.

NAVIGATION.
COasting, Pilot, etc. Collin's Mariners Scale New plained. A Treatise of
Navigation. The Seaman's Tutor, etc. by P. Perkins. The Whole Art of
Navigation, in Five Books, by Captain Daniel Newhouse, in 4 to. Norwood's
System of Navigation, 4 to. Pickering's Marrow of the Mathematics, Twelves.
Dialling.
TIme is the greatest Treasure in this World, that a Mortal can be entrusted
with. We are not only Probationers for Eternity by the help of Time, but even
the little Interests of this World are managed by the means of it. It Is this
which views the Revolutions of Kingdoms, the Rise of Common wealths; it is by
this that we have opportunities put into our hands of advancing our Families,
of gaining Reputation; in short, of procuring whatever Man has occasion for, in
order to his happiness.

The Learned Descartes, in his Method, where he Abridges the Precepts of Logic
into Four Heads, lays down this as his Second, viz. To divide every one of
these difficulties he was to examine into as many parcels as could be, and as
was requisite the better to resolve them. This Rule is equally applicable to
our present Subject, only it is of lesser Concern, the last being the more
precious; and, if once lost, all the Knowledge of Men can never effect its
redemption. How necessary is it then, to divide that of so great value into
little parcels, that we may be sensible of their stealing away, and not
squander it away by wholesale?

To divide time by Dials; Clocks, Watches, etc. is a faint Imitation of
God-Almighty, who has constituted Seasons, has divided the Year into Spring,
Summer, Autumn and Winter, and our Life into Days and Nights.

It must be a pleasant, as well as profitable Divertisement, to be so well
acquainted with the Calculations of the Motions of Heavenly Bodies, as to make
Horologes upon any side of an House, under any Latitude, Declination, etc. --
Mellesius is said to be the first who found out the Proportion and Reason of
Shadows -- The Caldeans first divided the day into Twelve hours -- The
Egyptians had a hand in this Science, and called the Sun Horus, which, by its
Motion, limits the time of every hour -- An Hundred years before Cicero's time,
we find that Clocks and Dials were used at Rome; for the Parasite in Comedy
envied the Clocks, Optans ut suus cuique venture sit Horologium, wishing, that
every ones own Belly might be their Clock, which indeed was pleasant enough.
There Is no further occasion of describing the Great Use and Convenience of
Dialling, since we find it every where, and in every Nation; though in some, we
read, that they Measure their Hours by Devices in Water, which yet shows the
necessity of doing it some way; for it would be nonsense to believe all the
World would Conspire in any one unnecessary thing, which Interest and Utility
did not prompt 'em to.

DIALLING.
FOster's Art of Dialling, 4 to. Brown's Use of the Triangular Quadrant; also
Horologiographia, or the Art of Dialling, etc. 8 vo Collins's Sector, or
Quadrant, etc. Dary's Description of the Universal Quadrant, etc. Dialling
Plain, Concave, Unequal, Projective, Reflective, etc. By William Leybourn, in
Fol. Clavis Horologii, by John Howel, 4 to. Dr. Prolocutoris Arithmetica.
Optics.
THE Eye is to the Body, as Reason is to the Mind. This Study is dependant upon
Geometry; and we may put in Dioptricks and Catoptricks; Since altogether they
undeceive the Eye and Solve the Fallacies that it is subject to, by Distance,
Refractions, Reflections, etc. It Is a very agreeable Curiosity, to see the
great abuses that the Noblest of the Senses is by these Arts freed from; To
Calculate the distance of a Star, or its Diameter; To find the Errors of such
as are unskilled in this Study to be above a Thousand times greater than it is
possible to persuade 'em, till they are first made Masters of Geometry and
Demonstration; Galilaeus has demonstrated, that there are Mountains and Hills
in the Moon, above Four perpendicular Italian Miles in height, which is
incredible to a Country fellow, that cannot be persuaded, that the whole
Circumference of the Moon exceeds the bigness of a Cartwheel; It Is pleasant to
undeceive the Eye in the common accidents of Life, as to give a certain
Demonstration of a Straight Stick appearing Crooked in Water; The Reason of
things being Magnified, Multiplied, or made lesser than they really are; In
short, to see the Eye approach, in some measure, toward that certainty of
Judging, and Apprehending Visibles, as it will at the day of Resurrection; when
it will be above the power of being Cheated by Concave or Unequal, deluded by a
Refraction, or Reflection, or weakened by distance; this may, in a great
measure, be accomplished in this World, by such as give themselves up to this
Study, and make themselves Masters of the following Catalogue.

OPTICS.
SYnopsis Optica Auth. Honorato Fabri Soc. Jesu Lugdun. Gall. in 4 to. Johannis
Kepleri Sae Cae. M^s. Mathematici Dioptrice, in 8 vo. Descartes his Dioptricks.
Johannes Pena, Gallus, de Usu Optices Universae. Mollineux ( of Ireland) his
Treatise of it. Moxon's Practical Perspective. Anguelonii Optica, in fol.
Geography.
WE might also have added Geography, under the Mathematics, as a proper
Recreation for a Gentleman; but by the Means of History and Maps, the Study is
soon accomplished, Music also is too near a kin to Poetry, Music
to speak too largely about it here; besides, we have purposely omitted it;
since Eight or Ten years cannot well be spared in a short Life, a time requisite
to be a Master in that Art; for, less than to play and compose well, is not
worth Learning: Besides, the time that is to be spent upon Music, should be in
Youth, because of the Pliableness of the Fingers, and that is a time also most
proper to take the Impression of the best Studies. So that after all, when a
Gentleman has a Mind to Recreate himself with Music, it is best done at the
expense of a Masters time, and a little of his own Money Architecture.
Architecture we may also pass over, and leave to Mechanics; A Beautiful Mind
is a finer thing than a Magnificent Building; not but that there is a great deal
of Geometrical Curiosity in the former. Fortification and Gunnery.
Fortification and Gunnery are also more proper for private Persons than
Gentlemen; for, if their Genius be Martial, it is more noble to Command Men,
than Engines; for these three last Arts there are several Treatises mentioned
above, under the Mathematics, which will be of Use to the Student. That we
have past over the Learning of the Schools, as Grammmer, Rhetoric, etc. we
need make no great Apology, since they are always supposed, a tolerable
Education in them being absolutely necessary for meaner concerns in the World,
than what we have been treating of; so that we shall not particularize them here,
nor indeed would the brevity of our Discourse permit it.

A Great Man makes a strange observation of his Friend, for condemning
Knowledge in himself, but not in its self. This (says he) persuades me, that
it is near akin to Grace, for Moses perceived not his own Face to shine.
Licinius, Constantines Colleague, calls Barrenness of Learning, The Public
Plague and Poison of an Empire. Zenophon says, Good Consorts are worth my
Acquaintance, and Good Books my Perusal: My Lord Cook has a pretty Notion of
Books, Of all Companions Books are best: for, there one may solace himself
without other Friends: Of all Glosses, Books are best; for they being
Inspective, are both Prospective, and Reflective. In short, whoever makes a
Trial of the Worth of Knowledge and Learning, will find, that all Encomiums, be
they never so agreeable and noble, come far short of the thing it self; and,
that those only can best reflect upon its Value, who are sensible of the
Enjoyment of it.

The YOUNG Students Library, etc.
All the Works of John Lightfoot Doctor in Divinity, Master of Catherines's
Hall at Cambridge, and Canon of Ely. Rotterdam; Sold by Reinier Leers, 1686. in
Fol. Two Volumes.
MOST of the Treatises which are in these two Volumes, have appeared only in
English; many of the Learned beyond Sea look upon them as Pieces perfectly new.
This Work has been translated out of English into Latin. First, as to the
Preface; though it be not Lightfoot's, because it treats of the principal
Subjects upon which Lightfoot has written, yet we shall mention it, since
there is to be found in it very curious Remarks. Mr. Bright speaks there, first
of the Usefulness of Chronology, and shows us that it may be very serviceable
to the understanding of Sacred History. He brings for example this passage, 2 Chronicles. 16.1. where it is said, that in the 36 th year of the Reign of Asa,
Baasha King of Israel went up against Judah. We must not understand this date
from the time in which Asa began to Reign, since Baasha ascended to the Throne
of Israel, but the third year of the Reign of Asa, and Reigned but 24 years,
that is to say, to the 27th year of King Asa's Reign, 1 Kings 15.33. The same
numbers are found in all the Ancient Interpreters; so that it is not very
likely that any fault should have slipped herein. If we consult Chronology, it
tells us, that the year in which Baasha King of Israel made War against Judah,
was the 36th from the division of the Ten Tribes; so that by the Reign of Asa
must be understood, That the Reign of Judah took its beginning from the time
that Jeroboam dismembered the Ten Tribes. It Is thus that Lightfoot interprets
it, p. 80. from his Harmony of the Old Testament. See also p. 81. and 87. It Is
also remarked, that these two passages of the Chronicles, to wit, the 2d of
Chron. 27.2. where it is said, That King Achaias was 42 years old when he began
to Reign; and Chap. 23. v. 9. where Iehoiachim in the beginning of his Reign,
is said to be eight years old, ought to be translated otherwise, if we suppose
that there is no fault in the present Hebrew, because it is contrary to
Chronology. But in the Ancient Version the first passage is 20, or 22. and in
the 2d 18. which makes us believe that there may be a fault in our Hebrew
Copies. You may see what Lightfoot says of Achaias in the preceding Discourses
of his Harmony of the Evangelists.

Mr. Bright maintains against Grotius, that the ordinary manner of reading that
passage, Isa. 8.8. is better than the corrections that Grotius would have made.
It is 65 in the Hebrew, and in all other Translations; and Grotius pretends
that it ought to be read 6 and 5, that is to say, eleven. The Author of this
Preface shows upon what (he thought) Grotius built this Conjecture, and fell
into an Error contradistinct to the the true Chronology of the Kingdom of
Israel. He send the Reader back again to the Computation of Lightfoot, who
removes all the difficulty.

It Is not, that he was of the Opinion of Lightfoot, who believed there was no
fault in the Hebrew Text; he thought that it was better to follow the Samaritan
Pentateuch way of reading, and the Translation of the Seventy, than that of the
Hebrew Text, which says, Exodus 12.40. that the time that the Children of
Israel abode in Egypt was 430 years, whereas they continued no more than 210
years. But it is in the Samaritan Pentateuch, and in the Septuagint according
to the Manuscript of Alexandria, that the time of abode which the Children of
Israel and their Fathers made in Egypt and in the Land of Canaan, was 430
years, which agrees exactly with Chronology. After having spoken something of
the necessity that there is to study Sacred Geography for the better
understanding of the Scripture, he passes to the Original Text and Ancient
Translations. He shows first by some examples, that the consent of all the
Ancient Translations with the Hebrew and Samaritan Texts, proves that those
places which may be suspected, have not been corrupted, and that when all the
Translations agree with either of these Texts, it is something very
considerable in favor of them to whom they are found conformable. Secondly, He
shows that by the same consent one may find diverse faults in the Hebrew Texts
at this day. As our Hebrew Copies (says he) are without doubt those which
represent the Ancient Originals best, and which ought to be preferred to all
others; it would nevertheless be a sign of obstinacy and superstition to
believe that there is no considerable fault which may be corrected by means of
the Translations. There are many examples in other Authors, as in the Epistles
of St. Ignatius, of which Usher Primate of Ireland, has corrected diverse
places by means of the Ancient Latin Translations of these Epistles.
Afterward he brings for example that of Psalm. 22.6. and 145.14. Exodus 12.14.
where one ought according to him correct the Hebrew Text by the Ancient
Translations, to which he also adds Genesis 49.22. and chapter 4. v. 11. which the
Reader may examine if he finds it to his purpose.

These mistakes concern the Consonants of the Hebrew Tongue. Mr. Bright
believes that there are also some slipped in amongst the Vowels, although he
would not approve all the examples the Learned have brought thereon. Thus there
is according to him Psalms the 11. and 9. (...) ( Therognem) Thou shall break
them with a Rod of Iron; for (...) Thou shall feed them, ( Thirgnem) or thou
shall govern them with a Scepter, etc. The Septuagint having read it in this
last manner, since they have translated it (...), Thou shall feed them. He also
brings Hosea 13.14. and Amos 9. and 13. The sense of this last passage is
extremely different, according to their manner of reading and pointing, who
followed the Massorites, from the sense that the Septuagint gives it. According
to the first it must be translated, So that they shall possess the rest of
Idumea; and according to the last which St. Paul has followed, Act. 15.16. So
that the Rest of men shall seek the Lord.

Our Author afterward says, that the pointing at this day is not always
conformable to the Analogy of the Hebrew Tongue, which appears by many
Anomalies, of which the Massore says nothing, and by diverse proper Names which
are better written in the old Translations.

The Ancient Versions furnish us likewise with diverse significations of some
words, which without that, would be perfectly unknown to us. We are extremely
confirmed in this thought, when the same words in our neighboring Tongue have
all these significations, as in the Syriack, Arabic and Ethiopick Languages,
etc. which have much affinity with that of the Hebrews. But he marks
nevertheless that we must not too much confide in this manner of finding out
the signification of some Hebrew words by the means of the neighboring
Tongues, because that diverse accidents happen too long to enumerate, as when a
word changes its signification with another People, by losing its Ancient
sound, and acquiring something new, and unknown from the Language whence it was
first taken. For example, the English word to Try, is without doubt the same as
the French, Trier, nevertheless it has a signification which has no agreement
with that of the French word, to make a Trial or a Proof of. So to Crack, which
comes from Craquer, signifies in English to Boast: To Let in English signifies
both to Permit and to Hinder, but the Dutch word Letten, or as they now speak,
Beletten, which is the same, signifies to Hinder. So we cannot altogether trust
to the Conjectures of some Learned men upon the Hebrew word (...) Tsagnir,
which is found, Micah 5.2. They believe there, that the Hebrew signifies Great
and Little, at the same time, because it has two significations in the
Arabic: It Is true that they have founded it upon this, that the Seventy have
translated Little in this place of Micah and St. Matthew, which is not Little.

Mr. Bright comes afterward to the use that may be made of the writings of the
Rabbis, and it is in this that Lightfoot has excelled. As first, from the
knowledge of the customs and opinions of the Jews, which although sometimes very
extravagant, we may notwithstanding afford us some benefit. Secondly, It may
serve to the confirmation of the History of Jesus Christ, for it appears by
that, that there was one Jesus which had Disciples who lived in such a time,
and such a place, who did and said diverse things; That there was such places,
such opinions, such customs, such ceremonies. It Is found in the writings of the
most ancient Jews, the same style and same manner of speaking are seen in the
Evangelists, and very often the same thoughts the same Parables and the same
Proverbs. Our Author brings from thence some examples that have never been
observed before. There is to be found in the Thalmud of Babylon an ancient
Tradition of the Jews: It says, that in the time of the Messia there shall be
an extreme Impudence, etc. That the Father shall be ill treated by his Son, and
the Daughter should rise up against her Mother, the Daughter-in-law against her
Mother-in-law, and a man's Enemies shall be those of his own House, etc. By that
we see that our Lord according to this ancient Doctrine of the Jews made it
known that he was the Messia, when he said, That he was come to separate
betwixt the Son and the Father, the Daughter and the Mother, and the
Daughter-in-law and the Mother-in-law, and that a man's Enemies should be those
of his own House. Mr. Bright after that marks the places of the Thalmud where
there is mention made of Jesus Christ. Thirdly, The reading of the Rabbis is
useful to convince the Jews at this day, that they ought to understand Him to
be the Messia, from many passages of the Old Testament. Which they endeavor to
interpret otherwise, tho their Fathers understood it as we do. From thence he
brings a great many examples. It is said in an ancient Jewish Book which is
called Pelicta, that God had a Dialogue with the Messia in these Terms: God
began to make a Covenant with the Messiah, speaking thus to him: Those which
have sinned are unknown to thee, and will impose upon thee a Yoke of Iron, by
which they will render thee like to a Heifer, almost blind with excess of
labor, and at last they shall destroy thee: because of their iniquity thy
Tongue shall cleave to the Roof of thy Mouth. And will thou suffer this? The
Messia. It may be that these griefs and afflictions shall endure but for a
time. God. I am fully resolved that thou shall suffer it a whole week of years,
but if thou consent not thereto, I shall not impose these sufferings upon thee.
The Messia. I willingly submit my self on condition that one Israelite may not
perish, but that they may all be saved, those that live and dye in my Time,
those that are hidden under the Earth, and which are dead since Adam, even the
Children which died before they were born, or that are come into the World
before their time; in a word, all that have been created until now, and which
shall be hence forth. Although there is much extravagance here, we it may
nevertheless discover through all these fictions, that the ancient Jews have
not always promised themselves a Triumphant Messia, and such as should
peaceably enjoy the advantages which the Jews of our times attribute to him. It
is plain 'twas believed that the Sufferings of the Messia should be a means to
expiate the sins of Israel. It Is this which the same Author assures us of, in
terms very clear, which Mr. Bright relates. Fourthly, Much use may be drawn
from the reading of the Rabbis, because therein are found opinions, customs
and manners of speaking, which were used amongst the Jews in the time of our
Lord, as he shows by some examples never before produced; thus, Lightfoot has
composed all the second Volume of his works upon this Subject: Mr. Bright
believes that St. Paul had a respect to an opinion of the Jews, when he obliged
the Women to have their heads covered in Devotion, because of the Angels, 1
Cor. 11. and 20. and he cites thereupon a place of the Babylonish Thalmud and
some passages of two or three other Rabbis, from whence it appears that the
Jews thought the Angels had much curiosity to know what passed amongst men, and
particularly in anything of great importance.

After all these remarks we find a little abridgment of the Life of Lightfoot,
where as occasion serves, there are diverse Reflections intermixed, which we
shall mention briefly. The thoughts of Monsieur Simon, are there refuted,
touching the abridgment of a new Polyglot, which he has proposed in his
Critics, and touching the Authentickness of the Vulgar, etc. He also refutes
the Interpretation that Lightfoot has given in the Epistle to the Corinthians
just before cited. For although Mr. Bright had a great esteem for Lightfoot, he
thought himself not obliged to receive all his opinions or defend whatsoever he
has said. He says he is not of the same Opinion with our Author, who believed
that the least point of the Bible is a Divine Institution, and that all therein
is mysterious even unto the least irregularities. Mr. Bright Criticizes on two
or three remarks of Lightfoot upon the Rabbis, founded upon the faults of the
Copier, which he explains after a mysterious manner.

As the Life of Lightfoot composed by Mr. Bright was too short, Mr. Stryp has
joined thereto another more large, which is followed with a collection of
diverse things concerning the person and writings of our Author. Therein we see
the manner of his Study and Employ, with the esteem they had of him in England
and elsewhere, etc. those who love to know the least particulars of the lives
of great men, will here find what will both divert and instruct 'em. There is
an account in his Life of some of the reasons of the controversies between the
Divines assembled at Westminster, who had undertaken to reform, during the
Civil Wars, what they called Errors in the Church of England. Lightfoot
opposes stiffly some of their opinions, as may be seen in the third Article of
the Collection that is added to his Life. We shall find in the eighth a List of
his Works, which have not been finished, which were mostly concerning the
History of the Hebrews, with the explication of some Book of the Holy
Scripture. One part is in English and the other in Latin. He has even given
himself the trouble to write all the Texts of the Evangelists and to dispose
them into an harmonious method. It is offered to any Bookseller that will Print
it. In what respects the Harmony we may advertise the Public that Mr.
Toignard has promised to publish it at the end of his, wherein shall soon be
seen the method which he has made use of in a place of Josephus, where he
compares the Iudaick Antiquities with the Books of the Jewish Wars. This last
Harmony is now in the Press and will soon appear abroad. Before we consider the
works set forth by Lightfoot, we cannot forbear speaking of the loss that has
been sustained in a Map of Palestine, which he had effected with much care, and
traced with his own hand. It Is a loss doubtless very great to such as desire to
be instructed in the Sacred Geography, because there is no Card of Judea left,
that can satisfy those who are but indifferently versed in this kind of
learning. We have nevertheless endeavored to supply this loss received by that
of Lightfoot, working therein upon his Ideas, and in giving a Map of those
places whereof this Author makes mention in his Geographical Remarks, and which
have been placed according to his observations. But although many faults are in
this Map corrected which are found in all others, we shall yet find it a
trouble, to persuade our selves, that the notions of Lightfoot could be
followed to such perfection as what he had done himself.

The first Work that we meet with in this Volume, is an Harmonious and
Chronological disposition of the Text of the Old Testament. The Sacred Writers
are so little tied to the order of Time, and those who have collected them into
a Body, had so little regard to Chronology, that the Jews form thereupon a
constant explication of the Holy History, to wit, that in Holy Writ there is no
before nor after. Our Author proposes to himself to remedy this inversion of
Method, in making an Abridgment of all the Holy History, and placing every
event where it ought to be in his Judgment. He has added in the Margin the
year of the World, and that of the Judicature or Reign of those who governed
Israel, and he has taken care to mark the precise date of all the events
whereof he could have had any certain knowledge. Those that he has placed by
his own conjecture have no date. In the Margin he has added the reason why he
has there inserted these places, without undertaking to refute the reasons of
those who place them elsewhere, lest he should make his volume too large. He
has only proposed his opinion upon the difficulties that represent themselves,
and leaves them to be judged by the Reader. His opinions are often very new, as
will be easily acknowledged if they compare what he says, with what is to be
found in other Interpreters. As for the rest he confesses what he has written
is but an Essay, and advertises the Reader that he ought not to expect it very
exact.

1. The Text of Genesis Chronologically disposed, reaches to p. 22. and
Lightfoot ends the History of this Book by a Citation from the first of the
Chronicles, which he believed ought immediately to follow the death of Joseph.
1 Chronicles. 6.21, 22.23. In this place are to be found the years of the
Patriarchs, and the years of Promise joined with those of the World.

2. The Books of Exodus, Leviticus and Numbers joined together, continue the
holy History, p. 38. where the Establishment is seen of the half Tribe of
Manasseh on that side Jordan. There are only two places of two other Books
inserted amongst those of Moses. Lightfoot believes that the 88th and 89th
Psalms were composed by Heman and Ethan Sons of Zerach, which lived, according
to him, in the time that the King of Egypt oppressed the Israelites with
excessive Labor and Taxes. The Author thinks also that Job lived in the same
time, and that he was the Grand Son of Nahor, Abraham's Brother, and that Elihu
one of those which speaks in his Book, and who was his near Kinsman, is the
Author of this work. This he asserts in p. 24.

3. Afterward comes Deuteronomy followed with the Abridgment of the Books of
Joshua and Judges. The History of Ruth is inserted between the time of Ehud and
Deborah. The Author takes notice but of one word in chap. 3. and 13. v. that
has an extraordinary point, and but of one other in the 19th chapter of Genesis
of the same nature. Our Author seeks there the mystery of it.

4. Lightfoot continues his Chronological Abridgement of the Sacred History, by
some Texts of the Book of Samuel, of the Chronicles, and of Kings put together,
according as the order of events required. Here are also many Psalms, with the
occasions and most difficult passages of the Canticles explained, after the
manner of our Author, that is to say, according to the method of the Rabbis,
who only guessed at many things in ancient History. Whereof see an example in
C. 58. about the explication of Psalm 58.35. but as neither the time nor the
Authors of all the Psalms are not known, Lightfoot could not range them in
Chronological order. Which has obliged him to place the Book of Psalms, after
the the 35 th chapter of the 1 st Book of Chronicles. In this place he makes
diverse reflections upon the gathering together of these Sacred Songs, Ps. 71.
He tells us the Book of Proverbs, and the Song of Songs, was written when
Solomon had finished the buildings he had undertaken. He believes that the Song
of Songs was composed by this Prince upon his Marrying the King of Egypt's
Daughter, who (that being a very hot Country) was Brown, as it is Cant. 1.5, 6.
but his chief end was to represent the Spiritual Marriage of Jesus Christ with
his Church, under the sensible Type of his own with an Egyptian. As for the
Ecclesiastes, Lightfoot places it much later, and thinks it a work, that he
composed in the time of his Repentance; see Page 26. from this place the Books
of the Kings and Chronicles, are Printed in Columns, so that one may see at
first view the conformity and difference which is between them, as there is in
this History many Chronological difficulties, so Lightfoot is more exact to
mark the years of every Prince.

5. Being come to the Reign of Vzziah, whom the Scripture also calls Azarias,
he says, that before that time there always had been some Prophets, but that
none of them had left his Prophecies in writing. And according to him, 'twas in
this time that the Prophets begun to write. On this occasion he describes the
order and end of the Prophecies of Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah and Jonas; he
maintains that the first occasion of the Prophecies of Hosea, was the death of
Zacharias Son of Barachia. As all that this Prophet says cannot relate to one
time only, so he here mentions but the four first Chapters, the others are each
in their place. He has observed the same order in regard to the rest who have
prophesied in diverse times. Those, according to his Judgment, whose Predictions
have been delivered in the same time, are inserted entire in the places where
Lightfoot speaks of what happened at that time, as Nahum, Zephaniah, etc.

6. The Book of Esdras immediately follows the first of Chronicles. It was
then that Cyrus published his Edict, by which he permitted the Jews to return
to their Country; for though Darius of Media, or Astyages, as the Greeks call
him, lived at that time, it was made in the name of Cyrus his Grandson.
Lightfoot makes diverse remarks upon this Darius of Media, to p. 113. in
explaining the 5th Chapter of Daniel; and to p. 136. he speaks of several
things during the Reign of Cyrus, and the Succession of the Kings of Persia.
Lightfoot inserts the History of Esdras after the 4th Chapter of Esdras. He
believes the Assuerus mentioned in this History was also called Artaxerxes, and
that he was called Assuerus, from the name of one of his Predecessors, which is
spoken of in Dan. 9.1. to wit, the Grandfather of Cyrus, whom the Greeks
called, according to Lightfoot, Astyages. He makes this Assuerus immediately to
follow Cyrus.

7. Nehemiah and Malachy end this work, and the Spirit of Prophecy having
ceased among the Jews, the Books that they have since made, have not had the
same Authority as those that preceded them. Lightfoot explains here the
difficult Chronologies that he meets with in his way.

2. The Harmony of the Old Testament is followed with some remarks upon,
Genesis and Exodus; the first are entitled Paucae ac novellae observationes
super librum Geneseos, quarum pleraeque certae, caeterae probabiles sunt; omnes
autem innoxiae, ac raro antea auditae. It is a Collection of diverse Rabbinical
Remarks, or like in subtilty to those of the Rabbis: They conjecture at many
things according to the custom of these ingenious Doctors; for example, That
the first natural Day in the Climat of the Garden of Eden, was thirty six hours
long, even as the day whereof mention is made in the 10 th Chapter of Joshua;
That the Moon and some Stars were created before the Sun: That it was at the
full before the Sun appeared, which then augmented its Light; but that the
Earth hindering the sight thereof, it appeared not to Adam till six days after,
who saw it in its first quarter after that the Promise had cleared the darkness
of the Fall: That the clean Beasts were created in each kind to the number
seven, whereof three pairs were destined to the propagation of their kind, and
the seventh to be sacrificed by Adam after he had sinned; but that there was
but one pair of each kind of unclean Animals, etc. His Remarks upon Exodus bear
this Title; Manipulus spicilegiorum e libro Exodi, ubi solutio probabilis
scrupulorum quorundam manifestorum, and explanatio difficiliorum textuum, qui
hoc libro occurrunt, antea ab aliis raro exhibitae. These Remarks keep much of
the subtilty of the preceding ones; therein is nevertheless seen a method a
little more conform to that which the Interpreters of the holy Scripture
commonly follow. Every Section contains particular Remarks which have no
connection one with the other; and there are 59 Questions, which we cannot
undertake to make an exact Extract of. We shall only bring two or three of
them, by which you may judge of the rest. Lightfoot believes that the 88 th and
89 th Psalms are the most Ancient Works that remain amongst us, and are made by
Heman and Ethan Sons of Zerach, as has already been remarked, who lived in the
time of the Egyptian Slavery. He makes answer to those who oppose him therein,
that Ethan speaks of David. (1.) That this might be a Spirit of Prophecy, as
it is spoken of Samuel in Psalm. 99. which the Hebrews believe to be of Moses.
(2.) That Prophet having left some Writings, they have been polished and
augmented by others, who had also the gift of Prophecy, according as certain
things present, past, or to come, required it. This will plainly appear (says
Lightfoot) if we compare the 18th Psalm with the first of Sam. chap. 22.
Obadiah with Jeremiah, c. 49. v. 14. 1 Chronicles. c. 16. with Psalm. 92. and 105. 2
Pet. c. 2. with the Epistle of St. Jude. He believes that this piece of Ethan
has likewise been polished in David's time, and that several times the name of
David was then inserted, from Section the 30th, unto the end. Our Author
endeavors to describe the Tabernacle and Priestly Habits. In giving the
measure of all the parts of the Tabernacle, he speaks of the height of the
Altar for the Burnt-offerings, which was three Cubits. He says, that if every
Cubit had been three foot, no man could serve at the Altar which had not been
nine Cubits in height. He therefore reduces a Cubit to a Foot and half, so
that the height of the Altar was but four feet and an half. According to
Lightfoot, this is the measure that was observed in the Dimensions of the
Temple. As to the rest, he remarks with care the mystical significations of
each part of the Sacred Building, in the 48th Section. Speaking of the Vrim and
Thummim, he confutes the Opinion of those who believed that God answered to the
Questions that were made him in causing a certain brightness to appear upon the
Stones of the Breast Plate. He maintains that they proposed first to the Priest
what they desired to know, and that afterward the Priest consulted the Oracle
of God, or in drawing near to the Ark, when that might be done, or even without
the Ark, provided that he was clothed with the Ephod and Breast Plate which
was unseparable.

3. After these Treatises there is another, p. 195. whereof the Title is,
Erubhim, sive Miscellanea Christiana and Iudaica aliaque, relaxandis animis,
and otio discutiendo conscripta. It Is one of the first Works of Lightfoot, and
a mixture of diverse Remarks on the profane Authors, and upon the holy
Scripture, but the greatest part of it concerns the sacred Books. Every Chapter
is like a work apart, which has no connection with the others, so that we
cannot undertake to give here an abridgment of all that is therein. The Author
says, Chap. 4. the reason for which God called Ezekiel and Daniel Son of Man,
was because this manner of speaking was much more common to the Chaldeans and
Hebrews, than to say simply a Man. In the 19th and 20th Chapters he compares
some passages of the Rabbis to some of the New Testament. He believes that
even the Rabbis have taken thence diverse places, and that it is not at all
surprising, if the Jews, who lived amongst the Christians, and who had often
heard them speak of the New Testament, should retain something thereof, and
added it to their own Writings. But if it was so, many observations of our
Author would not be of great use, as may be seen in the Extract of the second
Volume. He says in Chap. 22. that he believes the Seventy Interpreters
translated the Old Testament into Greek in spite of the Jews, and that it is
for this reason that there is nothing in this Version but what is wandering and
uncertain, and that there are many additions, changes and faults. He brings
some examples, of which some are drawn from some words, that the Seventy have
pointed contrary to the Massorites, as Genesis 16.11. and Judge. 5.8. id. 7. and
11.7. Chron. 10.7. Tho our Author believes that the Vowels of the Hebrews are
of Divine Institution in the same manner that they are found at this day, he
says, every thing is a fault that agrees not in the Seventy. He had even
undertaken a work in which he would recollect all the Errors which he thought
he saw in this Translation. In his Manuscrip^^ there is to be found a
Collection entitled Discrepantiae (...) 70. a Textu Hebraico, which he had
begun to place in a clear Method, with a design to publish it under the Title
of Disquisitio modesta de 70 and de Versione Graeca. See the second Section of
the Collection of diverse things concerning the Life c. 30.
of Lightfoot. He praises in some places, the Elegance, Sweetness and Richness
of the Hebrew Tongue, as the Rabbis did before him; and he maintains every
where the Antiquity of the Points, so that it seems there was no other
knowledge of the Hebrew Tongue, than that which may be drawn from the Writings
of the Rabbis, to whom all the World has not given so much credit as himself.
It is difficult to know from whence he had learned Cap. 3.
That the Greek Tongue having flourished for many Ages, at last received its
perfection from the New Testament, and that as they called Athens the Greece of
Greece, the New Testament deserves to be called, because of the Tongue, INTER
GRAECA GRAECISSIMVM, the most excellent Greek of all the Greeks.

4. Page 117.
This work we speak of, is a Product of our Authors younger years. There is
another of his more mature Age. It Is a Harmony of the four Evangelists, as also
of the Old Testament, divided into three parts. This is the Method of the
Author: 1. He disposes the Text of the Evangelists according to the order of
times, to which he joins a literal Interpretation of the most difficult words
and phrases. 2. He gives the Reason of this disposition. 3. He expounds the
principal difficulties of the Text, and shows the agreement that is between
the sacred Writers. You may find before the first part of the preceding
Discourses, that our Author gives an Abridgment of Chronology drawn out of Holy
Writ, from the Creation to the Birth of Jesus Christ. He therein expounds, by
the by, diverse Chronological difficulties of the Old Testament. He believes
Jesus Christ was born in the year of the World 3928.

The first part of this Harmony compriseth what we find in the Gospels, before
the Baptism of our Lord, and what St. John says of the Word. There is a
Calendar in p. 260. whereby you may discern the order that was among the
Priestly Families, as to what regarded the service of the Temple, the time in
which each entered into service, the Sections or Portions of Scripture that were
read each Sabbath day, so that in the circuit of one year, the whole Law was
read. As the Author in the Title of the work promises to show the Harmony
betwixt the New Testament and the Old, so he expounds in their places the
Prophecies, which have foretold the coming of the Messia, as Numb. 24. in p.
287. This first part ends with an exposition of what the Evangelists say,
touching the Baptism of Jesus Christ, and of his Genealogies, as St. Luke
relates it.

The second comprises what happened since the Baptism of our Lord, to the first
Passover that he celebrated. Here we find a very large exposition of our
Saviors Temptation, especially upon these words of St. Matthew, that p. 371.
the Devil showed Jesus Christ all the Kingdoms of the Earth, and their Glory.
p. 390.
There is a digression some pages lower, touching Baptism, where the Author
makes diverse remarks, (1.) Upon the practice of Baptism with the Jews, before
that St. John the Baptist Preached amongst them. (2.) Upon the custom of
Baptizing Infants, which was in use in that time. He relates the passages of
the Thalmud and of Maimonides, whereby it appears that the Jews did Baptize
their Children. This Rabbin in his Treatise of Slaves, says, that if an
Israelite find a Child and Baptize him in the name of a Proselyte ((...)) he is
a Proselyte from that very moment: but he assures us of another thing
elsewhere, which is not so conformable to the use of Christians, to wit, if a
Woman with Child was Baptized, and received into the number of Proselytes, it
was thought needless to Baptize the Child. p. 410.
As to the Pots of Cana, the Water of which Jesus Christ changed into Wine,
Lightfoot takes occasion from thence to enumerate all the Vessels of the
Hebrews, whereof mention is made in Scripture, and tells what they severally
contained.

The third part of the Harmony of the Gospels comprehends the space of one year
which passed from the first Passover that our Savior celebrated after his
Baptism, to the second. As to these words of Jesus Christ in St. John, If any
man be not born a second time, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God,
Lightfoot makes a long digression touching the sense of these words, the
Kingdom of God, or the Kingdom of Heaven. He immediately remarks that the Jews
in the Thalmud, take them in a very extraordinary sense, that is to say, for
the rigorous observation of their Ceremonies, and particularly that of the
Tradition of Phylacteries. Rabbin Gamaliel being Married, did upon the very
night of his Nuptials rehearse what was written upon his Phylacteries, upon
which (says the Thalmud) his Disciples spoke thus to him: Have you not taught
us, that a Bridegroom is not obliged to mention his Phylacteries? and that he
answered them: far be it from me to be so complaisant to you, as to quit one
only hour the yoke of the Kingdom. After that Lightfoot shows, that thereby
(in our Saviors time) was understood the State of the Jewish Church under the
Messia. In fine, he largely shows the different signification, these words
had in the Mouth of the Carnal Jews, and in our Saviors. Upon John 3.23. p.
446.
And John Baptized at Enon near Salim, our Author makes sundry remarks upon
Enon and Salim; he believes these places were in Galilee. Afterward he
examines these 2 Questions, to wit, what Ceremonies the Jews used in their
Baptism? and how far St. John the Baptist has imitated them? When a Proselyte
was received, he was immediately asked, if it was not through some humane
consideration, that he would embrace Judaism, as through fear, desire of
Riches, or love to some fair Israelitish Woman? If he answered, it was not,
then the difficulty of observing the Law, was represented to him, and the
Punishment it inflicted upon Transgressors: But for fear of discouraging him,
he was also told of the rewards promised in the Law, they declared to him, that
tho Israel was seen miserable in this World, yet God had prepared for it a
felicity, that he kept concealed, and which they should enjoy in observing the
Law; that if God did not render Israel happy in this Life, it was to the end
only to keep it from Pride; but that the other Nations should everlastingly
perish, how happy soever they for the present seemed to be. They added, that if
he Repented that he had offered himself to be received into the number of the
Proselytes, he was permitted to withdraw. If he still declared he was in the
same Mind, they Circumcised him, and when he was cured, he was brought to some
Water, wherein he presently entered up to the Neck. Whilst he kept himself in
this posture, the three inferior Judges of the place rehearsed to him diverse
Precepts of the Law, after which he plunged himself over Head and Ears, and
came out a very little while after. If 'twas a Woman that was to be baptized,
she was by Women put into the Water; the Judges held themselves at a sufficient
distance from the place where she plunged her self, and she turned her back as
soon as ever she came out of the Water.

In expounding St. Luke 4.14. Lightfoot makes an ample digression concerning
the Synagogues, wherein he treats of their antiquity and establishment; of
the Synagogues after the Captivity; of the days in which men went to them, of
the conductors of the Synagogues, and of their Preachers. He believes that in
this the Christian Churches have imitated sundry customs of the Jews; and that
is it which others have evinced in whole Treatises.

A passage of the same Evangelist, viz. C. 5.17. gives our Author an occasion,
to insert in his Harmony, a small Treatise of the different conditions that
were found amongst the Jews, of the diverse Orders of their Doctors, of the
fundaments of their Religion in the time of our Savior, of the different
Sects, and particularly of the Sadduces and Pharisees. But all this is only an
Abridgment of some parts of a greater work, that our Author proposed to himself
to make, as may be seen in Section 1. of the Collection of the remarkable
things concerning his Life.

For the better understanding of diverse passages both of the Old and New
Testaments, we must of necessity have some idea of the manner of the structure
of the Temple at Jerusalem, and of its different parts. Therefore Lightfoot
has undertaken to give us an exact description of this sumptuous Building,
particularly such as it was in the time of our Savior. We see a Draught of it
at the beginning of this Treatise, that the Author himself had traced. As this
Treatise had not been Printed till now, but in English, the Latin version made
of it will appear a work altogether now to those that understand not the
English Tongue. This same reason, (besides the delight it may be to all men to
know how this Temple was made, whereof the Scriptures speak so advantageously)
engages us to give a small description thereof, according to the Ideas of our
Author.

The Top of the Hill of Moriah whereon the Temple was Builded, was at the first
somewhat narrow, but by little and little it was made larger, partly in filling
up the Valleys which were about it, and in environing it with a strong Wall.
Under the second Temple, it made a perfect square of 750 foot Diameter, and of
3000 in circuit. The Wall that environed it on all parts appeared to those that
were in the midst of it, thirty seven foot and an half high, excepting over
against the Eastern Gate, where it was but nine foot high, for a reason that
Lightfoot produces. On the outside this Wall was prodigiously high, raising it
self from the bottom of Valleys which Moriah was environed withal. On the side
of the Eastern Gate, it was 600 foot high. It was of white stones, triangular,
of 30 foot broad, and of nine high; so solid a structure, that this Wall
remained till the destruction of the second Temple.

In the beginning of the side of the East, to consider the exterior
circumference of this magnificent Building, one might see the principal Gate of
this circumference, which was called the Gate of Susan. The entrance was in
height 30 foot, and breadth fifteen; but the Ornaments of the Portal were
raised 15 foot higher, and reached to both sides a little more than four feet.
Above this was to be seen a Picture which represented Susan, the Capital City
of Media, which the Jews had caused to be put there, in remembrance of Esther
and of the feast of Purim. That was the reason why it was called the Gate of
Susan, tho it was likewise named the Royal Gate, because King Solomon had built
the Wall on that side.

One being ascended to this Gate, if he turned himself from the side whence he
was come, part of the Mount of Olives was to be seen on the right hand,
separated from Jerusalem by a deep Valley, called the Valley of Hinnom, or of
Tophet, or of Ashes. There it was that the Idolatrous Israelites used to
Sacrifice, by an abominable superstition, their own Children to Moloch. Right
against the Gate, was the Mount of Olives, where the custom was to Sacrifice a
Red Cow. Thither Men went by a way sustained by a double Vault, fearing lest
the Priest, who was to officiate in this Ceremony, should pollute himself as he
went, not knowing it, upon some hidden Grave. On the Left appeared the same
Mountain of Olives, separated from the City on that side, by the Brook and
Valley of Cedron.

As for the Gate of Susan, it was not just in the middle of the outward
Circumference of the Holy Mountain, because the Temple was not placed in the
midst of the Top, but toward the North, else it could not have been opposite
to the Temple, which was built on that si^e, because the place of the Altar
which the Fire from Heaven had marked, and which was on the North, had obliged
Solomon to frame thereupon the building of the House of God.

There were two Gates on the South part of this Wall, which were called the
Gates of Hulda. People went by these two Gates to the City of Jerusalem. At the
West, on the side of Millo and Mount Sion, there were four, whereof that which
was most North was called the Gate of the Rising, or of Coponius. By reason of
the inequality of the Ground, and of the depth of the Valley which was at the
foot of Moriah, Solomon had caused the Ground to be raised from his Palace to
this Gate, and this rising was garnished with Trees on both sides. 'Twas that
way the Kings went to the Temple. The next Gate was called Parbar, and the two
others were named Assuppim. Within these two Gates was a building of the same
name, where part of the Treasures of the Temple were kept.

On the North side, there was but one only Gate named Tedi, or Tadde. On this
side, the Wall which environed the Holy Mountain, was not quite on the verge of
the Top, as on the other sides, there remained some space which had been
neglected, to the end that Holy Place should make a perfect Square. At the
corner of this space which looked to the North-east, a Tower was built called
Baris, which at first was the Mansion of some High Priests, and the place where
were kept their Holy Garments; but since, Herod rebuilt it otherwise, and named
it the Antonian Tower, in remembrance of Marcus Antonius, it served to the
Roman Soldiers for a Citadel, and he that was Governor of it, was called the
Captain of the Temple, Act. 4.1.

After this entrance by one of the Gates we mentioned above, as by the Eastern
Gate, there were to be seen along the Wall on the right and on the left three
ranks of Marble Pillars, holding up a Cieling, which could keep out the Rain
and the Sun, and furnish a covered Walk of 365 paces. There were like Porches
on the four sides. only that which went along the Southern part of the
circumference, had four ranks of Pillars, which formed three Alleys. The
Cieling of that of the middle was much higher than that of the sides, which was
equal in height to the Cielings of the three other Porches, and this same
Alley was proportionably larger than the others. The Pagans and polluted
persons were suffered to enter into these Porches, and there to walk round
about the Temple, as well as in the inward space which these Pillars environed
on all sides. Within this space was a long Walk surrounded with a Wall full of
holes, so that light came through, by which one might discover all that passed
about the Temple. This walk encompassed the Court of the Women, and the ascent
to it was by some steps. No Pagan was permitted to enter therein. The Doctors
of the Thalmud call it Chel. 'Twas this which the Jews in the time of Josephus
called the second Temple, whenas they named the space enclosed within this
little Wall which surrounded all the Holy Mountain, The first Temple, which the
Christian Authors call The Court of the Gentiles.

From the Court of the Gentiles, men went up into the second Temple by fourteen
steps. It Is in this space, and in the Northern part of the Court of the
Gentiles, where was Situate that which is called properly, the Temple with its
two Courts. When they entered into the second Temple on the East side, they
might see before them the gate and wall of the Court of the Women, from whence
one might be distant seven or eight paces, and walk covered on all the sides of
the Temple. Those that were minded to enter into the Court of the Women, might
go in by three sides, to wit on the East on the North and on the South and were
to ascend by three steps, which were before each door. That on the East was
more magnificent than the others, and 'twas for this they called it the Fair,
Act. 3.2.

This Court was also a perfect square of 200 steps or thereabout in length and
breadth and which on the West had the Court of Israel. It was embellished with
Porches within, as was that which they called the Second Temple, excepting the
corners, where were buildings destined for diverse uses. In coming in by the
gate, whereof we now spoke, on the right hand was seen The House for Wood,
whereinto was put the provision of Wood requisite for the Altar, and where the
Priests that were polluted by some accident separated that which was worm-eaten
from the other; for it was thought unlawful to put worm-eaten Wood upon the
Altar. On the left hand was the House of the Nazarites* a building where those
that had accomplished their Vow of Nazaritism, and would return to their
Ancient manner of Life, boiled the flesh that remained of their offering. At
the Corner which looked to the South-West was seen the House of Oil, wherein
the Oil was kept which they stood in need of for the use of the Temple. Over
against that, at the opposite Corner which points to the North-West, was the
House of the Leprous, where were kept enclosed those that presented themselves
to be purified from the Leprosy. Between these different buildings were four
Gates opposite to one another there was an Entrance from the Court of the
Gentiles into that of the Women by three Gates, which were at the East, South
and North; that which was at the West was for to pass from the Court of the
Women into that of Israel.

They ascended to this Gate of the Court of Israel by fifteen steps for the
ground of this was higher by ten foot than that of the Women. This gate was
called the Gate of Nicanor. Josephus says it was of brass, and that twenty men
could scarcely open it. Amongst the Presages that preceded the ruin of
Jerusalem, one of them that most surprised, was that which happened to this
Gate, which being well locked and bolted with great bars of brass, opened of
it self one night and no man meddled with it. The Court of Israel was
imbellished within with a Porch which extended all round about the Temple and
which was supported by a rank of Marble Pillars, except in places where there
was some building, which advancing it self within side, did hinder the
continuation thereof. Lightfoot has carefully sought after the names and
usages of these different buildings, and of the gates that were between both:
But it shall suffice here to remark that men entered into the Court of Israel by
six gates; besides those we have named. There were on the North three, on the
South three. The other two were on the East, opposite to the Altar of Burnt
offerings, those of the middle were over against the Holy place, and the two
others over against the Holiest of all.

The Court of Israel was properly called the space that was betwixt the Pillars
of the Porch and the Wall. It was about 16 foot and an half in breadth, and was
140 paces in length. The square space between the Porch and the Frontispiece of
the Temple, was called the Court of the Priests, whereof the ground was higher
by some feet than that of the Court of Israel. On the right and left of the
Gate of Nicanor, there were two Pulpits which were equal in height to the
Ground of the Court of the Priests, where the Levites which sang the holy song,
were accustomed to place themselves. At the corner of the Court upon the right
as you came in, were to be seen Marble Tables, Pillars, and Buckles of Iron
fastened to the Pavement; there they Sacrificed, slead, and washed the victims.
On the other side was the Altar of Burnt offerings. This Altar was 15 foot
high, and that the service might be made therein, there was made a kind of an
ascent of stone without stairs, of 48 feet in length. This Altar was squared
and was above 36 feet in circuit, but it was much more large at the bottom. At
the end of the ascent was a large edge of a foot and a half broad, upon which
the Priests ascended to adjust the Wood of the Altar, to lay thereon the
Victims, and to rub with Blood the four Horns of the Altar, which extended
themselves from the corners of the edge unto the Top.

c. 34.
Lightfoot upon the occasion of the Altar, proposes some difficulties, which he
thinks cannot be resolved without having the Jews recourse to a Miracle. 1. It
cannot be comprehended how it was possible to offer in a few days upon so
little an Altar, such a prodigious number of Victims, such as the Scripture
sometimes speaks of, as when it is said that Solomon offered in 14 days,
22000 Bullocks and 26000 small Cattle, 1 Kings 8.63. They must therefore needs
have offered more than 1500 Oxen, and above 8000 other Victims a day. Though all
these Victims were not to be entirely burned, it is yet very difficult to
conceive how they could burn the very Fat of their Entrails and Kidneys. 2. The
Blood of so many Beasts would make one think that all the Court must be
overwhelmed, and have drawn an infinity of Flies together, and caused a great
stink. 3. The Smoke and Scent of so much flesh burnt, should have necessarily
stifled those that were about the Altar. He answers to the first difficulty,
that Solomon offered not only upon the Altar, but in the middle of the Court,
as the History testifies it, and that the Fire from Heaven is infinitely more
quick than ordinary Fire; to the second that by a perpetual Miracle, there
never was a Fly in the Court of the Priests, and that the Blood ran in an
instant by subterranean Channels which brought it to a sink made for that use:
and to the third, that by a third Miracle, the Smoke did rise always directly
upwards* what wind soever there was, so that it did not incommode those who
were employed in the Court.

Now to come back to his dimensions, it was about 50 paces in length from the
East to the West, and almost twice as many in breadth. We shall not mark the
Basins, nor the other Vessels that were in it, because our design is only to
describe the prinpal parts of the Building. Those that would be instructed
thoroughly therein, may consult Lightfoot himself.

On the West of this Court was the Frontispiece of Solomon's Porch, by which
they entered into the Holy place. The Top of the Holy Mount was not even, but it
extended it self from the East to the West, the Threshold of the Entry of
Solomon's Porch was 33 foot higher than that of the Gate of Susan. This
Frontispiece was 150 foot broad, and 180 high: It was of a new white Marble,
after the manner of Jasper, and of a Structure equally fair and solid. The Gate
was sixty foot high, and thirty broad, and was all imbellished with Gold, which
gave a great luster, and which appeared very far off. The body of the Temple
which was but 100 foot broad, and 150 high was behind the Porch. It
comprehended the Holy Place, and the Holiest of all, and diverse Chambers above
and on all sides. Although the Roof of the House was almost flat, the middle
was more elevated and formed as a new Stage, higher than the Apartments that
were on the North and South. This Top was garnished quite round with a kind of
a Rail, as was common for all the Tops of Houses in Judea.

I shall stay no longer on this Description. Lightfoot can fully furnish the
curious wherewithal to satisfy themselves farther about the difference betwixt
the Dimensions of the Temple of Solomon, of that which was rebuilt at the
Return from Captivity, and of that of Herod, their different Uses, Apartments,
Places where the Priests and Levites kept Guard at night, the changes of the
place where the great Sanhedrim were to sit, and the disposition and figure of
the Cherubims, and of the Ark, which gives him an occasion to expound the
manner whereby Ezekiel, Isaiah and John in the Apocalypse describe the
mysterious symbol of the Presence of God. In fine, we may see here a complete
Treatise of the Temple of Jerusalem drawn from the Scripture, from Josephus and
the Doctors of the Thalmud.

6. After, having given an Idea of the Temple, and of all its parts, there
remained only to instruct us about the Divine Service that was therein
performed, to make us thoroughly know the principal Ceremonies of the Jewish
Religion. It Is this also which Lightfoot in his Treatise of the Service of the
Temple has done. He begins with the different degrees of Holiness, which the
Jews attributed to diverse places of Judea, and particularly to the different
parts of the Temple, which Holiness was so much the greater, as they drew near
the most Holy Place. It was permitted to all manner of People to enter into the
Court of the Gentiles, but there were Pillars at the Entrance of the second
Temple, where was seen written in Hebrew, Greek and Roman Characters, That it
was lawful to none but the Israelites to enter into this Interior
Circumference. Thus the second Temple was more holy than the Court of the
Gentiles, but the Court of the Women was more holy than the second Temple, in
that it was permitted to those that were polluted, so that their pollution
remained only till night, to enter into this last place; they cursed not enter
into the Court of the Women. The Court of Israel was yet more holy, seeing
Women never entered thereinto, but when they went to offer some Sacrifice, and
that no person polluted with what pollution soever, dared to set foot
thereinto. The Court of the Priests likewise went beyond that of Israel in
Holiness, seeing no Laick went ever thither, but when he went with an Oblation.
It was an easy thing to discern a Laick from a Levite, or from a Priest, by
the clothing, but polluted persons could not be known by any mark, it was left
to their own Consciences*

Nevertheless to strike awe into them, they would say that they had four sorts
of punishments to fear, whereof the two former were immediately to be inflicted
by Divine Vengeance, and the two others depended upon Man. They called the
first Death by the Hand of Heaven, that is to say, of God; and the second
Chereth, or Cutting off. The Rabbis seem to distinguish these two sorts of
punishment, but it is hard to know the difference they put betwixt them. Though
they said that it was God alone that did send these chastisements, we must not
think that as soon as some polluted person entered into a prohibited place* and
it came to men's knowledge, he was solely left to the Wrath of God; the Judges
caused him to be whipped, according to the nature of the Case, or else the People
without expecting their Sentence, beat the polluted body so violently
sometimes, that he died* and this it was which they called The Blows of the
Rebellion.

These were the Precautions that were taken to keep the Temple from being
polluted. Cap. 2.
After this Lightfoot shows us what were the Orders of the Ministers that had
the care of it: He reduces them to eight: 1. The High Priest. 2. The Sagan,
who was as his Vicar. 3. The two Catholikin, which were the Substitutes of the
Sagan. 4. The seven Immarkalin, who were entrusted with the Keys of the Gates
and Treasures. 5. They had under them three Gizbarin or Treasurers. 6. The Head
of the Order of Priests that were upon service. 7. The Heads of each Family
that were found in this Order. 8. Those that were only Priests. The first five
Orders formed a kind of perpetual Council, who took care of what concerned the
Temple. There were besides these fifteen Memonin, or Commissaries about diverse
things, whereof a part changed every week with the Order of the Priests. The
Enumeration thereof may be seen in p. 679.

C. 3. ad 5.
Lightfoot after this treats of the 5 first Charges which we have just
mentioned, and expounds exactly all their Functions as much as may be
discovered in the Writings of the Jews that are amongst us. He describes even
the Clothes of the High Priests, and gives an exact List of them from Aaron to
the destruction of the Temple.

Cap. 6.
We find in the following Chapter the Division of the Priests into 24 Classes
the manner how they were examined before they were admitted into public
service, and how the Classes divided the sacred Functions between them
proportionably to the number of the Families whereof they were composed, for
they had not all an equal number.

Cap. 7.
After this we see the cares of those that were Levites only; they were
Porters, and kept Guard in diverse places of the Temple. They were also Singers
and Musicians, and they only had the privileges of entering into the Consort of
Voices, that was every day kept in the Temple. As for the Musicians, they
received People of every Tribe, provided they^ could play well, and were allied
to some Priestly Family. The Consort of Voices was never of less than twelve
Men, but that number could be augmented as much as they pleased. As to the
Instruments, there were Trumpets, Flutes, and three other Instruments that the
Hebrews call Nebel, Kinnor, and Tseltsel, which are hard to compare to any of
our Modern Instruments, because they are too Ancient for our Inquisition.
Lightfoot proposes thereupon his Conjectures, and tells us afterward what
Psalms were sung on diverse Festivals, and after what manner the Instruments
were joined to the Voices.

Upon the Subject of the Classes of the Levites, Lightfoot informs us also
that there were 24 Classes of Israelites, that were necessitated to go to the
Temple each his week, fearing lest there should be some time, the Officiates
only present at the Divine Service. They kept themselves in the Court of
Israel, and represented the whole body of the People.

Our Author treats after that of the Sacrifices and Oblations of the Jews,
cap. 8.
whereof he expounds the different sorts, and the Ceremonies that were
observed in offering them. cap. 9.
But he applies himself particularly to describe the common Sacrifice of the
morning and evening, and all the parts of the Divine service, wherewith it is
accompanied. cap. 10.
They took care not only to observe the Ceremonies prescribed by the Law, but
to inspire more respect into the People, it was prohibited to carry into the
Temple any stick. to enter therein with Shoes or Feet dusty, to carry Money
about one in a Purse. Neither was it permitted to spit upon any place of the
Holy Mountain, if it was necessary to spit, they were to do it in some corner
of their clothes, says Maimonides. No body was to make any gesture that
should in the least restifie the least irreverence, as to wal^^thither too
fast, to pass through it purely to go into another place. No body might sit in
the Court of Israel, saving the Princes of the House of David. They would
likewise have taken it for a mark of irreverence, if any one uncovered his Head
whilst he prayed to God; and the Priests were so far from taking off their
Tiaras, that they covered themselves with a vail over that. They imitated in
that those that were in some great sorrow, or that feared some fatal accident.
But the Apostles established in the Christian Churches a custom quite contrary.
Every man that prays or that prophesies, says St. Paul, having his Head
covered, dishonors his Head, 1 Cor. 11.4.

cap. 10.11, 15.
After this general description of the service that was performed throughout
the year in the Temple, Lightfoot treats very largely on the Festivals of the
Jews. He begins by telling us after what manner they observed the new Moon, and
how in a very short time they made known the day it appeared throughout all
Judea. It was done by the means of Fires that were lighted successively upon a
vast number of Hills, or by Messengers, which was not extremely certain, and
gave much trouble, whereas if the Jews had known a little of Astronomy, a
Calendar or an Almanac would have spared them all this labor, and would more
surely have marked the new Moons.

After this are seen the differences that the Jews put betwixt the Passover
celebrated in Egypt, and those that have been celebrated since that time: The
manner how they took away all the Leaven that was found in their Houses: Which
was done the morning and afternoon of the day of the Passover, before they
Sacrificed the Paschal Lamb: The precise time of its immolation: The number of
persons that associated to eat it together, and the manner it was offered in
the Temple. No body till now has so exactly described all these circumstances,
and we may further say that neither Buxtorf nor Cappel who have had a dispute
upon this Subject, have with so much clearness spoken of it as our Author; The
Ceremonies the Jews observed in eating the Passover, Chapter 13. are of much use to
Illustrate what the Evangelists say of the last Passover of our Lord, and to
discover the Original of the Institution of the Eucharist. This it was that
obliged us to give here an abridgment of what our Author says; in which those
that doubt may find the proofs.

1. They did not begin to eat till night, whence the Evangelists say, that the
night being come our Savior sat at meat with his Disciples. They did not eat
much before this meal, or else they fasted, that they might with more appetite
eat the unleavened bread.

2. They neither did properly sit, nor altogether lie down, but stretched
themselves upon the beds which were about the Table, so that they held
themselves half risen upon the left Elbow. This was the ordinary posture of the
Romans, as may be yet seen in their ancient Monuments, but the Rabbis do seek
herein for a Mystery, and say men put themselves into this posture to note that
they were free, because slaves were used to eat standing. They call this
Posture at Table Iesibba, (...) Thus in process of time they changed this
Ceremony, tho the Law had commanded them, to eat the Passover standing, and in
haste, with their staf^ in their hand, and their shoes on their feet, as if
they were beginning a journey. Our Savior, that did not so much regard the
Letter as the Sense of the Law, accommodated himself to this custom of his
time, and it is by this that Lightfoot expounds these words of the Gospel of
St. John, one of them that Jesus loved leaned upon his Bosom, chapter 13.23. Jesus
Christ was in the posture we have observed; so that St. John who was in like
manner lying near him, was almost in his Bosom, because Jesus Christ could not
lift his right Arm to make use thereof, but in a way that it should seem to
embrace this Disciple that he loved. Thence it comes that to speak softly to
Jesus Christ, St. John needed only to turn his Head backwards and lean it upon
the breast of our Savior, this he did when Peter made him a Sign to enquire of
Jesus, who was he that was to betray him: leaning says the Evangelist, upon
the Breast of Jesus, he said, Lord who is it? ver. 25.

3. As soon as he was lain after this manner, one of the company gave thanks,
and each drank a Glass of Wine with Water. There could not be less Wine than
the 16th part of a Hin. That was the first cup.

4. After having drunk each washed his Hands in plunging them into the Water.
They thought themselves obliged to take notice of all the Ceremonies, and to
say for example; This Night is different from all others, in which we wash but
once, but in this we wash us twice.

5. The Paschal Lamb was served in with unleavened bread, and a Dish of bitter
Herbs. They might be green or dry, but they were not to be boiled or salted.
Besides that, other food was added, that there should be enough to fill them.
They had particularly a Dish that they called Charoseth, which was a Ragoot
composed of Figs, Dates, and Raisins with a little Vinegar. All that mingled
and kneaded together, was to represent the Bricks that their Fathers had made
in Egypt.

6. He that rehearsed the Haggadah, or the Paschal Prayers, took a few bitter
Herbs, and then putting his hand into another dish, he put thereto at least the
bigness of an Olive of some other food, and every one did the like. He did that
for to excite curiosity, and for to oblige those that were present to be
attentive to all the ceremony. It Is upon this occasion that our Lord said, that
he who put his hand in the dish with him would betray him.

7. A little after all the Dishes were taken away, and every one drank a second
time, and then it was that he who rehearsed the Haggadah related the
deliverance from Egypt, and the institution of the Passover. The dishes were
after that put upon the Table and all the Guests drank a second time, after
that they returned thanks many times.

8. They also washed their hands again, and he that served took two unleavened
Cakes, broke one in the middle, put it upon the other that was whole, and gave
thanks. It was the order constantly kept on this occasion, whereas on other
occasions they gave thanks before they brake Bread, as it appears in diverse
places of the Gospels.

9. Hitherto they eat but bread and herbs, but after these ceremonies he that
officiated gave God Thanks in this wise. Blessed be thou O Lord our God,
Eternal King, who have* Sanctified us by the Precepts, and have commanded us to
eat Sacrifices. Then they ate of a Sacrifice, if they had offered any a few
days before, or of some other food, if they had no Sacrifice.

10. After a second Thanksgiving like the first, except that it ended with
these words, and who have commanded us to eat the Paschal Lamb, they ate this
Lamb, and every one was obliged to eat at least the bigness of an Olive.

11. After they had eaten the Paschal Lamb, he that officiated washed his hands
three times, and gave thanks upon the third Cup that he then drank. This was
called the Cup of Thanksgiving, because as they drank it, they gave thanks to
end the Meal. Hence it is, that St. Paul calls it the Cup of Blessing, 1 Cor.
10.16. because it was upon the occasion of the Cup of Benediction of the Jews,
that Jesus Christ instituted his Eucharist. All were obliged to drink this Cup
of Benediction, and the two preceding ones. The very Children themselves were
not exempted.

12. In fine a little while after, they drank a fourth Cup, which was called
the Cup of Hallel, because that after they had drank it, they would sing the
Hallel, which was a Song composed of six Psalms, which are from the 113 to the
118th. This Song was yet followed with a Benediction.

In the sequel with the same exactness is found the description of what was
done the second day of the Paschal week, the manner how they gathered, and
offered the Omer of the first fruits of the celebration of the Pentecost; of
the Ceremonies of the day of Expiation, and of the Feast of Tabernacles.
Lightfoot adds a word of the Festivals of the Trumpets and of the Dedication.

cap. 17.
He ends this Treatise by describing some other parts of the public service.
He shows the manner how the Kings read a section of the Law, the first day of
the feast of Tabernacles: the ceremonies with which they sacrificed the Red
Cow: The examination of a Woman whom her Husband suspected to have committed
Adultery: the Purification of the Leprous: the oblation of the first fruits:
and the manner how they provided Wood for the Altar.

7. There remains in this Volume but three little Treatises, whereof it will
be sufficient to mark the Titles, because they contain nothing particular. The
first is of the Descent of Jesus Christ into Hell, which the Author
understands to be the time that the Soul of Jesus Christ remained in Heaven,
for according to him (...), which has been translated Hell in the Creed,
equally signifies the place, where the Souls of the wicked are, as well as the
receptacle of the Righteous. The second is a Latin Sermon made at Cambridge in
1652. where Lightfoot took his Degree of Doctor. The Text is 1 Cor. 16.22. He
that loves not the Lord Jesus let him be Anathema-Maran-atha. The third is a
Dispute of Divinity published on the same occasion, and which consists of these
two Theses. (1.) That after the Canon of Scripture has been perfected, we
ought to expect no new Revelations. (2.) That the personal Election of
particular persons is founded upon the Scripture. He only proposes this second
Thesis, without proving it, as he does the first.

II. The second Volume of Lightfoot principally consists in his Horae
Hebraicae and Thalmudicae, upon the Evangelists, the Acts, and some places of
the Epistle to the Romans, and upon all the Corinthians. As the Author has
composed these Works in Latin, and as they have already been Printed in
England, France and Germany, so we shall say nothing of them.

We only must speak a word or two of a Treatise that is before this Volume,
entitled, Harmonia Chronica, etc. A Chronological Harmony and Order of the New
Testament; where is methodically disposed the Text of the four Evangelists; as
also the Times of the History of the Apostles; the Order of the Epistles, and
Times of the Apocalypse. The Text is cleared by literal Remarks, and Deductions
from the Thalmud, upon the most difficult places. To that has been added a
Discourse of the Destruction of Jerusalem, and of the State of the Jews after
this accident.

This Work differs from the Harmony of the Evangelists, which the Author
published ten years before, which we spoke of in the Extract of the first
Volume. 1. In that here is found the Time in which the Epistles have been
written, etc. 2. Lightfoot is much briefer in this Work, where he makes not an
exact Commentary. 3. He there introduces more Rabbinism. 4. He more exactly
observes the Years and Times of every thing.

There is a Preface that shows the Author's design, and the profit of the
Writings of the Jews for the Exposition of the New Testament, which is proved
by a pretty long Commentary upon Mat. 5.22. The Author testifies that he had
made these Notes upon the Gospels, to serve for an Exposition to the four
Evangelists; the whole Text he had disposed into Columns, in a Method of
Harmony, but that he found no opportunity of Printing them.

Lightfoot extremely differs from the Sentiment of several Interpreters of
the Apocalypse. He believes that God revealed to St. John that which
immediately followed the last things that Daniel foretold. This Prophet had
marked the Ruin of the four Monarchies, which he said would be succeeded by
the Reign of the Messia, and it is with the Reign of the Messia that St. John
begins. Lightfoot believes that he had these Visions about the 12th year of
Nero, a long time before the Ruin of Jerusalem. In the three first Chapters he
marketh the State of the Churches of Asia, such as it was in his time: But from
the 4th Chapter he begins to speak of the time to come, and foretells the Ruin
of Jerusalem, and diverse misfortunes of the Roman Empire, to Chapter 8. From
the 9th to the end, St. John, according to our Author, has respect to Times
more distant, and in this Lightfoot is conform enough to the common Sentiments
of Protestant Interpreters, only he speaks in terms a little more general, than
others commonly do. He carefully discovers, according to his custom, all the
allusions that are found in the Apocalypse to the Ceremonies and Sentiments of
the Jews.

The Treatise that is added to the end contains an Abridgment of the History of
the Jews from the third year of Nero, to the first of Vespasian, and the state
of the Sandrin, of the Schools, and of the learned amongst the Jews after the
Ruin of Jerusalem. He speaks of the Heretics of the first Ages, which came
out from amongst the Jews. He defends this Nation against those that accuse it
to have corrupted the Old Testament. He ends with the conversion of the Jews
which according to him may be yet expected, provided we Imagine not that the
whole Nation shall be converted, but that we only believe that a greater number
of 'em may.

The Works of ISAAC BARROW Dr. of Divinity, of Trinity College in Cambridge;
published by Dr. Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury. In three Volumes in Folio.
The First Volume of the English Works of Mr. Barrow.
1. IT is composed of three parts, whereof the first contains thirty two
Sermons Preached upon diverse occasions, before which is placed a small
Abridgment of his Life. We are informed that he was born at London in October
1630. As soon as he was fit for study, he was sent for Cambridge, where by his
own industry he maintained himself, because his Father had lost the greatest
part of his Estate in the Service of the King, after that he lived at Oxford,
where he had most of his subsistence from the bounty of the famous Dr. Hammond.
'Twas there that he chiefly applied himself to study, and 'twas remarkable that
he had a more than ordinary desire to be instructed in the Fundamentals of the
Sciences, and being yet very young, he read the Works of my Lord Bacon, Des
Carts, and Gallileus. In reading the Remarks of Scaliger upon Eusebius, he
observed that Chronology was founded upon Astronomy, whereupon he also resolved
to apply himself to the study of this last Science: He set himself to read the
Almagest of Ptolomy, but he soon perceived that he could not read this sort of
Books, with advantage, without the help of Geometry; then he applied himself to
the study of Euclides Elements, in which he profited much in a little time, and
afterward published the Elements of Geometry explained in few words, and
better than ever was done before him. Besides, these are the Titles of some
other Mathematical Books which he composed, Euclidis Data, Lectiones Opticae,
Lectiones Geometricae, Archimedis Opera, Apollonii Conicorum, Lib. IV.
Theodosti Sphaerica, Lectio de Sphaera and Cylindro. One would be surprised
that so great a Geometrician could also be a Poet; yet we are assured in his
Life, that there are found several Poems amongst the Titles of his Latin Works.

Dr. Duport having renounced his Charge of Professor of the Greek Tongue, he
recommended Mr. Barrow who had been his Scholar, whereupon he was admitted to
Examination, and read with great applause, but he could not obtain the place
because 'twas thought he was inclined to Arminianism which was not savoured in
England during the Usurpation; this made him resolved to travail. He went to
France, from thence to Italy, where he embarked at Leghorn for Smyrna, from
whence he went to Constantinople, there he tarried a year, and we are assured
during that time he read the works of the most famous Patriarch that that City
ever had. (We may easily understand it was St Chrysostom that is here spoken
of;) afterward Mr. Barrow embarked for Venice from whence, he returned for
England by the way of Germany and Holland.

When King Charles the second was restored, all the World believed Dr. Barrow
would be preferred, because he had been always firm to the Interests of the
Royalists, but being disappointed he made this Distich upon his unkind
treatment.

Te Magis optavit rediturum, Carole, Nemo,
Et Nemo sensit te Rediisse Minus.
However he was elected Professor of the Greek tongue in 1660, and Chosen two
years after to teach Geometry. In the year following Mr. Lucas having founded a
Chair for a Professor of Mathematics, he was the first that filled it; and
there was an Order made for him, and those that were to succeed him, that they
should be obliged every year to leave to the University Ten of their Lectures
in writing; he so passionately loved the Mathematics, that there was found
before his Apollonius these words written in his own hand, (...), Tu autem
Domine, quantus es Geometra? cum enim haec Scientia nullos terminos habeat,
etc. God himself has Geometry in his thoughts -- but thou, O Lord, how great a
Geometrician art thou! For though this Science has no bounds, yet one may find an
infinite number of new Theorems by the only assistance of a humane Capacity.
THOU see all these Truths at one glance without any chain of consequences,
and without being wearied with a long search of demonstrations. In other things
our Intellect is defective, and it seems that we do think of I do not know
what, for want of a perfect assurance: From whence it happens that there are
almost as many Opinions as different Persons. But all the World agree in the
Truth of Mathematics, and it is in this that the Mind of Man feels its
strength, and is persuaded that it can effect something great and wonderful,
etc. This only is able to inflame me with the Love of Thee, and to make me wish
with as much ardor as is possible, for that happy day in which my Spirit being
delivered from every thing that now perplexes it, shall be assured not only of
these Truths, but of an infinite number of others without the trouble of
deducing consequences, etc.

There is without doubt but a very few Men, who amongst those reasons which
induce 'em to wish for Heaven, give this, of expecting the Happiness of a
Perfect Knowledge of the Mathematics there. Thus Mr. Barrow having wearied
himself with these Speculations, resolved to addict himself only to the study
of Divinity: After which the Bishops of St. Asaph and Salisbury gave him some
Benefices, and the King made him Rector of Trinity College in Cambridge in the
year 1672. The Colleges of the Universities of England are otherwise regulated
than those beyond Sea: The charge of the Master of a College is much more
considerable than that of the Rectors of Foreign Academies or Colleges. A few
years after Mr. Barrow was preferred to a more eminent Post, to wit,
Vice Chancellor, which is the greatest charge of the University, and after this
Chancellor, which is not given but to Persons of the first Quality.

The Author of the Life of Mr. Barrow, informs us how he governed the College
with an Universal Applause; but it shall suffice to say, that he there composed
diverse Treatises, and amongst others, that of the Supremacy of the Pope, which
is at the end of the first Volume.

In fine, he died at London the 4th of March, the year 1677. and was buried at
Westminster, where his friends erected a Marble Monument without an Epitaph,
which is added to the end of his Life.

The first five Sermons which compose the first Volume, treat of the Excellency
of the Christian Religion, and of the Interest which accrews to us in loving
and practicing it; the four following expound the great Duties of Christianity,
Prayer and Thanksgiving. The 10th, 11th and 12th, are upon particular
occasions, to wit, The Return of the King; The Gunpowder-Plot; And the
Conse^ration of the Bishop of Man his Uncle. The ten following from the 13th to
the 23d, were composed against the sin of speaking too much in conversation; in
speaking ill of his Neighbor, and Swearing, etc. Mr. Barrow is very large upon
these matters, because there are few Vices so universal -- In Ep. ad Celantiam.
tanta hujusmodi Libido (says St. Paulinus cited by the Author) Mentes hominum
invasit, ut etiam qui procul aliis Vitiis recesserunt in illud tamen quasi in
extremum Diaboli Laqueum incidant.

Those which follow even to the 30th, have respect unto the great Precepts in
which the Law is fulfilled, to wit, to love God and our Neighbor: All the
preceding Sermons were not published till after the death of the Author, but he
himself caused the two last of this Volume to be printed, whereof one treats of
Charity toward the Poor, and the other of the Passion of Jesus Christ, Dr.
Tillotson speaks of the first, that there could be nothing more elaborate in
its kind, and that Dr. Barrow had spoken the utmost that the subject could bear.

II. After these Sermons of which we have spoke, there is a small work
Entitled a brief exposition of the Lords Prayer, and the Decalogue, with the
Doctrine of the Sacraments, these treaties have been already published in
Twelves; they are extremely short, but one may there find the Lords Prayer and
the ten Commandments explained in a good and correct method, yet there is
almost nothing essential which is forgot. Although the Author took pains for the
Vulgar, yet he did not omit to cite in the Margin the Fathers and Heathen
Authors, where he found it for his purpose; as when he expounded these words in
the Lords Prayer, thy Will be done, etc. he cites Epictetus, Plato, Antoninus
and Seneca. cap. 38.
Epictetus says in his Enchiridion, if God will have it so, let it be so, and
Plato in his Dialogue Entitled Citron, affirms that Socrates being in Prison
passed the time whilst he tarried there, as one that resigned himself to God in
every thing which should happen to him. Lib. 4.31.
The Emperor Antoninus says that we must cheerfully receive every thing that
happens to us; and the words of Seneca are no less remarkable, Ep. 37.54.71.
Ego Secundum Naturam vivo, si totum me illi dedo optimum est, Deum, quo
auctore cuncta proveniunt sine murmuratione comitari, etc. hic est magnus
Animus qui se Deo tradidit. I live according to Nature when I resign my self
entirely to him, nor is there any thing better than to follow, without
murmuring, that God, that is the cause of every thing. It belongs only to great
Souls to commit themselves wholly to God.

Mr. Barrow in the beginning of his Exposition of the Decalogue, says, it seems
at first sight, That it rather contains the Laws of the Jewish State, than
their Moral Precepts, since there is nothing spoke of the manner how we ought to
live in regard of our selves as to the Continency, Sobriety or Devotion, and
which we owe toward God, as to Prayer, Thanksgiving and Confession of sins
etc. It seems to have a particular respect to the Jews, who were a chosen
people, and that God governed them after a more peculiar manner than other
Nations, in giving 'em Laws for every particular thing which was only
accommodated to the State of the Israelites, to whom God only made himself
known; and that so this Law does not oblige all Nations in that especial sense
wherein it was given by the Holy Ghost. After this he gives diverse Reasons for
which we yet ought to have the Decalogue in the greatest Veneration, and to
observe it exactly, except the 4th Commandment, which does not oblige the
observation of Christians in this, that it is Ceremonial, no more than the
first Patriarchs, who also were not the less pleasing to God, notwithstanding
the testimony of Justin and St. Ireneus; but Reason it self dictates that it is
necessary to set some time apart in which we may more particularly apply our
selves to Divine Service, and in which Servants may rest themselves from
Labor; it is this the Heathens themselves observed, witness De Leg. 2.
Plato, who says, that the Gods are touched with pity toward Men, and because
of the Labor which they are obliged to, he permits 'em some repose and days of
rest. Legum Conditores (says Seneca) festos instituerunt dies, ut ad
hilaritatem homines public cogerentur, tanquam necessarium laboribus.

Mr. Barrow says nothing of the Sacraments, since there is enough spoken of
them by the most able Protestant Divines.

In the beginning there is one thing worthy of remark, Page 543.
Besides other Washings which he speaks of, he shows that it was a Custom
amongst the Jews, that those who were dedicated to God, were exhorted to
repentance for transgressing the Law, and were washed, in public Testimony
that they should change their Life. He maintained this assertion upon the
success which the Baptism of St. John the Baptist had, for it would have been,
without doubt, rejected as an Innovated Ceremony in a time when the Jews had
such an extravagant respect to their own Traditions, that they would have
opposed it, if not upheld upon an Ancient Custom. If this is so, one might also
conjecture that the Lustrations of the Heathens gave birth to this
extraordinary Baptism; for it is well known, that those who had committed some
Crimes, were to be washed by some public person, and even by Princes
themselves, whereof we find an infinite number of Examples in the most Ancient
History of the Greeks.

III. The third piece which is in this Volume, is a Treatise of the Pope's
Supremacy, to which is added a Discourse concerning the Unity of the Church.
There has been already published in quarto in 1679. by Dr. Tillotson, to whom
the Author had committed the Care of the Impression at his death; the first
Testimony in a small Preface. He believes that Dr. Barrow has omitted nothing
essential, or what might be of any consequence in this Controversy, he
believes that there is enough to decide for ever, all the difficulties, and to
dissuade all wise men of either Party from writing any more upon this Subject.

We shall remark in few words the method of his Treatise, to the end that we
may have a general Idea of what is contained in it, we have at the first sight
a preface, wherein the Author relates the different sentiments of the Doctors
of the Roman Church, touching the Authority of the Pope, which some make
Inferior to that of the Councils, whilst others are of a contrary persuasion,
yet he briefly gives us the History of the Original, and progress of the Papal
Power

Mr. Barrow having remarked, that all that is said on this Power, can only be
founded upon seven suppositions, he divides his Work into seven parts, and
examines them one after another; these are the suppositions. (1.) That St.
Peter received from Jesus Christ the Pre-eminence amongst the Apostles, and had
given to him an Authority and Sovereign Jurisdiction over the rest. (2.) That
the rights and advantages of this Sovereignty were not personal, but might be
transmitted to others, and left to their Successors. (3.) That St. Peter was
the Bishop of Rome. (4.) That St. Peter continued to be Bishop of Rome, after
he had left Judea and that he remained so till his death. (5.) That it is from
thence that the privileges of the Pope do come as Successor to St. Peter, to
wit Universal Jurisdiction over the whole Church of Jesus Christ. (6.) That the
Popes have effectually enjoyed this Power, and have exercised it without
discontinuations from St. Peter till now. (7.) That this Power could not be
lost, nor be lessened by any means whatsoever.

page 30.
The Author admits that St. Peter might be the first of the Apostles, in regard
of personal qualities, esteem, and reputation, but he questions his precedence
in order or dignity. It appears too great a vanity for a man that had the
Virtue and Humility of St. Peter. He supposes it is very probable that the
Apostles insisted upon no points of Ceremonies amongst themselves, which should
oblige 'em to a certain order, as to precedence in walking, etc. he confesses
that one might oppose to this the Authority of some Fathers, but he maintains,
that their Authority is not of so great weight in these things, which are not
essential to Faith, because that upon these occasions, they followed their own
thoughts and conjectures, being as much actuated by the dictates of their
imaginations, as other-men, although St. Cyprian and other African Doctors assure
us, that St. Peter had only this Pre-eminence, because that we might learn
thereby to keep the Unity of the Church. Mr. Barrow omits not to tell us that
one might assent to the Priority of St. Peter and he gives there the same
reasons, for example, he was called to the Apostleship before the others, he
was older, etc. That which cannot be granted to St. Peter (according to our
Author) is a Superiority of Jurisdiction, whereof nothing is to be found in
Holy Writ, and which ought to be there contained and very clearly, if it were a
Doctrine of Faith; according to this Rule of St. Austin, De pec. mor. and v^n.
2.36.
Credo etiam hic Divinorum eloquiorum clarissima auctoritas esset, si homo sine
dispendio promissae salutis ignorare non posset. The Author is very large in
proving that St. Peter had not any Authority like to this over the Apostles and
carefully answers the passages of the Fathers, which the Roman Catholics use
to object to the Protestants on this occasion, and he brings diverse of the same
Fathers, frequently opposing themselves, and very strongly confutes those
arguments brought for the Superiority of St. Peter.

Page 76.
Mr. Barrow endeavors in the sequel to show that the Privileges of the
Apostleship were personal, and died with the Apostles, according to that Maxim
of the Law -- Privilegium personale personam sequitur, and cum persona
extinguitur. That if the Fathers say that Bishops are Successors of the
Apostles, they also say it indifferently of all Bishops. They could not say any
thing more than this, that the Apostles have established them to govern the
Christian Church after 'em, not that any of them has succeeded in the utmost
extent of the Apostles Charge, but because that every Bishop governs the Flock
which is committed to him. Singulis Pastoribus (says St. Cyprian) Ep. 55.
portio gregis adscripta est, quam regat unusquisque and gubernet, etc.
Episcopatus unus (as he adds in another place) De Vnitate Ec^lesiae.
cujus a singulis in solidum pars tenetur.

Page 82.
He afterward attempts to show that the Episcopacy of St. Peter is
incompatible with his Apostleship, and that none of the Ancients believed that
he was the Bishop of Rome, where he could not stay long, although it is pretended
he continued many years. It Is said on this occasion, that he who wrote the
Letter (by some, supposed from St. Peter, to St. James,) does not misrepresent
the personage of this Apostle, since it makes him to say, If whilst I am alive
they dare raise so many falsities upon me, what will not posterity undertake?

Page 88.
He maintains yet farther, that St. Peter was not Bishop of Rome, because there
were others there in his time, to wit, Linus established by St. Paul, and
Clement established after Linus by St. Peter himself. There are yet brought
many other Reasons drawn from Antiquity.

Page 94.
After having refuted the four first Suppositions of the Roman Catholics, he
remarks that since they are the only foundation upon which the fifth can be
upheld, it must necessarily be false, since the preceding ones are so, which he
believes he has sufficiently proved. He yet maintains farther, which is more
than needful, that when they grant to St. Peter all the Roman Catholics
attribute to him, it would not follow that the Bishop of Rome should be his
Successor. This he shows all along by many Reasons, and by the Testimony of the
Fathers, as well as by Sacred Writ, he much enlarges upon the Inconveniences,
which would be in obeying the Bishop of Rome, as the only Successor of the
Privileges of the Apostles, and he says, amongst many other things, that the
Popes have rendered that definition true which Scioppius has given to the Roman
Church; viz. Ecclesia est Mandra sive grex aut multitudo Iumentorum sive
Asinorum. He also mentions the History of the Establishment, and the
Jurisdiction of the Metropolitans or Primates, and maintains that as they were
established by Humane Prudence, so they might also be abolished by the same
Power, and other things of this nature which entirely ruin the Authority of
the Pope.

The Author after this applies himself to show that the Popes since St. Peter,
have not enjoyed without discontinuation this Sovereign Authority, which they
usurp, since they have not had the power to convocate general Councils, nor to
preside there, nor to make Laws, or oppose themselves to the Canons of the
Councils; and lastly, that they enjoyed not for many Ages, the other Rights of
this Sovereignty. There is in this Chapter, the History of the Convocation of
General Councils, and the oppositions which have been made diverse times against
the power of the Bishop of Rome.

page 271.
In fine, Mr. Barrow engages the last supposition of the Roman Catholics to
wit, that the Supremacy of the Popes could not be ruined. He brings many
reasons to evince that it might cease, and that when it was granted to the
Pope, it might happen, that he could lose it, by the faults he should commit,
or personal defects, as if he turned a Heretic, because St. Ambrose says,
those who have not the faith of St. Peter, cannot be his Successors; de p^^n.
l. 6.
Non habent Petri haereditatem qui Petri fidem non habent, quam Impia divisione
discerpunt, and this frequently happens, as Dr. Barrow says, acccording to the
Ancients, and is yet seen to this day, if we may believe the Protestants, whose
reasons the Author proposes very strongly, in enumerating the sentiments of the
Roman Church, which are considered as very erroneous.

It Is this which contains the treaties of the Popes Supremacy, the other
follows, to wit, the Unity of the Church, where Dr. Barrow designs to prove,
that Unity may well subsist without the necessity of the Christian Churches
having a visible head. He engages to show that the Unity of the Church consists
in this, that all the Christians do agree in Fundamentals, particularly in
those which have a necessary connection with Piety and the Practice of good
works, and in this, that they be joined in the bond of mutual charity, etc. He
afterward shows in what manner the Christian Churches may root out Heresy and
Schism, without the assistance of a Visible Head, and keep at the same time a
Conformity of Discipline in things of the highest consequence, even when it
could not be established but by Humane Prudence; but he yet maintains that this
last Union is possible, in supposing certain things which are not necessary,
nor ordained by the Apostles, and he gives many reasons to which he adds diverse
Examples in Ecclesiastical History, by which one may see he believes it not
necessary that there be an Union of Discipline amongst the Churches. Upon this
occasion he particularly makes use of the Epistles of St. Cyprian, by which it
appears, according to Dr. Barrow, that every Bishop lay under a double
obligation, whereof one regarded his Flock in particular, the other the whole
Church. By the first, he was obliged to take care that every thing be done in
good order in his Church, and that nothing should be done which was not for
Edification, and this should be endeavored by taking counsel of his Clergy and
his People. By the second, he was obliged, when the good of his Flock required
it, to confer with other Bishops touching the means of preserving Truth and
Peace: But in that time a Bishop knew not what it was to be hindered from
acting according to the extent of his Power, by appealing to a Superior Power,
to which he was obliged to give an account of the Administration of his Charge.
Bishops were then as Princes in their Jurisdictions, but they omitted not to
keep a certain Correspondence, for the preserving an universal Peace. Ep. 55.
Statutum est omnibus-nobis (says St. Cyprian) ac aequum est pariter, ac
justum, ut uniuscujusque causa illic audiatur, ubi est Crimen admissum, and
singulis Pastoribus portio Gregis sit adscripta, quam regat unusquisque
praepositus rationem actus sui Domino redditurus? and elsewhere. Page 314.
Qua in re nee nos cuiquam facimus nec Legem damus, cum habeat in Ecclesiae
administratione voluntate sui liberum arbitrium unusquisque praepositus,
rationem actus sui Domino redditurus.

Dr. Barrow shows after this the Inconveniences which would attend the
Government of the Christian Church, if it should acknowledge one Visible Head.
Thorndike Antiquit. Eccles.
A famous Divine of the Church of England having maintained the Unity of an
Ecclesiastical Discipline, so that all the Christian Churches ought to be
(according to him) in the nature of a Confederacy, which submits every Church
in particular to an entire body (if it is permitted so to speak.) Dr. Barrow
believes he is obliged to refute this Tenet, and to that end he has drawn from
his Works twelve proofs of this Opinion which that Divine has spread in diverse
places, and which he proposed with great care, although after a manner very
obscure and intricate. This last Author having objected, for instance, to those
who believe not, that the Unity of Discipline is necessary, the Article of the
Creed, where it is said, I believe in the Holy Catholic or Universal Church,
and the Creed of Constantinople, where it is said, The Holy Catholic and
Apostolic Church: Dr. Barrow answers to this, that this Article is not in the
Abridgment of the Christian Faith, which is found in St. Irenaeus, Tertullian
and St. Cyprian, no more than in the Creed of the Council of Nice; And (1.)
That it was not in the Apostles Creed, which the Church of Rome makes use of,
but that it is added after the Times of Ruffinus and St. Augustine, against the
Heresies and Schisms which sprung up in the Christian Church. (2.) That it
agrees with the Unity of the Catholic Church in many respects, and that this
is not the manner of Unity which is in Question, and which is not decided in
the Creed. (3) It Is fairly supposed, that the Unity which is spoken of in the
Creed of Constantinople, is that of outward Government. (4.) That one might
reasonably think that the sense of this Article is no other than this, That we
make profession to remain steadfast in the body of Christians, which are
scattered throughout the whole World, and which received the Faith, the
Discipline and the Manner of living Ordained by Jesus Christ and his Apostles,
that we are bound to be charitable to all good Christians with which we are
ready to Communicate: That we are willing to observe the Laws and
Constitutions, and Ioynt-Opinion of the Churches for the Conservation of Truth,
Order and Peace. Lastly, That we renounce all Heretic Doctrines, all
scandalous Practices, and all manner of Factions. (5.) That it appears that
this is the sense of this Article, because that he has put it in the Creed to
preserve the Truth, Discipline and Peace of the Church. (6.) That it is not
reasonable to explain this Article in any manner which agrees not with the
Apostolic Times and Primitive Church, for then there was no Union of
Discipline amongst Christians like to what has been since.

As it was objected to Dr. Barrow that this opinion favors the Independants,
so afterward he shows the difference between it and that of these Men, after
which he draws diverse consequences from his own positions, as, That those who
separate from the Communion of the Church in which they live (that is
established on good foundations) are Guilty of Schism, and ought to be Censured
by, and excluded from the Communion of all other Churches; and they must not
think themselves to be exempted from Error, although some other Church would
receive them, as a Subject cannot withdraw himself from the obedience of his
natural Prince in putting himself under the Protection of another. This also is
defended by the Apostolic Canons which the ancient Church has observed with
much Care, as Dr. Barrow makes appear by many examples.

This is according to his opinion a means to extirpate Schisms, and not that
which is proposed by the Roman Church, to wit, to Establish a Political Union
amongst diverse Churches by which they are Subordinate to one only. Every Church
ought to suffer the others to enjoy in peace their Rights and Liberties, and
content it self to condemn dangerous errors and factions, and to assist with
Counsel the other Churches when they have need thereof.

The second Volume contains the explication of the Creed in 34 Sermons upon
this Article. I believe in the Holy Ghost: The rest being briefly explained,
because that the Author has treated of 'em in other places of his Works, marked
in a little advertisment which is at the End of his Sermons. These Sermons are
not simple explications of the Letter of the Creed. The Author has explained
the Articles as he had occasion, by diverse texts of Scripture treating of the
matter, that he found therein, and the particular circumstances of each text.
He shows first how much doubting is necessary, and on the contrary in the two
following, what Faith is Reasonable and Just. In the fourth and fifth he
explains Justification by Faith. He afterward proves in four Sermons
successively the existence of a Deity by the Works of Creation by the order of
the Body of Man, consent of all Nations and by supernatural effects. The tenth
and two following treat of the Unity of God, of his power and of the creation
of the World. In the 13th and to the 20th the Author proves the truth of the
Christian Religion the falseness of Paganism and Mahometanism, Imperfection of
the Religion of the Jews and the excellency of that of Jesus Christ, whom he
shows in four large Sermons to be the true Messia: Afterward he explains all
that is contained in the second article of the Creed. In the two last he shows
the Justice and certainty of a day of Judgment* In fine the 34th treats all
along of the Divinity of the Holy Ghost.

The third Volume contains 45 Sermons, which treat mostly of Morals. The three
first are upon those texts of the Scripture which command us to do all in the
Name of Jesus Christ, and in Imitation of him. The six following show the
Submission which we ought to have to the will of God, and contentment of mind
to which the Apostle gives so great praises. The 10th and 11th treat of
patience and joy, the 12th and 13th on the study of a man's self, the 14th and
15th of the thoughts of our latter end, the 16th and 17 of the danger of
deferring repentance, the 18th and from thence to the 22th of the labors and
employments of all sorts of persons, of whatsoever condition they may be, the
23d. of the depth of the Judgment of the Almighty, the four following of the
obedience we owe to our spiritual Guide, the 28th and the following to the
31st, of self-love and its different kinds, the 32d and unto the 35th to do
nothing but what is honest in the eyes of the world, the three following of the
goodness of God, and that he is no respecter of persons, the 39th and unto the
42th of the Universality of Redemption and the three last of the birth and
passion of Jesus Christ and of the gift of the Holy Ghost.

Besides what we have said of the method of Dr. Barrow which is that that is at
this day observed by the most able Divines of the English Church, 'twill not be
amiss to observe that by the application he has made to the Mathematics he
has formed to himself a habit of writing very exactly, avoiding unuseful
digressions and making use of Solid proofs rather than Rhetorical figures,
according to the Custom of many Preachers who apply themselves rather to a
plausible eloquence than the Solidity of sound reasons. It was thought
necessary to give this account, lest the Public should be displeased with the
name of Sermon which was so dreadful, for three Volumes in folio to contain
nothing else. Those who have been in England, and have had any knowledge of the
writings of the Divines of that Country, know the esteem in which our Author is
there; but to satisfy in some manner those who understand not English, I shall
here give an extract of the 8th Sermon in the 2d. Book where the Author proves
the existence of God by the Consent of all Nations.

Lactantius -- After having cited many Heathen and Christian Authors against
Atheism, he brings the testimony of all People and Nations, which agree almost
in nothing but the belief of a Divinity. Testimonium* Populorum atque Gentium
in Vna hac re non dissidentium, this is of great force, whether it be
considered in it self or by the relation to its Original.

An Ancient Philosopher ranged probable things in this order, that which seems
true to some learned persons is in some sort probable, that which appears so to
the greatest part or to all the Learned, is most probable, what is believed by
most men, both Learned and Ignorant, is yet more likely, but what all men
consent to has the greatest probability of truth; so that one must be very
extravagantly obstinate to have the boldness to deny it, there is no man in the
World can by his reasons only balance the constant authority of all men. If
any one by a Spirit of contradiction or otherwise should undertake to prove
that Snow is black, as did Anaxagoras, or maintain motion impossible, as Zeno
did, or that contradictory assertions may be true at the same time as
Heraclitus did: That there remains no other means to refute such a man, because
he has rejected the most evident principles, and opposes himself to the
Universal consent of Mankind; if he refuses such a concession, all that we can
do is to look upon him rather with pity than contempt. We ought to have very
convincing and clear reasons to resist the common suffrage of all men and
accuse them equally of error.

To illustrate this still more, or rather to demonstrate the Thesis upon which
it is founded, it is necessary to cite the testimonies of some Heathen
Philosophers which cannot be suspected on this occasion. The consent of all men
(says Seneca) is of very great weight to us, it is an argument a thing is true
when it appears so to all the World, thus we conclude there is a Divinity,
because that all men believe it, there being no Nation however corrupted which
denies it. Cicero says, the same thing in several places, and observes further
that many Nations had extravagant opinions of the Divinity, yet they all agree
in this, that there is one eternal power, on which all men have their
dependence. In violent disputes (says Maximus of Tire) in contestations and
diverse opinions which are amongst men, one may see a Law and Doctrine equally
established in all Nations that there is a God which is King and Father of all
men, and that there are many Gods Sons of this Supreme Being, which Reign with
him -- This is confessed by the Greeks and Barbarians, the Inhabitants of all
places both Learned and Ignorant. There are many like Witnesses and if any
Philosophers have contradicted this general consent, they are so few in number,
that according to the foresaid Author they ought to be looked upon as Monsters,
as an Ox without Horns, and a Fowl without Wings.

If we should consider the Original of this common Opinion, we should
acknowledge it yet more solid, for in fine, this consent can proceed but from
one of these four things. Where there is a thought which is the result of a
natural Instinct, as the most evident principles of the Sciences and the desire
we have to be happy, as Cicero De. Not. Deor Lib. 1. and 2.
and many other Philosophers have declared. Where we have a natural disposition
to receive this Impression, as our eyes are naturally disposed to see the Light
as soon as it appears, as Julian Julian Heraclit.
himself said. Where some strange reason that presents it self to the minds of
men even the grossest and what depends chiefly upon common notions has
produced this consent as Plutarch has it. Where, in fine some ancient Tradition
that came from the same source, has spread this opinion through all the earth,
according to the thoughts of some others. There can be no other way Imagined by
which this opinion has been received amongst all men who are so much inclined
to judge diversely of the same thing; now choose which of these ways you will,
our reasons are equally strong and convincing; if it is by the Light of Nature
'twould be as extravagant to deny it as that the most evident principles of all
Siences are false. if it is said, that it is by a natural disposition that men
believe there is a God, why should we resist the Instinct of Nature, since the
notions thereof never deceive us? If you agree that there is a powerful reason
which persuades all men, it is renouncing a Common sense to refuse to yield
thereunto.

But if they agree that man received this knowledge from an ancient tradition,
as appears more likely, we must seek from whence this tradition is come to us,
and who was the Common Master of all mankind. The Names of those who were the
first founders of a sect are sufficiently known, as are they also who have
engaged the World in certain opinions, but of him that invented this, there is
neither name nor place to be found, nor time in which he lived, nor the manner
whereby it was introduced and spread amongst Men; it is this that makes one
believe that the Authors of this tradition were our first Parents, who as they
could not be Ignorant of their Original were obliged without doubt to teach
this truth to their children. It is easily conceived that from thence all the
World have learnt it. This thought conducts us to another which is of the
greatest Importance to the subject we are speaking of, viz that all mankind is
descended from one man only, or at least a very little number of People that
assembled together, from whence appears first that the Generations of men had a
beginning, and secondly that we cannot resist the doctrine of the existence of
a Deity as an apolitical fiction, for suppose that mankind has a beginning
upon the earth, from whence could he draw his Original but from a Divinity, as
we have conceived? what other being could form bodies so admirably as ours, and
to have joined to 'em an Intelligence like that of our soul? let us consider
also who has taught the first man there was a God, and how it entered into his
mind, that he drew his existence from him, if he that formed him had not
discovered it to him in a sensible manner, and taught him 'twas to him he owed
his being only? in a word since they have taught to their posterity, we have no
reason to refuse 'em our belief, and we cannot Imagine their testimonies less
worthy of faith, nor find men who can be instructed in their Original than
themselves, nor can we reasonably reject a Tradition which is transmitted from
'em to us: This reason we find entire in In Timaeo.
Plato. We must believe those who told us they were of the race of the Gods,
since they say they know perfectly from whom they were descended, it is
impossible to distrust the Children of the Gods although they should bring no
evident demonstration of what they declared, and since they advance things only
that belong to themselves, it is Just to believe 'em.

Thus one sees these two truths, the universal Tradition of a Divinity and the
Supposition that all men are come from the same Original, maintain both. As to
the last there are diverse Histories and opinions that confirm it, although it
cannot be better upheld than by the universal belief I just spoke of.
Nevertheless it is not unuseful to give you some examples.

It Is without doubt by an ancient Tradition, (which relates no more, than to
the first men as the greatest part of the Heathens have believed) that all
mankind drew their Original from the same Parents who received their being from
that divinity in resemblance of which they were formed*

Finxit ad effigiem Moderantum cuncta Deorum
That the Soul is immortal, that there are rewards and punishments after this
Life, according as men live well or ill. That there are places where good men
are happy, and others where the wicked receive their punishment after death. It
cannot be said that Philosophers have discovered these truths, and persuaded
all the World of 'em, for they are too subtle and fine upon this subject to
persuade all men. It must necessarily be from Tradition that all men have
learned this Truth -- One ought to believe (with De Leg. 2. Georg. sub s. m.
Plato) Relations touching these sort of things, which are so great in number;
permanere animos (says Tus. 1. and in Laelio, c. 117.
Cicero) arbitramur consensu Nationum omnium: Cum de animarum aternitate
disserimus, says Seneca after him, Non leve momentum apud nos habet consensus
hominum aut Timentium inferos aut Colentium. It Is also from the same source
that this Opinion is spread amongst the Heathens as thus, that in the beginning
men enjoyed a Felicity which they lost by their own fault, and that this fault
is the Original of all evils to which their Posterity have been exposed. It Is
well known what the Poets have said of the Golden Age, and of Pandora's Box.
From this also comes the Opinion of the prae-existence of the Soul, whereof
these words are to be found in the fragments of Cicero, When one considers the
errors and miseries to which men are exposed in this life. It does not seem
unreasonable that these Ancient Prophets and Interpreters of the will of the
Gods who have instructed us in the mysteries of Religion, say that we are born
to be punished for Crimes which we have committed in a prae-existent state.

I know (if Ancient Traditions be not corrupted by length of time) that Plato
believed that the first man was man and woman, and divided into two; and this
disagrees not with holy Writ, which informs us, that the first woman was formed
from the body of the first man.

There are also some Histories which agree with the Sacred Writ; as what the
Poets say of the long life of the first men, of the general Corruption of all
Mankind, and of the Deluge sent to punish them; several things have been also
said of the Divinity of Hero's, which seems to come from the same source. To
which may be added diverse Customs formerly spread almost through the World; as
that of counting by Tens, dividing the Time by Weeks, beginning to reckon from
the Night, as being made before the Day. Besides, that men almost always, and
throughout the whole Earth, agree upon the principal Heads of Morality. It Is
true that reason might teach such as consulted it, but the greatest part of the
World was not well enough disposed to hearken quietly to the voice of Reason
only, and to silence those passions which hindered us from understanding it, if
this Voice had not been maintained by another more clear and powerful, to wit,
that of Tradition. It may also be said there were Barbarous Nations, among
which the belief of a Divinity had been stifled by Ignorance and Stupidity, and
among more learned Nations, as the Greeks, some have been doubtful, and
rejected it as a Lie; but it must also be granted, that it has been commonly
received in the East amongst the most Ancient People, from whence Colonies have
filled all the World, as we are taught by the oldest Histories that remain
amongst us.

It Is true also, that to this has been added a thousand Extravagancies
touching the Nature of the Divine Being, and the manner of Worship done to him:
But it is thus that Judaism was corrupted by the Jewish Doctors, and the
Christian Religion by that of the Christians which have innovated so many
Changes, that it was hardly known for some Ages. Is it not false, say they,
that these two Religions came from Moses and Jesus Christ? The same thing has
happened to the first Tradition; and Aristotle has believed that in effect it
was thus; his words are too remarkable to be omitted; The most profound
Antiquity has left to future Ages under hidden Fables the belief that there
were Gods, and that the Divinity was displayed in all the Works of Nature --
There Is added afterward, That these Fables teach us to persuade the People,
and render 'em more obedient to the Laws, for the good of the State, although
some say, that the Gods resemble Men, Animals, and other things. If we keep to
those things only which were spoke of in the beginning, to wit, that the Gods
were the Original of Nature, there would be nothing said that is unworthy of
the Divinity. There is some likelihood that the Sciences having been often
found out, and as often lost, these Opinions were preserved until now, as the
other Doctrines of the Ancients. Thus we may distinguish the Opinions of our
Fathers from those who lived first upon the Earth. 'Twould be difficult to make
a better proof of a matter of fact; and some have even dared to say, That in
Physics there is rarely proved an existence of one Cause by a great number of
effects, which are so great in number, so diverse, so sensible, and so certain.
The harmony which is between the parts of the Universe, which conspire all to
the same end, and always keep the same order, shows that this Divinity, known
to all Mankind, is one in Number, and the same in Concord, as may be seen in a
State between persons of different humors, which live under the same Laws.
Thus it appears in the March of an Army which obeys its General, and thus the
Order and Regularity, which is seen in a House proves 'twas built by one
Architect only: This all the World acknowledges, in spite of the great number
of Gods, the Heathens have made, for they themselves confessed a Supreme
Divinity to whom all others were to submit themselves, as the Poets even call
him, The Father, the King, the Most High, the Greatest, the Most Excellent of
the Gods, etc. This much Philosophers have acknowledged, which say, that even
all names that are called upon by the People, showed but one Divinity only, De
Benes. 4.7.
Quoties voles (says Seneca) tibi licet aliter tunc Auctorem rerum nostrarum
compellare: Tot appellationes ejus esse possunt quot Munera; hunc and Liberum
patrem and Herculem, ac Mercurium nostri putant, etc. omnia ejusdem Dei nomina
sunt vary utentis sua potestate. In Exerc. Grot. p. 140.
Sophocles says very often in a Tragedy that is lost, (...), etc. In truth
there is a God, and there is but one who has made the Heaven, the Earth, the
Sea, and the Winds; nevertheless there are many Mortals who by strange
Illusions make Statues and Gods of Stone, of Brass, of Gold and Ivory, to give
them speedy deliverance from their evils; they offer Sacrifices, and consecrate
Festivals, vainly imagining that Piety consists in Ceremonies.

Thus Marcillius Ficinus who translated Plato into Latin, and (who was willing
to renew the old Platonic Tenets) believes amongst several more, that men were
offended, because they found in Plato the name of God in the Plural Number, but
this Philosopher did only mean subalternate Gods or Angels, that those (says
he) which are not surprised with the number of Angels, are not at all
astonished with the number of Gods, because in Plato so many Gods import no
more than so many Angels, and so many Saints.

Dr. Barrow concludes upon the whole that the Universal consent of all Nations
does very well prove that there is a God, and we cannot doubt but that it is
very reasonable. One may understand by this, that the Sermons of this Author
are rather treatises or exact dissertations, than pure harangues to please a
multitude. If we were not resolved to keep within the bounds of an unbyassed
Historian we might say that there never was a Preacher comparable to this
Author, but our particular suffrage, or rather that of all England ought not to
be a president to all Europe.

The Life of the most Reverend Father in God James Usher, late Lord Archbishop
of Armagh, Primate and Metropolitan of all Ireland, with a Collection of 300
Letters, which he writ to the most illustrious men of his time for Piety and
Learning, and some he received from England, and other parts; Published from
the Original by Richard Parr, after his Death, to whom he had given the Care of
his Papers. London, Sold by Nathaniel Ranew, 1686. in Folio.
THIS Volume is composed of two Parts, whereof the one contains the Life of the
famous Usher, written by -- Parr Doctor of Divinity, and the other a Collection
of diverse Letters that this Illustrious Archbishop has written to several
Learned Men of his Time, with some of their Answers.

1. There have been already seen several Abridgments of the Life of Usher, but
as those who composed them, had not a memory sufficient for the Work, so they
have given nothing to the Public but what was very imperfect. 'Twas this made
Dr. Parr undertake to publish what he knew of this Prelate, to whom he was
Chaplain thirteen years, from 1642 to 1655 he knew him thoroughly in that time,
and learned many circumstances of his Life, which those were Ignorant of, who
lived at a greater distance. Dr. Parr has also received much assistance from
the Papers of Usher which among others fell into his hands, and from the
Conversations that he has had with Mr. Tyrrel his Grandson, a Gentleman of an
extraordinary merit.

The Primate of Ireland, was Universally esteemed during his Life, and his
works are still in so great a reputation, that men will not be sorry to see
here a little Abridgment of his History.

James Usher was born at Dublin the fourth of January 1580. his Fathers name
was Arnold, and was one of the six Clerks of the Chancery. The Family of the
Vshers is very Ancient, although the right name is not Usher but Nevil, but one
of the Ancestors of our Archbishop changed it into that of Usher, because he
was Usher to King John, who ascended the Throne of England 1199. our Prelate
had from his Infancy an extraordinary passion for Learning -- Two Scotch
Gentlemen, who advised him in his studies, entertained him with much care. The
one was named James Fullerton, the other James Hamilton. They went into Ireland
by order of the King of Scotland, to form some agreement with the Protestant
Nobility of that Country, intending thereby to assure himself of that Kingdom
in case Q. Elizabeth died suddenly. The better to cover their enterprise, and
to give no Umbrage to a Queen extremely suspicious, they set themselves to
teach Latin at Dublin, where (at that time) 'twas very rare to find persons
learned in Humanity. Usher having profited very much by them in a little time,
seemed to have a particular inclination to Poetry* which he afterward changed
into as great a desire of understanding History; that which created this
inclination in him, was reading these words of Cicero, Nescire quid antra quam
natus sis acciderit, id est semper esse puerum, his Annals and his other
writings sufficiently show what progress he had made in this study, whereof he
has given sensible proofs in his Infancy.

Being in the University of Dublin established principally by the care of Henry
Usher his Uncle Archbishop of Ardmagh. He set himself to read the Fortalitium
fidei of Stapleton, which made him resolve to apply himself to the reading of
the Fathers, to see if this Author had cited them faithfully, he began to put
this design in execution at 20 years old, and continued this Study without
intermission for 18 years, obliging himself to read every day a certain task.

His Father had a mind to divert him from it, and engage him to Study the Law,
to which our Prelate had no inclination, but in 1598. he dying soon after, left
his Son at Liberty to choose what manner of life was most pleasing to him; he
was the eldest son of the family, and the estate his Father left, was
considerable enough to make him apply all his time in Domestic affairs. This
made him resolve to put off this trouble, and to remit the Estate to his
Brother, with orders to give to his Sisters what their Father had left them,
reserving only to himself what would maintain him in the University, with a
sufficiency to buy himself some Books. Whilst he was at the University, and but
yet 18 years old, he disputed against a Jesuit called Fitz-Symmons, and
overcame him in two conferences, which made this Jesuit afterward in a Book
Entitled Britannomachia, call him the most learned of those who are not
Catholics, A-Catholicorum Doctissimum; he made so great a progress in the
first years, that he applied himself to Divinity, that his Uncle Archbishop of
Ardmagh, ordained him Priest at the 21 year of his Age. This ordination was not
conformable to the Canons, but the extraordinary merit of young Usher, and the
necessities of the Church, made him believe it was not necessary to stay till
the age marked out by the Ecclesiastical Laws of Ireland. He preached then at
Dublin, with very great applause, he particularly devoted himself to the
controversies, which were between the Protestants and Roman Catholics, he
treated on them so clearly, and with so much solidity, that he confirmed many
wavering Protestants, and prevailed with many Roman Catholics to embrace the
Protestant Faith.

But amongst those who ranked themselves in the Protestant Churches, there was
a great number that were not so sincere as he could have wished them, they did
all they could to obtain the public exercise of the Roman Catholic Religion
at Dublin, that they might insensibly have had the Liberty to make a profession
of their true Sentiments. Usher who believed that this toleration would be of a
very dangerous consequence, opposed it with all his might, and one day as he
Preached upon this matter with great zeal, he spoke something which then no
notice was taken of, but 40 years after it was found to be a true Prophecy, he
took his Text upon these words of Ezekiel. chapter 4. v. 5. And thou shall bear the
Iniquity of the house of Judah 40 days, I have appointed thee a day for a year.
He applied these days to Ireland, and said, that he who reckoned from this year
to 40. should find that the Protestants of Ireland should bear the Iniquity of
those who were for a toleration in these times, this was in 1601. and 40 years
were no sooner expired 1641. but the Irish Catholics made a bloody Massacre
upon the Protestants.

He never wholly discontinued to Preach whilst he was in Ireland, although he was
Professor of Divinity in that University, but he accustomed himself to make a
Voyage every three years into England, where he found a greater variety of
Books than in Ireland, there he past one part of his time at Oxford, another at
Cambridge, and another at London, and carefully visited all their public and
particular Libraries, he made collections of what Books he there read, and made
remarks upon them, with a design to make a work that he had resolved to
Intitule A Theological Bibliotheque, wherein he had treated very accurately of
all the Ecclesiastical Antiquities; but the misfortunes of Ireland, and the
Civil Wars of England hindered him from finishing it, he ordered when he died,
that it should be put into the hands of Mr. Laugbaine Dr. of Divinity, to
supply what was wanting, and publish them to the World. This learned man
engaged himself forthwith in this useful work, but he died before he finished
it, 1657. There is yet to be seen in the Bodleyane Bibliotheque, his
Manuscripts which no man dares undertake to finish.

In 1615. there was a Parliament in Ireland and an assembly of the Clergy,
where certain Articles were composed touching Religion and Ecclesiastical
Discipline. Usher who was the chief in it, caused it to be signed by the
Chancellor of Ireland, and by the Orators of the Assembly of the Bishops and of
the Clergy; King James approved of 'em also, although there was some difference
between these, and the Articles of the Church of England; some ill disposed
persons, and it may be Roman Catholics took occasion from that to spread evil
reports of Usher. They accused him of Puritanism, which was no little Heresy
in the opinion of the King, they also made use of this artifice, to render
those odious who appeared the most capable of opposing the progress that the
Missionaries of Rome, endeavored to make in Ireland.

Indeed the people knew not what this word signified and wherein Heresy
consisted, but it was known the King mortally hated Puritans, and that was
sufficient to make 'em look upon these Puritans as most dangerous Heretics;
Eman. Downing. page 16.
'twas this that obliged an Irish Divine to write to Usher, who was that time
in England, that it would not be amiss to desire the King to define Puritanism,
that all the World might know those who were tainted with this strange Heresy,
but Usher had no need to make use of this way to justify himself, some
conversations that he had with the King, settled so good an opinion of him, that
the Bishopprick of Mead in Ireland being vacant the King gave it him
immediately, and said also, that Usher was a Bishop that he had made, because
that he had appointed him so without being solicited to it by any person, this
Election was made in 1620.

Returning into Ireland sometime after, he was obliged to discourse some
persons of Quality of the Roman Religion, to administer to 'em the Oath of
Allegiance and Supremacy that they had refused to the Priest, this discourse is
inserted in his Life; he remarks the form of this Oath is composed of two
parts, the one positive, in which they acknowledge the King is Sovereign in all
cases whatsoever, and the other negative, in which they declare they
acknowledge no Jurisdiction or Authority of any strange Prince in the estates
of the King, he says afterward in regard of the first part, that the Scripture
commands that we submit our selves to the Higher Powers, and that we ought to
acknowledge, that the power the Kings have, whatsoever it may be, is Supreme as
they are Kings, upon which he cites this verse of Martial.

Qui Rex est, Regem, maxim non habeat.
That one ought well to distinguish the power of the Keys from that of the
Sword, and the King of England does not exact an acknowledgment of the same
power, that is possessed by the Bishops, but nevertheless the Kings may
interest themselves with Ecclesiastical Affairs, in as much as it regards the
body, since according to the Church of Rome, it is the Magistrates duty to
punish Heretics. For that which regards the second part of the Oath, where
it is said, that we shall not own any strange power, as having any Jurisdiction,
Superiority, Pre-eminence, Ecclesiastical or Temporal in the Kingdom. He says
that if St. Peter were still alive, he would willingly own that the King had
this Authority in Ireland: and that he used the same in regard of all the
Apostles, that the Apostleship was a personal dignity, which the Apostles have
not left hereditary to any: but nevertheless, suppose it was so, he sees not
why St. Peter should leave it to his successors, rather than St. John, who
outlived all the Apostles; that there was no reason to believe that St. Peter
should leave the Apostolical Authority to the Bishops of Rome, rather than to
those of Antioch, this last Church being founded before the first.

The King writ to Usher to thank him for this Discourse which produced so good
effect. He afterward went into England by the King's order, to collect the
Antiquities of the Churches of England, Scotland and Ireland, and published two
years after that his Book entitled, De Primordiis Ecclesiarum Britannicarum.
'Twas in that time that the King made him Archbishop of Armagh.

The Winter following he caused to be brought before him the Order for
Toleration of the Roman Catholics and the Lord Falkland, then Deputy for the
King in Ireland, convocated and assembled the whole Nation to settle this
Affair: But the Bishops called by the Primate, opposed it with much heat, as
may be seen by a Remonstrance signed by ten Bishops, besides the Primate, and
which is in the 28th page. They also spoke of raising some Forces by the Joint
consent both of Catholics and Protestants, to hinder any differences that
might arise in the Kingdom; the Protestants refused to consent thereto, and
would not hearken to discourse the Primate thereupon in the Castle of Dublin,
although his reasonings were founded upon the principal Maxims of the Government
of Ireland, and maintained by Examples drawn from the Ancient and Modern
Histories of that Kingdom.

During the time our Primate stayed in Ireland, after he had performed the
Duties of his Charge which he acquitted with extraordinary care, he employed
the remaining part of his time to study, the fruits whereof were to be seen in
1631. in the first Latin book which he ever published in Ireland, it is his
History of Godescalch Monk of the Abbey of Orbais who lived in the beginning of
the 6th Age there was soon made a small abridgment of the History of
Pelagianism which was then extremely dispersed through Spain and England; when
he comes to the History of Godescalch he explains his Doctrine, and shows by
Flodoard and other Authors of that time, that those sentiments whereof Hincmar
Archbishop of Rhemes, and Rabanus Archbishop of Maynce accused him, and which
were condemned by their Authority in two Councils, were the same that St.
Remigius Archbishop of Lions, and the Clergy of his Diocese defended openly:
many opinions and odious consequences (according to Usher) were fathered upon
Godescalch, because that this Monk who maintained the opinions of St Augustine
about Predestination and Grace did not at all understand 'em. Ioannes Scotus
Erygenus wrote a treatise against him in which are to be found the principal
heads of Usher, but Florus Deacon of the Church of Lions answers it, and
censures him in the Name of all the Diocese. Usher gave an abridgment of this
Censure, as also of diverse other treatises, as that of St Remigius Pudentius
Bishop of Troy, Ratramus Monk of Corbi, who writ against Scotus for his defense
of Godescalch, there had been two Councils which established the doctrine of
this Monk, and condemned that of Scotus. It Is true that Hincmar published a
very large Book against these Councils, which he dedicated to Charles le
Chauve, as Flodoard reports, who shows briefly what it is that this Book treats
of, but that did not at all hinder St. Remigius, and those of his Party, to
convocate another Council at Langres, where they confirmed the Doctrine
established in the former Councils, and condemned that new one of Scotus. These
Controversies were still agitated in the National Council of the Gauls, where
nothing was concluded, although Barancus and others voted that Godescalch should
be condemned there. On the contrary, Usher maintains that in an Assembly which
was in a small time after, his Sentiments were approved of.

Nevertheless this wicked Godescalch was condemned by the Council of Maynce to
perpetual Imprisonment, where he was severely treated, because he would never
retract his Errors. There are still two Confessions of his Faith, by which one
may see there are many things attributed to him which he never believed; after
having made a faithful report of the Sentiments of this Monk, and those of his
Adversaries, Usher concludes that it were better for men to be silent upon
these matters, than to scandalize the weak, in proposing to 'em such Doctrines
from which they may draw bad consequences. There has been (adds Mr. Parr) and
always will be different Opinions upon the great and abstruse Questions of
Predestination and Free Will, which nevertheless may be tolerated in the same
Church, provided those who maintain these diverse Opinions, have that Charity
for one another which they ought to have: That they condemn them not publicly;
That they abstain from mutual Calumnies; and that they publish no Invectives
against those who are not of the same Sentiments.

To return to the Life of our Prelate, who, although he took all imaginable care
that the Roman Religion should not make any progress in Ireland, yet it stole
in by the negligence of other Bishops, insomuch that that Party which
maintained it did sensibly increase and grow strong. It was this that obliged
King Charles the first to write a Letter to the Primate of Ireland, which is to
be found in page 38. wherein he authorizes him to write Letters of Exhortation
to all the Bishops of Ireland, that they should discharge their duty better
than they had done.

About the latter end of the year 1631. Usher makes a Voyage into England,
where he published a small English Treatise concerning the Ancient Religion of
Ireland, and of the People which inhabited the North of Scotland and of
England; he shows in this Treatise how it was in respect to the Essential
parts, of the same Religion which at present is established in England, and
which is very foreign to that of the Roman Catholics. The year following our
Archbishop returned into Ireland, and published a Collection entitled,
Veterum Epistolarum Hibernicarum Sylloge, whereof the first Pieces were written
about the year 1590. and the last about 1180. there one may learn the
Ecclesiastical Antiquities of Ireland. In 1639. which was seven years after he
published his Book entitled, Britannicarum Ecclesiarum Antiquitates, wherein
he inserted the History of Pelagius and his Sentiments. There are to be found
the Antiquities of the most distant Churches of Great Britain, since
Christianity was Preached there, that is to say, since about 20 years after the
death of Jesus Christ.

In 1640. Usher makes a Voyage into England with his Family, with design to
return very soon into Ireland, but the Civil Wars hindered him, insomuch that
he could never return to his Country again. It Is said, that in the year
following, he brought the King to sign the death of the Earl of Strafford, but
as to this Dr. Parr speaks very much in his Justification; he afterward shows
us after what manner he lost all that he had in Ireland, except his Library,
which he brought into England. Strangers very much envyed this great man, that
his Compatriots should offer him diverse Places of Retreat. The Heads of the
University of Leiden soon gave him a considerable Pension, and offered him the
Title of Honorable Professor, if he would come into Holland. The Cardinal
Richelieu sent him his Medal, and also proffered to him a great Pension, with
the liberty of professing his Religion in France, if he would come thither. Our
Archbishop thanked him, and sent him a Present of Irish Greyhounds, and other
Rarities of that Country. Three years after he published a small Treatise
entitled, A Geographical and Historical Research touching Asia Minor, properly
so called, to wit, Lydia, whereof frequent mention is made in the New
Testament, and which the Ecclesiastical Writers and other Authors called
Proconsulary Asia, or the Diocese of Asia. In this Treatise there is a
Geographical Description of Asia Minor, and of its different Provinces, as that
of Caria and Lydia, under which the Romans comprehend Ionia and Aeolia. Usher
shows there, (1.) That Asia, whereof mention is made in the New Testament, and
the Seven Churches which St. John spoke of in the Apocalypse, were included in
Lydia, that every one of these Cities were the Chief of a small Province, and
because of this Division they were chosen to be the principal Seats of the
Bishops of Asia. (2.) That the Roman Provinces had not always the same
extension, but were often contracted or enlarged for reasons of State; thus the
Empire was otherwise divided under Augustus than it was under Constantine,
under whom Proconsulary Asia had more narrow bounds than formerly, it is
remarkable that under this last Emperor Proconsulary Asia, which was governed
by a Proconsul of the Diocese of Asia, from whence the Governor was called
Vicarius or Comes Asiae or Dioceseos Asianae; but this division was afterward
changed under his Successors, and whereas every Province had but one
Metropolis, to satisfy the ambition of some Bishops 'twas permitted to two of
'em at the same time, to take the Title of Metropolitan. (3.) That under
Constantine Ephesus was the place where the Governors of Asia met to form a
kind of Council, which decided affairs of importance; and 'twas for this that
Ephesus was then the only Metropolis of Proconsulary Asia: that the Proconsul
which was Governor, never submitted to the Authority of the Praetorian Prefect,
and that there was something so like this in the Ecclesiastical Government,
that the Bishop of Ephesus was not only Metropolitan of Consulary Asia, but
also the Primate and Head of the Diocese of Asia. (4.) That there was a great
conformity between the Civil and Ecclesiastical Government, in this, that the
Bishops of every Province were subject to their Metropolitans, as the
Magistrates of every City were to the Governors of the whole Provinces.

This was the time wherein Usher published in Greek and Latin the Epistles of
St. Ignatius with those of St. Barnabas and St. Polycarp; seven years after he
added his Appendix Ignatiana where he proves that all the Epistles of Ignatius
are not suppositious, and explains many ecclesiastic antiquities, he published
the same year his Syntagma de editione 70 Interpretum, where he proposes a
particular Sentiment which he had upon this version; it is this, that It
contained but the five Books of Moses, and that it was lost in the burning of
the Library of Ptolomaeus Philadelphus and that Doritheus a Heretic Jew made
another version of the Pentateuch, and also translated the rest of the Old
Testament about 177 years before the birth of Jesus Christ, under the Reign of
Ptolomaeus Philometor and that the Greek Church preserves this last version
instead of that which was made under the Reign of Ptolomeus Philadelphus; he
also treats in this same work of the different editions of this version which
according to him are falsely styled the version of the 70, this Book was
published a year after the death of our Prelate with another De Cainane altero,
or the second Canaan, which is found in the version of the 70. and in St. Luke
between Sala and Arphaxad. This last work of Usher was the Letter which he
wrote to Mr. (...) the difference he had with Mr. a friend of the Archbishops,
we sha^^ speak of it hereafter.

Dr. Parr informs us that in the Civil Wars of England, Usher going from
Cardisse to the Castle of St. Donates which belonged to Madam Stradling, he was
extremely Ill treated by the Inhabitants of Glamorganshire in Wales, they took
his Books and Papers from him which he had much ado to regain, and whereof he
lost some which contained remarks upon the Vaudois and which should have served
to carry on his Book de Ecclesiarum Christianarum Successione, where there is
wanting the History of more than 200. years, viz from Gregory the 11th. to Leo
the 10th. from the year 1371 to 1513, and from thence to the end of the Last
Age.

Whilst our Primate was in Wales there was published at London without his
consent, three works under his name: (1.) A Body of Divinity, or the Substance
of Christian Religion (2) Immanuel, or the Incarnation of the Son of God (3) A
Catechism Entitled, The Principles of the Christian Religion. The last being
full of faults he corrected it and printed it himself in 1652.

In the year 1647. whilst he was at the Countess of Peterborough's in London,
the Society of Lincolns Inn chose him for their Preacher, and gave him a
lodging and a handsome Pension; whilst he was there he published two Books.
(1.) Diatriba de Romanae Ecclesiae symbolo apostolico vetere, and aliis fidei
formulis, he there treats of the Creed which is commonly called the Apostles,
and of the different Copys which have been found in the Roman Church, and of
diverse forms of the Confession of Faith, which where proposed to the
Catechumenoi, and to the Youth of the Eastern and Western Churches. (2.) His
Treatises de anno solari Macedonum and Asianorum, where he explains diverse
difficulties of Chronology and Ecclesiastical History, Cap. 3.
and marks the precise time of the Martyrdom of St. Polycarp; he compares the
year of the Macedonians, the Asiaticks, etc. with the Julian Account, and makes
diverse curious remarks, upon the Motions of the Heavenly Bodies according to
the opinion of the Ancient Greek Astronomers, Melonius, Calippus, Eudoxius,
etc. In fine, he gives the Ephemerides of the Macedonian and Asiatick year,
compared with the Julian year, to which he adds the rising and setting of the
Stars, and the presages of the change Weather in Thrace, Macedonia and Greece,
according to the observations which Ancient Philosophers have left us. The
Parliament at that time took the King Prisoner in the Isle of Wight, and would
have him absolutely abolish Episcopal Government, so that this Prince was
obliged to consent that that Government should be suspended for three years,
but the Presbyterian party were so eager, that they would have it utterly
extirpated; upon this the Primate of Ireland proposed an Expedient, in which he
would have had mixed a sort of of Presbyterian and Episcopal Government in
lessening the power of the Bishops, and bringing them to be Moderators or
Presidents of the Assemblies of their Province, without whose advice nothing of
Importance should be acted, whereupon Usher was accused to have been an Enemy
to Hierarchy; but Dr. Parr vindicates him all along.

He also informs us that Usher being in the Countess of Peterboroughs House,
over against Charing Cross near White Hall, when the King was to be beheaded,
and being upon the top of the house to see this bloody Tragedy, the good
Archbishop fainted away, so that he was forced to be carried to bed, where he
said, that God would not forget to punish this wickedness upon the English
Nation, he added that the Usurpation of Cromwell would soon expire, and that the
King would be recalled, but that he himself should not see it, we are assured
that at another time, he foretold that the Romish Religion should one day be
powerful in this Kingdom, and its reign should be sharp, but short. It Is
reported also, that Preaching in a Church at London, he declared to his
Auditors, that a great fire should soon consume a part of the City, and when
'twas asked him how he knew it, he answered 'twas a Thought which was so
strangely impressed upon his mind, that he could not forbear speaking of it. If
that was true our Primate must be of the number of these Prophets who have
sometimes foretold what was to come without knowing it.

About the middle of the year 1650. he finished the first part of his Annals to
the year of the World 3828. unto the Reign of Antiochus Epiphanes. There is in
this Volume all the celebrated Epochs marked with great exactness, the times of
the Reigns of the Kings of Israel and of Judah, compared with each other -- The
succession of the Monarchies of Babylon, Persia and Mac^^onia, the years of the
Olympiads, the Era of Nabanassar, the most remarkable Eclipses of the Sun. The
second part was published in 1654. it begun at the Reign of Antiochus
Epiphanes, and ended at the destruction of Jerusalem. Usher gives there exact
accounts of the Kings of Syria and Egypt, with the times of their Reign, which
he has put together with more care than any Chronologer has done before him.
In fine, there is all that can be wished in an Universal History, both for
exactness and Judgment.

'Twas after the edition of this work that Cromwell said, he desired to see
him. Usher appeared before him, and the Protector after having received him
with great Civility, promised to make up part of the loss he sustained in
Ireland, but he kept not his Word to him, no more than when he promised him the
Episcopal Clergy should not be molested as they had been to that time. The good
Archbishop having obtained this promise, in a visit he made to the Protector,
he was obliged to put him in mind of it, by seeing him a second time, where
Cromwell ingenuously declared that he could not give Liberty of Conscience to
men who were sworn Enemies to his Government, and who without intermission
endeavored to destroy him. When Usher entered this Usurpers Chamber he found
him in the hands of a Surgeon, who was dressing an Ulcer in his Breast -- The
Protector desired the Archbishop to sit down, and said he would speak to him as
soon as his Ulcer was dressed -- Whilst the Surgeon was busy about it Cromwell
said, that if this Ulcer was once cured he should soon have his Health. Usher
replied immediately, that he feared there was a more dangerous Ulcer in his
Heart which must be cured before he could promise himself a perfect health.
It Is true (said the Protector) sighing, but though he seemed to take this censure
of the Archbishop's in good part, he refused to keep his promise to him.

Usher lived not long after that, falling very sick on the 20th of March of a
Pleurisy, but the Physicians knew not his Distemper, so that he died the day
following at Rygate. in a Country House of the Countess of Peterboroughs in
the County of Surrey, he was seventy five years old, he had been fifty five
years in Orders, during which time he continually Preached, fourteen years
Professor in the University of Dublin, four years Bishop of Mead, and one and
thirty years Bishop of Ardmagh, he was the hundredth Bishop of that City after
St. Patrick.

Cromwell who sought all occasions to please the people, and knew that Usher
had been well beloved ordered him to be buried with great solemnity in April
17. 1655.
Westminster Abbey, in the Chapel of Erasmus, although he would not be at the
charge of the Funeral; he did also another thing which much prejudiced his
Family, which was to hinder their selling the Archbishops Library without his
consent, there was more than 10000 Volumes, they were forced to refuse
considerable sums from the K. of Denmark, and Cardinal Mazarine, who had a
desire to buy 'em. But Cromwell obliged the Heirs to sell them for much less
than they were worth, to his Neighbors in Ireland, to make a Present of it to
the University of Dublin, l'Armee p. 240. Q. 2. Tom.
in imitation of Queen Elizabeth's Army, who after the Victory at Kinsale
brought back from the Spaniards and the Rebels in 1603. 1800 l. sterling, that
is more than 7000 Crowns, which they gave to the same University.

Dr. Parr after that gives us a Character of the Person, good Works, and
Learning of the Archbishop of Ardmach, which is not in the Original. It Is said
when they opened his body to embalm him, they found a strange Membrane Thick
and very Fat, which was like the continuation of the Omentum, and extends it
self to the upper part of the Stomach, being fastened to the Peritonaeum, a
little below the Diaphragma. 'Twas supposed that this Membrane contributed much
to the goodness of his Stomach, that no Diet injured him.

Dr. Bernard a Divine, Printed after his death a collection of some English
Treatises, Entitled, the Judgment of the late Primate, etc. where he speaks
first of the Spiritual Babylon, of which it is spoken Apoc. 18.4. and 2. The
Imposition of hands, Hebrews 6.2. and of the words formerly used in the
Ordination, Thirdly, The Forms of Prayer, which are used in the Church.

It Is thought fit to speak of the principal works of this Celebrated
Archbishop, because that there are many men that knew but a part, and even some
but the Titles of 'em; he left many other imperfect writings, which have not
yet been Printed, that may be seen in the Catalogue at the end of his Life; he
wished that they might be published in form of Miscellanies, that they may be
the better read by the public -- there are many Booksellers beyond Sea, that
would be glad to Print this work.

An Appendix is added to the end of Vshers Life, where is a Defense of what he
said against Dr. Heylen, in a Book Intitul'd Respondit Petrus, where he accuses
him of being of a contrary opinion to the English Church.

Secondly, The Letters which compose the second part of this Volume, are not
all of the same equal importance, there are some of pure Civility, which
contain nothing but news, others, where the Archbishop declares he has sent
for and received certain Books, on which he raises queries, the solution of
which is not to be seen in this collection; others, wherein he only speaks of
particular affairs, and of certain useful things concerning the Ecclesiastics
of Ireland.

The third Letter contains the project of a work of William Air, a learned
Cantabrigian; he proposed to defend the points of antiquity, and the vowels of
the Hebrew, against Ios. Scaliger who had said that the Masorethes were
Invented a long time before St. Ierom, and to remark all the varieties of
reading in the Old and New Testament, to show that there is no corruption slipped
in there, he designed this in 1607. and it is not known whether he accomplished
it. As to the Old and New Testament, we are sure that Buxtorf and Cappel have
drained the subject, and treated more of it than he could, if we may judge by
his project.

There are ten Letters and eleven opinions of Usher and Samuel Ward, upon the
collection and number of the Ancient Canons. Usher writing to this last in
1608. tells him, that he believes that the first collection of the English and
Greek Canons, contained only those of the first ecumenical Council and of five
Provincial Councils, after which was joined thereto the Canons of the other
ecumenical Councils, as in the sequel. This appears chiefly by these words of
Dionysius Junior in the Preface to his Greek Canons dedicated to Stephen Bishop
of Salones in Dalmatia: Regulas Nicaenae synodi and Deinceps omnium
Conciliorum, sive quae antea sive quae post modum usque ad synodum 150
Pontificum qui apud Constantinopolin Convenerunt sub ordine Numerorum, id est a
primo Capitulo usque ad 165. Sicut habentur in Graeca auctoritate digessimus,
cum sancti Calcedonensis Concilii decreta subdentes, in his Graecorum Canonum
finem esse declaramus. Harmenopulus in the Preface to his Abridgments of the
Canons of the Greek Church reckons twenty Canons of the Council of Nice, twenty
five of that of Ancyra, fifteen of Neocaesarea, nineteen of Gangres, twenty
five of Antioch, and sixty of Laodicea, that amounts just to 164. which with
the first Canon of the Council of Constantinople (which followed (according to
Dionisius) the five national ones we have been speaking of) amounts Just to
165. Secondly, If from the time of the first collection, they had had the
Canons of the first General Council, they would not have placed 'em after some
of the National ones, but immediately subjoined 'em to that of Nice.

Usher doubts if at the same time, they added to this Collection the Councils
of Constantinople, and Calcedon, and also that of Ephesus, because Fulgentius
Ferandus cites it not, and it is not well known whether they were the Canons of
Ephesus which are supposed to be collected from Issidore being very different
from those that are found in the edition of Tilius.

There was an Ancient Latin version of the Greek Canons before Dionysius
Junior, as he witnesses in his Preface, but being in some confusion he
reprinted the same anew with additions, placing before them the fifty Canons of
the Apostles, which he translated from the Greek, having finished the Canons of
the Greeks at the Council of Chalcedon; he there also adds the Sardick Canons
and those of the Council of Africa, which he had not inserted before in the
body of the Canons. We cannot find that he has spoke of these Sardick Canons
added by Dionysius and Ferrandus So this is not in the five Canons of the first
Council of Carthage, which Usher reserved for a careful examination.
after the year 530, They were unknown even to the Greek Church, though
afterward they were added to the collection of the Greek Canons. Constantius
(...).
A certain Author who lived about the time of Justinian, did not compose his
collection of Ecclesiastical Constitutions, but the Canons of the Apostles, and
those of the ten great Councils, as they were called, to wit, the Councils of
Ancyra, Neocesarea, Nice, Gangres, Antioch, Laodicea, Constantinople, Chalcedon
and Carthage. He makes no mention of that of Sardis, of which the Canon seems
to have been formed to increase the Popes Authority, when it is seen they
attempted in vain the same thing at the Counsel of Nice. Usher afterward makes
some reflections upon the Roman Copy of the Greek Canons, he says, there is
nothing is this version of Dionysius, except the Canon of the Apostles, but
what is also in the Ancient version, or some other, for there have been many,
as Usher proves by the supposed collection of Issidore, and by Hincmar
Archbishop of Rhemes. There were no more Councils in the Roman collections,
than in Dionysius, but by degrees they were increased by the Letters of some
Popes, as our Author makes appear, which gives him occasion to make diverse
remarks upon the collection attributed to Issidore.

Samuel Ward confirms this opinion of Usher by several reasons; he says that
after having thoroughly considered the thing, he is well persuaded that the
first collection of the Canons, of which we spoke, was made in the years 364
and 381 after the Council of Laodicea, and before that of Constantinople; he
brings the same reason as Usher drew from the Preface of Dionysius, to which he
adds these two proofs. First, That in the sixteenth Decree of the Council of
Chalcedoa, the Secretary Constantine after having read the Canons of Nice in a
Copy which appeared, like to that of Dionysius Junior; then he comes to read
those of Constantinople as thus, Synodicon Concilii Constantinopolitani. It
seems to be the Title which is before the Canons. Secondly, That in the Title
which is before the Canons of Ancyra, Neccesarea in the Greek Copies in that of
Maynce and in many other Latin Editions, those who made the collections, say,
that they have first placed the Canons of Nice, because of the authority that
this Ecumenical Council had over the Provincials. The same reason would have
made him join the Council of Constantinople to that of Nice, if the collection
had been made after the first Council.

Usher believed that the Edition of Crab, of Colon, contained not so much as
that of Maynce, but Ward sends him an Index, by which he may see the contrary.

Our Archbishop at the desire of some of his friends explains his opinion,
whether the benefits of the death of Jesus Christ be extend-to all, in the 22
and 23 Letters. He says that two extremities are to be avoided therein, the
first carried too far the benefits of the satisfaction of Jesus Christ, as if
by that God was on his side, actually reconciled, and really discharged all men
of their sins; so that if men were not satisfied of the Fruits of the death of
Jesus Christ, 'twas because they had not Faith; from hence it follows that God
forgave men their sins, and Justified them before they had Faith. The other on
the contrary has too much confined the satisfaction of Jesus Christ, as if no
body had any part therein, but those who were elected before the Creation of
the World, although the Evangelist commanded every one to believe that Jesus
Christ died for him; from whence it follows, that men in Conscience should be
obliged to tell a lie, and that they were commanded to embrace those merits
which belong not unto 'em.

Usher says, that in these two extremities there are inevitable absurdities, if
he should attribute the first to some Ancient Heretics, he thinks he should
not wrong 'em, but he is well assured that none in this Age has maintained this
opinion, which infers a sensible contradiction, nor is the Archbishop alone in
his opinion, almost all the Roman Church, the greatest part of Protestants, the
Lutherans, the Reformed, the Remonstrants, etc. maintain it. We ought to
distinguish between the satisfaction considered absolutely, and the application
that God has made thereby to every particular Person. The first was once done,
says he, for all men, and the second is always doing. The satisfaction of Jesus
Christ has put men in an estate of obtaining pardon for their sins, but in the
particular application that God thereby makes, he grants them actual pardon.
Usher confirms and explains this thought by diverse passages of Scripture and
diverse examples; but as these subjects have been more largely treated of since
that time, He writ ^t in 1617.
it is not necessary to dwell longer thereon.

In the 49th Letter directed to the famous Seldinus, he proves by Walafridus
Strabo, that in the beginning of Christianity, they put themselves to little
trouble to what place soever they were obliged to go, they assembled together
to pray to God, although the use had been since to turn to the East.

In this collection is found some Letters of an English Merchant, called Thomas
Danyes, who lived at Aleppo, and sent to our Bishop many Books of that Country,
and among others a Samaritane Pentateuch, the first that was ever seen in
Europe, in the 81 Letter he says, he had learnt of a Jew, that the Samaritanes
pronounce the name of God Iehova quite otherwise than we read it, to wit,
Iebueh.

One Ralph Skinner a Learned English man dedicates a Treatise of Maimonides
translated into English, to our Archbishop, and his Epistle Dedicatory makes
this the one hundredth and second of this collection; he shows there the error
of this Jewish Doctor, and the use that may be drawn from the reading of his
Works, he reduced his principles to six errors. He believed, First, That the
Stars and Celestial Spheres were living Beings. Secondly, That God never
Repented but once, viz. in the destruction of the first Temple, he made the
Just perish with the Wicked. Thirdly, That the Law of Moses was Eternal.
Fourthly, That Man has a free Will to do Good or Evil. Fifthly, That those
Promises which God has made by the Prophets are Temporal, which should be
accomplished upon the Earth, when the Messia should come. Sixthly, That the
Kingdom of Judah was given to the Posterity of Iechonias after his Repentance,
whereas Salathiel was the Son of Neri.

Provided that they take care of these six Errors (says Skinner) there may be
drawn six considerable advantages from the reading of Maimonides. First, We may
profit from his Hebraical Speeches. Secondly, He teaches diverse Sentences of
the Jewish Doctors. Skinner has marked these two things in the Treatise he
dedicated to Usher in placing 'em in the Margin or marking 'em with an Index
(3) we may find in Maimonides the expressions and Maxims of the Thalmud which
serve to explain diverse manners of speaking in the new Testament. (4.) Passages
of the Ancients, otherwise explained after an uncommon manner. (5.) The Civil
Laws of the Jews, and the punishments inflicted for every crime. (6.) The
Doctrine of the Rabbis, touching the Judaical Religion.

First Skinner gives diverse examples of the third use that may be made of the
works of Maimonides, we will relate three or four by which the rest may be
judged of. St. John says, Apoc. 74. I heard the number of those that were
Sealed; there was one hundred forty four thousand Sealed, (...) of all the
Tribes of the Children of Israel. This manner of speaking is often found in the
Holy Scripture, as also much used in the style of the Rabbis; witness this
passage of Maimonides in his Treatise of Repentance, Chap. 3. Sect. 3. As he
examines the Justice and Iniquity of man, at the day of his death, even so he
weighs the Iniquity and Justice of every man in the first day of the same year,
he that is found just is sealed for Life, and the Wicked for Destruction, but
as for those who are between these two estates they are sent back to be judged
in the day of expiation, if they repent they are sealed for life, if they
continued in impenitence, death was to be their inevitable reward.

2. St. Paul cites a passage of Scripture to the same purpose, Ephesians. 5.14.
Wherefore says he, Awake ye that sleep; Arise from the dead, and Christ shall
give you light. They unprofitably plague themselves to seek this passage in the
Scripture, for there it is not: In vain they look for it in Isaiah; the 26.19.
the 60. and 18. or in the Apocriphal pieces which are attributed to Jeremiah,
from whence the Christians might insert it. Skinner tells us that St. Paul
makes this allusion from a custom of the Jews which Maimonides mentions, and
paraphrases the words which he finds amongst the Jews upon this occasion. 'Twas
the Custom ( says Maimonides in the same treatise Chap. 3. Section four) to
sound a trumpet the first day of the year after which the public Crier
pronounced these words Awake, Awake you that sleep. Although this Custom of
sounding the trumpet was commanded by the Law, Levit. 23.24. he observes
another thing from these Words of the public Crier? 'twas as much as if he
should say, you that sleep awake from your Drouziness, you that perpetually
sigh cast away your Grief, examine your, works return to your duty by
repentance, and remember who it is that created you.

Thirdly our Lord in speaking of the Sin against the Holy Ghost tells us that
it shall neither be forgiven in this World, nor in that which is to come, Matt
12.32. The Rabbis have also a manner of speaking very like this, there is a
Sin which is punished in this World (says Maimonides) in the same Book, Chap.
6. Section 189. and not in the world to come, there is a sin also which shall
be punished hereafter and not now, and one that shall be punished in both, thus
our Lord has said, that those shall be punished in this Life and the other,
that should blaspheme against the Holy Ghost, and it is this which has happened
to the Jews, who attributed to the Devil the Miracles of our Savior, they
suffered a thousand evils in this Life by the Tyranny of the Romans, and dying
in impenitence they are delivered to the pains of the next, which they have
merited thereby.

Fourthly, Jesus Christ forbids his Disciples to Swear, he commands they shall
be contented to say, yes, yes, no, no, it is or it is not, Mat. 5.32. Maimonides
also says, that the commerce that is between the wise is full of truth and
fidelity, they answer No to that which is not, and Yes to what is. Lightfoot
cites this last passage in his remarks of the Thalmudists upon St. Matthew, In
Pec. c. 5 13.
but he has not observed the others. Skinner farther shows some passages of
the Rabbis in the four following Letters, but as there is nothing very
considerable, so I shall tarry no longer upon 'em.

A little before Usher had finished his History of Godeschalch, of which I have
spoken. S. Ward Dr. in Divinity, wrote to him in a Letter dated May 25. 1630.
That he had encouragement to wish this History would be more famous and correct
than any thing of the same nature then extant. He adds to that, that he doubted
not but that there were Semipelagians or Divines of Marseille, who first placed
the Predestinarians in the Catalogue of Heretics, he found therein nothing
that surpised him, but that the Predestinarians were first called those
Heretics who were not of the opinion of St. Augustine: thus Divines have
always done the like. Ward believes that it is Arnobius, Author of a commentary
upon the Psalms, who first treated of the Heresy of the Doctrine of St.
Austin, about Predestination Vid. Psalm. 100.146.
and who gave the name of Praedestinati, to those who maintained his Doctrine,
he lived according to Ward before Tiro Prosper, Faustus and Gennadius. He
approves of the conjecture of the sixth Age, who thought that Arnobius lived in
the time of St. Augustine, because that his commentary upon the Psalms, is
dedicated to Laurentius and Rusticus African Bishops, who were of the Council
of Carthage, when St. Augustine was there. Although Ward found not these names in
any Council of Carthage, he easily persuades himself, it may be because that
two Bishops of Africa, both called Rusticus sign^d the Synodical Letter to
Innocent the First, where they condemned Pelagius and Celestius. It is the 90th
Letter amongst the Epistles of St. Augustine, and was written in the year 416.
Two years after the Council of Carthage was held* where the preceding Councils
were confirmed; 'twas composed of 217 Bishops* amongst which was St. Augustine,
but there was but 24 who signed 'em, and among their names was found Laurentius
Iositanus. Besides, Erasmus in the sixth Age, has remarked in this Arnobius
many Latin words which were very much in use in Africa in St. Augustine's time.

This is the reason which Ward brings to prove that in the time of St.
Augustine a Divine who dedicated a Book to two African Bishops, had the
boldness to accuse his Doctrine of Heresy. Nevertheless he finds not that this
Arnobius was censured for it. It Is not that Ward approves his Sentiments or the
name that he has given to those of St. Augustine, but on the contrary, he
speaks of it with Indignation.

He adds that Arnobius was followed in that by Tiro Prosper, who must be
distinguished from Prosper Aquitanus, a disciple of St. Augustine. Ward found
these words in In the Binnit College.
a Manuscript of this first Author, the 24th year of Arcadius and Honorius.
Praedestinatorum haeresis quae ab Augustino accepisse initium dicitur, his
Temporibus Serpere exorsa. The Heresy of the Predestinarians, which as it is
said has taken its birth from St. Augustine, begun to spread in this time.
After him Fausius and Gennadius have given this ill name to the Doctrine of St.
Augustine, and particularly the last, although Sigebert (adds Ward) says that the
opinion of Predestination was produced from the ill Interpretation of some
places of St. Augustine from whence they draw these false consequences.
Nevertheless it seems that these of Marseille and some Africans in the time of
St. Augustine maintained this opinion of the Predestinarians (as Sigebert
relates) was drawn from St. Austine by mistaken Inferences, as it appears by
the objections of Prosper and Hillary proposed to him, which have been related
by others.

There is in 162 and 163. Letters, some fragments of a discourse of the same
Ward with William Bidell Bishop of Kill-more in Ireland, touching the efficacy
of the Sacraments, and particularly that of Baptism, and in the 205 Letter, the
opinion of Usher concerning the Sabbath, which he believed to have been
observed from the beginning of the World, which made some enquiry among the
Heathens, of which the greatest part looked upon the seventh day as Sacred,
which he proves by many passages after Salmatius and Rivet, etc. He shows
afterward in what manner the Apostles consecrated the Sabbath, particularly by
this passage of St. Ignatius to the Magnesians: Non amplius sabbatizantes, sed
secundum Dominicam Viventes in qua and vita nostra orta est. But this matter
has been more largely treated upon by others, and Usher confesses when he read
the Fathers, he collected nothing upon this subject, because he thought there
was never any controversy about it, produced amongst the Divines.

Those that desire to understand all the Ancient Characters of the Saxons, may
find an Alphabet thereof in the 253 Letter from Dr. Longbain, as also diverse
Letters that treated by the by of Chronological questions and Astronomy, but as
there is nothing complete or very considerable upon these abstruse matters,
upon which few persons will give themselves any trouble, 'twas thought
unnecessary to make any extract thereof.

I shall say but one word of the 267 Letter, addressed to Lewis Cappel, where
our Archbishop takes against him, the part of Arnold Boat; the difference that
was between these two Learned men may be reduced to these two heads: First,
Boat believed there was very little variety of reading in the Old Testament, as
the differences of Keri and Chelib and of the Eastern and Western Copies, and
that these varieties were not to be found but by the means of the Massore and
from the Hebrew Manuscripts. Cappel on the contrary maintains, that the number
of these varieties are very great, that they may be collected from many ancient
Copies, and particularly that of the Septuagint, although much corrupted. The
Archbishop says also that we cannot have such assurance upon this version, where
there are many prodigious faults, and so very many differences that the Authors
connot be made use of but as an Original very corrupt, even without speaking of
the errors produced by malice; but there is no Book of the Scripture where they
are so far from the Original as that of Job, which by the Authority of Origin
and St. Jerome, is proved that these Interpreters have cut off a great number
of verses. Usher maintains after St. Jerome that they added and changed several
passages: He says 'twas occasioned by malice, to keep from the Greeks the
knowledge of the Sacred Oracles, having shown in some places that they were
very capable of translating it well, had they been Inclined thereto, as in the
Book of Ezekiel. where they are much more conform to our Hebrew than in the other
Books of the Scripture according to the works of St. In prolog. in Ezekiel.
Jerome: These Sentiments of Usher are not to be wondered at, when we consider
what has been said of his opinion concerning the Author of the Translation of
the 70. Secondly, Boat and Usher believed that they began to work at Massore
immediately after the time of Esdras, whereas Cappel maintains that it was not
so much as thought on, till 600 years after Christ -- Usher endeavors to
maintain his Sentiment by a proof drawn from the Gemare of Babylon. Which makes
mention of Certain Scribes who counted all the Letters of the Law, and marked
that Vau which is in the word Gachon, Levit. 11.24 is exactly in the middle in
regard of the number of the Letters, etc.

On which occasion Usher speaks of Joseph, and tho he confessed to Cappel that
Philo did not know the Hebrew, he agrees not with the Jewish Historian who had
written his History in Hebrew, as himself says, and who drew it from the
Original Hebrew, Usher says nevertheless, that he has not done it faithfully.
As Jerome Xavier the Jesuit says, it is not long since he gave the History of
the Evangelists to the Persians, which he has adjusted as himself pleased,
Joseph gave formerly to the Greeks the History of the Old Testament, changing
therein, and adding thereto many things drawn from the Apocriphal Books. It Is
thus that he says Solomon Reigned 80. years in stead of 40. and that he says
David Left for the use of the Temple 100000 talents of Silver instead of
1000000 He adds to the Text an account of Moses Age, from three years of the
War he made with the Ethiopians, and of Tharbis son of the Ethiopian King,
which conceived a great love for him, etc,

Usher speaks also of the Samaritan Pentateuch from whence he brings 5. or 6:
Copies first into Europe: He believes that it was corrupted by one Dosthes or
Dositheus which in the time of the Apostles was supposed to pass for the Messia
amongst the Samaritans -- this is founded upon the Authority of St. Tom 14. in
Joac.
Origin who assures us in express terms that this Dositheus corrupted the
Pentateuch in many places. He afterward brings some passages in the Samaritan
Pentateuch, where he maintains that the numbers or the words were changed, he
even believes that Hebrew was intermixed with the Greek Septuagint: If that
were true, we ought not to be surpised to find that this translation is more
conform to the Samaritan text than the Hebrew. Usher also pretends that there
is not more variety of reading any where than in the Greek Version.

Tom. 8. p. 174. The Antiquities of the British Churches, in which is inserted
the History of the Pestiferous Heresy, introduced into the Church by Pelagius
a Britain, against the Grace of God. To which is added an historical Exposition
of the most important dispute about the Succession and State of the Christian
Churches. By James Usher Archbishop of Ardmagh, Primate of Ireland. The Second
Edition, Each part Corrected and Augmented by the Author himself. At London
1687. in Fol. page 738.
THE British Antiquities of Usher, are composed of three parts, the first
contains six Chapters, and includes the fabulous History of the Progress of
the Christian Religion in England, since the year XLI. of Jesus Christ, to the
year CCI. The Monks of the last Ages have almost entirely invented it, and
whatsoever truththere may be in it, is so mingled with gross lies, that in
diverse places of the Pagan Fables, are found more footsteps of truth than in
these Monastic Histories. Neither does Usher propose them as true, he is so
far from that, that he advertiseth the Reader to believe nothing of it, by
these terms of the Epicharme. Ex Cicad. Attic. lib. 1. ep. 7.
Watch, and Remember to be incredulous, are the sins of Wisdom; and by these
words of Euripides: In Helena, Act. 5.
there is nothing more profitable to mortals than a wise incredulity.

(...)
(...).
As it is certain that a great many men do but too much follow this maxim in
our Age: So it cannot* be doubted but a great part of Christianity has need
enough to be put in mind thereof.

What is most likely in it to be true, is, according to the testimony of
Gildas, which has been related elsewhere, that some person Preached the Gospel
in England toward the end of the Reign of Tiberius, which continued here until
the time of Dioclesian. At least Tom. 1. page 351.
Tertullian and Origin reckon England amongst those Countries that in their
time had the Gospel Preached unto 'em, and Maximianus Herculius, violently
persecuted the Christians which he found here in the year CCCIII. It Is what
Usher tells us Chap. 7. Where begins what we have called the second part of
his Work. It may be that many things might be added to the precedent, which he
says there upon the Faith of the Monks, of the great number of Martyrs that
Maximianus put to death, and of the circumstances of their punishments. Howbeit
it is certain that Dioclesian and Maximian, having voluntarily quitted the
Empire in the year CCCIV. and Constantius Chlorus being declared Augustus* he
put a period to all violences of what nature soever in the Provinces of his
Jurisdiction, and England was amongst the rest, in which the Monks assure us,
that he built some Churches, but dying two years after at York his Son
Constantine, who till then had been but Caesar, was proclaimed Augustus by all
the Roman Army, which had lately got a signal victory over the Picts. This
gives occasion to our Archbishop to seek into the native Country of Constantine
and of Helena his Mother in the eighth chapter. page 93.
The Country of this Princess is very doubtful, although the Monks affirm she
was of Treves, yet is it not unlikely to be true that her Son was born in
England, as it may be seen in our Author, who builds his opinion chiefly upon
these words of Eumenius in his Panegyric of Constantia: O fortunata and nunc
omnibus terris beatior Britannia, quae Constantinum Caesarem prima vidisti.

Usher afterward shows that some Bishops of England, assisted at the Council
of Arles in CCCXIV, and 11 years after at that of Nice, likewise at the other
Councils called upon the occasion of the ancient controversies. Notwithstanding
that hindered not Arianism to pass into Great Britanny, when Gratianus had
granted liberty to all the sects of the Christians, saving to the Manicheans,
to the Photinians, and to the Eunomians. But it seems that the Tyrant
Maximius, that favored the Orthodox, suffered not Arianism to take root in
England, where he began to Govern, in CCCLXXIII. some time after he sent hence
a great number of Inhabitants, which he established in Amorica, that is to say,
Low Brittany, which he remitted to one Conan Meriadoc, who was the person
according to the Monkish History, that obtained of Dionot, King of Cornwall his
Daughter Vrsula in Marriage, with 11000 Virgins of noble Birth, besides 60000
other Virgins of meaner families. All the World are acquainted with the Story
of St. Vrsula, and of the 11000 Virgins, and those that would know who has
refuted it may consult Usher, who relates it, with many reasons to show it is
but an impertinent Fable, although Baronius maintains the contrary.

In that time many people went to see the Holy places in Palestine, which was
the occasion of making known in the West the Books of Origin, which were
unknown there before Rufinus. Amongst others a Priest of Aquila, after having
lived three years in the East, and Studied under Evagrius an Origenist; imbibed
not only the sentime^ts of Origin, but returning into Italy, spread them every
where, by translating diverse of his works. It was of him that Pelagius and
Celestius learned at Rome this Doctrine, whereof we shall speak in the sequel.
They both were Monks, and of Great Britain, Celestius of Scotland, and Pelagius
of England, the second was called Morgan, in the Language of the Country that
is to say born of the Sea, or in Greek (...), a name given him out of his
Country. If In Pro^m. Dial. cont. Pel.
St. Ierom may be believed, Pelagius was an ignorant man, who could not express
himself, that was more to be pitied than envied; and Celestius a studier of
solecisms: but St. Augustine speaks advantageously of their wit in diverse
places, and indeed it is seen by the fragments that remain in his works, that
they expressed not themselves so ill as St. Ierom says. We have still two
pieces of Pelagius amongst the supposed writings of this last, whereof one is a
Letter to Demetriades and the other is entitled the Symboli explanatio ad
Damasum, whereas it should have been called Professio fidei ad Innocentium, for
it was to Innocent that Pelagius sent it. This last piece is also found in
Baronius, and in the first Tome of the Councils of the edition of Cologne in
1606.

Pelagius sojourned long enough at Rome, where he acquired much reputation by
his works and his conduct, whence it comes that Augustine Bishop of Hippona,
spoke honorably of him, and writ to him a very obliging Letter, before he
entered into a dispute with him. He calls him in his Book de peccatorum
meritis c. 1. and 3.
vir, ut audio sanctus, nec parvo profectu Christianus, bonus ac praedicandus
vir. He is, says he, a man as I am told, Holy and much advanced in Piety, a
man of Merit, and Praise worthy. Father Petau in his book Dogm. Theol. T. 3.
page 586
De Pelagianorum and Semi Pelagianorum Dogmatum Historia, remarketh that St.
Augustine composed the Book, in which he speaks so advantageously of Pelagius,
after the condemnation of Celestius in the Council of Carthage in CCCCXII.
Thence he concludes that it is not of this Pelagius, whereof St. Chrysostom
speaks in his fourth Letter, wherein he deplores the fall of a Monk of the
same name. There is no more likelihood that the Pelagius a Hermit to whom St.
Issiodorus de Diamette Lib. 1. Ep. 314.
has written great censures, be him that we speak of here, whose life was
always irreproachable, as appears by the Testimony of St. Augustine.

Rome being taken by the Goths in the year CCCCX. c. 19. p. 116.
Pelagius, who was there, departed and Sailed to Africa, yet he remained not
there, but immediately went into the East. Notwithstanding his Disciplie
Celestius stayed at Carthage, and aspired to be Priest of that Church, but as
he made no difficulty to maintain the Sentiments of his Master; he was accused
by Paulinus Deacon of the same Church, in a Council where Aurelius Bishop of
Carthage presided in the year, which is already mentioned. Celestius was there
condemned and excommunicated, as having maintained these seven Propositions. I.
That Adam was created mortal, and that he should die, whether he had sinned or
not. II. That the sin of Adam was only prejudicial to himself, and not to all
Mankind. III. That the Law opened the entrance into Heaven, as well as the
Gospel. IV. That before the coming of Jesus Christ, men were without sin. V.
That Children newly born are in the same State, as was Adam before his fall.
VI. That all Mankind dies not, by the Death and Prevarication of Adam, as all
Mankind rises not, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. VII. That man is
without Sin, and that he can easily obey the Commandments of God if he will.

Celestius answered to these Heads, but we have only part of his Answers in the
Books of St. Augustine; that is to say, that we have no other Testimonies of
his Doctrine, than his Adversaries, which have taken no great care to propose
clearly their accusations; nor to comprehend well the Sentiments of those they
accused, as appears by the obscurity of the Heads which we have read.
Celestius, Aug. de Pec. Orig. c. 6. etc.
says amongst other things, that as to what regards the Propagation of Sin; he
heard several Catholic Priests and particularly Rufinus deny it. He presented
a Petition to the Council, where he confessed the Children were redeemed by
Baptism, but he was condemned nevertheless, and being obliged to depart ou^ of
Africa, he retired into Sicily, where h^ writ some works in his Defense. It was
from thence that he sent to St. Augustine short questions which he had
composed, to prove that man of his Nature inevitably is not carried to do evil.
These Interrogations are in fourteen Articles, that Usher has related at
length. We shall mention here one or two of them by which the rest may be
judged of* Qu. 1.
First of all, says he, we must ask of those who say that man cannot be
without sin, what sin is in general? If it is a thing that may be avoided or
not? If it cannot be avoided, there is no hurt in committing it. If man can
avoid it, he may be without Sin. But neither reason nor Justice permit that,
that should be called a Sin which cannot be any way avoided. Qu. 2.
We must again ask, if Man ought to be without Sin? 'Twill be undoubtedly
answered that he ought. If he ought, he can; if he cannot he is not obliged.
Besides that, if man ought not to be without Sin, he ought to be a Sinner, and
'twill be no more his fault, if it be supposed that he is necessarily such.

In the same time Pelagius that was at Jerusalem, published diverse pieces where
he expounded more at length his Sentiments, p. 125.
and where he particularly granted that no man excepting Jesus Christ* had ever
been without sin, it did not follow that that was impossible. He affirmed, that
he disputed not of the Fact, but of the Possibility; and that yet it was not
possible, but by the Grace or the Assistance of God. St. Augustine has
undertaken to refute one of these pieces of Pelagius in his Book of Nature and
Grace. He accuses him on the one side, of confounding the Graces that God
gives us in Creation with those by which he regenerates us; and on the other
side to say that God gives his Graces, according to merit, and that these
Graces are but outward; but it shall be seen in the sequel how Pelagius
expounded his Opinion.

Three years after that Celestius was condemned at Carthage, his Master was
accused at Jerusalem of holding the same opinions. John Bishop of this City,
called an Assembly of some Priests to examine Pelagius, and to see if really he
held the Opinions that were attributed to him. For to know what was done in
Africa against Celestius. Into this Assembly were called three Latin Priests
Avitus, Vitalis, and Oros. This last was then at Bethlehem studying, as he
says himself, De lib. Arbit. p. 621. Edit. Moguntinae in S.
at the feet of St. Jerome to whom St. Augustine had recommended him. Whilst he
was in Africa, in the time of the Condemnation of Celestius, he related to this
Assembly at Jerusalem, with what zeal those of Carthage had condemned that
Heretic, and said that St. Augustine had made a Book against Pelagius, and had
besides in a Letter written into Sicily, refuted the questions of Celestius.
Having this Letter about him he offered to read it, and did so, at the entreaty
of the Assembly.

After this reading the Bishop John desired that Pelagius should be introduced.
It was permitted by connivance, says Orose, whether for the respect they had
for the Bishop, or that it was believed fit that this Prelate should refute him
in his presence. He was asked if he acknowledged to have taught, what Augustine
Bishop of Hippona had refuted. He instantly answered who is this Augustine? and
as all cried out; that a man, who blasphemed against a Bishop, by the mouth of
whom, the Lord had kept an Union in all Africa, ought not only to be banished
from this Assembly, but from all the Church; John ordered him to sit in the
midst of the Catholic Priests, though a Laick, and guilty of Heresy. After that
he said to him, It Is I that am Augustine, that acting in the name of this
offended Bishop, can more freely pardon Pelagius, and appease enraged Minds. We
then said to him, continues Orose, If you represent here the person of
Augustine, follow his Opinions. He replied by asking us, if we believed that
what was read was against some other or against Pelagius? If it be against
Pelagius, added he, what have you to propose against him? I answered, by the
permission of the Assembly, that Pelagius had told me, he maintained man could
be without sin, and could easily observe the Commandments of God, if he
pleased. Pelagius confessed it was his opinion. Thereupon I said this that
'twas that which the Bishops of Africa had condemned in Celestius, which
Augustine declared in his writings to be a horrible Doctrine, and that which
Jerome had rejected in his Epistle to C^esiphon, and which he refuted in the
Dialogues that he then composed. But the Bishop of Jerusalem without hearing
any thing of all that, would have us to bring parties before him against
Pelagius. We are not, answered We, the Accusers of this man, but we declare
unto you what the Brethren and our Fathers have judged and decreed touching
this Heresy, that a Laick publishes now, lest he should trouble you, the
Church, into the bosom of which we are come. Then to engage us in some sort to
declare our selves parties, he begun to instruct us, in what the Lord says to
Abraham, Walk before me and be thou upright; and what is said of Zacharia and
Elizabeth, that both of them were just before God, and walked bamleless in all
the Commandments of the Lord. Many amongst us knew that that was a remark of
Origin; and I answered him; We are Children of the Catholic Church. Exact not
from us, O Father, that we should undertake to raise our selves into Doctors,
above the Doctors, nor into Judges, above the Judges. Our Fathers whose Conduct
is approved by the Universal Church, and in whose Communion you rejoice to see
us, have declared these Maxims damnable. It Is just that we should obey their
decrees: Why do you ask the Children, what they think after having learned the
Sentiments of their Fathers?

The Bishop said after, that if Pelagius maintained that man could be without
sin, without the help of God it would be a damnable Doctrine, but that he did
not exclude the help of God, and asked what we had to say to that? If he denied
the necessity of this assistance? We answered Anathema to those that did deny
it; and we cried out that he was a Latin Heretic, that we were Latins, that he
was to be judged by Latins, and that it was almost an impudence in him to
pretend to judge thereof, seeing we were not Accusers. As he said that I was
the only witness against Pelagius, and that I was suspected, some of the
Company thought themselves obliged to say, that the same Person could not be
Heretic, Advocate and Judge at the same time. The Conclusion was that Pelagius
should be sent to the Judgment of Innocent Bishop of Rome, and that in the mean
time Pelagius should be silenced.

Thus it was that this Assembly ended, where Pelagius that knew but the Latin,
spoke by an Interpreter to the Bishop of Jerusalem who could only speak Greek.
There was held a Synod at Diospolis in Palestina, toward the end of the same
year CCCCXV. where were fourteen Bishops. Eros and Lazare Bishops of the Gauls
had given to Euloge Archbishop of Caesarea, an accusation in writing against
Pelagius, but they could not be at this Synod, because one of them fell sick by
the way. Pelagius appeared and answered to all the heads of the accusation that
were proposed against him, so that the Council declared him absolved, and even
approved his Doctrine, according the Interpretations he gave it. Here is in
brief, what all was reduced into.

Aug. de Gest. Palest. Syn.
Pelagius was accused of maintaining these Propositions. I. That none can be
without Sin without knowing the Law? He answered, he meant nothing else by
that, but that the Law was a means to avoid Sin, and not that this knowledge
was solely necessary to avoid Sin.

II. That all men are led by their own will. He confessed this Proposition in
saying, that although Man has his Free Will, when he chooses the Good, it is
by the help of God.

III. That in the day of Judgment, God will not pardon the Wicked and Sinners.
It is, says Pelagius, the Doctrine of the Gospel.

IV. That Evil comes not only in Thought. To which he protested he had only
said, that Christians ought to endeavor to have no ill thoughts.

V. That the Kingdom of Heaven is promised in the Old Testament. He maintained
it out of Daniel c. 7.18.

VI. That Man can be without Sin if he will. Pelagius said that he had proved
that 'twas possible by the Grace of God, but that he never had taught that any
man had lived without Sin, from his Childhood to his Old Age. He also denied
the having maintained some other maxims whereof he was accused. He was
thereupon asked if he anathematised not those that were of that opinion? I do
anathematize them, said he, as Fools, but not as Heretics, for they are
ignorant of what they affirm.

VII. He was accused of maintaining some things that were condemned at
Carthage, which have been before related, and besides it, that a Child can be
saved without Baptism. He denied that he had taught any thing in the manner
they related it, and particularly that he had ever said, those that have lived
before Jesus Christ were without Sin.

VIII. In fine, some places were proposed to him, that were said to be drawn
from the Books of Celestius, but he told them he could not answer for what
another had written, and that he condemned such as maintained any Propositions
of that Nature. There was amongst others this Proposition, That Sinners which
repent obtain forgiveness of their Sins, not by the Grace and Mercy of God, but
according to their Deserts and Repentance. It may be that was only a
consequence, which was drawn from the Sentiments of Celestius, for in all this
controversy each Party has mutually attributed to themselves the advantage of
consequences either well or ill drawn, as express opinions. Besides this, these
propositions that Eros and Lazarus had drawn from the Books of Pelagius and
Celestius, being taken from the sequel of the discourse, might form a contrary
sense to what they intended in their Books.

The Council having approved of all these answers, declared him worthy of the
Communion of the Catholic Church. But the Enemies of Pelagius accused him of
having hidden his true Sentiments, and of deceiving these Grecian Bishops to
whom he spoke but by an Intrepreter. St. Augustine says, that the answers of
Pelagius were Orthodox, De gest. Pal. Syn. c. 1. and 2.
as the Fathers of the Council had understood them, and not as Pelagius
understood them. But those that have not so ill an opinion of Pelagius as St.
Augustine had, observe that he knew not the Greek, and could of himself have no
certain knowledge of the Sentiments of the Greek Church upon this matter. If he
had been capable, say they, of reading these Doctors, he would have found that
they speak no otherwise than Pelagius does, Vid. Bull. Harm. Apostol. Diss. 2.
c. 7.. 14. and Exa. Censur. p. 157.
as it may be seen by an infinite number of places of St. Chrysostom, and St.
Isiodorus de Diamette his Disciple, whom some Moderns have openly accused of
Pelagianism. It ought not therefore to be thought strange that Greek Bishops
should approve of the opinions of this English Monk.

Before the acts of this Council had been published, Pelagius writ to one of
his friends that his sentiments had been there approved of, and made his Letter
public. He also made a kind of an Apology in the year CCCCXVI. for this
Council, which he sent to the Bishop of Hippo, who having received no Letter
from Palestine ^urst not trust to it. He writ together with some other African
Bishops of John of Jerusalem to have the very acts of the Council of Diospolis.
Notwithstanding St. ^erome who had written against the Pelagians and
particularly against the Bishop of Jerusalem, was the occasion of a disorder
that happened at Bethlehem, where a Deacon was killed, and some Monasteries
burned. The Bishop was accused to have excited this Tumult, but there was no
time to call him to account, because he died that very year. St. Jerome also
having offended the Bishops of Palestine in despising their Assembly, thought
he could not better secure himself than in getting the friendship of those of
Africa, though they were not at all of his opinion, being of the Semi-Pelagians,
whereof we shall speak in the sequel of this History. Therefore he writ to St.
Augustine in these terms. I have resolved to love you, to honor you, to respect
you, and to admire you, and to defend what you say, as if it were my self that
had said it, mihi decretum est te amare, te suspicere, te colere, te mirari,
tuaque dicta quasi mea defendere.

Pelagius was every where accused of denying altogether the help of Grace; to
justify himself he composed a work of Free Will, where he showed that he
Petav. de Pal. c. 2. and Siqq.
acknowledged six sorts of Grace.

First, It Is a Grace of God, according to Pelagius, to have a Soul reasonable
and free, that is to say, that can obey, or not obey God without being
invincibly determined to the one or to the other. Pelagius maintained that all
men were born in this state, so that if they applied themselves to evil, it was
not by an invincible necessity, but in abu^ing of their liberty: St. Augustine
in the first place says, that we ought not to call that Grace, which after
this manner we receive from God by Creation, but only that which we receive
from him by virtue of our Redemption. But that is only a dispute of words. St.
Augustine denied moreover, that men were born in any other state than in an
absolute and unavoidable determination of doing ill, and said it was impossible
for them to do any good, without an immediate assistance from God, which he
gave but to some men, and that those who had this aid were unavoidably carried
to good. Thus although he admitted of free will; he gave to these words a new
sense, seeing liberty according to him, is no other than a simple Spontaneity,
and includes not the power of not doing what we do. The difference only that
was between St. Augustine and Pelagius, is that the first believed, that since
the sin of Adam, his Posterity had been so much corrupted, that they came into
the World with inclinations to evil, which necessitated them to it, that if God
had designed them to Salvation, it was necessary that in every good action, he
assisted them with his particular Grace, that would unavoidably carry them to
good, and that those he was not willing to give Grace unto were damned; God by
a Wisdom that we comprehend not, designed that Mankind should be born in an
unavoidable necessity of offending him, and to be after that tormented by
eternal punishments, without delivering from this sad necessity, but a very
small number of persons to whom he gives an invincible Grace. St. Augustine
believed that that was rendering to God the Glory that is due to him. Pelagius
on the contrary thought God had not permitted the sin of Adam to make so great
a disorder in the World, that those who were descended from him, were not in a
necessity of obeying, or not obeying the Law of God, which has given to them
the power of avoiding evil and doing good; so that it was but by their fault
alone that they were damned, not being compelled to crimes, and everlasting
unhappinesses by an unavoidable necessity. Having received of God the
Free Will, it was not needful that God intervened in each action. Usher p. 141.
To be able to do good, says Pelagius, comes from God which has given it to
his Creature, but to be willing to do good, and to be Virtuous, depend upon man.

The second Grace that Pelagius acknowledged is the remission of past sins,
which God grants to those that leave them off. Pelagius anathematised in the
Council of Diospolis, whosoever should dare to say that God had any regard on
this occasion to merit. St. Augustine complaining that Pelagius, contenting
himself to acknowledge that God forgiveth us graciously our past sins, granted
not that he aideth us in the non-commission for the future. But Pelagius
maintained that this pardon served us as well for the future, to carry us to
our duty, because we cannot apply our selves to serve God after having offended
him, but in the persuasion that he will pardon us what is past graciously. He
said likewise that afterward, in respect of the sins that were committed in
the very time of Repentance, that is to say, in the state of Regeneration, they
were forgiven us in consideration of our good works by which we also obtained
glory. And it is in this sense that he maintained Grace was given according to
merits, that is to say, according to our good actions. As Children before the
use of Reason commit no sin, so this Grace regards them not.

The third Grace according to Pelagius, is the Law, by which he understands the
Preaching of the Gospel, and the example of Jesus Christ, that those who have
lived under the old institution had not. He said that this Grace was altogether
necessary, to live conformable to Christianity.

The fourth sort of Grace is an interior illumination of our mind, that
Pelagius expressed in this wise, Apu^ Aug. lib. 1. de G^at. Chr. c. 17.
I maintain that Grace consists not only in the Law, but in the assistance of
God, etc. But God aideth us by his Doctrine and by his Revelation, in opening
the Eyes of our Mind, in showing us things to come, to hinder the present from
making too dead an impression, in discovering to us the Ambushes of the Devil,
in illuminating us by the diverse and ineffable gifts of his Celestial Grace.
Does it seem to you, says Pelagius, that those that speak thus, deny the Grace
of God? Do they not acknowledge rather the Free Will and the Grace of God
altogether? St. Augustine accuses Pelagius in this, not for having simply
denied Grace, but for denying its necessity; and for having said that God gave
it not but to the end that Free Will should be the easier carried to good. This
Grace according to Pelagius, produced not infallibly and by it self the will of
doing well, and good works, but induced only to will more easily.

The fifth is the Grace of Baptism, by which, according to him, although
Children receive not the pardon of sins that they have not committed, being,
according to Pelagius, altogether innocent, they enter into a better condition,
which consists in that they are thereby adopted by God, and become Heirs of
the Kingdom of Heaven. St. Augustine on the contrary affirmed that Children
being born sinners, Baptism does confer upon them the Remission of sins, and
sanctifies them by a Grace that God has applied thereto.

The sixth Grace finally consists, according to Pelagius, in eternal Life,
and in bestowing the Kingdom of Heaven. He is accused of having distinguished
these two things, and of having said that without the Revelation of the Gospel
Life Eternal could be obtained, but that God did not give the Kingdom of Heaven
but to those that were Baptized. According to Pelagius this Grace was given as
the effect of merit, (to wit,) that of a good Life. It is hard to know wherein
this distinction consists, of Eternal Life, and of the Kingdom of Heaven, and
to reconcile it with the accusation that was made against Pelagius* that the
Kingdom of Heaven was promised under the Old Testament. St. Augustine said by
this last Article was to be understood the legal covenant, that it promised not
Eternal Life; but if that were all that was meant by the Books of the Old
Testament, it was true that it was promised, though there was no mention made of
the Kingdom of Heaven, this phrase of the New Testament. There never was a
dispute more intricate than this, because each of the parties finding
themselves pressed by some ill consequence, endeavored to save themselves by
terms, to which they gave a different sense, from what they had in the mouth of
the Adversaries. The word Grace, in that of Pelagius signifies not the same
thing as in that of the Bishop of Hippo: and this latter gave the name of
Liberty to a thing that was not commonly so called. In short many men believe
that if we take the pains to examine the principal words that have been made
use of in this controversy, and the Ideas that have been applied to 'em, it
will be found that almost none of these Ideas are distinct, so that when the
word is spoken to which it is applied, we may perfectly know what is meant by
it. There are also according to them some of these words to which there has
been no Idea absolutely applied, so that in some places of this dispute the two
parties do very nigh the same thing that a French man and an Arabian would,
that should know their natural tongue only, and speak by turns the lowdest they
could, and sometimes both at once without understanding each other, and then
each should boast to have conquered his Adversary.

This was chiefly what the opinions of Pelagius consisted in, and those of his
Adversaries touching Grace. As to the election it seems Pelagius has
believed that there were two sorts the one to Grace, and the other to Glory.
God has resolved according to his Judgment to call certain persons to the
knowledge of the Gospel, that they might the more easily arrive at everlasting
happiness. This was the predestination of Grace. He after that has resolved to
save those that he foresaw would persevere until the end in making good use on
these favors. This is the Predestinatiof to Glory, which is founded upon
merits; whereas the other is purely of Grace. St. Augustine in disputing against
Pelagius, has confounded, p. 614. ibid.
as Father Petau believes, these two Predestinations, and made thereof but one;
because according to his opinion all those, that have received the necessary
means to attain Salvation do infallibly arrive at it. 'Twas that made him
exclaim so strongly against those that maintained Predestination, according to
works, as if the Predestination to Grace was in question, whereas they meant
but the Predestination to Glory.

The year after the Council of Diospolis being Anno 415. there were in Africa
held two Councils upon the same matter the one at Carthage, and the other at
Mileve. Aurelius Bishop of Carthage presided in the first, where were LXVII.
Bishops more met together also. They had not as yet received in Africa the Acts
of Diospolis; but Eros and Lazarus had written what had passed therein, and had
sent their Letters, by Orosius who was returned from Palestine to Africa. It
was resolved on the hearing this Relation to anathematize the opinions of
Pelagius, to hinder them from spreading any further, and to anathematize him
after, with his Disciple Celestius, in case they did not absolutely renounce
these Errors. After that they sent the Acts of the Council to Pope Innocent,
to engage him to condemn the same opinions. The Council of Mileve consisting of
LXI. Bishops, in which Silvanus Primate of Numidia presided, did the same thing
as that of Carthage. Besides the Synodal Letters of these two Councils,
Innocent received particular ones from some Bishops of Africa, among which St.
Augustine was one. The design of these Letters was the same as of the preceding
ones; the design being to incline Innocent to condemn the Doctrine attributed
to Pelagius, and to cite him before himself to examine, whether he continued to
maintain the same. They insinuated that they might accomplish their end, that
it might be, that Pelagius had deceived the Bishops of Palestine, though they
could not positively affirm that the Churches of Africa, might not be joined to
those of the East. Innocent answered the year following (ccccxvii) to the two
Councils, and to the Bishop that had written to him in particular. He said he
believed that Pelagius and Celestius did deserve to be excommunicated, and that
the former could not be purged at Diospolis, but by Equivocations, and by
obscure expressions. Nevertheless having received no new assurances from that
Country, and not knowing well how things had passed there; he says, he can
neither approve nor disapprove the conduct of the Bishops of Palestine. He
likewise excuses himself in regard of citing Pelagius upon the distance of the
places. This Bishop writ these Letters at the beginning of the year, and died a
little after, for the tenth of March, in the Martyrology of Beda is marked for
the day of his death.

After the death of Innocent, C. 10.
St. Augustine and Alypius writ to St. Paulin Bishop of Nola, to exhort him to
oppose Pelagianism in Italy, provided he was in a Condition of making any.

An historical Explication of the most weighty Question of the continual
Succession and State of the Christian Churches; especially in the West, from
the Apostles time until the last Age. By James Usher Archbishop of Armagh, and
Primate of all Ireland. Augmented and Revised by the Author. London 1687. in
fol. p. 191.
THe principal difficulties, which Roman Catholics raise against Protestants
consists in these two things; that the Protestant Religion is new, and that it
was not remitted from the Apostles unto us; whereas they pretend theirs is that
of the Apostles, and has suffered no Interruption, from their time unto ours.
John Iuel Bishop of Salisbury has undertaken, in his Apology for the Church of
England, to show on the contrary, that the opinions of Protestants are
conformable to those of the Fathers of the six first Ages: Usher was willing to
answer the above cited difficulties, in showing that from the sixth Age unto
the Reformation, to wit, during 900 years, there have always been Churches in
the West who have received the same Doctrines with the Protestants. To that end
he thought he ought to give the History of the Tenets, and conduct of the Popes
with those who have opposed their Usurpations, during these nine Ages; without
mixing any thing of his own; being contented to cite only the proper terms of
the Authors, who have spoken of those times, for fear he should be accused of
turning things after a more favorable manner for the Protestants. This History
had once appeared imperfect enough, but now very much corrected and enlarged in
this Edition, and therefore we shall give a complete Abridgement thereof. We
shall not however stay to relate what the Author says as concerning the
thousand years, during which the Devil was to be bound, and the time in which
he was to be set free. As there are as many different Sentiments as
Interpreters upon this opinion; and that there are but simple conjectures
brought, which are likewise subject to a thousand difficulties; 1. Those who
have a mind to be instructed therein may consult the Commentaries upon the
Apocalypse. At what year soever men relate the beginning of the thousand years,
whether it be from the Birth of our Savior, or from his Death, and his
Ascension, or finally from the ruin of Jerusalem, our Author equally draws his
advantage as will be seen in the sequel. It shall suffice to say that he
divides his work into three parts, whereof the first goes from the seventh Age
to the eleventh, in which Gregory the seventh arrived to the Pontificate: The
second should have gone to Mccclxx, but the Author could not continue it but to
Mccxl. The third reaches to the past Age. So this work is far from being
perfect, and we know not what those meant, who had the care of this Edition, in
putting in the Latin Title, Opus integrum, unless these words signify only,
that there have been inserted, in diverse places, additions which the Author had
made.

1. For to conceive well the change; which happened by little and little in the
Christian Church, we must begin at the Original, and consider the State in
which it was for the first six Ages. Hegesippus assures us that during the Life
of the Apostles, Heretics scarcely durst appear, but that as soon as these
Holy men were dead, a great number of them were seen openly to oppose the
truth. In that time diverse Philosophers attacked the Christian Religion, with
so much the more boldness that the Christians were destitute of Persons who
could refute the Pagan Religion, and defend Christianity with sufficient
eloquence. This is what Lactantius testifies in these words; Si qui sort
literatorum ad eam contulerunt, defensioni ejus (veritatis) non suffecerunt.
And a little lower, after having named Minucius Faelix, Tertullian and Cyprian,
quia defuerunt apud nostros idonei, peritique Doctores, qui vehementer, qui
acriter errores publicos redarguerent, qui causam omnem veritatis ornate
copioseque desenderent; provocavit quosdam hac ipsa penuria ut auderent
scribere contra ignotam sibi veritatem. This scarcity of able men made many
Heretics to slip in amongst the Christians, and easily seduced the weak and
ignorant who were in a very great number. But as soon as there were Christian
Emperors, the corruption was much greater; pleasures began to be introduced
into the Christian Church, and amongst Ecclesiastics there appeared Enmities
and Divisions. And because Bishops were rich and considerable they made use of
all manner of means to attain Bishoprics, and when they came to it, they
assum^d a Tyrannical Authority. These disorders always increased, until they
came to a great head, as Usher shows is too evident by many passages of famous
Authors, who have left us frightful Characters of the corruption of their Ages.

It increased particularly in the time of Boniface III. who came to the Chair
in Dcvi. and who obtained of the Emperor Phocas the title of Ecumenick Bishop
and Chief of the Church. The Historians of that time describe this Phocas, as
the wickedest man in his Age, and Cedrenus says that a holy Monk having asked
of God several times, why he had made Phocas Emperor? a voice from Heaven at
last answered him. Because I have found none worse, This History true, or
false, marks, the horror People had for the memory of Phocas. Usher believes
that it was then that Antichrist came into the World, and that he was during
some Ages but in his Childhood. Boniface, according to him, contributed not a
little to the establishing and extending his Empire. Yet there were Assemblies
held, and courageous Persons found, that opposed the progresses of certain
Tenets, who have much contributed to the Grandeur of the Ecclesiastics in
general, and Popes in particular, amongst which our Author seeks for
Antichrist, as most part of the Protestants do.

A Council composed of cccxxxviii. Bishops condemned in the year Dccliv. at
Constantinople, the worship of Images, and gave this reason for their
proceeding; that there is but one Image, instituted by Jesus Christ, to wit,
the Bread and Wine of the Eucharist, which represent his Body and Blood.
Although the second Council of Nice opposed it, and re-established the worship
of Images in Dcclxxxvii. These Canons were rejected in the West by the Churches
of great Britain, as our Archbishop shows by diverse English Authors. The
Churches of Germany and France did the like, in Dccxciv. in the Council of
Francfort, the History of which may be seen, as well as that o^ Nice, in a
Dissertation of Mr. Alix's entitled; Dissertatio de Conciliorum quorumvis
definitionibus, expendendis, at Paris 1680 in 8 vo.

Charlemagne writ himself against Images, and sent what he writ to Pope Adrian,
who had had his Legates at the Council of Nice, and who had approved thereof.
But it is not the custom of Popes to learn Religion from any one. Adrian had no
respect to the remonstrances of Charlemagne whom he endeavored even to refute;
the Images were adored at Rome as much then as before, and his Successors did
as much as he. 'Twas this that obliged Lewis the meek to convocate in DCCCXXV.
an Assembly of learned men at Paris, who examined the question of Images, and
condemned their worship. They even collected a great many passages out of the
Ancients, who disapproved them, and sent them to Pope Eugenius II. by Jeremy
Bishop o^ Sens and Jonas Bishop of Orleance, with order to treat mildly of this
Affair, fearing that in resisting too much, they should engage him to an
obstinacy, whence he would not recede.

In DCCCXXXIII. The Sons of Lewis the meek having conspired against him, the
rumor run in France that Gregory the fourth was onward in his way to come
thither, to excommunicate Lewis, and those of his party, but the Bishops who
were engaged in the Interests of this Prince, declared, that they would submit
in no wise to his will; and that if he came to excommunicate them he would
return himself excommunicated. Usher besides relates diverse other examples, by
which it appears that the Liberty of the Churches of France and Germany was not
yet quite extinguished, even at the end of the tenth Age, seeing it was thought
strange that a Cardinal, sent from Rome, blessed a Chapel in the Diocese of
Tours, without the permission of the Bishop of that City. There are also
remarkable words of Arnulph Bishop of Orleance, in a Council of Rheims, held in
DCCCCXCII. where he says, speaking of the Pope: If he is destitute of Charity,
and pufft up only with his Knowledge, he is the Antichrist, who is seated in
the Temple of God, and who shows himself as if he was a God. But if he has
neither Charity, nor Wisdom, he is in the Temple of God as a Statue, or as an
Idol, from whom an answer can be no more expected, than from a Marble. Si
caritate destituitur, solaque scientia inslatur and extollitur. Antichristus
est in Templo Dei sedens, and se ostendens tanquam sit Deus. Si autem caritate
fundatur, nec scientia erigitur, in Templo Dei tanquam Statua, tanquam Idolum
est, a quo responsa petere, marmora consulere est. If this principle of Arnulph
is true, it is requisite the Defendors of Popes discover by what wonder they are
all full of Charity and Learning, although they appear in our eyes either
Ignorant, or Proud, and oftentimes both together.

Usher then shows, how that the Tenet of Transubstantiation was much
resisted, which began to be introduced in the ninth Age. He rangeth among the
Defenders of the spiritual presence, Rabanus Maurus, Bertram, John Scot
Erigene, and several others, upon which we may consult Mr. Arnauld and Claude
in their dispute upon the perpetuity of the Faith of the Church concerning the
Eucharist, and concerning Bertram, in particular his Work entitled: Ratramne,
otherwise, Bertram the Priest, of the Body and Blood of the Lord, printed in
Latin and French, with an Advertisement wherein in shown that this Author is a
witness not suspicious of the Faith of the Church in the ninth Age, at Roan in
12. But the efforts that a great number of Learned men made against the new
Tenets, which were introducing in that time, were unprofitable. Whereas those
Tenets were too advantageous to the Court of Rome, not to maintain them with
all their might. It lacked but one thing only, which was to diminish the power
of Emperors, to whom they were submitted until then. It worked powerfully
therein, and begun by publishing Suppositious pieces, in virtue of which the
Popes pretended that the Sovereignty of Rome and Italy belonged to them, and
that they had an universal Jurisdiction over all the Bishops of the World; to
that purpose tended the false Donation of Constantine to Pope Sylvester, and
the Epistles attributed to the first Bishops of Rome, of which Blondel and
several other learned men have shown the falsehood.

Notwithstanding the manners of the People, Monks, and Clergy were in the
utmost corruption, and a horrible account is given us of the depravation of the
tenth Age, drawn as well from the writings of modern Catholics, as from the
Authors of that time. The conduct of the whole Clergy, from the Bishops of Rome
with the least degree of Priests and Monks, was so far from the duties which
the Gospel prescribes us, that there have been few Ages, whilst Europe
continued in Paganism more corrupt, than that was. This is so known, that it is
needless to make a further stop thereat, and those who would be instructed
thoroughly in it may only consult Usher and the Authors whom he cites.

The eleventh Age is in like manner described, and they assure us that the year
M. after the Birth of our Lord, was afflicted with diverse* Prodigies, besides
War, the Plague and Famine which ravaged Europe a long-time, as it appears by
the testimony of diverse Authors, which may be read in Usher. In that time they
reckoned amongst Prodigies, the Comets and Eclipses, and the Historians, a
little while after, describe them to us in such frightful terms, as, if we
never had seen any, we should tremble for fear, in reading what they say
thereof. But when once one has a wounded imagination, nothing ordinary and
common is seen, all is great and wonderful; and we see even that which never
was, such as was perhaps the Dragon whereof Glaber Rodolphus speaks in his 11.
book c. 8. The Saturday night before Christmasday, was seen in the Air, says
he, a surprising Prodigy, a frightful Dragon, which was all Shining with Light,
and which went from the North to the South. The evils of that time and the
reports of these prodigies, true or false, made it to be believed that the time
was come in which Antichrist was to appear, after that the Dragon should be
untied. This was probably enough grounded upon what is said in the Apocalypse,
that the Dragon was to be chained during a thousand years, and then let loose.
These thousand years were reckoned, from the Birth of our Lord, by which the
Devil had begun to lose his Power, until that time. This calculation was not
new, seeing it is found conformable to that of St. Hippolita's Martyr, of St.
Cyril and Chrysostom. It appeared without doubt more just and better grounded,
so that they expected from day to day the coming of Antichrist and end of the
World. Many People made a difficulty to undertake any considerable business,
and even of re-establishing the Churches which were destroyed, fearing they
should work for Antichrist. Lastly when they saw it did not come, they were
persuaded that they did not well understand the Prophe^y, and went about
rebuilding the Churches, and to live as before. Richard Victorinus of Scotland,
who upon the relation of John Major his Compatriot is the first who maintained
that the Holy Virgin was exempted from Original Sin, says in his Commentary
upon the xx. Chap. of the Apocalypse, that as to the Letter the thousand years
were already accomplished a long time since, but that it could not be known
when Antichrist would come, nor when the Serpent would be unloos'd. Thus it is
that the Interpreters of Prophecies which they understand not, never miss of a
back door to escape at, when the event shows that they are mistaken. There is
a great likelihood that our age will furnish us with some examples of this
truth. As it is desired, in great evils, to know if they shall last long, those
who of late have arrived to a great many Protestant Churches, have made a great
many to covet a knowledge of the time to come, some thought they foresaw it in
the obscurity of the Praedictions of the Apocalypse, and have foretold it with
sufficient boldness, though they agree not amongst themselves, no more than those
who undertook to do the same thing the eleventh and twelfth age.

Glaber Rodolph says, that in effect the Devil was let loose in 1000, because
one Vilgard who taught Grammar at Ravenna, and some others had essayed in that
time to reestablish Paganism, But this event appears too inconsiderable, to
apply unto him what is said in the Apocalypse of the Dragon, who was to be
loosed. Also our Archbishop believes that Antichrist was not to be be looked
for out of Rome, and that the Devil was enough at liberty, whilst in the
Pontifical Chair sat a Magician, such as was Sylvester II. if the Authors of
that time may be believed, and whilst great errors were brought into the
Church; as the infinite Power of Popes, Transubstantiation, and Prayers for the
Dead. And it is observed that Berengarius, Wickliff and his Disciples, have
maintained that from that time this Prophecy of the Apocalypse begun to be
accomplished. There have been notwithstanding some who have believed, that the
thousand years were to begin at the Ascension of our Lord, as John Purvey
says, and Wickliff seems not far from this thought in a place of his
Trialogue, which Usher cites. Some persons had already been of this opinion in
the time of St. Augustine, as he testifies in his City of God, l. XVIII. c. 53.
But these people speak with more precaution than the others, for they did not
positively say that the World would end 1000 years after the Ascension of Jesus
Christ, but only that it might be, that there were but a thousand years from
this term, unto his last coming, annos mill ab Ascensione Domini usque ad
ultimum ejus adventum compleri posse. One of the new Interpreters of the
Apocalypse has said the same, with much prudence, that the present Persecution
may end in three years and a half. God, if he will, says he elsewhere, can
reckon the three years and half of the death of the Witnesses, from the
Revocation of the Edict of Nants.

To return to our Author, he remarks that the same prodigies have been related
of the year MXXXIII. and the same evils, as of the year M. There was also
toward that time a Mortality and Famine, and Signs from Heaven appeared, to
wit, Eclipses and Comets, besides, Earthquakes that were in diverse places. And
that there should nothing be wanting of what had appeared at the beginning of
this Age, one Arnulph a Monk of Ratisbone, testified he had seen in Hungary a
Dragon suspended in the air, and altogether like the Leviathan, whereof mention
is made in Job. It came also out of the North, and after having appeared
sometime as unmovable, he began to fly with an extraordinary swiftness, and
went amongst the Clouds whisling horribly, where he raised Lightnings and
Thunders, for more than 24 hours. Notwithstanding ignorance and superstition
increased from day to day. A Bishop of France, at the relation of Sigebert,
would fain make people believe that he had received Letters from the third
Heaven, wherein all men were ordered on Friday to live upon Bread and Water, to
bear no Arms, to recall nothing, by way of Justice, what had been taken away by
violence, and not to pursue the Murderers. Heaven promised Salvation to those
who should live thus, not having need of any other penitence but to abstain
from flesh on Fridays. There were Bishops so simple or superstitious as to
believe, and impose those new Laws upon many under pain of Excommunication, and
of being deprived of Burial, if they died in the refusal thereof. In this time
likewise were discovered many Relics of Martyrs, which had been unknown in
former Ages. Glaber relates that an Impostor sold in diverse places of France
Bones of dead Folks, which he had gathered in some Church yards, for Relics of
Saints, that afterward did an infinite number of Miracles, and which much
benefited the Churches in which they were placed. Fearing he should be
suspected, and that men would desire to know whence this inexhaustible fund of
Relics came, he stayed not in one place, and changed his name when he changed
his Habitation. He gave amongst others to the Inhabitants of the Alps and
Tarantoise a Martyr, to whom he gave the name of Just, and who did, as it is
said, so great a number of Miracles, that the sick were carried from all parts
to be cured, and that the Saints were sorry if they had not some disease
whereby they might have an opportunity to be cured by him: Poenitet insuper si
non est sibi morbus quo curari se poscat. Glaber attributes these Miracles to
the Devil, and mightily censures the Bishops of that Country, for not having
put a stop to such extravagances of the People.

The Pope who ascended the Apostolic See in the year MXXXIII. was Bennet IX.
whom Glaber accuses of all manner of impurities, and Cardinal Baino of
Idolatry and Magic. This Pope coming to the Chair at the age of XII years,
lived eleven years only, but he committed so many crimes that he was driven
from Rome, and was forced to sell his dignity, whereof notwithstanding he would
not be deprived afterward, so that there were at Rome three Popes at once,
Bennet, Sylvester and Gregory. The disorders of that time are too known to make
any stop at them, it will suffice to say that the memory of this Benet, was in
so great a detestation, that there ran a report that his Soul had been sent
after his death into the body of a Monster, which was shaped like a Bear, and
which had the Ears and Tail of an Ass, where he was to stay till the day of
Judgment, that he would be sent without remission into Hell.

It was at the beginning of this Age, as our Author shows, that the dignity
of Cardinals begun to be considerable, but it came not to the height till they
only had the privilege of choosing Popes; since they have been equalled to
Kings, and have carried their Pride so far, that Nicholas de Clemangis
Archdeacon of Bajeux, who lived in the year MCCCCXVI. describes them in these
terms. The Pride of Cardinals, who sit at the side of the Pope, is so
excessive, their words are so fierce, and their ways so insolent, that if a
Painter would make a Picture of Pride, he could not better do it than in
Painting a Cardinal: Cardinalium qui Papae assident spiritus, verba tumulentia,
gestus taminsolentes, ut si artifex quisque vellet superbiae simula^hrum
effingere, nulla congruentius ratione id facere posset, quaam Cardinalis
effigiem oculis intuentium objectando, etc.

It has been seen that according to our Author, the term at which the Devil
was let loose, expired a thousand years after the Birth, or after the passion
of our Lord. He afterward says that if men will take the beginning of these
thousand years, from the destruction of Jerusalem, it may be said with as much
likelihood, that they are in effect expired in MLXXIII. that the Monk
Hildebrand ascended the Apostolical See, and Governed the Church with the
utmost Tyranny, under the name of Gregory VII. The unheard excesses which this
Pope committed, made the honest men of that time to say, according to the
relation of Sigebert, in his Chronicle, upon the year MLXXXVIII. that the Reign
of Antichrist then begun, according to the Prophecies of the Apostles. Waltram
Bishop of Naumbourg, or the Author of the Apology for the Unity of the Church,
says in these terms. That is seemed then that the Devil was come out of
Prison; whereas it is written in the Apocalypse, he went forth to seduce the
Nations, and to engage 'em to War, etc. The Church of Liege, in its answer to
Paschal II. says as much, as well as diverse other Authors cited by Usher, who
describe Hildebrand as the most wicked of all men. He was accused of Witchcraft
in a Synod held in MLXXX. and several Catholic Writers have sufficiently
declared the same thing, which gives occasion to our Archbishop of applying
unto him what St. Paul says of the man of sin, that he was to come accompanied
with the work of Satan, and with deceiving Miracles. And also what St. Paul
says elsewhere of some Impostors, who were to come in the latter times, and
which he describes by two remarkable characters, which is, that they would
interdict Marriage, and order the abstaining from Meats, which God has created
to be eaten with thanksgiving. In effect Gregory VII. did 'em both in two
Synods assembled the sixth year of his Popedom, wherein he prohibited the
Marriage of Priests, and the use of Flesh on Saturdays. Sigebert de Gemblou and
Lambert de Schafnabourg, have written at large the murmurs and disorders which
these prohibitions caused. Priests said particularly, that it was unjust to
constrain men to live like Angels, and that in stopping the ordinary course of
Nature, the bridle was let loose to Fornication and Impurity. They added that
if the Pope grew obstinate in his Sentiment, they would rather quit the
Priesthood than Marriage, and that Gregory who despised men, should take the
care of providing himself with Angels to govern the Church. These good men
without doubt spoke with much sincerity, and it may be if those, who have
endeavored to blacken the conduct of the Reformers, in that they have
introduced anew the Marriage of Priests, would let nature speak, they would not
say less. But it is a great unhappiness, and a great prejudice at the same time
against the deluders of Virginity, to live in a Church, whereof they are
constrained to defend all the Sentiments, unless they would dishonor and
destroy themselves.

In fine, the Authors of the time of Hildebrand, and those who have written
since, give him several times the name of Antichrist, and it cannot be denied,
at least, but that it is he who has established the excessive authority of
Popes, and who the first durst to maintain that they have the power of deposing
Kings, and to change what they please in the Canons. It is no more than may be
seen in the Decretals of the Edition of Rome, whereof Usher cites diverse
scandalous articles. He also gives the History of the quarrels which this Pope
had with the Emperor Henry IV. and relates all the evil that has been said of
the first. And with this he ends the first part of his work, which was to have
extended to the time in which the Devil has been let loose.

II. As it is in the Apocalypse, that a thousand years being past, the Dragon
was to be unloos'd for a little time, Usher begins his second part by the
explication of this place, and remarks that according to the maxim of
Aristotle, nothing being called great or little, but by relation to another
thing, the time in which the Dragon was to be unchain'd should be short, in
comparison of the time during which he had ravaged the World, before he had
been put in Chains.

Roman Catholics demand of Protestants, where the Church was then, if the Pope
was Antichrist? Usher answers that the Church was then in the state, in which
some Ancients, and diverse Catholic Authors have said that it would be under
the Reign of Antichrist. St. Augustine in his XX Letter, which is directed to
Hesychius, says that the Church appeared not, because of the excessive cruelty
of the Persecutors. Ecclesiam non apparituram, impiis tunc Persecutoribus ultra
modum saevientibus. Several ancient and modern Authors, have spoken to the same
effect: Usher takes occasion from hence to make a parallel of the State of the
Churches, which followed the Council of Nice, in the times that the Arians were
the strongest, with that wherein the West was found in these corrupt Ages. The
Arians reproached others with their small Number, and their Poverty, as it
appears by these words of Gregory of Nazianza: Where are those who upbraid us
with our Poverty, who say that the greatest Number forms the Church, and who
jeer the smalness of our Flock? But as there lived in the Roman Empire several
People who were not Arians, Usher conceives that under the Government of the
Pope there was a pretty great number of Persons, who were not of these opinions.

To show that he does not advance a simple conjecture, he gives the History of
the Original Opinions of the Vaudois, who have rejected several of the
Sentiments of the Church of Rome. But he speaks more of them in the sequel, as
being a place wherein he should properly speak of them, which obliges us to
pass to the vii. Chapter, and afterward we will return to the Vaudois.

Usher divides the time, during which the Dragon has been delivered from his
Prison, into three Periods; the first reaches to the time of Innocent III. The
second unto Gregory XI. And the third unto Leo X. The first comprehends two
Ages, taking it is beginning from the year 1000. The State the Western Church
has been in during the first of these two Ages, and the complaints that the
Authors of that time made against Corruptions, which were equally seen in the
Ecclesiastics and People. There have been no less complaints made of the
Disorders of the twelfth Age, as is plain in our Author, who relates a great
number thereof, amongst which is this famous distich of Hildebert Bishop of
Man's, who says in speaking of Rome, Vrbs foelix, si vel Dominis Vrbs illa
careret!
Vel Dominis esset turpe carere fide!


Happy City, if it had no Masters! or if those who possess it believed it a
shameful thing to want Faith.

The Popes took great care in that Age to have paid to them from England a kind
of Tribute, that they called St. Peter's pence, which Alexander II. in a Letter
written to William the Norman says, had been paid by the English, ever since
they had embraced Christianity. It appears by this Letter, that the English
sent this Money at first to Rome, only through Liberality; but this Liberality
becoming a Necessity, because the Kings commanded absolutely to do it, the
Authors of those times looked upon it as a Tribute. Therefore Bertold of
Constance, who lived toward the latter end of the eleventh Age, says that it
was then that the Prophecy of the Apocalypse was accomplished; which says,
That no Person could sell, or buy, without having the Mark or Name of the
Beast, or the Number of its Name. The Reason of this is, that according to the
Relation of this Author, in his Appendix of Hermannus Contractus toward the
year Mlxxxiv. William the first King of England rendered his whole Kingdom
Tributary to the Pope, and suffered none to sell or buy, but such as submitted
himself to the Apostolic See, that is to say, before he paid the Rome-scot or
penny of St. Peter. Notwithstanding this same William refused to swear an Oath
of Fealty to Hildebrand, and punished Bishops and other Ecclesiastics, who had
offended him, as he thought fit, without having any regard to the Prayers and
Exhortations of this Pope. Some other Kings of England resisted the Popes
likewise with the same vigor, and we have proofs that the opinions of Rome
were not yet spread every where. Here is one that is pretty remarkable, which
is that Frederick Barbarousse being gone into the Holy Land to fight the
Infidels in Mclxxxix. Niaetas Choniates observes, that the Germans were
welcomed by the Armenians, because the adoration of the Images of Saints was
equally prohibited with the Armenians and Germans. Hereby it appears that they
had not as yet forgotten in Germany the Council of Francfort. It is also
remarked that several English Authors, who have written after the arrival of
the Normans, said that the Church had in abhorrence the worship of Images. The
Doctrine even of Lanfranc concerning the Eucharist, which the Normans brought
into this Island, was contrary to diverse ancient Forms and Writings of the
English. And this is the cause that a long time after the Condemnation of
Berengarius, there were in this Country several People of his Opinions, against
whom Matthew of Westminster, published a Book in the year Mclxxx. Our Author
gives the History of Berengarius in this Chapter, but this matter having been
treated at large in French Books, by Arnauld and Claude, the Reader will be
there better satisfied. We shall only take notice here, that toward the middle
of the twelfth Age, they had an Idea of the Sacrifice of the Eucharist far
different from that which the Roman Church has at this day, seeing Peter
Lombard Bishop of Paris, who is called Master of the Sentences, speaks thereof
thus, l. iv. did. 12. What is offered and consecrated by the Priest, is called
a Sacrifice and Oblation, because it includes the Memory and Representation of
the true Sacrifice and Immolation made upon the Altar of the Cross; Jesus
Christ, adds he, once died, and has been immolated upon the Cross in himself:
But he is immolated every day in the Sacrament; because the Sacrament includes
a Commemoration of what was once made. Semel Christus mort^us est in Cruce,
ibique immolatus est in semetipso, quot idie autem immolatur in Sacramento,
quia in Sacramento recordatio fit illius, quod factum est semel.

The Beringarians have given exercise enough to some Popes successively one
after another. But the Vaudois, who begun to be known in Mclx. gave them much
more. Reinier a Dominican, and an Inquisitor, who lived in the year Mccl. less
than 100. years after the Vaudois, speaks thereof in these terms: Amongst all
the Sects which are, or have been, there has been none so pernicious to the
Church, as that of the Leonists; and this for three Reasons. The first is, that
it has lasted longer, for some say, that it has been from the time of
Sylvester, others from the time of the Apostles. The second, because it is more
general, for there is scarcely any Country, where some of this Sect, are not
found. The third is, that whereas all other Sects gave a horror to those who
so much as heard of them, by the excess of blasphemies which they vomited
against God, the Sect of the Leonists has a great show of Piety, because they
live well in the eyes of Men, and that there belief toward God is good, seeing
they embrace all the Articles of the Creed. They blaspheme only the Roman
Church and Clergy, against whom the multitude of Laics suffer themselves
easily to be overcome. Hereby we may see, that the Vaudois boasted then, that
there had been People since the Apostles time, who had been of the same
opinions with them, so that they pretended not that theirs begun only in the
twelfth Age. As to what concerns the purity of their manners, several of those
who have written against them, give them a good Name, as appears by the
passages -- which Usher cites thereof. An Inquititor says, with Ingenuity
enough speaking of them, Cognoscuntur Haeretici per mores and verba, sunt enim
in moribus compositi and modesti, superbiam in vestibus non habent, etc.
Heretics are known by their manners and Discourse, their Manners are
well-ordered and modest, and there appears no Vanity in their Clothes.

It is not easy to know their belief; because those who have spoken thereof do
contradict each other almost of them, and that most have endeavored to blacken
them the most they could. Monks are such Liars, and so well known for so long a
time, that one scarcely dares trust them, how little soever their Interest is
of telling a lie, and such are the principal witnesses which may be produced
upon this matter. Wickliff said facetiously enough in his Trialogue, that as it
is a Topic Argument to say, that a man is luxurious, because he is too well
dressed; it is also a Topic Argument to reason thus; this opinion comes from a
Monk, therefore it is false: for the lies of Monks, render this Topic Argument
evident. Sicut est Argumentum Topicum, quod homo comptus exhinc est luxuriosus:
Sic est Argumentum Topicum; ista opinio originatur a fratre, ergo est falsa.
Nam eorum mendacia faciunt evidentiam ad hoc Argumentum Topicum. If any would
have a more express Testimony of a Monk, let him read these Words of Thomas
Walsingham a Benedictine. This is a Monk, therefore he is a Liar, is as good an
Argument in form, and matter, as this Argument; That is white, therefore it is
colored. In ore cujuslibet, bonum fuerit Argumentum, tenens tam de forma, quam
de materia; hic est frater, ergo mendax: Sicut and illud, hoc est album, ergo
coloratum.

Usher shows that the contrary Testimonies of diverse Authors, that opinions
have been attributed to them which they never had. Their principal Heresy is,
that they rejected the excessive Authority of Popes, and that they condemned
the Tyranny, Disorders and violent Superstitions of Monks. They were called
Vaudois not only by one Peter Waldo, who according to some lived in MCLX, and
according to others much sooner, but also the Poor of Lions, or Leonists,
Insabbathavies, Cathares, or Gazares, Paterines, Publicanes, Agennese,
Petrobrusians, Henericians, Passagines, Iosephines, Arnaldists, Humilists,
Albigese, Goodmen, etc. These Names are drawn either from the opinions which
were attributed to them, or of some famous Doctors amongst them, or of places
where they lived, as our Author has at large shown in Chapter viii. It Is much to
be desired, that there was as much method as reading, and that the additions
which he made in the first Edition, were either better ranged, or better
distinguished from the Rest: For it must be granted that in this great
confusion are many repetitions, which all sorts of Readers are not equally fit
to digest.

Peter Waldo, according to some Historians, was of Lions and engaged himself
after this manner to form a new Sect. One of his acquaintance dying suddenly,
he was so frightened thereat that he gave all his Goods to the Poor, and so
drew many of the People, which he went about to instruct in expounding unto
them the New Testament. He was reprehended therein by the Ecclesiastics of
Lions; which made him withdraw into Gasconny, and into the neighboring
Provinces, where he always taught the People, and censured the manners of the
Ecclesiastics, praising voluntary Poverty, and blaming the covetousness of
Priests. A great number of Laics joined themselves to him, in spite of the
Excommunication, which the Council of Tours held by Alexander the III. in
Mclxiii, and the Bishops of each place darted against them. They assure us that
in the beginning there were no learned men amongst them, but that afterward
there were. So that we cannot be certain that they at first had all the
opinions which since appear amongst 'em; because nothing hinders, but that
there might be some introduced by learned men, who entered into this party. If
what Gaultier Mapes an Author of that time, says of the Vaudois be true, they
were also extremely ignorant in the time of the III. Council of Lateran held
under Alexander III. in MCLXXIX. This Author says, that some of them presented
to the Pope, diverse books of Scripture translated into French, with Comments,
and demanded instantly of him the Power to preach. Two amongst them, who passed
for the most able, were introduced in an Assembly, where Mapes was
Commissioned, as he says, to Question them. He asked of them, if they believed
in God the Father, the Son and Holy Ghost. They answered Yes. Do ye also
believe, added he, in the Mother of Jesus Christ? The Vaudois replied they did,
and made themselves thus, says the Author, to be laughed at by all Men.
Notwithstanding as it appeared not, that they were willing to desist from their
design, they were excommunicated in the Council, yet they continued their
Assemblies in Gasconny, and in the Neighboring places, where they begun from
that time to exclaim against the abuses they had observed at Rome.

History tells us, that Manicheans were mixed among them, though they were very
different in opinions, and some were burned who were discovered in diverse
places of France and Germany. St. Bernard has written in the following Age
against I know not what Heretics, whereof he speaks very contemptibly, and to
whom he also attributes, some of the Sentiments of the Manicheans. He assures
us, that they chose rather to die than to be converted, and that they not only
showed Constancy, but even rejoiced when they were led to the place where they
were to be put to Death. Mori magis eligebant, quam converti; nec modo
patienter, sed laeti, ut videbatur, ducebantur ad mortem. We may see hereby
that seduced Persons as sincerely believe a false Doctrine, as the Orthodox do
theirs, who defend the Truth, for infine, one would not be burned for what one
looked upon as a lie.

An Author of that time named William de ^uylaurens, in the Prologue of his
Chronicle, besides adds Arianism to them, and says, that they as well as the
Vaudois, though in different opinions (licet inter se dissides) agreed equally
against the Catholic Faith. They made the greater progress by reason that
Priests were fallen into the utmost contempt, whereof here is a proof drawn
from a vulgar way of speaking which this Author relates. To show that they were
far from doing a thing, they were accustomed to say, I would rather be a Jew;
But the Proverb changed, and it is said in Gasconny, I would rather be a
Priest, than to do that: Mallem esse Capellanus, quam hoc vel illud facere. Men
were every where so wearied with the Ecclesiastical Tyranny, and so scandalized
at their lewd course of Life, that those who spoke against them, were hearkened
to with Delight and Pleasure, as they did to one Arnand of Bresse a Disciple of
Peter Abailards, who went to censure them at Rome. The Poet Gunther speaks
thereof more at large, in the third book of his Ligurin, and concludes thus
what he says of 'em.

Veraque multa quidem, nisi tempora nostra fideles
Respuerent monitus, falsis admixta monebat.
Our Author relates diverse of the violent proceedings against them, and amongst
others a Declaration of Alphonsus King of Arragon, published in MCXCIV, wherein
he drives the Vaudois out of his Estates, prohibites his Subjects to give them
any succors, upon pain of Confiscation of all their Goods, and orders them to
add all manner of grievances and affronts, to beat and abuse them, yet upon
Condition they will neither kill nor cripple them, praeter solummodo laesionem
mortis, aut membrorum detruncationem. This is a cruel mildness, which sometime
Persecutors have practiced, and whereof it would not be hard to find fresh
Examples.

The second period of time, during which Usher believes the Dragon was let
loose, extends from the beginning of the Pontificate of Innocent III. unto the
beginning of that of Gregory XI. to wit, from the year 1194. unto 1370.
Innocent endeavored not a little to establish the indirect Authority of Popes,
over Kings, and that which they pretend to have over all the Bishops of the
World. He named himself, in a discourse which he made upon the Consecration of
Popes, the Spouse of the Church. He maintained that all Bishops were but his
Vicars, and that it was he alone, who retained an absolute Episcopal Authority.
So that other Bishops might say of him as of God, we have received of his
fullness. He caused a Synod to be held at Rome in MCCXV, which is called the
fourth of Lateran, where he confirmed a Canon of the III. Council held in the
same place, by which Alexander III. had absolved from the Oath of Fidelity the
Subjects of a Prince, who had favored Heretics, against the Remonstrances of
the Court of Rome. Here are the terms of the second decree. If a Temporal Lord
required and advertised by the Church, neglect to purge his Lands from the
pollution of Heresy, let the Metropolitan and the other Bishops of the
Province excommunicate him. If he makes not satisfaction in a year, let the
Sovereign Pontif be advertised, that he may declare his Subjects absolved from
the Fidelity which they owe him, and give his Country to be possessed by
Catholics, who, having rooted out the Heretics, may possess it, without any
contradiction. As this Decree is quite contrary to the Authority of Princes,
some Catholic Authors, who have lived in places, where this indirect Authority
of Popes is refused to be acknowledged over the Temporalities of Kings, they
say that the Canons attributed to this Council were suppositious, or at least
that things did not pass therein after a canonical manner, so that these
Decrees obliged no Body. But a famous English Protestant has shown that these
Decrees are not suppositious; that they are obligatory, according to the
Principles of the Roman Church; that they have been received in England; that
the distinction of those who say that the Decrees of Councils oblige in matters
of Faith, and not in matters of practice are unreasonable and contrary to the
Principles of the same Church; and that though this distinction was true, it
could not exempt them from submitting themselves to the Decrees of the IV.
Council of Lateran. It was in this same Council that Transubstantiation was
established, and that a Croisade was published against the Vaudois, as it was
usually done against the Infidels. Antoninus in his Chronicle affirms that the
County of Thoulouse, and Lombardy being full of Heretics, who amongst other
errors endeavored to take from the Church all it is Temporalities ( omnem
Temporalitatem.) St. Dominick set himself to preach against them, and converted
a hundred thousand of 'em. He took, adds he, to his help some devout and
zealous Persons for the Faith, who conquered these Heretics corporally with
the material Sword, when they could not convince them with the Sword of the
Spirit. Quae corporaliter illos Hereticos gladio materiali expugnarent, quos
ipse gladio verbi Dei amputare non posset. They were called the Brothers of the
War of St. Dominick.

At that time Innocent established an Inquisition at Thoulouse and in other
suspicious places; because the Bishops being employed about their temporal
Affairs took no^ care enough to extirpate Heresy. St. Dominick was Commissary
over Gasconny, and established his Order there that they might assist him in
the Work; there never was before regular and perpetual Inquisitions. Another
Order of begging Monks was established, besides that of the Dominicans, to wit,
the Minor Brothers founded by St. Francis, and that of the Augustines, as an
assistance to the Bishops and Pastors. But it soon appeared that instead of
helping them they pretended to take the care upon themselves alone, which the
Pastors were invested with; this necessarily caused a great many complaints, as
our Author sufficiently shows. There was particularly a great quarrel in
MCCLIII, betwixt the University of Paris and the Preaching Brothers; which was
hard to be appeased, because the King favored the University, and the Pope
upheld the Monks* who pretended to a Right of Teaching Divinity without having
any regard to the Laws of the University. During this quarrel John of Parma an
Italian Monk, and General of the Minors, published a Book entitled the Eternal
Gospel. This Book was full of Impieties, and of as strange absurdities as those
of the Alcoran. The Author amongst other things maintained, that the Gospel
should be abrogated, as not being capable of conducting to perfection, and that
this was reserved to the Order of the begging Monks, who in the latter end of
the World should teach a Doctrine much more perfect than that of Jesus Christ.
This Book was condemned at Rome, and the Author was obliged voluntarily to quit
his Charge, with the least noise that could be, not to irritate an Order then
powerful enough, and which was of great use to the Court of Rome. A Book was
also condemned, which four Doctors of the University of Paris had read against
the former, entitled, De periculis novissimorum temporum. It was burned at
Anagnia, where the Court of Rome then was, and at Paris likewise, not for any
Heresy which it contained, says William de Nangis* a Monk of St. Denis, who
lived in MCCC, but because it might give scandal and cause a Sedition among the
Monks.

Since the time of Peter Abailard, to wit, from the year MCXL. the Philos^phy
of the Age, as Trithemus says, begun by its vain curiosity to corrupt Divinity.
The new Order of the begging Monks furnished Doctors, which accomplished its
Destruction by the Philosophy of Aristotle, and a thousand ridiculous
subtilties. There was amongst the Franciscans in MCCXL. Alexander de Hales, who
was called the Doctor of Doctors, the source of Life, and the irrefragable
Doctor. He commented on the first four Books of the Sentences of Peter Lombard,
and summed up all the heads of Divinity, by order of Innocent IV. About the
same time Gaultier Bishop of Poitiers made the first work de Quodlibetariis,
which gave birth to the custom of disputing for and against all sorts of
Propositions. Bonaventure, Surnamed the Seraphick Doctor, was their
Contemporary, and so much esteemed by Alexander de Hales, that he was
accustomed to say, it seemed to him that Adam had not sinned in Bonaventure.
John Duns a Scotchman, who flourished at the beginning of the IV. Age, and who
was a Disciple of the same Alexander, acquired to himself the glorious Surname
of Subtle Doctor. Thomas Bradwardin, had toward the middle of the same Age,
that of Profound Doctor. The Dominicans also have not failed of having Divines
also in their party, whereof these are the two chief: Albert Bishop of
Ratisbone, who died in MCCLXXX, Surnamed The Great, even during his Life, and
Thomas Aquinas, the Angelical Doctor, who was his Disciple. There has besides
been in this Order the famous Durand de S. Porcien, Surnamed, the most Resolute
Doctor, resolutissimus. There was at the same time a Carmelite named Gilles
Romanus, who was called the most Profound Doctor, Doctorem fundatissimum; and a
little time after, in the Order of Cisteaux, Alain des Isles, who was named the
Universal Doctor.

Usher has also collected without much Order, diverse things concerning the
Original and Sentiments of the Vaudois and Albigese, and there begins to make
the History how they were persecuted, from the beginning of the third Age,
until the year MCCXL. (As these events are found in diverse French and Latin
Histories) we shall not relate them.

Here is only an Example of the barbarity of that Age. William le Brebon
contemporary Poet, says in his Philippide LXVIII, with an Ingenuity particular
to himself, speaking of the taking and sacking of Beziers: 60000 Souls had
their throats cut, which the inordinate fury of the Vulgar, and the
indiscretion of the Ribaldorum killed, without the consent of the Governors,
making the faithful die with the incredulous, and not much mattering which
deserved Death, or ought to have his Life saved.

Yet what he says of the Consent of the Heads of the party is not altogether
True. Arnold Abbot of Cisteaux, since Archbishop of Narbone, and Legate of the
Pope in this occasion, was so much afraid that some Heretic should escape,
that he ordered the Soldiers to cut off indifferently all those they met. He is
a witness not to be suspected who tells us it, to wit, Cesaire de Heisterbach
Monk of the same Order, in the Diocese of Cologne, and who lived in the time
this Massacre was. Knowing, says he, by their Confessions, that there were
Catholics amongst the Heretics, they said to the Abbot, what shall we do,
Sir? we cannot distinguish the good from the bad. But the Abbot and the rest
fearing that the Heretics would counterfeit themselves to be Catholics, only
for fear of Death, and should return to their old Heresy, when the Army
withdrew, the Abbot, I say, answered, as they tell us; kill them, for God
knows those who are his: Caedite eos, novit enim Dominus qui sunt ejus.

If Usher could have continued, he might perhaps have recovered Authentic
pieces, to end his History. There was one seen, a little while since, which
could have served his purpose, and would be of great use to those who would be
willing to prosecute his design. It is an Original Register of the Inquisition
of Thoulouse, written and collated by two Notaries of the same Inquisition,
which contains what it has done against the Albigeses for sixteen years, from
the year Mcccvii, to the year, Mcccxxiii. The forms of the Oath are therein
which Civil Judges tendered to the Inquisition, to defend it, and not to protect
Heresy directly or indirectly; and the Excommunication which was designed
against those who favored it; amongst whom were reckoned even those who
accused those Heretics which were of their acquaintance. There is the process
of a great number of Persons condemned for Heresy, to diverse punishments
according to the exigency of the case. Some of those were condemned who
repented, after having kept them some time in Prison to put upon their clothes
violet coulor'd Crosses; which they thus wore all their Life, not being
suffered to appear with other clothes, and with this clause that the
Inquisition reserved a full power of changeing the Sentence pronounced, as it
should be thought fit, whether those who had been condemned to wear the Cross
were accused anew, or whether there was no accusation at all. Those whom they
resolved to mortify by a sad imprisonment were kept between four Walls, where
they were constrained to go of themselves, and where they were nourished only
upon Bread and Water. The obstinate Heretics were put into the hands of the
Secular. There was at that time in Gasconny of diverse sorts, as well as before.
In this Register are Vaudois, and Albigeses condemned for diverse pretended
Heresies, as of denying Transubstantiation, and the seven Sacraments of the
Romish Church, of maintaining that we shall not rise in spiritual Bodies, etc.
There have been besides Baguins, certain Monks of the third Order of St.
Francis, who thought that it was not lawful for them to possess any thing
whatever, who called the Pope Antichrist, because he suffered the Religious of
St. Francis to possess Riches, and who suffered themselves to be burned rather
than to retract these Fantastic Opinions. There is also the Condemnation of
diverse Manicheans. And the proceeding against Peter Ruffit, who quite to
overthrow Concupiscence, had with a Woman the same commerce, as some Priests
had with Young Women in the time of St. Cyprian, a Custom which lasted so long,
that the Council of Nice condemned it. As being used in the beginning of the
fourth Age, and that St. Basil, St. Chrysostom, and St. Jerome, employed all
their Eloquence to cure several Ecclesiastics of this Custom in their time, an
exact account hereof may be seen in Mr. Dodwel's third Dissertation upon St.
Cyprian.

Two small pieces of James Usher Archbishop of Armagh. One of the Original of
Bishops, and the other of Proconsulary Asia, to which is added an Appendix of
the Privileges of the British Churches. At London, by Samuel Smith, 1687. in
8vo. And at Rotterdam, by Renier Leers.
THis is another Posthume Work of the Learned Usher, Archbishop of Armagh,
which sufficiently testifies that profound Learning that has rendered him so
famous, and makes him still respected as one of the Oracles of England. The
Question he starteth here has so employed the wits for some years past, that
instead of reuniting for the common Interest, they cannot without much ado calm
the Agitation; which this dispute has caused, though it only concerns Exterior
Order.

It is therefore pretended, that in this Work, Episcopacy is a Divine
Institution founded upon the Old and New Testament, and the Imitation of the
Ancient Church. Usher immediately remarks, that the chief of the Levites bore a
Title, which was translated in Greek by that of (...), The Bishop of the
Levites, he expounds these Words of the Apocalypse Write to the Angel of
Ephesus, as if the word Angel was the same thing as that of Bishop. The
Succession of the Bishops of Ephesus appeared evident enough at the Council of
Calcedon held in 451. And there it is likely enough that Timothy or one of his
Successors, was the Angel to whom the words of St. John are directed. St.
Ireneus says, that he had seen Polycarp, who was established Bishop of Smyrna
by the Apostles. Lastly he adds, that Tertullian in his Book of Prescription
against Heretics, and St. Irenaeus pressed the Heretics, by the Argument of
the Succession of Bishops from the Apostles unto their time; and chiefly upon
that of the Bishops of Rome, beginning with Linus, Cletus, or Clement, that the
Apostles had placed there, and continuing until Elentherius the twelfth Bishop
from the Apostles. And it was Eleutherius, who had the Glory of receiving into
the Christian Faith Lucius King of England with all his Kingdom: and that there
were Bishops so well established from that time, that ten years before the
Council of Nice, held in 325. three English Bishops assisted at the Council of
Arles.

After having proved the establishment of Bishops by the Apostles, Usher
examines the origin of the Metropolitans to whom he gives the same Antiquity.
For supposing as we have said, that St. John speaking of the seven Angels
understands nothing else but Bishops, he extends his conjecture so far as to
say, that St. John having written to the seven Churches of Asia without
denoting them more particularly, it necessarily follows, that they had some
Pre-eminence, and that they were distinguished by themselves; that is to say,
by their quality of Metropolis. He confirms it by this circumstance, that the
Prefects of the Romans resided in these Cities as Capitals, and that the
Adjacent Cities came for Justice thither. Whence he concludes, that they were
as Mothers to the other Churches. He concludes in showing it to be the
Sentiment of Beza and Calvin, and proceeds to the second part of his Work,
which treats of the Proconsulary or Lydian Asia.

He observes, that the Name of Asia properly belonged to Lydia, for they
pretend that Asia was the Name of an ancient King of the Lydians; and that it
was Vespasian, that made a Proconsulary Province on it. After that these three
Questions are resolved. The first if at the time of the Council of Nice, all
the Bishops were subject to the three Patriarchs of Rome, Alexandria and
Antioch. It Is proved by the very Canons of the Council of Nice, and by the
first Council of Constantinople assembled under Theodosius the Great, that each
Patriarch had Power no farther than the extent of his Territory, and over the
Bishops of his particular Province. And to inform us, where the Patriarchats
were limited, he says that, that o^ Alexandria comprised Egypt, Lybia and
Pentapolis; but that Africa, Thebes, nor the Mareotides were not subjected to
it. That of Antioch had not the whole Empire of the East, whereof
Constantinople was the Capital. But only all that extended from the
Mediterranean Sea toward the East, to the Frontiers of the Empire. That of
Rome contained ten Provinces. The Islands of Sicily, Corse and Sardinia were
three of them, and the Continent of Italy on the East Side made the other
seven, that the ancient Lawyers called Suburbicaries. But not to leave the work
imperfect, upon this Subject, he examines in what dependence the Churches were,
who set up no Patriarchs. To this purpose he observes, that the Roman Empire
was divided into thirteen Dioceses, seven on the East Side, and six on the
West Side, in all 120. Provinces. Each Diocese had a Metropolis, where the
Primate resided as well as the Praetor or Vicar, who decided appeals in Civil
Affairs, as also each Province had it is Metropolis. It will not be useless to
add, that though Primates had the same Authority as the Patriarchs, they preceded
them notwithstanding in Councils; and that Rome, Alexandria and Antiochia were
honored with this dignity, which gave them the Preference, because they were
the three chief Cities of the World.

The second Question is, whether the Bishop of Carthage was subject to the
Patriarch of Rome or Alexandria; and answer is made, that he was subject to
neither, because he was a Prima^e himself of one of the thirteen Dioceses,
whereof we have spoken.

As to Jurisdiction, he says, that according to the Canons of the Councils,
the order of the differences amongst Ecclesiastics, and all that concerned the
Clergy was immediately to be carried before the Metropolitan, and by an appeal
before the Primate without acknowledging the Superiority of the Patriarchs.
That which makes the difficulty is, that St. Augustine said that St. Cicilian
in his difference with Donatus, appeals to the Bishops beyond Sea. But answer
is made, that that ought to be understood of the Council, and not of a
particular Bishop, as that of ^ome, who would draw the honor thereof to
himself; and attributed that Right to himself from the time, that the Vandals
under their King Genserick destroyed all Africa; as the Popes have done since,
in regard to the Greek Church by the fall of the Eastern Empire.

The third Question is, an enquiry whether or no England ever depended on the
Patriarch of Rome; and its decided in the Negative. It had it is Primate, who
was the Bishop of York. For although London according to the Relation of
Tacitus, was already famous through commerce, notwithstanding the City of York
was the Capital, the Vicar of the Empire resided there, and the Emperor
Constance, Father of Constantine the Great died there.

If the Gallican Church has it is Liberties, the English Church is not wanting;
this is examined in a Treatise, which follows those we have already spoken
of, but it is not Vshers. The Author establishes for a Foundation, that under
the ancient Law, the Priesthood and Royalty was joined together; and that when
they were separated, the whole Authority always remained in the Person of the
Prince. Which is justified by the example of Solomon, who nominated Abiathar to
perform the Function of High Priest, and by other Examples inserted in the
request that was presented to King Philip the Fair, by all his Subjects against
the enterprises of Pope Boniface VIII. And he thence concludes, that the
outward Policy of the Church belonged always to the Prince, and that it is he
alone, who has the power to convocate Councils, and in particular by that of
Nice and Constantinople, which were assembled by the Authority of the
Emperors, and confirmed by Constantine the Great, and Theodosius the Great.
For though the Intrinsic Authority depended on the Word of God, the Extrinsick
nevertheless depended on the Imperial Seal, to give them the force of public
Law.

From whence he infers, Patriarchs were not erected but by the Councils and
Authority of the Emperors; and chiefly that of Rome, the Author evidently
demonstrates, this dignity was not attributed to it, but by the respect that
the Fathers and Councils had for the Capital of the Universe; which was adorned
with the Senate and Empire. To convince these who are most prejudiced in favor
of the Court of Rome; we shall relate but the terms of the last Council save
one. The Canon of the Council of Calcedon, as it is to be seen in the
Manuscripts of the Libraries of M. de Thou, and M. Iustel. He says, that the
Privileges of Rome were granted by the Fathers, because it was the Mistress of
the World; Quod urbs illa imperaret. Neither by Divine, nor Apostolic
Institution, as he observes, but a motive purely Temporal. Therefore also the
same Canon grants to Constantinople new Rome; the first rank after old Rome for
the same reasons, because it was also honored by the Senate and Imperial
Throne.

After that, the Author descends to the Privileges of the English Church; and
maintains it did not depend on the Roman Patriarch, because it was a different
Diocese, and that it was not in the number of the Suburbicary Provinces. This
Verse only is a proof on it.

Ad penitus toto divisos orb Britannos.
It Is also further justified by this particular circumstance, that the English
celebrated the Passover, according to the Custom of the East, and conformed not
to the West.

Having thus prepared the Mind, he shows that the Order of Parliament under
Henry the 8. who shook off the Popes Yoke was not a new Law, but the
re-establishment of the Ancient Laws, and Maxims of the Kings of England, who
have maintained in all Ages, that the Excommunications of the Pope were void in
England; and he brings many Examples to prove it. He thence draws this
Consequence, that the Church of England cannot be aspersed with the odious term
of Schismatic; because it has not raised Altar against Altar; that it has
kept it is Ancient Government, and can show a Succession of Bishops not
interrupted since the beginning of Christianity; and consequently it had
sufficient Authority to reform it self.

There is added to these Treatises, the advice of John Barnesius a Benedictine
Monk. Who much disapproved these flatterers of the Court of Rome, who have
incensed the Minds of men, in maintaining that the Kingdom of England owes any
homage to the Holy See, and have caused this breach with the Pope. He says, it
would be very happy, if the Pope for the good of Peace, would again receive
into his Communion the Kingdom of England, without rendering it dependant on
him, until a Council may cure the evil. But the Court of Rome never lets go its
hold, and it is long since that Pope Paul the fourth answered to this
Proposition of Barnesius. For the Ambassadors of England under Queen Mary,
asking him Absolution in the Name of the whole Kingdom, he omitted not to
demand of them if he might send an Exactor of the Tribute of St. Peter,
declaring unto them that they should not expect this Apostle should open them
the Gate of Heaven, whilst they retained his Patrimony upon Earth. Barnesius
confesses it is very hard to be submitted to the Pope, who when he pleases
Arms the Subjects against their King; and adds, that the Councils of Constance
and Basil having declared those Heretics, who hold that the Pope was not
Inferior to General Councils, the Modern Popes are in the Case of
Excommunication declared by these Councils. This he says, not to quarrel with
his Holiness, but humbly to insinuate unto him the means of bringing back so
fine a Kingdom into the bosom of the Church. Notwithstanding the good
Intentions of this poor Monk, have been very ill acknowledged; for he was sent
out of Paris, stripped of his habit, tied like a fierce beast, and
uncompassionately dragged to Rome, and there cast into the dark Dungeon of the
Inquisition, where he miserably expired.

An Extract of the Letters of Grotius, I. PART, The Subject, Critics and
Divinity.
WE have not seen until now but a very small Number of the Letters of this
Great Man; the Volume of those that he has written to many Learned Men of
France, which were Printed in Holland and Germany, contain two hundred and
four, and we find no more than sixty nine in the Volume of the Epistles
entitled, Amsterd. in Fol. 1684.
Praestaentium ac Eruditorum Virorum Epistolae Ecclesiasticae and Theologicae,
which he has written to some other of his Friends in Holland and elsewhere.
Besides all those which have appeared abroad until now, one may see in this
Edition a great number that have been drawn from his Papers, and the Public
(without doubt) will receive 'em with the same satisfaction. In these he has
excepted against some Divine Pieces Printed for Monsieur Bleau in the year 1679.

This Volume is composed of more than two thousand five hundred Letters that
are placed according to the order of the time in which they were written: The
first whereof was directed to Monsieur Thou, and dated the first of April 1590.
and the last, which was to William Grotius, bore date the 18th of July 1645.
just a month before the death of the Author, which happened the 18th of August
following. It Is true, there is about 750 Letters at the end, which could not be
put in the same order with the former, because they were received too late,
notwithstanding they were mixed together in this same Method.

These Letters treat of an Infinite Number of Subjects, but without stopping at
those which contain nothing very important, as are the Letters of pure
Civility, or those which speak of Domestic Affairs, I shall relate here what I
find most curious on Critics, Divinity, Law, History and Politics: These are
the five Heads to which one may reduce all that is remarkable in the Epistles
of Grotius.

Things belonging to the Critics.
1. To begin with Critics, we find in the 54th Letter of the first part,
Advice to Monsieur de Maurier touching the manner whereby he ought to regulate
his Studies. But as this Advice is fitted to the Age, Charge and Employ of this
French Ambassador in Holland, it shall not be related in particulars. He gives
also to his Brother in the third Letter of the second part, that which he
judges the most proper Method for the first Studies of those who are designed
for the Law.

The Original of the Latin Tongue.
Grotius being at Paris after he was escaped from the Prison of Louvestein,
received Visits there from many Learned Men, and amongst others, from Monsieur
Peires^, who has done so much honor to the Ingenious of his time, and who
has also received from them the praises that he merited. In these Visits they
often discoursed of Science, as it appears in the first page of the 107th
Letter, where Grotius proves something that he had before advanced in a
Conversation: It Is this, that the Latin Tongue has very few words that come
from the Phrygians, from whence the Latins drew their Original, or from the
Hetrurians, which was the most Ancient Tongue of Italy, from which we may
believe the Romans had theirs. He shows that the Original of the Latin must be
sought in a Dialect of the Greek Tongue, because that the Greeks inhabited a
part of Italy, as well as the Neighboring Isles, from whence it is called Magna
Graecia, very near that which he calls the Kingdom of Naples. They formerly
divided all the People that spoke Greek into Ionians and Dorians, which were
the two Principal Dialects. The Attick Idiom, according to Grotius, is but a
Branch of that of the Ionians, and differs only in certain Proprieties. The
Aeolian Dialect is also but a part of the Dorians, which they used in Sicily,
as appears by the Eclogues of Theocritus, which are pure Dorick, whereas they
spoke Aeolian in the Isles of that name. It Is this last Dialect that Grotius
maintains comes from the Latin Tongue, as he proves by many Examples. The
other Dorians changed into A long, the common termination of the Feminins in,
but the Aeolians changed it into A short, and for example (...) Nympha, (...)
Fama. The 6th Letter in the Ancient Greek Alphabet was formerly called (...),
as it is called Vau in the Phenician Alphabet, from whence the Greeks have
derived theirs. Others call it the Aeolian Digamma, and, although its not seen in
the late Alphabets, it ceases not to retain its place in the Greek numbers, for
F, or, make six. The Aeolians used to place it before words which begin with a
Vowel. As for (...) they used to say (...), according to Priscian. The Latins
followed their Example, and instead of (...) they said Vesperus, instead of
(...) Vinum, etc. The Aeolians put their Bau before those words which begin
with R, as (...) frango, for the Dorick (...) which comes from (...), is out of
use, for which they say (...). It is apparent from the Aeolick frago comes the
Latin frango, since there is no difference at all, only an N more in the last,
which sometimes was omitted, as appears by the Latin word frago, and
confrages. The Aeolians also used an S before the Vowels, as well as the
Latin, who for (...) say serpo, for (...) say sus etc. Thence it comes that
one finds in the Aeolian Dialect only diverse Latin words whereof no footsteps
are to be seen in the others, as (...) Nuncius, (...) Nepos, etc.

The same matter is treated on more at length in Vossius his Etymologicon, and
in some of Salmatius Letters.

Grotius having consulted the last, to know if C or S was not taken for six
with the Greeks, answers yes, and gives some proofs of it, which Grotius
confirms by others in the 2 d. page of 480. Letter. Our Author makes use of
these remarks to prove, that Trajan is the same, whereof St. John speaks in the
13. of Revelations and 18. v. because in the word (...), which is the Name of
that Emperor. The number 666. is found in taking C for six, and not for two
hundred, according to the general acceptance of the S.

In matters belonging to the Critics, there is also some Explications of
diverse passages of Scripture, and of profane Authors. He shows for example in
the 91. Letter 1. p. that this passage of the An Explication of Prove. 19.4.
Proverbs and the 4. v. which is translated, God has made all things for
Himself, and the Wicked for the day of Calamity, ought to be translated thus:
God has disposed all things, so that they answer one another, and the Wicked
in the day of Adversity; that is, that God has ordered it so, that even by the
course of Nature, the Wicked should be punished. A passage very like to this in
the 33. of Ecclesiasticus 14. v.

He maintains also, that these Words of the 1. of Timothy 3 d. Chapter 2. v. Let
the Bishop be a Husband of one Wife, ought to be explained in this Sense; That
a Bishop should have but one Wife only. Which excludes not simply the Plurality
of Women at the same time, but second Weddings also. It Is thus, that Lycophron
calls Helena (...), Wife to three Husbands, although she never had three at a
time; Theseus being dead, when Paris took away Helen from Menelaus. Afranius
has called the same Biviram, a Woman that married a second time; and
Tertullian, Vnivitam a Woman married but once. The ancient Christians building
upon this passage, as does the present Impiety of the Romans, who permitted not
the High Priest to marry a second time, forbid the same thing to the Clergy. It
is thus, that the same Apostle c* 5. v. 9. would have the Widows that they
chose for the service of the Church to be the Wife of one Husband only. That
is, that they had married but one Husband, for it was never permitted to Women
to have more at the same time, and St. Paul took no care to prohibit a thing
that might never happen. But as the Roman Law suffered Women to repudiate their
Husbands, so it came to pass that unchaste Women changed them too often; witness
this passage of Seneca cited by our Author: Illustres quaedam ac Nobiles
Faeminae non Consulum numero, sed Maritorum, annos suos computant, and exeunt
Matrimonii causa, nubunt Repudii. -- Sic funt octo Mariti,
Quinque per Autumnos.
As Iuvenal says; see the Letters 297.323.

Peter du Puy Counselor in Parliament, demanded one day of Grotius, the reason
The design of the Evangelist.
the Evangelist said nothing of what happened to our Lord before his 30 th.
year, except one thing only that befell him at 12. years, as St. Luke reports.
Grotius answers to that, that it is, by the end which is proposed in an Author,
that we must judge of what ought to be said, and what omitted: That the
Evangelist had no design, to write only the Life of Jesus Christ, but to give
the Gospel to Posterity, that is, a Doctrine under the Conditions of
Repentance, promising to men the Remission of Sins, and Life Eternal: That it
is composed of two parts, whereof the one has a respect to the Doctrine, and
the other to History, as much as is useful to confirm this Doctrine, as the
History of the Miracles, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension of Jesus Christ:
That this History begins properly, but at the Baptism of Jesus Christ, because
from that time he began to teach publicly without Intermission, and that he
had done Miracles: So that the Evangelists have omitted all which passed in
that time; and if they said any thing, it ought to be looked upon rather as a
kind of Preamble, to make known the Person of Jesus Christ, than as the
beginning of an exact History of his Life. Letter 143. first part.

Nicholas of Damascus.
We may add here to the Critics, that which is in 264. Letter to Monsieur de
Pegrese, touching the writings and Life of Nicholas of Damascus. Monsieur de
Pegrese having recovered a Manuscript Copy out of the Collections of
Constantine ^orphyrogennete put them into the hands of the famous Henry of
Valois then but young, who caused them to be printed in Greek and Latin with
Notes of his own, 1634. in 4. at Paris. Grotius having seen this work before it
was printed, writ to Monsieur de Pegrese, all that he knew concerning Nicholas
of Damascus, of which there are many fragments in this Collection. He treats of
the writings of this Author, who was a particular Friend to Herod the Great,
his universal History, and his Life of Caesar Augustus in 180. Books. He speaks
of his Style, and manner of Writing; and shows that that which bears his Name
in the Manuscript of Monsieur de Piersc is really this Historians. He after
that, writ his Life in Latin, and the fragments of his Works, that he found in
Josephus, Athenaeus, Phocius, etc. In fine, he sends to his illustrious Friend
a Latin Version of a part of Nicholas's which was in the Collections of
Constantine.

There is a remarkable place in the Discourse of Epictetus collected by A
passage of Arian explicated.
Arian Book 2. c. 9. Why do you call your self a Stoic? says this Philosopher
to a Jew who counterfeited a Heathen: Why do you deceive the Multitude? Why
feign you your self a Greek, since you are a Jew? see you not why they call a
man a Jew, Syrian, or Egyptian, and that if any one is seen leaning on both
sides, we are accustomed to say, that he is not a Jew, but feigns himself to be
so: But when he comes to be of the mind as those who have been baptized, and
who have embraced this Sect; they call him a Jew, and he is so in effect. And
thus we, who have been vainly baptized are Jews by Name, but in effect another
thing: (...). Ruarus who proposed this passage to our Author, demanded of him
who Epictetus meant by those, that he called ((...)) baptized in vain, if they
are not Christians? and from whence it comes to pass that Epictetus puts
himself in their number? Grotius answers, First, That we must read in these
last words, (...) (or rather (...)) which makes this sense: In like manner we
resemble those who have been baptized in vain, we are honest men by name, but
in effect another thing. Secondly, That the Author speaks not of Christians,
which he else where calls Galileans, but of the Jews, which received none into
their Religion that were not first baptized, Letter 322, 336. See the first
Century of the Letters of Ruarus Epistle the 31. and

We find also in the first page of the 673. Letter, Corrections of Sta^e.
diverse Corrections upon the works of Stace, that Grotius sent to Gronovius,
who was then preparing an Addition thereof.

The most noble part of the Critics, if Judgments upon diverse Authors.
we may believe those who make a Profession of it, is that which teaches us to
judge of Authors to discern their true Works, from those which are
Suppositions, to distinguish their style, to find out the defects thereof, and
to remark the faults they commit. For that Reason, we shall place here the
Judgment that Grotius has made of diverse Books both Ancient and Modern.

The first Epistle of ^lement to the Corinthians. Grotius judges it to be much
the same that Phocius read; that there is no reason to believe, that that which
Phocius read is not the same, that St. Jerome, Clemens Alexandrinus, and St.
Irenaeus read, who where nearer the time of the Author. That the style
according to the remarks of St. Jerome is very near that of the Epistle to the
Hebrews; as also there are many other marks of a true Antiquity, as this, Quod
de Christo semper loquitur non ut posteriores (...), sed simpliciter plane, and
ut Paulus Apostolus solet, and quod alia qu^que dogmata, postea subtilius
explicata tractet, (...), etc. For what regards the High Priest, Levites and
the Laics, relates (according to our Author) to the Priesthood and to the
Custom of the Jews. This Epistle being written about the end of Nero's Empire,
or at least before that of Vespasian whilst the Temple yet stood, Letter 347.
1. p.

Tacitus. After having said, that many learned men have discovered, of what use
Tacitus is in Politics, without excepting the the Italians, who pretend to be
the great Masters in this Science; He says, that Berneggerus and Freinshemius,
had given at Strasbourg an Edition of it in 8 vo. with a very large Index and
most useful Notes in the Margent. He adds, that he read it with pleasure, and
that it was esteemed by all the Ingenious of Paris. The same Author undertook
to make an Addition in Folio, with a perpetual Commentary drawn from all the
Notes, which had appeared tell then upon Tacitus Letter 1092. 1. p.

Theophilactus. It Is the abridgement of the Greek Fathers, which had written
before him and is, as the Voice of the Greek Church, who gave us the opinions
of St. Paul, which he had preserved with much Fidelity, Letter 1243. 1 p.

Predestinatus. It Is the Title of a Book, in 8 vo. printed at Paris 1643. by
Father Sirmond. Grotius says, that he has drawn this Book from a Manuscript,
which was formerly Hin^mar's Archbishop of Rheims, that this work is opposed to
those that believe absolute Predestination. And that the Style is strong and
elegant, Letter 673. p. 2.

Father Casaubon. I have not had less veneration says our Author, for his
natural openness and sincerity, than for his great Learning. He told me in the
year, 1613. at London, where I was almost every day with him, when he went out
of France, he quitted all Studies, which belong to the ancient Soldiery, to
which he had been persuaded by Henry the 4 th. who was as great a Soldier as a
Prince, and that in England he had turned his Studies of that side, which most
pleased King James, who was given more to peace than War. Casaubon had no
Collection, except in his memory, Margents of his Books, and upon loose Papers.
Wherefore we have no Notes upon Polybe, but what is upon his first Book, and
they are imperfect also 184. Letter p. 2.

Seldom. This Author who made his wit appear in many pieces, has given to the
Public his book entitled Mare Clausum, in opposition to another entitled
Mare liberum. This work is very learned, and attributes in particular to the
King of England all the Sea that extends it self from the Coasts of England,
Spain, France, the Low Countries and Germany unto that of Denmark, Letter 590.
p. 1.

Seldom, says Grotius in another place, has taken figurative Expressions
(whereof I have made use in my Poetry) to defend the Laws of the King of
England; and has opposed them to others more serious. I am very much obliged
to him for the honesty with which he has spoken of me, and I believe I shall
not injure the Friendship that is between us, by this Epigram that I have made
upon his Book.

Ipsum compedibus qui vinxerat Neptune.
Ennosigaeum,
Est graeca Xerxes multus in Historia.
Lucullum Latii Xerxem dixere Tagatum,
Seldenus Xerxes ecce Britannus erit.
Letter 371.2. p. The Bishop of Bellai. I know him, says Grotius, not only by
his writings, but also by Conversation. He is an honest man, and well versed in
Controversy. This is the Title of one of his Books, The Demolishings of the
Foundation of the Protestant Doctrine. He has a great hatred to the Monks, and
would not have them instruct the People, but have it referred to the
Ordinaries. He is very much esteemed amongst the Bishops, and of an exemplary
Life, Letter 1716. p. 1.

Crellius. I thank you, says our Author to him, Letter 197. p. 1. both for the
Letter and the book you^ sent me. I have resolved to read over and over with
care all that you have written, knowing how much profit I have gained by your
Works. When I received your Letter I was employed in reading your Commentary
upon the Epistle to the Galatians. You have very happily found the design and
occasion of this Epistle as well as the sequel of this discourse. I have cast
my eye, says our Author, elsewhere in speaking to Ruarius friend to Crellius
upon his Commentary to the Epistle to the Hebrews which is very Learned. I have
profited much thereby, as well as upon that which he has made upon the
Galatians, of which the Ministers of Charenton make the same judgment as I do.
Let. 552. p. 1. He says to his Brother, speaking of the Book that the same
Crellius had written against that of Grotius, de satisfactione Christi, that he
has written modestly, and with much learning, although he approves not of his
opinions p. 2 Letter 138.

George Calixta Professor of Divinity at Helmstadt. I know not whether you have
seen the preface that Calixta has put before the books of St. Austin de
Doctrina Christiana, and of the Commonitorium of Vincent de Lerins, the book
that he has made de Clericorum coelibatu, and the first part of his divine
Morals with a digression touching the new Method, de Art nova. I approve the
judgment of this Man and the respect he has for antiquity, joined to the love
of Peace. A. M. des Cords Canon of Limages. p. 1. Letter 350. see Letter 339.
p. 1.

Salmatius. I have run through the book of Salmatius upon Simplicius. There is,
as you say, much reading. I wonder he disposes not his thoughts in a better
order. It Is sometimes difficult to reconcile him to himself; he often disputes
about words, etc. To William Grotius, p. 2. Letter 326. Salmatius has been
with me* he is disposed to defend every thing to the utmost extremity, and even
maintains that St. Peter never set foot in Italy. I wonder the spirit of a
Party should have so much strength; says he, in the same Letter 533. Salmatius
is pleased to defend Opinions abandoned by all the World, for even Blondel who
is a Minister in France maintains in a book, Printed at Geneva, that St. Peter
was at Rome. He denies also a Woman was ever Pope, but Salmatius affirms it in
the same Letter 536.

A great friend of Salmatius, has told me a little while since, that a Book
could not easily be made de lingua Hellenistica Rediviva, drawn from this, that
he says he is constrained to confess in many places that he acknowledges the
thing, and disputes but of the Name. He says that no body has remarked that
(...) answers to a manner of speaking Latin. But I had, and even in three
places, Mat. vi. 2. etc. in the same book 6921.

Daniel Heinsius, I have read the Works of Heinsius upon Nonnus, which was not
worth my while, for others have said several things which he remarks upon John.
I find that speaking of the Trinity he contradicts himself in many places, as
it happens to those who would know too much upon this matter. In the same Let.
149. there are many things which are not to be despised in the book of
Heinsius, but he has not drawn a few thereof out of the Epistles of Scaliger,
and the Works of Peucerus, of Fuller and Seldom, without naming them. The more
I consider him, the more I find that those who would know more concerning the
Trinity than Scripture tells us, are punished for their pride. The desire they
have of contradicting others, makes them to contradict themselves. See only p.
272. He calls practice [(...)] which is really different, and not simply
according to our manner of conceiving. After that he says that Essence in
Trinity is really distinct, and the proprieties of the Persons, only according
to our manner of conceiving, etc. Let. 152. Grotius censures such like
absurdities in his Letters 156. and 157.

Ph. Cluvier. After having cast my eyes upon the Germany of Cluvier I cannot
but approve the application, which always produces some fine thing, when it is
applied altogether to one subject. He does not seem to me so haughty, as he
appeared in a little book which he had sometime since published, yet he shows a
great boldness therein. A sensible proof of this is, that he often blots out
and changes words in the ancient Writings, without following any Manuscript but
his conjectures only. He has also much delight to reprehend others, and when
it is any that is still living, it is the more easily to be suffered, but he often
accuses Caesar, Strabo, and, several other excellent Authors, of great
Ignorance, etc. to Isaac Pontanus, Let. 11. P. 2.

C. Graswinkelius. This Author made an answer to Seldens book Entitled Mare
Clausum. Here is what Grotius says on it. Let. 999. 2. par. The book of Mr.
Graswinkel ought to be very dear unto me, seeing it has cost me 11 l. 1 s. 2
d. Carriage. I approve his exactness in gathering all that can serve for his
subject. He writes even Latin better than the most part of your Authors etc.

Father Petau the Jesuit. Denis Petau, says Grotius, has published three
Books de Dogmatibus Theologicis. He promises more upon other questions, more,
or less necessary. He applies himself to the opinions of the Greek and Latin
Fathers, and speaks not of the Scholasticks. He distinguishes the Tenets
defined by the Church, from those upon which it is permitted to say what we
will. He expounds-them all very well; his Books are extreme useful. Salmatius
is abused therein, and it is said it was he who named himself Wallo Messalinus.
But I could not but laugh to see him call Conrad Vorstius Calvinist, Let. 678.
p. 2.

Mr. Arnaud Doct^r of the Sorbon. All the World knows that Grotius was very far
from the opinions of Mr. Arnaud, upon Praedestination, and Grace, but this has
not hindered Grotius from giving him the praises he deserves. This he says of
his book of Frequent Communion. Mr. Arnaud will have public penitence
re-established in regard to the public sins, and that those who shall make
their sins known but by their* Confession to the Priest, abstain from the
Communion, until they are assured that they are amended in it. This book was
approved by five Archbishops, thirteen Bishops, and one and twenty Doctors;
some have already introduced this Custom into their Churches. For it is lawful
for Bishops to bring again into use the ancient Canons, even by the Authority,
of the Council of Trent, and by the example of Cardinal Berronius Archbishop of
Milan, who has been Canonized. Let. 669. p. 2. to William Grotius.
Adververtise your Stationers, says he, in the 671. Letter, to send for the
book of the frequent Communion, and to get it Printed anew. You will do thereby
a good service to Christianity. And elsewhere: They make it a crime in him for
having said in what he has written against a Jesuit, that he believes those who
feel in themselves their ancient inclinations to vice, do not ill to abstain
from Communion; and that he judges that even those who are given but to venial
sins, do not amiss to abstain, and other such like things. The ancient
severity, which we are no more able to suffer, as one says, annoyed him.
Nocuit antiquus rigor, cui jam pares non sumus, a^t ille. The Prince of Conde
(for he has also Written upon this matter, but without adding his name) thinks
it is believed hitherto, that if any one has confessed his sins, is in the
resolution of never more returning to 'em, and to undergo the penitence that
will be imposed on him, he may morally be assured that he is in a State of
Grace, and that he does well to Communicate. The Queen demanded the judgment of
the Sorbon upon these matters. The Parliament and Sorbon think it is against
the Laws, that a Subject of the King should be constrained to quit the Kingdom,
especially the Abbot Dubyse (Dubysium) who going to Rome to justify himself,
was immediately put into prison. Therefore Mr. Arnaud, being a Man of so good a
life, that his greatest enemies could find nothing to say against him. being
thirty six years old, and submitting himself to the judgment of the Sea of
Rome, to the Catholic Bishops, and particularly to the Archbishop of Paris and
the Sorbon, as you may see by what I have sent you, we may judge here of his
affair, adding to these Judges those which the Pope has Commissioned for that
purpose. For my part, as I favor those who would reestablish the ancient
satisfaction, I see that the most part of those who favor Mr. Arnaud are
Jansenists, to wit, Calvinists upon matters of Predestination. Thus it is that
Grotius speaks to his Brother in a Letter dated the 9th. of April, 1644.

Peter Hoofet. I have begun to read the History of Hoofet, it is a fine work,
his expressions after the ancient manners of speaking will not please others.
But Thucydides and Salust have given him the example, as well as Tacitus who
lived a great while after them, Let. 636. 2. p. He also praises the History of
Henry the Great Writ in Dutch by the same Author.

Iustus Vondel. This famous Flemish Poet published in 1638. a Tragedy, which is
acted once a year at Amsterdam, entitled Gishrecht van Amstel. He dedicated it
to Grotius, who makes this judgment thereof in a Letter to Vossius the 28th. of
May the same year: Vondel did me a kindness in dedicating unto me (as to a man
who has some gust of these sort of things) a Tragedy whose subject is noble,
whose order is excellent, and expression fine, etc. It is a folly not to have
in a subject of 300 years, the customs of that time represented. Thus it is
that those of Geneva in a French Edition of Philip de Comines, have observed
every where, where the Author says that the King heard Mass, that he was at
the Lords Supper.

II. These are the chief things of the Critics, which are in the Epistles of
Grotius. We shall observe in short the Theological matters before our Author
was put in Prison, being still in possesion of his Employments, he Writ several
Letters touching the Controversies of Grace and Predestination, which then were
maintained with much heat, and which was the occassion of his ruin.

In Letter 31. p. 1. He quotes some words of St. Jerome, whom he says it is
hard absolutely to excuse of Semipelagianism, as well as St. Chrysostom. He
endeavors notwithstanding, to give a favorable interpretation thereof. Here
is one of these passages of St. Jerome, drawn from his third book against the
Pelagians: Vbi misericordia Dei and Gratia, ex part cessat arbitrium, quod in
eo tantum est ut velimus and cupiamus, and placitis tribuamus assensum. Iam in
Domini potestate est ut id quod cupimus, quod laboramus ac nitimur, illius open
and auxilio implere valeamus. Grotius says, that perhaps St. Jerome and the
other Fathers, who speak thus have called Grace, but that which renders us holy
and acceptable unto God, and not that which excites us to do well, and which
prevents the first motions of our will. He speaks more of this preventing Grace
in the 31, 33* 34, and 62. Let.

He treats in Epistle 62. and 31. of Predestination, and he maintains that on
this occasion we ought not to prefer the authority of St. Augustine, to that of
all the Fathers who lived before him in the purer Ages of the Church, and such
as were also troubled with disputes. But he clearly maintains that all these
Fathers rejected absolute Predestination, and maintained that God has
predestined to Salvation, those only whom he foresaw would make good use of
his Graces, and on the contrary has resolved to Damn those only whom he
foresaw would continue impenitent, according to the formal Concession of
Prosper Disciple to St. Augustine. Retractatis priorum de hac re opinionibus
paene omnium par invenitur and una sententia, qua propositum, and
praedestinationem Dei secundum praesentiam receperunt. He cites upon this
occasion diverse passages of Justin Martyr, St. Irenaeus, St. Chrysostom and
several others. But these things may be seen treated on more at large in the
Pelagian History of Vossius, which our Author approves of in several places of
his Letters.

Moreover he treats of Liberty, Universality, and Sufficiency of Grace, of
Perseverance, and of the certainty of Salvation in Letter 62. But as he speaks
of these difficult matters only by the by, to comprehend well the sentiment of
the Remonstrants, which he maintains through the whole, we should read in those
amongst their Doctors who have treated thereof ex professo, as Episcopius, de
Courcelles, etc.

Grotius seems to have believed in his Youth that the Socinians were far from
deserving the name of Christians, and merited not barely to be called
Heretics, as appears by a Letter Written in 1611. to Anthony Walaeus. But
afterward he was of another mind on this occasion, though he always protested
that he was not of their opinions touching the Divinity and satisfaction of
Jesus Christ. He could not however hinder his being suspected of having too
much inclination to their opinions, though he took great care to Write the
contrary to his Friends. See Letters 880, 883, 1035. P. 1.411.456. P. 2. He
assures us in this last Letter, that after having had some Conversations with
Ruarus, this Unitarian had in fine answered him upon the Article of
satisfaction, so that there scarcely remained any Controversy amongst them.
Alios quosdam, adds he afterward, qui in illo caetu fuerunt, plene ad meam
perduxi sententiam. This may be seen in their Confession of Faith, and in the
Apology which they made about it a little after. This renders one thing
credible enough which Grotius says in the same Letter, which he had learned of
Bisterfeldius and of some others, viz. that Crellius said on his deathbed that
he would never have undertook to Write against his book of the satisfaction of
Jesus Christ, if we had read what Grotius had remarked in his Book de jure
Belli ac Pacis, concerning the Communication of Punishments.

The same thing happened to our Author in respect to the Roman Catholics, as
it did in regard to Socinianism. As he grew mild concerning the opinion of the
Socinians, which was the cause why his Enemies accused him of being an
Unitarian, so he growing more moderate in regard to the Roman Catholics, he
was accused of being of their Communion. It may be seen by some Letters Written
in his Youth, that he had the same sentiments of the Roman Church as the
generality of Protestants, though he was then more moderate than several Reformed
Divines. See his Letters 14. and 15. of the 1. p. and the 15th. of the 2. p.
There is also a Letter from Paris of the 7th. of June 1622. wherein he exhorts
Episcopius to refute the grounds of the followers of Cassander, who maintain
that those who disapprove most of the errors of the Roman Church, ought not for
that to separate themselves from it is Communion. He says that we ought
principally to examine two questions against these Gentlemen: the first is, to
know if an action permitted of it self, such as is genuflection in
Communicating, becomes unlawful by the Interpretation which those give it who
govern the Church, that this action has Jesus Christ for an Object present
under the accidents of Bread, or even the visible Signs: the other, to know if
it be lawful for one to join with an Assembly, whose Pastors maintain certain
Tenets which are disapproved, are necessary to enter into their Communion; though
they exact not of Particulars a distinct profession. But Grotius believes,
that it is needless to prove against these Gentlemen, that the Pope has not the
whole Authority which the Court of Rome attributes to him, because they do
agree therein. He says that they bow not their knee before the Images; that
they shun the Processions wherein the Eucharist is carried; that they hold the
belief of the Invocation of Saints, and that of Purgatory, as Opinions that are
unnecessary; as they do not hold themselves obliged to embrace the definitions
of the Latin Church, and that they place the force which is used to make them
to be received, in the Rank of Persecutions which good Men ought to suffer, as
well as the denying of the Cup.

It seems that in process of time the Correspondence which Grotius had with
some of those whom he calls Cassandrians, made him almost of their Opinions, as
may be seen by the notes upon the Consultation of Cassander, and the other
books which he published, touching the means of reuniting Religious. He
testifies in many places of these Letters that he desired passionately the
Reunion of Protestants amongst themselves, and of Protestants with Roman
Catholics. But it appears also that when he reflected upon the difficulties of
reuniting, which are already, and upon those which arise every day, he looked
upon the Reunion as a thing which ought to be wished for, but of which there is
but little hopes. Thus it is that he speaks in several places. In the first
part may be seen Letters 422.426.519.649.976. Where he complains particularly
of the new Institution of the a Monks dress worn over their faces.
Scapular, and of the books of the Office of the Virgin, which he looks upon as
obstacles to peace. This is what makes him speak thus to his Brother William
Grotius in a letter of the 21. of February 1625. Hoc voti magis est quam spei,
praesertim cum Romae M. Antonii de Dominis damnata si^ memoria, corpore exusto.
Et tamen sunt qui me Romam invitent: Sed quae tanta, precor, Romam mihi causa
videndi?


But as when we ardently desire a thing, this Passion often makes the
difficulties disappear which are in the obtaining thereof, so Grotius hoped
sometime that he should see it but rather as a simple object of his wishes than
his hopes: so it appears by the Letters 534. and 637. of the 2. p. that he
flattered himself that in time the Roman Church might relinquish several of its
Tenets, and correct several abuses whereof the most understanding persons of
that Communion complain every day. He hoped nevertheless to see it, but this
Idea flattered him so pleasantly, that he could not but say, Amare liceat, si
potiri non licet.


What he had written in his youth was objected against him, as contrary to what
he maintained toward the end of his life. But first he says, that if all this
be examined there will no contradiction be found in it, and he adds in the
second place, that if by a more advantage, by the conversation of the Learned,
and by much Reading, his judgment is become more solid, he ought no more to be
accused of inconstancy than St. Augustine who retracted in his old age, several
things which he had advanced in the first books he published. P. 2. l. 647.

Besides these matters of Divinity which respect Controversy some Questions of
Morality are found in these Letters, which are not of a less importance; for
example, What rule men should keep in the estimation of things which are
exchanged and sold, and in the Interest which can be demanded for ones money?
l. 953. p. 1. As this depends on infinite circumstances, the Laws have defined
nothing upon these matters. People have been forced to be referred to natural
equity, which all men ought to have for one another.

Ruarus demanded of Grotius if a Man can espouse two Sisters after one another,
because the Divine Laws say nothing on it, though human Laws prohibit it? and if a
Christian is obliged to follow but man's Laws? Grotius answers that Princes have
Right to declare null these sort of Marriages, just as the other Contracts, and
that a Christian is obliged to follow the Laws, unless they are altogether
unsufferable. Let. 327. and 336. P. 1.

In the Letter 1057. Grotius expounds a place of his book de Iure belli ac
Pacis, and shows in what sense these words of Jesus Christ ought to be
understood, He that will take your Coat from you, let him take your Cloak, etc.
The sense of the explication which he gives in this Letter, cannot be
comprehended without comparing it with the book above mentioned.

One Nicholas de Bye of the Society of the Menonites, which Grotius calls genus
hominum non malum, had sent him a great letter, by which he endeavored to
prove that it was prohibited to Christians to make War, and to punish with
Death. Grotius answers to that several things in the Letters 545 and 546. of
the 2d. P. which may be added to what he has said upon these matters in his
book de Iure Pacis ac Belli.

An Extract of the Letters of Grotius, II. Part, Treating upon Law, History,
and Politics.
WE have run through the Critics and Divinity in the Letters of the famous
Grotius. It remains that we should make an extract of the matters concerning
Law, History and Politics. Though he undertakes not to treat thoroughly on this
subject, there are nevertheless several places which may contribute much to the
understanding of diverse hard questions in the Law. History and in the
Government of States.

III. The famous question concerning the Domination of the Sea may be referred
to Law, which has been so often agitated in the North. There was at the
beginning of this Age a dispute between the English and the Dutch concerning
the fishing for Whales. Commissaries were named on both sides, to regulate this
difference. Grotius was one of the Commissaries of the Province of Holland, and
he relates the success of the Conference which they had with the English
Commissaries in his Letter 56. 1. p. He says they silenced the English, and
made it appear that neither the Country of Greenland, nor the Sea belonged to
them, and that the Dutch could not lose the liberty of their Navigation, nor of
fishing for Whales, whereof none had any right to claim the Propriety to
himself. We clearly showed, says he, that the Land belonged not to them,
seeing before the year 1596. no body had gone to it, that the Hollanders
discovered it, and gave it the Name which it has yet, as is evident in all the
modern Geographers Spheers, and Mapps. They would fain have persuaded us that
Hugh Willoughby discovered it in 1553. But we prove by the very Journal of this
Voyager, that he being parted from Finland, took Anchor at the Isle of that
Name, which is very far from Greenland; that he in fine died with Cold and
Hunger, with all his Companions, upon the Coasts of Lapland, where some
Laponians found them the next Summer, and whence their journals were carried
into England. The English could answer nothing to all this, only that there had
been much wrong done to their master to contest a Right with him, which he had
till then peaceably possessed.

In the letter 15. P. 2. He treats of this question, to wit. Whether a Lord of
Holland might yield something touching the Rights of Navigation and Commerce
without the Consent of the States. He maintains he cannot, because the Lords of
Holland were but the Guardians of the Rights of the People, without being able
to Alienate them, as he says may be shown easily by the Laws of the Country.
Upon this occasion, he says that Holland was a free Country, even under its
Lords, and that this liberty began not when the King of Spain was declared a
Receder from his, Rights or when a Truce was made with him. Grotius brings some
reasons for this, which may be read in the Original.

Grotius had written in 1615 to the Ambassador of the States at the Court of
France, touching the Controversies which were in agitation at that time in
Holland, and his Letter was shown to Peter du Moulin as then Minister of
Charenton, who had made some Reflections upon this Letter, which were sent to
Grotius. This gave him occasion to write to the same Ambassador the 62 Letter
of the 1. p. Where he treats of some of these Controversies, and amongst others
those which respect the Authority of the Magistrate in Ecclesiastical things.
It seems by what Grotius says, that du Moulin should believe that a Magistrate
ought to be Learned to have some Authority in Ecclesiastical things. Grotius
refutes this thought. He applies himself again to show, that the Authority of a
Prince depends not on the truth of his opinions in matters of Religion. He
brings the words of St. Augustine in the Letter ad Vincentium: Reges cum in
errore sunt pro ipso errore leges contra veritatem ferunt, cum in veritate
sunt, similiter contra errorem pro ipsa veritate decernunt. He cites besides,
the example of the Emperor Aurelian, who, at the prayer of the Christians,
drove from his Bishopric Paul de Samosate, who would not submit himself to the
Authority of the Councils, which had condemned his Doctrine. Grotius says
several things upon the Power of Princes, in the regulating of Controversies
which arise in matter of Religion. But he has treated on all this more fully
in his Book de Imperio summarum Potestatum circa sacra.

We find in the Letter 329. the solution of another question which belongs to
the Canon Law. It was to know if the Religious to whom the Pope permitted to
Preach and Confess, can do it without consulting the Bishops, and without
asking their Permission. Mr. de S. Cyran under the Name of Petrus Aurelius
maintained they could not, and the Jesuits pretended that these privileged
Friars needed no permission from the Bishops. Mr. des Cords Canon of Limoge
and a great friend to Grotius, had demanded of him his opinion thereupon. He
answers that the Antiquity of Mr. de S. Cyran was certainly reasonable, and
that even where these Commissions are received, they ought to be interpreted in
such wise that they make the least prejudice to the Canons and received Uses.
But he adds that he cannot tell how Mr. de S. Cyran, as well as the Jesuits,
attributing to the Pope an almost absolute Authority, can maintain that he has
not the power to do what Bishops do every day, to wit, to give the permission
of Preaching and Confessing. He says that in giving the Pope the power that is
given him, they ought to fall into the same inconveniency wherein the Romans
were under an Emperor, who would have all the questions of Law to be sent to
his Oracle.

In Letter 693. directed to a Polish Lord, who had asked him his opinion
concerning Torments, he answers that there is nothing less certain than a
Confession extorted by Torments, upon which he cites this word of an ancient:
mentietur quiferre non potuerit, mentietur qui far potuerit. I have (says
he) infinite examples of People who were unjustly put to Death, upon so
uncertain a foundation. I do not wonder that there have been grave persons who
believed that Christians should not make use of Torments to extort Confessions,
seeing it is certain there is no such thing in the Law of Moses: That in England
Men live in as great security as any where, though Tortures are not in use there,
and that whilst Rome conserved it is Liberty the Citizens were never tortured.

William Grotius had made some questions to his Brother concerning the public
Law, upon which occasion our Author shows in his Letter 4. P. 2. the difference
which is betwixt particular and public Laws, and shows that they are equally
founded upon Nature, the Law of Nations, and the Civil Law. He treats
afterward on this Question, If natural Right can suffer some change? He
divides this Law into diverse branches, and shows in what sense there may happen
some change. He also treats on the same matter in Letter 6. It had been it
seems objected against him that the Civil Laws do sometimes alter the Law of
Nature, when they make void all the promises that a Pupil might make without
the consent of his Guardian, seeing he violates this Right of the Law of
Nature, that one must keep his promises. Grotius shows how Civil Law agrees
herein with the Law of Nature, and also expounds some like cases; as if a Pupil
having borrowed without the consent of his Tutour, and being become rich by
this borrowing, whether he is obliged to pay? Grotius answers, that although by
the Ancient Civil Law of the Romans, a Creditor could not have an action
against a Pupil, although the Pupil is bound to pay by the Law of Nature, whereof
here is an inviolable Law: That none ought to enrich himself with the damage of
another. He cites diverse Laws upon this subject.

He treats in Letter 4. of the same Part, of Servitudes, and shows that it is
a Right established by Men against Liberty and Natural Freedom. He expounds the
Law in fine ff. de aqua, where it is said that the low possessions have
commonly this Servitude, that they receive their waters which run from those
that are highest. In Letter 12. He speaks fully enough of Conventions in
general, and of Stipulations in particular. He shows that the Law of Nature
necessarily obliges one to keep his word, whence several Philosophers have
given the name of Truth to justice, and Simonides said that Justice consisted
in speaking the truth, and in giving what one has received; notwithstanding
Plato and Theophrastus were of opinion that no body ought to have the power of
forcing any one to keep his word by virtue of the Laws, but that it should be
free not to keep it, as it is free not to be generous. But this Philosophy,
says our Author, agrees not with our Age, wherein few Folks are virtuous by
their own motion, without the fear of Laws. He enters after that, upon a great
Question, to wit, how Civil Law can derogate from the Law of Nature, in matters
of agreement and promises? He expounds in a few words in what manner the Roman
Laws have taken away, from those who submitted themselves thereto, the Liberty
of promising certain things, so that on these occasions they have rendered
contracts void, as well as when they were not extorted after the manner which
these Laws prescribed. He shows that the Laws have not in all that, injured the
Law of Nature.

We find besides in Letter 352. p. 2. The examination of this Question: Vtrum
voluntas testatoris coram septem testibus ad id convocatis declarata, nolle se
Testamentum ante factum valere, habenda sit pro Testamento tali quale esset, si
haeredes ab intestato instituisset diserte? Grotius answers yes, and that it is
thus he understands those terms, Voluitque intestato decedere in l. 1.. Si
haeres. D. si tabulae Testamenti nullae extabunt.

IV. Grotius has also by the by spoken of some other Questions of Law, which
are not necessary to be related here. We shall pass to what is Historical in
his Letters, whereof one part belongs to ancient History, Profane or
Ecclesiastical; and the other to the History of his Time, or of his own
Adventures. We shall in a few words observe, what is most curious upon these
matters.

We have already noted, that there is in a Letter to Mr. de Pieresc, the Life
of Nicholas of Damascus. There is no other profane History but this, except
some allusion by the by, to some fact which he relates not, as Letter 399. p 2.
One of the finest works, says he, of Parrhasius is written in Pliny. He
represented the People of Athens, after a very ingenious manner. He would
represent a People Choleric, Unjust, Inconstant, and at the same time easy to
be persuaded, Merciful, Clement, Proud, Cowardly, Fierce and Timorous. He
painted the figure of a man, much as I would have the Republic of Holland, or
that of the United Provinces, to be represented by a Virgin. I would have a
Virgin to be painted, who has yet her Virginity, but who makes it known, that
it is burdensome to her.

In the Letter 122. p. 1. He remarks the Oaths that the ancient Jews were
accustomed to make use of, but in things of small consequence, they believed
one should not swear by Divinity it self, but by ones Father and Mother, by the
Earth, by the Stars, by Heaven, or by the Universe. It Is apparent in the
beginning of the Book of Philo, entitled de specialibus legibus. Which serves
much, according to the Judgment of Grotius, to clear what Jesus Christ says of
Oaths, in chapter v. of St. Mat. Where he prohibites us to swear at all, ((...)) to
wit, after any manner which the Jews swear. He makes besides, some other
remarks upon this place of the Gospel, but as he most enlarged upon this matter
in his Annotations, it is better to send the Reader to them, and to take notice
of another thing which is in his Letters touching the Jews. He says, that
since the Jews were banished from their Country, and dispersed amongst Nations
who hate them, they are more exposed to calumny, and that we ought not slightly
to believe the evil which we may hear of them; that notwithstanding he would
not always answer for their innocence, seeing they believe it is lawful to
curse Christians, as appears by the Thalmud, and by other Books. They are not
satisfied with words, they proceed to effects, when they think themselves
strong enough for it. You may see, adds he, in the History of Dion, what the
Jews of Cyrene have done in times past; and in Sozomen l.vii. c. 13. and
Socrates l.vii. c. 17. what the Jews did who lived between Calcedon, and
Antioch. Nicephorus passes for an Author, on whom one cannot well rely. It Is
not amiss however to hear what he says of the Jews of Arabia, Samaria, and
Antioch, l.xvii. c 6. and 24. l.xviii. 44. because, what he says, is upheld by
the Testimony of Paul the Deacon, l.xviii. and by Zonaras in the Life of
Phocas. Polydor Virgil assures in l.xvi. of his History, that they were
banished from England, because a cruel design was discovered which they had
formed. Stumphius, Thomas Barbartensis in his Fortalitium fidei, Michael
Neander in his Erotemata linguae sanctae, accuses them of having killed
Children, and gathered their Blood for he knew not what uses at Munster,
Zurich, Berne, at Weessensch, in Turing, at Vberlingue near Ausbourg, at
Dieffenhof, etc. Sabellicus affirms the same thing of the Jews of Trent,
l.viii. Ennead. x. Bonfinius says as as much of those of Tirnave in Hungary,
l.iv. Dec. v. For to say nothing of the Magic and Superstitious uses which may
be made thereof, the Blood of Infants being a remedy against Leprosy, whereof
several Princes have been accused to have made use; Jewish Physicians might
have easily undertaken to make a trial of it, because of the hatred which they
bore to Christians, when they believed they had no reason to fear the Laws.
It Is then visible, it is a long time since this crime was imputed to them true
or false, Let. 693. p. 1.

There is another observation touching a Sect of the ancient Jews, wherein
perhaps more likelihood of Truth will be found. The most exact Chronologists,
according to Grotius, say that Pythagoras lived toward the end of the Empire
of Cyrus. Numenius, Porphyrius and Hermippus followers of this Philosopher say,
he was in Judea, and that he followed in several things the Sentiments of the
Jews. If we seek, what Sect of the Jews might have served for a model to
Pythagoras, none will be found, upon whom this suspicion may fall, but that of
the Esseans. There was nothing more alike than the Assemblies of these Jews,
and the common Auditories of the Pythagoreans, such as Porphyrius, Iamblicus,
Herocles and others describe. In effect Josephus says, that the manner of
living of the Esseans and Pythagoreans was the same. If Josephus speaks of the
Esseans, only in remarking what happened under Ianathas, an Asmonean Prince, it
was but by the by, and on the occasion of mentioning the Sadduces and
Phari^ees, without telling when this first Sect begun. Grotius believes, that
their Sects were formed upon those of the Rechabites, and Nazarenes, Let. 552.
p. 1.

Speaking of Ecclesiastical History in general, he cries out, Let. 22. p. 1.
What do those read, who read the Ecclesiastical History, but the Vices of
Bishops? Qui Ecclesiasticam Historiam legit, quid legit nisi Episcoporum vitia?
and elsewhere, upon the occasion of something which Heinsius said of the
Trinity, he remarks that the Greek and Latin School agree not, after which he
adds, Mihi constat Patres in explicatione harum rerum plurimum dissensisse,
etiamsi vocum quarundam sono inter se conveniant: quae sex repertae sunt bono
affectu, successu non semper optimo. There arose in 1630. a pretty warm dispute
between Mr. de l' Aubespine, Bishop of Orleance, and Mr. Rigaut, who had
printed some Books of Tertullian corrected upon some old Mss. touching the
sense of a passage of this Author, in his Book, de Exhortatione Casti^atis. Mr.
Rigaut thought Tertullian meant, that it was permitted to Laics to Consecrate,
being in places where they could have no Priests. Mr. de l' Aubespine upheld,
that in this place, he did not speak of the Eucharist, but of what we now call
Blessed-Bread; because the Council of Trent defined, that it belonged to
Priests only to consecrate. These are the Words of Tertullian; Nonne and Laici
sacerdotes sumus? scriptum est, regnum quoque nos and sacerdotes Deo and Patri
suo fecit, Differentiam inter ordinem and Plebem constituit Ecclesia, and honor
per Ordinis consessum Sanctificatus: adeo ubi Ecclesiastici ordinis non est
Consessus, and OFFERS and TINGUIS, and Sacerdos es tibi solus. Sed ubi tres,
Ecclesia est, licet Laici, etc. Grotius took the part of Mr. Rigaut his Friend,
and then printed a small Dissertation; de Coenae administratione ubi Pastores
non sunt. It is in the third Tome of his Theological Works. We may also see an
Abridgment thereof in a Letter to Salmatius, which is 260. of the 1. p. where
our Author testifies, he was of Erasmus's opinion, to wit, that in the
Primitive times the Faithful consecrated the Bread and Wine, and communicated
together, there being often no Priest in the Company. See the Letter of Erasmus
to Cuthbert Tonstar, l. xxvi. Epist.

Grotius seems to have much respect for Christian Antiquity, as may be seen by
all his works, and by this place of the Letter 191. of the 2. p. Perhaps those
who are of Voetius 's opinion will think, it will be a Socinianism to make the
principal part of Religion consist in the observation of the precepts of Jesus
Christ. But I see that the Christians of the first Ages, the Assemblies, the
Doctors, Martyrs have been of this Judgment, that there are few things which we
ought necessarily to know, and that as to the rest God Judges us, according to
the obedience we have rendered to him. The same also appears by a Conversation,
that Grotius had with the Prince of Conde in 1639. and whereof he gives an
account to Chancellor Oxenstiern in Letter 1108. of the 1. p. He relates to
this Suedish Lord, that the Prince had given him a visit, that they had
discoursed of several things, and that this Prince had approved his Opinions;
that in this Age one may attribute to himself the Name of a Christian, and the
Surname of Catholic, the Scripture must be believed, interpreted, not
according to the particular Judgment of each one, which has caused Seditions,
Schisms, and often Wars, but according to the universal and perpetual consent
of the Ancient Churches; which we find in the Writings of several excellent
men, and chiefly in the Symbols and Acts of the true Ecumenick Councils, which
were held before the Schism of the Eastern and the Western Churches; and which
the Emperors, and all the Churches have approved of: That moreover, we must
abstain from calumniating any one, to leave off the Spirit of Parties, to
endeavor the Unity of the Church, such as Jesus Christ has ordained, and the
Apostles have founded, and to hold for our Brothers, to wit, for Christians and
Catholics, all those who are in these opinions, although those who rule over
the Churches have separated themselves from the External Communion. Haec omnia
Princeps and sibi dicebat probari, and sapientissimis quos cognosset hominibus.

Not that Grotius was very much conceited with the antiquity he believed, as
some are, that the Ceremonies which it has constantly kept to, are all of
Divine Right. Thus he speaks to Mr. des Condes about Confirmation and
Imposition of hands, Let. 329. 1. p. I have found by reading, that the
imposition of hands was a Jewish Ceremony, which was introduced, not by any
Divine Law, but by Custom, every time that any Body prayed God for another. For
the Jews prayed God, that his Power should accompany that Man, as the hands
which were put upon his Head, and which were the Symbol of the Divine Power,
were united to him. Jesus Christ followed this Custom, as several others of the
Synagogue, whether Children were to be Blessed, or the sick were to be Cured,
in joining Prayer to this Ceremony. It is according to this Custom, and not
consequent to any Precept, that the Apostles laid their hands on those to whom
they conferred the Gift of the Holy Ghost by Prayer. Thus it was, that not only
Priests used the same, when they received any into their Body, as it appears by
the Example of Timothy, 1 Timothy iv. 15. But the Apostles themselves received
anew the imposition of Hands, when they engaged into any new design, Acts
xiii.2. So if at every time, that hands were imposed, a Sacrament was
conferred, we shall find Sacraments in all the Prayers, which have been made
for any one; which is contrary to the true Signification of the word, and to
the use of the Ancients.

It Is from this Ceremony, continues our Author, which was not ordained by God,
but which has of it self been introduced amongst the Jews and Christians, that
sprung the Sacraments of Confirmation, of Ordination, and Penitence, of Extreme
Unction, and even of Marriage; for the Ancient Churches, laid their hands on
those who were Married, as the Abyssins this day do.

The Baptism of Christians, adds he, consisted in times past in immersion only,
as that of the Jews who baptized all those who embraced their Religion. It
appears not that any laid hands on those who were baptized, but those who had
the Gift of conferring the Holy Ghost. This has been introduced rather in
honor of Bishops, to persuade the People, that they had succeeded to the
Rights of the Apostles. In the second Age, and the following, diverse Ceremonies
were added to Baptism, by allusion to some passages in Scripture, according to
the Custom of the Ancients, who expressed themselves not only by Words, but
also by Signs and Symbols. It is for that, that they made those who were
baptized to taste of Honey and Milk. But it was thought fit to represent
particularly by these Symbols, that those who believe in Jesus Christ receive
in their Soul the same Graces which Jesus Christ made the sick feel which he
cured, in their Body, or that those who make profession of believing in him,
feel the Eyes of their Soul to open* as well as the Ears of their Heart, that
they are cured of all their spiritual maladies, and that the Devil has no
further Power over them. Therefore Exorcisms were made use of, and the term of
Epphata, be opened, also of Spittle, of Oil, whereof Jesus Christ and the
Apostles made use of in curing corporal maladies.

Posterity was not content with this. 'Twas thought it ought to be made
apparent, that Christians are Kings and Priests, in anointing with a more
odoriferous oil. This Unction was joined to Baptism, as it is yet with the
Greeks, and as it has been a long time in the Latin Church. The Priests who
baptized, administered it as well as the Bishops, the Bishop according to the
Testimony of St. Jerome, and St. Augustine, differing from the Priest, only in
this, that the Bishop had the sole right of Ordaining Priests. Our Author,
after having made these Remarks, gives his Sentiment concerning a Canon of a 1.
Council of Orange, which caused then great disputes betwixt Mr. de S. Cyran,
and F. Sirmond, and maintains that the latter had well cited and understood it,
though his Adversary accused him of falsehood. Grotius believes, that this Canon
gives the Power to Priests to administer the Chrisme, and orders that it should
be administered but once: Nullus Ministrorum qui baptizandi recepit officium,
sine Chrismate unquaem debet progredi, quia inter nos placuit semel Chrismari.
Nam inter nos Chrismatis ipsius non nisi una benedictio est. Non ut
praejudicans quicquam dico, sed ut necessaria non habeatur Chrismaetio
repetita. But according to him, this hinders not, but that when they use two
Chrisms in Italy, as it appears by the famous Decretal of Pope Innocent, who
speaks of a Chrism, which Priests as well as Bishops administered in Baptism,
and of another which Bishops alone administered in Confirmation: Presbyteri, seu
extra Episcopum, seu praesente Episcopo baptizant, Chrismate baptizatos ungere
licet, sed quod ab Episcopo fuerit consecratum, non tamen frontem ex eodem oleo
signare, quod solis debetur Episcopis, cum spiritum tradunt Paracletum. Grotius
also believes, that Father Sirmond had reason to follow the Mss. where there is
non habeatur, and not the Editions, where this Negation is omitted, but that he
has not well expounded praejudicans by nocens, a signification which has been
given to this Latin word only in the time of Bartolos, or of Baldus. He says
it signifies condemnans.

Grotius wonders, that Christians dispute so much amongst themselves for
indifferent things as these, which are neither commanded, nor prohibited, and
which make nothing of themselves to the distinction of Bishops and Priests. He
treats besides of the same Ceremonies in Letter 355.1. p. where he says, much
the same thing. One may see what he thought thereof, before he was gone out of
Holland, in Letter 62. Where he speaks very respectfully of these ancient
Ceremonies.

Writing to one of his Friends, from whom he had received Letters, from Grand
Cair, and who had consulted him touching the Schism of the Nestorians and
Eutychians, he answers thus: The Schism of Alexandria whereof you write unto
me, was begun from the time of Dioscorus, of whom there are several Proselytes
in this Country, in spite of the Condemnation of the Council of Calcedon, and
who are spread even into Aethiopia, as the party of Nestorius stopped at
Babylon, whence it extended it self into all Asia. I doubt not, but Nestorius
has used hard ways of speaking, who inclined too much on one side, as well as
Eutychus did on the other; and I freely follow in this, the consent of the
greatest number of Churches. Nevertheless it seems to me, that the Ancients
were too forward in putting out of the Church, those who were not of their
Opinion in all things. See Letter 239. p. 2. As Grotius believed, that his
Friend was in Abyssine, he takes occasion to speak of some Ceremonies of the
Abyssines, as follows; Suarez in his Book of the Laws, says, that although the
Abyssines retain Circumcision, provided they believe not that it is absolutely
necess^ry to Salvation, they may be received into the Church. I believe, they
make use of this Mark, not in imitation of the Jews, or from the time of
Solomon, as they speak, but that it is much ancienter, seeing Herodotus puts it
amongst the Customs, which were always received in Aethiopia. I should believe,
that it owes its Original to the Children, which Abraham had of Kethura; who
according to Josephus went to inhabit Aethiopia. I suppose, they abstain from
certain Meats rather for health than for Religion. The annual Commemoration of
Baptism is a tolerable Ceremony. It is better to interpret favorably the
Ceremonies, affirmed by the Observation of so many Ages, than to rend the State
and the Church all at once.

To mix some diverting Subjects to these which are so serious, we shall not
omit a remark touching the Original of Academies, which is in Letter 285. p. 1.
In the time, says he, that the Roman Empire was the most flourishing, each
City had Professors, not only in Eloquence, Non Eloquentiae tantum and
Philosophicarum Haeresium (nondum ob id nomen comburi homines coeperant) sed
Medecinae quoque, and in all the Heresies of Philosophy, thus the Sects of
Philosophers were called in the Ages, wherein Heresy was not a Crime worthy of
Fire, but also in Physic. An arrest only of the Decurions was needful. It Is
what the Pandects the Code, and several Greek and Latin Authors teach us.

In the time of the Controversies about Grace, Grotius made a small Treatise
entitled, Disquisitio an Pelagiana sint ea dogmata quae nunc sub eo nomine
traducuntur. It is in the third Tome of his Theological Works. He endeavors to
show in this small work, that the Sentiments which then were called Pelagian
are not so: But he does more in the 19. Letter of the second part, where he
maintains that these same Sentiments are far from those of some Pelagians. The
Divines of Marseilles, says he, who were called Semi-pelagians, pressed the
necessity of Grace, after such a manner that they denied Grace prevented the
first good motions of the Will, at least in some Persons. We need only to see
the Council of Orange, which has condemned the Errors of the Semi-pelagians.
This was all their Error, which the Council disapproved so, that
notwithstanding the Communion was not refused those, who were of this opinion.
But those who believe, adds he, that Predestination is founded upon foresight,
the universality of sufficient Grace, and the opinion of those who maintain
that Grace can be resisted, and that it can be lost, are Tenets of
Semi-pelagianisme, ritu sabino quod volunt somniant, according to the Latin
Proverb. And as to the Semi-pelagians, we shall find a passage of Vincent of
Lerius in Letter 31. p. 1. upon which Grotius makes some Reflections.

To return now to more modern Histories, Grotius relates, Letter 366. p. 2. A
quarrel which happened between the Pope and the Venetians, in 1636. about an
Inscription which the Pope caused to be put under a Picture, of Pope Alexander
III. and Frederick Barbarousse at his Feet, with these Words; Alexander Papa
III. Frederici Imperatoris iram and impetum fugiens abdidit se Venetiis, and a
Senatu perhonorifice susceptum, Ottone Imperatoris filio navali praelio a
Venetis victo, captoque, Fridericus pace facta supplex adorat, fidem and
obedientiam pollicitus. Ita Pontifici sua dignitas Venetae Reipublicae
beneficio restituta est. These terms did too much honor to the Republic of
Venice, the Pope caused the Inscription thus to be corrected: Fridericus I.
Imperator Alexandrum III. Pontisicem, quem diu insecutus fuerat, post
constitutas cum eo pacis conditiones, and damnatum Schisma, Venetiis supplex
veneratur. Grotius sends to his Brother a Latin Epigram, where he equally
disapproved the action of Alexander and that of Urban, and which ends with this
distich, Nolite in fastum titulo pietatis abuti,
Esse jubet Regum libera colla Deus.


This quarrel of the Venetians with the Pope, makes me remember a rumor that
ran at Paris, in 1630. they said that Fra. Fulgentio, a Divine of the Republic
of Venice, and Successor to Fra. Paolo, endeavored to inspire into the Greeks
of the State of Venice, the Sentiments of the Protestants, to introduce the
Reformation into Italy, by that means. See Letter 238. p. 2.

It may be, this was but a bare Report. Grotius was too far from the places, to
be thoroughly informed in it, but he had opportunities to be perfectly
instructed of some other things, which happened in Holland, whilst he was
there. He says, Letter 11. p. 1. That in a Conference* which Arminius and
Gomarus had before the Gentlemen of the States of Holland, as Oldenbarndvelt
said to these two Gentlemen, that he praised God for that the Controversies
which was amongst them, were not upon any fundamental Article, Gomarus
answered, that the Opinions of Arminius, his Colleague were of such a nature,
that he could not appear before the Tribunal of God with 'em. The whole dispute
concerned Predestination* and the greatest difference that was betwixt their
opinions, was that Gomarus believed God had resolved to create the most part of
men to damn them, without having any respect to their Actions, only for the
Manifestation of his Power; whereas Arminius maintained that God damns not men,
but because of their unbelief and impenitence. This last opinion is
Melancthon's, as Grotius says* Ep. 58. p. 1. and elsewhere.

The Gentlemen of the States of Holland made in 1614. an Edict, which may be
seen in the 3. Vol. of the Theological Works of Grotius, by which they ordered
the two parties, which then were in the Reformed Churches of the Low Countries,
to support each other, and to treat with moderation the controverted matters,
the then King James of England at first praised this order, also diverse Bishops
approved it, as Grotius says in his Letters 28, and 29. But this Prince
changing his opinion afterward disapproved this conduct, as appears by Letter
111. p. 1. to Mr. Anthony de Dominis, Archbishop of Spalatro. But that which
was most fatal to Grotius and those of his party, was, that from that time
diverse Provincial Synods were held where they were not favored, as he himself
says, in Letter 64. p. 1. The Magistrates of every City, promised Pastors of
that party, should exercise their charge as before, but those of the contrary
party, thought the same toleration ought not to be given to them. Some refused
to Preach in public Churches, because the other party were suffered there.
They assembled themselves in private Meetings, so that the Magistrates feared
these diverse Assemblies would cause trouble in the State, as they had in the
Church. There was an attempt made at Rotterdam, as Grotius relates Letter 65.
p. 1. to calm these troubles by a particular conference, where the reasons of
those Pastors were heard, who would not Preach in public Churches with those
who were not of their opinion nor communicate with them. But this Conference
had no good effect, as may be seen in this Letter of our Author, and in the
following, where he gives an account of what happened on both sides in this
Assembly.

Lastly the Schism was made after such a manner as all the World knows, and
that besides many other reasons was no little hindrance, according to the
Judgment of Grotius, to the design which several Pious persons formed some
years after, of reuniting all Protestants. The King of Swedland too endeavored
it a little before his Death, having assembled at Leipswich diverse Lutheran and
Calvinist Divines. The authority of this great King, made this Conference end
with mildness on both sides, but his Death which happened a little while after,
made all hopes of accommodation vanish. It was at that time that an English
Divine named Duraeus, who had as 'twere consecrated himself to endeavor this
reunion, ran vainly over all the Protestant States to induce them to Peace,
which the Archbishop of Canterbury William Laud, whose Encomium Grotius makes
in diverse places, ( v. p. 2. Ep. 405, 406.532.540.) and several Bishops of
England passionately desired: Grotius says, that an answer of Doctor Hois
Preacher to the Elector of Saxony being too violent against the Reformation,
hindered it very much; see Let. 444. p. 1.

Protestants not being able to unite with one another, there was no likelihood
that the Union between them and the Roman Catholics should succeed. Yet there
was a great talk on it in France, and Cardinal Richelieu, if we believe Grotius
Letter 531. p. 2. affirmed that it would be agreed on. Cardinalis quin (...)
negotium in Gallia successurum sit dubitare se negat. This made several persons
apply themselves to writing, to propose to the public means and projects of an
Union. Amongst whom none appeared that made so much noise as Theophilus Brachet
dela Millitiere, which seemed the more surprising, because before the taking of
Rochel, this Author had attacked the Kings party, and all the Roman Catholics
with an extraordinary heat, in a little Book which he Printed for the defense
of some Assemblies held at Rochel. Grotius speaks of it in diverse places, but
particularly in Letter 373. p. 1. 385.343, 345. p. 2.

There was then a report at Paris, which gave some hope to those who penetrated
not the policy of Cardinal Richeleu, that there would happen a change in the
Gallican Church, which would much contribute to an Union. Which was that the
Cardinal had a design to render himself Patriarch in France, and thus to draw
the Gallican Church from the obedience of the Court of Rome. To this design was
applied, according to the relation of Grotius Letter 982. p. 1. this Tetrastich
of Nostradamus.

Celui qui etoit bien avaunt dans le Regne
Aiant chef range, proche Hierarchy,
Apre and cruel, and se fera tant craindre
Succedera a sacree Monarchy.
Some are so far from taking away from the obedience of the Apostolic See,
that they scarcely dared to defend the Liberties of the Gallican Church. The
King who had given orders to make a Collection of the Edicts of the Kings of
France, and of the Acts of Parliament, by which until then the excessive power
of the Court of Rome was opposed, got this collection suppressed in 1639. when
the impression thereof was finished, Grotius who had promised himself much from
the courage of the French on this occasion, could not dissemble his grievance,
which he too strongly expresses: Ita sub Regibus aut ignavis, aut ignaris,
tantum sape fit damni, quantum successores aegre sarciant: mirumque est pro
Regibus scribi Lutetiae non licere, cum Romae quotidie contra Reges and eorum
jura libere fiant. He speaks thereof also in as weighty terms in Letter 1105.
to Lewis Camerarius, Ambassador from Swedland into Holland.

This event and some others made Grotius doubt of the Roman Catholics ever
giving any satisfaction to Protestants, concerning the complaints made of the
abuses which they believe to be slipped into the Roman Religion. He testifies
these doubts in Letter 85. p. 2. where he says that there is more reason to
wish than to hope for peace, particularly since the Memory of M. Anthony de
Dominis had been condemned, by burning his body. It Is known this Prelate
believed that it was easy to reunite Religions by correcting some abuses in
the Roman Church; and Grotius says of him, Let. 37. p. 2. Marc Anthony de
Dominis now says Mass at Antwerp. He follows the opinions of Cassander, only
he attacks more openly Transubstantiation, and some other Tenets. I know not
what he will say of changing his Religion, if he says not that he has not
changed. ^or he believes that the Religion of Protestants and Catholics is the
same. Another thing which made Grotius despair of ever seeing Religious united,
was the establishing chambers for the Propagation of Faith, whereof he
complains in a Letter to the great Chancellor of Swedland dated June 29. 1639.

Besides these matters wherein great Kingdoms have been interested, there are
several particular Histories in these letters, whereof we shall here relate
some. Ambrosio Spinola Besieging Breda prohibited duels in his Army upon pain
of Death. His Son having afterward transgressed this Order, was seized and
condemned to Death, but the Guards letting him escape, he turned all his
severity against them, and hanged six of them. He demanded his Son of the King
of France, into whose Country he was withdrawn, to punish him, but he had not
his desire, Let. 83. p. 2. Here is moreover another example of a Roman
severity. A Venetian Senator of the Council of Ten, named Zeni, after he had
punished the Sons of the Doge, who had done something against the State, he was
attacked by assassinates, who wounded him in diverse places. The People running
to him, he was carried to his house, where he ordered his Sons and his Men to
take his Bloody Clothes, and thus to carry them to the Palace of St. Marc, to
call for Justice. The Senate thereupon promised a great recompense to those who
should discover the Accomplices; some days after the Doge himself came to
accuse his own Son, who was withdrawn from the State of Venice, after having
done the Fact, and was of opinion that a far greater reward should be promised
to him who could deliver the guilty dead or alive, into the hands of Justice,
Let. 166. p. 2.

Grotius relates in the Letter where he speaks of Spinola, which we have cited,
a History of another kind, and which is more diverting. He says that a
Courrier named Doublet, who was sent in 1625 from Holland to the Ambassador of
the States at Paris, not knowing his abode, nor even himself, made a pleasant
equivocation: Which is, that having asked where lived the Ambassador of the
Low Countries, he was carried to the Envoy of Brussels, to whom he gave the
Packet, and immediately begun to speak of affairs of great consequence,
afterward perceiving his mistake, he got himself conducted to the Ambassador
of the States, where he yet committed another fault, in opening his Port-mantle
before those who conducted him, and showed them that there was Money in it,
after which going abroad about some affair, he returned no more, and this
caused in the Ambassador a great uneasiness.

It was doubtless a great imprudence to commit matters of State to so unhandy a
Man, but Grotius relates another fault of a witty man, which is as great, if it
be true. He says that famous Peter du Moulin was obliged to go out of France
by reason of a Letter he had written to King James, wherein he exhorted him to
succor the Elector Palatine, who was of late chosen King of Bohemia, to which
he added, that the Reformed of France would see what they could expect from him
in such an occasion. These Letters being fallen into the Hands of the King of
France, M. du Moulin staid not to be bid to withdraw, nor until he should be
seized, Let. 640. p. 2.

Here are other Histories for the diversion of Naturalists and Philosophers.
Grotius assures us in Letter 361. p. 2. that the whole Court of England had
seen in 1635 a man aged 153 years, who was in good health, but that he lost his
sight 20 years before. In the Letter 405. p. 2. a Soldier, says he, lying in
the Trenches before Landrecy, was advertised in a Dream speedily to retire,
unless he was willing to be overwhelmed by a Mine which was going to play.
Scarcely was he up, but the Mine blew up the place he lay upon. This will
surprise you, but if you had M. de Saumaise, he would relate unto you a History
which he has of his Father. A certain man who knew not a word of Greek, came to
see M. de Saumaise his Father, who was a Counselor at the Parliament of Dijon,
and showed him these words which he had heard, at night in his Dream, and which
he had written in French Characters as soon as he awaked, (...); he asked of
Mr. de Saumaise if he knew not their meaning; Mr. de Saumaise said unto him
that they signified, Away, perceivest thou not thy Death? This man quitted the
House where he lived, and it fell the night following.

If this History is true, it is assuredly surprising. It includes a prediction,
which may be attributed to some Invisible power, who had advertised this man in
a Dream of what was to happen the next day, but here is another prediction,
which deserves not less our Relation. Grotius not only made a kind of Horoscope
of a great Prince who was born the fifth of September in 1638. In the Letter
1079 of the 1. p. directed to Queen Christine, but foretold upon a simple
passage, that he would be one day a great Conqueror. This Prince troubled
several Nurses which were to be given him in biting the Nipple of their
Breasts. Fugiunt eum conquisitae ad hoc Faeminae, says Grotius Letter 189. p.
1. quod ubera earum morsicando lancinet robustus calidique Spiritus puer; non
sine omine futurae rapacitatis. Grotius seems to have taken delight in this
thought, seeing he repeats it in his Letter 1231. written to Barlaeus the
following year: Nutrices, says he, non lassat tantum, sed and lacerat, caveant
vicini sibi a tam matura rapacitate* The Fable teaches us some such thing of
Hercules, whom Juno was obliged to abandon, after she had undertaken to Nurse
him, because he dealt too violently by her Paps. See Diodorus Lib. IV.

To finish the Extract which we are to make of the Historical things which are
in the Letters of Grotius, we need no more but to add some matters which
concern himself. Mr. Aubery, who caused to be Printed some years ago a Book
Entitled Memorials of the History of Holland, has made in this Book a kind of
an abridgment of the Life of our Author, where he praises and blames him,
according as he thought him to have deserved either. But it is astonishing that
being a particular friend to this great man, and having often seen him in the
time wherein he was Ambassador to the Court of Swedland, he notwithstanding
does advance diverse things, which are contrary to what Grotius says himself in
his Letters. He says for example, that Grotius being vexed because Cardinal
Richelieu had cut off his Pension, the first time he was in France, and had
caused him thus to leave it, See not the Cardinal under this fine pretense,
that he helped not the Ambassadors. It Is what Mr. Aubery calls an unconceivable
stand, or for a better expression, a Dutch obstinacy, which hindered his
reconciliation with this potent Minister, though he had a very great need of him
for his service in his particular affairs, so that he treated but with the
subaltern Ministers. Grotius says on the contrary, that he saw him pretty
often, and relates some discourses he had with him, as may be seen in 1. p.
letter 491, 505, 535. and elsewhere. There is no great likelihood that Grotius
gave the Chancellor of Swedeland, long relations of any affairs which he had
negotiated, as he says, with the Cardinal himself, if he had never seen him
during his Residence in France* as Mr. du Maurier assures. But it seems this
Author has confounded the Cardinal of Richelieu, with Cardinal Mazarin, of
whom Grotius thus speaks in a Letter dated the 26th of September, 1643. I
have caused your Letters to be given to Cardinal Mazarin; I shall not see him,
without an Order from our Queen, because at his own house he gives not the hand
to the Ambassadors of Crowned heads, and being treated with the Title of
Eminence, he treats not again with that of Excellence, pretending to be equal
to Kings, according to the Opinions of the Court of Rome, and very difficultly
yields precedence to Princes of the Blood.

Mr. du Maurier also says another thing, which is not conformable to the
Letters of Grotius, viz. that the Ministers of Charenton, who despised Grotius,
during the time he was but a private man in France, used him quite another way
when he was Ambassador of Swedland. Having considered, says this Author, that
it would be a very great honor to them, that an Ambassador of so considerable
a Crown should be present at their Assemblies, they sent unto him one of their
Ministers, with the Elders of the Consistory, to pray him to honor their
Sermons with his presence; telling him, that the very Lutherans were of late
admitted to their Communion, by an Act of the last Synod of Charenton, hut he
answered them haughtily, that they having neglected him whilst he was a private
man and a Refugee, he would neglect them in his turn, being Ambassador. It Is
very well known, that the Ministers of Charenton endeavored to draw Grotius to
their Assemblies, from the first time that he was in France; but as we see
nothing of it in these Letters, we do not at all rely upon it. It Is true, some
were deputed to Grotius, as he says himself in the Letters 378. p. 1. 340, and
350. p. 2. but he refused not to go to the Sermons of Charenton, after the
manner which Mr. du Maurier says; he thus tells us himself, he received the
Deputies of Charenton, Letter 350. p. 2. I have had this day at my House three
Learned Reformed Ministers, le Faucheur Minister of Montpellier, and Mertrezat
and Daille Ministers of this Church. They desired me to join my self to their
Communion, and told me that what was in times past established at Alez and
Charenton, being changed by new rules, wherein Lutherans are admitted to the
Communion, they hoped we should hold their Confession for a Christian
Confession, as they had the same opinion in respect to the Remonstrants: that
they remembered what I formerly writ against Sibrandus, to wit that I should be
very much surprised if the Reformed refused the Communion to Chrysostom and
Melanchton if they came again into the World: That they had read and approved
my whole Book of the Truth of the Christian Religion, and the admonition I gave
at the end to Christians, to bring them to an agreement. I told'em I was
satisfied with what they said, being conformable to my maxims: that the opinion
of Melanchton had always extremely pleased me, and that I had sufficiently
shown it; that as to what concerns Ecclesiastical Peace, I knew well that it
ought not to be troubled by a turbulent manner of acting. That there should be
free conferences amongst the learned. They also said that they endeavored to
bring the Remonstrants of Holland into their Communion, and that they had
written about it to M. Rivet: that they were become more prudent with time, and
that they hoped that the Dutch after having well examined their reasons, would
do somewhat in their favor. After having said these things on each side, I
added that I was ready to testify by the external signs the Communion of the
Spirit, in which I had always joined with them; and that it was never my fault
that it was not so: that if I went into a Country where Lutherans, knowing my
opinions of the Eucharist, would receive me into their Communion, I would make
no difficulty to communicate with them. They approved this conduct. Grotius
seemed after this to be inclined to go to communicate at Charenton, but there
was an obstacle which never could be taken away, that hindered him; 'twas that
Grotius would have had a distinct place in the Temple, and to be received there
in the quality of Ambassador of Swedland; which the Consistory of Charenton
would not grant him. Grotius complains thereof in these terms, in Letter 358. I
am surprised at the inconstancy of these people, who having invited to their
Communion the Lutherans, say that they cannot receive an Ambassador of
Swedland, in the Quality of Ambassador, because of the difference which is
between the sentiments of that Kingdom and theirs.

Grotius notwithstanding in the Letters which we have cited praises the
moderation of the Ministers of Charenton. But here is a good character of Mr.
Daille in Letter 232. p. 2. A Roman Catholic having put several questions to
M. Daille in a Letter, and amongst other things why the Reformed had condemned
the Arminians; he answered that seeing peace was oftentimes offered to the
Lutherans who are of the same opinions, it was not so much the Arminians who
had been condemned as Arminianism. I fear says Grotius, that those who are
here stronger than they, shall say one day that they drive not away the
Calvinists but Calvinism; which I pray God may not befall them.

M. du Maurier relates a pleasant History of a Lutheran Minister that Grotius
had at his House, whom he names Doctor Ambreus, whereas Grotius complains of
Brandanus, Letter 840. p. 1.410. p. 2. He says that this Ambreus, instead of
expounding purely and simply the Word of God, flung himself into controversy
with so much violence, that his Sermons were full of invectives, which Grotius
being at last weary of, exhorted him to expound the Gospel, without wounding
Christian Charity. Upon which Doctor Ambreus told him he could not but say what
God inspired him with: and Grotius having at last ordered him, either to
abstain from railing, or Preach no more, this Ambreus leaving him in anger, and
coming down stairs, said grumbling, that it was a strange thing that the
Ambassador of the Crown of Swedland, would shut the Holy Ghost's mouth. Which
Grotius related unto me, adds Mr. du Maurier being ready to split with
laughing, and said that this Ambreus complained every where that he shut the
Holy Ghost's mouth, because he hindered him from speaking against his
Neighbor. Yet Grotius complains only of Brandanus, and also contradicts in
another thing M. du Maurier. This Author says that one M. d'Or who was of the
same Sentiments with Calvin, Preached in the Afternoons, and that he would also
engage himself in Controversy. Grotius had only a design to take this M. d'Or
after he had sent away Brandanus, and this M. d Or was formerly of the Judgment
of the Arminians, on which account he came out of Sedan, where he was Minister
before the Synod of Dordrecht. See Let. 410. p. 2. by the following Letters we
see that Grotius made no use of him, though he had a design so to do.

We shall end the Extract of what concerns the Person of Grotius, by his
Epitaph which he made himself, and which is in Let. 536. p. 2.

Grotius hic Hugo est, Batavum Captivus and Exul,
Legatus Regni, Suedia magna, tui.
Concerning his works, he tells us himself that his Book of the Truth of the
Christian Religion, was translated not only into High Dutch, French and
English, but even into Arabic and Persian, to serve for the Conversion of
Infidels. See the 2 d. p. Letter 411, 444, 534. He says also that the Queen of
Swedland caused his Book de Iure Belli and Pacis, to be read which some Divines
said included Socinian principles. Grotius says laughing thereat* Fiet and
Regina Sociniana, si quid Voetio, Riveto, Cleopenburgio credimus.

V. To come, in fine, to what is in the Letters of Grotius concerning
Politics, we believe we may say to the public what Peter Grotius Son to our
Author, esteeming so much the Letters which his Father had Written during his
Ambassy, that he said they were as excellent in respect to Policy, as his
Annotations upon the Gospel were in matters of Divinity. It is what the Public
may Judge, and whereof persons would yet judge better, if diverse places, which
undoubtedly contain the most important things, were not written in figures, or
if the Author had not made use of invented names, which are not easy to be
understood M. du Maurier is of a sentiment very different, since he says, that
Grotius being withdrawn from the society of the Living, and passing whole days,
and the most part of the Night with the Dead, he could only send into Swedland
news about new bridge in fine Latin.

We shall not undertake to decide which of the two had most reason, because
here we write a History, and not an Apology. Those who will take the pains to
compare the news which Grotius writ to the Chancelof Swedland with the events
of those times may judge thereof. But it would not be surprising that an
Ambassador, who is obliged to write very often and has not always considerable
affairs, should write news either not of great consequence, or perhaps false.
Howbeit, we shall here collect some political places, which are spread through
this great Volume.

In the 364. L. p. 1. we find a dispute something extraordinary, concerning the
power of sending Ambassadors. The great Chancellor Oxenstiern, who after the
Death of Gustavus, had a full power to do all he thought convenient for the
good of the state, to send Ambassadors, etc. sent Grotius into France. Some
difficulties were raised thereupon, which Grotius refutes in this Letter by
diverse examples, and particularly by that of the Ambassadors, who having been
sent from Flanders by Archdukes, in virtue of the power they had received from
Madrid, were received in France and England, as Ambassadors from the King of
Spain. Grotius then tells us in what manner he was received, after he had been
acknowledged Ambassador from the Crown of Swedland.

He sometimes makes political remarks upon the Nature of Nations, and upon the
manner wherewith one ought to treat with them, as when he says of the French,
Let. 371. p. 1. that they are at first harder to be dealt with, but that by
little and little, they become more tractable, according as they perceive they
get nothing by acting haughtily. The same Nation, says our Author Let. 582. p.
1. boasts of its riches, when it seeks for Allies; but when any thing is to be
paid, it is not ashamed to say that it is extremely poor: Galli cum socios
quaerunt, maximas praeferunt divitias; Vbi solvendum est aliquid, ultimam
paupertatem. So he speaks elsewhere in what manner the French do use the Court
of Rome, that when they do not obtain of them what they would, they menace it.
People, says he* might make use of this way, to diminish the Pope's Power; but
for the most part when the affairs of private Men go on well, those of the
State are neglected. It Is thought the Cardinal would frighten the Pope, that he
may make him here a perpetual Legate to the Apostolic See. For the Romans of
these days do through fear, many things which they would never do with their
good will, Let. 1292. part 1.

In this Letter also is the manner wherewith Cardinal Richelieu negotiated, and
how he employed the most famous Father Joseph in the most difficult
negotiations. Grotius tells us that the Cardinal made use of him, to begin the
negotiations, and to put them in a way of succeeding, after which he would put
in himself. Butillerius Pater, says he, and Josephus Capucinus negotia cruda
accipiunt, cocta ad Cardinalem deferunt. Let. 375. p. 1. An example hereof may
be seen in Let. 371. In the 380. is the History of a Conference which Grotius
had with the Cardinal and F. Joseph. This Capuchin at first speaks there with
the Ambassador of Swedland, and goes through the hardest part of the
Contestation. Afterward the Cardinal intervened, as to make them agree in
proposing a Medium. Dixit deinde Cardinalis, they are the words of our Author,
videre se inter me and Iosephum minus convenire: velle se esse Conciliatorem
mutuae inter nos benevolentiae.

After having observed in a Letter to Lewis Camerarius, that the Swedes had run
so much in debt, that they were no more trusted, and that the neighboring
Nations were not less drained, he adds this political reflection: Pro divitiis
nobis erit eadem apud hosts paupertas; the poverty of our Enemies will serve
us instead of Riches. Let. 884. p. 1. But there are few places of the Politics
that are stronger and livelier, than a Description of the Court of France in
1635. whereof here are some words, for it is too long to be all inserted: The
Cardinal burdened with care, unloads it on a Monk, this Monk discharges it
very slightly. Boutiller the Son only runs about, the Father defers every
thing, the Commissaries of the Treasury, and the Generals of the Armies, think
they are all called to a Harvest of Gold. The Cardinal is charged with the Sins
of all the World, and even fears his life.

It happened in 1637. that Grotius and the Earl of Leicester, the English
Ambassador having sent their Coaches to meet an Ambassador of Holland, the
Swedish Ambassadors Men took the Precedence, in spite of the English, which
made the latter draw their Swords. The Duke de la Force who went for the
Ambassador ran to the tumult, and thought he could easily decide it, but the
Swedes made it appear they were prepared for this accident in giving the
reasons they had to do so, which may be seen in Let. 722. p. 1.

I almost forgot to remark that in the 2. part which contains much fewer
political Letters than the first, that the Opinion of Grotius may be seen upon
these two questions: to wit, if one is obliged to send a Prince such succor as
has been promised him, when we are attacked our selves? Letter 16. and after
what manner the Republic of the United Provinces hold Democracy? Let. 209.

This is what was thought fit to relate of the Letters of Grotius concerning
Politics. The subject of his Embassy may be seen in the new History of
Swedland by M. Puffendorf, lib. vii c. 4.

In this great number of Letters one may well judge that there are some of all
sorts: but we were contented to mark the principal subjects. The Letters of
Consolation may be added, whereof these are the most considerable, the 133. to
M. du Maurier upon the Death of his Wife: The 334. to G. Vossius upon the Death
of his Son Denis: The 445. to M. de Thou: The 1116. to a Prince of the House of
the Palatinate.

What follows is a Continuation of Bishop Ushers Works, Entitled, The
Antiquities of the British Churches, etc. And should have followed in page 37.
after these Words, Day of his Death, but was there left out through the
Printers mistake.
AFter the death of Innocent, c. 10.
St. Augustine and Alypius writ to St. Paulin Bishop of Nola, to exhort him to
oppose Pelagianism in Italy, provided he was in a Condition of making any
progress. In the mean time Celes^^us that was returned from Asia, whither he
was gone after having made some little abode in Sicily, came to present himself
of his own accord to Zozimus, Born in Cappadocia, and successor to Innocent. He
gave him a small Tractate, wherein he had particularly expounded his Opinions.

He ran over therein all the Articles of Faith, from that of the Holy Trinity,
to the Resurrection of the Dead, and declared that he held all these Articles,
after the same manner the Catholic Church did. He added likewise, that if
disputes were raised in things that were not matters of Faith, as for his own
part he had not attributed to himself the authority of forming an absolute
Judgment thereof, but offered to be examined by Zozimus what he had Written
upon these subjects drawn from the authority of the Prophets, and Apostles,
that it might be corrected if there was any error. In fine every sentiment he
there explained that we have before spoken of, and denied manifestly Original
Sin. Zozimus cited ^elestius to appear before him in the Church of St. Clement,
where he caused this Writing to be read, and asked of the Author, if he verily
believed what he said therein. Celestius answered, Yes; after which Zozimus put
diverse questions to him, the sense whereof may be contained in these two: If he
condemned the Doctrines that Paulinus Deacon of Carthage had accused him of
maintaining? He said to that, that he could prove this Paulinus to be an
Heretic, and would not condemn the propositions whereof he had accused him.
The other question that Zozimus put to him, was if he agreed not with Pope
Innocent in what he had condemned, and if he would not follow the sentiments of
the Church of Rome? Celestius answered, yes.

After these formalities Zozimus Writ to the Bishops of Africa a long letter,
where he relates in what manner Celestius had appeared before him, and how he
had been examined. After that he reproachech them with having acted in this
affair with too much precipitation ( fervore fidei praefestinatum esse) and
that they had too lightly believed extravagant reports, and says the same to
certain Letters of Eros and Lazarus, not being well assured of their worth.
Lastly he cites those that shall have any thing to say against Celestius to
appear at Rome in two Months at farthest. Notwithstanding he took not away the
Excommunication that the Bishops of Africa had pronounced against him.

As in that time the judgment of a Synod, or even of a Bishop, and particularly
that of the Bishop of Rome was of great weight in what manner soever they had
proceeded, and that afterward Zozimus was accused of having prevaricated in
condemning Pelagius after having approved his Doctrine, St. Augustine de pecc.
c. 5, 6, 7.
has endeavored to give the best turn he could to this conduct of Zozimus, as
if this Prelate had acted mildly on Celestius's account, only for pity, and
thinking to have an account of his Opinions only for the better instructing
himself, and that seeing they could not not be attributed to him as obstinate
Heresies, it would not be so difficult even to bring him back to the truth.
Zozimus in a Word according to St. Augustine, looked upon Celestius as a Man of
great wit, and who being corrected might be very useful to others The will of
rectifying, but not the falsity of Opinion is commendable. ad Bonif. lib. 2. c.
3.
In homine acerrimi ingenii, qui profecto si corrigeretur plurimis profuisset,
voluntas emendationis, non falsitas dogmatis, approbata est. It Is a long while
ago, says our Author, p. 147.
that the Learned Vossius has shown this great Bishop endeavored in vain to
hide the broken back of Zozimus, with his Purple. It cannot be doubted after
reading the Letters that he Writ to the Bishops of Africa, that he not only
favored Celestius, but also Pelagius, as being Catholics, without dissenting
much from the true Faith.

Zozimus having sent his Letter unto Africa, received a Packet from Palestin
directed to Innocent, whose Death was not yet known. There were Letters of
Prayle Bishop of Jerusalem, and an Apology of Pelagius, with a small book
wherein he expounded his Opinions very clearly, as it may be seen by the
reading of it. Prayle openly took the part of ^elagius, and Zozimus caused to
be read publicly these Letters and Writings, which were approved by all, as
appears by what Zozimus writ a little while after to the Bishops of Africa.
Would to God, says he to them, my most beloved Brethren, that some of you
could have assisted at the reading of these Letters? What was not the joy of
the holy Men that were present? In what admiration were they all in? some could
scarcely keep themselves from shedding tears. Is it possible that you could
have defamed persons of so unspotted a Faith? Is there any place in their
Writings, where they have not spoken of the assistance and Grace of God?

He condemned moreover in these Letters Eros and Lazare, accusers of Pelagius
and Celestius, as persons guilty of great crimes, erubescenda factis and
damnationibus nomina and spoke with much contempt of others that were parties
against them.

Notwithstanding the Bishops of Africa took no notice of these Letters, but
assembled themselves at Carthage to the number of ccxiv, and condemned anew
Pelagius and Celestius, until they acknowledged the necessity of Grace in the
same sense, that it was maintained in Africa, without making use of any
equivocations as they had done till then. This Assembly was held at the
beginning of the year CCCCXVIII, they sent their Constitutions with a Letter to
Zozimus, wherein these Bishops exhorted him to act against Pelagius conformably
to them. Their Letter had the effect they desired, and Zozimus and all his
Clergy (who had admired the Writings of Pelagius, where they freely declared
their sentiments, giving attention, as St. Augustine, says, to what the Romans
believed thereupon, whose faith might be spoken of with Praise to the Lord) saw
that all their Opinions, which were conformable to each other, were very
zealous for the Catholic Faith against the Opinion of Pelagius.
Notwithstanding Zozimus in condemning him, spoke not so strongly, as he had in
judging in his favor, as it may be seen in Usher. The Emperors Honorius and
Theodosius, received also the acts of the Council of Africa, and thought fit to
prop them with their authority, in making an edict which they sent to the three
Prefects of the Praetorium, for to publish it in the whole Empire, by which
they banished Pelagius and Celestius from Rome, and likewise condemned to a
perpetual banishment and confiscation of Goods all those that should maintain
their Tenets, where e're they were, authorizing all persons to accuse them. The
Prefects of the Praetorium accompanied this Imperial Law with particular
Edicts, whereof one is still remaining, and may be seen in the Centuriators of
Magdebourg. It is of Palladius's, and in these terms, If he that is fallen into
the infamous Opinions of this dangerous Heresy be T. v. Col. 849.
Laick or Ecclesiastic, whosoever he be that brings him before the Judge,
without regarding the person of the accuser, the accused shall have his
Goodsconfiscated, and depart immediately into perpetual banishment: Et si sit
ille plebeius ac clericus qui in caliginis hujus obscoena reciderit a quocunque
tractus ad judicem, sine accusatricis discretione personae facultatum
publicatione nudatus irrevocabile patietur Exilium. Suspicious Persons may
believe that this Edict* conceived in so emphatical terms, came from the Pen of
some Zealous Ecclesiastic; but it is nothing in comparison to those of the
Emperors Honorius and Theodosius, that may be seen more at large in Usher, p.
151. Those that know the Style of the Preachers then, will be persuaded easily
that it was requisite to follow the like method for some time, to begin an
Imperial Edict in these Terms. Ad conturbandam Catholicae simplicitatis lucem,
puro semper splendore radiantem, dolosae artis ingenio, novam subito emicuisse
versutiam, pervulgata opinione cognovimus: quae fallacis scientiae obumbrata
mendaciis, and furiato tantum debacchata luctamine, stabilem quietem coelestis
conatur attrectare fidei. Dum novi acuminis commendata vento, insignem notam
plebeiae vilitatis sentire cum cunctis, ac prudentiae singularis palmam fore,
communiter approbata destruere, etc. All the rest are of the same Style, by
which may be seen the Spiritual Excitations in Honorius time to convert
Heretics, were not very different from such as have been made use of in these
latter Ages.

Notwithstanding the same Bishops of Africa, who had lately condemned Pelagius,
knowing nothing yet of the Emperors Edicts which were dated the last of April,
assembled themselves again at Carthage, the next day, and anathematized those
that should say, that the first Man was by his Nature mortal. 2. That little
Infants ought not to be Baptized, or that they might be so, though they were not
infected with the Sin of Adam. 3. That the Grace by which we are justified,
serves but for the Remission of Sins, and is not sufficient to make us abstain
from them for the future: 4. That Grace assisteth us only to know our duty, and
that it produces not obedience of it self. 5. That Grace is given us, that we
may the more easily by its means do, what we should do with most difficulty
without it. 6. That it is only by humility that we are all obliged to say that
we are Sinners* 7. That every one is not obliged to say, pardon us our sins for
himself, but for others only that are sinners. 8. That the Saints are obliged
to say the same words by humility only.

It seems that this Council intended not only to condemn the Opinions of
Pelagius, but also to anathematize aforehand those that could fall into the
sentiments that should have any connection with theirs. For it is apparent
according to these principles, he could absolutely deny the four last
propositions. He believed not that Grace made us simply to know our duty, nor
that there had been any man that had passed his life without Sin, excepting
Jesus Christ. But it has always been the custom of Councils to anathematise
some supposed errors that no body held, in condemning the real Opinioins of
Heretics; it may be to inspire more horror for Heresy, and to hinder that
none should be so bold as to protect Heretics. Thus as Ep. 157.
St. Augustine speaks, By the Vigilance of Episcopal Councils, with the help
of the Lord, who defends his Church (and that of the Imperial Edicts)
Pelagius and Celestius were condemned in all the Christian World, if they did
not repent.

Nevertheless Pelagius, who was still at Jerusalem pressed by Pinianus and
Melanius, made a declaration of his thoughts concerning the necessity of Grace,
which he acknowledged to be necessary to every act: and at every moment. He
also says, that he always was in regard to Baptism of the same sentiments, he
had mentioned in his profession of Faith to Pope Innocent, which is, that
Children must be Baptized as accustomed. But whatever he could say, it was not
believed that he understood what he spoke in the same sense with the African
Church. Nevertheless Iulianus Bishop of Celenes in Campania, published
Commentaries upon the Song of Songs, a book de Constantla, and four books
against the first of St. Augustins de Concupiscentiae and Nuptiis, where he
maintained the sentiments of Pelagius. In the last of these Works, he treated
openly the Bishops of Africa, as seditious and Innovators, and said that they
could not have Reason on their side, since in the dispute, they frighted those
that resisted them, with the Imperial Edicts, but that acting after that nature
they persuaded not intelligent persons, but the fearful only: laborare illam
partem rationis inopia, Ap. Aug. cont. Iul. lib. 3. c. 1.
quae in disserendo cum terrorem surrogat, nullum a prudentibus impetrat, sed
caecum a meticulosis extorquet assensum.He accused Zozimus of having used
Prevarication in condemning Pelagius, after having approved his sentiments, and
as to the Synods of Africa he said that those that had been condemned by them,
could not defend their cause; that none can well judge of controverted things,
if he does not bring a mind free from hatred, friendship, enmity, or anger,
that the Bishops of A^rick were not thus qualified, having an aversion to the
Opinions of Pelagius before they knew them, that his sentiments were not to be
received, but weighed; and finally all that has been usual to be objected to
the judgments of great Assemblies.

A new Council was afterward held in the year CCCCXIX. at Carthage, composed of
CCXVII. Bishops, where all that had been done in the former against Pelagius
was confirmed, and in effect to make use of the terms of St. Prosper, in his
Poem of the Ungrateful, An alium in sinem posset procedere sanctum Concilium,
cui dux Aurelius, ingeniumque Augustinus erat.

But the Episcopal Authority was still upheld in this rencounter by that of the
Emperors, who in a Letter directed to Aurelius confirmed their precedent
Edict, and ordered, that if any knew in any p. 161.
place of the Empire Pelagius and Celestius kept themselves hidden, and
discovered them not, or did not immediately drive them away, he should be
liable to the same punishment those Heretics were. And to correct the
stubborness of some Bishops who maintained, by a silent consent, those that
disputed in favor of the Heresy, or that did not destroy it in publicly
attacking it; Aurelius should take the care to depose those that would not sign
the Condemnation of Pelagianism, and should be excommunicated and banished.
Aurelius had orders to publish this Edict in all Africa, and he executed it
punctually, joining to it a circular Letter to the Bishops of the Byzacen and
Arzugitan Provinces, by which he compelled them to sign the acts of the last
Council, as well those that had assisted at it, as those that could not be
present, that it might be acknowledged that there was not in Bishops neither
dissimulation nor negligence, or fearing that by chance there might remain some
lawful suspicion of some bidden Heresy. The Bishops that were of the same
Opinion with Pelagius subscribed the acts, but with great difficulty; and
eighteen of them Writ to the Bishop of Thessaloni^a endeavoring to draw the
Eastern Bishops on their side. That they might the easier engage them in their
own cause, they accused their adversaries of Manicheism, because the Manicheans
maintained also the unavoidable necessity of Sinning, and the natural
corruption of Man. This accusation was the rather more odious, that St.
Augustine the principal defender of these Opinions, had been in his Youth
infected with the Opinion of Manicheus, and that having abjured them, he had
attacked them by the same principles whereof the Pelagians had made use, when
he was come to the Episcopacy. On the other side Iulianus Writ to Rome, and
Celestius sent to Constantinople in the year CCCCXIX, to endeavor to win some
Proselytes there. But after the Imperial Edicts that we have already observed,
they could in no likelihood have a good issue. Celestius was ill received by
Atticus who had succeeded to Arsacius, substituted next to St. Chrysostom, but
dead a little while after. The Pelagians were also very ill treated, according
to the relation of St. Prosper, at Ephesus and Sicily; and Constantius that
Honorius had associated in the Empire, made in the year CCCCXX, an Edict like
to that of this Prince against those that should hide Celestius. St. Jerome
died this year, and St. Augustine composed his four books addressed to Boniface
Successor to Zozimus, and the six against Julian addressed to Claudius. He,
made therein the Elogium of St. Jerome and assures us that he was of the same
sentiments with the Bishops of Africa, because it seems he had attacked the
Pelagians, though on the other hand he did not make use of St. Augustins reasons,
as it may be seen in the first Tome of this Library. p. 21. St. Jerome said
lib. in Pelag.
that the Commandments of God are possible, but that every one cannot do that
which is possible, not by any weakness of nature, which would be injurious to
God, but the custom of the Soul, which cannot always have at the same time all
virtues. Possibilia praecipit Deus, sed haec possibilia cuncta singuli habere
non possumus, non imbecillitate naturae, ut calumniam facias Deo, sed animi
assuetudine, qui cunctas simul and semper non potest habere virtutes. St.
Augustine was so far from this Opinion that in the CXII. Sermon de tempore he
speaks thus: We abhor the Blasphemy of those, who say that God has commanded
Man any thing impossible, and that the Commandments of God cannot be kept by
ea^h in particular, but by all in common. Execramur Blasphemiam eorum qui
dicunt impossible aliquid homini a Deo esse praeceptum, and mandata Dei non a
singulis, sed ab omnibus in commune posse servari, here must be understood by
the help of Grace.

Whilst Cap. 11.
Pelagius remained hidden in the East, and was silent, Julian composed four
Books against the second of St. Augustine de Concupiscentia and Nuptiis, having
refuted the first in the four, whereof we have spoken. St. Augustine undertook
to answer to the last work of Julian, as he had done to the precedent, but he
could not end his answer, being dead before. We have two books thereof, with
the two books Julian, that he refuteth, Printed at Paris, by Claudius Menard in
1616. Julian kept no measure in his Books, and seems to have been willing to
abuse the Adversaries of Pelagius, to vindicate himself of the severe Edicts
they had obtained against him. But this conduct did him no good, seeing
Celestinus Bishop of Rome banished him out of Italy, with Florus, Oroncius,
Fabius, and all the Bishops of the same party*

It seems notwithstanding that Pelagianism did spread it self in spite of
all this, seeing the Emperor Valentinian, to clear the Gauls of it, published
an Edict at Aquilea in Ccccxxv, by which he ordered Patroclus Bishop of Arles,
to visit diverse Bishops that followed the opinions of Pelagius, and to declare
unto them, if in 20. days they they did not retract their Errors, they should
be banished from the Gauls, and deprived of their Bishoprics.

John Cassienus, originally a Scythian, that some call an Athenian, others a
Roman, and some a Gaul, who had been a Deacon to St. Chrysostom, and made a
Priest by Innocent the first, being retired to Marseilles began to compose
Books, by which sweetening a little the Sentiments of Pelagius, w^om he also
condemned as a Heretic, he gave birth to the opinions, to which were since
given the Name of Semi-pelagianism. His Sentiments may be seen in his
Collations, or Conferences that St. Prosper has refuted, and maintained
against the pure Pelagianism. Peta^. lib. laud. c. 7.
Here in a few words is what they were reduced unto.

I. The Semi-pelagians allowed, that men are born corrupted, and that they
cannot withdraw from this Corruption, but by the assistance of Grace, which is
nevertheless prevented by some motion of the Will, as by some good desire;
whence they said, n^cum est velle credere, Dei autem gratiae est adjuvare; to
Will to Believe depends of me, but it is the Grace of God that helps me. God
according to them expects from us these first motions, after which he gives
us his Grace.

II. That God inviteth all the World by his Grace, but that it depends of the
Liberty of men to receive or to reject it.

III. That God had caused the Gospel to be preached to Nations that he foresaw
would embrace it, and that he caused it not to be preached to Nations, that he
foresaw would reject it.

IV. That notwithstanding he was willing all should be saved, he had chosen to
Salvation none but those, that he saw would persevere in Faith and good Works.

V. That there was no particular Grace absolutely necessary to Salvation, which
God gave only to a certain number of men, and that men might lose all the
Graces they had received.

VI. That of little Children which died in their Infancy, God permitted that
those only should be baptized* who, according to the foreknowledge of God would
have been pious if they had lived; but on the contrary those that were wicked,
if they came to a more advanced Age, were excluded from Baptism by Providence.

VII. The Semi-pelagians were yet accused to make Grace entirely outward, so
that according to them it chiefly consisted in the preaching of the Gospel; but
some of them maintained that there was also an interior Grace, that Pelagius
himself did not totally reject. Others allowed that there was preventing Grace.

So it seems, that the difference that was betwixt them, and Pelagius
consisted only in this, that they allowed Men were born in some measure
corrupt, and also they pressed more the necessity of Grace, at least in words.
Though the difference was not extremely great, he notwithstanding anathematized
Pelagius. But this they did, it is like, in the supposition, that Pelagius
maintained all the opinions condemned by the Councils of Africa. St. Augustine
accuses them to have made the Grace of God wholly to consist in Instruction,
which only regards the understanding, when as he believed it to consist in a
particular and interior action of the Holy Ghost, determining us invincibly to
Will good, this determination not being the effect of our understanding. The
other Sentiments of this Father, are known opposite either to the Doctrine of
Pelagius, or that of the Semi-pelagians. We may be instructed herein
particularly, in his Books of Predestination and Perseverance, that he writ at
the entreaty of St. Pro^per against the Semi-pelagians, and in the works of the
latter.

To come back to the History, it is said, that in the year Ccccxxix, one
Agricola Son of Severiaenus a Pelagian Bishop carried Pelagianism into England,
but St. Germain Bishop of Auxerre, was sent hither by Pope Celestin, or by the
Bishops of the Gauls, and extirpated it suddenly. Several miracles are
attributed to him in this Voyage, and in the stay he made in England, as Usher
observes. But if what Hist. Scot. lib. 8.
Hector Boethius says, a Historian of Scotland, who lived in the beginning of
the past Age, be true, he used a means that is not less efficacious for the
extirpation of Heresy, which was that the Pelagians that would not retract,
were burned by the care of the Magistrates.

But whilst St. Germain purified England, the Seeds of Pelagianism, that
Cassian had spread amongst the Monks of Marseille, and in the Narbonick Gaul,
caused it likewise to grow in France. St. Prosper and Hilary, had writ of it to
St. Augustine, and had specified it to him, that several Ecclesiastics of the
Gauls looked upon his opinions as dangerous novelties. St. Augustine answered
to their objections in the books, which we lately have named; but the support
that Hilary Bishop of Arles, and Maxim Bishop of Riez granted to the
Semi-pelagians, hindered any body from molesting them, though they showed much
aversion for the Doctrine of St. Augustine.

Julian and the other Bishops banished, as I have already observed, from Italy,
were gone to Constantinople. where they importuned the Emperor, to be
re-established, but as they were accused of Heresy, he would grant them
nothing, without knowing the reasons why they were banished. Nestorius Bishop
of Constantinople writ about it to Celestine, who answered him after a very
sour manner, and as if it had not been permitted to be informed of the reason
of their condemnation, reproaching him at the same time with his particular
Sentiments. His Letter is dated the 12. of August in the year Ccccxxx.

It was at that time, that St. Augustine died, whose Elogium may be found in
our Author who approves of the praises that Fulgentius gives him in his 2.
Book of the Truth of Predestination, where he speaks of him as Inspired. A
little after his death, the Letters of Theodosius, that had called him to the
Council of Ephesus, arrived in Africa, whence some Bishops were sent thither.

In the year Ccccxxxi, the 22. of June, this Council composed of CCX. Bishops
was assembled for the Condemnation of Nestorius* Cyril of Alexandria presided
there, and whilst it was holding, John Bishop of Antioch was assembled with 30.
other Bishops, who made Canons contrary to those of this Council. The
particulars were, that the party of Cyril, and that of John reciprocally
accused each other of Pelagianism; but the greater part approved of the
Deposition of Julian and other Bishops of Italy, that Nestorius had used with
more mildness. He is accused to have been of their opinion, and to have
maintained that Jesus Christ was become the Son of God, by the good use he made
of his Free Will, in reward whereof God had united him to the Everlasting Word.
This was the cause, that in this Council Pelagianism and Nestorianism were both
condemned together.

But notwithstanding all this, and the cares of three Popes, Celestinus,
Xystus, and Leo the first, Semi-pelagianism was upheld amongst the Gauls. It
may be that the manner wherewith Celestine writ to the Bishops of France
contributed to it, because that though he condemned Pelagius with heat, and
praised St. Augustine, he said at the end of his Letter, that as to the deep
and difficult Questions, which were found mingled in this Controversy, and
which were treated at length by those that opposed the Heretics, that as he
durst not despise them, he did believe it not necessary to make a party therein.

Our Author shows Cap. 12.
what pains St. Prosper, and the Popes Xystus and Leo took to refute, or to
destroy Pelagianism, and Semi-pelagianism. It was in the same time that Vincent
of Lerins made his Commonitory to wit, three years after the Council of
Ephesus. He is suspected to be the Author of the objections that St. Prosper
has refuted, under the Title of Objectiones Vincentianae; this Commonitory was
Printed lately in 12. at Cambridge, with the Notes of Mr. Baluze, and the Book
of St. Augustine of Heresies.

Usher in this same Chapter relates the Ravages, that the Scotch and the Picts
committed in England, the arrival of the Saxons into this Island, the manner
how they became Masters on it, and the other events of that time.

Before C. 13.
that these disasters happened in England a Monk named Faustus retired from
hence into the Narbonick Gaul, where he became Abbot of Lerins and afterward
Bishop of Riez, after Maximus, whom he also succeeded in the Abbey of Lerins.
He assisted at a Council, which was held at Rome, toward the end of the year
Cccclxii, where it was concluded that every year there should be a Council held
amongst the Gauls, which should be convocated by the Archbishop of Arles. There
was assembled one, in this City which ordered Faustus to express his Sentiments
touching the matter of Grace, and another at Lions by the order of which he
added something to what he had already writ, because some new Errors had been
discovered. These Errors are those to which the Divines of Marseilles gave the
Name of Predestinarian Heresy, that some maintain to have been a real Heresy,
and others the opinions of St. Augustine. We have no more of the Acts of these
two Synods, but the work of Faustus subsisteth yet. It is entitled, de Gratia
and libero arbitrio, directed to Leontius Archbishop of Arles, and very clearly
contains Semi-pelagianism. Erasmus got it first printed at Basil, in
M.D.XXVIII, and it has been since inserted in the 8 th. Tome of the Library of
the Fathers. Faustus sent the opinions of the second Council of Arles to a
Predestinarian Priest named Lucidus, to oblige him to retract his Errors, and
to subscribe this Doctrine of the Council. His Letter to Lucidus is still to be
^ad, and the answer of this Priest directed to the Bishops assembled at Arles,
where he declares that he condemns the Sentiments of those that believe, that
after the fall of the first man, Free Will was entirely extinct. That Jesus
Christ died for all men; that some are destined to death and others to life:
that from Adam to Jesus Christ no Pagan has been saved by the first Grace of
God, to wit, by the law of nature, because they have lost the free Will in our
first Father: That the Patriarchs and Prophets, and the greatest of Saints have
remained in Paradise until the time of Redemption. This is almost a full
Abridgment of the Book of Faustus. Some learned men have maintained that
Faustus had passed his Commission, and that many of those that had assisted at
the Councils of Arles and Lions, had not subscribed his Book. It is
nevertheless difficult to believe that a Bishop that was very much esteemed as
Faustus was, as it appears by the Letters of Sidonius Apollinaris Bishop of
Clermont in Auvergne, who makes his Elogy in several places, and by Gennadus
who praises this work; it is I say, difficult enough to conceive how he could
have the boldness to attribute to a Council, opinions which were so odious to
the greatest part of 'em, and to think the Members of this Council could not
show their Resentment thereof. Neither do those who say that Faustus exceeded
his Commission, give any reason, only that they cannot persuade themselves that
there were so many Semi-Pelagians amongst the Gauls. In our Author are the
different Judgments that diverse learned men have made of Faustus and the
greatest part of 'em are not very favorable to him. Baronius too speaks ill
enough of him. So that it happens now to the Semi-Pelagians, what did in
times past to the Pelagians; which is, that those who believed their principal
Tenets, condemned them only because those who have been more considerable than
themselves have formerly condemned them.

The Book of Faustus is C. 14.
not unknown, it being carried to Constantinople, where men's minds were divided
concerning the Doctrine it contained. Some maintained it was Orthodox, and
others Heretical, as it appears by a Letter of Possessar an African Bishop,
who was then at Constantinople, and who writ of it to Pope Hormisda in the year
DXX. to know his thoughts thereupon. Persons of the first quality amongst which
were Vitalianus and Justinian, who has been since Emperor, desired to be
instructed what Sentiments the Church of Rome had of it. Hormisda disapproved
the Book of Faustus, and sent them to consult these of St. Augustine of
Predestination and Perseverance. There was then at Constantinople, a Monk named
John Maxence, who writ an answer Tom. 6. Bibl. P. P. Ed. Col.
to the Letter of Hormisda, where he compares the opinions of St. Augustine and
those of Faustus, and desperately censures Possessar and those that maintained
that the Book of Faustus was Orthodox. It appears by that, that Possessar was a
Semi-Pelagian, and consequently that the Councils of Africa, had not been able
as yet to submit all the Bishops of this Church to their Decisions.

The Vandals were become Masters of Africa, during the heat of the Pelagian
Controversies, and as they were Arians, they drove away a great number of
Bishops that followed the decisions of the Council of Nice. Thrasamond King of
the Vandals had sent 60 of them into exile from the Province of Byzacene, into
Sardinia. They were consulted from the East upon the Controversies of Grace,
rather to have a public Declaration of their opinions, than to draw
instructions from them, seeing those that did write to them, had already taken
party and condemned in their Letters not only the Pelagians, but also the Books
of Faustus. Fulgentius Bishop of Esfagues answered in the name of the others,
and exposed the sentiments of St. Augustine, in a Letter, and in a particular
Book directed to one Paul a Deacon. The same Fulgentius made also other works
upon this matter, whereof several places may be seen in our Author. He had
composed seven Books against the two of Faustus of Grace and Free Will, but
they are lost. These African Bishops returned to their Churches in the year
DXXIII. which was that of the Death of Thrasamond, as Victor of Tonneins
informs us in his Chronicle. But Fulgenius had refuted Faustus before he had
left Sardinia, whence it follows, as well as from the Letter of Possessar,
that Binius has not well related the third Council of Arles, whose opinions
Faustus had expounded in the year DXXIV. But this is not the only fault he has
committed, he has corrected, or rather corrupted as he thought fit, an
infinite number of places of the Ancient Councils, without having respect to
the MSS. which makes Usher P. 235.
to give him the Title of Contaminator Conciliorum.

As Hilary and Leontius Archbishops of Arles had favored Semi-Pelagianism,
Cesario, who succeeded Leontius inclined to what the Divines of Marseille
called Praedestianism, to wit the Sentiments of St. Augustine. It was by his
direction, that the second Council of Orange was held in the year DXXXIX, which
approved the opinions of St. Augustine, and our Author gives us P. 262.
an account of all their entire acts. A little while after another Council was
held at Valence upon the same matters, and which also condemned
Semi-Pelagianism. Boniface II. approved the acts of this Council, by a Letter
that he writ to Cesario in the year DXXXI, and which Usher has inserted in his
Works.

Here it is that ends the History of Pelagianism and Semi-Pelagianism, which
was not nevertheless extinguished among the Gauls, nor in England, by so many
Efforts and Decrees of the defenders of Grace, as may be seen by the History of
Godescalch, written by the same Usher. What can there be concluded from thence,
according to the Principles of St. Augustine, but that God would not apply his
Grace to Anathemas, to Confiscations, to Depositions, and to Banishments,
whereof the Pious Emperors and Holy Councils made use of against the
unfortunate Pelagians?

We may relate the beginning of the third part of the British Antiquities in p.
268. where the Author begins to speak of King Arthur, and of the privileges
pretended to be given by him to the University of Cambridge. The rest of the
Chapter, excepting what there is in it concerning Gildas, of whose works Usher
makes long Extracts, is but a collection of Fables and Citations of Monks.

The 15 th Chapter treats of the Colonies that the Facts, a People of
Scythia, and the Sc^^ch that inhabited Ireland sent into England, and of the
manner how these Barbarous People were converted to Christianity. There are
also in this place more Fables than Truths, seeing if we except some general
acts, the remainder contains only impertinent fictions; in this Chapter are
also new Fables concerning St. Ursula, which some Monks report to have been
Daughter to a King of Scotland.

The 16 and 17 th Chapters which contain the Ecclesiastic Antiquities of
Ireland, are of the same stamp as the preceding ones, and we may wonder how the
Archbishop of Armagh has had the patience to make such a great collection of
Fables, and to read such a great number of Works of Monks, both Manuscript and
Printed. Those that are minded to know a great part of their fictions
concerning the British Isles from the year DXXX unto the end of the fourteenth
Age, may have recourse to the Original. In the same nevertheless may be found
some more certain antiquities touching their fir^^ Inhabitants, and the names
of these Islands, and some considerable changes that happened in them. The
Author has also added at the end, a Chronological Index, where one may see in
what time each thing ought to be related. It Is a thing much to be wished in
other Works, which contain such disquisitions of Antiquities, where commonly
there is a strange Confusion.

Those that desire to be thoroughly instructed in the Ecclesiastical Antiquities
of England, ought to add to Usher's Work, whereof we have given now the
extract, a Book in Folio, of Doctor Stillingfleets, Entitled, Origines
Britannicae, or the Antiquities of the British Churches; with a Pre^a^e
concerning some pretended Antiquities relating to Britain, in vindication of
the Bishop of St. Asaph, Printed at London 1685.

The true System of the Church, or Analysis of Faith, etc. by Sieur Jurieu
Doctor and Professor of Divinity. At Dordrecht, Sold by the Widow Caspar and
Theodore Goris 1686 in 8vo.
THIS piece is chiefly designed to answer Mr. Nicoli, but the difficulties that
Mr. Arnauld, Father Maimbourg, and the Bishop of Meaux have proposed in the
chapter of the Church, are herein examined with the utmost exactness; the whole
is reduced to these five general questions, 1. What are the essential parts of
the Church? 2. What is the invisibility and ma^ks thereof? 3. What is its
extent? 4. What is its Unity and Schism? 5. What is its authority and judgments
the exact and profound discussion of these matters take up three Books.

The first is begun by the comparison of the Church with a Human Body animated,
and it is pretended that as the essential parts of man are a reasonable Soul,
and an Organized Body, and the Union of this Body and Soul; likewise the
essential parts of the Church, are Faith and Charity, the Profession of Faith*
the outward practice of Charity, and the Union of these four; Faith and Charity
are the Soul of the Church, the outward Profession and Practice the Body, and
according to this Idea, neither the Saints in Paradise, nor the Predestined
that are not yet born, are any part of the Church, which is proved by
Scripture; after that is examined if false Christians and Heretical Societies,
make part of the Church; and having shown the prodigious encumbrances whereunto
the R. C. cast themselves, in maintaining that an ill man may be a true member
of the Church, and even of those Members on whom God confers the Spirit of
infallibility. We are taught after what manner the men of the World are in the
Church, and may be lawful Pastors in it. Mr. Nicoli stands here a rude brunt,
for he pretends that his efforts do make St. Augustine agree with the
Scholastic Divines upon the question, whether the wicked are true Members of
the Church, which is full of obvious contradictions. As to Heretical or
Schismatical Societies, it is needless to prove to the R. C. that they do not
belong to the Church, for they say it often enough, yet without giving good
reasons why crimes are more privileged therein than errors; but the
encumbrance which may be in this respect, hinders not Mr. Iuricu from fully
examining this matter; he enters therefore into the discussion of the Unity of
the Church.

He maintains, always leaning upon his comparison of human bodies, that all the
Sects of Christianity belong really to the body of the Church, and that in this
there is no more absurdity, than to maintain that a distempered Member is a
true part of Man's Body; he asks whence comes the Idea of the Unity which
excludes from the Church all the Christian Societies but one; and he persuades
himself that the monstrous errors which are raised in the first Ages, have been
the true Origin of this Idea, in accustoming the Orthodox, to think that
Heretics are Members wholly separate from the Body. He adds that St. Cyp
finding this Idea ready at hand, applied the same to the Novations, and
grounded thereon such strong reasons against the validity of the Baptism of
Heretics, that nothing of weight was answered him; this occasions the Author
to criticize on the Hypotheses of St. Cyprians antagonists. He shows them that
they understood not what the Unity of the Church is. He makes the same reproach
to St. Augustine and accuses him of perplexing himself with a thousand
contradictions in maintaining on one side, that the Baptism of Heretics is
valid, and on the other that they are absolutely separated from the body of the
Church* But St. Ierom is not so used; it is granted that he has better
understood the question, and it is proved by his disputes against the
Luciferians, that he excluded not from the Church, even all Heretics. After
this it is maintained by eleven proofs, that the Catholic Church includes all
the Christian Societies which retained the fundamentals of Christianity.

The first proof is drawn from the extent which the Word of God promises to
the Church, for as it is evident that there is no particular Church which has
ever completed the notion of this extent, the promises of God must either be
false or verify themselves by the extent of Christianity in General. Here are
refuted the pretensions of Mr. Nicole, upon the extent of the Romish Communion;
the second proof is taken out of the places of the Word of God, which foretell
that the Church shall have a mixture of good and bad, of wheat and tares, for
if crimes hinder not a Christian to be a Member of the true Church, why should
error have the fatality to hinder from it? It is surely a pretention that
abuses the light of Nature, to say that a Man that kills another is yet a
Catholic, but if he blames the retrenchment of the Cup, he is by that very
thing Excommunicated and banished the whole Communion of the Church; we need
only to ask good reasons for this enormous inequality to make the most resolute
Doctors sweat. The third proof is drawn from this, that God keeps the knowledge
of the Truth, and Preaching of his Word in Schismatic and erring Societies,
whence we must conclude that God saves Men in it. Other proofs are founded on
examples, or on the Opinions and Conduct of the Roman Catholics. The examples
are, the Schisms of the ten Tribes, which continued, as this Author says, to
be the People of God, and the Jews that were converted to the Gospel in the
Apostles time, and who refused to have any Communion with the converted
Gentiles. For the proofs ad hominem, they are drawn either from Father Goar, or
from Leo Alatius, who said that the Schismatic Communions of the East are not
out of the Church; Or, according to Mr. Nicole, several persons have been
saved, though of the Arian Communion, or else the Gentlemen of Port Royal; err,
which glory in this point of Transubst antiation, to have Conformed themselves
to the Schismatics; or, according to the Confession of the Romish Church, that
there is a true Mission and a saving Grace in the other Communions, so that
other sects are Christians; and during the Schism of Anti-Popes, the true
Catholicity was found under diverse obediences. Mr. Nicole is strongly refuted
upon this Article.

Neither is he with less vigor refuted upon the objection which he has so
much boasted of, which is, that the Unity of the Church necessarily includes
the Unity of Communion. It is the first difficulty which Mr. Iurieu examins in
his answer to the arguments, which may be alleged against his system. The 2d.
difficulty is found in the 7th. Book of Mr. Arnaud, upon the downfall of
Morality, where he says this System is that of the indifferency of Religions:
but it is strongly denied him, for it is maintained that one cannot be saved in
all the Sects of Christianity, and that there are cases, wherein we must
separate from them which err, and that we cannot Communicate in all, nor
tolerate all, nor pass successively from one unto another. These are great
questions, and for to clear them one must have as much wit, and depth of
Judgment as Mr. Iurieu has: He makes a thousand fine remarks upon all this, he
says there are two ways which God makes use of to save Men in Heretical
Societies, one is the Grace he gives them to discern the true spiritual
nourishment from the false. The other is to bear with their faults according to
his great mercy. But lest People should abuse this Doctrine, the Author brings
several Cautions which show that such as throw themselves into the Communion of
Rome, have reason to fear their Souls, and maintains, that it was well done to
separate from it, as in the last Age. He speaks much upon the important subject
of Toleration, nor will he have Sovereigns deprived of the liberty of
reprehending their Heretic subjects in certain cases, nor will he have them
that err, have any privilege of maintaining their pretended Truths, he
examines upon this subject, the reasons that have been lately published to
maintain the privileges of a Conscience that really errs, and then passes to
the visibility and perpetuity of the Church: two great questions, upon which he
says some things that are both solid and curious. And so much for the first
Book.

The second runs upon a subject no less important, that is, upon the Authority
of the Church, and analysis of Faith. The Author begins his proofs against the
infallibility of the Church for this reason, that the Universal Church being a
Collection of all Societies that retain its grounds, and principles, can no
ways be infallible, nor has it any need of being unerrable, for every part
maintaining that each other part being contrary to it is self, has fallen into
error, it follows that the Church being but a Collection of all these parts,
whereof the one refutes the rest, is erroneous in all its parts; and that being
so, how can it be infallible, or any single part thereof be unerrable. Nor is
it less evident that the infallibility of the Church would be to no purpose,
because it is not possible that a Congregation of all Christian Sects should
clear or decide any difficulty. And it is confessed here that the unanimous
consent of all Communions to teach a certain truth, is a kind of infallible
judgment given by the Church, and moreover the Character of a fundamental truth
so hard to be agreed upon is consented to; but lest the Socinians might come to
cross it, it is declared that neither they, nor the Fanatics have any share in
it, nor yet the other Sectaries of these times. After this the Authority of
Councils is spoken of, and diverse reflections made thereon: The Councils are
considered different ways. 1. Either as the meeting of wise Men, that have a
mind mutually to instruct each other; and Communicate their knowledge. 2. As
commissioned Lawmakers that Assemble for to regulate the form of Government,
3. As Judges established by their Church to learn the prevarications of
Religious Societies. The first of these relations belong to them in respect of
matters of Faith, the 2d. In respect of ordering of Discipline, and the 3d. in
respect of censures and Excommunications; this is exactly ordered, and helps to
resolve a thousand great difficulties, the submission Christians owe unto
Councils, and upon the infallibility that M. Meaux maintains that Protestants
attribute to Councils. M. Nicole goes farther, for he affirms that they
attribute the gift of infallibility to each faithful person to refute him; he
is given to understand by several examples that it is not necessary to think
ones self infallible to be convinced of any Opinion, and because the knot of
the difficulty lies in this, that they which are deceived are no less convinced
than the Orthodox, the Author acknowledges, that the Characters cannot be
precisely shown which distinguish the false and true persuasions, and at the
same time says, that these differences are real, and make themselves apparent.
It is good faith that can convince the public that Mr. Iurieu is none of those
Controvertists whereof M. Simon gives us such ugly Ideas, I would say of those
that would rather dye, than acknowledge that they cannot clear precisely this
or that difficulty. He gives us at the same time many instructions upon the
manner, how hearing and reading the Word of God, conducts infallibly into the
Truth, those in whom the Holy Ghost works by an efficacious Grace, but lest
people may confound the infallibility that is produced by this Grace, with the
privileged infallibility which was belonging to the Apostles, he teaches us the
marks whereby to distinguish them, after which he fully answers two objections,
that were proposed to make the Protestant Church seem to become to the highest
pitch of impertinence. For it was objected that a private Person, how ignorant
soever he could be, should be assured according to their principles, that he
can understand the true sense of Scripture, better than all the Church besides,
and that he owes no submission to Church, or Council, unless he sees by his own
proper light, that their decision is good; all these difficulties are solidly
answered and made to disappear.

The reader sees that hitherto M. Iurieu has met with several difficulties in
his way, but they are but trifles to what he must encounter now, for he is
going to answer objections that relate to the way of examen, and that are
without any dispute the main strength of M. Nicole. He answers them first
indirectly, and argues almost thus. We must go to the knowledge of Scripture
either by Authority, or by way of examen, but it is impossible that Authority
should conduct us to it, therefore we must make use of the way of examen. He
proves the minor in showing, that upon Earth there is no infallible and
speaking Authority; and though there were, it would be impossible to have
recourse to it, because it cannot be known, by any certain sign of necessary
truth. It is the bravest Field in the World wherein the Enemy is led without
having any place to retreat to, so that if there were able and disinterested
Judges, as the Platonists and Aristoteleans were, to observe the strokes given,
there are no People in the World they would despise so much, as the Christians,
whereof they would see the greatest part brag of a Doctrine that cannot keep
the Field one Moment in sight of the Enemy, and which nevertheless subdues
every day some of the other party, upon this may be well said, the absurdity
which Sandaicat published concerning the Battle of Cerisoles les Spagnales
victoriosos serinder, however it be, let us mark in a few words what the Author
does here.

He shows that if Faith did not enter the Soul, but by the way of Authority M.
Nicole would have it, the Jewish Church should never have had any good
assurance of the Will of God, as well because there was not in a long time any
Prophet or other infallible Tribunal that declared it, as that the Authority of
the Prophets themselves might have been suspected to be false, and that amidst
the most famous Miracles; because there was none that could infallibly assure
them, that these Miracles came from God, or from the Devil. These dreadful
difficulties are pushed to the time of Jesus Christ himself and his Apostles;
and it is shown that according to the Roman Church the Jews would have had no
reason to be converted to it. The same thing is shown in respect of following
ages; in a word, it is maintained against M. Nicole, that his principle is the
great road to Pyrrhonisme, and Atheism, because for to trust well the way of
Authority, we must know it well; but very few could be able to come to the
requisite assurance by the way of examen upon this subject, and to the end that
the difficulty should come to be more inexplicable, the Author has invincibly
refuted all that M. Nicole brought to prove that the Authority of the Church
makes it self easily known, so that here is the way of Authority quite shut up;
by what way then will people enter into the Faith? must it be by examen? if
that be the way M. Iurieu must take away the Obstacles that M. Nicole has put
in it, and he must answer directly, for to answer by retortions, as was
observed by a Modern Author, is to furnish Deists with the best Arms that they
ever yet made use of, and is to complete what M. Nicole has begun, for the
dullest amongst them would say after he had seen Mr. Nicoles book, and what we
have mentioned of Mr. Iurieu, that seeing God has not made Man capable of
choosing without rashness, the only Religion that is Good, it is evident that
he has Revealed us nothing of it, but has left it to our Education and Natural
light; therefore of necessity to disarm these Libertines, he must answer
directly to what Mr. Nicole says, and let us see how he will behave himself.

He accuses his adversaries argument against the way of examen, of two great
faults; one that it supposes no help from the Holy Ghost to them who meditate
upon Scripture; the other that he supposes a Cartesian principle that would
entirely ruin all Religions if it were applied to Moral knowledge; this
principle is, that we must believe nothing but what we understand clearly and
distinctly, and to be lawfully assured that we have attained this evidence, we
must first have examined a thing all manner of ways, and must have known that
it could not have been other ways. Our Author says that this condition being
impossible in regard of most People, and yet all men being obliged to be firmly
satisfied of their Religion, it follows, that Religion is not subject to these
preliminary conditions, which Des Carts only requires for the objects of
speculation. The Remonstrants believe they can draw great Advantages from M.
Nicoles objections, because they believe that for to answer him, the points of
Faith must be reduced to a very little number of Articles, clearly contained in
the Word of God, but the Author says that this answer would cure no evil,
because to be assured to that degree of certainty which is required by Mr.
Nicole, that Jesus Christ came into this World, we must examine, according to
the Cartesiaen method, whether the Gospel be a feigned Book or no, and hear all
that is said by the Wicked upon this Subject, and examine all the moral
demonstrations whereon the certainty of things done, is grounded. Moreover, we
must be assured by Philosophical reasons and by good answers to Spinoza's
Systeme, that Man acts freely, that he has an immortal Soul, and that God
prepares pains and recompenses: Where are Tradesmen or Peasants who are capable
of so long a dispute pushed to a contradictory decree? So that this cannot be
the way to answer well, for if we did but retain one or two Articles of our
Creed, we should have enough to do to render our selves certain of them
according to des Carts method. And all this shows that Mr. Nicoles principle
ought not to be applied to matters of Religion. And he is shown several other
very inconvenient consequences of this principle, and it is concluded that
Faith does not depend upon an examen of discussion, but upon an examen of
attention, the effects whereof are Learnedly explained in showing the manner
how Divine Truths are imprinted in our understanding; this is very fine, and
gives us a second example of Mr. Iurieu's sincerity, for without troubling
himself whether Mr. Nicole will brag of having obliged the Ministers to quit
their ground, he leaves him wholly to the examine of discussion, and maintains
that this was not what he ought to have disputed against, and he answers an
objection of Mr. de Meaux, whether there be a time, wherein a Christian may
doubt of the Truths of Scripture, and that according to the Principles of the
reformed Church.

Let us say a word upon the last Book of this answer; the Author has not so
much indifference for Mr. Nicole, but he has taken care to hinder his too great
brags of the full victory that he has had in several cases upon the examen of
discussion, and says that this victory is but of little use to Papists, but
that it furnishes Weapons to Libertines and Pagans to combat the Christian
Religion: Moreover, he is not of Opinion, that all the Arguments that were
thundered against the examen of discussion, are good, and as to what concerns
the way of feeling, and this ray that he has so much laughed at, he is shown
that there is no reason to be so merry upon that word, that there are really
things in Scripture which are known by the way of feeling, and that it is no
sufficient Argument against it, to say that it deceives Heretics daily, for
the Author says, if it deceives them, it is because it is not assisted by an
interior Grace from the Holy Ghost, as when we feel the light of Truth:
besides this he maintains that the most simple were able to know what was
requisite to make them quit the Roman Communion. In fine he shows the analysis
of Faith according to St. Augustine, and he answers Mr. Nicole in several
things concerning the calling of the first Reformers, and the Schism whereof
some would fain have convinced them, he answers him I say in all this, and
accuses him of a thousand frivolous quibbles, unworthy both of a Man of Honor
and a witty Man.

I do not doubt but many of my readers may not understand what the analysis of
Faith is. Let us then say that we understand by these words, the reducing of
Faith to its first principles, that it is a Metaphor borrowed from Chemists,
who call Analysis the Operation that disunites the parts of a compound body,
setting apart the ingredients until they come to the most simple parts; so to
make the Analysis of Faith is nothing else, but to mount by degrees to its
beginning, and to the first reasons whereon it is grounded, and in this the
Religions of the West are very different, for though it is very true that the
Protestants and Catholics being questioned why they believe the Trinity, agree
in answering that it is because God has revealed it in Scripture, but if you
ask them this other question, how they do know that God has revealed it in
Scripture, their answer will be very different, the Catholic will answer that
it is, because he is told that the Roman Church finds the meaning of Trinity in
certain passages of Scripture, but the Protestant will say, it is because he
finds that these passages signify the Trinity, whence it follows that the Faith
of a R. C. is grounded on the Authority of the Church, and that of a Protestant
upon the very Light which he finds in the Object proposed by Scripture. There
are but few who trouble themselves with this Analysis, they content themselves
well enough with believing what they have a feeling of. Moreover, it is a great
question with Roman Catholics, whether in the Analysis of Faith they must stop
at the Pope, or go on to the Council. Gregory of Valence, in his Analysis Fidei
Catholicae, maintains firmly that they are to stop at the Pope. But Mr. Holden
an English Man by Nation, and a famous Doctor of Sorbonne, hol^s for the
Council in his Divinae fidei Analysis, seu de fidei Christianae resolutione,
which has been reprinted lately at Paris, with some additions. A Lutheran
Professor called Hannekenius refutes the Jesuit in the year 1683, by
publishing paralysis fidei Papaeae; I do not know whether he will publish such
another Paralysis against the Doctor of Sorbonne.

Mr. Iurieu put at the end of his Book a short answer to what Mr. Ferrand
published against the Parallel of Papism and Calvinism; if this Article had not
passed the bounds already, we could give a short extract of this short answer,
it is admirable, and discomforts this Author, who to speak the truth, has not
answered the hopes that the Catholics of this Country conceived of his Work;
they were a little surprised with the stroke they received from the parallel,
and they expected that Mr. Ferrand that was chosen to revenge their common
Mother, would acquit himself well of the Office, but they experienced that he
did not hold to what the Church promised it self of him. Non illum nobis
genetrix pulcherrima talem promisit.

The Accomplishment of Prophesies, or the Deliverance of the Church near at
hand, etc. Corrected and Augmented almost a third part, with the Explication of
all the Visions of the Apocalypse. By the S P. J. PEPETH. A. R. at Rotterdam,
by Abraham Achers, 1686. 2. Vol. in 12.
THis Work has made such a noise, that there are two thousand Copies disposed
of in four or five Months, and yet there are but a very few gone into France,
which would have taken off a great many, if it were suffered, that it might be
disposed of there, this considerable part of Europe being almost nothing by
report in respect of the Booksellers Trade: one would think, that the first
Edition should have sufficed, nevertheless there was soon occasion for the
second, and it is that, which occasioned Mr. Iurieu, to add to this Work the
Additions, which are to be marked. We shall not speak of them that are
insensibly spread all over the Book, but stick to such as form a new entire and
well distinguished Member. The first of these Additions is in the Preface, and
serves for an Answer to two complaints, the one treats on the fear that new
Converts may entertain in their state of Hypocrisy, in hopes of a great
Reformation in a little time; the other is of what the Author has said, of the
reign of a thousand years; he answers to the first of these complaints, and
proves too much, because he proves, that God never promised the deliverance of
the Church, and that Jeremiah never revealed to the Jews the near Destruction
of Jerusalem, which God revealed to him; he adds, that God thought it
convenient to keep the Knowledge of certain Prophecies from Men, to the end,
that they might not shun them, but that at other times, he thinks it convenient
that we may be aiding in procuring the Effect and Execution; he says, that as
it would be the sign of the last Judgment, to drink of stinking and impoison'd
Waters, in hopes, that they might be purified in two or three years, so it
would be a disorder both of Mind and Heart, that would be very strange, to
stick to the Communion of the Church of Rome, in hopes that in some years it
might be purified. As for the other point, he admires that some have made a
noise against the reign of a thousand years, and declares that he will
patiently wait for it, although some have threatened to complain of it, and he is
not ashamed in this to be of the opinion of Cocceius.

The second Addition contains the eight first Chapters of this Work, and serves
for Explication to the first nine of the Apocalypse, so that there is nothing
of Prophecy in the Revelations of St. John, which is not explained, by Mr.
Iurieu, he has judged, that in showing the complete systeme of all the eve^ts
spoke of in the first book, it would dart a great light upon each of the
Visions. He refutes them that believe that the seven Epistles of St. John to
the seven Principal Churches of Asia are Prophetic; and his opinion is, that
the opening of the great Theater of the Visions of St. John was but at the
fourth Chap. of the Apocalypse. He finds that it begins like that of the
Prophet Ezekiel, and he stops chiefly at the four beasts, and at the twenty
four ancients, that are about the Throne of God. After this, he gives us an
Observation, which is called the Key of the Apocalypse. This whole Book is but
a Paraphrase upon what Daniel says, in the seventh Chapter of his Revelations
about the four Beasts; he explains the systeme of the seven Seals, and the
seven Trumpets, in great and small, and always by very ingenious and happy
Suppositions: and all that relates to the destiny of the Roman Empire, to the
day of Judgment. What follows, and what has been explained, in the first
Edition, relates to the Church, and the Antichristian Empire, which was formed
in the bowels of the Church. The third Addition comprehends the 14, 15, and 16
Chapters, and applies to the Empire of the Papists, the second Chapter of the
second to the Thessalonians, and the Visions of the 13 th. and 17. Chapter of
the Apocalypse.

The fourth Addition is very curious, and of importance to the Author, it is
contained in the 15. Chapter of the second Tome; and answers to a remark made
by a great many people, that things are spoken of here with great assurance,
which ought not to have been proposed but as conjectures; he says, that it will
be known some day, what made him speak after so decisive a manner, and with
such confidence; but in the mean time, he would be willing that three things
were considered. First, That he does not speak of the most part of events that
are to happen yet, with so much Assurance as is thought. The Second, That
whereas he has declared in proper terms, that he consents willingly, that that
may pass with the Readers as conjectures. It is reasonable, that he may have
the liberty of believing what he sees, or what he thinks he sees in the
Prophets writings. The Third, That before we censure him of rashness, upon what
he so confidently believes, that we are at the end of the 1260 years of the
Reign of Antichrist* his principles are to be considered and examined together;
but because the Readers may choose whether they will take notice of this last
remonstrance, when there is any pains to be taken in finding out the connection
of diverse Principles, that are here and there in that great Volume; the Author
eases them by summing up his Principles, and their Consequences, and after he
has showed their connection, he concludes, that it is impossible that false
conjectures should meet always; and that chance should unite one or two hundred
upon the same Subject.

Whatever strength of Reason is in the Explication of these matters,
Philosophers will not find what they will look for, but if they stop at the
fifth Addition, they will find that Mr. Iurieu has labored for them as well as
for others; that he has reserved for them the Conclusion of his work as a
relishing piece, and the highest point of Meditation. The Title of this
Appendix is, An Essay of Mystical Divinity, where are seen proofs of the
greatest mysteries of Religion drawn from Nature. This maxim is first settled,
that God applies his Essence to all Beings, and that from this Application
comes an Impression that makes the Divinity, and all its Mysteries appear every
where. After that he declares, that this Truth may be ascertained by three
Examples, that will show that the Union of the Father with the Word, the
adorable Trinity of the Persons in the Unity of Essence, and the Incarnation of
the Word* are three Mysteries, whereof the Impressions were stamped in Nature.
To show this, the Author begins to consider the History of the Creation, and
after having said in general, that these three Mysteries are found there, he
examines in particular Adams Marriage, as the Image of the Union of the Father
with the Son, showing several fine Relations of these two matters; then he
raises himself to the higher Worlds, and he finds there the same marks, that he
found below, for he finds that the Union of Matter and Motion is a kind of
Marriage, which resembles much that of Adam; and the same resemblance appears
yet more in the Union of the Spirit of God with what is called Nature, and in
the Union of Jesus Christ with the Church. See then four Impressions of the
Union of the Eternal Father with the Son, one in the Marriage of Adam and Eve;
one in the Union of Matter and Motion, and in what regards the sensible World
considered in its self; one in the Union of the Spirit of God with Nature, and
this belongs to the sensible World, considered as united with the intellectual
World; and the last in the World purely intelligible, or in the Union of Jesus
Christ with the Church, ascending higher even to the infinitely perfect Spirit;
we shall find not only the Impression, but the Seal it self, not a Copy or
Image, but the Original: We shall find the Father united with the Eternal
Wisdom, upon which there are several remarks. This is the first of the three
Mysteries. The second, which is the Trinity of Persons, was not imprinted in
fewer Subjects, and has not made fewer Copies of the Archetype and Original
Seal. We are shown here, the Impressions, (1.) In Spirits, which are thinking
and understanding Substances, that is, these Qualities are Essential to them,
and they have a Will, which is their active principle, (2.) In the Light, for
we observe three things in it, viz. a luminous Body, Brightness, and Heat, (3.)
In Bodies, for they have three Dimensions, length, depth, and breadth, all this
is still clearer by three great parallels; whereof the last is, what was
published in the Novels of July, 1685. the others may be judged of by this, so
we will not give an account, which could not be well done without transcribing
the whole.

As for the Mystery of the Incarnation Mr. Iurieu does not meet with many
Impressions in the Creature; he finds but one, and that so strong, that it is
equivalent to many; it is the union of the humane Soul with an organized Body,
the parallel he gives between the Incorporation of this Soul, and the
Incarnation of the Word is a very Collection of the resemblances that a great
Wit can imagine between these two things. A curious reflection upon the Reason,
Why God said, let us make a man after our own likeness, worthily shuts up these
parallels.

When the Author published in the Journal of the Novels, that of the Trinity,
and of the three Dimensions of Bodies, he desired the learned to send in their
Objections, and that they might do it the more freely, he does not name
himself, he thought he should receive many; but whether it was, that the
Orthodox had rather acquiesce to the Reasons that favored them, than by
examining them, to expose their own opinion to doubt, or whether they found the
thoughts convincing, or whether it was that the Heretics had not wit enough to
oppose these difficulties; or did not understand the strength of this proof,
and therefore despised it, or whether other reasons work't upon them both,
there was but one man that sent in Objections. First, He sent those that are in
the Nouvelles of August, 1685. and a little afterward, he sent some that were
never printed. M. Iurieu examines them here after one another, and refutes them
with his usual acuteness; the Author of these Objections having understood by
the Journal of September, that no more would be published upon this Subject; but
what was sent should only be communicated to the Author of the Parallelle, he
writ again in Anonymy as before, that though he saw nothing easier than to reply,
upon what was objected, yet he would do nothing, because of the Intentions
which were published: Now he will find the lists open, and if the Glory of
disputing against a famous Antagonist (that has at last named himself) does not
tempt him, there will be reason to believe that he has but little to reply
against his strong Answers.

Ioh. Raius his second Tome of the History of Plants, with a double Index, the
one of the Names, and chief Synonyma's, the other of the Qualities and
Remedies. To which is added, a Botanick Nomenclatura English and Latin, at
London, 1688. in Fol. p. 951.
THE first Volume of this History of Plants, may be seen at the beginning of
the third Tome of this Bibliotheck. It is needless to say more, but that it is
believed, it may be profitable to the public to communicate the Judgment of a
Botanist upon this work, who lives above two hundred Leagues off London.

If they that write the History of Beasts meet with difficulties, in reducing
them to certain species, or to different kinds: The Botanists are as much
troubled to put in order, and to find common Characters to diverse kinds of
plants, by which they may be placed under one kind. At first there occur very
general differences, as when plants are divided into Trees, Shrubs and Herbs,
as Animals are distinguished into four-footed Beasts, Birds, Fishes, and
Insects, etc. But each one of these kinds is too general, because it
comprehends under it, an almost infinite number of Species altogether
different. Notwithstanding it is impossible, that they which will know in
particular all Animals or Plants, should burden their memory with so great a
number of Specieses. There must be found a mean, between these Extremes. We
must shun on one side Divisions too general, and not multiply too much, we must
reduce several particular Specieses under subaltern kinds.

It Is this, that Mr. Raius undertakes in his new method of Plants, and in his
History. Cesalpine, who was Professor at Pisa in the last Age, was of opinion,
that one may distinguish the subaltern kinds of plants by the differences that
are between their Seeds, their Husks or the little Shells that contain them.
Mr. Raius acknowledges, that the different dispositions of the parts, furnish
these principal differences and maintains, that the flowers and what environs
them below, which he calls Perianthium, also furnish very essential differences
upon diverse occasions, as well as the order of the leaves which are along the
stalk, and a figure of the root. The Pease have a flower like a Butter-fly
Florem papilionaceum, though their Seeds and Covers differ very much. The Order
of the Leafs along the stalk essentially distinguish Plants, which are called
Verticillatae as Horehound, and Pennyroyal, etc. These plants have betwixt,
distances a round button that encompasses the stalk, and is composed of small
flowers of little leaves. This button is called Verticillum, because it
resembles the small buttons, that are put at the bottom of Spindles to make
them turn, and which the Latins call Verticilla. After the same manner are
distinguished Plants, that are called Asperifoliae or rough Leaves, that differ
from the Verticillatae in this, that the Leaves which are along the Stalk do
not altogether encompass it, nor are all disposed in the same order. The Roots
differ amongst themselves in this, that some are Fibrous and Thready, the other
are like buttons; that is to say, round and solid as Radishes. The others are
composed of diverse Tunicles or Skins* one over the other, as Onions, or
disposed after the manner of Flower de luce. We must then examine all these
Plants, that we may not confound them in the establishment of their kinds.

Those that have never applied themselves to Botanicks cannot presently see
what the use of this method is, and may judge to be only a dalliance of wit.
It Is notwithstanding most true, that nothing more useful could have been
imagined, nor more proper for the acquisition of the Knowledge of Plants. One
finds, for example, walking in a Garden, a Plant never seen before, and has
none to tell him the Name on it, and knows not whether it be a Foreign or
Native one. If he had the most exact, and the most universal Herbal that can be
imagined, it may be* he may look it all over, without finding the Plant he
seeks for, unless he takes the pains to read all the Descriptions after one
another, and to compare this Plant with the Figures; he may probably spend too
much time, unless by chance he meets it on a sudden. On the contrary, according
to the method of Mr. Raius, he only need take notice of the marks whereof we
now speak, and to seek for the Plant in Question, in his Herbal amongst those
that are of a like Character. If it has been described, it will be infallibly
found in the Rank, and under the kind it ought to be. Not but that there are
Anomal Plants, that one cannot tell where to range them: but if any of this
Nature be found, it must be sought for in a particular book of the second Tome
of Mr. Raius, where he has put those whose Character was ambiguous.

The Author having made a Collection of all those, who have written before him,
whether of the Plants of Europe, Asia, of Africa, or America; it may be said,
that nothing will escape this Herbal, when there are Figures, That will
undoubtedly render it a little dear, but whatever it costs, when all these
Figures will be in it, it will not cost the tenth part of what all the Herbals
would, which it comprehends. There are diverse, which are no more to be found,
or which are extremely dear, as Fabius Columna, which is but a small one, in 4
to.

This is the Judgment of a Botanist, which Mr. Raius knows not. Nothing is to
be added, but 1. There will be found in this Volume, the p. 1929.
Abridgement of the History of Plants of Mexico, by Francis Hernandez.

2. The Reader ought moreover to remark in general the method of Mr. Raius,
that it has been invented, but to avoid Confusion, and to help the Memory. It
would be ridiculous to imagine that, by the means of some Divisions and
Subdivisions drawn from the exterior figure of Plants, their nature is
thoroughly known: as the Philosophers of Schools imagined to know all by the
means of the Vniversals and Categories, into which they reduced well or ill all
the Beings that they knew. They did the same thing as a man would do, who for
to know the forces of an Army, would carefully observe what colors the Clothes
of the Soldiers were that should compose it, and should believe he could judge
thereby of the enterprises of this Army. The Truth is, that we know but the
outside of things, and some of the Effects they produce, whilst the inside
remains in such Obscurity, as all our Knowledge cannot dissipate; so we cannot
distinguish the Species, but by some outward appearances which cannot be so
much as described, but very gros^^.

A Body of Canon Law, with the Notes of Peter and Francis Pitheas Brothers.
Sold at Paris, 1687. in Folio, 2. Volume, and at Rotterdam. By Reinier Leers.
THis new Edition of the Works of Peter and Francis Pitheas, is added, by the
care of Mr. Pellatier Comptroller General of the Kings Exchequer, to the Works
of Peter Pitheas his great Grandfather. This Family was originally of
Normandy, and we find the Name of William Pitheas in the Catalogue of the
Gentlemen of that Province; who made the Voyage to the Holy Land, in the year
1190. since they retired into the Country; and Peter Pitheas, who was Advocate
in the Parliament of Paris rendered himself so famous by his profound Learning,
that they called him the Varro of his Age. He was afterward Procurer General
of the Chamber of Justice the King established in Guyenne, and after having
refused the same place in Catalonia, he returned to Paris, where he contributed
much to the Resubmission of this great City under the Obedience of King Henry
the fourth. The most part of his and his Brother Francis's Works had been
printed. But there were some others, upon which Francis wrought since the death
of his Brother; and not having time to print them, he gave them to Anthony
Alain his Friend who kept them a long time; and at last they came into the
hands of Mr. Pelletier, who knowing how precious the Relics of these great men
of Letters are, has himself assisted in the Work, and given the public this
mark of his Love to Sciences. So we find in this Edition with another in Folio
of Francis Pithou, which is the, Codex Canonum vetus Ecclesiae Romanae notis
illustratus; Parisiis ex Typographia Regia, 1687. Many pieces that had not
appeared, which are enlarged with many fine Notes.

Two Treatises with necessary Indexes of William Seldens of Utrecht about the
use and abuse of Books, Amsterdam, at Booms, 1688. p. 520
IF there be Plagiaries, who attribute unto themselves the works of others,
whether it is in translating them into another Language, or in publishing the
same things in another order, and under another Name, the Public may be
assured that Mr. Seldom is not of this number. He attributes not his Works to
the fertility of his imagination, and suffers us not to doubt, that they are
fruits of his reading: For almost at every Period he cites the Authors, whence
he has taken what he says. We see therein passages of Scripture, Fathers
Scholastic Doctors, Canonists, Catholic and Protestant Divines, Lawyers,
Physicians, Philosophers, Historians, ancient and modern Poets, Humanists,
Critics, etc. And in case the Citations are as faithful, as they appear exact,
this work may be very useful to find passages or Authorities, which men want
sometimes: we shall briefly explain the Subject thereof.

It is divided into two parts, the first whereof treats in nine Chapters of
those who love Books. 1. He begins by relating the Names of some persons who
have Written, or became famous by their Works; and then passes to the manner
of describing how the Books of the Ancients were made, the matter and form of
their Volumes, after which he shows that the fair sex is not destitute of
learned Persons, and that well ordered study cannot be displeasing to Women, 2.
The multitude of Books is the subject of the second Chapter. He speaks herein
of those Libraries, which have made most noise, and of the Invention of
Printing. He examines whether this prodigious quantity of Writings, and great
Reading spoils sound sense. 3. He gives rules to prevent the falling upon bad
Authors, by marking, 1. That we ought not to Write with haste. 2. That we ought
to propose general maxims and leave the application thereof to the Reader:
which is the Origin of Apologies and Fables. 3. That the Style ought to be
modest, sweet and moderate, whereupon he much diaspproves the heat of most of
the Controvertists, and the false delicateness of some Divines, who make
capital errors of every thing, and who as soon as they see any, stumble, or to
swerve from their Opinion, endeavor to make him be considered as an Enemy to
Truth, to the good of the State and the Salvation of Souls. 4. He shows that
order is the life of Books, and that those who have no method, have but
confused Ideas of what they advance.

In the fourth Chapter he examines wherein consists the solidity of Writing. In
the 5th. How clear it ought to be. In the 6th. He shows how briefness is
acceptable, and the difference there is betwixt Plagiaries, Centons, and those
who make a judicious use of their learning. In the 7th. he treats of Reading in
general, and proves that it is so far from doing any injury to Divines, that
they cannot thoroughly understand the Sacred nor Ecclesiastical Authors, if they
are not well acquainted with profane Writers. The 8th. speaks of the choice of
books, and how to read them with advantage; and the 9th. of several famous
Library-keepers, and of diverse Princes, who favored Learning.

II. The second Part treats in five Chapters. 1. Of the hatred People have for
books, and of its principal causes, sloth, avarice; 2. The love of novelty
which makes us despise the labors of the Ancients. 3. The pride and foolish
vanity of the Learned, who contemn one another. 4. The mutual envy they bear
one another. 5. In fine he endeavors to find the means to shelter Authors from
the envy, or hatred which may be conceived against their Works, and speaks of
the different destiny of books. We have two other Treatises of our Author, Otia
Theologica and Concionator Sacer.

A Voyage to Dalmatia, Greece and the Levant, by Mr. Wheeler; enriched with
curious Medals and Figures of the chief Antiquities which are to be found in
those Places: The Description of the Customs, Cities, Rivers, Seaports, and of
all that is most remarkable therein. Translated from the English. Amsterdam,
for John Wolters Bookseller, in 12. 607 p.
IT IS not above Ten or Twelve Years since the Celebrated Mr. Spon gave a very
handsome Relation of this Voyage to the Levant, with Mr. Wheeler. Which has
received such applause from the Public, that there is no reason to fear this
will be less welcome. For as Mr. Wheeler's Curiosity has carried him to many
more Subjects than the other has treated on, so he likewise having made a
longer abode in those Countries that he describes, has much more enriched and
diversifyed his History. Whereas Mr. Spon engaged himself chiefly to the
Observation of the Monuments of Antiquity, and made it his particular Study; It
may be said of our Author, that he forgot nothing that was considerable in any
place he passed through, of what nature soever. With the exact Descriptions he
has given of the Principal Monuments he saw, he has very agreeably added an
Account of all the Plants of each place, the Cities, most of the Villages,
Mountains, Plains, Seaports, Rivers, and all that he met with remarkable in
his Voyage. He carefully observed the Genius, Manners, and Religion of the
Inhabitants; the nature and price of the Commodities of the Country* what
Foreign Goods sell there to the best Advantage; with the distance of the Ways;
and many other things of this nature. As he opened that, both the Old and New
Geographers were deceived in the Situation of diverse places, so he Marks what
he thought the most agreeable to Truth. He gave himself the trouble to draw out
a new Map of Achaia, incomparably more Correct than was ever seen before.

The whole Work is divided into two Books, each of which is subdivided into
three others. The first contains, 1. The History of our Authors Voyage from
Venice to Constantinople. 2. A Description of Constantinople, the Neighboring
places and their Antiquities. 3. The particulars of his Voyage through the
Lesser Asia.

In the second Book is comprehended, 1. The Voyage from Zant to Athens, and
through diverse parts of Greece. 2. The Description of Athens, and it is
Antiquities. 3. Several Voyages from Athens to Corinth, etc. With an Account of
whatsoever he saw remarkable therein.

Being at Venice that these two Illustrious Friends entered upon their Voyage
together, Mr. Wheeler thought he was obliged to begin his History with a short
Description of the Original of this great Republic, of it is Progress, Losses,
and in fine the Estate it was in at 1675. when they were there. The first
considerable Place they visited in their course was Pola, where they found
diverse Monuments of Antiquity, which evidently showed it to be one of the
Antientest Towns of Istria, and that it was formerly a free State. At one of
the best places of Dalmatia, which is the Chief City thereof, called Zara, they
found nothing less considerable; which place is more secured by the number and
courage of the Morlaques, the natural Inhabitants of the Country, of whom the
greatest part of the Garrison are composed, than by the goodness of it is
Fortifications; they having an irreconcilable hatred to the Turks. But one of
the most curious Pieces of Antiquity that this Country affords, is the residue
of a Palace that Dioclesian caused to be built near Salone, which was the place
of his Birth, that he might pass the rest of his Life in this happy Retirement,
when he had renounced the Empire.

Those who have formed an advantageous Idea of Ithica, because it was the
Country of Ulysses, and the particular place of his Residence, will be
surpised to hear our Author affirm it to be a pitiful little Isle, that would
be a perfect Desert, if a People they call Thiaki went not from time to time to
cultivate it. In this last is seen the Ruins of an Old Castle, which the
Thiaki pretend was formerly the Palace of Ulysses. Samos, that is now known only
under the Name of Cephalonia, was the greatest Isle under the Command of this
Prince: For according to Mr. Wheeler, it is 60 Leagues in Circumference, although
Strabo allowed it to be but 300 Furlongs, which makes not above 19 Leagues, and
Pliny but 22 Leagues. Zant, formerly called Zacynthos, is nothing nigh so
large, since the utmost extent is but 15 Leagues. It Is very fruitful, and
nothing could be added to make it more agreeable, were it not for the
Earthquakes which in the greatest part of the Spring are very often twice a
week. From this Island now comes the greatest part of those Raisins without
Stones, that they call Corants, the Plant of which Fruit is not like our
Gooseberrys, as without reason has been an Opinion generally received; but a
Vine differing very little from the other sort of Raisins. At the foot of one
of the Hills of this Island is a Fountain, which to admiration, casts forth with
it is streams that are very bright and clear, lumps of Pitch in Quantities so
great, that every Year they fill 90 Barrels therewith. The Inhabitants profess
the Grecian Religion. And instead of a Bishop which they will not admit of,
they have a Protopapa as they call him, that is, an Archpriest. The Piety that
our Author makes appear throughout this whole work, obliges him to complain of
the little care that those of its Nation have taken to form an Ecclesiastical
Body, and maintain a Pastor therein.

Delos is the most celebrated Isle of all the Cyclades. It is two or three
Leagues about, is also very full of Rocks, and by consequence Barren. And at
present an uninhabited Desert. Though there still remain some Monuments of it is
Ancient Splendour. The most remarkable is a Pile of White Marble, on which the
Temple of Apollo was supposed to be built. It Is otherwise with Sestos and
Abydos, whereof there remains not the least Footsteps to be found, what is now
called the Old Castles of Rometia and Anatolia, not being built in the same
places, nor having any mark of Antiquity. Gallipoli, which is also near, has
preserved very few of 'em: But at Lampsaque, which has still kept it is Name,
and at Heraclea, are many more to be found.

Constantinople having been above Twelve Ages, the Seat of the Eastern Empire,
Mr. Wheeler thought he could not be too large in describing of it. Many
Writings being extant of the same nature, I shall observe in our Author only
what is the most curious. It Is thought, that Titus Livy's Works are all entire
in the Grand Seignior's Library. But Mr. Wheeler being inquisitive about it
himself, offered, as he assures us, great Sums to the Bacha, who has the
charge of the Books, yet could not procure a sight of it. One of the greatest
Conveniences they have for Travelers at Constantinople, and almost every where
throughout Turkey, is the Public Houses to entertain Strangers; which they call
Karavan-Seras or Kans, where Persons may live as well as they please, having
commonly near 'em Shops that afford all things necessary at a reasonable Price.
It is true, the greatest part of 'em are like Barns, and have about the Walls
what they call a Sopha, a Foot and a half high for Travelers to lie thereon.
But those which are now built in Cities or great Towns, are incomparably more
commodious, having many Apartments all distinguished from each other. Our
Author wishes the like conveniences were established amongst Christians, which
would cut off many useless Expenses, and be a Remedy for several Disorders that
occur from the contrary.

The Patriarchal Church is an obscure Edifice, without Beauty or any
considerable Ornaments: And the Patriarchs Palace is not larger than one of the
most despicable private Houses in London. This Prelates Habit also is very
plain, and little differing from the ordinary garb of Caloyers, or of the Monks
of St. Basil. Nevertheless, it is hardly to be credited with what earnestness
this Dignity is sought after: And how dearly those that aspire thereto, pay for
it to the Grand Vizier, who to make it the most advantageous he can, often upon
the least pretense turns out those he has lately put in, to sell it to others;
so that sometimes there have been five Patriarchs in the space of 5 Years. The
Celebration of the Eucharist, Mr. Wheeler says, is an Act of Religion, wherein
the Greeks appear the most devout, yet he thinks it impossible to determine
exactly, what is their general Opinion upon this Subject. At some places they
hold Transubstantiation, as at Corfou, and at Zant. But he assures us, the
Bishop of Salone, and the Convent of St. Luke in Beotia, believes in this
Sacrament only, a Spiritual and Efficacious Presence; and as he found none that
received the word Transubstantiation, or of (...), except among those that had
some connection with the Roman Church, so he doubted not but others which were
not yet deceived by 'em, are of the same Faith with the aforesaid Bishop and
Caloyers.

Though the Turks have always been looked upon as sworn Enemies to all Learning:
Nevertheless our Author says, They have very Learned Men among 'em; and as in
the Seraglio there are Historians on purpose to observe great Events, so at
Constantinople and elsewhere are maintained Professors in all parts of the
Mathematics, in Poetry, and in the Arabian and Pers^an Tongues: That they have
a Bazar, or Purse for the Manuscripts of each several Science, composed in the
Turkish, Arabic, or Persian Language: And what appears the most surprising, is
their asserting to us, that they had seen an ancient Book of Astronomy, which
supposed formerly the Use of the Needle and Loadstone, although it served them
not for Navigation. From Constantinople Mr. Wheeler passed the Bosphorus, and
came to Chalcedon; and this Town which became so famous by having the 4th.
Council held there in the Year 452. is now but a small Village that the Turks
call Cadiqui.

Mr. Wheeler designing to Visit all the Celebrated Places of Natolia, and
particularly those where formerly the seven Churches of the Apocalypse were. He
sailed from the South Side; in passing by the Mount Olimpus of Mysia, the place
where Ajax killed himself for Despair; which the Inhabitants have still stamped
upon their Moneys. It Is very sad to see the deplorable Estate the Christians
are there reduced to, who having formerly defended their Liberty as much as
they could, are now constrained to pay double to the others of Caratch, or
Tribute, as 9 or 10 Piastres by the Year, the Caratch being commonly but five,
or four and a half to the rest.

The first of these famous Cities of the Apocalypse that our Author arrived at,
was Thyatira, a place well peopled with Turks, but not above 10 or 12
Christians therein: The ancient stately Buildings of Marble having been for a
long time buried in their own Ruins, and the place filled with low despicable
Houses, it is Name was almost forgotten, but at length was discovered by some
old Inscriptions that were dug out of the Earth. It is not so with Smyrna: For
that being a very fruitful Soil, and situated advantageously for Commerce, they
have taken care to keep it in it is former Splendour, by rebuilding each place as
it fell to decay; nevertheless, it was overturned six times by Earthquakes,
and it is final Ruin, according to an Old Tradition, is expected by a seventh.
A greater Number of Christians inhabited there, in a much better Estate than in
any of the seven Churches, Philadelphia only excepted. Many Camelions are in
that place, which obliges our Author to give us a very exact Description of them.
At Ephesus all the Earth is covered with pieces of Marble, Pedestals, Pillars,
and all the Ruins of the handsomest and most ancient Architecture: This City
which was formerly the Capital of Asia, so famous, and populous, is not the
receptacle at this day of more than 40 or 50 Turkish Families, who live in
miserable Tenements, without having so much as one Christian amongst 'em. Which
sorrowful Object drew Tears from our Author: When he there saw that Threatening
accomplished, that Jesus Christ had made to this Church when flourishing, To
remove it is Candlestick from it is place. It fares little better with Pergamus;
whose Church formerly so fine, is now composed but of 12 or 15 Families of poor
dejected Christians. Sardis has no way the Advantage. Once the Capital of
Craesus's Kingdom, is now the retreat only of Beggars and Vagabonds, which have
a few Christians amongst 'em, who serve only as Slaves to these Infidels. But
the Desolation of Laodicea surpasses all the others; for it is absolutely
destroyed and deserted. There are still at Philadelphia 200 Christian Families,
who have four Churches where they assemble together; which our pious Author
omits not the observing, that it is an effect of the promises that Jesus Christ
had made to this Church, to preserve it in the time of Trial that should come
upon all the World.

And Greece, which he afterward traveled into, presented him with a Picture
not less sorrowful for the Inconstancy and Vanity of humane Things, than that
of Natolia. It was no small trouble to Mr. Spon, and to himself, that they
could not find the place where Delphos formerly stood; and after a great deal
of care and diligent Search, they perceived some Old Inscriptions that
testified this City, once so famous, was now a Village called Castri upon the
Hill of Parnassus.

Athens has not perfectly shared the same Fate. It at least retains it is Old
Name; for the Greeks still call it Athini; and not Satines, or Saitenes, as it
is now read in the Modern Maps. It Is 2 or 3 Leagues in Circumference, and is
possessed by eight or ten thousand Inhabitants, who are all naturally of a
great Wit and Politeness. Though there remains no sign of it is Ancient Splendor,
but the Ruins of some Rich Places and Noble Monuments; Mr. Wheeler assures us
next to Rome, it is a place that surpasses all the world for curious Pieces of
Antiquity. The chief of which he describes very exactly. He observes amongst
other things, that there is in the Acropolis, which is the Citadel, the Ruins
of a Temple of Minerva, the Front of which is adorned with Historical Figures
round about, to an admirable Beauty. Likewise he has not forgot to mention the
Stadium, where they celebrate the Public Games called Panathenaica, It Is built
all with Marble, in length about 120 Geometrical Paces, in breadth 26 or 27;
which had two parallel sides, and was enclosed Eastward, and opened exactly at
the opposite Point. Yet says, he could have no certainty of the Place where
the Areopagite was, no more than many others, related to us in the Histories of
former Times.

The Mount Hymetta, which is but three or four Leagues from Athens, is the most
noted for it is Honey, which is indeed the best of all Greece. Megara, is but a
small Village, with very pitiful Houses, covered with Faggots and Turfs
thereon: And there is nothing remains of the Ancient Grandeur but the Footsteps
of its Walls, and a few Inscriptions that are not quite obliterated. Something
more considerable is to be found of the Town and Theater of the Isthmus of
Corinth, where they kept public Plays; and observes the place they begun to dig
a Canal to join the two Seas together in Corinth, has been more favorably
dealt with by time than any of the former, since it is at this day large enough
to merit the Name of a Town; at least, it cannot pass for worse than a very
handsome Village. Though nothing is more worthy observation, than the Change that
has happened to the Euripus, if what De situ Orbis. l. 2. c. 7.
Pomponius Mela, and Strab. l. 9.
Strabo says is true, That in their time it Fluxt and Refluxt regularly seven
times a day; since Mr. Wheeler affirms, That for two days that he staid there,
he saw no more motion in it than that of our Marshes; and all the Inhabitants
agree, that this Flux and Reflux is sometime regular, and often irregular,
according to the Moon: As a Learned Jesuit found out, who resided two Years at
Negropont, that it is regular, and very little differing from the Main Ocean,
at the end of the Old Moon, till the first Quarter of the New; but at the other
part of the Month it is irregular, and changes 12, 13, or 14 times in 24 or 25
hours. In the end of our Authors Work, he gives only a succinct Relation of his
Return to Zant, and from thence to England.

A New Relation of China, containing the Description of the Particularities of
the most considerable things of this great Empire. Composed in the Year 1668.
By the Reverend Father Gabriel de Magaillans of the Society of Jesus,
Apostolic Missionary; and Translated from Portuguese into French by the Sieur
B. -- Paris, at Mr. Claudius Barbins, 1688. in Quarto, page 385. and is to be
had at Amsterdam at Henry Desbordes.
ALthough after so many Relations that have been given of China, since one Age
or thereabouts, it seems it is difficult to tell us any new thing thereof;
notwithstanding we are assured that in this there is scarcely any thing to be
found that has been seen in others, and that it will appear to the Readers as
new as it is curious. Besides, that the History of China is a matter rich and
vast enough, and therefore not to be so easily drained, it is pretended that the
most part of those who have written thereof, instead of making exact Recitals,
have said nothing on it but what is almost all Fabulous; that others having
written in a different intention to that of informing us of all the
Particularities of this great Kingdom, have omitted the principal ones, or have
spoke of them but by the By; and that finally, amongst so many Men that have
treated of the same Subject, scarcely was there seen one who could so Learnedly
speak thereof as Father Magaillans, and that had the same means and the same
occasions of instructing himself therein. It was therefore in all likelihood to
Supply what was deficient in the other Relations that this Jesuit so well
informed, had composed his. But as he dyed in the Year 1677. without having
published his Writings, and even without having finished it, the Public would
have run the hazard of being deprived of all the Fruit that it might gather
from this Work, if the Translator, who is said to be the Abbot Mr. Bernou, had
not drawn it from its Obscurity and Dust, and had not put into a condition to
see Light by his Translation and Notes, and by all the care that he took
thereof.

This Author begins ( C. 1.) with the diverse Names that the Chinois and
Strangers give to China. And he immediately notes, that it is an ordinary
custom, where some new Family becomes Master of this State, they make it to
lose it is name. Under the Precedent Family, it was called Tai-Mim-que, that is
to say, Kingdom of a great Brightness. But the Tartars which are now the
Masters, call it Tai-cim-que, Kingdom of great Purity; and it is also the Name
that the Chinois themselves commonly do give it. They call it also very often
Tien-hia, or Kingdom which contains all that is under Heaven; these People
being prepossessed with a fancy of the Greatness of their Empire, that they
reckon as nothing all the States of the Universe besides. Strangers do also
call it after several different Names, Catai, Mangi, etc. But the most part
call it China; a Name that our Author brings, either from the Family Chin,
which governed 169 Years after Jesus Christ; or more apparently yet from the
Family Cin, which Reigned 246 Years before Jesus Christ, the chief whereof was
the first Absolute and Universal Master of China. Father Magaillans shows at
large and with great evidence, that the Countries of Catay, and of Mangi, are
but parts of China, and not Kingdoms really different, no more than Tam-gut and
Tainfa, that Cluvier has also taken for other Kingdoms distinct from China,
though they are but Cities, whereof the Name is a little corrupted.

( C. 2.) The Kingdom of China is situate almost on the Extremities of Asia on
the East. It Is length from North to South, according to the Chinois Books, that
is, from the Fortress of Caci-pim, upon the Frontier of the Province of Pekim,
to the Meridional Point of the Isle of Hai-nau, at the South of the Province of
Quam-tum, is 23 Degrees in Extent, which make 5750 Li, or Chinois Stades at 250
to the Degree, and 575 French Leagues at 25 the Degree. And it is breadth
measured in a straight Line from the East to the West, from the Point of
Nim-Po, a Seaport Town of the Province of Che-kiam, unto the extremity of the
Province of Su-chuen, is 426 French Leagues, and 4080 Li, or Chinois Stades, at
240 a Degree. But they pretend that that is not all the Extent of this vast
Empire, seeing that in considering it in another sense, it is 8400 Li, which
are 750 French Leagues in it is utmost length; and 5400 Li, which make 500
French Leagues in it is greatest breadth. In short, the Calculation is very sure
and exact, and the proportions of it is Measures very just and certain; and here
it is that Men have not yet removed all the Difficulties as may be seen in the
following Notes.

There are 15 Provinces in the Kingdom of China, all which for their Greatness;
Richness, and Fertility, might pass for vast Kingdoms. Cluvier was mistaken
when he counted 18 Provinces, and among them the Kingdom of Cochinchine, and
that of Tim-kim, for though these have been at other times subject to China, they
were so, but for some Years, and have not obeyed it of a long time. It Is
thought the Walled Places that are in China, amount to the number 4402 divided
into 2 different Orders, Civil, and Military. It Is true, that several Cities
and Towns are comprehended in that number, situated in the Provinces of Yun-nan
de Q'uel-ches of Quamsi and of Su-chuen, which though they are joined to the
Emperors State, pay him no Tribute, nor do they acknowledge him, but have
particular Sovereigns, and make use in their District of a different Language
from the Chinoise; this great Empire is so Peopled, that near 12 millions of
Families or Fires are counted therein, without comprehending Privileged
Families or Persons, Manderins, Magistrates, Soldiers, Batchellors,
Licenciates, Doctors, Bonzes or Eunuchs, nor any of those who are of the Royal
Blood. In a word, counting only those that Till the Ground, or that pay
Tributes or Rents to the King: Although all the rest, as may be easily urged,
make up an almost infinite Number.

There are 2045 Places walled of the Civil Order, divided into Towns, Cities,
and Royal Inns; these last places for the most part are not less great, nor
less peopled, than are the Towns and Cities, and in each of them is a place
where Manderins which the King sends, and all other Persons to whom he is
pleased to do the like Favor, are Lodged, and their Charges born at the
Princes Expenses, and are entertained according to their Quality and Employ.
The Military Order comprehends 7 different sorts of stony Places. The first and
principal are great Fortresses, which are places upon the Frontiers, as the
Keys and Defense of the Empire against the Tartars, or upon the Borders of
Provinces against Rebels and Highway-men. There are 629 of this Order: The
others are less considerable and less great proportionably. And the last of
these Places are small Forts, whereof some are built in the Fields, to serve as
a Refuge to Laborers, when they fear the Insults of Enemies or Thieves, or are
willing to secure themselves from the Imposition of the Soldiers, when the
Royal Armies are in march, and the others are situated upon Mountains, whereof
there are some almost inaccessible; all these Military Places amount to 2357.
which being added to them of the Civil Order, make together the number marked
above, 4402. Besides this, there are without and within these great Walls that
surround almost all China, at least a great part, above Three thousand Towers
or Castles, wherein are continually Guards and Centries kept. These famous
Walls extend 405 Portugal Leagues, which make 23 Degrees 10 Minutes from East
to West, which is to be understood in a right Line; for if the Windings of the
Mountains and of the Walls were counted, it would amount to more than 500
Leagues: If we credit our Historian, There are more than Nine hundred thousand
that guard the Frontiers, and there are Seven or Eight hundred thousand
employed in the Guard of the Kingdom within. But the Translator, to diminish
somewhat the wonder, that such a prodigious number of Troops amount to, makes
us remark in his Observations, that the greatest part of these Soldiers are of
the Militia, and that there are but very few that have not another Calling
besides being Soldiers. However it be, our Author assures us, That all these
Soldiers are always entertained, and that China is so well furnished with all
the Requisites of Defense, that the Tartars who have once invaded it, and are
Masters of it to this very time, had never passed the Walls, if the Soldiers
Cowardice, and the Treachery of the Officers had not opened them a Passage.

There are in China Two thousand fourscore and ninety Mountains, famous either
because they have been cut in Form of Idols and monstrous Collosses, or for
their renowned Fountains, or for their Plants or Minerals, endowed with some
particular Virtue; or these Mountains were looked upon for their extraordinary
height, or for some other Advantages of this nature, that makes them be
distinguished. There is a like number of Antique Pieces, as Statues, famous
Painting, Vessels of great price and value; there are Eleven hundred and fifty
nine Towers and Triumphal-Arches, and other Works extraordinarily sumptuous,
raised for the honor of their King, or other famous Persons of both Sexes; and
what deserves to be remembered, there are 272 Libraries embellished with many
Ornaments, and full of Books, and built with vast Expense.

There can nothing be added to the marks of Love and Veneration, wherewith the
Chinois are used to honor their Ancestors deceased; they are not content with
building them Tombs and Monuments, but they build them Temples; and there are
seen more than 700 built at several times on this design, and these are equally
considerable for the Bigness and Beauty of their Architecture; as for Temples
of Idols, there are 480 famous and much frequented, whether for their Riches
and Magnificence, or through the Fables that are told of pretended Miracles done
there; and it is in these Temples, and in the others of the Empire, whereof the
number is incredible, that Three hundred and fifty thousand Bomzes live, which
makes but about a third part of this sort of people, who according to the
Account of our Author are above a million, counting all that are of it.

But there is nothing according to his Relation more magnificent, than the
Burying Places of the Nobility of China, among others are seen 685 Mausolees,
whose Richess and Architecture has rendered 'em very famous; and the others do
not want their Beauty and Pomp Our Historian brags of them all as very worthy
of being seen and admired: He adds, That among them whose Memories are
honored, the Chinois Reverence after a particular manner 3636 Men, famous for
their Qualities and Heroic Actions, and 208 Maids or Women who have for their
Chastity or Courage, or something else, deserved to be Celebrated as so many
Examples of Virtue.

There is no Kingdom in the World so ancient as that of China, nor that can
brag of a Succession of Kings, so long and so well continued; it has stood in
the same Form more than Four thousand Years, and the Succession has be^n
continued by 22 Families, which during that time, have furnished 236 Kings.
It Is what the Chinois justify by the History of their Country, whereof all the
parts have been written by Contemporary Authors; and by a Chronology which
appears so just, so well followed, and is backed with such good Circumstances,
that it does not seem that it can be denied; and they are so fully persuaded of
this Antiquity, that it is a capital Crime among them to doubt of this Article;
and generally this Antiquity with the other extraordinary Advantages of this
Kingdom, puffs them up with so much Pride, that they conceive Opinions not a
little unreasonable to other Countries, and as if all were at an end at the
Frontiers of their Empire; they scorn as much as to inform themselves of the
rest, and they never speak of it but with a mark of the greatest Contempt.

We believe that the Egyptians were the first that had Letters or Sciences, and
Hieroglyphics, yet it is certain, That the Chinois have had them before.
However it be, the Chinoise Letters are not the least Curiosity they have. For
whereas, all other Nations have a common Writing that consists of an Alphabet
of about 24 Letters, which are almost of the same Sound, tho they differ in
Figure: The Chinois have 54409 Letters that do all of them signify something,
and do not seem so much to be dumb Characters as speaking Words, or at least
Figures and Images that represent to the life, what they signify; so admirable
is their Artifice. These Letters are either simple or compound; these last are
a mixture of the first, to signify somewhat that has some kind of Relation to
the Composition: As for Example, the Letter Mo, which signifies Wood, is
simple; but the Letter Lin, that signifies a Forest, which comprehends many
Trees, is composed of two Mo. The Author gives upon this many curious things;
he shows, that all these Letters are true Heroglyphics, and that nothing has
been invented with more wit than the Language of the Chinois. However, it
cannot be denied, but that i^ is a very surprising thing, that this Language
having but about 320 Words, and all of one Syllable, can bring them together,
change them, and mix them in so many different Ways, and yet so Eloquent, and
so multiply the Use and Signification by the almost infinite Variations of
Sound and Accent, that they that can speak it, can deliver their Thoughts upon
all Subjects with as much facility, clearness, grace, force and energy, as in
any other Language, though never so rich and copious, as the Greek and Latin. Our
Author who assures this, maintains at the same time, that the many different
Significations that are given the same word, do not occasion the confusion and
difficulty that some imagine; that on the contrary this Language has that
benefit by the small Number of Monosyllables whereof it consists, that there is
neither a living or dead Language in all Europe, that can be Learned with so
much Facility. And he alleges for proof, the Examples of the Missionaries of
his Order, who in a very short time rendered themselves so Learned in it, that
they composed Books much admired by the Chinois themselves; this gives the
Author occasion to run much upon the praise of their Fathers, and to give us a
List of their fine Works.

There is no Nation that is wittier than that of China; they are inventive and
industrious, and we cannot dispute them the Honor of having been the first
Inventers of Letters, Paper, Print, Gunpowder, without mentioning other
things. There is nothing imploys them more, than the Study of Morals; and yet
they have wit enough lest to dive into the subtilest and most difficult.
Questions of Mathematics and Divinity, when they make it their Study: So that
there is no Country that has so great a Number of Learned Men, and where the
knowledge of Sciences is so universal and common as it is in China. And it may
be said, that no Nation out of Europe has more Books upon every Subject, as
well in Verse as Prose, than this has; among that great number, there are 5
which the Chinois call V-kim, or the 5 Volumes; that are to them the same thing
as our Bible to us. The first is a Chronicle of their 5 Ancient Kings, whom
they honor as Saints, with a particular Veneration: The second is the Book of
Rites, that contains the greatest part of the Laws, Customs, and Ceremonies
observed in that Empire: The third is Verse and Prose, in praise of Virtue and
and dispraise of Vice: The fourth is Historical, and was composed by Confucius:
The fifth is esteemed the antien^est of all, as being the most mystical* the
Chinois being persuaded, that it is the Work of Fohi, their first Prince. In
fine, these 5 Books are accompanied with another, which is called the 4 Books,
because it is divided into four Parts, and which being but the Marrow and
Quintessence of the first 5, has the same Weight and Authority as all the other
together.

The Chinois are the most courteous, and abound most in Ceremonies of any in
the World; our Author says, they have a Book to direct them, that contains more
than 3000. and explains them, and it is very strange how punctual they are in
them. They surpass all other Nations, both for the diversity and number of
honorable Titles which they give themselves, as well as in certain Airs of
Civility, and good Breeding, which they affect, and in the care they take of
their Clothes. There can nothing be seen more composed than the Countenance,
Actions, and the Ways of their Learned Men: And the Women apply themselves
after such a manner, to Bashfulness, Modesty and Chastity, that these Virtues
seem born with them. Their Magnificence appears in their Feasts, which they
keep with much Pomp, and in their Public Works and sumptuous Buildings, which
for their Greatness and Number in the Authors Opinion, easily surpass all other
in the Universe. In general, the Palaces of their Princes and of the chiefest
Mandarins look like Towns, and the Houses of some private Wealthymen resemble
Palaces. The great Canal which the Author describes with his ordinary
exactness, and which he says is 3500 Furlongs long, which are about 350 French
Leagues. This Canal, I say, is one of those Works of Art where Profit is so
well joined with Magni^icence, that by means of it one may go from one end of
the Kingdom to the other, which is the space of more than 600 Leagues* and all
this way by the Chanel or by Rivers, only one days Journey by Land, and to cross
a Mountain; an advantage which the Jesuit our Author, which has gone this
Voyage himself, observes to be beyond any that is to be found in any Country of
the Universe. He adds, that whereas there is no Town nor Village that has not
some River or Channel, or at least some Navigable Arm of the Sea, that this
convenience renders Navigation so common there, that there are as many almost
seen upon the Water as upon the Land; people may soon judge the usefulness of
this for Commerce: and with what case, plenty spreads it self over all the
parts of this Kingdom. Besides, there is no Country that is more rich in proper
Goods, and that draws more from its own Fund than China; all is had there, and
it may be said almost above wish, and not only what is necessary, but plenty of
all delicious things: The quantity of Gold that each Province has, is so great,
that instead of coining it, to buy other things with it, it is sold like other
Merchandise. As for Silver, as there is none that comes into the Country that
can be carried out again, there being rigorous Laws that prohibit it, it may be
easily judged that this Nation that is more greedy of this Metal than any other
is, has gathered immense quantities of it since the beginning of this Empire,
that is, more than 4050 Years ago: All other Metals are found there, at least
in as great abundance as in any other Climate, especially Tin an^ Brass,
whereof the Chinois Handicrafts-men make several Works precious as well for the
goodness of the Matter as for the excellency of the Work: Nor are Silk and Wax,
what this Country has least of. The first is not only the fairest and best in
the World, but is there in such great abundance, that most places of Asia and
Europe furnish themselves thence, and that besides the incredible Quantity that
is made use of in China it self, where the use of it is so common, that the
very Foot-boys wear Satin and Damask. The Wax is of a certain sort peculiar
only to this Kingdom, the fairest, neatest, and whitest, that was ever seen,
and being of a more agreeable use than ordinary, is used by the King himself,
and by all the Court, and the Lords and Mandarins, and by the Men of Learning,
and generally by all rich Folks. It is produced in certain small Trees near the
bigness of our Chesnut-Trees, and that by means of certain small Worms, which
by a natural instinct pierce these Trees to the Sap, and which in eating all
together, as admirable as it is peculiar to themselves, prepare, purify, and at
length turn it into Wax as white as Snow; they after pass out through the same
Hole that they made to enter; this Wax when it comes to the outward Surface of
the Tree, the Wind and Cold congeals it, and it hangs in form of Drops.

In fine, one cannot express the Price, Beauty, Variety, and Quantity, not only
of their rich Cloth, but also of the Skins and precious Furrs that this Nation
makes use of, especially in the Northern Provinces, and at the Court of Pekin.
And what belongs to other things, necessary either for the maintenance or
convenience of Life, as Flesh, Fruit, and other Provisions, it may suffice to
say, that they have all that we have, and besides this, Stores of such things
as we have not.

There is no Country in the World where the Nobility have greater interest to
keep the Crown in the Reigning Family than the Gentry of China have, seeing all
considerable Noblemen and great Lords do not subsist, but whilst that Family
lasts, and that as soon as another is raised to the Crown, they are all ruined
by him. There has been but one Family to this very day, that could exempt it
self from this sad Fate: And it was that of the famous Confucius, for the Merit
and great Worth of this great Philosopher, and the incredible Veneration which
his Memory is preserved in, has maintained his Family in all its Splendor for
above 2020 Years, so that flourishing yet in the same State of Esteem and
Honor, it may be with justice called the Antientest Family in the World.

But among all the Advantages attributed to China, it is pretended, that it
deserves to be esteemed for nothing so much as for the Excellency of its
Government; and it is here that our Author gives the Relation as curious as
important, of the Conduct of this Empire. In general, the Mandarins, the
Officers and Magistrates of all the Kingdom, they are distinguished into 11
Orders, whereof the Differences are so well marked, and the Subordination so
just, that in the Authors Judgment there is nothing comparable to it any where
else. The Mandarins of the first Order, or the King's Counselors of State form
the Supreme Tribunal, whence all other depend. After this come 11 Great
Tribunals, among whom the Kings of China have distributed all the business of
the Kingdom. And they pretend that the Establishment was made 2000 Years before
Jesus Christ, and that it has continued ever since in the same manner, wherein
it is seen now, if some Corruptions be excepted that may have slipped in; of
these 11 Tribunals, there are 6 of Mandarins of Learning, as they call them,
and 5 of Mandarins of Arms. The 6 first are the most powerful, because there is
hardly any thing but what is subject to their Jurisdiction, and they may be
said to govern China. The first of the six is that which has a general Rule
over all the other Manderins, and can give them their Places or Employment, or
take them away. The second has a superintendance over the Customs and Tributes,
and in general over the King's Treasure. The third has the Direction of the
Rites and Ceremonies of Sciences and Arts. The fourth has for its share all
that belongs to War, and to Arms in all the Kingdom. The fifth of the Crimes
and Punishments of Criminals, among which by the by, there is none looked upon
to be so base and ignominious as to be beheaded. The sixth over-looks the Works
and Building of the King, so that there is no business of any nature, but is
subject to these 6 Supreme Tribunals; and as they have jurisdiction over almost
all the Court, and over all them of the Provinces, there can none be more
respected nor better obeyed than they are wherever they go. The 5 Tribunals
of Arms are governed by great Lords, as Marquesses, Counts, etc. and have above
them one Supreme Tribunal, called the High Tribunal of War, the President
whereof is always one of the greatest Lords of the Kingdom; the Authority of
this President seems very considerable, since his Jurisdiction reaches over the
five other Tribunals, and over all the Officers and Soldiers of the Kingdom.
But lest he might abuse so great a Power, he has given him for an Assister, a
Mandarin of Sciences, under the Title of High Regent of Arms, and two Syndicks
or Royal Overseers, who take part in all Affairs: Moreover, it may be said,
That all these Tribunals of War, have more Show and Appearance than real
Authority, because in all things that belong to Execution, they depend
necessarily upon the Supreme Tribunal of Arms, which is the fourth of the six
that we spoke of; this was one of the cunningest of the Politics of the Kings
of China, and an effect of the Knowledge they had of the Humor of their
Subjects, whose ruling Passion is to grow rich, and to command. To have thus
ordained so great a number of Tribunals or Courts, that a great many might have
the means to content their Ambition by the Honors and Profits of the
Employments they are in, whilst the little Power they have takes away from them
the means of abusing their places: And the same measures within a very little
were observed by the other Supreme Tribunals, whose Power seems greater and
less limited: For as it might be feared, that any one of them might render
himself absolute, if he were left to the entire disposal of the Matters
belonging to him, all their Employments were distributed, and their Functions
were ordered with so much Prudence, that not one among them is absolute in the
Affairs of his Office, but all have a dependence upon one another.

All the Eleven Tribunals are placed according to their Rank in magnificent
Palaces on both sides of that of the King's; the first six upon the left, which
is the place of Honor, and toward the East, the other five on the right
toward the West; and whereas each of the Six has under it several Subaltern
Tribunals to prepare and order Business, so have these inferior Tribunals
their Palaces within the great one, of which they depend; these lesser
Tribunals are in greater or lesser number, in each of the great ones,
proportionably to the business they have, and according to our Authors
Calculation, there are in all 44, in such sort, that it seems business should
be treated of, exactly passing through so many different Tribunals; and yet it
must be known that in the Palace of each Supreme Tribunal, there is always a
Hall and an Apartment for a Mandarin, who is called Overseer or Supervisor, who
examines publicly or secretly all that is done, and as soon as he knows of any
Disorder or Injustice, he is obliged to acquaint the King with it; all other
Tribunals whether of the Court, or belonging to the Provinces, which are joined
to these Supreme Tribunals, are governed with no less Policy. Those of the
Court, which are established at Pekin, are so numerous, that we shall take no
care to mention them here; for there are some for every kind of business, among
others there are some that make up a Royal Academy, and which consists of the
best Wits of all the Kingdom. They are as it were the King's Learned men, with
whom he discourses very often upon several Sciences, and makes choice of many
to be his Counselors; and for other Tribunals, that which is called the
Visitors, or that belongs to the general Supervisors, Oversees all the Court
and Empire; it is charge is to see the Laws observed, and Justice executed, and
to see that both the Mandarins and People do their Duty; this Tribunal is much
feared, and has under it 25 Tribunals, and is placed in a huge Palace; every
three Years it causes a general Visit to be made, sending Visitors into each
Province, who no sooner enter into them than they become above all Viceroys
and Mandarins, and do all with an Authority that inspires no little Fear. But
there is yet another Tribunal, the Functions whereof is not less considerable,
nor of less importance, which is that of the Overseers, which we have spoken of
already, which are divided into six Orders, as the six Supreme Tribunals which
they oversee; their Authority goes so far, that they may reprehend the King
himself when he commits any fault in the Government of the State, and there are
found some generous enough to expose themselves resolutely to a Banishment, or
even to Death it self, in acquainting him of his faults, sometimes by a
Memorial, and sometimes by telling him them to his Face. In fine, every
Province has its Tribunals as well general as particular, and above all there
is one that is Chief, and oversees all the rest, and gives the King and the six
Supreme Tribunals of the Court an account of all important Affairs. It may be
easily judged that all their Imploys have a great many Mandarins; and so there
are 32000 in the Roll, which the Court sends from time to time into the
Provinces: and though this number may seem very strange; yet our Author says,
That the distribution, distinction and subordination is much more mavelous
and surprising. It seems the Lawmakers have not forgot any thing for the
establishing of things upon the best bottom that it was possible to put them;
and that they have prevented all the inconveniences that might be feared; but
by ill looking to the Conduct and Goodness of the Officers, does not correspond
to so good an order; for, as they all have an in^atiable desire of raising
themselves, and becoming Rich, they transgress, for these ends, all Human and
Divine Laws and Justice: and, whilst they counterfeit in their Exterior, the
exact observers, and are very nice in Formalities, they do not make the least
scruple to commit the greatest Injustices in the bottom; and to tread upon
Reason, Religion, Honesty and Equity, which does not hinder the form of
Government, from being in it self very excellent; Because, as our Author says,
the Knavery of the Men, takes away nothing from the goodness and excellency of
the Laws.

What has been hitherto said, must give a very high Notion, or Idea of the
Grandeur of this Empire: but, it seems, there is nothing can do that better,
than the Pomp and extraordinary Magnificence that shines at the Emperors
Court. Fancy it self would be troubled to add any thing to the Relation that
has been here made in several Chapters; and, it is hard, after Reading, but the
Flattery of the People, will seem more excusable; who, dazzled with this
Splendor, never speak of their Sovereign, but in Hyperbolick Expressions, and
treat all, who have Relation to his Person, with the terms of Heavenly and
Divine. What the Author says in this Article, must be seen in himself; and the
Account he gives of the City of Pekin, which is the Princes Place of abode, and
Capital of the Empire, and, above all, must be seen, what he says of that Great
and Magnificent Palace of this Emperor.

There are but few Readers that will not take pleasure in this part of his
Work, and to whom, the particular account he gives, will not seem curious; and
the more, because other Relations have said but very little upon this Subject,
and very confusedly; which, in Mr. Bernon's Judgment, proceeded from the small
help that people had until now, of Learning much of it: The Ambassadors that
are sent to that Court, being always shut in, in the Palace that they have
given them; and the Missioners, except a very few, having never seen Pekin, or
if they have, it was only in passing through it; So that, in his opinion,
there were but Father Magdillan's, and two or three others, that could have any
knowledge of the Court or City; And this Jesuit is the only Man that gave us
the Description, after 25 years abode there: In his Book then may be seen more
distinctly, than ever yet was seen, the Situation, Form, Disposition and
Greatness of this Famous City, which has been a long time spoken of without
being known: his Description is as ample, and accompanied with as good
circumstances as can be desired; and the Great Palaces, that contain a great
many other, and which, by its great and prodigious scope, and breadth, and for
the Beauty, Riches, Majesty and Grandeur of all contained in it, may justly
pass for the rarest and most mavelous thing in the World. Four Chapters are
employed in this Description, and the Author has joined to them a Draught of
the City and Palace, which serves much to comprehend the Symmetry and Order
that accompanies all that Magnificence: in fine, in the last Chapter that
immediately follows these, the Author shows the way the Emperor goes out of his
Palace, whether it be when he designs to divert himself in walking abroad, or
in Hunting; or whether it be when he goes abroad to make some public Function,
as some one of the Sacrifices, which he does every year, in every one of the
Seven Churches Ordained for this Ceremony; and which are situated in the City,
without the Walls of the Palace: on either occasion it is believed, that no
Prince can appear with so Magnificent an Equipage. But above all it is
presumed, that the Pomp and Magnificence cannot be equalled, wherewith he goes
to the Public Functions, for then he is accompanied with the most Sumptuous
and Majestic Guard that can be seen in any Court; nothing could better
complete the representing to us the Splendor of this Empire, and all the Glory
of its Monarch, than the description given to us of this Pompous March; and so
Father Magaillans judged, that he could not better conclude his History than by
it; and this is the dash with which he was willing to finish the Picture
wherein he has drawn the Grandeur and Magnificence of all China.

The Translator has added to this Relation, the Life and Death of the Author,
Written by Father Lewis Buglio, his inseparable companion all the time he staid
in China, which was 36 years. According to this Account, Father Magaillans was
a Portugese; and, according to M. Abbe Bernon, he was of the same Family that
Ferdinand Magaillans was of, who was, and still is corruptedly called Magellan;
and who first discovered the Gulf that bears that Name, at the extremity of
the Southern America. He showed from his youth, a great Passion for Visiting
the Indies; whither his Congregation, or Society having sent him in the year
1634, he soon found the opportunity of passing into China; where, after
suffering much from the Infidels, he was, at last, happy enough, to gain the
Favor of the Tartar Prince, who became Master of China; and by diverting him
with his ingenious Inventions, and pleasing him from time to time with some of
his own Works, it occasioned, that when he died, the King caused him to be
Sumptuously Buried, according to the Custom of the Country; And Father Buglio,
who describes us all the Ceremony, does not stick to say, that there has not
been seen a more Famous one at that Court.

A JOURNAL of Chardin's Voyages into PERSIA, and to the East- INDIES, by the
Black-Sea, and by Colchis, the first Part; containing a Voyage from Paris to
Ispahan. London, Sold by Moses Pitts, 1686, in Fol.
THE Author, in his Iournals, tells us, of a Famous River of Colchis, a Mile
and a half broad, and more than 60 Fathoms deep at its entry; and that he has
gone round the Isle of Phase, if possible to discover the Remains of the Temple
of Rhea, which Arian says was to be seen there in his time; and that he has not
found the least sign thereof, though Historians assure us, that it was whole in
the Low Empire, and was Dedicated to Jesus Christ, in the Emperor Zenon's
time; nor could he perceive any Marks of the great City of Sebastia, or of that
of Colchis: All that he found conform to what the Ancients Writ of the
Black-Sea, was only the great number of Pheasants that are about it: He
mentions, upon the Credit of some Authors, that the Argonauts brought these
Birds into Greece, where there were none before, and that they Named them
Pheasants, because they were taken about the Phase. I call to mind a
considerable mistake of a shepherd, who was otherways very Learned, as he has
shown himself in his History of the Highways; and in his Treatise of the Break
of Day, he says, in the 32 Chapter of the Fourth Book of this Treaties, That
the Luxury of the Romans was so great, that they did not measure the goodness
of Meats by the Taste, but by the Quantity and Cost, as were Pheasants, which
they sent for to Colchis; he would find it a hard task to prove this; for,
these words of Petronius, which seem to be his grounds for what he says, viz.
Ales phasiacis petita Colchis, signifies no more than that the race of these
Birds was brought from Colchis. The hard usage that Mr. Chardin had when he was
in the hands of the Dovaniers, and from a Lieutenant, worse than the Dovaniers
themselves, and that before he arrived at the Caucase, there were no
encouragements to go to Travel into these Countries. This Mountain is very
famous, the top is always covered with Snow, and is inhabited; and the passage
over it is Eight Leagues; all the rest of it abounds with Honey, Corn, Gum,
good Wines and Fruits; Hogs, and other great Cattle: There are many Villages,
and most of the Inhabitants are Christians, live after the Gregorian Rule, and
enjoy their ease.

Before we come to the Description of Georgia, it is pleasant to see the Author
meet his Comrade, after a thousand troubles, with the Riches that he brought
out of Europe. Georgia reached heretofore from Taunis and Erzorum to Tanais,
and was called Albanie, but it is less now: there are some that would have its
Name derived from that of St. George, the great Saint of all the Christians of
the Gregorian-Order; others will have it derived from the Inhabitants who were
called Georgi by the Greeks, which signifies Laborers; it has but few Towns.
The Kingdom of Caket had many heretofore. It is properly the ancient Iberia
that was ruined by the People of Mount Caucase; and, as it is said, by the
Amazons. The Author says, he has seen none in Georgia that ever was in the
Amazons Country; but that he has heard much of them, and has seen at the
Princes Palace the Habit of a big Woman, made of thick Woollen, and of a
particular form, which they said was that of an Amazon, killed near Caket in
the last Wars.

The Sons of the Prince of Georgia understanding by Mr. Chardin, what History
says of the Amazons, said, that they were some of the wandering Scythians, like
the Turcomans and Arabians, and have transferred the Sovereignty to their
Wives, as did the Achinese; and that these Queens were served by some of their
own sex, that followed them every where; after the manner that Georgia and its
Inhabitants are spoken of here, it would move one to apply to them the Proverb,
touching the Kingdom of Naples; Camer. 1 Vol. l. 5. c. 5.
Il regno Neapolitano e un delicato paradiso Mahabitato da gli dianoli: In
effect, Georgia is as fertile a Country as can be; one may live there
deliciously and cheap: the Bread is as good as in any place of the World, the
Fruit is very excellent, and of all sorts; abundance of very good Cattle, Fowl
innumerable, and incomparably good: the wild Boar is as delicate there, as in
Colchis, and there can no better thing be eaten than the Hogs, which the common
people feed on: there is Fresh-water-fish, and Seafish in great quantity, and
the best in the World. For 8 Livres may be bought a Horse-load of the best Wine
in the Country, that is to say, 300 pound weight. All this resembles an Earthly
Paradise; but if we consider the Inhabitants, they will be found like Devils
only, except that they are Civil, Grave, Moderate, and very Fair: The Author
Remarks, That he did not see one ugly Person of either Sex, but Angelick Faces;
and, that nothing can be Painted more Charming, than the Georgines.
Nevertheless, he adds, that they all Paint, they generally have a great deal of
Natural Wit, but being ill brought up, they become very Ignorant and Vicious,
Cheats, Knaves, Traitors, Ungrateful, Proud, and strangely Impudent in Lying,
Irreconcilable in their Hatreds, Drunkards, Usurers, immodest to the highest
Degree. The Churchmen drink as well as the rest, and have with them handsome
Slaves which they make their Concubines; and what is the height of all
Corruption, none is scandalized, because it is Authorized by the general
custom: The Author says, that the Guardian of the Capucins told him, that he
heard it said by the Catholics, (for so are called the Patriarchs of Georgia)
that whoever was not drunk at the Feast of Easter and Christmas, etc. does not
pass for a good Christian, and ought to be excommunicated.

The Women are neither less evil or vicious, they have a great eagerness for
Men, and have a greater part in this Torrent of Immodesty than is to be found
in any other part of the World: Every one has liberty in Georgia, to live
according to his own Religion, to discourse of it and maintain it: There are
there more Armenians than Georgians; there are also Greeks, Jews, Turks,
Persians, Indians, Tartars, Muscovites, and Europians. The Religion of the
Georgians, is much the same with theirs of Mingrelia; but that they Fast more,
and have longer Prayers, and look after their Churches better: The greatest
part live on remote and inaccessible Mountains; they see them, and salute them
at the distance of three or four Leagues, but hardly ever go thither; and what
is yet more ridiculous, though the Prince is a Mohammedan, yet he fills all
Benefices; generally he places his Friends in them, and it is his Brother that
is Patriarch now; without doubt, it would be known how this Catholico first
renounced Mahometanism; and it is very pleasing to see how the Georgian Princes
have become Mahometans and Subjects to the Emperor of Persia: The Account is
very distinct, and in few words opens all the History of that Country, from
Ismael Sophi to this very time. There we learn among other things, that the
Kings of Persia soon converted them by inflicting great Torments upon them that
continued in Christianity, and in giving great Advantages to such as abjured
Jesus Christ, and this was done with not so much Reluctance, as quitting the
Protestant for Romish Religion; but as there never was Country or Age wherein
were not found some firm in the Religion that they believed good, so there was
a Princess of Georgia that neither Iron nor Fire could shake: Abas the Great
would not received the Lie, but sent Orders to the Governor of Chiras to make
her a Mohammedan at any Price; the Governor omitted nothing to overcome the
constancy of this Princess, he made her suffer 8 Years Martyrdom, by so much
the more cruel, that he renewed her Torments every day; she died at last upon
Flaming Coals in the Year 1624. her Body was thrown to the Birds of the Air,
but the Augustins sent it secretly to the Prince her Son; she was called
Kela^a^e, and very few have imitated her. The Princess of Georgia and great
part of the Lords do now profess Mahometanism, some to employ themselves at the
Persian Court, others for Pensions, and some that they might marry their
Daughters to the King, or make them enter into the Queen's Service.

The head City of Georgia is called Tifflis; there are fourteen Churches, which
is much in a Country of so little Devotion, but that is not the most
surprising. It is more admirable, that these People should be so much against
the Building of Mosques; the King of Persia their Sovereign could never compass
the Building of one at Tifflis. The People rise presently, and being armed,
ruin the Work and abuse the workmen; they thought to build one at the Fort, to
accustom the People to the sight of Mosques, and to see their Priests call
People to Prayer, from the top of the Building; but the first time that the
Priest was doing; this Functions, there were so many Stones thrown on that
side, that obliged him to come down in haste; and after this Mutiny, there was
none put to do this Office. The King of Persia's Patience, is to be more
admired here than the Georgias Zeal: For tho they have neither Piety nor
Virtue, the mere Passions of the Machine or Body, may naturally produce Sallies
and Religious Extravagances; it was a thousand times observed, That the most
Pros^igate when let loose on the persecuted Party, by the chief Persecutors,
were those that showed most Zeal.

The Capucins of Tifflis are very near as lewd as the Theatins of Mingrelia;
their capacity in Physic and Chemistry is of more use to them than any they
can have in Controversy; and they do not maintain their Embassies as they told
M. Chardin, for any Benefit they reap, but merely for the Glory of the Roman
Church; which would not be Universal, say they, if it had not Ministers in all
parts of the Inhabited World; they have the Popes leave to receive Pay for
their Cure, which they turn to good Profit; they have power to absolve from any
sin, and to disguise themselves to sell and buy, and to receive and set at
interest. The Zeal of the Georgians for their Fast is so unreasonable, that
they do not believe one a Christian that does not Fast as they do, which
obliges the Capucins to fast the Georgian way, and to abstain from Hares,
Tortoises, and other things, which the Georgians abhor.

There is also at large the Patent which the King of Persia, sent to M. Chardin
full of Pride; and indeed generally the Eastern Princes assume the highest
Titles that can be conceived. I believe that for the honor of Europe and
Christendom, every one ought to know what Spirit guides them in the East; for
when that is not known, we are thought the most ridiculous People in the World,
which is false; for these in Asia surpass us, and if we keep our selves as we
are, they will always excel us in that particular; there was lately published,
which was well done, a strange Legend of pompous Titles which the Kings of Siam
give themselves; the Author being minded to show, That the Eastern Nations are
infinitely more vain than all the other; he has inserted in his Journal the
Translation of a Letter from the Prince of Georgia to John Casimer King of
Poland; but because the Patent of the King of Persia is dressed with much form,
there is care taken to expound all after an Instructive manner. I will meddle
but with this Point; the Persians have this way, never to place the Name of God
at the bottom of a Leaf, they put it at top, and at the side, and leave a Blank
whereto it relates; and they make a great business of this Circumspection. --
And they take the same care for their King's and chief Ministers Names in all
their Law Papers, and in Petitions and Public Acts.

The Author being invited by the Prince of Georgia to a great Nuptial Feast,
gives us the Description of it, which among other curious Circumstances, has
this, that the Prefect of the Capucins all in white, and very old, was obliged
to play upon the Virginals before the Guests, and to sing at the same time; he
sung first the Magnificat, the Te-Deum, and the Tantum ergo, and then the Tunes
of the Court in Italian and Spanish, because the Hymns did not enough delight
this Mohammedan Prince: This Consort lasted 2 hours, during which M. Chardin
that found it very mean, learned of a Steward that the Mohammedan Faith did not
permit the use of Music, and above all prohibits it in Matters of Religion,
there being nothing but the voice of Man wherewith God will be praised. The
Prince asking how the King of Spain his Cousin did, occasioned the Authors
Learning, that Clement the 8th. writing to a Prince of Georgia, and saying,
that Philip the Second was his Cousin, gave way to this pretension of Kindred;
and that the Iberians and Spaniards were Brothers. Before M. Chardin quitted
Tifflis, he had the complaisance on the Account of a Capucin to write in his
Table Book, several Secrets of an Old Woman that practiced Physic. His Journey
from Tifflis to Irivan was very tiresom. Irivan is a Town of Armenia, whereof
he gives us the Description; it is the most considerable Government of the
Kingdom: The Revenues producing near 500000 Crowns yearly without reckoning the
200000 which it raises by indirect ways; he that was in possession of it then,
was called Sefi-Couli-can, the Dukes Slave of Sefi; the Name of Slave, which
really belongs to the Subjects of the Eastern Princes, is a Name of Honor in
Persia, Chacouli or Coulom-cha, which signifies Slave of the King, i^ as
honorable a Title as that of Marquess in France: The Slaves of the King have
at the Persian Court almost the same employments that ordinary Gentlemen have
at that of France; they are Children of Quality that are engaged very young in
that Service, as well for the profit that they receive, as that they the sooner
have admittance to the Court; as for the rest, the Persian Eloquence does not
flatter ill the Vanity of that Nation, when to signify that an Ambassador has
saluted the King: they say, He has kissed the King's Slaves Feet; and for to
say, That a Prince has done some great Action, they say, The Princes Slaves
have done a great Action. The Author imagines, That this is copied from the
Alcoran, wherein the Works of God are often called the Works of Angels; the
Mahometans maintain, that it expresses more nobly the Works of God; for if they
that are but Servants are capable of forming the World, what will not he do
that is Master?

The Governor of Irivan seems to have much Merit for several Reasons; but
before he is spoke of, Mr. Chardin rehearses several considerable Points of the
Tradition of that Country, which is of great Service to the Christians of
Europe, because it shows, that those of Asia make far more idle Stories; some
of these Traditions relate to Noah's Ark. I shall be easily pardoned, if without
stopping at these things I acquaint my Reader, that M. Chardin shows us very
curious things concerning the Couriers of the King of Persia* and of the
Persian Marriages. Their Morals upon the Chapter of Women, is the most
licentious in the World. For they may have four, they may buy, or hire as many
as they will, and use them as Treasure, without breach of Civil or
Ecclesiastic Law. There are but few nevertheless that Marry more than one
Wife; and they find it more to their advantage, not to trouble their Houses
with Jealousies of several Heads, whereof every one would be Mistress, and to
diversifie their Pleasures cheaper, by the number of Slaves, which they bring
up to be their Concubins, without prejudicing in the least the Superiority of a
Wife. Mahomet had been but a little Politic if in lieu of permitting them to
have four, he had commanded them to have so many; and if the contrary were
desired of him, as a favor it would be as Phaeton did: Poenam, Phaeton pro
munere poscis. They are married there without seeing each other, and a Man does
not see his Wife until after the Consummation of Matrimony, and often he does
not consummate it; for some days after she is brought to him, because she hides
her self among the Women, and will not let the Husband enjoy her. These Forms
are more frequent among People of Quality, because in their Opinion, it is like
a debauched Person to yield the Last Favor so soon; especially the Women of
the Royal Family, there must be sometimes whole Months to prevail with them. It
is very probable, says Mr. Chardin, That this way of Marrying without seeing
each other should produce very unhappy Effects, but happens perfectly contrary;
for it may be said, That there are more lucky Marriages in those Countries
where they do not see the Women at all, than in them where they are seen and
frequented: The reason is evident, when we do not see another Man's Wife, we do
not so soon lose the Love we may have for our own. And the Reflection is very
good. I shall say nothing of several other particularities which the Author
mentions here in this great Chapter. He reports of the Governor of Irivan,
which is a little better than the Answer of this which the Ambassador of
Vi^qufort speaks of, that upon the demand made him, what he would have the
Present consist of, that was intended him; he Answered in Bills of Exchange.
This Governor understanding, That the Box which M. Chardin presented him with,
was worth 10 Pistols: he desired him to take it again, and to give him the
value of it in Keys, Springs and Strings of Watches; this and several other
things to be seen in that Journal, shows that Covetousness is so predominant
with the Eastern People that it puts them on a thousand base little Actions.

If this Article had not been a little too long already, I would have related
many other things out of this Volume. The Author shows much skill in Geography,
and gives us the Description of some considerable Towns, with the Plans of
them, and an Abridgment of their Histories, which may satisfy well enough the
desire of any curious Reader. He represents us the City of Tauris as very
beautiful: there are 250 Mosques in it, and a place where the Turks may put
^0000 Men in Battalia: He prefers their Opinion before any others that will
have it to be the Ancient Town of Echatane. The Letters of Recommendation given
him, and his Notes on them, are not the least curious part of this Book: For
they help to teach us the Genius of the Persians: There we learn that they call
their Kings the Vicars of God, because they pretend, That the Race that Reigned
these 250 Years, sprung from Ali Son-in-Law, and Successor of Mahomet.

Casbin the Country of the famous Locman, the Eastern Aesope, appears with
great Pomp, but it would be nothing in comparison of another Town, called Rey,
if it were true, that Rey was what the Persian Geographers maintain it to be,
upon the credit of all the Eastern Authors, who say, That in the Sixth Age of
Christianity, the Town of Rey was divided into 96 Parts, whereof each had 46
Streets, every Street 400 Houses and 10 Mosques, and that the Town had 6400
Colleges, 16600 Baths, 15000 lesser Mosques, 12000 Mills, 17000 Channels, and
13000 Caravanserais. The Magies Chronicles affirm, That Chus Grandson of Noah
was the Founder of Rey, and laid the first Stone under the Ascendant of
Scorpion. This is no small comfort to our Northern and Southern Fablers: for if
on one part they are concerned to be called Dreamers, they will have on the
other side the satisfaction of having Companions all over the World: For what
concerns the Magnificence of the Mosques and Mausolees of Com? They are not
Dreams, but Realities, since the Author professes himself an eyewitness
thereof. The Tomb of Fathme, Daughter of Mouza-Cazem, one of the 12 Califes,
which the Persians believe were the lawful Successors of Mahomet after Ali, is
in the chiefest of these Mosques with those of King Abas, and Sefi. There is
but very little wanting in the Worship of Fathme among the Persians, to equal
it to what most of the Christians pay to the Mother of the Son of God. This
appears by the Prayers that Pilgrims of Com rehearse; and the People are
persuaded, that the Virgin Fathme was transported to Heaven both Body and Soul,
yet they do not celebrate the Feast of her Assumption. Mr. Chardin gives us in
French some of these Prayers, as also the famous Elegy of Haly, made by the
Learned Haran Carry: This Panegyric is writ in great Letters of Gold, in the
Gallery of the Tomb of Abas, and is a piece of Eloquence* wherein may be seen
not only the Genius of the Persian Poetry, but also Transports of the Mohammedan
Devotion. It Is in Songs divided by disticks; the first is all upon Mahomet, the
six other upon Ali. If I were minded to make a more ample Addition of the
Spanish Rotomandos, many places of this Poem should be copied out. To speak
seriously, there are some turns of Expressions that have much Force in them, as
when to express the Beauty of Ali the Poet* assures us, That God has assigned
his Love us a Ioynture to the Ladies of Paradise: Naturalists will not find
what they look for here, but they may examine the White Pot Work of Com, and
they will find enough to busy themselves in; it refreshes Water in Summer very
well, by the means of a continual Transpiration. The first time that this Pot
is used, a Quart transpires in 6 hours, and then less and less afterward until
at last the Pores are closed by gross Matter that is in the Water, that stops
its passage through the Pores; and then a new Pot must be used, or else the
Water would stink in the other.

The Author set forth from Com the 16th. of June 1672. and arrived at Ispahan
the 23 d. And here the First Volume ends; it is to be sold at Amsterdam;
Reprinted in Twelves at Wolfgang's.

Reflections on the cruel PERSECUTIONS that the Reformed Church suffered in
FRANCE, through the Conduct and Acts of the last Assembly of the Clergy of that
Kingdom, with an Examination of the pretended Calumnies whereof the Clergy
complains to the King in the Profession of Faith.
PErhaps there never was seen so strange a difference as is found now between
the Catholics and the Reformed, who write upon the Conversions in France: The
first maintain, that they do all mildly, and with Christian Charity, and upon
this make continual Exclamations and Panegyricks. The last affirm, That they
force them by threatening, or corrupt them by other means, and that at last they
employed an Army of 50000 Men, who except killing committed all the Disorders
that they usually commit when they live at discretion in an Enemies Country,
which has made some merry People term it, The Dragoon Croisade, or the
Conversion of the Dragoons.

They say a great deal more, but since it is the sign of prudence not to
believe them lightly: Qui cito credit levis est cord. I would advise the
Readers to suspend their judgment a little. All wise Men should go on leisurely
on these Matters, and should neither believe the Relations of the Catholics,
nor them of the Reformed, until they have well considered all the
Circumstances. What is most certain upon sight of all their pieces, is, that
either the Reformed Writers must be the boldest Calumniators that ever were in
the World, or that the Catholic Writers must be the falsest and the boldest
Flatterers that have ever been heard of. For in fine, an Army that Plunders, or
threatens to Plunder the Hugonots Houses through all the Kingdom, is a thing
that it is hard to suppress the Truth of, or to persuade that it is false.

The Author of this Work dedicates it to God: This Dedicatory Epistle has a
very singular turn and an uncommon advantage, which is that it prosecutes his
Praises to the highest, without becoming suspected of Flattery. I am mistaken
if Praises be the only thing aimed at in it: For certainly, there enters
Censure either directly or indirectly in the Reflections that follow this
Dedication; they have much Fire and Wit, but are very disadvantageous to the
Clergy; for they show, That they managed their Work after so cheating a way,
that though they have gulled the People, yet there could be nothing so gross and
ill knit together as their Artifices: This Author complains continually that on
all occasions they seemed to have wholly the Edicts of Pacification, tho at
bottom they had no such thought, as the Event has confirmed; one might press
People far enough both according to the Notions of the Gospel and Maxims of
Morals, when they are convinced of such Dissimulation; but those that are
acquainted with the Rights of the Art of Governing, and who have experienced,
that Politic Wisdom is obliged to conceal their intentions, and know that this
is a necessary evil in this State of corrupted nature, will not trouble
themselves with all these Complaints, but will send all Protestant Writers to
Plato's Commonwealth, or to Sir Thomas Moore's Vtopia, because they think like
Cato, without considering what a Man is in such an Age as this, and without
thinking that a perfect Regularity does not belong to this World; we must stay
until the Resurrection new forms Man from Head to Foot, to see him in this
Order.

To these Complaints are added others; the violent Advices suggested by the
Bishops, and after this are made some rough Reflections upon the two Orations
of the last Meeting of the Clergy, spoke by the Bishop of Valence and the
Coadjutor of Rouen, and there is to be seen the Discourse which the Lieutenant
General of Rochelle made to the Heads of the Protestant Families, wherein he
declared, that if they did not quickly learn and enter into the bosom of the
Church, they should be punished in this World with much Pain and Calamities.
And here follows an Account of what passed at Mounaban, and of diverse Remarks
that help to show, that the Persecutions of the Pagans, nor of the Duke of
Alva, and them of Hungary, were not so grievous as those of our Days: The
Donatists are spoke of, and it is maintained, that they are not to be compared
with the Hugonots, and that the success of the Persecutions raised against them
is not to be expected now.

They found it on this thought, that the new Converts change only in the
exterior, and that they will never be drawn from their Hypocrisy, but by having
leave to return to their former Belief: If a thousand Reports that run, were
credited, it would be thought that there would become a true Samaritanisme in
France, and a mixed Religion that would neither be Calvinism nor Papism, and
which would have been soon excommunicated by the Pope, in the times that the
Court of Rome could maintain his Pretensions. There was a Discourse that there
is nothing asked of the most of the Proselytes, but a general Promise, That
they would not remain Separatists. And the Gazett tells us, they are suffered
to sing in the very Cathedrals the Psalms of Clement Marot: And upon this many
cry, that it is an effect of the Promise, that they complain of. But as I have
said already, A wise Man should not credit things of this nature upon
Hear-says; we must expect until time clears all these doubtful Matters, to see
whether the Prelates of France will not, by good Apologies, annul the
complaints spread of them through all Europe. As the Commonwealth of Sciences
is a State of Abstraction and Precision from all Sects, and, as such, is not to
take the part of any Sect of Divines, or Philosophers; it will be its duty to
give an impartial account of the Books that will be published by the Clergy,
and which it will not neglect. The Author makes an end of the First Part of his
Book with a Letter upon what happened at Guyenne, in the time of the M. of
Boufflers Croisade. It Is strange he says nothing of the Revocation of the Edict
of Nan^es. And we may conclude hence, that his Book was Printed before that was
known. Without doubt it will be the subject of another Work. He that made these
Reflections, does not look as if he would slip so fertile a matter, or as if he
would stop in so fair a road.

To understand better the Contents of his Second Part, I must first tell the
Reader, that the Second Assembly of the Clergy brought a parallel of the
Doctrine of the Roman Church, and that which is imputed to it by Protestants,
which comprehends in Seven Articles, all the Points that are Disputed of; and
there are three Columns made on each Article of these: The first contains the
Formal Terms of the Profession of Faith, and of the Council of Trent. The
second, the French Translation of these Terms: The third is of the Imputations
of Protestants, which the Clergy pretend to be Calumnies of the highest degree,
and have all, in a Body, petitioned the King for a Formal Justice. The Author
having made several Remarks on all this, with his ordinary heat, descends to a
more particular examination of these Seven Articles, and maintains, that the
Calumnies that were complained of, are very unjust Accusations, and pretends,
that the most rigorous and hard expressions of the Ministers contain nothing,
but pure Truth; and marks, that the Translation of these pretended Calumnies
contain a more injurious meaning than the Original: I will not enter on
particular proofs; it is enough to say, that they are passed with much Vigor
and Wit, and that for the honor of the Roman Communion they must be Answered.

The Third Column will produce an infinite number of Books of Controversy,
which may last a long time; for Questions of matters of Fact are sometimes an
Abyss, whereof the bottom is never seen. The Philosophers of this Country will
be less impatient for these Books, than for the Apology; for that they hope
that the Author of the Apology will teach them many curious things, touching
the Nature of the Soul, and the Easiness of changing Opinions from morning to
night: for, without this, their Apology will seem to want one of its most
Essential Parts; because the Cartesians have made the World experience sensibly
the great force of Prejudices that there are, but few thinking Men but believe
that there would be need of the Adress of the most able Philosopher for two
years, to persuade all People, that Sensible Qualities are only in the Soul;
that the Earth moves continually; that Body and Space are the same thing, etc.
And, upon this, they imagine some hardness of the Fibers of the Brain for
Faith. But, in all likelihood, they will be otherwise looked upon in the
Apology; and it will be Mechanically Explicated unto them a Method to be
instructed, in four days, which makes People to pass from white to black, in
Doctrines sucked in with their Milk, as of Matters of the greatest and most
eminent importance.

The British Theater, or the True History of Great Britain. Written by
Gregorio Leti. Amsterdam: Sold by Abraham Wolfang, 1684. 5 Vol. in 12.
THe Author of this Book has made himself known long since, by a great many
fine Italian Pieces, which have been Translated into diverse Tongues; and,
amongst others, by Italia Regnante, by Itinerario della Carte di Roma; by
Politica de Principi; by il Livello Politico; by i Diala hi politici; by Vita
di Philippi II. and by la vita de Gisto V. Printed lately at Paris, being
Translated into very fine French. The Praise of some of these Works may be seen
in the Journal of the Learned. Mr. Leti has published the most part of them at
Geneva, where he lived several years. In the First Book of the second Volume of
this British Theater, is the reason why he left it. He went into France
immediately upon it, and presented to the King a Panegyric, which he had made
upon that Monarch, Entitled, la Fama Gelo sa della Fortuna. The Gallant
Mercury of the Month of July, 1680. and the Journal of the Learned of the 29th
of the same Month, speak much in the Commendation of the Person of Mr. Leti,
and of the Panegyric which he presented at the same time to the King at
Fontainebleau. He was very well received by this Prince, yet notwithstanding he
made no stay at his Court, because he saw there was nothing to be done there
for Protestants* he chose therefore to withdraw into England. He was soon known
there, and honored with a considerable Present by our King some few days after
his arrival. Which also obliged him to Compose a Panegyric upon His Majesty,
who received it very Graciously. He afterward got leave to carry on the
History of England, and the Secretaries of State received Orders to fu^nish him
with the Memoires which he would require. This was the reason why this Work was
much talked of; As it was one day spoken of at the King's getting up, some one
said, That he did not believe that a Stranger could succeed in Writing the
History of England: others maintained, That a Stranger would succeed better,
because he would speak with less Interest; and that there ought to be no
difficulty made to furnish him with requisites for it, rather than to a Native
born. The King, who excells in Reparties, said thereupon; Let him alone; if he
does well, it is so much the better: if not, 'twill excite some other to try to
acquit himself better. The Author knowing what was said of his Work aforehand,
neglected nothing of what could be useful to him: He visited carefully the
Wisest Persons of England, and had considerable Memorials of them: He informed
himself of the Antiquities, of the Laws, and of the Customs of the State, and
of all the Particularities of the Country. It must not be forgotten that he
was made a Member of the Royal Society, by the Nomination of the Deceased Duke
of Norfolk.

He begun with describing the Ancient and Modern State of Great Britain, which
he included in two Volumes in 4to. He proposed to himself to compose three
others, for the History it self of the Country. Whilst he was about these two
first Volumes, the King asked him one day, If his History would be soon ended.
He Answered, That he feared it would be finished too soon. And why, replied the
King? Because, Answered Mr. Leti, I fear the Destiny of Historians, which is to
be recompensed by Exile, or Imprisonment. You are too Wise, replied the King,
to expose your self to that. If one was as wise as Solomon, answered the
Author, ones destiny cannot be avoided. Well then, added the King, if you
believe there is so much danger in Writing Histories, Write Proverbs as Solomon
did. That seemed to be a Presage of what happened afterward; but Mr. Leti ceased
not to go on in his Work, and even to say to the Court, when the occasion
offered, That he Writ a History, and not a Panegyric; that they should dispose
themselves so as to see the Truth there, without Flattery as well as without
Satyrs.

As soon as the Edition of these two Volumes were ended, he presented them to
the King and Queen, to whom they were Dedicated; to the Duke and Duchess of
York. They were very well received: and during ten days Mr. Leti was seen at
Court as favorably as before. He believed then, that seeing the King who was
willing to read the Work himself, and who stayed up very late some nights to
end the Reading thereof, said nothing, it was a sign the Book did not displease
him. From that time he made diverse Presents to the Ambassadors who were at
London, and to the Lords of the Court. It was, it seems, through the suggestion
of an Ambassador, that this Work which the King had read without any apparent
dislike, passed for a dangerous Book, and hurtful to the State, as treating too
openly, and too clearly of such Truths as were thought would be better
concealed. The Council assembled diverse times thereupon, and it was at last
concluded, That all the Copies should be seized which the Author had, and that
he should be commanded in Ten days to depart England. The thing was executed,
but mildly. One may see what Mr. Leti says thereof, p. 16. of the Second
Volume. He relates in the Preface of the First* something a Prelate said to
him, which deserves to be taken notice of. Signior Gregorio, says he un^o him,
a few days before he left London, voi avete fatto l' Historia per altri, and non
per voi, e dovevate far la per voi, e non per altri.

We thought that the Reader would be glad to learn the Adventures both of an
History, and an Author, who have made so much noise. And therefore shall
proceed to the Work it self.

What had been Printed at London contained but the Ancient and Modern State of
Great Britain. It is to be had entire, without any thing cut off in the two
First Volumes of this Edition; except the Author thought it more expedient to
reserve for the Fifth Volume any thing which was Historical.

The First Volume contains eleven Books; whereof the First gives a brief
account of the History and Religion of England, whilst it had been possessed by
diverse Princes, and bore the Name of Britannia, to wit unto Egbert, who reduced
it altogether under his Power, and gave it the Name of England, or of Anglia,
at the end of the Eighth Age. There are in this First Book diverse things very
curious concerning the Druides, and the Gods who were adored in England, before
the Faith had been planted in it. The Author describes in the Second Book, the
Greatness, the Situation, the Provinces, the Rivers, the Cities, the
Bishoprics, the Inhabitants, the Fertility, the Merchandises, the
Negotiations, and the Buildings of England. The Third Book is employed
altogether upon the Description of the Famous City of London. Here there is
more exactness than in the very Writings of some English, who have given the
Public the state of this Famous City, and that of the whole Kingdom. There is,
according to the supputation of Mr. Leti, near Four hundred fifty thousand
Souls in London, and about Six Millions in the whole Kingdom. The Fourth speaks
of the Government and Privileges of the same City, as well as of the Factions
which do divide it. The Sixth describes the Humor of the English, and the
Application they have to Religion, and to the Observation of the Laws of the
Country. The Seventh is a Continuation of the same subject, and a description
of the Laws and diverse Customs of England. The Eighth speaks of the strangers
who are in that Country, and chiefly of the French Protestants who have fled
thither some time since. In this is the Declaration of the King of France,
importing, That the Children of those of the R. P. R. may convert at seven
Years; accompanied with political and very curious Reflections. In the Ninth
Book the Author describes the Three States of England, the Clergy, the Nobility
and the People, but particularly the first. It contains the number, and names
of the Bishops of this time; the manner of consecrating them, their Revenues,
etc. The Tenth speaks of the State of Roman Catholics in England, of their
number, of their Exercises, of the Endeavors to bring in again their Religion,
of the Missions of Friars, and of the Complaints they make of Protestants. The
Author adds the Answer of the Protestants to these Complaints, and shows by the
Catholic Authors the Designs of the Court of Rome upon England, and of the
Intrigues it makes use of to bring it under its Yoke. The last Book of this
Volume contains the Policy of the Court of England and its Maxims of State.

The Second Volume is composed of Eight Books, whereof the two first do treat
of the Religion and different Parties which divide it. Therein are to be seen
the Disputes of the Conformists, and of the Non-Conformists, the Opinions of
the Quakers, of Anabaptists, etc. The Fourth contains the Foundations and the
Rights of the Monarchy of England, the Revenues of the King, and other
Particulars of this nature. There are several things in this place, which
cannot be found elsewhere. The fifth describes the Government of England, the
King's Council, the Parliament, and the diverse Tribunals of Justice of this
Kingdom. Herein are the Reasons why Parliaments have opposed in so many
Rencounters the Designs of King's, which Strangers are commonly ignorant of.
The sixth speaks of the particular Government of Cities, and of Countries, as
also of the Posts, of Governors of Places, of the Garrisons, and of the Land
Forces and Sea Forces of England. The seventh is a Description of the Court,
and the King's Officers, and of the Royal Family. The last speaks of the
strange Ministers who are at London, of the manner wherewith they receive
Ambassadors there, Residents, Envoys, etc. and of the Privileges they enjoy.
Here is the Description of those who were in England whilst the Author lived
here. He tells very frankly their good or ill Qualities; and this is not a
little useful to judge of their Negotiations, and to know why the one succeeds
without pains in his Designs, whilst the other stumbles every where. It were to
be wished, that all the Histories which we have, were thus circumstantiated.
For as there would be much more pleasure in reading them, so we might also
profit thereby much more than we do. We should know not only the Events, but
also the secret Causes, the Intrigues, and the means which have contributed to
the great Revolutions, and it is what may profitably instruct us. What
signifies it to know in general, that a certain thing has happened in a
certain Year, if we do not know how and wherefore: It is the Conduct of Men
which serves us for an Example and an Instruction, and not the simple Events,
which of themselves are of no use to us. But where are there Men so courageous
as to write without Flattery the History of their Time? Where are there Princes
who are so just as to suffer that their Truths should be told to their Faces?
Where are there even Ministers of State, who would permit that their Defects
should be divulged during their Life? Nevertheless, it is but then that it can
be well done; for if in the time wherein things are fresh, more than one half
is forgotten; much more are the following Ages deprived of the knowledge of a
thousand particular Facts, which have produced great Affairs.

The Author having thus described the State of the Kingdom in the two first
Volumes, takes up again in the three others, the sequel of the History of
England, from Egbert, and continues it unto M DC Lxxxii. He has disposed his
Work after this manner, that after having made all the Essential Remarks of the
History of England in the two first Volumes, he should not be obliged in the
following to interrupt the course of his Narration. The third Volume contains
Six Books, whereof the last is destined to the Life of Henry the VIII. The
fourth Volume is composed of Five Books, the first whereof includes the Reign
of Edward, and of Mary, and the Second that of their Sister Elizabeth. In the
Third the Author after he begins the History of King James who reunited the
Three Kingdoms, makes a Description of Ireland and Scotland, and speaks of
their Ancient and Modern State, after which in the Fourth Book he composes the
History of the Reign of King James, wherein are very curious Particulars. There
is the Life of famous M rc Antony de Dominis, Archbishop of Spalatro, included
in a Letter written from Rome. The Author had already published it in the Third
Part of his Brittanica Politica. It is a very curious Piece, wherein is seen
how this Prelate embraced the Protestant Religion, and how being deluded by the
Promises of Dom Diego Sarmianto de Acuna, Ambassador of France in England, and
by that of the Court of Rome, he returned into Italy, where he unhappily ended
his Days, without obtaining any thing of what he hoped. There also is a Letter
of Pope Gregory XV. to the Prince of Wales, who was since Charles I. Upon his
Marriage with the Infanta of Spain, and an Answer of this Prince to the Pope.
The Fifth Book contains the Reign of the same Prince, where his Innocence may
be seen, and the unheard of Violence of his Subjects described without
partiality, and all the Proceedings which were made against him.

The last Volume is composed of Six Books. The first contains the History of
Cromwell's Usurpation more exact and sincere that it had been heretofore:
Hitherto have been but Satyrs or Panegyricks thereupon. The Creatures of
Cromwell have raised him up to the Clouds, and his Enemies have omitted nothing
that might defame him. The Author pretends that he has been the greatest
Politician, and the greatest Captain of his time, and that he was much more
able to Reign than several of those whom Providence has placed upon the Throne
by Inheritance. But he shows on the other side, That he was a Cheat and a
Tyrant, who after having dipped his hand in the Innocent Blood of his Master,
all his Life cheated the People by a specious Zeal for Religion. The Second
Book contains the History of Charles the II. until his Restoration. In this
Book are seen the Honors which were rendered to him in Holland; his Magnificent
Entry into London, his Clemency to those who had bore Arms against him, and his
Justice toward the Murderers of his Father. The same History is continued in
the Third Book from the Year M. DC. LXI. unto the Year M. DC. LXXX. There is
also the Life of the Duke of York, until his Marriage with Chancellor
Clarendon's Daughter; the Quarrel, which happened between the Ambassadors of
France and Spain, about Precedence: The subtilty wherewith the Spanish
Ambassador carried it; the Marriage of the Princess Henrietta, and that of the
King, the War of England with Holland, and with France; the Peace that was made
afterward with both the others, which was followed with a secret Treaty
betwixt England and France, appeared in M. DC. Lxxii. the Marriage of the Duke
of York with the Princess of Modena; the Calling, Prorogation, and dissolving
different Parliaments. In fine, the Discovery which Oats and Bedlow made of a
Conspiracy, which made so great noise, and whereof this Author appears not very
much persuaded. We find in the fourth Book the sequel of the same Troubles, and
the History of what passed in the Parliaments convocated in M. DC.LXXX. at
London and Oxford. There is particularly in this Book one thing of very great
importance, which the Author relates with as much sincerity, as if none was
interessed therein. Which are, 1. The Endeavors the Parliament of England made
to exclude the Duke of York from the Crown. 2. The Reasons which were alleged
for this. 3. The manner wherewith the Creatures of this Prince defended his
Rights. The Author ends this Book by the Description of Pensilvania, without
omitting either the Offers which are made to those who will go to inhabit it,
or the manner they may be established in it. The fifth Book begins with the
Encomium of the House of Savoy; and tells us afterward with a very great
exactness the means which Madam, etc. made use of in M. DC. LXXX. and
M.DC.LXXXII. to obtain of his British Majesty, that the Ambassadors of Savoy
should be received in London like those of Crowned Heads. It is one of the
finest places of the whole Work, and they who love to read the particulars of a
Negotiation, cannot read a more curious one, nor one better related than this.
The last contains the Affair of Count Koningsmarc, with all its Circumstances,
which is a very good History, and whence the manner may be Learned after what
Strangers are judged in England. Here it is, that the Work ends. The Author
promises us in his Preface another Volume, where all will appear which has
happened in England till these latter Years.

The Style of this History, as well as the other Works of Mr. Leti, is easy and
without Affectation, contrary to the custom of most Italian Writers: But what
is most considerable, is, that he relate^ Matters so nakedly, and speaks so
freely of the Interests of the greatest Princes of Europe, that perhaps one day
persons will not be easily persuaded, that the Author had caused this Work to
be printed during his Life, and the life of those of whom he speaks, if at the
beginning, the Year had not been marked wherein it was printed.

Mr. Leti has since written a Book which treats of all that concerns
Embassies. There may not only be seen the modern use of all Courts in this
respect, but the ancient also; so that it will be a History of great concern.
The Author is not contented to speak of the Duties and Privileges of all the
Ministers which one Sovereign sends to another, but of each according to the
Degree of his Character; he speaks largely also on the Origin of this
Function, and upon all the Principalities which are formed in the World. He
relates several Examples of Ambassadors, who have committed gross Mistakes,
and gives Instructions how to manage worthily this Post, according to the
different Courts wherein they are obliged to reside. Men, will easily believe
that a Work which treats of things of this nature, and of so great a number of
others, is worthy of Publication.

An Examination of the Infallibility and Right which the Roman Church pretends
to have in Judging Absolutely in Matters of Controversy. 8 vo. 1687. 255.
WHilst the Romish Church makes use of all the Power of Sovereigns, to reunite
to its Communion those who have quitted it, Protestants oppose these
progresses, by co^ntaining their Cause with the soundest Reasons which they can
think upon. Though they differ amongst themselves about several Speculative
Doctrines, they perfectly agree upon Morality, and the Worship which we owe to
the Divinity; they also, in general, are of one Mind, in those Principles of
Religion which they admit, in respect to Holy Writ, and have all an extreme
aversion for that Church, which pretends to be a Judge in its own Cause; and
which, without delay, forces those it calls Heretics, to a Worship which is
against their Consciences.

Amongst the Protestant Societies, there is none who has declared it self more
openly against Human Authority, in matter of Religion, and against the
Constraining and Spirit of Persecution, than the Remonstrants. They will have
the Fundamental Error of the R. Church to consist in this. We must not (says
Episcopius, in a Writing inserted by Mr. Limborg, in the Preface of this Work)
consider Popery in some of its parts, but in its whole; not in this Doctrine,
nor in that, which is accused of Heresy; for it is almost the same thing on
both sides; the one is mistaken in one point and the other in another..... We
must look upon the whole Body of the Roman Church, which is a composition of
ignorant, ambitious and tyrannical Men: I call them ignorant, not because they
are not very Learned, for sometimes they are too much so; but because they know
not, and are obliged to know only what is prescribed unto them, often against
their Conscience, against Reason and Divine Law. It is the most pernicious of
all Ignorances, because it is a servile one, which is upheld only by the
Authority of the Pope and Councils, and which is the source of the many
Sophisms they are constrained to make, to maintain such Opinions they have
engaged themselves into, whether they find them true or false. It extends its
Empire, as well upon the Practice as Belief, because they are both tied to the
Foundations, which they are always to suppose unshaken, without freeing
themselves by examining the solidity thereof.

Thence Tyranny is formed. It is this which makes it impossible ever to come
back from this ignorance; and which produces Idolatry, and ridiculous thoughts
of the Divine Worship. It is the Poison of true Religion, because it leads Men
to serve God, not according to his Will, or by a Principle of Knowledge and
Conscience, but after that manner which the Pope likes. So that it is in vain
to say, that in this Church are many things, which are good, or sufferable;
this avails nothing, seeing they hold not what is good, because it is good;
but because they are obliged to acknowledge it for such.

The Remonstrants have upon this, established Principles, which are very
opposite to those of the Roman Church. They not only believe, with other
Protestants, that Scripture contains clearly all that is necessary to be known,
to believe, to hope, to do, and to be saved; and that all those who read it
with an attentive mind, and without prejudice, may acquire* by this reading a
perfect knowledge of the Truths contained in it, and that there is no other
Divine Rule of our Faith: but they admit also, and maintain the necessary
consequence of this Principle, upon which many Divines expound not themselves
distinctly enough.

Thence it follows, says Mr. Limborg in this Preface, 1. That no Man,
whoever he be, no Assembly, how considerable soever its Authority is, and how
Learned soever its Members are, have not a Right of prescribing to the
Faithful, as necessary to Salvation, what God has not commanded as such in his
Word. 2. That from the Communion are to be excluded those only whom God has
clearly revealed he will exclude from Heaven. 3. That to know certainly
Damnable Errors, and wholesome Doctrines, we must see if in Scripture God has
promised Salvation to those who shall believe these Doctrines; or threatened
with Damnation those who shall embrace these Errors. 4. That the only means to
procure the Peace of the Church, it to suffer those who retain the Fundamental
Doctrines, although, according to us, they are mistaken in things which God
has not commanded, nor prohibited expressly, under the condition of Salvation
or Damnation. 5. That if this rule was followed, all Christians, who have
quitted the Roman Church, would soon agree in Fundamental Points, and differ
but in Tenets, which have neither been commanded, nor prohibited under this
condition. 6. That consequently none have a right of imposing the necessity of
Believing, under pain of Damnation, these non-essential Tenets. 7. That no
other means can procure a true Christian Union; because constraint may tie the
Tongue, but not gain the Heart.

This is the drift of the Preface; to come to the Work it self, It is composed
of three Letters, and of a small Treatise of William Bom a Roman Catholic,
with as many Answers, and some other Letters of Episcopius, concerning the
Infallibility of the Church. The matter, we see, is of the utmost consequence,
and it is sufficiently known after what manner Episcopius was able to treat
thereof. Bom was a Priest, who was no great Grecian, as he confesses himself,
and who besides was engaged in the weakest Hypothesis; which the Doctors of
Rome ever embraced; it is that which makes the Infallibility of the Church
reside in the Pope's Person. So that although he has exposed pretty well the
common reasons of his Party, it may be said of him, in relation to his
Adversary, Par studiis, aevique modis, sed robore dispar.


The occasion of this Dispute was a Conference which Bom and Episcopius had, at
the coming from a Sermon which the last had Preached. Some of those who had
been present thereat, declared, That Bom had been reduced to silence: upon
which, he being willing to show how much these reports were false, Writ to two
common Friends, to put them in mind of the Reasons he had said, and added to
that a Writing, to prove that St. Peter was established chief of the Catholic
Church. Episcopius at first made some difficulty of Answering this Priest;
because there is nothing more tedious and more unprofitable for a Protestant,
than to enter into dispute with a Catholic, seeing that as it is an Article of
Faith with him, that his Church is Infallible, so he believes himself obliged
in Conscience not to confer with Heretics, but in the design of instructing
them, and not to have even the thought of receiving any instruction, nor any
light from them.

It is not possible, without engaging ones self into an excessive prolixity, to
relate all the reasons, which have been said on each side, in this dispute; we
shall only stop at some of the principal proofs, and those which are not so
commonly met withal in Books of Controversy.

Episcopius failed not at first to ask of his Adversary, in what place of the
Gospel Jesus Christ had appointed any body to be Sovereign Judge of
Controversies, and to decide, without Appeal all the differences which should
arise in the Church, after the death of the Apostles? As there are not in
Scripture, passages sufficiently express for this institution? Bom had recourse
to the Practice of the Church; upon which Episcopius alleged to him three Acts
of the Ecclesiastical History, which agrees not well with the Belief of the
Infallibility of the Pope.

1. The first is drawn from the dispute; which fell out toward the middle of
the Second Age, concerning the day in which the Passover should be celebrated.
Victor Bishop of Rome Excommunicated the Churches of the Diocese of Asia,
because they Celebrated this Feast the Fourteenth day of March, and not the
Sunday following, according to the Custom of Rome, Palestine and the Gauls. The
conduct of Victor pleased not all the other Bishops, who exhorted him, in their
turn, to have sentiments conformable to a Peace, Unity and Love to our
Neighbors. There are still of their Letters, adds Eusebius, wherein they
reprehend Victor with eagerness enough. Amongst these Bishops was Irenaeus,
who, in the Letter which he Writ upon this Subject, in the Name of the
Brothers, over whom he presided among the Gauls, maintains also, that one
Sunday must be Celebrated the Resurrection of our Lord: yet he advertiseth
Victor with much gravity, that he ought not to cut off from the Communion whole
Churches of God, who observe a Tradition and Ancient Custom.

It will be some difficulty to believe, that Bom found in this Affair a Proof
of the Authority of the Pope: Notwithstanding it is the conclusion he draws
from it, and grounds, 1. Upon that the Bishops who were displeased at this
Excommunication, would undoubtedly have acted with more haughtiness against
Victor, if he had not been their Superior: whereas they speak unto him with a
mildness, which marks well, that they contested not the Right of
Excommunicating the Churches, as not being of his Jurisdiction; but that they
only found fault with the use he made thereof, the cause of the Excommunication
not being of consequence enough, according to them. 2. That notwithstanding
they were deceived in that, and that Victor did well to use this rigor,
because Blastus, one of the principal Patrons of the Opinion of the Asiaticks,
would have introduced Judaism, under this pretense. 3. That the Church approved
of the Conduct of Victor, in condemning the Bishops of Asia, to whom was given
the name of Quartodecimal Heretics. 4. That Irenaeus himself has not doubted
of the Superiority of the Bishop of Rome, seeing he says elsewhere, That all
the Churches must, to wit, all the Faithful, of what place soever they are,
come to this Church in which the Apostolical Tradition has been preserved, by
those who came to it from every Part, because of its more powerful
Principality. Ad hanc enim Ecclesiam, propter potentiorem Principalitatem,
necesse est omnem convenire Ecclesiam, hoc est, eos qui sunt undique fideles,
in qua semper ab his qui sunt undique, conservata est ea quae est ab Apostolis
Traditio.

To this Episcopius Replies: That the Answer of the Bishops of Asia, and the
Letter of Irenaeus, would not be very respectful, if Victor had been the Chief
of the Church; that the word (...), which signifies properly to give a contrary
order, and those of (...), acerbius perstringere, are not invented to express
the submission of a Subject to his Prince; and that if these Bishops could take
it ill, that their Judge, a pretended Sovereign, and Infallible, should banish
from the Church, and exclude from Heaven so great a number of Churches, for so
slight a cause, they have therefore thought that he might be mistaken in his
Decisions, upon matters of Faith, and that they had a right to examine them. 2.
That the Heresy of Blastus justifies not the proceedings of Victor; seeing the
Asiaticks looked not upon the Celebration of the Passover as a necessary
Observance, and which should precisely be applied to such a day; that they were
contented that Victor and other Bishops should Celebrate it on Sunday, if they
had their Reasons for it; but that they, having not the same proofs thereof,
believed themselves not obliged to abandon the Apostolical Tradition. It has
not been remarked that our Professor answers the passage of Irenaeus, because
we need only to read it thoroughly, to show, that there is no mention there of
the Right of the Bishop of Rome in the Decision of Controversies, but only of
the Characters which they, in the time of Irenaeus, did acknowledge
Apostolical. Thereupon he says, That it must be sought for in the places where
the Apostles have established Bishops; but because it would be too long to make
an enumeration of all the Apostolic Churches, he stops at one of the most
ancient and greatest, which is the Church of Rome. As this City was the Capital
of the Empire, Principalitas Potentior; and that for that Reason the
Inhabitants of diverse Provinces negotiated there, and were obliged to come
thither; Irenaeus concludes, that the Apostolical Tradition could not fail of
having been faithfully kept there; since that if the Christians of a Province,
or of a City had been minded to corrupt it; the Christians of other places, who
were at Rome, would have opposed it; it being improbable to suppose, that so
many different Nations would agree to abandon, in so little a time, the
Doctrine of the Apostles.

II. Bom often alleged passages out of St. Augustine for the Authority of
Popes; that gave occasion to Episcopius of citing him the 22d Canon of the
Council of Millan, where St. Augustine was Secretary; and another Canon of the
6th Council of Carthage, where this Bishop also assisted; both which prohibited
the drawing Ecclesiastical Causes of the Diocese of Africa on the other side
the Sea, whether they regard the Inferior Members of the Clergy, or the very
Bishops. That the Deputies of the Pope having represented to the Assembly, That
this Canon destroyed the Privileges, which the Council had granted to the
Patriarch of Rome, in permitting Ecclesiastics to appeal unto him in Judgments
had against them by the Ordinaries; the Bishops of Africa were extremely
surprised, and said all Unanimously, That they never heard of such Privileges.
Thereupon these Deputies related three Canons, which they said to be of the
Council of Nice, the Fathers of Carthage to Constantinople, Alexandria and
Antioch, and the Authentic Copies of this Council; where, not finding these
three Canons, they Writ to the Pope, That the Right of Appealing, which he
pretended to, in quality of Supreme Judge, and belonged not to him, by virtue
of the Council of Nice, seeing the Three Canons, upon which he grounded his
pretentions, were not to be found in the Originals.

The Exceptions are reduced to this, 1. That the Council of Millan prohibits
but the Inferior Clerks to Appeal beyond the Sea; and that this is evident,
because Pope Innocent, to whom the Synod of Millan submitted all their Decrees,
as to the Head of the Church, approved the Canon in question. 2. That there is
no reason to believe that the Copy of the Council of Nice, which was kept at
Rome, was supposed, but that there is much more likelihood that those of
Constantinople, Antioch and Alexandria were defective; seeing the Manuscript,
upon which Ruffinus Writ his History, was so; and that there are several Canons
of this Council, cited in that of Calcedonia, and in St. Ambros, St. Augustine,
and Jerome, which are not found in this Historian. 3. That the Decrees which
are accused of Supposition, have been cited by other Popes, before Zozime (as
Julius speaks, who living but Twenty years after the Council of Nice, could
easily have been convinced of falsehood;) as also by Leo and by Innocent. 4.
That there are several proofs of the submission of the Bishops of Africa to
that of Rome, as the Letter of Stephen Bishop of Mauritania Written to Damasus
in the name of three Synods of Africa, where, after several high Titles which
this Prelate gives to the Pope, he tells him, That the Decrees of all the
Fathers of these Synods have reserved every Sentence, Judgment of Bishops, and
Determination of Ecclesiastical Affairs to his See, in honor of blessed Peter.
5. That it is not true, that this 6th Council has prohibited to Appeal from
Africa to the Pope, seeing that in the Letter, which the Bishops Writ to him,
they only desire him not to hearken slightly to the Ecclesiastics of Africa
who shall have recourse to him.

To refute the first Objection, Episcopius relates the very words of the Canon
of the Council of Millan, viz. It was ordered that when Priests, Deacons and
other inferior Clerks shall complain of the Judgment of their Bishops, they
shall be heard by the Neighboring Bishops, who with the consent of their
Bishop, and jointly with him, shall pronounce a definitive Sentence upon his
Affair. That if they would appeal from this Judgment of Bishops, they shall
carry their appeal but before the Councils of Africa, or before the Primate of
their Province; so as it has been often ordered in affairs which respect
Bishops. If any one would appeal to the other side the Sea; that is to say, to
Rome, or without the Diocese, let him be excluded from the Communion of Africa.

The Letter which the Bishops of the 6th Council of Carthage, Assembled to the
number of 207, Writ to Pope Celestin, after they had received the Original of
the Council of Nice, and seen that the Canons, alleged by the Deputies of the
Bishop of Rome, were not in it, deserves to be related. We pray you, say they,
that for the future you give no more so slightly Audience, to those who shall
go hence to you, and that you no more receive into Communion those who are
excluded from ours; seeing you may easily mark that this has been thus ordered
by the Council of Nice. For if it seems that this Council was willing to
prohibit from such Appeals the inferior Clerks and Laics, by how much more
would it have this Prohibition to give place in the affairs which regard
Bishops; whence it follows, that those who are suspended from the Communion,
amongst us, ought not to be re-established precipitatly, or unlawfully, by your
Holiness. Let therefore all Refuge be taken away from bad Priests; seeing there
is no Canon, which has deprived the Church of Africa of this privilege, and
that those of Nice have as well submitted the inferior Clerks, as Bishops, to
their Metropolitans. The Fathers of this Council have prudently and justly
judged, that every Affair ought to be judged in the place where it happens;
assuring themselves, that the Grace of the Holy Ghost would not fail to be
poured into each Province, where there are Priests of Jesus Christ, capable of
examining wisely the equity of an Affair, and of constantly maintaining it;
especially since that it is lawful for every one who thinks he has reason to
complain of his ordinary Judges, to Appeal to the Provincial Councils, or to
the General. If it be not, as some imagine, that God may sufficiently inspire
every one of us, to judge of the equity of an Affair, but that he will refuse
his Grace to a great number of Bishops Assembled in Council.

It is a vain conjecture to say, That the Council of Nice, which was kept at
Constantinople, the Copies of the Patriarchs of Antioch and Alexandria, and all
those that 207 Bishops had, were defective. But we cannot believe that the
Pope, knowing that some Canons were missing in Copies of Particulars, embraced
this occasion, to make three Canons of a Synod of Sardis to pass for Decrees of
the Council of Nice, which were in his favor.

3. It Is true that Julius Writ a Letter to the Eastern Bishops, to get
Athanasius and some other Bishops reestablished in their Sees; but it is also
true, that when these Bishops had received it, they looked upon it as an
outrageous Letter; assembled themselves into a Synod at Antioch, and made him
unanimously a civil Answer in appearance, but full of Ironies and Menaces,
says Sozomene; to which Socrates adds, That they severely reprehended Julius,
letting him know, That it was not necessary that they should take Laws from
him, in banishing some Persons from their Churches, and that they had not
opposed him, when he had banished Novatus from his.

As to the Letter of Stephen to Pope Damasus, most of the Learned do take it to
be suppositious, because it is only to be found in Isidonus Mercator, who has
attributed several other Letters to Damasus, and one to Aurelius Bishop of
Carthage, which Baronius acknowledges false. But though it was true, What can
be concluded from the Letter of a particular Bishop, but that he was one of
these Ecclesiastics, who having been Excommunicated because of their Crimes in
Africa, flattered the Bishops of Rome, to re-establish them again by their
means? To this unknown Stephen are opposed famous St. Cyprian and Firmilian
Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, who treated Pope Stephen with contempt
enough, upon the occasion of the dispute touching the Baptism of Heretics.

5. The terms, of not receiving slightly and unlawfully the Communion: the
African Ecclesiastics, who fled to Rome, mark not (according to Episcopius)
and that the Bishop of the City had a right to admit them to the Peace of the
Church, provided this was done with the necessary Formalities. He pretends,
that the Fathers of Carthage expressed themselves thus, to show, that not only
the Pope violated the Canons, but that he often did, with much temerity, and
without any specious pretense, as when he received the Appeal of the Priest
Apiarius, and admitted him to the Communion, though this very thing is expressly
prohibited by the Canons of Sardis, which the Deputies of Zozime would suggest,
as Decrees of the Council of Nice.

III. The third Fact, which Episcopius alleges, is the Erection of the
Bishopric of Constantinople into the Patriarchship, to whom equal Privileges
were given with him of Rome; in Ecclesiastical Affairs, with this only
difference, That the Patriarch of ancient Rome would have the precedence in
Councils, before him. The Bishop of Bizantium was in times past but a Suffragan
of the Metropolitan of Heraclea; but after that Constantine had transported
thither the Imperial Seat, it was considered as new Rome, and erected into a
Patriarchiate by the Third Canon of the Council of Constantinople composed of
150 Bishops, and confirmed by the 28 th Canon of the 4 th Ecumenick Council,
which is that of Calcedonia. The objections that our Catholics make against
these Canons are so weak, that we think them not worthy of being related,
especially seeing Mr. du Pin has cleared this fact in his Historical
Dissertations, p. 45, etc. fol.

IV. Bom after that takes another turn, to Answer the Question of Episcopius,
touching the Institution of a Sovereign Judge over Controversies, who succeeded
the Apostles. He asks of him a formal passage, Wherein Jesus Christ has
ordered the Apostles, that if there arose Disputes in the Church, they should
Convocate a Synod, and make Decisions thereupon, to which the Faithful should
be obliged in Conscience to submit. There is no appearance, adds he, that the
Apostles should do it, if they had not believed this Action conformable to the
Will of their Master, nor that the Primitive Church should so soon imitate
them, if the Apostles had ordered nothing thereupon. It must then be that
either the Institution of Synods is an Apostolical Tradition, or that it is an
inseparable Sequel of the Ministry and Promises, that Jesus Christ has made
to those who exercise it; I am always with you until the end of the World; and
other Passages, which tho they are at every moment in the mouth of Catholics,
seem not the stronger for that to Protestants.

Episcopius confesses, that Jesus Christ has commanded no where his Disciples
to convocate Synods; and that notwithstanding they have done it. He adds, That
according to their Example, Ecclesiastical Assemblies may be held; but that it
follows not that these Assemblies, where none less than the Holy Ghost
presides, have as much Authority as the Apostolic ones. The reason hereof is,
that the Authority of the Apostolic Synods depended not so much on the consent
and conformity of their Opinions, as on the quality of their persons, and of
the Authority which God had clothed them with, by the Revelations he had made
unto them, and the Orders he had given them. This will appear evident, if we
take notice of the conduct of the Apostles. When they have an express command
from God, they expect not the Resolutions of a Synod for to act; and St. Peter
understood no sooner the meaning of the Vision, which he had had, but he went
to Cornelius. But when they speak of their own head, they say, I advise you, 1
Cor. vii. 25. On these occasions they took advice of one another: Sometime they
agreed not, as it happened to Paul and Barnabas, Act. xv. 39. But commonly the
spirit of Mildness and Peace, which filled them, and which showed them all the
Principles and all the Consequences of the Gospel, brought them mutually to
consult each other: So that their actions being thus conducted by the Spirit of
God, they could say, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us.

But tho it was granted, that the Convocation of Synods is of a divine
Institution, does it follow, that all the Synods and Councils, which have been
held after the Apostles, have made good Decisions? A Catholic denies it, and
if he is asked the reason: He must of necessity answer, that what
distinguishes true Synods from false ones, is, that there have been some which
have had all the Conditions necessary for a true Synod, and have made good
Decisions, and the others wanting these Conditions, have been but Conciliabula.
But how can it be known that these Conditions are assured marks of the Truth of
Synods, seeing that there is not one which is not equivocate, according to some
Doctors of the Roman Church? And how can one tell what Synod has them? Will it
be known by its Decisions? But they should be examined, and so to deny the
Principle, to wit, that it might have pronounced a definitive Sentence. Is it
enough to assure it lawful, that it be general? Yes, for the Gallican Church
which receives the Council of Basil, but not for Italy. It must besides be
confirmed by the Pope; but who has given him this Right? Is it a Privilege of
the Successors of St. Peter? How have they obtained it, and whence comes it
that the Bishops of Antioch, who have succeeded this Apostle as well as those
of Rome, have had no share in it? After all, what needs there any trouble to
prove the Authority of Synods, when People are of the sentiment of Bom, and the
Jesuits. And seeing that St. Peter and his Successors are the Sovereign
Judges of Controversies, what need is there of these Ecumenick Assemblies,
convocated with so much difficulty and Expenses? It Is not enough to interrogate
this infallible Judge, and to receive his Decisions as Oracles from Heaven.

The Passages which the Catholic alleges here in his behalf, and the Answers
which he has made to those of the Protestants, have been so often repeated,
that tho Episcopius refutes them sufficiently after a new manner, we
notwithstanding do not think it worth while to stop at them. We shall only
relate the manner, wherewith our Professor translates the famous passage of
the First Epistle to Timothy III. 15, 16. because it is not common, and that it
destroys at once all the proofs which the Roman Church could draw thence.
Episcopius having proved against his Adversary, as an illiterate Person, that
the Division of the Canonical Books into Chapters and Verses, is not of the
Sacred Writers, and that it is not they, who have put the Points and Comma's
thereto; he shows him, that it is much more natural and more conformable to
the aim of the Apostle, to point this place otherwise than the common Copies
are: And to Translate it thus: I have written this unto you, That if I delay to
come, you may know how Men ought to behave themselves in the House of God,
which is the Church of the living God. The stay and prop of Truth and the
Mystery of Piety is certainly great, God manifested in the Flesh, etc.

When there is want of clear Reasons and convincing Arguments, people are
constrained to have recourse to Prejudices, to Comparisons, and to the Reasons
of Convenience. Therefore the Roman Catholics say incessantly to us, That God
who well knew, that there would arise Disputes in the Church, upon Matters of
Faith (as there are Processes formed amongst Citizens of one State, touching
the Goods which they possess) ought to establish a Judge, who should be
consulted at all times, and who might instruct us in the true sense of
Scripture in contested places, and thus end the Differences. It seems that
Jesus Christ, otherwise would not have taken care enough of his Church and the
faithful who compose it; seeing he would not have given them means of assuring
themselves perfectly, that the Doctrine which appears most conformable to
Scripture, is true; if they might be in doubt as to several Articles of Faith,
and that what they should most determinately believe thereupon, could not pass
but for a a greater likelihood of Truth.

It must be granted, that there would be nothing better understood, nor more
commodious than a Judge of this nature. There would be no more need for one to
break his Head in examining all things, and to seek for truth; it should be all
found, and People would go to Heaven by a very plain way. Why was not Jesus
pleased to render the way more easy. and did not tell us where we should find
such a Judge? We are therefore obliged to look for him, says Episcopious; and
this Disquisition must necessarily aim at either of these two things; Either
that each particular Society of Christians, and even each Member of this
Society attribute to it self the Power of Sovereign judging of Controversies;
or that the Universal Church, to wit, the Body of all those who profess the
Gospel, has at all times right to choose such a Judge. The first cannot be
granted, because every one looking upon himself as Infallible, no body would
submit himself to the Decisions of his Neighbor. The second is naturally
unpracticable; for before the Universal Church can choose a Supreme Judge of
Controversies, it must needs have cast it is Eyes upon diverse Subjects capable
of fulfilling this Charge, and examined carefully their capacity. And how shall
it make this Examination? All the Christian Societies must concur in this
Election: But how should they agree thereupon, and whom could they choose, who
should not be suspicious or incapable of this Employment? Seeing all Christians
have already taken Parties, and those who are not Christians understand not our
Disputes. Add to this, that tho Men would be decided by the ordinary Judges of
the Roman Church, there would still a Party of Malcontents remain. If the
Pope was chosen, France would appeal to the General Council; if a Council was
assembled Italy would not accept on it until it had been confirmed by the Pope;
and this Bishop would only do it upon condition that this Ecumenick Council
would acknowledge it self beneath him; which is contrary to the pretensions of
France.

The impossibility of this Design is an evident proof, according to our Author,
that God will not have his Church to be governed after the manner of the
Kingdoms of the Earth, where one is obliged to submit without knowing for what;
because there is but the Body and some transitory Goods in question. But the
Kingdom of God extending it self over the Soul and Conscience, Men must be
instructed, convinced and persuaded. Men must read, pray, meditate, and live
Christianly, to obtain the Grace of distinguishing Truth from Falsehood. In vain
would Scripture teach us these Truths, and exhort us to these practices, if
there were an infallible Judge. All this would be useless, neither is it of
great me amongst those who believe they have one.

All the World knows the ridiculous explications the Roman Doctors gave to
Scripture, before Protestants had put it into the hands of the People; and no
body is ignorant of the many Truths which have been discovered, since it has
been believed that every one should instruct himself in the Will of God by his
Word. It is true, that there have arisen Disputes, which are the unavoidable
consequences of Examination. But if Christians applied themselves only to
Scripture, and that instead of deciding of their Differences, when Scripture is
not clear thereupon, they supported each other with a mutual Charity, we should
soon see them become both more wholesome in their Opinions, and more reformed in
their Manners. It is a consequence very clear and very easy to comprehend; but
such as apparently will never be justified by Experience.

V. The last writing of Bom is a small Treatise, to prove that St. Peter has
been established Head of the Catholic Church, where this Priest relates the
common Passage of Controvertists; Thou art Peter, etc. Feed my Sheep, etc. The
Answer of Episcopius is not complete: but that which there is on it appears more
than sufficient to refute all the Objections of the Missionaries. The first
Reason would be even enough; which is, that although his Adversary had clearly
proved his Thesis, he would do nothing for all that, if he did not show that
the promises made to St. Peter regard also his Successors, whereas most of the
Fathers have taken them for personal Privileges, as Tertullian in his Book of
Chastity, c. 21. who speaks thus to Pope Zephirin: If because the Lord has
said to Peter, Upon this Rock I will build my Church; I will give thee the Keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven, and all that thou shall bind or unbind upon Earth,
shall be bound or unbound in Heaven: If I say for that cause, you imagine that
the power of unbinding or binding is passed unto you, to wit, to all the
Churches founded by Peter, Who are you that overturn and change the clear
intention of the Lord, who has conferred this personally on Peter? Upon thee,
says he, I will build my Church, and I will give thee the Keys, and not to the
Church; and all that thou shall unbind, and not that they shall unbind.

2. After having showed that these Privileges are not personal, it should be
proved that they regard only the Bishops of Rome, excluding those of Antioch.
3. That they regard them all without exception, and without condition; to wit,
That all and every one of the Popes are infallible, as well in Fact as Right,
against the Experience and the Sentiment of most of the Doctors of the Roman
Communion. 4. It should be defined what the Catholic Church is, and showed by
formal passages, that these Terms denominate the Body of Pastors, which is
called the Representative Church; which is impossible: Whereas, it is very easy
to show, that the Church signifies in Scripture only the People in opposition
to Pastors. And in this sense, there is nothing more absurd than all that is
said of the Power of the Church and it is Privileges, seeing it is but the Body
of the Pope's Subjects and Roman Clergy, and that Subjects who are far from
making Decisions, must submit and obey their Lot.

5. After all this, it should be still proved, that the Privileges given to
St. Peter, and the Bishops of Rome his Successors, import not simply a Primacy
of Order, and some Authority in things, which regard the Discipline and
Government of the Church, which Protestants could grant, without doing a
prejudice to their Cause; but they do moreover mark a Primacy of Jurisdiction,
of Sovereignty, and Infallibility in matters of Faith; which is impossible to
be proved by Scripture, and all the Monuments we have of Antiquity; and which
is even contradictory; seeing the belief of a Fact, or Truth, is persuaded, and
forces not it self. Have not Roman Catholics much Grace to accuse Protestants
of Obstinacy, because they refuse to embrace a Hypothesis, which supposes so
many dubious Principles, whereof most are contested even amongst the Divines of
Rome; and to ask them to obey the Church, without distinctly telling them what
this Church is, or in what consists the Submission which is required of them,
or how far it ought to be extended.

An Abridgment of Universal History. The First Part containing the
Ecclesiastical History, in Two Books, by Henry le Bret, Provost of the
Cathedral Church of Montauban, in 125. 3 Volumes. At Paris. Sold by William des
Prez. 1679.
IN the Design which this Author has proposed, of giving us an Abridgment of
Universal History, he has begun these Three First Volumes with an
Ecclesiastical History, which contains the First General one. He divides it, as
he hat done the Preface, into Ancient and Modern. The first treats of what
passed in Religion* since the Creation of the World unto Jesus Christ* and the
second, from Jesus Christ unto the end of the 16th Age; that is to say, this
last contains the Establishment of the Gospel, the Life of Popes, the Schisms,
Heresies, Persecutions of the Church, the General and Provincial Councils; and
finally, the Elogiums and Characters of Saints, and of the Illustrious Writers
of all these Ages.

As the Principal events which have happened in all these Revolutions are no
more known, we shall touch here but certain particular things which Mr. le Bret
takes occasion to expound from time to time. For example,

Upon occasion of the division which Pope Marcellus, Successor to Marcellinus,
made of Rome, into 25 parts, which Pope Evaristus, and Denis had begun; he
speaks of the Establishment of Parishes which succeeded after that. The Priests
whom this Pope Commissioned to govern them, were named, by the duty of the
charge which was imposed on them, to Administer the Sacraments and the Word of
God to the Faithful, Parochi, from certain Magistrates which the Romans called
thus, (...), a praebendo, because they furnished at Rome, to the Ambassadors,
even of strange Princes, Salt, Wine, and such like things. He remarks, that the
Chief amongst the Priests were afterward named at Rome, Carthage, and in
several other places, Cardinals; because that as a Door, regitur a Cardine,
each Church was so by its Bishop, and the Principal of his Clergy. This name
was given them after the same manner in France, in all the Cathedral Churches,
which he confirms by a Synod (as Learned Coquille cites) held in 893, by Franco
Bishop of Navarre, with his strange Canons, Cardinals, Arch-Priests, and
Foreign Priests: to which he adds, that this name is still in use only at Rome,
where, says he, The Curates of the Principal Parishes are called Cardinal
Priests; the Benefactors of the other Churches, which are not Parochial,
Cardinal Deacons; and the Bishops who are Suffragans of Rome, in the quality of
Metropolitans, Cardinal Bishops.

In speaking of the Right which Alberic had obliged John the Eleventh to give
the Patriarchs of Constantinople to use for ever the Pallium, he explains what
this Episcopal Ornament was. Eusebius of Caesarea attributes the Institution
thereof to Linus, immediate Successor to St. Peter; and he adds, That as the
Ephod was the Mark of the Authority of the Priests of the Synagog^^, so the
Pallium was to Christian Priests of their Pastoral Power. It was White, and of
Lamb's-wooll, made into a Circle, and of about four fingers broad, having four
Bandelets hanging before and behind, two on the right, and two on the left,
with four Red Crosses, which were not without a Mystery.

The term of Corovesque, which is found in one of the Canons of the Council of
Ancyra, gives him occasion of expounding what this dignity was in times past,
which is still used in the Church, but under another title, for it was only for
the Bishops properly, which we call now in Partibus; which, in quality of
Suffragans are obliged to the administration of the Diocesses, when the Bishops
are absent; at least the Institution of the Corovesques seems to have given
place to that of other Bishops, who have notwithstanding some advantages which
the Corovesques had not.

All the World knows, that the White Horse which the King of Spain pays every
year, in quality of King of Naples, to the Pope, is a Right which is due unto
them for the Remise which Sixtus IV. generously made to Ferdinand King of
Naples, of the yearly Quit-Rent which he owed to the Holy See: but few know
perhaps what this Author remarks, after Father Morin, of the Oratory, upon the
Subject of Pope John XV. That the Predecessors of this Pope, who dated all
their Acts from the years of the Emperors, thought expedient to change this
date, after Charlemagne had made 'em Sovereigns; and as at first they dated
from the Indictions, so afterward from the years of their Pontificate, as at
this day; See the Synod of Rome held by this Pope in 993.

The discovery of the Canaries, under the Pontificate of Clement VI. toward
the year 1347. The Extirpation of the Order of Templars, who were condemned to
be burned at the Council of Vienna, under Clement V. The permission which
Innocent VIII. gave the Priests of Norwegue to Celebrate under the only Species
of Bread, because there are no choice Wines; and that those which are carried
thither, cannot come without becoming sour, and an infinite other things of
this kind, render this Reading very acceptable, and assure this Author (with
whom, notwithstanding all the World will not agree in what he says on certain
things, as upon the Nile, upon Abbot Gerseu, etc.) with what impatiency the
Abridgment of his Political History is expected.

A Collection of several Relations, with many singular and Curious Treatises of
T. B. Tavernier, Esquire; Baron of Aubone. Divided into Five Parts. In Quarto. At
Paris, Sold by Gervais Clouzier, 1679.
THE difficulty which there is of getting into Iapan, is the reason that we can
learn nothing beyond what the Hollanders have Written thereof in their
Relations. They are alone permitted to go and Traffic in these Isles, which
the Portuguese discovered in 1542; since a poor Cook of a Ship, which parted
from Amsterdam for the Indies, being come to the Charge of President of the
Comptoir of Iapan, put into his head to exclude the Portuguese from this
Commerce; for he invented, to this end, such black Calumnies against them, and
all the Christians of this Country in general, that the Emperor of Iapan
resolved to Banish the first, and to Extirpate the others; whose number, which
augmented every day in this Empire, was come to more than 400000. It Is what Mr.
Tavernier describes in the First of the Five Parts, which compose this Volume.

The Second is but a Relation of what passed in the Negotiation of the
Deputies, who have been in Persia and in the Indies, as well from the King as
the French Company, for the establishing of Commerce.

In the Third, which contains the Observations of this Author upon the Commerce
of the East Indies, and upon the Frauds which may be committed therein, there
are three or four singular things. The First he assures us he had learned of
several old People in the Kingdom of Bengall, that Sugar kept 30 years becomes
Poison, and that there are few sorts more dangerous. All the World assuredly
will not agree upon it. The 2. is the manner wherewith the Inhabitants of
Kasaubasar use to whiten their Silk, which is yellowish, by the means of a Lie
made of the Ashes of a Tree, called, The Fig Tree of Adams, which renders it as
White as the Silk of Palestine: and the 3d is the manner wherewith Indico is
prepared; but that is too common to be further noted.

He pretends that the Relations which have been given to us hitherto of the
Tunquin are not very exact. He corrects them in his Fourth Part, which is a
Relation of this Country; in which he remarks, amongst other singular and
curious things, two sorts of Dainties amongst the Tunquinois, which are far
from ours. The first is that of the Batt, which in Tunquin are neither smaller
nor less delicate than our Pullets; and the second is of the Nests of certain
Birds which are of the bigness of our Swallows, which being a kind of Gum,
melts in lukewarm-Water; and is made use of in all the Dainties and Sawces
which are made for Flesh and Fish; and communicates to the Flesh, which is
seasoned thereby, such a good Taste, that these Nests seem to be composed of all
the Aromaticks which are found in the East.

The manner whereby the Tunquinois do preserve Eggs, two or three years
together, deserves to be observed. They throw Salt into the water, and as soon
as the Pickle is done (which is known when the Egg swims on the top of the
Water) they throw Ashes into this Pickle, until it is made as it were a kind of
Paste. Then they enclose each Egg in a great Leaf of an herb, which resembles
the Leaves of our Beet. They put them afterward into great Pots of Earth,
which they cover well, and thus they Preserve them for two or three years.

As the other Relations speak of the Goodness of the Air, of Government,
Religion, and several other things of Tunquin, it would be useless to speak of
them here.

In fine, the latter part of this Work is the History of the Conduct of the
Hollanders in Asia. Those who would know the particulars will take the pains to
read it in this Original; and we shall be satisfied to speak here of some
Remarks which Mr. Tavernier makes therein by the by; as that of the ordinary
Muscade Nut, which being preserved, inebriates more than Wine, though one
should eat but one, whether at the beginning, middle, or end of ones Meal. He
says that the quantity of Elephants Teeth which are found along the Coast of
Mozambique, is so great, that they make Palisadoes thereof about Gardens, so
that they may be said to have a Cloister of Ivory. In fine, the last Remark is,
that of a pleasant, but filthy Counterpoison. In the Isle of Iava the Soldiers
have accustomed to Poison their Darts, etc. with a Poison so strong, that all
those who are struck therewith dye suddenly. The only remedy which prevents it
is, that every one having dried some of his own Excrements, and having reduced
them into Powder, puts a few thereof into a Glass of Water, and presently
swallows it as soon as he feels himself wounded. By this means they feel no ill
effect of the Poison. If this Remedy is as Sovereign as they say, this Secrecy
deserves well to be known.

DISSERTATIONS of Mr. Burman at Rotterdam, 1688. in Quarto.
THE Posthume Works of Great men are like Children half formed, who cause more
shame than honor to their Fathers. As Superstition has Consecrated the Hairs
and Bones of Saints; the respect and love Men have for the Learned, brings them
to let Posterity participate of their most imperfect Essays. It is true, that
there were in the Closet of Salmatius Treatises upon the Warfare of the Romans,
and upon Plants, which deserved a better lot than what they have hitherto met
withal. But on the other side, Men do Print some Scaligerana and Petroniana,
which should for ever had remained in the Closet of those who had them.
Howbeit, here are the Dissertations of Mr. Burman Professor in Divinity in the
Academy of Vtrect, where he died some years ago. He became famous chiefly in
binding his Divinity with the Philosophy of Descartes, and in keeping a kind of
Medium between the ordinary Hypotheses of the Divines of Holland, and the
Opinions of Cameron.

The Four first Dissertations are to prove Providence. The Pagans who were so
wise as to acknowledge a God, had much ado to believe that this same God
presided over all the events. Some have denied it openly; and as if they were
afraid to trouble the Repose of this Infinite Being, or to oppress him under
too great a number of Occupations, they have excused him from taking knowledge
of what was done on Earth. If there are Gods who govern the World, whence do
evils come, said Epicurus? It was also believed that all events depended upon a
certain Chain of Second-causes, which dragged the very Gods after them. In
fine, Fortune has been substituted in the room of Providence. The Romans,
naturally haughty, never received any disgrace from Fortune, without taking
their Revenge on her by a great number of abuses. Clement of Alexandria
reproacheth them, that they had made an Altar to this Goddess in a place which
was the receptacle of all the filths of Rome. Will ye take vengeance on your
Gods, says he unto them? Or do you believe that the ill smell annoyeth them
not, as the good ones cannot rejoice them? otherwise they could not suffer the
odor of the grease which is burned in Sacrifices, nor the smoke of
Frankincense, which blinds and blackeneth them. This Temple, whereof Clement
of Alexandria speaks, is undoubtedly the same which Pliny speaks of for the
detested Fortune. This Fortune was every moment, called blind, perfidious,
unconstant: Notwithstanding these very Romans did put it instead of Providence,
rendered unto it Divine Honors, and had dedicated several Temples in their
City. There was one of these Goddesses which was called Primogenita, because
she was considered as the Principle of all things, and the source of all
Goodness. There was another, which was represented with Paps, to mark her
abundance. In fine, there was one to whom young folks rendered Homage, when
they began to have a Beard: The Platonicks were the wisest of all Philosophers;
for, by walking in the steps of their Master, who was the first Inventer of the
Term Providence amongst the Greeks, they acknowledged that there was a God who
presided over second Causes. The Jews jealous of the Glory of their Nation,
have pretended, that the Cares of God had a respect to them only, whilst they
abandoned all other People of the World to the Course of Nature, to the
Influences of the Stars, or to the Malice of Devils. The wisest of the Rabbis
believe, that most Animals deserve not the looks of Divinity. But that which is
more astonishing, is, that St. Jerome was found to be of the same opinion,
without mentioning a great number of Philosophers and Divines, who, to extend
the liberty of Man, maintain, That God cannot foresee all events. The necessity
of a Providence is proved, which extends its self generally over all Creatures,
because God ought to have an Infinite Knowledge: But his Knowledge would be
necessarily limited, if he did not see to the very smallest actions of
Creatures; or if he saw them but after a speculative manner, as People speak,
to wit, without having any influence upon them. Moreover, if all the actions of
Creatures depended not absolutely upon God, there would be certain Moments
wherein Nature would be independent, it would subsist of it self, seeing it
would act by it self, and consequently it would be God, whose greatest
Perfection is to be Independent, and to subsist of himself.

The Author afterward Treats of the nature of Justification, whereof he
distinguishes three kinds: the one which would be solely done by Works, if the
first Man had persevered in his Innocence: the other which we obtain by Faith
in Jesus Christ: and the third whereof St. James speaks, which is done partly
through Faith, and partly by Works. The first is not properly speaking a
Justification: for this term supposes a Crime and guilty Men. There was then
no enmity betwixt God and Man, no demand from injured Justice. So there was no
need of Repentance. In the second may be remarked three actions of God. For, I.
He has imputed our sins to his Son. II. He imputes to us the obedience of his
Son, and keeps an Account for us of the Price which he has paid for us in
Suffering on the Cross. III. In fine, by virtue of this obedience which Jesus
Christ has rendered, he forgiveth us our sins, he receives us into his Grace,
and destines the possession of Heaven for us.


Whence it is easy to conclude, that this Second Justification is purely
Gratuitous. The Principal difficulty runs on the Second Action of God. For, say
they, How can God justify us by the Justice of his Son? Can one be White with
the Whiteness of another? And would it not be a ridiculous thing to say, That a
General of an Army is brave, by the bravery of Alexander? But, these Examples
are not proper for the matter of Justification. For it is true, that a Body
cannot be White by the Whiteness which another possesses: but nothing hinders
but that a Man may be acquitted from a Debt which he had contracted, though it
be not he, but a generous Friend who has paid it. Man had contracted
unmeasurable Debts with the Justice of God; Jesus Christ has paid this Debt
by his Death, and God keeps us an Account of his Satisfaction: There is nothing
herein which implies contradiction. It was all the Consolation which was given
to dying People in the time of Anselmus Archbishop of Canterbury, to make them
solely to rely on the Justice of Jesus Christ, as it appears by the Form of
Consolation which he had made for Confessors. And the Emperor Charles the
Fifth found nothing finer than these words of St. Bernard, which he often
repeated. I cannot enter into Heaven by my deserts: but I hope that Jesus
Christ, who has a double right to this happiness, will be satisfied with one;
and that suffering me to enjoy the other, which is the Merit of his Passion, he
will procure unto me the enjoymen thereof. This is the Foundation of all my
hopes. For it is a perfidiousness to put our confidence in our Merits.

Here the Socinians are engaged, who say, That God having foreseen that Man
could not absolutely be exempt from Sin, had resolved to supply the defect of
his Justice, provided that after having consecrated his heart unto him, he
endeavored to execute his Commandments, and to live conformably to his Will.
This is to renew the opinion of the Ancient Jews, who denied not, That the
Mercy of God intervened in the Work of Salvation; but, who maintained at the
same time, that the Acts of their Repentance joined to the Sacrifices which the
Law had commanded, were the causes of their Justification, whereas Scripture
represents it to us purely Gratuitous. St. Paul assures, That Man is justified
by Faith without Works: whereas these Doctors make this Grace to depend of
Works rather than of Faith. Moreover, How can God impute to Men the Charity of
Jesus Christ, to supply the defect of their Justice, if Jesus Christ in obeying
perfectly the Law, and in dying upon the Cross, had not had a Design to
satisfy for us?

The Third Justification is by Works. For the better comprehending thereof, we
must observe, that Man can be accused of two things before the Tribunal of God,
either to be guilty, or to be a hypocrite; God discharges us from the first of
these Accusations, in imputing to us the Merit of Jesus Christ, which
abolisheth all our sins. He discharges us from the second, by giving us, by his
Spirit, the force of producing good Works, which are marks of the sincerity of
our Faith. It Is in this sense, that it is said, that Abraham was justified by
the Sacrifice of his Son: God himself thus expounding this passage, when he
says, Now I see that thou love me. And it is the same Exposition which ought
to be given to this famous passage of St. James, who teaches, That we are
justified by Works.

We shall not speak of the Disputes, which are the Third Part of this First
Tome, because they are very short Analyzes upon Isaiah, Hosea, and some other
Prophets. The sense thereof is expounded after a very clear manner, and all
along there are some remarks mixed, as when Hosea says, That the People shall
weep upon Bethaven; he remarks very justly, That the pride of ancient
Conquerors stopped not at triumphing over Cities, or over People they had
Conquered, but insulted over the very Gods whom the People adored: and that
thus this Prophet threatens the People of Israel, That the King of Assyria
will lead their Calves in Triumph to Babylon.

There are at the head of the Second Volume Nine Dissertations upon the
Synagogues of the ancient Jews. The Origin thereof is not very ancient. Those
who believed that Moses had had a precaution, which all other Lawgivers had
past over, of making his Law to be Read every Saturday, that it might never be
forgotten, have been mistaken. It was at the Return from the Captivity of
Babylon that Nehemiah did a thing whereof there was no example. For he Read the
Law to the People without the Temple, in a Public place. Since that time it
was thought that the Service of God was no longer tied to the Church of
Jerusalem, but that it could be done elsewhere; and each City took care to
build them Synagogues, sometime without the City, and sometimes without the
Circumference of the Walls. This opinion which our Author believes to be
truest, may be opposed by a great number of Objections. I do not stand at this
passage of the History of the Acts, where it is said, That the Jews had
Synagogues according to an Ancient Custom, for 500 years, or thereabouts,
suffices to give this Name. Jesus Christ calls the words of the Ancients a
Tradition, which was much more new in the Jewish Church: and in the number of
the Ancients or Fathers is put St. Bernard, who lived in the 12th Age. But
Asaph in one of his Psalms, says, That all the Synagogues of the living God
will be burnt. Mr. Brochard was mistaken, when he believed, that this Asaph
lived since the Captivity of Babylon; for then he must needs have acknowledged
that there were Prophets since Malachy. And it is not only a constant
Tradition, but Josephus, who ought not to be suspected in the things which
concern the Glory of his Nation, assures us there were none. It is said, that
this Prediction concerns the Church under the Economy of Jesus Christ. But
this Oracle was not accomplished in the Ten Persecutions which the Christian
Church suffered. Dioclesian caused a Monument to be raised, by which he boasts
to have destroyed the Christian Religion. Yet then were numerous Churches seen
amongst the Gauls and in England, which were governed by Constantius. And if
the Church afterward has been as it were interred, it was rather under the
number of Vices and Errors, than the violence of Persecution. Therefore there
is much more likelihood that this Oracle concerned the time of Antiochus,
wherein the Temple of Jerusalem was profaned, and the Service of God in some
wise abolished. Therefore there were Synagogues in David's time. For how should
he invent a name to express a thing which he knew not, and which was not in
use? Moreover, how could the Jews pass so many Ages without making any public
exercise of their Religion, since the Event has shown that it was a lawful
thing.

The name of Synagogues became soon excessive. They built 460. in the very City
of Jerusalem. Each Trade had its Chapel or Synagogue. Strangers also had a
great many. The Thalmud speaks of that which those of Alexandria had built at
their expenses: and that of the Libertines is famous in the History of the
Acts. Each Synagogue had its Judges, who had a right to cause those to be
Scourged who were accused before them, as the Apostle St. Paul made a sad
Experience on it. It had also its Patriarchs and Apostles. Yet Cardinal Baronius
was mistaken, when he thought that Jesus Christ had borrowed from the Jews the
name of Apostles, which he gave his Disciples. For it is easy to prove that
this term is not in use with the Jews but since the establishment of the
Gospel. I know not if Mr. Burman has much more reason than Baronius, when he
thinks, that by the Angels, whereof St. Paul speaks, when he would have Women
to be veiled in the Temple, because of the presence of Angels, the Ministers
are to be understood, who bear this Name in the Old Testament.

The Service began with Prayers, to which the People answered, Amen. Yet there
is a Tradition which says, That this was not done in the Temple of Jerusalem;
but that at the end of the Prayers the People answered, Blessed be the God of
Glory, His Kingdom reigns for ever. In the Great Churches, where the Voice of
the Priest was not easily heard, he took a Pocket-Handkerchief, and showed it
to the People, when it was time to raise their Voice. This custom of answering
Amen, at the end of Public Prayers, has passed in the Christian Church, until
at length the negligence of the People has obliged the substitution of a
Deacon in their place. But what is most remarkable, is, that in the Prayers,
which were said with a low voice in the Temple, or in a Closet* they were
obliged to say Amen with a loud voice. Eusebius, in speaking of the Martyrdom
of Polycarp, insinuates it; and the Acts of Sufferances of Pionius suffer us
not to doubt thereof. The Christian Church has also borrowed from the Jewish
the manner of ordaining Bishops. For one could not be a Doctor of the Law but
after having received the Imposition of Hands in the presence of three Priests.
And the Councils have ordered the same thing for Bishops.

The Law was Read in Hebrew. But since the Captivity, that the knowledge of
this Tongue was lost, there was an Interpreter, who Expounded each Verse in the
Chaldaick Tongue, that all the People might understand it. They pretend, that
this respect for the Hebrew Text had passed unto the Hellenist Jews. Our Author
inclines much on that side. But it agrees not with the Veneration which they
had for the Version of the 70. If the Jews of Jerusalem condemned it, the rest
of 'em had Instituted a Feast Day, to give God Thanks for that he had given it
to them.

The Seventh Dissertation Treats of the Doctors of the Jewish Church. The Title
of Rabbin is not before Jesus Christ, at least if we believe the Jews, who say
that Gamaliel, the same Doctor whereof the History of the Acts speaks, was the
first who took it. But how could it be so common in the time of Jesus Christ,
if it were not more ancient? According as Knowledge and Virtue diminished, this
defect has been endeavored to be supplied by proud Titles, which should draw
the Veneration of the People. There have been none who have taken finer Names
than the Scholasticks, whose knowledge was pure Barbarity; and the Monks, whose
mind has been almost always filled with Visions, and an Imaginary Devotion.

The Scribes are ancient enough, for they appeared in the time of Esdras in a
distinguished Rank, seeing they are raised above the Priests. Their Original is
at this day the Subject of a great Contestation. For they pretend, that Moses,
who was instructed in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians, established Scribes at
the same time that he did the Law; and that we owe unto them the Body of the
Holy Scripture. But as they were never mentioned before E^dras, might it not be
as well said, that they came from Chaldea and Assyria, for all the East had
their Scribes, as well as the Egyptians; and that they established themselves
with the Jews at the Return from the Captivity, where they got a great
reputation? There were three sorts of persons who bore this name.

1. The Public Notaries, and the Secretaries of the Counsel. These first were
the least considerable. 2. Those who were called Scribes of the Law, to wit,
who had the right of Expounding unto the People. They were thought to sit in
the Chair of Moses, as well as the Pharisees. They were consulted with in
Important Controversies: and it is what Herod did upon the arrival of the
Messia. Finally, their Decisions were received with the same Veneration as the
Law of God: the Jews saying, That even the Traditions of the Scribes are better
than the Law. 3. In fine, the Title of Scribe is the name of a Magistracy with
the Jews, as well as with the Greeks, and it was the latter who were called the
Scribes of the People.
From the Ministers of the Synagogue we shall pass to those of the Christian
Church. Jesus Christ had Clothed his Apostles with so great Privileges, that
they could not have Successors in their Charges. Therefore the Protestant
Divines, who pretend that Episcopacy is of Divine Institution, maintain, at the
same time, That Saint James, Bishop of Jerusalem, was not an Apostle. But St.
Paul gives him the Title of an Apostle. They say, That this first Bishop of
Jerusalem had a right of entering into the most Holy Place, and to carry a
Golden Reed, as the High Priest of the Jews. But it is certain at least, that
St. Epiphanes mistook, when he relyes upon the Authority of Eusebius to prove
it. For Eusebius never said any such thing, speaking of St. James; and there is
a great likelihood that this is one of these false Traditions, which cannot be
applied to any of the Apostles.

Besides the Apostles, there* were Prophets in the Christian Church, whose
Charge consisted chiefly to edify the Church by the Exposition of the most
difficult passages of Scripture. They penetrated sometimes into the time to
come, and foretold its events. Justin Martyr assures us, that this Gift of
Prophecy continued also to his time. But it was soon extinguished. For when
Montan begun to publish his Revelations, the Churches of Phrygia were moved
thereat: and these motions of wonder and admiration are formed commonly on
unheard of events, or which are extremely rare. The Author affirms this Maxim:
That Prophecies are not well understood until after their accomplishment.

Opinions have been always much divided about the duration of the Ministry of
Jesus Christ, who is the Head of the Church. St. Irenaeus refuting the
Valentinians, is fallen into a great Excess. For he believed that Jesus Christ
lived almost 50 years. The most common opinion is, that he Preached the space
of 3 or three years and a half. Mr. Burman takes another Party, and maintains,
that Jesus Christ Celebrated but two Feasts of the Passover: whence he
concludes, That he could live but a year and a half after his Baptism. The last
Passover, wherein Jesus Christ Instituted the Sacrament of the Eucharist, makes
another subject of Contestation. The Greeks, who think they have a great
Interest to maintain, That Jesus Christ Communicated with Leavened Bread,
pretend, That he Celebrated his last Passover after the Wednesday at night.
This opinion, which is established by them but since the Dispute they had with
the Roman Church upon the Azymes, deserves not much examination.

Scaliger has not been ashamed to retract and to refute himself upon this
matter. For after having inclined to the Greeks, he maintains at last, That
there is reason to believe, that Jesus Christ eat the Lamb of the Passover a
day before the greatest part of the other Jews, who begun to Celebrate the
Feast but* on Friday at Night. Our Author believes on the contrary, That all
the Jews were forced to Celebrate the Feast the same day, because it was
necessary to kill all the Lambs in the Porch of the Temple.

The almost infinite number of these beasts which were to be killed, and which,
if Josephus may be believed, amounted to Five Millions five thousand six
hundred, troubles him not. He believes, that the great number of Priests who
assisted at this Service, was sufficient for this great Execution. Not
mentioning that each private Man had a right to kill his Lamb, provided it was
in the Porch of the Temple, which was so big, that in the time of Solomon there
entered into it 22000 Oxen, 12000 Sheep, besides the other Sacrifices which the
People offered. Yet there remains a great difficulty. For the Lambs were not
begun to be presented but at the Ninth Hour, to wit, at three in the Afternoon;
and Josephus assures us, that this Ceremony ended about Nine of the Clock. So,
though the Temple should be spacious enough to contain the number of Lambs, the
time would not be long enough to kill them.

The last Disputes concern the Eucharist. But as this matter has been treated
on very often, we will make an end here.

A Famous SPEECH of Monsieur Cocquelin, Chancellor of the Church of Paris in
1686.
IT is the Custom amongst the Divines of Paris, before the Cap is given to
those who have accomplished their License, to present them by a Doctor to the
Chancellor of the Cathedral Church. The Doctor who presents these Licentiates,
makes a small Discourse in their Praise, to which the Chancellor answers by
another Discourse. As this which Mr. Cocquelin has made this year on the like
occasion, has had something singular in it, as well for its Eloquence, which,
how natural soever it is to the Author, had not notwithstanding appeared with
so much luster, but for the fine and delicate turn wherewith he managed his
Subject, when he treated on the Affairs of the times, and by the fine Poem
which he added to it: We have thought we could not do better than to begin with
this Piece which has fallen by chance into our hands, and to gather together
the scattered Pieces which we have promised to impart to the Public, when they
should deserve to have this Justice done them. Here is then what he says.

VIris eruditis e Theologica Palaestra Biennio quolibet secendentibus, Viri
Ecclesiae Parisiensis Proceres, sapientissimi Patres, Auditores humanissimi,
non defuit huc usque neque decrit unquam laborum laudisque sibi conciliandae
seges: si modo quod in scholis didicerint and ad summum perducere, and pro
rerum, pro locorum, pro temporum opportunitate impendere, and ad bravium de quo
hodie Apostolus, at que immarcescibilem corenam, totis viribus contendere
voluerint.

Et sane quamvis pro uberrima Sacrae facultatis Theologicae Paris* feracitate
ex ipsius sinu viri in omni sacrarum litterarum genere quantum patitur aetas,
exercitatissimi long plures uno quoque biennio prorumpant quam ex toto quantus
quantus est reliquo Christiano orb; quod nihilominus apud Apostolos Christus
olim Dominus pronuntiavit effatum illud ipsum labentibus exinde perpetuo
saeculis, merito proferri potuit, poteritque inposterum: Messis quidem multa,
operarii vero pauci.

At nunquam ejusdem Christi aliud oraculum vos Apostolos ad fidem religionemque
praedicandam adhortantis aequiori jure quam in praesentiarum possit usurpari,
quo verae sapientiae candidatis ejusdem fidei religionisque aut disseminand^
aut propagandae pro nostro munere concedamus Licentiam: Videte, aiebat Deus
ille generis humani servator, videte Regiones quoniam jam albae sunt ad messem.

Enimvero quicumque hactenus, sacrae Facultatis Theol. Paris. stadium emensi,
praeivere vobis ad coronam, Galliam quae monstris ad Calvinum usque caruerat,
aut totam Catholicae fidei deditam, aut nascentem haeresim quae proinde tunc
contemptui potius quam timori habebatur, aut jam adultam atque roboratam, atque
adeo cui evertendae inutilis ut plurimum opera navabatur divino sacrae
sapientiae lumine illustrandam aggressi sunt: vobis vero Licentiandi
meritissimi, id unum ex divinae providentiae ordine servabatur, ut extincta and
profligata haeresi, eorum mentes, quicumque ad Ecclesiae sinum redicrunt,
coelestis doctrinae rore imbuendae obversentur.

Contemplanti itaque mihi atque praeterita Ecclesiae saecula animo repetenti
nova prorsus sese rerum facies objicit and incredibilis stupor ingerit.
Calviniana pestis, quae florentissimum late regnum pervaserat quasi de coelo
tacta momento defecit, concidit, evanuit. O Prodigium inauditum! O Portentum
supra emnem hominum fidem incredibile!

Haeresim videlicet qua peste nulla periculosius, nulla tenacius mentibus
hominum inhaerer, tot annos natam (supra centesimum enim quinquagesimus annus
est quo pestiferos Institutionum haereticarum libros, pro ea quae haeresiarcham
decet impudentia, Francisco primo Reg^ Christianissimo Calvinus inscripsit) tot
igitur annos natam, tot victoriis ferocem, tot epoto civium sanguine furentem,
tot ediotis Regiis perduellionis ejus testibus stabilitam, tot foederibus cum
exteris Regibus and Gallici nominis hostibus Batavis, Danis, Suevis, Anglis,
Germanis roboratam derepente corruisse: Quae ex perduellione nata cum ipsa
creverat, adoleverat, profecerat, quaeque novo prodigio, quo plus sanguinis
amisisset, eo plus ferocia, plus viribus, plus phrenetico furore valeret, hanc
illam puncto temporis extinctam evanuisse, erroris ministros, deceptarum and
incautarum ovium Pseudo-Pastores pravitatis haereticae defensores, volentes
lubentesque fuga sibi consuluisse; templa ubique diruta, deletos conventus,
amplexatam fidem, restitutam sacrorum religionem: iis etiam in locis ubi
numero, viribus, locorum asperitate toties se tutati fuerant quicumque a
veritate defecerant. Quod cum absque ulla mortis interminatione aut ulla
cujusque caede contigerit, ut nobis qui haec coram intuemur pro singulari
miraculo, sic exteris, sic posteris pro maximo quod usquam extiterit prodigio
dubio procul habebitur.

Dicam equidem quod sentio, Auditores, and confidenter dicam. Praeclarum illud
facinus and hactenus inauditum, ut summae in Ludovico Magno Autoritatis,
Prudentiae, Religionis, sic and summae in Gallis, in Ludovicum fidei,
venerationis, and si ita loqui fas est, amoris singularis certissimum est and
indubitatum argumentum; qua quidem laud an possit aliqua sive Regi sive
subditis dari major non video.

Iactent itaque, si qui sunt qui possint, ingentia bellicae laudis facinora:
referant emendatam unius ^eris spatio male memorem Batavorum gentem: inscribant
aeternis victoriarum trophaeis vi^ 50 dierum spatio urbes munitissimas plusquam
40 captas and expugnatas: tranatas narrent Rheni qua part Romany impervius
semper extitit, armato milite and superatas undas: dicant prolatos undecumque
Imperii fines, scribant Hispanos* toties concidisse, quoties nobiscum signa
contulerint: spe toties excidisse quoties prudentia vel art contenderint; in
commentarios referant Europam totam triplici foedere adversus Lodoicum Magnum
conspirant^m ejusque gloriae invidentem id unum profecisse ut and ejus gloriam
promoveret altius, and ad pacis conditiones quas ipsa respuisset, armis
victricibus impelleretur: memorent imperii praerogativam supra Reges omnes
media in pace frustra licet repugnante superbissima Hispanorum gente ex
praescripto assertam: depingant Algeriam, Tunetum, Genuam quasi de Coelo tactas
Lodoici Magni podibus advolutas pacem supplices and salutem exorasse: dicant
etiamnum totius Europae atque adeo totius orbis fatum ab unius Lodoici Magni
quasi aliud agentis and in summa degentis tranquillitate pendere arbitrio.

Aeternis, si qui sunt, rerum humanarum fastis inscribatur, Rex undecumque
Magnus, ac long supra titulos, qui rerum praeclare gestarum magnitudine,
Regibus long omnibus quotquot extitere major, vicit hosts fortitudine,
rebels clementia, invidos virtute, quique subditorum suorum felicitati
intentus orbi terrarum miseriis and calamitati sublevando indulgens pac^m inter
trophaea concessit, hostibus pacis leges praescripsit, ipsi victoriae modum
imposuit and sibi, sui simul and orbis victor.

Haec illi referant quibus tot referendis pro dignitate miraculis par est, si
quae tamen esse possit, a^t saltem non impar omnino erit eloquentia; caeleri
sileant and mirentur.

Nobis vero etfi haec omnia supra mortalium fidem and conditionem videntur esse
posita; long tamen praestantiora, long majora, long luculen^ora perpetuo
videbuntur quae ex Lodoici Magni pietate, religione, fide, and Regio in Deum
affectu profecta tanto caeteris antec^llunt quanto immortalia mortalibus,
aeterna caducis, divina humanis in immensum praestare atque anteferri oportere
nemo nescit.

Ita est profecto, And* non potes^ non esse caducum, non mortale, non humanum
quodcumque pro rerum humanarum sort atque condition geritur. Hinc and id omne
quod retro lapsis ante saeculis pro humanae gloriae consecutione f^nt
inscriptum, aut deletum and obliteratum omnino, aut ex majori part imminutum
est: s^la religio, sola pietas, sola divinae fidei divinique cultus, sola
Ecclesiae tutela, quia Deum spectant immortalem, ipsa immortalitate donantur.

Tria igitur praecipue Augustissimo Principi, quoniam quidem ex illa
felicissima scaturigine prodierunt, nullis rerum percuntium casibus, nullis
temporum injuriis obnoxia, gloriam peperere aeternumque parient omni prorsus
laud and claritudine praestantiorem.

Haec illa porro sunt, quod piissimus Princeps sacrilega blasphemantium ora
compresserit, quod duellorum furores compescuerit, quod haeresim extinxerit,
quorum quae duo prima sunt, singularem licet mereantur admirationem: postremum
tamen sicut omnium expectationem vicit, sic and supra laudem omnem videtur esse
positum.

December and sexies ad minimum centena hominum millia, pestifera superstitione
qua recentes ab uberibus imbuti fuerant abjecta, ad eam religionem subito
trans^isse adversus quam summo odio, summa animi ^ffensione, pravis s^.
perduellionum erroris ministrorum artibus delusi ferebantur, absque ullo
conflictus, absque sanguine, sed sola regiorum edictorum aut constitutione aut
revocatione, bonorumque non tam illata quam indicta adversus pertinaces
jactura, ut poena ad paucos, metus ad plures, salus ad omnes perveniret, ad
amplexandam veritatem feliciter adactos in Catholicae matris gremium
convolasse, ut in parentis optimae gremio atque ejus tut^la ea sibi servata
gestirent, quorum jacturam extra illius sinum positi metucrant.

Agite ergo L. M. and quo par est mentis affectu, qua decet grati animi
testificatione tanti principis Pietatem prosequimini, and tantarum rerum
sequimini ducem: Nos sapientiae stadium quo conclusi per biennium fuistis vobis
reseramus; Latissimum ipse Ludovicus Magnus ejusdem disseminandae campum
apcruit.

Et illi quidem quicumque ab Ecclesia defecerant ex divinarum scripturarum in
quas privato sensu, seu privata potius temeritate, invaserant pravo intellectu,
erraverunt, vos ex scripturarum peritia in Ecclesiae Christi sponsae
Authoritate atque unanimi SS. PP. consensu fundata, viam veritatis, quam
inoffenso pede decurrant, errantibus and quaerentibus aperite: illi ex superbia
peccaverunt; vos ex vestri dissidentia, sine qua omnis scientia inflet necesse
est, tumorem animi superbientis depellite, atque adeo in tantae Lodoici Magni
gl^riae partem quo decet humili sensu pro vestra virili ipso and jubente and
juvante venite.

Praeit and vocat illustrissimus Antistes tantarum rerum, sicut and consiliorum
ac secretorum praecipu^s administer: in quo, cum summa sint omni^, ea tam^n
videntur esse praecipua, quibus eam sibi vel apud haereticos existimationem
conciliavit, qua quidem freti in Catholicae matris gremium non nisi ipsius
manibus plerique omnes deduci voluerint.

Rerum scilicet omnium mirabilis est in illo concentus, quibus ex summa apud
homines existimatione nascitur omnium oriturque singularis benevolentia,
ingenii nimirum sublimis excellentia, stupenda facilisque eruditio, morum
inconcussa suavitas, comitas in omnes, summa apud regem maximum gratia.

Tanto igitur huic operi L. M. his tantis prodeuntibus ducibus and Architectis
toto animi conatu atque industria incumbite: divinae in vos providentiae
benignitatem agnoscite, quae vos faustis adeo sideribus, in tam praeclari
facinoris societatem adducit.

Vnus Moses sepeliendo mediis in undis Pharaoni seligitur, unus Iosue civitatis
Hiericuntinae excidio destina^ur, uni Ludovico Magno sepeliendus error and
excidenda Calviniana haeresis servabatur: Neque tamen Princeps opt. in tantae
laudis venire part^m eos abnuit quicumque aliquam ei promovendae possunt
operaem impendere.

Nunquam porro e vestris excidat animis quae vir sap. and vigilantiss. Pastor
sub cujus auspiciis e scholis manumissionem postulatis erudita atque eloquenti
facundia apud nos honorificentissime peroravit.

Ut vero quod ejus orationi addendum duximus, ac praesertim quod de Rege
augustissimo protulimus vestris mentibus tenacius insistat, strictiori and
heroibus celebrandis aptiori minerva quae exaranda censuimus pancis excipite.

REx magne, firmum robur and unica
Spes Liliorum, Gallia, dum tuo
Librata nutu, tot superbis
Tempora dinumerat triumphis,
Dum vincit orbem fortior Herculis
Confossa monstris dextera, and ultimae
Gentes ad auditum pavescunt
Cuncta supercilio moventis.
Illuxit orbi splendour and optimi
Late refulsit gloria Principis;
Ac solis aequavit labores
Belligeri fama vaga Regis.
Immo diei longius orbita
Excurrit, and qua nubibus atque atris
Foetus procellis, squallet orbis
Sole pigro dubiaque luce,
Intaminatis fulget honoribus
Rex magnus illic, atque vicario
Splendet corusco, sospitemque
Terra suum merito salutat.
Victore major Caesare, and inclyto
Quem Rex Philippus insuperabilem
Produxit, and Persae tremendum
Ut Dominum trepidi coronant.
Te Parthus arcu nobilis and fuga,
Te Turca ferro dirus, and Algidi
Rex magne cognovit Bootae
Incola, teque tuasque palmas.
Alte tonantem te tremit Africa,
Te fracta stupet fulmine Genua,
Supplexque throno mox superbos
Mente ponit meliore sensus.
Ut cum supremo pendulus aethere
Praedam superbus despicit infimam
Legitque dignos inter hosts,
Quos superet generosus ales;
Virtutis altae sic superat jugum.
Ast Sapientiae fundus hic est suae,
Segesque, Christo quod rebels
Magnanimus Lodoix revincit.
Ruunt superbae moenia Jericho,
Quamvisque nomen sit revolubilis
Sortita Lunae, exterminati
Damna nequit reparare cornu.
Cessere pestes, templaque cultibus
Indicta pravis, fulmine corruunt,
Fugantur erroris Ministri,
Et Stygiae reserantur arces.
Quin ante pugnax and male perfida
Linguam remordet Haeresis, os suum
Obducit, aeternumque luget
Tartareis revoluta stagnis.
Non ausa vultus tollere luridos
Maegera, fusos colla super statim
Condit cerastas, and resorbet
Pestiserum pudibunda virus.
Non sic Eoo littore cum rubet,
Altosque bigis sol rutilantibus
Montes colorat, Belluarum
Territa gens latebras reposcit:
Ut tu triumphos magne per inclitos
Tutoque fretus praesidio, malas
Repellis Erroris catervas,
Haereticaeque venena sectae.
Proceed fausto numine splendidus*
Tuasque lauros scande super sacri
Tutus triumphi, gloriosum
Prome caput Pharaone merso.
Gens fastuosi nube supercilii
Exosa Reges, scommatibus Deum
Vel prorsus expungens, vel ore
Sacrilego violans, rubentes
Dejecta vultus pone subit, manus
Gravant catenae, vincula tinniunt
Injecta collo, sordidusque
Membra tegit maculosa Cento.
Illa illa frendet, ringitur ac solum
Viru sequaci spumea collinit,
Fidemque victricem retortis
Luminibus furiosa limat.
Jam ponit errorem and facinus suum
Damnat profusis fletibus, and nova
Incude vesanum reformat
Dogma, deumque fatetur ultra.
Est dextra victrix Principis optimi,
Jacent superbae moenia Jericho,
Prostratus and mordens arenam
Semilacer Pharao recumbit.
Aptare dulci sic cytharae juvat
Non indecoro carmine splendidum
Heroa, dum praestabit albis
Currere Calliopem quadrigis.
Joanni Poloniae Regi, Magno Duci Lithuaniae, etc.
Suos supra titulos Augusto,
Quem virtus ad solium evexit,
Quem pietas e solio
Ad liberandam Germanian advexit;
Quique Angeli instar
Longinquos tractus permeans, Carpathia Saxa penetrans,
Immanem Turcarum Tyrannum
Strages late and ruinas Christiano orbi minitantem,
Dura and Senacheribea obsidione caput imperii prementem,
Piorum votis potius quam armis suffultus,
Plena Deo fortuna fretus
Disrupit, disjecit, profligavit.
Tota igitur Europa
Nuper excidio proxima, nunc periculo exempta,
Debitis and festis plausibus
Indesinentibus cujuscumque Aetatis, Sexus, Nationis vocibus,
Christo fatente and fide Jubente,
Procumbens acclamat
Inter natos mulierum non surrexit major
JOANNE.

Motet Dramatique, Ou Oratoire.
DEus venerunt gentes in haereditatem tuam, Historia.
ut polluerent Templum Sanctum tuum; flagellum appropinquat tabernaculo tuo:
fixerunt tentoria in circuitu Viennae, ecce quasi nubes ascendunt, and quasi
tempestas currus eorum, velociores aquilis equi eorum, posuerunt morticina
servorum tuorum escas volatilibus Coeli, Carnes Sanctorum tuorum bestiis terrae.
Vae nobis! Chorus Lugentium.
circumdederunt nos dolores mortis; vae nobis, dies, irae, dies tribulationis,
vastati sumus, vae nobis. O vos omnes qui transitis attendite, miseremini,
succurrite, accurrite.
Exsurge Deus and vindica causam tuam, Bassus.
salvos fac sperantes in te, ne quando dicant gentes, ubi est Deus eorum?
Fugite impii, Chorus Angelorum.
cedite, fugite, pavidi, saucii, territi, perditi, cadite, crimina mortibus
luite, dentibus fremite, tabescite. Arabes, Tartari, fugite, cadite, gladio
occumbite, dissipamini, occumbite.
Virtus Domini obvallavit Regem qui redemit Israel, Altus.
qui factus est Columna in Templo Dei, in qua scriptum est nomen and Majestas
Dei Sabbath. Quis est iste Rex gloriae?
Fuit homo missus a Deo cui nomen erat Ioannes, Cantus. Chorus.
hic venit. Benedictus qui venit, hic vicit. Benedictus qui vicit in nomine
Domini, hosanna in excelsis; hosanna in terris, hosanna in excelsis.
Paralelle de Jules Caesar and du Roy de Pologne.
Venit, vidit, vicit,
Quidni?
In proximo agebat bellum in sequanis meditabatur
Viribus potior, veterano milite, legionibus octo formidandus
Improvidum, imparatum, foederis fide securum, pace sopitum
Ariovistum oppressit,
Vt rempublicam opprimeret.
Noxae ideo dedendus, and Catonis sententia germanis tradendus.
Meliori causa, feliciori successu,
Poloniae Rex, Magnus Lithuaniae Dux, etc.
E remota Lithuania advolans, dissitas regiones emensus
Conscia virtute fretus,
Caesare
Promptior. Iustior. Fortior
Venit. Vidit. Vicit.
Immanem Turcarum Tyrannum,
Nulla lacessitum injuria, bellum gratis capessentem
Assyriam, Mediam, Thraciam, Aegyptum, Tartariam, Asiam
Sub signis trahentem
Orbi Christiano
Strages, incendia, vastationem, vincula minitantem
Alexandri sui in victorias adolescentis manu subnixus,
Numine plenus
Disrupit, fregit, profligavit
Vt Europam liberaret
Porro bellatorum, Iuli optime,
Oblatum a Tribuno plebis Diadema recusasti
Factum been:
Ioannem bellatorum Maximum
Triplici Diademate
Sarmatico adepto, Hungarico vindicato, Romano protecto
Coronari sine.
Acclamatum in orb Christiano millies, millies, millies.
Some LETTERS; Containing an Account of what was most remarkable in a Voyage
into Swisserland, Italy, and a part of Germany, in the years 1685 and 1686.
Written by Dr. Burnet to M.B. The Second Edition Corrected by the Author. With
Additions concerning Swisserland, Italy, Communicated by a Person of Quality.
At Rotterdam, Sold by Acher, 1687. in Octavo. p. 336.
THIS Book contains Five Letters, and is both in French and Dutch, as well as
English. There have been lately added some Remarks Written in French by a
Person of Quality originally of Italy, and who has lived there a long while.
These Remarks are but Fifteen Pages, and respect only some particularities
touching the Country of the Switzes, Grisons, the Duchy of Ferrara, the City
of Bologne, and the Government of the Pope. We see thereby, as well as by the
Letters of Bishop Burnet, that the greatest part of Italy, and particularly
that which belongs to the Pope, is altogether deserted and ruined, because of
the too absolute Government which is there every where exercised; and of the
Maxim of those People, to lay always the greatest Taxes that can be. Princes in
this Country seem to envy their Posterity the enjoyment of their Estates, they
take such care to ruin them without remorse; and this evil is but too common
elsewhere.

But Dr. Burnet observes in all this Voyage the same rules which he has
proposed to himself in his History. He praises and blames, according as
natural equity seems to require it, without having respect to Parties, in which
those he speaks of are engaged. So he praises the fine qualities of Cardinal
Howard in his Fourth Letter, and remarks what may be reprehended in the conduct
of the Divines of Swisserland and Geneva, in regard to a Form which those who
are received Ministers are obliged to Sign in that Country. As he who has made
the Extract of the Voyage of Dr. Burnet, which is in the French Republic of
Letters, has not spoken of this place, it shall be altogether inserted here.
It is in the First Letter dated from Zurich, the 1 st of September 1685.

As the Medium which Amyraut and Daille have taken in the Controversies
agitated in Holland, touching the Decrees of God, and the Extent of the Death
of Jesus Christ, had been almost universally embraced in France, this same
opinion has found some defenders at Geneva, and in Swisserland. These
Gentlemen maintain the Universality of the death of Jesus Christ, and the
sufficiency of Grace (objective) given to all Men; affirming otherwise, that
God has freely chosen a certain number of Persons, to whom alone he gives a
Grace (subjective) efficacious. They are called Universalists; and their number
had begun to be considerable at Geneva, because two Professors in Divinity
openly favored this Opinion. Those who incline to the contrary Sentiment, were
extremely moved at it, and the Dispute grew so warm, that almost the whole City
entered either into one or other of the Parties. If the Magistrate had imposed
silence on both, he had certainly done very well: for the Question was of
Speculations so uncertain, and so little Essential to Religion, that the
diversity of Sentiments ought not to cause any Quarrel or Faction. But though
the Party of the Universalists was pretty considerable at Geneva, it was
extremely weak in Switzerland. Therefore some Divines of that Country upheld
the received Opinion, and made Articles, wherein they, in the first place,
condemned the Opinions of the Universalists, and some Speculative Sentiments
touching the Immortality of Adam, and the qualities he had, according to those
Divines, in the state of Innocence. Moreover, Cappel and other Critics having
maintained not only the novelty of the Points of the Hebrews, but also taken
the liberty of correcting the Text in some places, upon supposition that there
were errors of the Copists in the Bible, both as to Vowels and Consonants: to
oppose these Sentiments, all the Corrections were condemned which might be made
in the Hebrew Text, and the Antiquity of the Points was asserted, at least as
to the force, or manner wherein they have determined the Reading. If hereby all
Divines are not engaged to be of the Sentiment of Buxtorf, as to what regards
the Antiquity of Points, the Correcting of any thing whatever is hindered, in
the punctuation of these times: If this Consent of Doctrine, for so this Form
is named, had been established as a Rule, against which it was not lawful to
Teach any thing, without incurring some censure, severity would have been more
sufferable. But all those are obliged who aspire to the Ministry, or to a
Chair of Professor, to subscribe, Sic sentio, I am of this opinion. This Form
being established at Berne and Zurich, the Authority of the Divines who had
made it caused its being ^ent to Geneva; where the Moderator and Secretary of
the Company of Ministers Signed it in the Name of all. So they were not
satisfied to make a regulation touching these matters, but by a Maxim, which
has been so often fatal to the Church, they undertook to become Masters of the
Conscience of the People, and to put the young Folks from their Employments, or
to impose an Oath upon them, that all, perhaps, have not signed without remorse
of Conscience. Yet some of those who have established this Form are persons of
an extraordinary merit^^ who I am persuaded have acted in this occasion by a
sincere zeal, to maintain what they regard as Truth; I should only wish, they
had more Extent, and a greater freedom of Mind.

(...). The 33 Orations of Themistius, 13 of which have been formerly
published. Dennis Petavius of the Society of Jesus, Translated many of 'em into
Latin, with Annotations. To 20 of these Orations are added other Notes; and to
the remaining 13 are joined the perpetual Observations of John Harduinus, a
Member of the same Society. Paris, in Fol.
THemistius was a Philosopher of Paphlagonia, so Eloquent, that he had given
him the Sur-name of Euphrades. He published Commentaries upon Aristotle, when
he was very young, which were so much esteemed, that one of the best
Philosophers of Greece quitted his School to go to see him. He Taught with so
much clearness at Antioch, Nicomedia, Rome, and elsewhere, that he out-did all
the Philosophers of his time. The Romans were so charmed with him, that they
sent to the Emperor, desiring, that he would oblige him to live in the midst of
them, but they obtained not this advantage. Themistius chose rather to return
to Constantinople, where he passed the greatest part of his life. He was
beloved of Six Emperors. Constantius conferred the dignity of Praetor upon him,
and honored him with a Brazen Statue. Valence had so great a deference for
him, that in consideration of him he moderated the false zeal which led him to
persecute the Orthodox. It is assuredly one of the greatest marks of esteem
which can be given to a Man; for as soon as a Prince has determined to
extirpate a Religion, all that retards the progress of this design is uneasy
to him, and incommodes him extraordinarily; they are very powerful Reasons only
which can work an alteration of this nature. Yet the Discourse of Themistius
produced this great effect upon an Emperor animated to the ruin of the
Orthodox, by the Counsel of some Arian Bishops, and by the Intreagues of the
Empress. This Philosopher represented to Valence, That he persecuted, without
cause, Men of worth; that it was not a crime to believe and to think otherwise
than he did; that he should not wonder at this diversity of Opinions; that the
Gentiles were much more divided amongst themselves than Christians; that every
one pointed at truth by some place; and that it had pleased God to confound the
pride of Men, and to render himself more venerable by the difficulty which
there is of knowing him. It is pity that such fine thoughts have been said by a
Pagan, and that it should be necessary that Christians should learn this
Important Lesson from an^ Idolatrous Man. Yet they ought to profit thereby. But
Mr. Flecher, who has so carefully related this Discourse of Themistius, to
shame thereby the Memory of an Arian Emperor, tells us, that the Emperor
Theodosius a little while after, also took upon him a command, which was as a
fit subject for a second discourse of Themistius; But he was far from doing it,
because of the charge of Prefect of Constantinople, and of Tutor to the Son of
Theodosius the Great, which this Emperor gave him, lest he should cease his
Applauses for all the Orders of the Court. It is very strange that a Prince who
abolished vigorously the Relics of Paganism, and who gave even no very good
quarters to the Sectaries of Christianity, should trust the Education of his
Son to a Heathen. Yet it is true, that Theodosius has done all this; for those
who say, that Themistius was a Christian, and Chief of the Sect of the
Agnoites, who believed, that Jesus Christ was absolutely ignorant of the end of
the World; they confound him with another Themistius, a Deacon of the Church of
Alexandria, who was the head of this Sect under the Empire of Justin, toward
the year 519. It signifies nothing to the proof of the pretended Christianity
of Themistius, to say, that he has cited this passage of Scripture, The heart
of the King is in the hand of the Lord: This, I say, signifies nothing, because
that besides his citing these words, as if he had taken them from the Books of
the Assyrians; every one knows, that Longinus has quoted Moses with Elogies
on him, without being on that account, engaged e're the less in Paganism.
Themistius must needs have been an honest Man, because he always had the
Friendship of St. Gregory of Nazianze.

He had left 36 Harangues. Henry Stephen is the first who has published any of
them. Father Petau being then at the College of la Fleche, made an Edition
thereof. He added a second much better when he came to Paris, but it was yet
very imperfect, seeing there lacked Sixteen Orations. He sought so successfully
that he found thirteen, whereof he Translated into Latin the considerablest
part. He left them as a Depositum in the College of Clermont's Bibliotheck;
and these are they which appeared the first time in the Edition of Themistius,
that Father Hardouin has lately given us. He is a very learned Jesuit, who was
brought to Paris to be employed with Father Cautel to make the Supplement of
Dogmata Theologica of Father Petau; but this design has not succeeded; so that
these two Jesuits have elsewhere endeavored, by other Works, to make their
Talent be valued. Father Cautel has set his face another way. As for Father
Hardouin, the Public has already known, that he works upon a Commentary of
Pliny, in usum Delphini, which will be, say they, a most complete piece, and
which will be published in a year. Moreover, he has a design to publish all
the Manuscripts of the Bibliotheque of Clermont, which have not been as yet
printed; and he has begun by the Orations of Themistius, at the entreaty of
Father Garnier, who dyed an Bologne in Italy the 26 th. of October 1681. during
the Voyage he made to Rome, about the Affairs of his Society.

In this Edition have been inserted all the Notes of Father Petau upon twenty
Discourses of Themistius, and many things are very Learned therein. There is in
particular, a gross Error of Appian, who says in the First Book of the Civil
War, That the Romans have had Kings during 100 Olympiads, and Consuls 100
Olympiads; also whereas it is certain, that Tarquin was banished Rome in the
Year 244, after the Foundation of the City 156 years, before it had lasted a
hundred Olympiads. Besides that, Appian contradicts himself visibly, seeing he
places the Dictatorship of Sylla, but in the 175 Olympiad. Father Petau also
pretends, That Scaliger was mistaken when he said, That the lesser Mysteries
were celebrated at Athens but every three Years. This Jesuit maintains against
him that they were celebrated every year. But when he afterward proves by a
very obscure passage of Titus Livius, that they were celebrated every first
Year of each Olympiad, he seems to give himself a needless trouble, seeing that
if he has proved well, that they were celebrated every year, it follows
without any difficulty, that they were celebrated the first Year of all the
Olympiads. It may nevertheless be said for his Justification, that he makes use
of the passage of Titus Livius, but to show the impossibility of the Hypothesis
of Scaliger. He corrects in this same place a passage of Plutarch, which seems
to say, That the Mysteries were celebrated in the Market place, (...).
Casaubonus who perceived the fault, thought he was bound to correct it in
reading, (...), or else (...); but it is not for that, we must read (...); to
wit, to Agra, which was a place near the River Ilissus, where there was a
Temple of Ceres, and whence Diana had apparently taken her name of (...). In
fine, her Remarks that most Authors have unseasonably confounded the Mysteries,
with the Thesmophoria, which were celebrated in the Honor of Ceres. He relates
several Differences betwixt these two Ceremonies.

One of the things upon which he has enlarged so much, is the Bridge that
Xerxes built to pass from Asia into Europe. Herodotus has given us the
Description thereof; Father Petau expounds it, and corrects in it a great many
faults. We should be too tedious if we should descend into a more particular
Relation. Let us be content with this Remark upon a passage of Cassiodorus, L.
9. Ep. 5. Where it is ordered to keep no more Corn than would be necessary to
maintain each Family, Sive in gradu, sive in aliis locis condita potuerint
invenire. These words have much tormented the Interpreters, Father Petau says,
that by in gradu, an Isle of the Adriatic Sea, must be understood, situate
toward the place where Venice has been built, and not the Bread which was
distributed upon the Stairs at Constantinople.

Let us now say somewhat of the Work of Father Hardouin. He has placed the
Orations of Themistius, in the order they ought to be in, according to the time
wherein they were spoken; and to effect this, he has made a Chronological
Table, the exactest that he could. He has filled the vacancies which were in
this Author; and cut diverse things which had been added, and spoiled the sense;
he has corrected the faults which had slipped thereinto; and finally, he has
cleared the places that are most difficult by his Learned Observations.

He observes that the Romans had Dragons in their Colors; and as it is also
certain, that they had Eagles in their Ensigns, he teaches us to discern these
two things; it is, says he, that the Eagles served for the entire Legion, and
the Dragons for a Cohort. He pretends, that Sethus Calvisius having placed the
Death of Procopius in the Year 365. and changed the Name of Iovinus designed
Consul for the Year ensuing, into that of Dagalaiphus, has added a false
Calculation in all the sequel of his Chronology. He makes several Discoveries,
and several Remarks upon the Family of the Emperor Theodosius, to whom he
restores two Children that no body does more than mention, to wit, Gratian and
Pulcherius, though it is certain, that St. Gregory of Nissa, and St. Ambrose have
spoken thereof. He speaks to the purpose, upon the Chapter of Genealogies, for
he has better distinguished than Mr. Henry de Valois had done the two young
Valentinians, whereof the one was Son to the Emperor Valentinian the first,
and the other was the Son of Valens, and was named Galates, because he was born
in Galatia. It was for this that the ninth Oration of Themistius was made. Mr.
de Valois seemed to believe when he published the first time his Ammian
Marcelline, that these two Valentinians were Brothers. He is reproached with it
here: but as he corrected this fault in his Notes upon Socrates, after he had
seen the Idatius of Father Sirmond, and that the same fault was also corrected
in the new Edition in Folio of Amien, it will be taken ill that Father Hardouin
thought upon such a Censure, and it will perhaps be said, that he fetched the
occasion a little too far.

One of his most curious Remarks concerns the passage which induced some to
believe, That Themistius made profession of Christianity, and which seems to be
the same with that of Solomon, The heart of the King is in the band of the
Lord. This Philosopher cites his fine Sentiment as taken out of the Books of
the Assyrians. Father Petau believed by these Assyrian Books, the holy
Scripture was to be understood, because Themistius sometimes gave the
Christians the Title of Syrians, according to the custom of the Gentiles, who
often confounded the Jews with Christians. Father Hardouin rejects this
Opinion, and founds his own upon this, that Themistius could not borrow the
passage in question, neither from the Original of Scripture, nor from the
Version of the 70. The Hebrew is, Leb melek Ve Iaed Jehovah, the Heart of the
King in the hand of the Lord. The 70 have thus Translated it simply, (...). But
Themistius says thus, (...). He has this passage from another place, according
to this Jesuit, and not from Holy Scripture. Some profane Author furnished
him, as was that who taught him to say, That Men commonly sung upon Lebanon.

I know not whether it was ever said, That Aesop must needs have read Solomon,
seeing he cites a Sentence which is found word for word in Chap. 3. of
Proverbs, God resists the Proud, but shows favor to the Humble.

So it is, That the 70. have turned the passage of Solomon, and that the
Apostle St. James has cited it in his Epistle. There would not be much reason
under pretense of this great conformity between the passage of Aesop, and that
of the Scripture, to maintain that Aesop, had read the sacred Books; for whence
could he draw the signification which the te^m has in the Sentence of Aesop,
which is a particular signification to the Greek Bible of the 70. It is better
to say with Vavasseur the Jesuit, That Plenuda is the Author of the Book which
we call this day the Fables of Aesop. At least it is true, That some Christian
is the Author of the Moral Sense, which has been expressed in one of the
Fables of Aesop, by the very Greek terms of the Scripture.

An Abridgment of the Prerogatives of St. Ann, Mother of the Mother of God,
approved by the Doctors of the Sorbonne, and Translated out of French into
English, to accompany a Book which is Entitled, Contemplations on the Life and
Glory of the Blessed Virgin, with the Defense of that Work and other pieces of
that nature; to which is added a Preface touching the Original of this History.
Sold by Mr. Chiswell at London 1688. p. 44.
THe Devotions of the Roman Church appear so ridiculous to them that are not
born superstitious, that the ablest Controvertists of that party have
endeavored to hide them, or to make them pass for popular Abuses: but as it is
impossible, that in a great Society all them that write should be of the
Secret; so there are a great number of Bigots who feared that the Bishops of
Meaux and Turnai would with their mildness betray the Church, and were minded
really to abolish the Ways that enriched it. So much the Protestants have
seconded the sincerity of these latter, and have collected out of their
Offices, Rites, and the most famous Doctors of Rome, the true Doctrine of our
Church. To avoid the contestations commonly raised by such as do not act
sincerely. The English are advised to translate whole Books of the Doctrine of
Rome, as the Life of Magdalene of Pazzi, the Contemplations of the Life and
Glory of the Blessed Virgin, and other such like.

The Abridgment of the Perogatives of St. Ann, is one of these Works. The time
will not be lost that is employed in making an extract of it; it is sufficient
that it was ridiculous enough to cause the Effect, which the Translator
proposed himself; it was printed at Paris in 43. with the approbation of the
Doctors of Sorbonne, and was Dedicated to the Queen Mother Ann of Austria, then
Regent; so that any godly Book could not be more Authentic. The Reader will be
far more obliged by the taking out of the English Preface the History of St.
Ann's Devotions, by which may be learned what are the grounds of Monastic
Orders, and the Authors of Legends.

The Friars used ways of forming the Genealogies of their King's, and
attributing great Deeds of Chivalry that never happened to their Princes, and
thought that it became them to be no less liberal to the Predecessors of Jesus
Christ. No Ancient Author ever spoke of Iachim, and of St. Ann, who are said to
be the Father and Mother of the Blessed Virgin, and St. Epiphanius, was the
first that mentioned it by the by. In the succeeding Ages Germain, Hyppolitus,
and Damascenus spoke of them, but 'twas little or nothing at all; and
Nicephorus one of the greatest liars among the Friars, made but a very short
History of them; so that all the Legends are grounded upon two pieces whereof
the Falsehood is well known by Critics. One is a Letter upon the Birth of the
Blessed Lady attributed to St. Jerome; the other is the pretended Gospel of St.
James.

As for the first, it cannot be precisely determined when it was invented. All
that can be said, is that an old Fabulous Tradition has been the occasion of
it. There is a feigned Letter of Chromatius, and of Heliodo^e, desiring St.
Jerome to Translate the Gospel of St. Matthew out of Hebrew into Latin, which
Armanius and Virinus said, was in his possession, and contained the History of
the Infancy of the Blessed Virgin, and that of our Savior. Jerome begins to
excuse himself from it upon the difficulty of the work, and because the Apostle
did not design to make this Book public, maintaining that he writ it in
Hebrew, and did not mention a word of it in the common Gospel, designing to
keep this History from the Peoples Knowledge, adding, That it was a Secret that
ought to be trusted to none but choice Clergymen, that might make the extract
of it to Christians. That Seleucus was the first that Translated it, and mixed
several false Doctrines, tho not very different from the Truth; in what
regarded the History and Miracles; and for that reason, he promised them an
exact Version of the Original Hebrew. There are in these Fables the Maxims and
Folly of the Friars, which suffice to refute it. Besides this, Seleucus or
Lucius was a Manichee, which doubtless was one of the reasons why St. Augustine
rejected a Work like this, or perhaps it might be the same with that of
Seleucus. For says he, If one did allege to me the Book of Apocrypha, wherein
Iachim is said to be the Father of Mary, I would not yield to that Authority,
because that Book is not Canonical. Pope Gelasius not content to term the Work
Apocryphal, calls the Author a Child of the Devil.

II. The second piece whereon the Legend is founded, is not of better Alloy,
because it is the Gospel of the false St. James. William Postel published it
first, and having Translated it out of Greek into Latin, got it printed at
Basil in 1552. under the Title of Prot-Evangelion cum Evangelica Historia
Sanctae Mariae Evangelistae, and vita ejus, Octavo. Some years after Bibliander
made Notes upon this Work; and this was printed with the other, which was not
much better under the Title of Orthodox Writing, Orthodoxographae. If any one
is minded to know who William Postel was, he may be informed in the first
Chapter of the Apology for the Reformers, by Mr. Iurieu. Henry Stephens that
was no Divine, but knew that such a Deist as Postell was might be suspected
that he had embellished this Work, and Casaubon attributed the whole to him.
However it is, this pretended Gospel of St. James with many others was
condemned in a Council of 70 Bishops held at Rome, under Pope Gelasius.
Nevertheless, the Writers of Legends receive them, and form new ones, as the
Book of the Birth of Mary, of the childhood of Jesus, and the Gospel of St.
Ann. The latter may be judged of according to this passage mentioned by Henry
Stephens, when Jesus was so grown that he could work, Joseph employed him to
Carpentry; and one day having commanded him to saw a piece of Wood, he did it
without taking notice of the Mark that was to direct him, and so made the piece
too short. Joseph was angry at this, and had a mind to beat him, and would have
done it, if Jesus had not lengthened the stick, by making Joseph pull at one
end, whilst he pulled at the other. If the Inventors of those absurd Relations
were designed to dishonor the Christian Religion, they could not find a better
way; the Gospel of the fictitious St. James is full of such extravagant
Histories; and one would think the Inventor had a mind by his Ironique
Imitation, to ridicule several passages of Scripture, and several Miracles of
the Old and New Testament, among others the History of Abraham and Sarah, that
of Hanna and her Son Samuel, and that of Zachary and Elizabeth.

And nevertheless, it is upon these counterfeit Books and scurrilous Relations,
that the most part of the Devotions of the Romish Church, are founded; the
pretended St. James has consecrated a Feast to St. Ann, which is kept the 16
th. of July, and was ordained by Pope Gregory XIII. 1584. Sometime after Sixtus
the 5 th. founded or at least confirmed a Religious Order, called the Maidens
of St. Joseph, who made choice of St. Ann for their Patroness; they afterward
established themselves in France, under the protection of Ann of Austria,
Regent of the Kingdom.

So that it was in our times, that the Grandfather and Grandmother of Jesus
Christ were brought into remembrance; and I hope his great Grandfather and his
Father will be soon deisy'd, especially if the principle laid by the Maidens
of St. Joseph in this work be followed; for if one must make his address to the
Blessed Virgin, because Jesus Christ cannot refuse her any thing, and if we
must address our selves to Ann the Mother of Mary, to have the Daughters
Favor, then we must go back to great Grandmother, and so on to the rest.

BOOKS concerning the Exposition of M. de Meaux his Doctrine.
I. An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England upon the Articles
that M. de Meaux heretofore Bishop of Condom, has Explained in his Exposition
of the Catholic Doctrine, with the History of this Book, Quarto, 1686. II.
Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, against M.
de Meaux, and his Apologists Objections, Quarto, 1686. III. A Second Defense of
the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England against M. de Meaux and
his Apologists new Objections, Quarto, At London, Sold by R. Chiswell, 1688.
IF it be useful in Civil Life to know them that give us advice, and the secret
motives that make them act; such an examination cannot be of less advantage for
our Spiritual conduct in the different ways shown to Christians by the Doctors
of diverse Societies: if Prejudices and Obstinacy do not damn, at least it
cannot be denied but they are very dangerous: but when Learned Divines, whose
imagination is neither overheated with Dispute, nor with the Opinion of a
particular Party, and does endeavor to call into doubts the most constant
practices and public customs; there is reason to suspect, that they have
imbibed no less odious Principles than Head-strongness and Prejudice.

If the Roman Church ever had Judicious and moderate Controvertists, they were
the Iansenists, and M. de Meaux, and some English, that in these times have
imitated the former; so that if there be want of sincerity in the proceedings
of these Gentlemen, it is a strong presumption against the Defenders of Rome,
and no weak proof, that its Doctrine cannot be maintained but by indirect
courses.

These Reflections were necessary, to show the usefulness of the Modern History
of Controversies, as well in France as in England, which Dr. Wake gives in his
Preface of these Three Works, and whereof we design to give a more than
ordinary exact Abridgment here, because there are remarkable circumstances
known to very few.

I. All the World knows now that the Extirpation of all the Hugonots of France
was resolved on even from the Pyrenean Peace; and there are some that believed
it was one of the secret Conditions of that Peace: The difficulty was to put
that Decree in execution without raising a Civil War, and without alarming the
Protestant Princes. The Politicians took very just measures to weaken
insensibly the Reformed of that Kingdom, and either lull asleep, or set at
variance the Foreign Powers of their Communion. There is none ignorant of the
success; but it would have been more happy, if the Divines employed to maintain
Rome's Cause had sped as well as the Coyners of Propositions, and Inventers of
Decrees.

And nevertheless it might be said, that the Roman Catholic Doctors were not
in the fault that things did not go on better, and that it was not for want of
incapacity that they persuaded no body. The first that endeavored to give a
new turn to Controversies, was M. Arnaud, whose very Name is praised enough. It
is well known that this eminent Man, who was a Philosopher, a Mathematician,
well read in the Fathers, and as well acquainted with Scripture; has had
several remarkable victories over the Adversaries of his own Communion; yet
with all his great qualities, all that he did in his perpetuity of the belief
of the Roman Catholic Religion, touching the Lord's Supper, was to repeat over
and over, that Transubstantiation being now the common Doctrine of the Church,
it followed, that there never was any other Belief, because it cannot be
comprehended how all Christians should have agreed to change their Opinion,
which had it happened, the certain time should be marked wherein the Universal
Church had varied in this Point; and when and how each particular Church came
to Corrupt the Ancient Doctrine.

It is very strange, that after so many proofs of matter of Fact, which M.
Aubertinus alleged out of the Belief of the Holy Fathers, that an Argument,
purely Metaphysical, should make so much noise, and be so much applauded by the
Roman Communion. It Is almost a certain sign of the weakness of a Cause, to see
the maintainers of it blinded with the least Sophism, and Triumph in their
fancy, for the least appearance of Truth.

There wanted no great strength to ruin these imaginary Trophies. The
Protestants had no harder task than to show, that this reason supposed no error
could be brought into the World, nor embraced by a numerous Society. The
beginning of Idolatry is disputed upon, and nothing yet decided. Some will have
it, that it began by the adoration of Stars, others from the deifying dead Men;
and then, say they, Statues were erected for Kings, for the Benefactors of the
People, for Lawmakers, and for the Inventors of Sciences and Arts. And this to
reduce People to the practice of Virtue; and, to do it the better, they spoke
of their Ancestors, and proposed their Examples; their Actions were spoken of
in high Terms, and their Soul placed in Heaven near the Divinity; they thought
they would not be idle there, but that God would give them some considerable
office there, because they had acquitted themselves so well of the Employments
they had upon Earth.

The common sort of People generally much taken with Figures and great Words,
it may be, conceived a higher Idea of those excellent Persons, than their first
Authors designed; and Priests observing that these Opinions made People more
devout, and brought themselves Riches, made the People to pass insensibly from
a Respect to a Religious Veneration. And hence Idolatry was raised by little
and little to its height; now must we infer from hence, that it is not a
pernicious Error, and that it was from the beginning of the World; because the
precise time cannot be marked in which People begun to adore the Stars; nor
tell who the first Hero was, that had Divine Honors rendered to him? and yet the
Argument would be as concluding as Mr. Arnaud's. Many Learned Men have Writ
much of the Ancient and Modern Idolatry, and have shown its various progress.
One can tell very near what time the Saturnalia were Instituted, and the
Mysteries of Ceres, and Corpus Christi-Day; and that of St. Ann. And at what
time the Temple of Ephesus was built, and the Church of Loret; and when
Hercules was Canonized, and Aeneas and Francis of Abisa; and Ignatius Loyola:
all this is known: But the first beginning of an Error, is always impenetrable,
and can never be found out.

As for the Consent of Christians, which Mr. Arnaud did allege, he was shown,
that the Eastern Churches termed Schismatics by Rome, were not of her opinion
touching the Lord's Supper, and that if they had any Idea of a Real Presence,
it drew nearer the Consubstantiation of the Lutherans, than the
Transubstantiation of Rome. It is true, Mr. Arnaud produces several
Attestations of Grecian Priests, to show, that the Greeks were of the same
opinion with Roman Catholics; but it is likewise true, that he obtained the
most part of them by Bribes. Mr. Wheeler assures us in his Voyages of Greece,
that he spoke to many Pappas whom M. of Nointel, Nephew to Mr. Arnaud, had
endeavored to bribe for the same end. The Miscellanea of Mr. Smith may also be
seen to this effect.

One might be satisfied with this Answer; yet the Superstitions of Rome being
not so ancient as those of Paganism, the Reformed have thought, that by a
continual search, at last that Prodigious Opinion might be discovered, which
gave Birth to Transubstantiation. And they have accomplished it, for they have
shown, how the Energetick Expressions of the Fathers, touching
Transubstantiation, occasioned in the ignorant Ages an obscure Idea of an
Union, or of an incomprehensible change; and they have marked the Authors of
these two Opinions differing thus about the Sense of Figure and Virtue: John
Damascenus in the year 728, began to Preach in the East the Union of the Bread
and Body of Jesus Christ; and Paschase Ratbert was the first that published
Transubstantiation, or the change of the Substance of one into the Substance of
the other, in the Latin Church, in the year 818.

So that all that the Catholics of France gained by Dispute, was, to see their
Heroes worsted, by a Minister, who, though Eloquent and Witty enough, would
nevertheless have yielded to M. Arnaud in many other things.

This Trial made the Romish Church sensible that it ran the hazard of losing
its reputation with all honest People, if its Tenets came once to be examined.
And therefore their Advocates turned wranglers, and barricading themselves with
formalities, prescriptions; and the ends not answering, they thereupon pretend
that their Adversaries are condemnable without any necessity of examining into
the bottom, who is in the right, and who is in the wrong. M. Nicole took upon
himself to plead this part, and acquitted himself in his lawful Prejudices
against the Calvinists, with as much cunning and Eloquence as could be expected
from a Disciple or Friend of M. Arnaud.

By ill luck the Iansenists came to the worst, both in Rome and in France, in
the Famous Dispute of the Five Propositions; and were forced to say, That the
Five Condemned Propositions were not in the Augustine of Iansenius; whence it
clearly followed, that neither the Pope nor Councils were Infallible in what
they did, because they might call People as Heretics, that were not so at all,
in imputing to them Opinions which they never held, nor were to be found in
their Works. The Iansenists saw this consequence, and maintained it openly, and
did advance several Principles that destroyed the Authority of the Church, and
its Infallibility.

The French Protestants presently took notice of this contradiction of Doctrine
between the Author of the Prejudices and his Friends, or his Disciples, and did
not fail to promote it. M. Pajon did it after, showing with much Wit and
Acuteness, that the Arguments of a prejudiced Author, are more valid in a
Iew's, a Pagan's or Mahometan's Mouth against Christianity, than they are, when
used by a Roman Catholic against the Reformed.

About the same time M. Claude Answered M. Nicole in a direct way, showing that
the excess of Corruption, which the Doctrine and Worship of the Romish Church
was come to, made our Predecessors to examine Religion strictly, and
consequently to separate from a Society that would force them to receive, under
pain of Damnation, a Faith whose practices were altogether opposite to
Scripture.

That was enough to make the Roman Catholics repent that they gave that turn
to their Controversies, and that being their last shelter, there was no hopes
they would leave it; for they continued turning their Prejudices into so many
meanings, and proposing them as confidently as if they had never been refuted.
And these pitiful evasions pleased the Assembly of the Clergy of France so well
in 82. that they made Sixteen Methods of Prescription, on which the conversion
of the Reformed was to be labored for. And which is yet more, these Gentlemen
thought them so convincing, that they entreated the King, that a Copy of them
might be given to every Consistory; imagining perhaps, that some Ministers may
happen to be there, who might be wrought upon by these Illusions, or frightened
with the Threatenings of the Pastoral Advertisement. The Intendant, or some
other of the King's Commissaries, went on a Sunday accompanied with some
Clergymen, deputed by the Bishop of the Diocese, and with Two Apostolic
Notaries, to acquaint each Consistory with this Writing, and give several
Copies amongst the People; making several Orations, to desire them from the
King to enter into the Communion of the Roman Catholic Church; but all to no
purpose. M. Pajon, Minister of Orleans, made presently some Remarks upon this
Advertisement and Methods, and addressed a Letter to the Clergy, wherein there
are not so many Figures of Rhetoric, as in their Writing, but much more Sense
and Judgment. Dr. Burnet who has always gloried in assisting his Afflicted
Brethren, seeing most of our Ministers out of a condition of defending
themselves, gave himself the pains to examine the little Books of the Prelates of
France. And at last Mr. Iurieu Answered them by way of Recrimination, in his
Lawful Prejudices against Papism, which he proposes, to the number of Nineteen;
which are so many, whereof the least plausible has more force than all those of
the Clergy. We must add to these Books Two other of the same Author, wherein he
Refutes two of the Indirect ways, which the Roman Controvertists use: the First
is his Apology for the Morals of the Reformed against M. Arnaud; and the
Second, his true System of the Church against M. Nicole. All these Methods were
in Vogue when the Book of M. de Meaux appeared. The turn he gave to the
Controversies, did much more surprise the Protestants, than all the Subtilities
which the Divines of France thought of. There was a Prelat of great reputation
Tutor to the Dauphin, that did not entangle himself in the Disputes of Grace,
and that consequently was neither suspected by Jesuits nor by the Iansenists,
nor by the Church of Rome, nor by the Gallican Church; he was seen, I say, to
publish a Book well stocked with Approbations, wherein he endeavors to moderate
the most displeasing Tenets of his Sect, to put their grosser abuses in
Oblivion; and finally, to bury the most part of School Disputes.

It was hard to think, that a Man supported by all that is great in his
Communion, whereof he seemed the Oracle, should Write to deceive his
Fellow-Citizens; or that he should think that a bare Exposition of the Doctrine
of his Church should be capable to bring back into its Bosom them that had
quitted it with so much reluctance, and remained in it in spite of what could
be inflicted upon them. The Tenets of Rome are not taught in the Indies, nor in
America; nor are we to learn from the uncertain relations of some ignorant
Travelers. We see its Practices and Devotions before our Eyes. The Books of
their Doctors are told in every place; and most part of our Reformers were
either Bishops, Priests or Friars; so that neither they nor their Disciples can
be ignorant, neither of what the Romish Church Believes, nor of what it
Practices: besides, the Ministers have no reason to dissemble in their
Opinions, because the Clergy of it gain far more than those of any other
Communion.

This Reflection might make M. de Meaux's sincerity very doubtful; who declares
at the very beginning, That he Designs to render the Tenets of the Catholic
Church more clear than they are, and to distinguish them from such as are
falsely imputed to it. Nevetheless the Reformed being brought up in a Religion
which inspires true Faith, and being otherwise moved to desire a Reunion, in
hopes to see the end of their Miseries; fancied, that the Accusation of this
Bishop was but a pretext he used to cast out of his Creed what is troublesome
and hard to believe. Besides the noise of an Agreement between the Two
Religions, which was a long time sown among the People, and whereof divers'
Ministers were made to draw the Project. M. de Meaux and his followers slipped
many words, which were general Promises of a Reformation, upon condition of
Reunion.

If it appears now, that there was not the least shadow of sincerity in all the
Promises that the Roman Catholics made, and that at that very time the
clear-sighted could soon discover, that it was but a pure cheat, the Reformed
cannot be praised enough for not trusting to them, nor can the others be blamed
enough that make nothing of playing with what is most sacred, when they have a
design to cheat the simple.

To know whether M. de Meaux be of this Number, as several Protestants pretend
and endeavor to prove, in showing the opposition of his Sentiments, with those
of the other Doctors of his Communion, it will not be unprofitable to know the
History of his Book, because it may be commonly perceived by the way that a
design is managed which is the end proposed.

M. Turenne who saw a long time that his Religion was a hinderance to his
Fortune, would have been very glad if he could accommodate himself to the
Romish Religion: But the vile Practices of this Church seem so strange to those
who are brought up in other Principles, that he could not persuade himself to
join with a Society that imposed such ridiculous Superstitions upon its
Votaries; to cure him of this Scruple, M. de Meaux published a small Writing,
wherein he strained himself to show, That these small Devotions were not of the
Essence of the Catholic Doctrine, and that one might live and die in its
Communion without practicing them.

This Work, or rather the King's Caresses and Liberalities having had Success,
which all People know; our Prelate was of Opinion, That he could work the same
effect upon others, and resolved to print this Manuscript that remained written
four years before, and to add to it diverse Sections, as that of the Lord's
Supper, of Tradition, of the Authority of the Church, and Pope, and obtained
the approbation of the Bishop of Rheims, and of some other Bishops.

Sorbonne these several Ages has been looked upon as the source of the French
Divinity, it is therefore that not only the Doctors of this University, but also
Bishops and other Clergy are glad to have the approbation of that famous House
at the beginning of what Books they write of Religion. M. of Condom had that
design, but he did not speed; for having sent his Exposition as soon as it came
from the Press to some of the Doctors of Sorbonne, instead of approving the
Work, they marked several Places either contrary to, or favoring but in a very
little the Doctrine of their Church. So that Edition was presently suppressed,
and another was composed, wherein the Passages were changed that were marked by
the Censurers.

This could not be managed so secretly, but the Reformed came to know it. Mr.
Noguier and M. de la Bastide who knew the Edition that was published; and this
last did not fail to remark the Alteration that the Author made in the
Manuscript, and in the suppressed Edition. They also reproached him, that the
true Roman Catholics were but little pleased at his Moderation, and one of
them finished the Refutation of his Book before any Protestant had Printed his,
but he was not forbidden to publish it.

M. de Meaux's Credit was great enough to stifle the direct Answer that those
of his own Party made to him: But he could not hinder them that were
dissatisfied from taking an indirect course, and to say what they thought, and
even to refute him. The Jesuits and the Friars sharp maintainers of the
Superstitions that enrich them, could not forgive him at all. Father Maimbourg
in his History of Lutheranism drew this Prelates Character, and criticiz'd on
his Book under the Name of Cardinal Contarini, and of one of his Works, and
says well, That these Agreements and Managements of Religion in these pretended
Expositions of Faith, which either suppress or do express in doubtful terms a
part of the Doctrine of the Church, neither satisfy one side nor the other,
who equally complain of swerving in a matter so momentous as that of Faith.

Father Cresset gave this Bishop a more sensible stroke in his Book of the true
Devotion to the Blessed Virgin, printed at Paris in 4to. in the Year 79. with
privilege from the King, and the Archbishops leave, and the consent of his
own Provincial, and of three Jesuits that are the Censurers of all the Works
of that Society. The Dauphins Tutor was too powerful an Adversary to be opposed
directly. But a Writer of lesser Authority that adopted the Opinion of this
Prelate, touching the Invocation of Saints, and Worship of Images, felt the
weight of Father Cresset's Anger.

This Author was a German Gentleman, called M Widenfelt, intendant of the
Prince of Suarzemberg, and his Book was Entitled Monita Salutaria B. Virginis,
wholesome Advices of the Blessed Virgin to her indiscreet Votaries. This Book
made much noise in the World, especially after the Pastoral Letter of the
Bishop of Tournay, wherein he recommends this Book to his People, as full of
Solid Piety, and very fit to remove the Abuses whereunto Superstition would
engage 'em. The Bishop of Mysia Suffragan of Cologne, the Vicar General of that
City, the Divines of Gant, Malines, and Lovain, all approved it. Nevertheless,
the Jesuit assures that That Writing scandalized the good Catholics; that the
Learned of all Nations refuted it, that the Holy See condemned it, and that in
Spain it was prohibited to be printed or read, as containing Propositions
suspected of Heresy and Impiety, tending to destroy the particular Devotion to
the Mother of God, and in general, the Invocation of Saints and the Worship of
Images.

There are now near 10 Years past since M. Meaux kept us in Expectation of Mr.
Noguier and M. Bastides Refutation, but at length instead of an Answer in form,
there only appeared a second Edition of his Book, bigger by half than the
first, by an Addition of an Advertisement in the beginning of it. One may soon
judge, that it does not cost so much pains to compose 50 or 60 pages in Twelves
as the taking of the City of Troy did. But though the time was not very long, it
was too long to oblige all that time the Pope and the Court of Rome, to give
their Approbation to a Book so contrary to their Maxims: Without doubt, the
Secret was communicated to them, and they were assured, That as soon as the
Stroke was given, and the Hugonots converted either by fair or foul means, what
seemed to be granted would be recalled.

Some Roman Catholics worthy of a better Religion, suffered through the
ignorance of this Mystery. A Prior of Gascogne Doctor in Divinity, called M.
Imbert told the People that went to the Adoration of the Cross on Good Friday
in 83. That the Catholics adored Jesus Christ crucified on the Cross, but did
not adore any thing that they saw there. The Curate of the Parish said, it was
the Cross, the Cross; but M. Imbert answered, No, no, it is Jesus Christ, not
the Cross. This was enough to create trouble; this Prior was called before the
Tribunal of the Archbishop of Bordeaux, and when he thought to defend himself
by the Authority of M. Meaux, and by his Exposition, what was said against that
Book, was objected to him, that it moderated, but was contrary to the Tenets of
the Church. After which, he was suspended from Ecclesiastical Functions; the
Defendant provided an Appeal to the Parliament of Guienne, and writ to M. de
Meaux to implore his protection against the Archbishop, who threatened him with
a perpetual Imprisonment and Irons; it is not known what became of it.

The History of M. de Wit, Priest and Dean of St. Mary's of Malines, is so
well known, that I need not particularize upon it. Our Author refers us here to
what the Journals have said: It is known what Persecutions he has suffered for
expressing the Popes Supremacy and Infallibility, according to M. de Meaux's
Doctrine. He did not forget to allege that Bishops Authority, and to say, That
his Exposition required no more of a Christian and an Orthodox; but this did
not hinder the University of Lovain to judge that Proposition pernicious and
scandalous, that intimates that the Pope is not the Chiefest of Bishops.

In the mean time the Reformed did not forget M. de Meaux; his Advertisement
did no sooner appear, but it was refuted by Mr. de la Bastide, and Mr. Iurie^,
a little after made his Preservative against the change of Religion, in
opposition to that Bishops Exposition. But all these Books and those that were
writ against his Treatise of the Communion under the two Kinds, had no Answer;
this Prelate expecting booted Apologists who were to silence his Adversaries in
a little time.

The Roman Catholics of England notwithstanding their small number flattered
themselves with hopes of the like Success, having at their head a bold
courageous Prince, and one that would do any thing for them. They had already
translated M. Condom's Exposition of 1672 and 1675 into English and Irish, and
as soon as they saw King James settled on his Brothers Throne, they began to
dispute by small Books of a leaf or two, written according to the method of the
French Bishop. The Titles with the Answers, and the several Defenses of each
Party, may be had in a Collection printed this present Year at London, at Mr.
Chiswells, which is Entitled, A Continuation of the present State of
Controversy between the English Church and that of Rome, containing a History
of the printed Books that were lately published on both sides. The Gentlemen of
the Roman Church did begin the Battle by little Skirmishes, but found
themselves after the first or second firing, without Powder or Ball, and not
able to furnish scattered Sheets against the great Volumes made against them,
said at last, instead of all other answer, that the little Book alone,
entitled, The Papist Misrepresented, and there represented anew, was
sufficient to refute not only all the Dissertations which the English Divines
lately published against Papists, but all the Books and Sermons that they ever
preached against Catholics. It is to no purpose to take the trouble of
Disputing against people that have so good an Opinion of their Cause. And in
consequence of this the English answer to M. de Meaux's Exposition, and the
Reflections on his Pastoral Letter of 1686. met with no Answer as well as
several other Books.

But Dr. Wake had no sooner published his Exposition of the Doctrine of the
Church of England, but these Gentlemen which know better to assault than to
defend made a Book Entitled, A Vindication of the Bishop of Condom 's
Exposition, with a Letter of that Bishop.

Because we do not design to enter on the particulars of these Controversies,
we will only take notice as to what past. That First, M. de Meaux denied that
any Roman Catholic writ against, or did design to write against it. Secondly,
That Sorbonne did not refuse approving his Book. Thirdly, He says his
Exposition was reprinted to alter those places which the Censurers had
improved; and maintains that it was put into the Press without his knowledge,
and that he had a new Edition made only to change some expressions that were
not exact enough. Fourthly, That he neither read nor knew any thing of Father
Cresset's Book.

Dr. Wake published the Defense of his Exposition about the middle of the same
year 1686, where he shows, First, That the deceased Mr. Conrait, a Man
acknowledged by both Parties to be sincere, had told many of his Friends, that
he saw this Answer in Manuscript, and other persons of known honesty that are
still living, assured the Author, that they had this Manuscript in their hands.

Dr. Wake justifies his Accusations on the 2d and 3d heads, by so curious a
History, that it seems worthy of being believed. He says, that one of his
Acquaintance who was very familiar with one of Marshall de Turenne's
Domestics, was the first that discovered this Mystery. For this Domestic
showing his Friend in his Masters Library the suppressed Edition of M. de
Meaux's Exposition with Marginal Notes, which he assured him were Written by
the hands of some of the Doctors of Sorbonne; the Friend desired to borrow the
Book, which the Servant consented to. So strange an accident made the borrower
use his utmost care to get a Copy of the First Edition, but there was such care
taken to suppress it, that all he could do was but to gather up some loose
Leaves, whereof he almost made an entire Book, and copyed what he wanted out of
M. Turenne's Original, which he then restored to the Servant; it is this same
Copy which Mr. Wake has, with his Certificate, that gathered it, and compared
it with the Mareschal's Copy.

It is not at all likely that Mr. Cramoisi, Director of the Printing House, at
the Louvre, should Print a Book of Importance, without the knowledge and
good will of the Author, that was a Bishop, and Tutor to the Dauphin, and a
great Favorite at Court; and it is more unlikely, that Mr. Cramoisi should
obtain the King's leave, and the Approbation of the French Prelates, for a
subreptitious Copy? And why did not M. de Meaux show his resentment for a
boldness of this nature? And how came he to give this Printer not only the
Corrected Copy, but also all the other Books that he made since?

We must examine but Fourteen places of the First Edition, taken notice of by
Dr. Wake, to see whether the alteration that M. de Meaux made in it, did only
concern the exactness and neatness of the style.

First Edit. p. 1. Thus it seems very proper to propose the Doctrine of the
Catholic Church (to the Reformers) in separating the Questions which the
Church has decided, from those which belong not to her Faith.

Second Edit. p. 1. It seems that there can no better way be taken than simply
to propose the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, and to distinguish them well
from those that are falsely imputed to her.

First Edit. p. 7, 8. The same Church Teaches, That all Religious Worship ought
to terminate in God, as its necessary end. So that the honor which the Church
gives to the blessed Virgin, and to the Saints, is only Religious, because this
honor is given to them only in respect to God, and for the love of him. And
therefore the honor we render our Saints, is so far from being blamable, as
our Adversaries would have it, because it is Religious, that it would deserve
blame if it were not so.

M. de Meaux has thought it expedient to blot out the last period, and to
express himself thus in his common Editions, p. 7. And if the honor that is
rendered to Saints can be called Religious, it is because it regards God.

In the same place, speaking of M. Daille, the Author expressed it after a very
ingenious manner, but little favorable to his cause; As for Mr. Daille, said
he, he thought that he ought to keep to the Three first Ages, wherein it is
certain that the Church then was exercised more in Suffering than Writing, and
has left many things, both in its Doctrine and Practice, which wants to be made
clearer. This Acknowledgment was of importance, and the Censurers had reason to
note it, and has not been seen since.

All the other Alterations are as considerable as these; and Dr. Wake protests
he could mention more, if he were minded to show all the places wherein the
Manuscripts differed from the common Editions.

The Author may judge, whether these be words, or things, that M. de Meaux has
corrected; but as to Father Cresset* it may be said, that this Bishop has
strained his boldness to such a degree, that none dares give him the Epithet it
deserves. Is it possible that this Author should not have heard of a great
Volume in Quarto, Writ against the profitable advice of the Blessed Virgin;
since the Pastoral Letter of the Bishop of Tournay, who approved this last
Book, has caused such long Disputes in France? Can it be supposed, that M. de
Meaux was ignorant that the Opinion of this Jesuit was contrary to his
Exposition? After M. de la Bastide reproached him with it, in his Answer to the
Advertisement. And that the Author of the General Reflections on his Exposition,
and M. Iurieu in his Preservative, have made great Extracts out of the Book of
The True Devotion. Since Mr. Arnaud laughed at Father Cresset, in his Answer to
the Preservative, and Mr. Iurieu refuted his Adversary, in the Iansenist
convicted of vain Sophistry.

That Mr. Imbert in his Letter to this Bishop, offered to refute the
Preservative, provided he might be secured, that no violence should be done
him, and that he might have the liberty of saying what he thought. In fine,
after that he himself Answered diverse passages of the Preservative, in his
Treatise of the Communion under both kinds.

Let us add to all this, what M. de Meaux had the confidence to advance in his
Pastoral Letter upon the Persecution of France: I do not wonder, says he, my
dear brethren, that you are come in such great numbers, and so easily into the
Church: none of you have suffered violence either in his Body or Goods. And so
far from suffering Torments, that you have not heard talk of any. I hear that
other Bishops say the same. Let this notorious falsehood be compared with the
Apology for the Persecution, which this Prelate made in a Letter to one of his
Friends, that I read my self, Writ and Signed by his own hand; The Original
whereof a certain Author proffered to show him. And it will be acknowledged,
that one may be very hard upon the Catholic Religion without committing so
gross a contradiction.

But why should we stay so long upon the discovering the mystery of the
Composition? the Gentleman had done it himself without thinking of it.
Confessing, that he weighed all his words, and racked his Invention to cheat
the simple. At least this is what they that understand French will soon
perceive, in reading this period of his Advertisement. In the mean time the
Italian Version was mended very exactly, and with as much care as a Subject of
that importance deserved, wherein one word turned ill might spoil all the Work.

Though one must be very dull to look upon these pious Cheats as a sincere
dealing, M. de Meaux was so fearful, lest he might be thought to abolish some
abuses, and to labor to reform his own Church, that he has lately given
evident proofs of the hatred that he always bore the Protestants, and which he
thought fit to hide under an affected mildness until the Dragoon Mission. It
was in the History of Variations that he unmasked himself, and showed him what
he was, by the Injuries and Calumnies which he cast upon the Protestants, and
has given a Model of the manner how he deserves to be treated.

There were Three Months past when Dr. Burnet, whom this Bishop attacked
without any cause, made a general Critique of all this History; to which he
adds some Reflections upon M. le Grand. It was translated into French, and had
been published long ago, had not M. le Grand busied himself in making a small
Book against a Letter of Dr. Burnet, and against the Extract of his History of
Divorce. The Author of this Bibliotheque had begun to Answer it, but this xi.
Tome of the Bibliotheque, which lay upon him alone, and which could not be put
by, made him discontinue; yet it is hoped, that the Public will lose nothing by
this delay, but may see once more, if God be pleased to lend him health, and
give him leisure to show, that M. de Meaux is none of the sinc^rest in the
World.

And yet this Prelate has subject to reason himself, since those who approve
his Works, have as little sincerity as himself. At least Mr. Wake shows, that
what the Cardinals Capisucchi and Bona teach in their Works is a very different
Doctrine from that of the Catholic Exposition, concerning the Invocation of
Saints, and the Worship of Images.

Dr. Wake's Adversaries were so long silent, that the Dispute was thought
ended; but at last they broke silence about the middle of the year 1687, when
was published a Reply to the Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the
Church of England, with a second Letter from M. de Meaux.

Dr. Wake a little after that made his 2d Defense, which he divided into two
parts; in the first he justifies all that he advanced concerning the
Expositions of M. de Meaux. He brings many Historical Proofs of the difference
between the old and new Papism, or between the Speculative Doctrine of M. de
Meaux, and of the other Doctors of the Catholic Church, and their common
practice. And examins in particular what Rome Teaches concerning the Worship of
Images. The Second Part runs upon the Nature and Object of the Divine Service;
upon the Invocation of Saints, and upon Images and Relics, and upon the
accusation of Idolatry, which the Protestants charge the Roman Church with.

III. M. de Meaux's Apologist believed, that to be even with Dr. Wake, he
should make a History of Controversies; and presently runs upon Generalities
that are not to the purpose; he speaks of the Roman Catholics Zeal, and of the
different methods that Rome has made use of to bring back those who have left
her Communion; but he has forgot the chiefest of them, at least that which had
most success, which is her Persecution. Then he comes to England, jumps from
the Monk Augustine to Henry the VIII. makes some Reflections upon the Duke of
Sommerset, and on Queen Elizabeth, and then, like Lightning, passes to the
Reign of Queen Mary, and then to James the 1 st to Charles the 2 d, and then to
James the 2 d.

These Preambles gave Dr. Wake occasion to speak of several remarkable things
which would be too tedious to mention here. It will be enough to Remark two of
the most important. The First relates to the Dissentions of the Episcopal Party
and the Presbyterians; and the other to the Murder of Charles the 1 st.

1. As to the First; He acknowledges that many of those whom the Persecution of
Q. Mary had Exiled, were obstinate in the Form of Religion which they saw
abroad; but that this Spirit of Schism was fomented by Roman Catholics, who
mix themselves with them, pretending to be of their number. In effect it was by
the Roman Catholics in 1588, that the Puritans begun to make a noise, the
Chief of them being Commin, Heath, Hallingham, Coleman, Benson, were all
Papists; who thus dissembled and disguised themselves, as appeared by a Letter
which dropped out of Heath's pocket. And it was discovered, that the Roman
Catholics had Colleges in Germany, France, Spain and Italy, wherein the
Students were brought up in Sciences and Mechanic Arts, and they exercised
twice a week, to Dispute for and against Independents, Anabaptists and Atheism
it self. After which they sent them to England, to play the best game that they
understood. A Jesuit of St. Omers acknowledged, that there were some of the
Fathers of their Society hid for Twenty years among Quakers, which is likely
enough, because the scruple these Fanatics make of Swearing, gives the Friars
the means of living among them, being so exempted from the Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy.

In 1625. the Jesuits published a Book, Entitled, Mysteria Politica, or the
Letters of some famous persons: designing to break the League that diverse
Princes of Europe made against the House of Austria; it contained Eight
Letters, equally injurious to France and England, to the Venetians, Hollanders
and Swissers. In the last, the Author that counterfeited the Protestant, forgot
nothing which he thought proper to give a mean Idea of King James, and to sow
division between this Prince his Son and the Princess Palatine; and between the
Lords of the Parliament, the Clergy of the Church of England, and the Puritan
Ministers.

Upon the Civil Wars of England, and the death of King Charles the First, Mr.
Wake acknowledges, that the fear of seeing Popery re-established, made the
People take Arms; who, since the Reformation, had always horror for this
Superstitious Worship. But he maintains, that the Papists were the first
Authors of the troubles. M. du Moulin; Doctor of Divinity, and Chaplain to King
Charles the II. accused the Roman Catholics with this a little after the
Re-establishment of this Prince; and not contented to prove it in his Answer to
the Philanax Anglicus, he offered to prove it legally, or by Law; there were
then many alive that were ready to Swear, that there was held a Consultation of
Cardinals and Doctors of Sorbonne, wherein it was declared, That it was lawful
for the English Roman Catholics to push the King on to his ruin, thereby to
endeavor the Change of Religion and Government. The Roman Catholics, instead
of taking this Challenge, made use of King Charles's Authority to hinder Mr.
Moulin to press for the decision of this Suit. And though the Book and
Accusation remained without Answer for 17 years. The Author renewed the
Challenge in a Second Edition of his Work, and dyed without being Answered,
none having Courage to undertake it. They that do not understand English will
find the most part of M. Moulin's proofs, in the Politics of the Clergy, in
the last endeavors of afflicted innocence. And in Mr. Iurieu's Parallel betwixt
Calvinism and Popery, with some new reasons of the Author, to which if we add
what Mr. Wake has here, the conjecture will be more than probable.

1. In the beginning of the Troubles, the King perceived that the Fanatics
were set on by the Papists. Their Principles, says he, in his Declaration
against the Rebels of Scotland, are those of the Jesuits; their Preachers
Sermons are the style of Becan, Scioppius and Eudaemon Joannes, from whom they
borrow their very Phrases. The pitiful Arguments of their Seditious Libels are
drawn word by word out of Bellarmin and Suarez. The means they use to make
Proselytes are the pure Stories and Inventions of the Jesuits, and false
Reports and Prophecyes, and pretended Inspirations of Women's Dreams; as if
Herod and Pilate were reconciled, and had joined to destroy Jesus Christ his
Worship and his Religion.

In 1640, there was a design discovered to the Archbishop of Canterbury, That
the Pope, the Cardinal of Richlieu, and several English Roman Catholics, but
especially the Jesuits, were engaged together, and that what they proposed,
was, to cause a Rebellion in Scotland, as was done a little after; this is
certain, for the Histories of those times have it all at length.

Sir William Boswel was then King Charles the First's Resident at the Hague, he
was told of this Conspiracy, and that the Roman Clergy misled the English,
giving them hopes of a Presbyterian Government. That there were Indulgences
from Rome, and Dispensations from the Pope, approved by a Congregation of
Cardinals, that suffered Scholars to be instructed to Dispute against the
Episcopal Party, and against the Liturgy of the Church of England. That in the
space of a years time 60 Priests and Friars went from France to England, to
Preach the Scotch Doctrine, and to endeavor to destroy the Bishops, whom they
looked upon as the only Supporters of the Crown.

Archbishop Bramhall being in France some time after the King's death, learned
there how this business was managed. In 1646, about 100 Popish Clergymen
crossed the Seas, and being Mustered in the Parliament Army, they kept
Correspondence with the Catholics that served the King, and acquainted them
with what passed every day. The ensuing year, having deliberated among
themselves, whether the King's death would not be an advantage to their Cause,
and main Business; they concluded in the Affirmative. But some Priests and
Friars were of opinion, to Consult the Universities, and among others, that of
Sorbonne, which made Answer, That for the good of Religion, and Interest of the
Church, it was lawful to alter the Government, especially in a Heretic
Country, and that so they might take off the King with a safe Conscience.

Father Salmone in his History of the Troubles of England, Printed in France,
with the King's Privilege, makes mention of two Companys of Walloon Catholics
which the Parliament had in it is Service; and that at Edge-Hill-Fight, there
were many Popish Priests found among the dead of their Army.

After all these Proofs, if one does but consider the Principles of both
Religions, it will be easy to find the true Authors of King Charles's Death.
It is certain that the Reformed had not Pastors at the Court of Vienna, nor in
Italy, nor in Spain, to cause Rebellions, or beset the Prince, and make them
violate the Privileges of their Subjects. But it must be confessed that they
were for a Commonwealth, as their Adversaries accuse them, and not that they
did not obey a King as freely as they would States; it was because they loved
Peace and Liberty, and that after the Example of Commonwealths, they sought
quietness, suffering others to do as they please. Their Doctrine and Discipline
dispose them equally for a Peaceable Life. All their Ministers may Marry, and
because this is a Grave and Staid State, there are few but do Marry. When one
is engaged in such firm Ties, there are but few that think of Removing, or
Seeing and Traveling the World: whereas those that serve the Roman Church have
no greater engagement than that of a Mistress, which they may break at
pleasure, and which they always do when a good occasion serves, or when they
are sent into other places by their Superiors.

Moreover, the Popish Conspirations against Q. Elizabeth and King James the
First, without mentioning other Princes, make it more suspicious that the Monks
were the contrivers of King Charles's death. What could not they do against a
King who did not love them, and that is certainly dead in the Profession of the
Protestant Religion; since they have Sacrificed the Repose and Restitution of
both his Sons, whereof the latter has declared in Ascending up to the Throne,
that he was of their Communion? After a step of that consequence, one should
think, that the Roman Church had reason to be satisfied, and that they should
study to blot out the remembrance of her past Cruelties, by a more moderate and
mild conduct.

But on the contrary it is well known, how far the Jesuits have pushed this
easy Prince; and his Retractations are undoubted proofs of the Infringments
they made him guilty of; they may be seen in the Memorials of the English
Protestants, and in his Highness the Prince of Orange's, (now King William's)
Declaration, which now are very common. But if these Books, and several others,
were lost, and that one had but the King's own Writing, they would be
sufficient to condemn that Society. The Proofs that were brought that the
Prince of Wales was but a CHEAT, deserved to be otherwise destroyed, than by
Witnesses, incapable of being heard, to Swear according to the Laws of the
Country. Or of such as only heard a Woman Groan, which they did not see; or
have seen a Child newborn, without being sure that it was the Queen's. To
examine a business of this consequence, and to prevent Civil Wars, there ought
to be a Free Parliament, according to the Custom of the Nation. And though all
England desired it, yet the Roman Catholics stayed the King a long time from
calling it, to give all along the marks of their bad intentions.

IV. It is time to give an Idea of each of these Treatises.

In the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, Dr. Wake follows
the Bishop of Condom's Order, and in explaining his Doctrine, he shows wherein
it agrees, or disagrees with Popery, as Mr. de Meaux explains it, and according
as the other Doctors Teach it.

There is a Preface in the beginning, where the Author examins the Principle by
which the Expositor pretends to justify the Tenets of his Church, which is,
that it is unjust to impute the consequences of a Tenet to Adversaries that
deny them. Which is true, when they deny as well in deed as in word. And thus
the Contra-Remonstrancers are to be excused, that make God the Author of Sin;
for this Inference can lawfully be made out of their System of Absolute
Predestination: Nor can it be imputed to the Lutherans, that some of them
believe, that Jesus Christ ceased to be Man, and was Transformed into a Deity
after his Ascension, though this is a clear consequence from the Doctrine of
Ubiquity. The reason is not that Contra-Remonstrants fear these consequences;
but because they do not influence neither their Worship, nor their Practice;
and because they Teach contrary Doctrines to these Principles. If in stead of
this the first had maintained, that a Man was but a Machine, that had neither
Liberty, Vice nor Virtue, nor Punishment nor Reward; and that all is necessary
to God himself: And if the other affirms, that Jesus Christ Interceded not for
us, and takes no care of his Church; and that he pities not our Infirmities,
having suffered them himself; and that he will not come at last to Judge all
Mankind; then there would be Reason to call the one Atheists, and the other no
Christians: but every one knows that they are far from these impious thoughts.

The Protestants accuse the Romish Church of Idolatry, and for having recourse
to other Saviors besides Jesus Christ; but the Moderators make a noise of
that, as if it were a heinous Calumny, and maintain that it is only God that is
to be worshipped with Religious Worship, and that we are not saved but through
the Merits of Jesus Christ. The Reformed show them, that they invoke Saints,
and that they worship them and the Cross, Images and Relics, as the Pagans did
their Heroes, their Demons, and inferior Gods, their Statues, their Idols,
etc. That they believe they satisfy Divine Justice, by Indulgences, Vows, and
Pilgrimages, and that according to them the Merit of these Actions, and of the
Saints, together with them of Jesus Christ reconcile Sinners to God. They prove
that this is the Doctrine which their Divines, Popes and Councils teach, not
only in their great Volumes for the Learned, but also for the rest in their
Catechisms and Prayer Books, and other Books of Devotion for the use of the
People; that it is not only the practice of the Laity and of some ignorant and
superstitious Priests, but also of all the Roman Church in their Rituals
Breviaries, Missals, and other Public Offices, that it never punished such as
pushed the Superstitions to an Excess, which the Moderator seems to blame: But
that far from having a mind to redress these Abuses, she prosecutes such as are
suspected to have a design to abolish them, as the Iansenists and Quietists,
though these two at bottom are but idle People, and of little sincerity. Would a
Magistrate set a Murderer at liberty simply because he denied a Deed that is
well proved, or because he has the face to maintain, that the killing a Man at
12 a Clock is neither Murder nor a Crime punishable by Law? On the contrary,
this Criminal would deserve a double Chastisement, as a Murderer and as a
Disturber of the Public Peace in teaching a Doctrine that is contrary to Civil
Society.

Because M. Daille acknowledges the Fundamental Points, which the Reformed
teach, M. de Meaux pretends to justify his Church, and prove it is Purity, tho
this acknowledgement serves only to state the Question between both Parties;
and to show that the Question is not whether the Fundamental Doctrine of
Protestants be true, seeing that is confessed on both sides; but the Question
is to know, whether what the Roman Catholics hold over and above be Articles
necessary to Salvation as they pretend, or whether they are contrary to the
truth that both hold as Divine, and whether they ought to be cast away for this
reason, as the Reformed have done.

It is according to this method that Dr. Wake explains the Articles exposed by
M. de Condom, marking in each what the Protestants approve, and what they
condemn in the Tenets of Rome, and bringing some of the chief reasons that make
them remark these Distinctions.

V. We said before, that we were not willing to enter upon the particulars of
Controversies; but because the Roman Church continually fomenting the Divisions
of Protestants, have persuaded some illiterate People, that the Church of
England agrees in a great many more Points with it than with the other
Protestants. We shall mention her Sentiments here according to Dr. Wake's
Exposition upon the Articles, wherein the Roman Catholics brag of this
pretended Conformity: As First, The Invocation of Saints. Secondly,
Justification. Thirdly, The Necessity of Baptism. Fourthly, Confirmation.
Fifthly, Orders. Sixthly, Real Presence. Seventhly, Tradition. Eighthly,
Authority of the Church. Ninthly, That of the Fathers. Tenthly, The Question if
one can be saved in the Roman Church? Eleventhly, If it be Idolatry?


First, The Invocation of Saints, Dr. Wake speaking in the name of his Church,
says, it is an extravagant Practice invented at pleasure, and so far from being
contained in Scripture, that it is several ways contrary to it. It is true,
that according to an innocent ancient Custom, we make mention before the
Communion Table of Saints that dyed in the Communion of our Church, thanking
God for the grace he did them, and praying him to give us the grace to follow
their Example: But this respect we bear their Memory, does not hinder us from
condemning a Practice that M. de Meaux seems to have omitted, and which cannot
agree with us at all, which is, that Roman Catholics recommend the Offering of
the Host to God by the Merit of the Saints, whose Relics are upon the Altar;
as if Jesus Christ whom they pretend to Sacrifice, needed S. Bathilde, or
Potentiana's Recommendation to become agreeable to his Father.

Secondly, Jesus by his Passion has satisfied Divine Justice for us, and
therefore God pardons us all our Sins through the Merits of his Son, and by an
Effect of his Good Will treats us with an Alliance of grace, and by Virtue of
this Alliance solely founded on the Death and Passion of Jesus Christ, he sends
us his Holy Spirit, and calls us to Repentance. If we answer this Calling, God
justifies us through his pure Goodness, that is to say, he forgives us all our
past faults, and gives us the grace to obey his Precepts better, and better,
and will Crown us in Heaven if we persevere in his Alliance; he grants us all
these Graces, not for any good Quality that he sees in us, or for any good we
do, but only in virtue of the Satisfaction and Merits, of his Son that are
applied to us by Faith.

Thirdly, Though our Church take all manner of care to hinder Childrens dying
without Baptism, rather than to determine what would become of them; they died
without it; we cannot nevertheless but condemn the want of Charity of Roman
Catholics that excludes them from Salvation.

Fourthly, The Church of England does not believe that Confirmation is a
Sacrament, nor that the use of Chrism, though of an ancient Custom, was an
Apostolical Institution; but because the Imposition of Hands is an ancient
Custom, and comes from the Apostles; the English have kept it, and according to
their Discipline the Bishops only have liberty to administer it. The Prelate
that does it, addresses his Prayer to God, to beg of him to strengthen with his
Spirit him that he puts his Hands upon, and that he may protect him from
Temptations, and that he may have the grace to fulfill the Conditions of his
Baptism, which he that he prays for ratifies, and confirms with his Promises.

Fifthly, Nor are the Orders a Sacrament according to the Church of England,
because they are not common to all Christians; but she believes that no one
ought to put himself upon the Function of a Minister without Ordination, and
that it belongs to the Bishop only to confer it; and she allows the Distinction
of Orders: And though there is none under a Deacon, because the Scripture makes
mention of none; yet she acknowledges that they are very ancient.

Sixthly, As for the Real Presence, though Dr. Wake treats of it at length; we
will omit speaking of it until we come to the XII. Article, where there are
many Books seen that concern this Subject.

Seventhly, We receive, says the English Expositor, with equal Veneration all
that comes from the Apostles, let it be by Scripture or Tradition, provided we
be assured that they are the true Authors of the Doctrine or Practice
attributed to them; so that when we are shown, that a Tradition was received in
all Ages and by all Churches, then we are ready to receive it, as having the
Character of an Apostolical Institution. So our Church does not reject
Tradition, but only the Tenets and Superperstitions which Rome pretends to
justify after this way.

Eighthly, And as for the Authority of the Universal Church of all Ages, the
English acknowledges, 1. That they have received Scripture from their Hands,
and it is chiefly for this Authority, that they look upon Solomon's Song to be
Canonical, and reject other Books Apocryphal, which perhaps they would have
received with as much ease. These Books have our respect even before we know by
reading whether they be worthy of the Spirit of God; but this Reading confirms
us in the respect which the Authority of the Church gives unto them, as to the
Holy Writings.

II. If there had been an Universal Tradition not contested, that had come from
the Apostles to us, concerning the meaning of the Holy Books, as concerning
their number, the Church of England would receive it also; but she does not
believe that a particular Church, such as that of Rome, should usurp this
Privilege, nor that it ought to force others to follow the Interpretations
which she gives of the Passages of Scripture.

III. When any Disputes arise concerning Faith, the best way to appease them is
to assemble a Council; but it does not follow, that such an Assembly can say as
the Assembly of the Apostles at Jerusalem, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and
to us, nor that it is Infallible, or that it is Canons are not subject to
Correction.

IV. Dr. Wake goes on, and says, When we say, I believe in the Holy Catholic
Church, we do not only understand, that Jesus Christ has planted a Christian
Church which is to last to the end of the World, but also that the Son of God
will conserve either among the Christians, or in the Universal Church, Truth
enough to denominate it such a Church; that is, he will never suffer that
Truths requisite for Salvation should be unknown in any place. So that though the
Universal Church can err, it does not follow, that it can sink altogether, nor
become wholly erroneous, because then it would cease to be; but such a
particular Church as that of Rome, can err and fall into utter Apostasy. And
though the Fundamental Points be clearly contained in Scripture, and that it is
very hard that one Man alone should gainsay the Opinion of all the Church,
nevertheless, if this Man was certainly convinced, that his Opinion was
grounded upon the undoubted Authority of the Word of God, we would be so far
being afraid to bear with him, that we all agree, that the most glorious Action
that St. Athanasius ever did, was that he alone maintained Christ's Divinity
against the Pope, the Councils, and all the Church.

V. And so, tho we acknowledge that God has subjected Christians to the
Government of the Church for Peaces sake, and to preserve Unity and Order, and
that she has power to prescribe to her Children what Doctrines are and are not
to be publicly taught in her Communion, yet we believe that the Holy Scripture
is the only Support of our Faith, and the last and infallible Rule by which the
Church and we are to govern our selves.

Ninthly, That there are some that think that the Church of England makes the
Fathers of the three First Ages Idols, and equals them in Authority to the Holy
Scripture: But Mr. Wake will undeceive them; for, says he, Though we have
appealed to the Churches of the first Ages for new Proofs of the truth of our
Doctrine; it is not that we think that the Doctors of those times had more
right to judge of our Faith, than those had that followed them, but it is
because that after a serious examination, we have found that as for what
concerns the common Belief that is among us, they have believed and practiced
the same things without adding other Opinions or Superstitions that destroy
them, wherein they have acted conformably to their and our Rule, the Word of
God; notwithstanding it cannot be denied, but that they effectually fell into
some wrong Opinions, as that of the Millenaries and Infant Communion, which are
rejected by both Parties.

Tenthly, Whether one may be saved in the Roman Church; the English think that
as she yet conserves the Fundamental Doctrines, those that live in her Bosom
with a disposition to learn and leave off their pernicious Errors and profess
all the truth that they will discover, may be saved through the grace of God, and
Faith in Jesus Christ, and by a general Repentance, that puts their Errors in
the number of the Sins they do not know of. But that ill use may not be made of
this charitable Grant, the Expositor limits it as follows.

I. That it is harder to be saved in the Communion of this Church, since the
Reformation than it was before, because its Errors were not so well known, nor
so solidly refuted, which rendered the ignorance excusable.

II. That they that live among Protestants and in a Country wherein they may
learn and make public and open profession of the Truth, are more condemnable
than the other.

III. That Priests are yet more than Laics. In a word the Protestants hope
that the good Men of the Roman Church will be saved; but they have no
assurance, that they are to be saved: Whereas they are assured, That they will
be saved that live Christian-like in their own Communion. They do not know,
whether God will condemn Roman Catholics for the Errors they professed, taking
them for truth; but they are assured, that the Crime of those that being
convinced of Popish Superstitions, leave the Protestants through motives of
Interest and Ambition, and maintain Tyrannical and Superstitious Tenets against
their Consciences, deserve no pardon.

Eleventhly, As for Idolatry, the Homilies of the Church of England accuse that
of Rome, as well as the English Doctors who lived under Edward the VI. and
Queen Elizabeth. The Catholics object, that the Learned of this Kingdom
changed Opinion in the Reign of King James the First, and begun to maintain,
that the Church of Rome was not Idolatrous; but these Gentlemen are so unlucky
in Proofs, that of six Authors which they quote, the Archbishop Laud, Iackson,
Feilding, H^ylin, Hammond, and M. Thorndike: There is not one but has writ the
contrary.

These are the Points whereon the Enemies of Protestants would make the Church
of England pass for half Papists, tho there is not one but was taught by other
Reformed, excepting Episcopacy. And this Government is so ancient, that even
those who think Presbytery better, ought not to condemn for some little
difference in Discipline a Church that is otherwise very pure, unless they are
minded to anathematize St. Ignatius, St. Clement, St. Polycarp, St. Irenaeus,
St. Cyprian, and the whole Church of the second and third Age, and a great part
of the first.

Without question the Episcopal Clergy of England, have the like Charity for
Presbyterians. I will not allege the Testimonies of Modern Doctors, nor of
such as were accused of having favored the pretended Puritans; we see the
Marks of its mildness and moderation toward all, excep^ing some turbulent
Spirits amongst 'em, which indeed are too common in all Societies. If there
ever was a time wherein the Church of England differed from Presbytery, and had
reason so to do; it was in the middle of the Reign of K. Iamss the First; and
notwithstanding, you may see how the Bishop of Eli speaks, writing for the
King, and by his Order, against Cardinal Bellarmin.

One may see how much the Protestants of this Country agree, by Harmony of
their Confessions, where each Church acknowledges wherein she agrees with the
rest. Then lay aside those odious Names, seek our Professions of Faith in our
Confessions. The Reproach you make us concerning the Puritans, is altogether
absurd, because their number is but small, and the most moderate among them
agree with us in the chief Articles of Religion. The Scotch Puritans Confession
has no Error in Fundamental Points; so that the King might say with reason,
That the Established Religion of Scotland was certainly true.

And as for the rest, there is no reason to suspect Dr. Wakes Testimony; for the
Bishop of London, and the Archbishop of Canterbury, have approved his Books:
None of the other Doctors contradicted him; and some sided with him against
Roman Catholics. And these last have not accused him of swerving from the
common Doctrine of the Church of England, only in the Article of the necessity
of Baptism; and he proves by several Authorities in his Defense of his
Exposition, what he therein advanced.

At the end of this Defense are several curious Pieces: 1. A Comparison betwixt
the Ancient and Modern Popery. 2. An Extract of the Sentiments of Father
Cresset, and Cardinal Bona, concerning the Devotion to the Blessed Virgin. 3.
The Letter of Mr. Imbert to Mr. de Meaux. 4. The Epistle of St. Chrysostom to
Caesarius, with the Preface of Mr. Bigot, which was suppressed at Paris in
1680. and a Dissertation of Dr. Wake upon Apollinarius's Sentiments and
Disciples.


A DISCOURSE of the Holy EUCHARIST, wherein the Real Presence and Adoration of
the Host is treated on, to serve for an Answer to two Discourses, printed at
Oxford upon this Subject. With a Historical Preface upon the same Matter. At
London, 1687. p. 127. in 4to.
DR. Wake, Minister of the Holy Gospel at London, who is said to be the Author
of this Book, gives, First, In few words the History and Origin of
Transubstantiation, as it has been ordinarily done amongst Protestants.
Secondly, He names several Illustrious Persons of the Romish Church, who have
been accused of not believing the Real Presence, or Transubstantiation, to wit,
Peter Picherel, Cardinal du Perron, Barnes, an English Benedictine, and Mr. de
Marca, Archbishop of Paris, who gave his absolute Sentiment hereon, in one of
his Posthume Dissertations, though in the Edition of Paris; the places wherein he
said, it have been changed or blotted out. But it could not be hindered, but
that this Work having appeared before Persons, took notice of these Sentiments;
some entire Copies thereof have fallen into the hands of Protestants, who got
it printed in Holland in 1669. without cutting off any thing. To these Authors
are joined F. Sirmond the Jesuit, who believed the Impanation, and who had
made a Treatise upon it; which has never been printed, and whereof some
persons have yet Copies. M. de Marolles, who got a Declaration printed in form
in 1681. by which he declared, that he believed not the Real Presence, and
which was inserted here in English: And in short, the Author of the Book
Entitled, Sure and honest means of Converting Heretics, whom we dare not
affirm to be the same who published a Treatise of Transubstantiation, which the
Fifth Tome of the French Bibliotheque speaks of, p. 455. The Cartesians, and
several others, are suspected of not believing the same no more than the
Protestants. So that if the Catholics cite some Reformed for them, Protestants
also want not Catholic Authors, who have been of their Opinion. Thirdly, The
Author shows the dangerous Consequences which arise, according to the
Principles of the Romish Church, from the incredulity of so many Men of
Knowledge, be it in respect to Mass, or in respect of the Infallibility and
Authority of the Church.

The Treatise it self is divided into two parts. The first contains two
Chapters and an Introduction, wherein is expounded the Nature and Original of
the Eucharist, much after the Ideas of Lightfoot. In the first Chapter
Transubstantiation is at large refuted by Scripture, by Reason, and the
Fathers. We shall make no stay at it, because this Matter is so well known. The
Second Chapter is employed to refute what Mr. Walker said, concerning the
Opinions of several Doctors of the Church of England, upon the Real Presence.
Dr. Wake at first complains, That his Adversary in that only repeats Objections
which his Friend T. G. had before proposed in his Dialogues, and which a
Learned Man had refuted in an Answer to these Dialogues, printed at London in
1679. As to what concerns the Faith of the Church of England, which he
maintains to have been always the same, since the Reign of Edward. He reduces
it to this, according to the Author, who refuted T. G. viz. That she believes
only a Real Presence of the invisible Power, and grace of Jesus Christ, which
is in, and with the Elements; so that in receiving them with Faith, it produces
Spiritual and real Effects upon the Souls of Men. As Bodies taken by Angels,
continues he, may be called their Bodies, whilst they keep them; and as the
Church is the Body of Jesus Christ, because his Spirit animates and liveneth
the Souls of the Believing; so the Bread and Wine after the Consecration, are
the Real Body of Jesus Christ, but spiritually and mystically.

He gives not himself the trouble to prove the solidity of this comparison by
Scripture; and when he comes to the Examination of the Authors, that Mr. Walker
has quoted; he contents himself to produce other Passages, where they do not
speak so vigorously of the participation of the substance of Jesus Christ,
which according to Calvin, descends not from Heaven: The virtue of the Mind
being sufficient to penetrate through all impediments, and to surmount the
distance of Places.

He cites several other places of Beza, of Martyr, and many English Doctors; by
which it appears, that they did not believe the Body of Jesus Christ properly
descended from Heaven into the Eucharist, or is in diverse places at the same
time, though they say we are nourished hereby through Faith, but after an
incomprehensible manner. Yet it must be granted, that if these Great Men
understood nothing by nourishing our selves by the flesh of Jesus Christ, but
to believe that we are saved by his Sacrifice, and, to feed our selves with
this hope, or to receive his Spirit, it was not necessary to tell us of a
miraculous Union of our Spirits with the Body of Jesus Christ, notwithstanding
the distance of places; the Spirit of God being every where, and Faith having
no relation to local distance, there is nothing in the Spiritual eating of the
Body of Jesus Christ, taken in the sense we have abovementioned, of
Miraculous, nor of Incomprehensible, more than in other acts of Piety, and
other Graces which God gives unto us. Whether we suppose this, or any other
method to expound the eating of the Body of Jesus Christ; there would be no
danger to the Reformation, to say, that these Learned Men have not had an Idea
altogether distinct thereupon, or that their Expressions are not exact.
Although it were granted that they mistook in some things, it would not follow
that the Romish Church could have justly rejected all their Doctrines; or that
Protestants are in the wrong, by inviolably retaining their Sentiments, as far
as they are conformable to Holy Scripture; and to abandon that wherein they
might be deceived. We do not make a profession of believing, that those who err
in one thing, are deceived in all; or of rejecting every thing they have said,
because they have not perceived the truth clearly enough in some things. Thus
all the Objections of this nature might be ruined, without undertaking to
defend indifferently all that the Reformers may have said, seeing it is agreed
on, that the Protestant Religion is not founded upon their Authority, and that
they might be mistaken in inconsiderable things, without its being in danger.
But Dr. Wake thought not convenient to act in this manner. He believes that the
Reformed never changed their Opinions hereon; and for the Divines of Edward and
Elizabeth, he maintains that they were perfectly of the same opinion; which he
proves by a passage of the History of the Reformation, by Dr. Burnet.

In the Second Part, which is wholly included in the 3d Chapter, he answers
first to what Mr. Walker affirms to have been allowed by Protestants, and
maintained against him, that he has not well understood the words of some of
the Authors whom he cited, that say very well, that in Communicating, Jesus
Christ ought to be Adored, but not as Corporally present under the Species of
Bread and Wine. As for Forbes and Marc-Antony de Dominis, it is agreed on, that
the desire they had of reconciling Religions, made them say too much. Thorndyke
speaks not less vigorously, but upon a Hypothesis quite different from that of
the Roman Church, seeing he believed that the Bread is called the Body of Jesus
Christ, and the Wine his Blood; because by the Consecration they are
Hypostatically united to the Divinity of Jesus Christ, as well as to his
Natural Body. It was spoken of in the First Part. To oppose to the Catholic
Author, Doctors of his own Party; they say, that Thomas, Paludanus and
Catharin, maintains, that it was an enormous Idolatry to Adore the Sacrament
without believing Transubstantiation. Thus, although it is agreed on, that if a
Consecrated Host is truly Adorable, one would not be guilty of Idolatry, if one
Adored one which should not be Consecrated, thinking it once would be so: It Is
incredible that the Reformed Religion can receive so much prejudice hereby, as
the Authority of the Catholic Doctors who have been cited; because the
Reformed deny that a Host can be Adored, whether it be Consecrated or not. As
to the Grounds of this Subject, he sends us in his Preface to a Book,
Entitled, A Discourse concerning the Adoration of the Host, Printed at London,
1685.

In the Second place, The Catholic Doctrine is briefly examined; but as there
is none who has not read diverse Treatises upon this Subject, we shall insist
no longer upon it.

ORIGINES BRITANNICAE, Or, the Antiquities of the British Churches; with a
Preface concerning some pretended Antiquities relating to Britain, in
vindication of the Bishop of St. Asaph, by Dr. Stillingfleet. London, 1685, in
Fol. p. 364.
WE should speak of the Preface of this Work, wherein the Author refutes the
Opinion of the Scots, concerning the Antiquity of their Kings, if there had not
been an Extract made In the 13 th Tom. of the Vniv. Bib. p. 169.
of a Book, wherein it is already done, and the Principal reasons related with
much fidelity. It shall suffice to say in general, that our Prelate in it
defends the Bishop of St. Asaph; who, in his Relation of the Ancient
Ecclesiastical Government in Great Britain and in Ireland has shown;

1. That the Scots could not be in Great Britain, so soon as they say.

2. That the Historians, from whom this is maintained, are not of sufficient
validity for one to rely upon. As the Scots may be pardoned the zeal they have
for their Country, their Neighbors likewise may be suffered to endeavor the
refuting them, if it be necessary. It Is a contestation, which as Dr.
Stillingfleet observes, will not be decided neither by a Combat, nor a Process;
and which has no influence in matters of Religion, or State. That which
concerns the Antiquities of the British Churches is more considerable, by the
connection, which this matter has with the important Controversies, as it will
appear hereafter. This nevertheless is but the Proof of a greater Work, where
the Author endeavors to clear the most important difficulties of Ecclesiastical
History. Judging, that to Write a complete Ecclesiastical History is a design
too great for one Man to accomplish: he has only undertaken to clear some
parts thereof, and thought he was obliged to begin with that which concerns the
Antiquities of the Church whereof he is a Member. This Book is divided into
Five great Chapters, the Abridgment of which you have here.

1. It has been believed for a long time in England, that the Gospel was
Preached here in Tyberius's Reign. But if the short time be considered, betwixt
the Resurrection of our Lord, and the death of this Emperor, and that it is
thought during a long while, the Apostles Preached the Gospel only to the Jews;
it will be hard to suppose, that in this little distance persons came from
Judea into Britain to Preach the Gospel. Sirmond de 2 Dionys. cap. 1.
Some of the Learned of the Church of Rome have, by the same Reason, refuted
the Fabulous Tradition, which brings Lazarus and his Sisters at the same time
into Provence.

The strongest reason to persuade us, that the Gospel was so soon Preached in
England, is drawn from a passage of Gildas's, Tom. 5* f. 350. and 8, and 216.
which was not well understood. Interea glaciali frigore rigenti Insulae, and
veluti longiori Terrarum Recessu, soli visibili non proximae, verus ille non de
firmamento solum (Dr. Stillingfleet reads* Sol) sed de summa etiam (those who
read Solum for Sol, have also added this Etiam, for the clearing of the sense)
coelorum arce tempora cuncta excedente, universo orbi praefulgidum sui coruscum
ostendens tempore, ut scimus, summo Tiberii Caesaris (quo absque ullo
impedimento, ejus propagabatur Religio, comminata, senatu nolente, a Principe
morte dilatoribus Militum ejusdem) radios suos primum indulget, id est, sua
praecepta Christus. These words of Gildas were taken until now, as if he meant
that the Gospel was Preached in England toward the end of Tiberius's Reign.
But thus the Bishop of Worcester understands them. Jesus Christ, the true Sun,
who, as it is known, made his Light to shine over all the Universe, toward the
end of Tiberius 's Reign, at which time his Religion was propagated, without
hinderance, in spite of the Senate, because this Prince threatened those with
death that should accuse the Christians; Jesus Christ, I say, made his Sunbeams
to shine, to wit, his Precepts, not from the Firmament, but the highest place
of the Heavens, (and which was from all Eternity) upon this frozen Island,
distant from the visible Sun. Gildas speaks of two several times, wherein the
visible Sun appeared; the one toward the end of Tiberius's Reign, at which it
shined to the view of the whole World: and the other that it particularly
appeared in England, and which he marks by the Particle interea. This word
relates to the time whereof he speaks, to wit, that in which Suetonius Paulinus
Conquered the Queen Boadicea, which happened toward the middle of Nero's
Reign, about Twenty years after that Claudius had sent A. Plautius to reduce
England into the form of a Province.

The Monks of the last Ages, fruitful in Ancient Histories, affirmed, that
Joseph of Arimathea came from Glassenbury, where he founded a Monastery,
Preaching there the Gospel. In a time, wherein all that came from these pious
Liars was believed, this Fabulous History was taken for an ancient Tradition;
but the Bishop of Worcester easily shows it is supported only by the Authority
of such Men and actions as are very suspicious, and accompanied with ridiculous
circumstances.

Nevertheless he believes it may be proved by good Authorities, and maintained
by probable circumstances, that Christianity entered into England in the time of
the Apostles. Eusebius Them. Evangel. l. 3. c. 7.
positively affirms, that these Holy Men Preached the Gospel in the British
Isles. Theodoret T. 4. Sermon. 9.
reckons the Britans amongst those People Converted by the Apostles. St. Jerome
De Script. Eccles.
says, that St. Paul, after his Imprisonment, Preached the Gospel in the West,
in occidentis partibus; by which he seems to understand England, as well as St.
Clement, who says, that St. Paul went to the farthest part of the West;. Terms
which Dr. Stillingfleet proves to have been commonly taken for Great Britain.
He shows after that, by the History of St. Paul's Life, that this Apostle had
time to come into England; and that he might have been persuaded to have taken
this Journey, because this part of Great Britain was then reduced into a
Province. There is also some likelihood that Pomponia Graecina, Wife to
Plautius, was a Christian; Tacitus Annal. 13. c. 32.
assuring us, that she was accused of a Strange Superstition, and that she
lived in a continual Melancholy. If this Lady was a Christian, she might have
informed St. Paul what state England was in, and encouraged him to come hither.
He might likewise have been instructed by those, whom Plautius led Prisoners to
Rome. True it is, that it has been said, that St. Peter and some other Apostles
were in England, but these Traditions appear altogether Fabulous; and if any
came it was undoubtedly St. Paul, according to the Testimony of St. Clement, of
whom we have spoken.

II. To pursue the Ecclesiastical History of England, our Prelate undertakes in
the 2 d. Chapter Page 49.
to Collect what is found in the Ancients, about the space of time, from the
Apostles to the First Council of Nice.

The Principal Proofs from whence we conclude there were Christians in that
time in England, are the Testimonies of Tertullian Cont. Iudaeos, c. 7.
and Origin, In Ezech. Hom. 14. in Luc. 1 Hom. 6.
which the Author defends, and Expounds at length. Many of the Writers of the
last Ages, said, that a King of England, named Lucius, was Converted to
Christianity, in the time of M. Aurelius, and Lucius Verus. But suppose this
true, in the Main, there are diverse circumstances, which are really false; as
when this Lucius is made King of all England, which was, at that time, a Roman
Province. Our Prelate believes there might be a Christian Prince of that Name,
in some place of England, and whom the Romans suffered to Reign, because he was
of their side; such as might have been the Descendants of one Cogidunus, who
favored them. That this place of England perhaps was the County of Sussex,
where there is no Monument of the Romans. This being so, it may easily be
conceived, that Lucius had heard Discourses of the Christian Religion by some
ancient Britans, or Soldiers of the Army, which M. Aurelius brought hither, and
which had been delivered from an eminent danger, by the Prayers of the
Christians that were in it, as the Emperor himself said Tertul. Apol. cap. 5.
in one of his Letters. After that, Lucius might send (as Tradition has it)
Messengers to Eleutherius Bishop of Rome, to be better Instructed, because of
the great Commerce which was betwixt England and Rome. If Persons had been
satisfied to have related this History after this manner, it may be none would
have called it in question; but the Lies wherewith it is stuffed, the better to
maintain it, have rendered, according to the Remark of the Author, doubtful and
suspicious, that which may be true in it. Others will not fail to add to this,
that in the Conjectures that are always made in the Enquiry after these
Antiquities, founded upon the Traditions of as great Liars as the Monks of the
past Ages; that in these Conjectures, I say, Si trapassano i confini del vero,
per scrivere negli ampii spatii del possibile, cose incerte and non seguite,
Idea dell' Vngheria in the Preface.
according to an Italian Author.

And also the silence of Gildas, who informed us of all he knew of the
Antiquities of England, yet speaks not one word of this Lucius, which renders
this History very suspicious, even in what appears most possible in it.

Our Prelate proves there were Christians in England, in the time of
Dioclesian, and that several suffered Martyrdom in it; though the Persecution
could not last long here, seeing Constantius, Father to Constantine, stopped
it. Constantius dying at York, and his Son being declared Caesar by the Army,
the Christian Religion was secure: we find the Names of Three Bishops of Great
Britain, who Subscribed to the Council of Arles in CCCXIV. The Author believes
there were a great many more; and that those Three were sent by the Bishops of
the Three Provinces, for all were never at any of the Councils, which would
have been too numerous, if every one had gone thither. He believes also, that
there was a continual Succession of Bishops in England, from the Apostles till
that time. Some Monks have thought, that Bishops were Established in England in
imitation of the Flamines, and Archiflamines of the Heathens; but Dr.
Stillingfleet shows it is but a Dream, and that the first Pagan Hierarchy was
established by Maximinus, after the Model of the Christians, which was much
more Ancient.

Speaking of the Council of Arles, the Author shows, that its Canons were sent
to the Bishop of Rome, not to Confirm them, as Baronius maintains, but to
Publish them. Quae decrevimus, say these Fathers, in Communi Coneilio,
charitati tuae significare, ut omnes sciant, quid in futurum observare debeant.
To this he joins the Canons of the Council, which he reduces to certain Heads,
and expounds, in a few words, particularly the Third De his qui arma projiciunt
in pace, who ought to be suspended from the Communion. If an Allegorical sense
might be given to these words, our Bishop believes they may be expounded of the
Christians, who, in the time wherein the Persecution ceased, grew more
indifferent, as to their manner of living, and less conformable to the
Discipline which they had kept before. But if they are understood Literally,
they may refer to the Christian Soldiers, who would leave the Army, when there
was no fear of being constrained to any Idolatrous act, in serving the Emperor,
as they had been under the Heathen Princes. Constantine offered to dismiss all
the Soldiers that desired it. The Fathers of the Council might fear that all
the Christians would abandon his Armies, and that afterward it should be
supplied with Pagans; which could have been fatal to Christianity: So the
Bishops assembled at Arles, and thought they ought to prevent this accident, in
suspending from the Communion such Christian Soldiers as quitted the Service.

III. After having P. 88.
shown, That there were Bishops in England, before the Council of Nice; the
Author speaks of the State, wherein the Churches of the same Island were after
this Council to that of Rimini. Although in the Subscriptions, which we still
have of the Bishops who assisted at the Council of Nice, there is none of any
Prelate of England; it is very probable there were some of them. 1. Because
Constantine did all he could, to assemble a great number of Bishops. 2. Because
there is no likelihood this Emperor should forget the Bishops of England, where
he was born and proclaimed Caesar. 3. Because they having been at the Council
of Arles, which was held before, and at those of Sardis, and Rimini, which
followed that of Nice, there was no reason to suppose, that they should be
forgotten in this latter.

This being granted, Dr. Stillingfleet believes, that we may learn from the
Canons of the Council of Nice, the Rights and Privileges of the British
Churches. Therefore he relates and expounds these Canons; but makes the longest
stay upon Page 95.
three which concern Ecclesiastical Discipline.

The fourth is conceived in these Terms, That a Bishop ought chiefly to be
established by all the Bishops of the Province; but if that be too difficult,
either because it requires more haste, or that the Proceedings of the Bishops
would make it too long; there must at least be three present, and they have the
consent of the Absent to consecrate him. But the Confirmation of all that is
done in the Province, ought to be reserved to the Metropolitan.

By this Canon, the Rights of the Metropolitans are established after an
uncontestable manner; but that which creates difficulty, is to know whether by
the word (...) to establish, which is at the beginning, must be understood the
Right of choosing a Bishop, was devolved on the Bishops of the Province; or
whether the Question be only of Conservation, which should be done by the
Bishops upon the Election, made by the Suffrages of the People. Several
Interpreters of the Canons, understand by the Word to establish, to elect; and
Dr. Stillingfleet shows, That all this may be proved, by a place of the
Synodal Letter Conc. l. 1. c. 9.
of the same Council to those of Alexandria, where it is said, That the Meletian
Bishops, which the People should choose, should be received, and that in the
time of the Council of Nice, the People named the Bishops, which hindered not
but that they were elected by their Brothers, and confirmed by the
Metropolitan, without which the nomination of the People signified nothing. So
that all that can be concluded from thence is, that the People had the Right of
Nomination; which they have since deservedly lost, by Seditions and Tumults,
and which they cannot recall; unless it is shown whether it is a Divine and
unalterable Right; which will never be, adds our Author, and which even those,
who strive to win the favor of the People, in defending it is Rights, do not
endeavor to prove, upon the Principles of the first Ages. It will not be
denied, but that the People had then the Right of Opposing the chosen Persons,
by showing, That they were not worthy. But in this case, the People were heard
as Witnesses, and not as Judges. If the Bishops who had chosen him who was
opposed, judged that the Accusations, which were against him, were just; they
proceeded against the Accused, according to the Canons; and then they came to a
new nomination, whereof notwithstanding the Synod of the Province was to judge:
The Author expounds thereby the 16 Canon of the Council of Antioch, and the 12
of that of Laodicea, where mention is made of the popular Election; not to mark
the Preferment of some one to the Episcopacy, but the choosing of a Bishop
already ordained, to be Bishop of some Church.

The fifth Canon of Nice informs us, That he who shall be excommunicated by one
Bishop, shall not be received into Communion by another. If any one complained
of being unjustly excommunicated, the Provincial Synod judged thereof, and if
this Synod revoked not the Sentence of this Bishop, every one was to hold him
Excommunicated. It Is for that the Council of Nice orders, That there should be
every where held Provincial Councils twice a year, at Easter and Autumn. Our
Author maintains, that the Council of Nice does not ordinarily acknowledge in
her Procedures any other Tribunal than the Provincial Synods; except in places,
whose ancient Customs were different, as it appears by the following Canon. So
that all strange Jurisdiction is forbidden, by the Fathers of Nice; as the
Churches of Africa maintained it boldly against the Popes. Thence it is
concluded, That the British Churches have a right of absolute judging of all
that happens, in the Extent of their Jurisdiction, seeing they have no less
Privileges than those of Africa.

For fear this Canon should be contradicted by the Bishops, who might have a
more extended Jurisdiction, the Council made another, which intimates, That
according to ancient Customs, the Bishop of Alexandria should extend his
Jurisdiction over Egypt, Libya and Pentapolis seeing the Bishop of Rome had a
like Custom; and so likewise at Antioch, and in the other Provinces, the
ancient Privileges of Bishops should be kept, that no Bishop should be
created, without the consent of the Metropolitan; and that when differences
should arise, the Plurality of Voices should decide them.

There are, according to our Author, three remarkable things in this Canon. 1.
A Confirming the Privileges of some of the greatest Bishoprics, as of Rome,
Alexandria, and Antioch. 2. A securing those of other Churches, against
Invasions. 3. To put out of contestation the Rights of the Metropolitan
Churches. For the last of these three things, it is so clear, that there is no
stopping at it; but the others, chiefly the second, are much enlarged upon.

It seems that the Church of Alexandria was the occasion of this Canon, and
thereby it appears, that the Bishop of the City had a much more extended
Jurisdiction, than that of the Metropolitans; seeing it reached over three
Provinces, named in the Canon, upon which here are diverse Remarks, which we
shall pass over. Some Learned Men have maintained, that there were no
Patriarchs in the time of the Council of Nice; but without disputing about
words, Dr. Sillingfleet shows by this Canon, and other Proofs, that the Bishop
of Alexandria had already before the Council of Nice, a true patriarchal Power
over Egypt, and which answered to that of the Governor, named Praefectus
Augustalis. Some pretend, that the Power of this Bishop was only that which
commonly the Metropolitans had; because the Provinces of Egypt had no other
Metropolitan but him, and depended immediately of him. But tho this Authority
was as that of Metropolitans, as to what concerns the manner of exercising; it
was Patriarchal, in respect of the extent. Such was also that of the Bishop of
Rome, who had under him no Metropolitans, and who received immediately the
Appeals of diverse Provinces.

Dr. Stillingfleet believes, that the Council of Nice provincially confirmed
the custom of Alexandria, fearing that if it were abolished, in remitting to
the Provincial Councils of Egypt, the Supreme Authority, as was done for the
most part by other Provinces, the Arians should draw an advantage thereby,
fearing also that this should draw too much hatred upon the Bishop of
Alexandria, if he were named alone, those of Rome and Antioch were added;
notwithstanding afterward, these Regulations of the Council of Nice were
abused; several Churches aspired to the Patriarchship, and that of Rome, though
named only upon occasion, pretended that its Universal Supremacy was
established therein. The Agents of the Bishop of this City had Conc. Chalced.
Act. 16.
the boldness to falsify the Title of this Canon in the Council of Chalcedon,
and of drawing an Advantage from it.

The other thing that they principally proposed, was to preserve the
Privileges of other Churches; for it is known that Exceptions render the Laws
more uncontestable in unexcepted Cases; so the Provinces, which are not
excepted in this Canon, have a right to govern themselves by their Provincial
Synods, without acknowledging any Superior Authority: Whence it is concluded,
that the British Churches ought peaceably to enjoy this Right, seeing they
never have submitted to the Patriarch of Rome. This Bishop has never had the
right of Consecrating the Metropolitans, or British Bishops, he has not
convocated them to his Assemblies at Rome, none of their Synods have been
called to him; so that the British Provinces have the Right, according to the
Council of Nice, of governing themselves independent of every other Church. It
was upon this Principle that the Council of Ephesus condemned the Patriarch of
Antioch, who pretended to have right of Consecrating the Metropolitan of
Cyprus, against the ancient Custom. The Canon of this Council may be seen, in
our Author who defends it against the Carpings of some Roman Catholic Doctors,
and shows the true sense thereof, particularly against F. Martin.

Notwithstanding, these same Doctors pretend that the Pope has always had a
Patriarchal Power over all the Churches of the West: It is granted that he had
this Authority before the Council of Nice, over the Diocese of Rome, or the
Suburbicary Provinces; but it is maintained, that it reached not any farther,
and diverse Doctors are refuted who have pretended the contrary. Page 112.
Mr. Schelstrate is particularly opposed, who in the second Dissertation of his
Antiquitas Illustrata, has undertaken to prove, That the Bishop of Rome has
this Patriarchal Power upon all the West* We agree with him, that the
Patriarchal Rights consist in these three things: 1. The Right of Consecrating
Bishops and Metropolitans. 2. In calling them to a Synod. 3. In receiving
Appeals and deciding 'em.


1. As to that which concerns the Consecration of Metropolitans and Bishops in
all the Western Churches; Mr. Schelstrate grants, That it was not exercised by
the Pope. His Adversary shows, even that St. Ambrose was elected Bishop of
Milan, without asking the consent of Damasus, who was then Bishop of Rome;
indeed the Diocese of Rome extended not unto Milan, but comprised only 5
Provinces, or 70 Bishops. Some call these Provinces thus: Marsi, Compania,
Thussia, Vmbria, and Marchia; and others thus, Latium, Valeria, Tuscia, Picenum
and Vmbria.

To prove that the Diocese of the Bishop of Rome extended further, a Letter
from Pope Syricius to Anysius, Bishop of Thessalonica, is cited where the
Latter is declared Legate of the Pope in Illyria: But our Author shows at
length, that that begun but in the time of Syricius, upon the end of the fourth
Age: and that this Pope did thus, to oppose the Grandeur of the Patriarch of
Constantinople, who extended his Diocese too far; upon which there are Remarks
in the Original, that cannot be related here.

Though the Library of the Pope is obliged to grant, That the Bishop of Rome,
consecrated not all the Western Bishops, he pretends to show, that before the
Council of Nice, he had the power of deposing the Bishops of the Gauls: He
proves it, by the Example of Marsian Bishop of Arles, who was deposed by Pope
Stephen. But it appears, That nothing else was desired of the Pope in this
Rencounter, but to join his Authority to that of the Bishops of the Gauls;
that acting jointly, the People should the more easily submit to their Order,
as appears by the LXVIII Letter of St. Cyprian, wherein he speaks to this Pope
as his Equal, exhorting him to do what we have said.

Dr. Stillingfleet refutes also two other Proofs of his Adversary, not very
considerable; we shall not stop at 'em, that we may not be tedious.

2. The Bishop of Worcester maintains, that the Pope could not convocate
Councils, but within the extent of the suburbicary Provinces; though he denies
not, but on certain singular occasions other Bishops have not been invited to
these Councils, as when Aurelian permitted the Bishops of Italy to assemble at
Rome, for the Affair of Paul of Samosatus. But the Bishops of the Diocese of
Italy, who acknowledged the Bishop of Milan as chief, Sirm. App. ad Cad. Theod.
p. 97.
thought themselves not obliged to be at the Patriarchal Councils of Rome. And
that which is remarkable, is that one of these Councils was of Sentiments very
different from him, who then was upon the Patriarchal See of this City,
concerning the Ordination of Maximus, to be Bishop of Constantinople. Damasus
writ twice Collect. Romans p. 37.
to Constantinople, with much fervor, for the deposing of Maximus. But St.
Ambrose, and the Bishops of his Diocese, in a Synodical Letter to Theodosius,
justified the Ordination of Maximus, and disapproved the Election of Gregory,
and Nectairus. The Defenders of the pretensions of the Bishop of Rome, are
asked, If this Council acknowledged the Patriarchal Power of this Bishop? Mr.
Schelstrate says after Father Lupus, That the Power of the Pope gave him the
Right of deciding all things, consulting only the Bishops, who could do nothing
without him. If that is true, it must be granted, That the Italick Diocese was
without the limits of the Patriarchate of Rome, seeing the Bishops of this
Diocese sent their Advices to the Emperor, without having any respect to the
Sentiments of Damasus. Dr. Stillingfleet shows the independancy of the same
Bishops, in respect to Rome, by the Example of the Council of Capua; where St.
Ambrose presided, without asking so much as the Advice of the Bishop of Rome.

To prove that the Pope had the Right of calling the Bishops of all the West to
all his Patriarchal Councils. Mr. Schelstrate relates some Examples of Bishops
amongst the Gauls, and Great Britain, who were at some Roman Councils. But he
is answered, That it is no wonder, that some should be found, in extraordinary
Rencounters; and that it does not follow from thence, that the Pope was
Patriarch of all the West, no more than that Councils of Western Bishops being
held at Milan, Arles, Rimini, Sardis, and elsewhere, proved, That the Bishops
of these Cities were their Patriarchs. It ought to be shown, That the Pope
convocated the Bishops of the West, by virtue of his Patriarchal Authority.
There was also a great Difference amongst the Councils assembled, for the Unity
of Faith and the Discipline of diverse Diocesses; and the Provincial or
Patriarchal Synods, c^nvocated at a certain time, to appear before the
Metropolitan or the Patriarch. This is seen in the Diurnus Romanus p. 66.
where the Bishops of Rome oblige themselves to be present at the Councils of
this City assembled at certain times, as Garnier shows. He says, it was
thrice a year; but no more for the Suburbicary Churches, which had no other
Primate but the Bishop of Rome.

The last of the Patriarchal Rights was to receive Appeals of the Provinces of
the Patriarchship. By these Appeals we must not understand, the free Choice
that parties can make for one, to be an Arbitrator of their Differences; but
Juridical Appeals, from an inferior Tribunal to a higher one. It has often
fallen out that Bishops have been chosen Arbitrators of a common approbation,
to make others agree; or that Bishops intermedled in the Differences of others,
without pretending to end them with Authority. Our Author brings p. 128.
an Example of a Council of the Italick Diocese, who meddled with a dissension
at Constantinople, whereof we have already made mention.

But to this is opposed, That the Bishops of Rome have several times sent
Legates, throughout all the West, to examine the causes of the Bishops, and to
make Report of ^em. For the Letters of the Popes to the Bishops of
Thessalonica, which are in the Roman Collection are cited to prove this. But we
have already taken notice, what Dr. Stillingfleet's Answer is to that. He adds
here, that the Origin of these pretensions was from this, That the Council of
Sardis, being exasperated against the Eastern Bishops, gave the Bishop of Rome
the liberty to reexamine some Causes in diverse Provinces. He took the occasion
from thence of sending Legates, and that was one of the first steps by which he
ascended to so great a Power in the West. A Doctor of Sorbone, who writ some
years ago, de antiquis and majoribus Episcoporum causis, allows, That in the
space of CCCXLVII Years, viz. about the time of the Council of Sardis, no
Example of a Cause can be produced, which was referred to Rome, by the Bishops
who were the Judges thereof.

It is besides Objected, That the Council of Arles attributes to the Pope
majores Dioeceses; but it has been seen by the Government of this Council,
which has been spoken of, that it was far from acknowledging the Bishop of Rome
for Superior. Besides, there are reasons to believe, that the place where
these words are, has been corrupted; and though it was not so, this may signify
another thing, except this Bishop had a Diocese more large than his Brethren.

Dr. Stillingfleet refutes some more Reasons of Mr. Schelstrate of small
consequence, and relates some places of the Letters Ep. 78, 79, and 80.
of Pope Leo, where he presses hard the Canons of Nice, against the usurpations
of the Patriarch of Constantinople; and maintains it was not lawful for any to
violate or to reveal the Decrees of this Council; from whence it is concluded,
that the Churches of England are in no wise obliged, according to the
Discipline of the first Ages, to submit to the Pope.

After having ended p. 134.
this Controversy, our Prelate shows there is a great likelihood that some
Bishops of England were at the Council of Sardis. But thence an occasion is
taken, to say, that the British Churches having received the Council of Sardis,
they are obliged to acknowledge the Pope for the Patriarch of the West; seeing
this Council has established the Appeals to the Bishop of Rome. To see if this
Objection be of any force, Dr. Stillingfleet examines the Design and the
Proceedings of this Council as follows:

Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, had been deposed by two Synods of Eastern
Bishops, for some Crimes of which he was accused. He could not hope to have
this Judgment reverst in the East, because the Arian Party was very strong
there; he made his Address to the Bishops of the West, and particularly to
Julius, Bishop of Rome, as to the Chief. He desired, that his Process might be
reverst, and showed, by Letters of diverse Bishops of Egypt, that he had not
been heard according to the Forms neither at Tire nor Antioch, because of the
violence of the Faction of Eusebius. Thereupon Julius Vid. Ep. Iulii ad
Athanasium.
having communicated his Design to his Brethren the Bishops of the West, writ
in their name and his own, to the Eastern Bishops, That it was just to examine
this Cause, by Judges that were not suspected of Partiality; and desired them
to go to the places where these Judges should be, with the Informations they
had taken against Athanasius. The Bishops of the East would not hearken to it,
whereupon those of the West received Athanasius, Marcellus and other Bishops of
their Party, into their Communion. Those of the East were extremely affronted
at it, there were many Complaints on each side, and at last the two Emperors
Constantius and Constantine agreed to call a General Council at Sardis, to
decide this Difference. There went Bishops to it from all parts, but the
Western, Bishops were willing that the deposed Bishops should be admitted to
the Communion, and take place in the Council; the Eastern would not suffer it,
and withdrew to Philippopolis, where they protested against the Proceedings of
Sardis, as contrary to the Canons of Nice. The Bishops of the West
notwithstanding continued their Session, and made new Canons, to justify their
Conduct. The Eastern Bishops complained, that the Discipline established at
Nice, was manifestly violated; and the Western Bishops said, That there was
Injustice done to the deposed Bishops, that Athanasius had not been heard in
Egypt, and that it was just that all the Bishops of the Empire should
re-examine this Affair. The Bishops of Sardis had no respect to the reasons of
their Brethren, they renounced not the Communion of Athanasius, and made
diverse* Canons, the chief of which are the III. the IV. the V. which concern
the Revisal of the Causes of Bishops. In the third they declared, that the
causes should first come before the Bishops of the Province; and if one of the
Parties was grieved by the Sentence, he should be granted a Revision. Our
Author makes diverse Remarks upon two Canons of the Council of Antioch, to which
its commonly believed, that that of the Council of Sardis has some affinity,
which we have spoken of; our Author discovers the Irregularities of the
Councils of Antioch and Tire.

He also remarks, that to obtain the Revision of an Ecclesiastial cause, an
Address was made to the Emperor, who convocated a greater number of Bishops, to
make this new Examination. The Council of Sardis made an Innovation in this;
for it seems, that it took away as much as it could, the Right of reviewing
these sorts of Causes from the Emperor, to give it to Julius Bishop of Rome, in
honor to St. Peter. He might, by the Authority of this Council, if he thought
fit, Convocate the Bishops of the Province, to revise the Process, and to add
Assistant Judges to them, as the Emperor used to do. Besides this, the Fourth
Canon enjoined, that no Bishop should enter into a vacant Bishopric, by the
deposition of him who was in it, nor should undertake to Examine anew a
Process, until the Bishop of Rome had pronounced his Sentence thereupon. The
Fifth Canon signifies, That if he judges the Cause worthy of Revising, it
belongs to him to send Letters to the Neighboring Bishops to re-examine; but
if he thinks it not fit, the Judgment pronounced shall stand.

This is the Power which the Council of Sardis grants to the Pope, upon which
our Author makes these Remarks.

1. That there was somewhat new in this Authority; without which these Canons
would have been useless. Thus de Marca, and he who published the Works of Pope
Leo, have established this Power of the Pope upon the Canons of the Council of
Sardis. But an Authority given, by a particular Council in certain
Circumstances, as appears by the name of Julius, which is inserted in the
Canon, cannot extend it self to the following Ages; upon the whole, this
Authority has changed nature so much, that now it passes for an Absolute and
Supreme Power, founded upon a Divine Right, and not upon the Acts of one
Council.

2. These Canons do not give this Bishop the Right of receiving Appeals in
quality of Head of the Church; but transport only unto him the Right of a
Revision, which the Emperor enjoyed before, It is a great question if the
Council of Sardis had the Power of so doing; but there is a great likelihood,
that the Protection which Constantius granted the Arian Party, engaged it
thereunto.

3. These Canons cannot justify the conduct of those who should carry Causes
to Rome, by way of Appeal, because they return the second Examination to the
Bishops of the Province.

4. The Council of Sardis it self took knowledge of a Cause, which had been
decided by the Bishop of Rome.

5. This Council could not be justified by the ancient Canons, in that it
received Marcellus to the Communion; he, who before had been Condemned for
Heresy, as also afterward even by Athanasius himself.

6. The Decrees of this Assembly were not universally received, as it appeared
by the Contestations of the Bishops of Africa against that of Rome, seeing the
first knew nothing of it some years after, as our Author shows.

IV. Arianism being spread every where, and afterward Pelagius and Celestius
being gone out of England, the Clergy of this Isle were accused of having been
Arians and Pelagians in those Ages. Our Author Page 145.
undertakes to justify them from these suspicions, and afterward describes
the Public Service of the British Churches. But as the Ecclesiastical
Antiquities of England afford no great matter, he has supplied them by
digressions. He immediately refutes I know not what Modern Author, who has
been mistaken in some facts concerning the History of Arianism, since the
Council of Nice, at which we shall not make a stay. After that Page 150.
there is an Abridgment of this History until the Council of Rimini.

The Arians being condemned at Nice, and vainly opposing the term of
Consubstantial, thought they could not better save themselves, than by yielding
to the times. They also suffered themselves to be condemned by the Council, and
to be Banished by the Emperor Arius, with Theones and Secondus his Friends.
Eusebius of Nicomedia, and Theognis of Nice, Chief Heads of the Arian Faction,
Signed as the rest, yet without changing their Opinion. Afterward they, in
like manner, endeavored to hide themselves under Equivocations. The
Circumstances of this History may be seen, as Dr. Stillingfleet relates them in
the Tenth Tome of the Universal Bibliotheque, p. 447. and the following ones.
Yet there are these differences, that our Bishop is larger in Reflections drawn
from St. Athanasius, concerning the Address of the Arians, who expressed
themselves almost as the Orthodox of that time, to deceive the simple.
Moreover, the Relation which we have cited, was not made on design to justify
the Orthodox, and to get those of the Arians Condemned, but to give an Idea of
these confusions, without taking any Party; whereas the design of our Author
is, to inform the Public against the Arians, without reprehending any thing
whatever in the conduct of their Adversaries. And our Author has not applied
himself so much to the order of years, which he does not mark; as has been
done in the Life of Eusebius of Caesarea.

Dr. Stillingfleet goes also further then any, seeing the History of Arianism
was left off at the death of Eusebius. Here is an Abstract of what he adds, and
which is chiefly drawn from St. Athanasius. The Falsities of the Arians were
not discovered until after the Council of Rimini; and it was chiefly at the
Council of Seleucia, where they declared themselves more openly. It was then
that the Followers of Basil of Ancyre, who rejected the word Consubstantial, as
well as the Arians, would separate themselves from them. But the Arians had
still recourse, in this occasion, to their old Artifices, and consented to Sign
any Creed whatever, excepting that of Nice. They caused Athanasius to be
banished a second time; but he was soon re called, and his greatest Enemies
were obliged to make him Reparation, if he may be believed. A little while
after, the Persecution began against him and all the rest, who professed the
Faith of Nice; as our Author describes at large, until the Council of Rimini,
whose Bishops were constrained to abandon the Terms of Hypostasis and
Consubstantial. The Orthodox Bishops would willingly depose all those who
refused to Sign the Symbol of Nice, and the Arians did not treat their
Adversaries better, when they could not prevail with them; so that they ceased
not Persecuting each other reciprocally. Councils declared both for the one,
and the other, which makes our Author reasonably conclude, that we must not
yield to the Authority of any Council whatever, till having well examined the
reasons of its Conduct. If it was not lawful to do it in times past, the Faith
of Nice could not be re-established; which would have received an irreparable
breach at Rimini; if the Orthodox Bishops were not restored to their Churches,
after the death of Constantius, and had not re-established, in smaller
Assemblies, what so numerous a Council had destroyed. We find a remarkable
example hereof Hill. Frag. p. 431.
in the Fragments of St. Hilary, where we see that a Council Assembled at Paris
declares, that it abandons the Council of Rimini, for assenting to that of
Nice. Dr. Stillingfleet conjectures, that the British Churches did as much,
because St. Athanasius, St. Jerome, and St. Chrysostom, do, in diverse places
praise their Application to the Orthodox Faith.

Sulpicius Severus L. 2.
speaking of the Bishops of the Council of Rimini, says, they refused to be
entertained by the Emperor; excepting those of England, who were to poor, too
bear this charge. Thereupon Dr. Stillingfleet makes diverse Reflections, whereof
these are the Principal.

1. That it follows from thence, that what Geoffrey of Monmouth says of
Riches, which King Lucius gave the Church of England, is false.

2. That it is notwithstanding strange, that the Bishops of England should not
have wherewithal to maintain them at Rimini, since before Constantine the
Churches had diverse Funds, besides the Offerings of the People, which were
considerable in the numerous Churches; and since Constantine had granted them
great Privileges, as is shown at length by diverse Edicts of this Emperor,
which are in the Theodosian Codicil, and elsewhere.

He comes thence to the Accusation of Pelagianism, P. 180.
which Beda and Gildas had before raised against the Clergy of England. He
remarks first, that Pelagius and Celestius were both born in Great Britain, and
not in the Armorick Britain, as some have believed; and Refutes, at the same
time, some places of F. Garnier, who has spoken of Pelagius, in his Notes upon
Marius Mer^ator.

2. That the Monastic History makes him Abbot of the Monastery of Bangor, but
that there is little likelihood that Bangor had had a Monastery famous in that
time, because the Convents of England are no antienter than the time of St.
Patrick; and if Pelagius was a Monk, he was of such an Order, as were
Pammachius, Paulinus, Melanius and Demetriades, who were pious persons,
withdrawn from the Commerce of the World, but without Rule.

3. That the Occupation of these Men, after the Exercises of Piety, consisted
in the study of Scripture; and that it was in such a Retreat that Pelagius Writ
his Commentary upon the Epistles of St. Paul, and his Letters to Melanius and
Demetriades.

4. That since he was accused of Heresy, he was employed to defend himself;
and that after having been Condemned in Africa, and Banished, he was yet
Condemned in a Council at Antioch, under Theodotus, as Marius Mercator tells
us; and all that, because the Sentiments of Pelagius were not well understood
Page 185.
as the Bishop of Worcester justly says.

5. That wretched Pelagius passed the remnant of his Life in obscurity, and
dyed, according to all likelihood, without returning into England.

6. That without the extraordinary cares of the Bishops of Africa, Pelagianism
would have been established by the Authority of the Sea of Rome.

Though Pelagius had been Condemned by the Emperor and the Councils; Agricola,
Son to Severian Bishop, who had embraced Pelagianism, brought it into England.
It was perhaps the severe Edict of Valentinian III. Published in CCCCXXV,
against the Pelagians, who were amongst the Gauls, which drove him thence.
Prosper witnesses, that there were several of them in England, which made some
believe that Celestius was returned hither; but our Author shows, that this
Opinion has no ground. The Adversaries of the Pelagians not being able to
defend themselves against so subtle Controvertists, sent to demand aid of the
Bishops of the Gauls, who sent them Germain and Loup, two Bishops of great
Reputation, but suspected to be Semi- Pelagians; the first being a great Friend
to Hilary of Arles, and the second being brother to Vincent of Lerins, Semi-
Pelagians. It Is found in a certain Writing, that is attributed to Prosper,
Disciple of St. Augustine, that it was Celestinus, Bishop of Rome, who sent him;
but our Author shows, that there is reason to suspect this to be the writing of
some other Prosper; and that though it were his, we have reason to believe,
that he was deceived.

Germain and Loup being arrived in England, had a public Conference at
Verulam, and acted so, that they left England in the old Opinions, as they
believed; but they were forced to return sometimes after. Our Author relates no
Head of the Doctrine of St. Germain and Loup, by which we may know, whether
they Taught Semi- Pelagianism, or the Predestinarionism in England, to free
themselves from the suspicions which might be had of them.

He passes Page 196.
to the Justification of Fastidius, an English Bishop, suspected of
Pelagianism, and of whom there is yet a Book de vita Christiana, published by
Holstenius. It is not so easy to justify Faustus of Riez, from Semi-
Pelagianism, though in his time he passed for a Saint, and that he was Prayed
to in this quality, during many Ages, in the Church of Riez: Sidonius
Apollinaris gives him this fine Encomium L. 9. Ep. 9.
Cui datum est soli melius loqui, quam didicerit, vivere melius, quam loquatur;
To whom alone it has been given to speak better than he had Learned, and to
Live better than he Spoke. What has been said of him may be seen, Tome 8. p.
228. and Foll. of the Universal Bibliotheque.

The Learned have much Disputed, to know if there really had been Heretics who
may be named Predestinarians. Some believed they were but Semi-Pelagians, who
turned the Sentiments of St. Augustine into Heresy, and consequences of 'em
into another Name; and others have said, that really there were some, who had
indeed drawn, from the Doctrine of this Father, this consequence; That there
was no Free Will, and consequently, that God would not Judge Men according to
their Works. Our Author proves P. 199. and foll.
there have been Men who maintained these strange Opinions, though there was
not enough to make a Sect.

After that, Page 202.
Dr. Stillingfleet returns to St. Germain and Loup, who established Academies,
or Schools in England, and who also introduced here the Gallican Liturgy. Upon
this Subject he seeks for the Origin of the most ancient Schools of England,
and speaks of the Gallican Liturgy, which he compares with the Roman. He shows
finally the Conformity of the English Church of this time with the Ancient
British Liturgy, and concludes, that the Non-Conformists are in the wrong, to
accuse the Episcopal Church of having received its Liturgy from the Roman
Church. It suffices to speak of this briefly, because there are almost none
but the English, who can be curious of these sorts of things.

V. The same reason obliges us to make this use of it in respect of the 6th
and last Page 239:
Chapter, where the Author treats of the fall of the British Churches. He
shows, 1. That all Great Britain was never Conquered by the Romans; and that
the Picts and Scots, being not subdued, made Excursions upon the Britans. 2.
That what is said of Scotch and Irish Antiquities is no more assured, than what
Geoffrey of Monmouth has published of those of England. 3. That as soon as the
Barbarous Nations of the North had some knowledge of Sciences, they would have
Histories, as they saw the most Polite Nations had; and to descend from some
Illustrious People, such as the Trojans were, the Greeks and the Egyptians,
whence an Infinity of Fables has taken birth. 4. That the Evils of the British
Churches came from their being exposed to the Fury of the Scots and Picts, upon
the Declining of the Empire of the West, which was no more in a way of helping
them; and that several times there were Walls or Retrenchments made betwixt
Scotland and England, to preserve the latter from the Incursions of these
Barbarous People. 5. That the Britans being afterward divided, one of the
Parties called to its help the Saxons, whose Origin is here sought for, that
they repented it soon after; and that the Britans were obliged to make War
against them, whereof diverse events are described, drawn from the Monastic
Histories full of Lies, and at the same time very defective. 6. That Armorick
Britain was Peopled by a British Colony toward the end of the Fourth Age.
There it was that Gildas Writ his Letter, where he Addresses himself to Five
Kings, amongst whom England was divided, and describes at large the Vices of
the Britans, to induce them to Repentance.


Lastly, The Bishop of Worcester Relates the manner how the Prelates of England
received the Monk Augustine, who was sent hither toward the end of the Sixth
Age, by Gregory Bishop of Rome. This Augustine being made Archbishop of
Canterbury by the Pope, desired to have a Conference with the British Bishops,
to whom he represented, that they ought to embrace the Unity of the Catholic
Church, viz. to submit to him and the Pope. All that he could obtain, is, that
they asked time to consult; and offered afterward to Answer him in a greater
Assembly. There were Seven British Bishops, and several Learned Men, chiefly of
the Monastery of Bangor, whereof one named Dinot was Abbot. The Result of the
Assembly was, That the Britans altogether refused to submit to the Church of
Rome, or to Augustine, as their Archbishop. It is what Beda, whose Authority is
indisputable in these matters, relates of this Conference. It is yet found more
at large in a M. S. published in the Collection of Mr. Spelman, an Ancient
Britan, in English and in Latin. As there have been some objections made
against this History, and this M S. Dr. Stillingfleet Answers 'em at the end of
this Chapter. Thence he concludes, that the British Churches are in the same
case, in relation to the Dispute they have with the Bishop of Rome, as the
Churches of Cyprus were, in regard to the Bishop of Antioch; who would fain be
their Patriarch, against their Ancient Rights, according to which they had a
particular Metropolitan: As the Council of Ephesus condemned the Bishop of
Antioch, who would extend too far the limits of his Jurisdiction: If the
pretentions of the Pope upon England be this day judged by the ancient Canons,
he shall infallibly be condemned, for striving to extend his Patriarchship in
places, where he has not been acknowledged for above 600 years.

All the WORKS of James Alting, Professor of Divinity in the Academy of
Groningen. Fifth Vol. in Fol. at Amsterdam. Sold by Gerard Borstius, 1687.
THose that have read the Schilo of this Author, his Treatises upon the
Sabbath, the Conversion of the Jews, and his Theological and Philosophical
Dissertations, will not wonder that Mr. Becker, Minister of Amsterdam, has
taken care to Print all his Works Posthum^. It has been thought that the Style
of Mr. Alting, which is simple enough, and sufficiently disengaged from the
terms of Schools, would not be ill received in an Age, where neatness is so
much loved, and wherein great words are no more taken for great things. This is
what may be judged by a general view of the Subjects to which this Divine has
applied himself, and by an Essay that shall be given here of his Method.

1. We find in the First Tome an Analysis, and Notes upon the Four first Books
of Moses, and upon the 24 First Psalms; a larger Commentary upon Deuteronomy,
from the first Chapter until the XIX. Verse. 11, and Lessons upon all the
Prophet Jeremy.

The 2d contains, besides the Parallel of diverse Prophecies of the Old
Testament cited in the New, very ample Commentaries upon several passages of
the Old Testament, whose sense is given, and whose use is shown in Religion and
Morality.

The 3d and 4th Volumes comprise Expositions of the same nature upon the whole
Epistle to the Romans, and diverse Texts of the New Testament, an Analysis of
this Epistle, and of that to the Colossians, with Lessons upon the Epistle to
the Hebrews, from the beginning to the Ninth Chapter, Verse. 10.

In the 5th there are the Dissertations which have been already Printed, with a
very long Treatise upon the Nature of the Sabbath, where it is shown it was
altogether Evangelick; Notes upon the Catechism of Heidelberg; a Method of the
Didactick Divinity. Five Heptads of Theological and Philosophical
Dissertations; the First upon Holy Writ and its Perfection; The Second upon
Justification; the Third and Fourth upon the Messia; and the Fifth upon diverse
Subjects.

Amongst the Pieces which have not as yet been published, are Nine Discourses,
delivered at diverse times, at the opening of the Academy of Groningen; Two
Dissertations upon the Hebrew Tongue; diverse Letters, or Extracts of Letters,
which deserve to be Read, as much for the matters of Critic which are therein
treated, as for the moderation which the Author shows upon Controversies, which
in his time were agitated amongst the Divines of those Provinces; and for
several Historical Actions, which may be there learned. To help the Reader to
judge of the knowledge of Mr. Alting, we shall show some of the critical
Subjects, which are treated on in his Letters, or in the Pieces which have not
yet been published.

The First Dissertation of the Fifth Heptad is Entitled, de Cabbala
Scripturaria; Cabal. 1. v. P. 4. p. 118.
He first seeks for the Etymology of the word Cabal, which is the Name that the
Jews give to their Traditions, and pretends, that even after that God had given
his Law by Writing, a kind of an Oral Tradition was conserved in the Church, as
long as there were Prophets and Apostles. He adds, that after the destruction
of Jerusalem, the Jews esteemed another Cabal, which they have equalled, and
even preferred to the first, and which is not in the Talmud; but in Books a
great deal less known; whether the Jewish Doctors do keep them hidden, or
whether their proper obscurity renders them impenetrable.

In regard to the Practick Cabal, which only serves for Magical Operations, the
Author entirely disapproves thereof: but as for the Theoretick, where some make
Thirteen sorts, and others Three, as it is a kind of a Symbolick Divinity, he
will have it to be treated even as Allegories are. There Is a great respect due
to Allegories, whereof the Sacred Writers are the Authors, as in Gal. 4.22. But
those that have no grounds in Scripture are looked upon with contempt. Mr.
Alting maintains, that we ought to make this use of the Cabal, and pretends
that in the Old Testament there are diverse Transpositions, Changes, Additions
or Retrenchments of Letters, which have not been without a Mystery. He gives,
for example, the change which God himself made, of the Names of Abram (...)
and of Sarai, into those of Abraham and Sarah. He says these Names were given
them by a particular Providence, to mark that they should be the Heads of a
Holy Generation, whence the Messia should spring; that it is for this reason
that Abram signifies Father raised, or rather Father of the raised; and that
the Name of Sarai shows, that this Raised is the Messia, the Son of the
Sovereign, being composed of Sar, (...) and of the first Letter of the Name
Iehova, (...) so that it signifies a Prince-Lord: that the (...) which marks
Iehova was in the Name of Sarai, and not in that of Abram, because it was to
the Woman Eve, and not to Adam, that God made a Promise of the Messia, or the
Seed which should bruise the Serpent's head. That God, to reward the Faith of
Abram, being willing to admit him to the participation of this Promise with
Sarai, would have them partake of the Sign, which was the (...), and that they
both should have, in their Name, Abra(...)am, Sara(...).
a Letter of his, viz. (...), which is worth Five, or the half of (...), which
stands for Ten.

The Author in this Dissertation makes still many Remarks upon diverse proper
Names, and other words of the Bible, Written diversely, to show, that this came
not by chance.

There are many of these Mystical and surprising Expositions in the Fourth
Dissertation of this Heptade, de arborum fructiferarum praeputio, sanctitate
and fruitione; where our Author Answers to the following Questions, according
to his Method, viz. in relating the Opinion of diverse Rabbis, and several
Famous Divines, and then his own; These Questions are, Why God commanded that
for the Three first years of a Tree, People should look upon the Fruit of it as
polluted, and why he forbid the eating of it? And why he would have the Fruit
of the Fourth year dedicated to himself? If these Consecrated Fruits belonged
only to Priests and Levites, or if all persons which were not polluted, or if
all unclean persons might eat of them?

The Second Discourse of the Seventh Heptade treats of the Anointing of the
Chief Priests and Kings; where the Author mentions the Opinion of the Jews,
which believed, that Moses only made the Holy Oil; because in the Second Temple
there was none of this Oil, the Vial wherein it was being lost with the Ark;
which denoted, according to Mr. Alting, that the Priesthood and Temporal Reign
of the Jews was declining, and making room for the Reign and everlasting
Priesthood of the Messia. This Exposition is founded upon this, That the Chief
Priests and Kings of the House of David were Consecrated with this Oil, whose
Dignity was hereditary, and descended to their Children. But for the Officers,
whose Charges were not considerable, nor did belong to a certain Family, they
were not Anointed. As for the Kings of Israel, after the Schism of Jeroboam,
either they were Anointed, or not; if they were as Iehu was, it was with
another Oil, and not with that which was kept in the Temple of Jerusalem.

There was much of this Holy Oil poured upon the Heads of Chief Priests and
Kings, to Consecrate them; but the manner of this pouring was different. 'Twas
poured round the Head of a King in form of a Crown; and the Forehead of Chief
Priests was Anointed in such a manner, that the Traces of the Oil expressed the
Figure of X. The Rabbis troubled themselves to find out the Reason of this
Ceremony; but our Author finds it not hard to discover it in the Truth of Jesus
Christ, Sacrificing himself upon the Cross.

In a Discourse upon the Leprosy, which is the Fifth of the IX. Heptade, it is
asserted, that the Jews believe, that the Leprosy is no Contagious Disease;
but an extraordinary one which God inflicted upon certain persons, by an effect
of his unsearchable Judgments; which they prove by Seven Reasons.

1. Pestilential Diseases fall indifferently upon Men and Beasts, but the
Leprosy has never infected a Beast. It Is true, that there is talk of the
Leprosy of Clothes and Houses, but it is not well known what that is; and it is
believed this kind of Contagion never appeared out of Palestin. 2. All Lepers
were to present themselves to one Priest, who should carefully examine, and was
obliged to search them strictly. But if the Distemper had been Contagious, the
Priests would have been exposed to great danger, because the Labor of their
Duty, and the Obligation of going barefoot made them very weak. 3. These who
were attackt with this Distemper, were comers-out amongst the rest of the
People, till they were visited by the Priests, and declared Lepers. And this
Inspection was neither made upon the Sabbath, nor Holy Day, that Devotion and
Public Rejoycings might not be hindered. It is not likely that People should
tarry so long a time to separate the Pestiferous. 4. The Gentiles who were not
Proselytes, and who lived in Canaan, were not obliged to show themselves to the
Priests, though they were Leprous, and yet they were not hindered to converse
with all the World. 5. Those who were suspected to be Lepers, were shut up in
the Field, or even in the Town, and there were only those who were judged
Lepers, that were obliged to go out, which if they recovered, were not suffered
to enter till after many washings, and other Ceremonies which they were to
observe. 6. According to the Judgment which the Priest pronounced, a Man was
looked upon to be clean or unclean, and so he was conversed with, or his
company shunned. But it is not likely that this Sentence rendered a Man more or
less Contagious. 7. The general Leprosy which covered the whole Body, did not
render a Man unclean, because they were declared clean who had all their Body
covered with White Leprosy, and in whom there was not a bit of Live flesh to
be seen. Naaman the Leper had several to serve him, and he himself was Minister
to the King of Assyria, which could not be if his Distemper was Contagious.
Also the Word (...) Tame, which is spoken of polluted and unclean People, marks
only a legal impurity, and is not applied to them who are Infected with a
Contagion.
The Heptades are followed by a small Treatise, entitled, Sciagraphia Biblica,
seu specimen Oeconomiae Patriarcharum. It is as it were a Historical Abridgment
of Divinity, disposed according to the order that is contained in Holy Writ.
This Treatise is not ended, because it begins at the Creation, and ends at the
Punishment of Sodom.

The Letters of Mr. Alting are one of the most considerable Pieces of this
Volume, being all full of Moderation and Learning. In the Second he proposes
some difficulties to Mr. Wetstein Professor at Basil, who said in one of his
Dissertations, that (...) and (...) were Synonyms in St. John. The Author, on
the contrary, will have the terms, (...), show not only, That the Word was in
the beginning of all things; but supposes also, that he was in being before;
whereas the words (...), show, that this word is destined to the Office of
Mediator, which was done since or at the beginning; God having Promised the
Messia who was to bring Life to Men, and that immediately after the first Sin.

In the Third Letter, which is Written to Buxtorf the Son, Mr. Alting, to show
that the Sabbath was a Ceremonial Institution, which Figured Jesus Christ, and
the Gospel, thus Translates a passage in Isaiah, 58.13. If thou call the
Sabbath a delight, (...) Likdos^h Iehova mecubbad; the Holy of the Lord. He
pretends, that this Holy of the Lord is the Messia, who is called the Holy One
of God, Mark. 1.24. Luke 4.34. And that the Father has sanctified, and sent
him into the World, John 10.36. The Author Answers in the 4, 5 and 6th Letters,
some difficulties which were made upon the Explication of this passage, and
upon Job 11.7.

In the Ninth is sought the Origin of this Phrase (...) Basar vedam, Flesh and
Blood, which is common in the Rabbis and Writings of the new Testament. The
Author believes, that the Jews did not begin to make use of it until after the
Prophets times, when Philosophy began to be brought in amongst them. They saw
some Pagan Philosophers define a man a compound of Body and Soul, and searching
in their own Tongue for familiar Terms, which would answer this Definition;
they added to the word Basar Flesh, by which the Scripture commonly marks Man,
and that of Dam Blood. Besides the passages of Genesis 9. and Levit. 17. where
it is said, That the Blood is the Soul of Beasts; there are many others by
which it appears, that the Soul and Blood are Synonymous, with the sacred
Writers; so they say in some places, the Messia has given his Blood, and in
other places, he has given his Soul to ransom many.

There is in the 16.50. a Judgment which deserves our observation; but to know
the importance of it, we must know the dispute upon which it was delivered
about the end of the Year 1655. There arose a dispute amongst the Mennonite
Ministers of Amsterdam, about the external State of the present Christian
Church; from Conferences they came to Writings, whereof there were several
Copies soon made, and as soon printed. The first which appeared upon this
Subject was signed by Gallenus, and David Spruit, who put it into the hands of
their Brethren. The 11 th. of January 1657. it was digested in Nineteen
Articles wherein these two Ministers expounded their Opinion touching the
Church, which is to this purpose:

1. That there is but one Church, which is called the Spouse and Body of Jesus
Christ, and that it was to that alone that the promises of Jesus Christ were
made.

2. That Jesus Christ has established in this Church Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Pastors, and Doctors, and has given them the Gifts of the Holy
Ghost, which guide them infallibly, so that they and their Hearers might be
assured they did not err.

3. That not only the Apostles, but even the inferior Ministers of the
Apostolical Church, and even the Deans, and Ancients after receiving the
imposition of hands, were endowed with miraculous Gifts which were necessary
for the Exercise of their Charge.

4. That so the first Ministers had a Right to call themselves Ambassadors of
Jesus Christ, and that the People were obliged to receive them in that Quality.

5. That the Church should fall into an entire Apostasy; that this Prediction
should be accomplished soon after the Death of the Apostles, seeing that from
the time of St. Paul and St. John the mystery of Iniquity began to increase,
since there were already several Antichrists. One must have but a small insight
of Ecclesiastical History, to know that the Zeal of Christians cooled a little
after, and that they fell from a Remissness into a corruption of Manners, from
a corruption of Manners into that of Doctrine: and that instead of the Gifts of
the Holy Ghost there was nothing seen to Reign in the Church but the Spirit of
Superstition, of Tyranny over Consciences, of Schism and Excommunication.

6. That those who undertook in these late Ages to reform the Church, had
neither miraculous Gifts nor an Express, not extraordinary Vocation from Jesus
Christ.

7. That to prove that the Assemblies which were held are the true Church, they
have only some Arguments drawn from passages of Scripture explained according
to the weak Lights of their own reason, or to speak better, according to their
conjectures.

8. That there is no Text in the Bible which privileges a Man who is not
inspired to form an Assembly, which should call it self the true and only
Church of Jesus Christ, and should appropriate to it self it is Privileges, by
excluding all others.

9. That nevertheless, Christians divided themselves into innumerable Sects,
whereof the most part excommunicates and condemns the other.

10. From all this it is concluded, That one cannot look upon any of these
Churches, nor the Ministers thereof, nor the Tenets, nor the Ceremonies of
them, with the same respect which one was obliged to have for the Church and
Apostolical Pastors.

11. Consequently that these Assemblies have no Right to impose their Doctrine
or Worship as a necessary Yoke upon Consciences, nor to condemn and
excommunicate such as do not the same with them.

12. That Baptism and the Supper of the Lord, are Sacraments ordained by Jesus
Christ, whose use is very profitable; that the Assemblies of Piety are so
likewise, provided their Government be not Tyrannical, that they are looked
upon as the work of some godly Persons who have endeavored to imitate the
model of the Church, which they found in Scripture; and they confess these
Institutors were not infallible, and that they left faults in their Works,
which they are willing to correct when they are better instructed. This was the
occasion of a Dispute, that then made much noise. One of Mr. Galenus's Brothers
answered these Articles, which Mr. Galenus had printed in the Year 1659. with a
Reply to his Adversary. In 1660. Mr. Pontanus, Minister of the Remonstrants at
Amsterdam, undertook to examine this Opinion in a Treatise which he made of the
visible Church of Jesus Christ, of it is Office and Worship. Without doubt this
dispute was spoken of in 1664. seeing one of Mr. Alting's Friends, asked him
his Opinion upon it, to which this Professor answered:

I do not see that the Opinion of Galenus, such as you mention it in your
Letter, is so condemnable; it would be in vain now to search the form of the
Apostolical Church, and the Gifts which the Apostles conferred by imposition of
hands. I remember I told you that we have a Faith which makes us incapable of
receiving Gifts. As we believe that the Signs which according to the Promise of
Jesus Christ, Mark 16.17, 18. should accompany the Faithful, viz. the gift of
Miracles, the gift of Tongues, and of Prophecy, have ceased in the Church, then
it is not strange, that they descend not to us. In the Opinion of some Men,
this Faith and it is Efficacy, lasted not as long as the first Age: It would
distract us to find out the Signs of it in such distant times; after this, I do
not admire that most Doctors have taken so different ways, and that like
Painters they have drawn more or less near after the model of the Apostles,
according as their Pencil was fine or gross. Thence sprung so many different
Churches, to which were given the names of their Doctors, as commonly the names
of Painters are given to their most excellent pieces. It Is true, that there are
some far better than others: but there are none but please some people so much,
that they despise and condemn sometimes all other Churches, how little soever
they differ from theirs. It Is an evil that could only be deplored hitherto, and
God only knows when it will be remedied: When he is pleased to give us this
Faith which we have lost, he will give us it is Fruits, and it is then we shall
be the Image of the Primitive Church. In the mean time, we must preserve, and
endeavor to preserve and increase the Faith we have, which is that of Tenets,
and which may conduct us to Salvation, notwithstanding the faults of the
exterior form and Government of the Church.

In answering to the same who asked him his Opinion upon the Visions of
Drabicius; he says, I know nothing certain upon that business now: I cannot
approve them, and I dare not condemn them, I suspend my Judgment in the design
to meditate upon this Subject, and perhaps at another time I will write to you
at large of it, l. 17.

In the Twenty first Letter are a great many helps for the History of David,
and upon the Persecutions which Saul makes against him. In answering a Divine
of Herborn who exhorted him to make a Translation of Scripture but, without
swerving from the received Versions, and the common Tradition; I cannot, says
he, make that two Councils agree, for one ruineth the other, to what purpose is
it to spoil Paper to say the same things a hundred times over? I take notice of
another fault, which has taken roo^ amongst the Reformed, that is, that we are
very Orthodox upon the Theory or Speculation of Scripture, but as to Practice
we are altogether Papists, Puri puti Pontificii. You will acknowledge it if you
reflect upon the Actions of both the one and the other. You advise me to be
silent upon the question of the Sabbath, though you acknowledge it is of great
importance, and you will not have me to oppose my self to the received
Hypothesis. I know full well, that it is an Axiom of the prudence of this Age
not to touch an evil which is strongly rooted; but the Reformers of the past
Age, had far more Christian Thoughts. They had the courage to attack the Errors
which were in the peaceable possession of Men's understandings* though they
foresaw the troubles which they would cause throughout all Europe. It is in
vain to expect to gain time, till Men were silent or did agree all to maintain
a false Hypothesis; this silence and this consent would not render it true. I
do not take the Testimonies of Men, says Jesus Christ, nor would he have St.
John Baptist himself to be believed if his words were not conformable to the
Writings of Moses, 50.27.

Upon the famous passage of the Romans, 3.25. the Author has an opinion
altogether different not only from the common Interpretation, but also from
that of Bezae and of Cocceius; the first Translates (...) Dissimulatio, and the
second Prateritio: But Mr. Alting will have it Transmissio or Translatio, a
Transposition. He founds it upon this, That there is a Pleonasmus in the
Version of these two learned Interpreters, because the terms of Dissimulation,
Praeterition, and Non-imputation, give no other Idea but the Patience of God,
(...), of which mention is made in the following verse. 2. He adds (...), which
answers here to the Hebrew (...) Hegnebbir, which is spoken of Sins, 2 Samuel
12.13. and Job 7.21. and that so Paresis marked in this place, that Action of
God considered as a Debtor, who transports the Debt or the Crimes of Sinners
upon Jesus Christ, who is made their Pledge or Surety. So the sense of this
Passage is according to our Author, that God has transported upon Jesus Christ
the Sins which were committed before his coming, and which he bore by his
patience, and that God has declared in the Gospel how much he loves Justice,
since he has pardoned Sinners after that his Son, their Surety, had expiated
their Crimes, and has even pardoned those which sinned before his coming. It
was objected, to Mr. Alting, that the sense he gave to the term Paresis, was
unknown to all Greece. He answers to this, it is the Custom with the Writers of
the New Testament to give Hebrew Significations to Greek Words, and that (...)
answers to the Hegnebbir of the Hebrews; nor is it strange that St. Paul has
taken (...), for Transport. To confirm his Opinion, the Author brings many
Examples of a very extraordinary Signification, of the Particle (...), for,
which answering to that of (...) Chi, In Hebrew, is employed for although in
the following passages, John 4.44. Two days after Jesus returned into Galilee,
(...), although Jesus had testified himself, that no Prophet would be well
received in his own Country. Romans 5.7. One would scarce die for a just Man,
(...), although for a good Man some would even dare to die. There are infinite
Examples of these Hebraisms: Thus the passage of St. John 8.25. (...), which
has given so much trouble to the Interpreters, is a phrase of the Rabbis,
(...), Lebitchilla tascher any omer Lachem: I am really what I tell you. The
same Apostle does not commonly take the word (...), in a Greek sense, but in a
signification which the Rabbis give to their (...) beparhesia, which signifies
Publicly, 50, 27, 42, 44, 52.

In the 45.50. Mr. Alting proves the necessity of studying the Hebrew Tongue
against a Professor who durst maintain in his Public Lessons that that Tongue
was not necessary for Ministers, nor for Students in Divinity, because St.
Augustine and all the Doctors of his time were ignorant of it, except St.
Jerome, who drew upon himself the hatred of all his Contemporaries. The same
Author writing against the Jew Athias, p. 4. according to the citation of Mr.
Alting, Libros veteris Testamenti partem Bibliorum inutilem dixit, potiorem
vero and sanctiorem novi Testamenti libros; that is, the Books of the Old
Testament, are the unprofitable Part of the Bible; but that those of the New
Testament are the most holy and most considerable.

Mr. Perizonius designing to refute Spinosa, consulted Mr. Alting upon some
difficulties, which our Professor resolves in his 59. and 50. The first relates
to the Authors of the Canon of the Old Testament; and it is asked whether it was
Esdras? Mr. Alting says, That it is commonly believed upon the Testimony of
Buxtorf who assures us in his Tyberiade, That the Members of the great
Synagogue assembled to bring into one Body the Canonical Books, and that Esdras
presided in that Assembly, and that the three last Prophets were there
accompanied with Mordocheus. But Gans David remarks that Simeon the Just, who
is said to have been the last of the Assembly of this great Synagogue, lived
eight Generations after Ioshuah, Son to Iosadack. Add to this, that there is no
likelihood that Malachy was Contemporary with Esdras, since he does not speak
of the rebuilding of the Temple nor return of the Jews, and that he chiefly
sticks to reprehend the Priests, who corrupted the Law by their
Interpretations: So that this Prophet seems to have lived about the time of
Hillel, when the Sect of the Pharisees began to flourish, and their Traditions
to be in Vogue. Parker has remarked, that the Fathers of the Church passed for
Apostolical Traditions, customs established by long use, whereof the first
Author was not known, and to which they had a mind to give some Authority. The
same Remark may be made concerning the Jews. There were amongst them
Institutions, whereof the Authors were uncertain, which they attributed to the
Members of the great Synagogue, and made them come from inspired Men, which
were but Traditions of the Pharisees. The Members of the Synagogue never lived
in the same time, nor in the same place, and that consequently there never has
been such an one. It is an invention of the Sticklers for Tradition, to give
some likelihood to their System.

The second difficulty regards the numbering of Jews who returned from Babylon
to Jerusalem. Esdras and Nehemiah agree in a Total Sum, which was 42360. but
when we our selves will muster up the number of each Family, there will be only
found 29818 in Esdras and 31089 in Nehemiah. There is yet this thing
remarkable, that Nehemiah mentions 1765 Persons, which are not in Esdras, and
that Esdras has 494, whereof Nehemiah does not all speak. The Difference that
seems to make it impossible to reconcile these two Authors, is what makes them
agree; for if you add the Overplus of Esdras to the number of Nehemiah, and
the Surplus of Nehemiah to that of Esdras, the same Number will come of them
both.

^

Which being subtracted from 42360, there remains 10777. which were not
mentioned perhaps because they lost their Genealogical Books, being of the
Posterity of the Priests, Chabaja, Cotzi, Barzillai, or of the Israelites of
the Ten Tribes.

In the sixtieth Letter our Author makes the History of the Canon of the Old
Testament, Moses, says he, committed the keeping of his Books to the Levites,
Deuteronomy. 31.25. and the following, and created them as 'twere Doctors of the
People. Deuteronomy. xxxiii.10. And it seems that Malacby alludes to this charge, Chapter
2. verse. 4, 5, 6, 7. Yet these Doctors did not much increase this Bibliotheque
until the time of David. The Prince assisted with some Prophets, divided the
Priests and Levites into diverse Classes, who were to serve by turns: But this
Order was the cause of a great confusion amongst the holy Levites, whereof none
took care, but when his turn was come. Thence proceeds the disorder which is
remarked in the Collection of the Psalms: David gave them to the Levites, who
were in their Week, according as he composed them; each Classis kept those
which had been remitted to it: In fine, there was a Collection made, joining
together what each Classis had received, without having regard to the Order or
time in which they were Written. The same thing sometimes hapened, in regard to
the Sermons of the Prophets, Habac. 2.2; which having been entrusted to diverse
Priests, were gathered, according to this Method, and put into the number of
the Sacred Books. As in the time of Malachy, they began to have too much esteem
for Traditions, and to attribute unto them an Authority, which weakened that of
the Sacred Writings; this Prophet discovered the Imposition of the Levites, who
gave way to these Traditions Malac. 2.8, 9.
because it augmented their credit. He prohibited, for the future, that any
Writing whatever should be put into the Sacred Volumes upon their Word, and
before it had been compared with the Law of Moses, Malach. 4.4.
which he would have to be as the Rule to all Books: Thence it comes, that
after him nothing was added to the Canon of the Holy Writings. I cannot believe
that this was done by the advice or order of some Ecclesiastical Assembly.
There are no Footsteps of these sorts of Assemblies in Scripture, and it is
evident that God would not suffer that there should be any; least it should be
thought, that the Authority of his Word depended on the Will of Man; or that
the Church, under this pretense, should attribute to it self the right of
Pronouncing upon the Canon, and to reject, or admit the Books, as it should
think fit. If the Church had this power, there are many Prophetical Writings
which we should miss: undoubtedly we should not have the Prophesies of
Jeremiah, to whom the whole College of Priests, and all the ordinary Prophets
were opposed; and it is absurd to say, that the Church had this Power one time,
and not another. God gave Credit enough to Moses, in speaking to him in the
sight of all Israel, Exodus xix. 14. and his Writings never wanted the Authority
of any Assembly to be received. As to the other Prophets, Do you ask how their
Books were received, or how they have been preserved? It is a conduct of
Providence, which I adore without comprehending its ways. It has not yet been
proved that we owe this obligation to the Pharisees, or Rabbis in particular.
It is to the Jewish People in General that St. Paul gives the Title of
Depositors of the Divine Oracles, Romans 3.

Several other Questions of Critics are treated of in these Letters, of
Divinity and Morality. If Boaz Let. 68. and 69.
Espoused Ruth by virtue of the Right of Next-a-Kin? What Motive compelled the
Gibeonites to feign that they were come from a far Country? If the Seven
Nations of the Canaanites were not of the number of those to whom God had
commanded Peace to be offered? It Is Answered, That these Seven Nations were
excepted, and not contained amongst those to whom Peace was to be offered;
Deuteronomy. 20.10, 15.
That the Gibeonites being of their number, saw themselves obliged to put a
Guile upon the Israelites, to be received amongst their Allies; that this
having been Sworn, it was not permitted to break it, because it was not the
Israelites who had offered Peace, but the Gibeonites which had demanded it; a
Conjuncture upon which God pronounced nothing, and which seemed even to exempt
them also: Submission being a mark of Faith, see Joshua 11.9. and compare the
example of Rahab, Ios. 2. Yet as the Gibeonites had obtained this Alliance by
deceit, and remained in the midst of Palestine, for fear they should corrupt
the People, they were obliged to Abjure Idolatry; and an Employment was given
them, which kept them with the Priests. As for the other People which the
Israelites Conquered, they were suffered to live in their Religion, as it
appears by the Example of the Neighboring Nations, whom David made Tributaries.

It is Asked if the Daughter of Iephtha ought to have been Sacrificed, and it is
Answered, Yes? Diverse Questions are put about the Baptism of little Children,
if it canbe Administered without the Temples, and set Hours, or by Laics? upon
which occasion our Author makes the History of this Sacrament, and concludes,
that we ought to Conform our selves in this to the use of the Church wherein we
live: that it is absurd to have the Public stoop to our own particular
Customs; and that a Protestant, who threatens to separate himself, for these
things, from the Communion of a Church, has already abandoned it, seeing he
has a design to trouble the Peace thereof, and that he can suffer no Order but
that which he establishes: L.LXX. Other Questions upon Baptism of Infidels,
may be seen in L.XCVIII.

Those who would have it, that the Prophets who followed Moses, made
alterations in his Writings; and those who suspect that the Pentateuch is a
Collection of some other Prophet, who lived a long while after, and composed it
upon the Memoirs of this Lawgiver, commonly do cite, to prove their Hypothesis,
the Passages of the Five Books of Moses, where there are Names which were not
in use in his time. That of Genesis, Chap. xiv.14. where it is said, that
Abraham pursued the Five Kings unto Dan, seems one of the strongest, seeing it
is evident by Josh. xix.47. and Judges xviii.29. that this City was called
before Leschem, or Lais. Mr. Alting Answers, It Is likely there were Three
Cities of this Name, Leschem and Lais being perhaps different Cities, to which
the Danites gave the Name of their Father; and that of Genesis, being, it may
be, a Third City situate near the source of Jordan: If we may not rather say,
that it is at the very source of Jordan. And this source was but Ten Miles from
Sidon; whereas Lais seems to be distant enough from it, Judge. xviii.7, 28. This
same source was very distant from the Territories of the Tribe of Dan, being at
the South of Naphtali and Asher. There is no likelihood that these two Tribes
should permit the Danites to seize upon Cities, which were fallen unto them by
Lot; nor that the Idol of Micah, to which the Tribe of Dan gave Public
Adorations, was erected so far from their Land, Judge. xviii.18, 30, 31. All
this makes our Author believe, that Lais was situate near Ioppe, more than
Forty Miles from Sidon, since it is said, it lived after the Fashion of the
Sidonians, because it was washed with the Sea, that it subsisted by Commerce,
and that its Government was Democratick, as well as that of that Famous
Republic, L.lxxx. and the Letters lxxxiii, lxxxiv, lxxxvii, lxxxviii, are
Burman's and Alting's, and Treat of several Questions, wherein these Two
Divines differed in their Opinion, concerning the duration of the Sanhedrin,
and the Scribes of the Old Testament: What the Face of God signifies in the
first Precept of the Decalogue? If the Seven Epistles of the Apocalypse are
Prophetical? The CXIV. contains Two Curious Questions of Morality: Whether it
be lawful for a Christian to wear Modest Ornaments, and to get his Livelihood
in making Lace, Ribbands, Perukes, etc. After the Letters are Two Dissertations
upon the Hebrew Tongue; the first Treats of its Names, Iudaic, Hebraic and
Holy: The Second shows, that 'twas God himself who Taught Man this Tongue.

The Manner of Thinking well, as it has a Relation to the Operations of the
Mind. In Dialogues. At Paris, Sold by the VVidow of Sebastian Mabre-Cramoisy,
1687. in Quarto, p. 402. And at Rotterdam by Reinier Leers.
IT is not difficult to find out the Author of the Dialogues of Aristus and
Eugenius. Here we find the same Form and Politeness, with a Collection of the
finest places of the best Authors, done by a delicate Hand. Yet we are not more
charmed with the choice of things, than with the pleasant turn, and refined
manner, wherewith they are united, and which will very well bear a second or
third review by the Reader. As the Definition of an Art is, the manner of
well-doing a thing; so this Work seems, at first sight, to be the same thing
with a French Logic, attributed to the Gentlemen of the Port Royal, and
Entitled, The Art of Thinking. Wherefore Father Bouhours thought himself
obliged to say in a Preface, That his Object was different, and that he has
not proposed the Teaching how to form Ratiocinations, with all the exactness
that Reason requires, assisted with Reflections and Precepts; but that his end
was to observe those Ingenious Sentiments which are called Thinking, as it has
a relation to the Operations of the Mind. So that one regards exact Reason,
and the other a good Relish and Fine Wit. The Two Persons that are to maintain
the Four Dialogues, whereof this Work is composed, are adorned with all the
Gifts which can render Conversation Ingenious and Sparkling. Science has not
spoiled them, nor have they much less Politeness than Learning. The Judgment of
the one is good, and nothing pleases him but what is Reasonable and Natural:
And all that is Glittering and Bright charms the other. It Is this difference of
their Judgments which is the Subject of their Dispute. If there should a new
Cleanthes arise, he would perhaps find that Father Bouhours could as well say,
without Complements, that he himself has all the Good Qualities, seeing he is
here both Eudoxius and Philanthus, as he formerly was Aristus and Eugenius. In
short, unfold the matter (to wit) blot out those imaginary Names, and the
Elogiums run immediately back to the Author. This severe Critic would perhaps
let go some fine Raillery, because Father Bouhours makes the Conversation
proceed from the doubts upon the French Tongue proposed to the Academy by a
Country Gentleman. Philanthus found his Friend intent upon this Book, and the
business could neither be more agreeable, nor more necessary to the will of
Father Bouhours. But this place ought not to be examined with rigor. The
^tenderness of a Father left him, and he could not retain his love for this
exposed Child, which bears not the Name of him that gave it Birth. Do we not
forgive the Transports of a Mother for her Infant, because of Nature? This
secret power draws us as 'twere against our Will, and possesses all the
affections of our hearts.

The first Thought that falls under the Censure of Father Bouhours, is that of
Lucan, in this Verse so famous; Victrix causa Diis placuit; sed victa Catoni.
The Gods serve Caesar, and Cato follows Pompey.


He says, That notwithstanding the Adorers of this Poet, it has only a fine
appearance; and that when it is examined into, it is no good Sense. For it
represents the Gods upholding the Unjust Party, as was that of Caesar, who
Sacrificed his Country to his Ambition, and Oppressed the Public Liberty. But
good Sense will suffer the Gods to approve of the Unjustice of an Usurper. And
Cato being a Man of worth, according to the Poet, there is no reason to oppose
him to the Gods, and to give him even the advantage over them. That would
destroy his Character of Virtue. Notwithstanding, the Friends of Lucan might
say, that his Thought should be examined by the Spirit that reigned then
amongst the Heathen. The Pagans, far from making any scruple to put their Gods
in the unjust Party, made use of a way, in relation to them, which was not the
most respectful in the World: On the contrary, they would sling them out of the
Windows when they were not well satisfied with them; and it has been observed,
that Alexander was so angry because they had let Hephestion dye, that after
having said a Thousand Injurious things to them, he destroyed their Altars.
According to this opinion of Father Bouhours's, there is no good Sense in all
the Aeneids of Virgil. For one of the finest places is the Anger of Juno, who
persecuteth pious Aeneas, and utterly resolves the loss of so good a Man, in a
passion, because Paris did not think her handsome. As for Cato, all the World
knows, that those who were educated as he was in the Opinions of the Stoics,
had not a Piety so exact. Seneca would say boldly, That the Prosperity of Sylla
was the crime of the Gods. The quality of Honest Man that was given to Cato,
regards only his unshaken Love for the Public Liberty and Good wherewith he
was animated. So the Poet that makes him a Hero upon that account, by a noble
and bold thought, puts the resolution of Cato in balance with the Power of the
Gods, and the Fortune of Caesar. The Reader charmed with so fine a stroke, does
not stand to decide the Quarrel of Caesar with Pompey, nor to examine, which of
the two had most justly unsheathed his sword. Father Bouhours, after having
marked that Breboeus mistook the Sense of Lucan, and that he has been a little
remiss in this place; begins to give Rules to discover a True Thought. He
says, That it ought to be Natural, and far from those Lustres which have no
Solidity; that it ought to be a faithful Image of the Thing it Represents, and
always founded upon Truth. Not but that a Thought which runs upon a Fiction,
may be Just, provided it be authorized in the Fable: but the points of Wit
which the Italians call Vivezze d'ingegno, are not agreeable to the Judgment of
this Age. Metaphors well placed produce a handsome effect; and they are very
ingeniously compared to Transparent Vails, which let us see what they cover.
The Author disapproveth not Equivocations: For example, this of Mr. Voiture, in
favor of the Coachman that had overturned Cardinal Mazarin. He thought he
could hazard nothing in overturning you, says he to him, because you always
fall upon your feet. The true sense of this Equivocation was, that nothing
overturned either his Designs or Fortune, and that his Wit was still in the
same situation, and drew him out of the most entangling Affairs. But if the
Reputation of Mr. de Voiture made it be approved in that time, we may doubt it
would not now have the same success. Our Age; delicate even to a scruple, loves
not the Games of Wit, wherein Ambiguity makes all the Finery; wherefore he adds
here, that they become nauseous, and insipid, even at the very instant that we
think to gain credit by 'em. A mysterious appearance that forms a double sense,
causes a secret despite; when having sought long to find the true meaning, we
perceive it to be a thing of so little value. Hyperboles, so dear to the
Italians and Spaniards, have a little more credit, provided there is nothing
excessive in them. For Virtue it self cease from being so, as soon as it runs
into Extremities: and it was permitted to Mr. de Balzack only to speak with a
Grave Tone things that were extreme. If they are too harsh, they must be
sweetened with Terms, and so prepare the Mind for it, that it might not be
obliged to revolt. Notwithstanding they lie, according to Quintillian, without
deceiving, and lead to Truth by a Lie; because something on it is always abated,
and the intent of it is reduced to a reasonable Sense. And if the exactness of
thoughts makes the beauty of the Work, we must not be litigious with a Sporting
Writer, who, in a small debauch of Wit, speaks a World of Follies to please
himself. Then too much strictness would be a Fault. And as a Woman ought not to
be regularly dressed but for Ceremonious days, so the'yre only grave and
important Pieces, where all ought to be in the utmost exactness.

After that, the Author relates Examples of false Thoughts, that he has drawn
(if our Conjecture be true) from Essays of Morality. He condemns much this
Moral Reflection: When Ignorant Persons see these great Libraries, they imagine
a Man happy, or capable to know all that was contained in these Collection of
Volumes, which they consider as Treasures of Light. But they are mistaken; for
if all that should be reunited in one head only, it would not either be more
Regular, or more Wise: It would but augment its Confusion, and darken its
Light. Yet the Fancy is neither altogether just, nor altogether false. For if
there are Wits capable of disintangling all these Idea's; there are a great
many more to whom Reading does but produce disorder and obscurity. And, as the
design is to make Men perceive the unprofitableness and vanity of Human
Sciences, there was no great danger of pushing the Reflection a little beyond
the Truth. Father Bouhours also condemns the false Motions of Preachers. He
Laughs at him, who, examining the Reason why Jesus Christ, after his
Resurrection, first appeared to Mary, says* That it was because God would have
the Mystery of his Rising to be Public, and that a Secret of this Importance,
in the hands of a Woman, would speedily be spread every where. He maintains,
that if Custom has authorized, in Profane Works, such Thoughts, as make
Fortune enter in the shape of a Person, that is like the trifling and
Chimerical Divinity which the Pagans thought presided over Events, and
dispensed Good or Evil, according to its Capriciousness; it ought now to be
banished, because it savors too much of the Fable, and Paganism. After which he
merrily proposes this Question, Whether we may, with exactness, say, That the
Heart is more ingenious than the Mind? But why should it not be said, Seeing
those that Love have their sight more fine, and quick, than the most
apprehensive persons? Nothing escapes Love, it refines above all things, and
knows how to deceive the most clear-sighted. This opposition of the Heart and
Mind may be very delicatly applied: And can there be any thing juster than
this, The Mind cannot personate the Heart very long?

At the beginning of the Second Dialogue, the Author gives us to observe, That
from the Elevation of our Thoughts should proceed a certain Sublimity, that
transporteth even to ravishment. He cites this Magnificent Elogy that Seneca
gives to Cicero, That he is the only Wit that the Romans had equal to their
Empire: and this of Horace; That Caesar brought into subjection the whole
Universe, except the fierce and invincible Soul of Cato.

After this, is a long Chain of Passages of diverse Authors, and a very Polite
Commentary upon the finest places of Tatius. He shows, that this Poet robbed
others; but that sometimes he so pleasantly stole from them, that his Thefts
were pardonable. Father Bouhours ingenuously confesses, that he is not violent
for the Ancients; and it is easily seen that the Moderns have very much Charmed
him. Wherefore he rangeth himself in the Sentiment of Chancellor Bacon, who
said, That the Antiquity of Ages was the Youth of the World; and that in
Accounting justly, we are properly the Ancients. Those that will be willing to
determine of his Judgment, may do it by examining the Choice of such Thoughts as
he cites for Examples of Nobility and Majesty. In this great number, the
Praises of the King are not omitted. It is, say they, a Noble Thought, to tell
him, That he has the Looks of a Hero; and that if the Title of Majesty was not
due to his Rank, it would be to his Person: That he is not like those, that
would be Nothing if they ceased to be Kings: but that the Hero is greater in
him than the King, and that there is nothing above his Dignity but his Merit.

We shall add, that in the high Elevation Kings are placed, they seldom taste,
without mixture, the pleasure of being Praised, because it may be perplexed
with this unquiet Thought, that in their Persons is not adored the Fortune
whereof they are Masters; and by this Reflection, so Judicious in a Prince: I
should be proud of the Praises that are given me, if those that give them to me
durst tell me the contrary.

Comparisons also produce a handsome effect, where they are rich and noble, well
chosen, and borrowed from the greatest Subjects of Nature and Art. They must
not be too bold, neither ought they also to be condemned with too much
precipitation; because with them often it is the same, as with those Pictures;
where that which seems at first to offend the sight, by strokes too strong and
particular, is a happy boldness, and a Masterpiece of Work in the eyes of
understanding Men.

In the matter of Comparisons it is said, that the Prince of Conde said one day,
after having read the Lives of St. Ignatius and St. Xavier; St. Ignatius Caesar
who never did any thing without good Reasons: St. Xavier Alexander whose
Courage hurried him away sometimes.

The Author ravished with so happy a Comparison, finds a wonderful Relation
between the Character of these Two Apostolical Men, and th^se Two Famous
Conquerors. For St. Ignatius was Illustrious by his fine Achievement in Arms,
and in leaving the World, he lost not his Warlike Ideas: On the contrary, he
conceived the Affairs of God under these Martial Images, whereof his head was
filled; and it was in the Meditation of the Two Standards that he formed the
Draught of his Order, and in the same Mind he gave it a WARLIKE NAME, calling
it the Society of Jesus. As for St. Xavier, as he has made many Evangelical
Conquests in the Indies, so there is no Injustice in comparing him to Alexander
the Conqueror of Asia; both having always followed the ardour that animated
them, without being frightened at the perils inseparable from great Designs. But
both have sometimes suffered themselves to be transported with their Courage,
and have almost passed the bounds of Heroic Virtue. Can there be any thing
more Noble, or that can give a higher and more magnificent Idea of the Society,
than to make these Two Founders equal with these Two Heroes, who have brought
the World under their Yoke, and founded the Two Greatest Empires in the World?
We must not therefore wonder, if the ORDER have kept the Spirit of CONQUERING,
and this Warlike Humor, that makes People submit to it.

To awake the Mind of the Reader, Father Bouhours observes, that the Gallant
Strain has its Licenses as well as the Poetic. He gives a Picture, (or rather
Translation) of the Despair of the unfortunate Dido, and of the Habitation of
Lovers in Hell. Virgil seats them in places besprinkled with Tears, and in
Solitudes under the shadow of Myrtles; because Melancholy does not abandon them
even in the Habitation of Death. He confesses, that his heart is touched with
this Thought, and that nothing makes us more sensible, how far this foolish
Passion reaches. He very gallantly Laugheth at the folly of Orpheus, who went
in search of his Wife even to Hell. The Torments of the Unhappy were suspended,
according to his Opinion, more by the surprise that this Husband gave by his
New Enterprise, than by his Melodious Voice: And the God of Hell, being touched
to see him re-enter into such hard bonds, snatched his Wife from his hands to
recompense his Music.

After the Thoughts of Pleasantness, Men pass to those that are delicate; If
you ask of me (says he) what delicateness of Meat or Music is, it would not
be hard to content you: But I do not know where I should meet with Terms to
expound a delicate Thought. It suffices not to say, it is the finest
production, and even the most Curious Piece of Wit; it must be added, that it
contains a Sense, which is not visible enough to transport us of a sudden. It
resembles not those Sheperdesses, whereof the great Strokes offer themselves
immediately to our eyes; but such Masterpieces, where Nature works by little,
and whose Matter and Structure, almost imperceptible, make us doubt whether it
has a design to show, or hide its Address. For an Example of this Delicacy,
which leaves more to be Thought on than is said, we'll cite this place of
Cardinal Bentivoglio; The Illustrious Birth and great Merit of the Marquess of
Spinola made him a Grandee of Spain before he was so. Is not here a little
Point and Game of Wit rather than Delicateness? This Stroke of the Panegyrist
of Theodosius the Great appears more fine. You have, says he to him, so acted,
that no Man thinks himself Conquered when you are Victorious: and that of
Cornelius, that makes Sabina say, being divided betwixt her Love to her Husband
Horatius, and her Tenderness for her Brother Curiatius; I fear our Victory as
much as our Loss:
Rome, if thou complainest that this is to betray thee,
Make thy self Enemies that I can hate.


The Application of these two last lines to a Catholic who had changed his
Religion, to Espouse a Huguenotish Woman, I believe is no less delicate than
the Thought it self. It Is a great Art continues the Author, to know how to
Praise well; and no kind of Eloquence requires turns so delicate as this. A
gross Praise, that is, a Praise that is affected, or strained, and which is in
no wise concealed, makes Rational Persons ashamed. A false Praise renders those
ridiculous that are praised; Whilst the Praises that are acute flatter their
Self-love, and satisfy their Vanity.

At the beginning of the Third Dialogue is his Critics upon Thoughts, wherein
too much Affectation and Art appears. It Is a defect that costs much: But the
Reader loves not to perceive the Work of the Author, and will not have us show
him all the efforts that we make to please him. He imagins, that we would
ravish his approbation. A Painted Discourse (if I may use the Expression) and
too exact, as much displeases delicate Minds, as high flights displease Men of
a good Judgment. Artifice spoileth Nature. A Thought is vicious in a sublime
strain, when it is too far sought, and too much extended. True Greatness ought
to have Just Measures: or to express our selves more Figuratively, A Discourse,
like to a River, quiet in its Course, should not overflow, nor become of a
sudden an impetuous Torrent, which produces a Noise, and falls into
Precipices. The Spaniards only are lovers of these Foppish Thoughts, and
Chymerical Pomp, which they insert with so much Pride into their Works.

Lucan also sometimes raises things a little too high, and beyond their
Nature. Is there not an excess in this Flattery, wherewith he treated Nero? For
after having lamented the evils of the Civil War, he again cries out, But if
the Destinies would not give Nero to the World, but only in lieu of so many
Evils, let us no more complain of any thing, we are very willing to buy him at
that price.

Iam nihil, O superi, querimur, scelera ista nefasque
Hac Mercede placent.
It Is likewise a Vice to affect too much Finery in Ornaments, and it often
happens that we Please not, for having too much Wit. For Example, these Verses
are drawn from a Treatise, which has passed for a Masterpiece, and where the
Author Paints a Fountain: Within this Grove a Liquid Cristal Glides,
Which like a Mirror made of Frozen Glass,
Shows every Passenger his Mien and Face.


There is nothing natural in this. On the contrary it may be said, that it
would be finer if it were less, and that it were better a Thought should be a
little more Dim, than to be so bright. It is sufficient to adorn, without
setting it off with so many false colors. Seneca the Tragedian often falls
into this Fault. He Is so much afraid lest a fine Thought should escape the
Hearer, than he sets it off with all the colors that can render it pleasing.
Pressed on by the heat of his imagination he will have every thing sparkling in
his Works. But it is a sign of great Wit to stop, and know how to make an end
when it is necessary. The Passions, of all things, will not be too ingenious.
The agitation they cause suffers no motions that are exquisite, for Nature
expounds it self more simply. In fine, Men Preach too acutely, because the
Thought being too much refined, degenerates into subtility, and evaporation. It
is with them, as with Works that are over-fine, which have no solidity, and
where Art is no more sensible, because there is too much on it. The Author upon
this proceeds to Tacitus, because his reflections are too refined. Every thing
is a Mystery with him, and he relates not things as they fell out, but as he
imagines they might have been. That is the Turn, adds he, that pleases one
of those Apes of Tacitus, who thinks to be as great in counterfeiting him, and
in giving us noble Idea's which his Imagination furnishes him with, as also
Political Mysteries forged by his own brain, which he has added to his Memoirs.

The Fourth Dialogue is designed to recommend to us the care we ought to have
for neatness of phrase. The Mind is not agreeably touched, when it is put to too
much trouble to clear the obscurity of the thought. He shows here, the
difference betwixt Gallimatius and Phoebus. Gallimatius (says he) is
incomprehensible, and dark on every side, Phoebus is less obscure, and seems to
signify something fine. Does it belong to Phoebus to call the Long Robes of
Women, Hyperbole's of Cloth? The Author relates the unimitable Models of
Gallimatius, and the Abbot of St. Cyran furnished him with the chief of 'em.
The Adorers of Aristotle have invented a most honorable reason to excuse his
obscurity. They said, that the Ambition of Alexander could not endure that all
the World should know as much as he did; and that these Mysterious ways
produced more veneration to the sublimity of the Matter. But why should any one
Write when he has no mind to be understood? He thinks that this Reflection is
not well displayed, how fine soever it appears: Gravity is a Mystery of the
Body, invented to hide the faults of the Mind. These Terms, a Mystery of the
Body, are not altogether intelligible. Obscure Thoughts resemble those Pits,
whose depth surprizeth the Sight; or such Persons as have always their Masks on
their Faces, so that they cannot be known.

Is not this to lead the Reader into byways, where perpetual Night Reigns, or
at least a very dull day? There are besides so great a number of fine things
mixed together in this Work, that it appears to be made only for the
Imagination, and to please the Ears; that one is dazzled with the variety of
Objects. It must be granted that Father Bouhours had the advantage of Youth in
his Age, for he appears as Polite and Sparkling as in the Dialogues of Aristus
and Eugenius, which was Writ Twenty years before. His Wit has always the same
advantages, and resembles not in any thing the Melancholy common to Old Age,
which is an Enemy to the Graces and Charms of Raillery, under pretense that it
no longer becomes it: A great Wit, once said, that an Honest Man ought to be of
all Professions, and to make no show of his own. And here he may be pleased,
for the Author does it without discovering his.

The History of a Christian Lady of CHINA: Where occasionally the Customs of
these People, and the Exercises of Piety of the New Christians, are explained.
At Paris, by Stephen Michalet, 1681. in Twelves, p. 151.
THis is a Second Work of Father Cauplet's, who, after having given in his
First Treatise an exact Idea of the Philosophy of the Famous Confucius, and of
the Principal Sciences of the Chinois, was willing, in this, to instruct us in
the Life and excellent qualities of a Christian Lady of China: to which he adds
the Relation of the Manners and particular Intreagues of some of the
Missionaries, and of the Establishment of the Christian Religion in this great
Kingdom.

Yet he first declares, that he pretends only to give here an Abridgment of the
Life of this Illustrious Lady; and that he intends to edify the Public by a
more Ample Relation of her Virtuous Actions; which if we Judge of them by this
Abridgment, ought to be very surprising, and the worthy Subject of an Apotheose.

The Author begins his History with relating, in a few words, who were the
Ancestors of this Heroine; their Life, their Manners, their Employments, and
their happy Calling to Christianity, in spite of the blind Error and Idolatry
wherein they were plunged for so long a time.

He insists most a Discourse upon Paul Siu, her Grandfather, who, he says, was
not only the Introducer and Protector of the Missionaries at the Emperor of
China's Court, but also the Apostle and Doctor of his Nation, by the
Translation of several Books and Treatises of the Christian Religion, and even
by the Learned Apologies he made in its favor in the Chinoise Language.

He observes that Paul Siu was one of the Colao, which are the Chief Ministers
of State, and the Great Officers of the Empire. From whence he takes occasion
to speak of Matthew Riccius and Adam Schall Jesuits, and of their Entry into
the Court of China, which was effected by the means of the Mathematics, and
Reformation of the Calendar they undertook, whereof he relates the Particulars:
adding, that after Five years labor of these good Missionaries, Paul Siu took
the pains to Revise and Translate into his Tongue their Works, with all the
Elegance that could be expected from the most able and intelligent Man of all
China: Which sufficiently shows, that no Science ought to be neglected: since
the simplicity of Evangelical Doctrine would have rendered useless the
important projects of this Mission, if it had not been upheld by Astronomy, to
which, with the Protection of this Great Minister, it owes its Establishment.

After that, the Author comes to the particulars of the Life, and Pious
Employments of the Granddaughter of Paul Siu, which he makes to consist almost
wholly in Alms, building of Churches, and Ornaments for Chapels, the particular
Chapter of the Missionaries, which they commonly imbellish with the most
pathetick Figures to touch the Consciences, and inspire the most hardened
hearts with compassion.

Yet that nothing might be objected against the great Liberalities of this
Lady, who was a Widow indeed, but had many Children; he says, that her Work,
and that of her Daughters, was sufficient to have furnished all her Charities,
which were so prodigious, that at one time she gave 220000 Livers to the
Jesuits. She was so scrupulous, that she could not suffer her Son to Employ for
the Maintaining of the Mission, the Money he got by his Employments: fearing
lest what he got in the Tribunals of Justice, should not be acquired by lawful
means.

This Example would be dangerous to be proposed, if our Devotee's in the West
had such tender Consciences on this Subject, as the Proselytes of the East.

He afterward Treats of the different Congregations that were established in
the Provinces of China, on the account of this Christian Lady, who is the
Mother and Benefactress thereof; and plentifully furnishes them with Pictures
of the Passion, Images, Beads, Agm^s Dei's, Crosses, Medals, and other such
things as may serve to the Instruction of New Converts.

And on this occasion he makes mention of the Conversion of the Bonzes, which
would easily be effected in giving each Thirty Crowns a year, since the fear
only of seeing themselves miserable and abandoned, hinders them from embracing
the Christian Religion, whereof in their hearts they acknowledge the Excellency
and Truth.

These are the Efficacious Means with which our Modern Apostles Convert Pagans
as well as Heretics. But it is much to be feared that this Character of
Interest does not agree with that of the Inspirations of the Spirit.

This was not the Motive to Madam Hiu (which was the Name of this Christian
Lady.) The Fervor of her Zeal did not permit her to be one moment at rest. She
went from City to City, and from Province to Province, to re-establish desolate
Churches, to build new ones, and to provide, in all places, for the wants, and
Assistance of the Missionaries and new Converts.

Her indefatigable cares were very useful in the time of a great Persecution,
which arose against them in 1664, which Father Couplet gives here the
particulars of.

They were accused of Inspiring into the People a Spirit of Rebellion; and of
persuading them to change their Religion; a Capital Crime in this Kingdom: and
they would infallibly have suffered the rage of their Enemies, had it not been
for diverse Prodigies that appeared in their favor, and which the Reiterated
Prayers of Madam Hiu obtained from Heaven.

We must not wonder at it, since her Devotion was so great, and so universal:
she observed all Duties of Piety, from the least unto the greatest, which she
acquitted admirably well.

Never was there a Life better employed. Women, Children, Old Men, the Poor,
and chiefly the Jesuits, were the continual Objects of her Care and Charity,
without interrupting thereby her particular Exercises of Meditation and Prayer,
which she Addressed to the Blessed Virgin, to whom she Devoted her self.

From whence the Author takes occasion to give us an account of the Devotion of
the Christians of China, which has scarcely any other object but the Virgin,
the Angels, St. Ignatius, and Saint Francis Xavier, and consists entirely in
the frequent Rehearsal of Litanies, and upon the number and measure of sundry
Adorations, and Reiterated Genuflections, which is as much as to say a kind of
Idolatry, disguised under the Name of Christianity.

This Remnant of Pagan Superstition disperses it self through all their Acts of
Religion, but particularly their Funeral Pomps, in which they express an ardent
zeal to make them very Magnificent, for their Parents and Friends; whose
Mourning and Ceremonies last many years after their death. This is it wherein
the Missioners have not had any great need of their Complaisance.

Father Couplet therefore confesses, that these Funeral days of Christians are
days of Triumph for Religion; and that the Magnificence of the Images wherewith
they adorn them, the Wax-Candles, the Perfumes and Incenses they employ
therein, make the Chinois look on them with admiration, and as People of a
singular Piety.

They have found by the Advice of Madam Hiu, the Secret of entering into several
Provinces, where they never had any establishment; in burying there the Bodies
of some of the Fathers of their Mission, having first asked leave to perform
their last duties to them, which lasts as long as the Devotion of Parents
finds it convenient, and often as long as they live.

Upon this Subject the Author gives us an Account of a Stone Table adorned with
the Figure of the Cross, and several Chinois and Syriack Inscriptions, which
were taken out of the Earth in 1625, in the Province of Kin-si. He pretends
that the Names of Seventy Preachers of the Gospel, which went from Palestine
into China, in the year 636, are Engraven thereupon, and amongst others those
of some Bishops: which he pretends are an Authentic Testimony of their Mission.

Howbeit, its Antiquity is considerable, and if the Truth on it was called into
Question, that joined to what I have said before, would suffice to show, how
Ingenuous the Devotion is, when the Propagation of Faith is questionable.

He passes from this to show the difficulties which the Missioners find in
that Country, for the Instruction of the Neophytes, and chiefly the Women, with
whom there is no Commerce in China, no more than in other parts of the East.

Which shows, that they must needs have extraordinary regards and managements
to succeed: to which the Charge of President of the Tribunal of Mathematics,
and the Title of Mandarin that the Emperor of China has given to Father Adam
Schall, and to Father Ferdinand Verbiest, successively, and which they accepted
of, with the consent of the Pope, has not a little contributed.

We must notwithstanding confess, if Father Couplet is to be believed, that
nothing has so much contributed to the advancement of Christianity in this
Empire, as the assiduous and charitable Cares of this Lady.

He imployeth the rest of his History to Relate some Surprising Particulars of
her Zeal and Piety.

He says that she has Founded near Thirty Churches in her Country; that she
also built Nine more, with Fine Houses in other Provinces; and that there is
neither Chapel, nor Oratory, nor Mission, nor Congregation, that has not had
share of her Liberalities; that she would even Correspond as far as the West,
after diverse Manners, to oblige, by her Example, the Christian Ladies to
imitate her industrious Piety.

That which is very surprising in this, is, That in all these Foundations, and
these particular Charities which she gave several Thousands of Persons, she
only employed the fruit of her Labor and Parsimony, without prejudicing the
Fortunes of her Children.

He ends with a Remark which the Death of Madam Hiu causes him to make, upon
the particular care that the Chinois show in all the Funeral Apparel of their
Burials.

They cause Rich Coffins to be made a long time before their Death; and even
the Children often do make a Present thereof to their Fathers and Mothers, as
did the Lord Basil Son to Madam Hiu, who gave her a Coffin worth Eight hundred
Crowns.

They buy Gardens; they build therein Houses and Chapels to be joined to their
Tombs: and the Great Mourning of the Parents who survive, answers well enough
to the Care which the Dead have taken of 'em, to preserve their Bones, and to
perpetuate their Memory.

'Twas in one of these places that the Body of Madam Hiu was Interred after she
dyed as she lived, to wit, as a Saint, whose Memory is blessed, to all the
Christians of China.

If her Death has not obstructed the Progress of the Gospel, their Number at
present ought to be very great; seeing the Author says, that at that time
there were Ninety Great Churches in one only Province, and that Fifteen
Thousand Children were Baptized a year in all CHINA.

But this we have only the Author's word for; be the whole true or false, it
shows what the Spirit of JESUITISM is, and it is of Use to Expose their
Ridiculous Principles.

The History of the East Indies, by Mr. Souchu de Reunefort. At Leyden, by
Frederick Harring, 1668. in Twelves, P. 571.
THe Great Advantages that Holland has drawn from the East India Companies
(which are become so famous throughout all the World) have caused other States
to form a Design of Erecting the like.

France especially, by reason of its Power and Advantageous Situation,
conceiving great hopes from this Enterprise, formed a Company in 1664. for the
Commerce of the East Indies. They made a Fund of Fifteen Millions, whereof the
King was pleased to advance Three; and his First Exploits were in the Isle of
Madagascar.

This Isle, the greatest of the known Seas, was occupied by the Marshal de la
Meilleraye for his particular profit; and the Company then, by Orders from the
King, took Possession of it. The Portuguese call it the Isle of St. Laurence,
because they discovered it on the Feast of this Saint; and the French called it
the Dauphine Island, in 1665.

The Description that is here made of it, gives a very pleasing Idea of the
same, whereas the Orange Trees, and Trees covered with Flowers, like the Jasmin
of Spain, by their mixture, form natural Arbours, which surpass all the
Regularity of Art. It produces all sorts of Animals, and particularly
Chameleons, whereof Naturalists have so variously spoken. The Author assures
us, that they take by the eyes the color of the Objects upon which they stay.

The Clothing of the Inhabitants is Fantastic enough, and their Past-times
gross and barbarous. He observes nevertheless a singular Ceremony amongst
them* which is, that the Master of the House offers the Fairest of his Women to
the Pleasure of those that come to Visit him; It is an Incivility, and even a
kind of Shame to make any Excuses. The Woman, on her part, is grieved, when her
Beauty acquireth only Looks.

The People of the Country are of a Large Size; they have a Proud Gate, and can
Dissemble as well as the most refined Nations. Their Blackness is unalterable,
and proceeds not from the heat of the Sun. The Cause is chiefly in their
Blood; for the French there are Born as White as at Paris.

The Author shows that these Black Women have the advantage of having a
constant Beauty, because it has not those inequalities and paleness of White
Faces, which renders our Beauties variable.

Marriage is there accompanied with no manner of Ceremonies. The Virgins make
none unhappy; and each takes a certain number of Women, according to his
Fortune, or his Quality.

There are no Temples seen in the Isle; and Circumcision, which is in use
amongst them, makes us judge, that the Jews or Mahometans have left there some
footsteps of their Religion. They Adore an Oly, which is a kind of a Cricket,
that they nourish with great care. When one Reproaches them that they prostrate
themselves before a vile Animal, they Answer very seriously, That through it
they respect the Author; and it being necessary to have some Object to fix the
Mind on, the lowest best represents the Homage which they owe to the true and
Sovereign Being.

The Beginnings of the Company was not Prosperous at Madagascar. The Jealousy
of Command divided the French; and that which hasted their Ruin in the Island,
was, that the Catholic Zeal came in for a share. A Missioner, willing to
Convert Dian Manangue, the most Valiant and full of Spirit of all the Princes
of the Insulars, without staying for the tediousness of Reasons and Persuasion,
made use of Force and Menaces.

Dian Manangue, that had been drawn into the Dauphin-Fort under pretense of a
Deliberation of War, perceiving the violent designs that were formed against
his Person, very cunningly feigned to yield himself, and set a day apart to be
Baptized. He returned very full of Trouble, and meditated the Cruel Tragedy
that he Executed some days after. For he Poisoned the Missioner who went to him
to perform the Ceremony; and Marching at the Head of a small Army, being
Clothed with the Surplis of the Missioner, and wearing the Square Cap upon his
Head, in an Insulting manner routed the French, and forced them to shut
themselves up within the Walls of the Fort Dauphin. Their Affairs were never
since re-established.

On the contrary, Dian Manangue having raised the Chief Men of Madagascar,
drove away almost all the French; and those that were left were forced to
abandon this Isle, which might have served as the Center for the Commerce to
the Indies.

The Company not being dismayed at these Ill successes, went further into the
Indies, and took Measures how to establish themselves at Suratte.

This Puissant City is under the Obedience of the Great Mogul, and there are
Inhabitants of all the Countries of the World. It is the Magazin of the Indies
and Asia, and perhaps the Chief City in the World for Traffic.

The Author makes some Remarks upon the Manners of the First Inhabitants of the
Country, and Affirms a thing that without doubt will find many Incredulous
Readers; That there are many Hermophrodites at Suratte, who, with Women's
Clothes wear Men's Turbants, for distinctions, and, to show all the World, they
have the advantage of both Sexes.

The Women for Decency and Honor are obliged to Burn themselves with the Body
of their Husbands, and give them, after their Death, this sad Mark of their
Love. Yet they ask permission of the Governor, who Grants it only according as
he thinks fit.

They seem to believe that Old Women Ask it with all their Hearts, and they are
permitted to Sacrifice their Sorrowful Remainder according to Custom.

As for the Young, they are Commanded to be Comforted, and are acquitted for
some Extraordinary Show of Grief.

In short, the Company has not made such progresses as answered what might be
expected from a Puissant Kingdom, and the Cares that had been taken to render
it Flourishing.

Of Nature it self: Or, an Ingenuous Disquisition into the received Notions of
Nature: In a Letter to a Friend. By the Honorable R. Boil, Esquire Fellow of the
Royal Society. In Twelves, at London.
ONE may see in the second Part of our Bibliotheque an extract of a Book taken
from the English Journal: All the Matters which are treated on in this Work are
well digested, but there is one thing wanting to render it conformable to our
Method, that is, to make an Abridgment of one of the Matters, and also to give
an Idea of it, and of the Author himself; but Mr. Boil having lately done us
the Honor to send it to us, we shall now supply the Defect, and set apart the
eighth Section for it.

After having explained by other Causes in the preceding Sections the greatest
part of the effects which we attributed to Nature, we shall here show that
though some of these Phaenomena's which some would have Nature to produce,
could not be explained by Mechanic Principles; yet it follows not that we must
have recourse to an Imaginary Cause which is expressed by that confused word
Nature, which gives us not to understand after what manner these effects are
produced; and to show that this pretended Principle of all Motions and of all
bodily Operations, is a Chimera, we demand of all Naturalists, If it is a
Substance or an Accident? If they answer that it is an Accident, we continue to
demand, What kind of Accident it is, and how it is possible that an Accident by
it self and separate, can produce Effects so different and extraordinary? If
they say it is a Substance, we ask of them, What sort of Substance? Created or
Increated? Corporal or Spiritual? And as they show which Side they incline, so
they lose themselves in such Absurdities as they cannot disengage themselves
from. Mr. Boil has not contented himself to maintain this System with so many
Reasons, but he also ends this Section by showing that it is not less profitable
than true. (1.) Because it seems to destroy the Opinion of those Heathen
Philosophers, who would make God the Soul of the World, and who would imagine
that the Soul of Man is part of his Substance; this is a Sentiment, which those
who make an exterior Profession of Christianity, have renewed in our days under
other Names, and which Mr. Boil styles wicked, pretending that their God is
very different to that of the Jews and Christians.

The second Use which the Author draws from his Method, is, to justify
Providence and the Divine Wisdom against Atheists, who pretend that all things
happen by pure Chance or Necessity, because of certain Events which they look
upon as Imperfections and Disorders, such as Earthquakes; Innundations,
Volcanos, the Plague, etc. which he explains according to his own Principles.

I. God being one perfect free Being who created the World as a pure effect of
his Bounty, when there was no Being besides himself, there could be no Bounds
put to his Works by any other Power, nor could he receive Laws of any Creature.

II. And as the Divine Intellect infinitely surpasses ours in Extension and
Penetration, we must believe that God created the World, and formed its
different Motions for various ends; some to serve for Corporal Creatures, and
some for Spiritual ones; those which are discovered to us to exercise our
Reason, and those which are hidden from us to make us adore the unsearchable
depth of his Wisdom.

III. We have Reason to think that this Infinite perfect Being has stamped his
Works with a Character in which we may discover his Divine Wisdom; this
Character is the Production of a great number of things, by a small number of
Principles, simple, uniform and worthy his Perfections.

IV. According to these Suppositions, God having duly established among other
parts of the World universal and constant Laws, and which should be conformable
to the ends he proposed to himself in creating them, did dispose of things in
such a manner, that the universal Laws should not contribute to the good of
particular Beings, but so long as these particular Beings should agree with the
simplicity and uniformity of these Laws, and with the designs of God. Thus
laying aside Miracles and Events, wherein God acts after a particular manner,
one might reasonably say that the infinite Wisdom, to whom all things are
present, having weighed all the Consequences of these Laws and all their
connexions in all their Circumstances, he always thought fit to prefer
(Miracles and other Cases excepted) the universal Laws to the particular ones,
the principal ends to the Subalternate, and the uniform Methods to an
Inconstant Administration. He thinks not fit to change these simple and pure
Laws, to prevent what Men call Irregularities, as Earthquakes, Innundations,
Flux and Refluxes of the Sea, the Eclypses of the Sun and Moon, etc.

V. He adds, That what appears Irregular to us, in comparing the Designs of God
with what we know may be a very wise Method, to find out these other ends which
are unknown to us; and it is very just to have this thought of God, since in
those Works of his which we know least, we see clearly so much Order and so
much Wisdom; we should have at least in this search as much Equity, as a Man of
a good understanding would have, when he judges of a Book that treats of many
Heads, and which is written in diverse Languages and Characters whereof he
understands but a part, if what he understands there pleases him, he imagines
he should not be dissatisfied with what he does not, if he could find out the
sense. Thus it must certainly be confessed, That the Eye was made to see, since
all the parts thereof are so composed, that they concur to form the Organs of
the the Eye.

VI. This Administration of God which discovers unto us clearly some of his
ends, and hides others from us, is worthy of his Wisdom; and adapted to our
Wants; for it convinces us of two Important Truths, That we are of our selves
but Imperfection and Darkness, and that It Is God which is the Light of our
Minds.

In fine, Mr. Boil believes that there may be drawn from this System this Use,
which is of great consequence in Religion, to wit, To look upon God as the only
Governor of the World, and to attribute to him the great variety of Effects,
which are falsely assigned to a Chimera of Nature.

An Extract of a Book, Entitled, A Philosophical Essay upon Human
Understanding, wherein is shown the Extension of certain Knowledge, and the
manner of attaining to it: By Mr. Lock.
BOOK I.
IN my Thoughts upon Human Understanding, I have endeavored to prove, That the
Mind of Man is at first like a Tabula rasa, a blank Paper, without Ideas and
Knowledge; but as this was to destroy the prejudice of some Philosophers, so I
was persuaded that in a small Abridgment of my Principles, I ought to pass by
all preliminary Disputes which compose the first Book: I intend to show, in the
following Discourses, the Source from whence we draw all Ideas which happen in
our Reasonings, and the manner how.

BOOK II.
The Intellect being supposed void of all sorts of Natural Ideas, comes to
receive them by degrees, as Experience offers them to it. If we will observe
them, we shall find that they all come from two Sources, to wit, from Sensation
and Reflection.

1. It Is evident that the outward Objects in striking our Senses, give diverse
Ideas to our Minds, that they had not before. Thus it is that we have the Ideas
of Red, Blew, Sweet, Bitter; and all the rest that are produced in us by
Sensation. I believe that these Ideas of Sensation are the first Ideas of the
Thought, and that until such time as the outward Objects have furnished to the
Mind these Ideas, I do not see that there is any Thought.

2. The Mind in attending upon its proper Operations, which regard the Ideas
that happen to it by Sensation, comes to have Ideas of these same Operations
which are in it. And this is the other Source of our Ideas, that I call
Reflection; by whose means we have our Ideas of Thinking, Willing, Reasoning,
Doubting, Resolving, etc.

Its from these two Principles that all the Ideas come to us that we have; and
I believe I may boldly say, that our Mind has absolutely no other Ideas, but
those which our Senses do present to it, and the Ideas that it has of its
proper Operations, received by the Senses. This clearly appears by those that
are born Deaf or Blind. It follows, Secondly, That if we could suppose a Man
that had been always destitute of all his Senses, he would have no Idea,
because he never would have an Idea of Sensation, the exterior Objects having
no way to produce any in him but by the means of his Senses; nor an Idea of
Reflection, because of the want of all manner of Sensation, which is that that
exciteth first in him these Operations of his Mind, which are the Objects of
his Reflection. For there being in the Mind no innate or natural Idea, to
suppose the Mind occupied by Ideas, before it has received them from without,
is to suppose a thing contradictory.

For the better understanding of what I would say, when I affirm that we have
not, nor can have any Idea, but from the Sensations or from the Operations of
the Mind upon its Ideas, we must consider that they are of two kinds; Simple
and Complex. It is of the Simple that I now speak, such as are the whiteness of
this Paper, the sweetness of this Sugar, etc. where the Mind perceives no
variety, nor any composition, but a perception only, or a uniform Idea. I say
that we have none of these Ideas but by Sensation, or by Reflection. The Mind
in this regard is absolutely passive, and cannot produce to it self any new
Idea, though of those that it already has it may compose others, and so make
thereof Complex Ideas, with a very great variety, as shall be seen in the
following Discourse. Therefore though we cannot deny but it was as possible to
God to give us a sixth Sense, as it was to give us the five we have;
nevertheless we cannot form to our selves any Idea, that might come to us by
the sixth Sense; and that for the same Reason that one born Blind has no Idea
of Colors, because it cannot be had but by means of one of those five Senses,
whereof he has always been destitute.

I do not see that it is necessary to make here an Enumeration of all the Ideas
that are the particular Objects of each of the Senses; because it would not be
of any great use for my Design, to give a list of Ideas, whereof the most part
present themselves of their own accord, and because the greatest part have no
Names; for Colors excepted, and some few Qualities that are perceived by the
Touch, to which Men have given particular Names (although a great deal less
than their great variety would require) Taste, Odours and Sounds, whereof the
diversity is not less, have but seldom Names, except in general Terms. Though
the taste of Milk and the taste of Cherries, are as far distant as white is
from red; notwithstanding we do not see that they have particular Names. Sweet,
Sour, Salt, Rough and Bitter, are almost all the Names we have for an infinite
number of different Sapors that are found in Nature. Therefore without applying
my self to make an Enumeration of the simple Ideas, that belong to each Sense,
I shall only mark that some of these Ideas are carried to the Mind by one only
Sense, as the Colors by that of the Sight, the Sounds by the Ear, the Hot and
the Cold by the Touch. Besides these, are others that come to the Mind, by more
than one Sense, as Motion, Rest, Space and Figures, which are apprehended by
the Sight and the Touch. There are also Ideas of Reflection alone, as those of
Thinking, of Willing, and of all their different manners. In fine, There are
others that we receive by all the Methods of Sensation and Reflection; as
Numbers, Existence, Power, Pleasure, etc.

These in general are all the simple Ideas, or at least the most part, whereof
we are capable, and which are the Subject of all our Notions, of which all the
other Ideas are composed, and beyond which we have neither Thought nor
Knowledge. Chapters 3, 4, 5, and 6.

7. I shall yet remark something about simple Ideas, after which I shall show
how the Complex ones are composed, viz. That herein we are easily mistaken, and
that we often judge that they are Resemblances of some things which is in those
Objects, that perform them in us; but for the most part they are nothing like,
although they lead us to the consideration of the manner whereby Bodies operate
upon us by means of the Senses. I only pretend to expound Historically the
Nature of the Understanding, and to mark the way and manner by which our Mind
receives the subject of its Notions, and by what degrees it comes at them; I
should be unwilling to engage my self here, into a Physical Speculation. It Is
notwithstanding necessary to expound briefly this subject, to avoid Confusion
and Obscurity. For the better discovering the Nature of sensible Ideas, and
making 'em more intelligible, it is necessary to distinguish 'em as they are
Perceptions, and Ideas of our Mind, and as they form in Bodies the Causes of
those Perceptions that are in us.

I call an Idea every immediate Object, every Perception that is in our Mind,
when it thinks. I call quality of the Subject the power, or the faculty it
has, of producing a certain Idea in the Mind. Thus I call Ideas, Whiteness,
Coldness, Roundness, etc. as they are Perceptions or Sensations in the Soul;
and when they are in a Ball of Snow, that can produce these Ideas in us, I call
them qualities

The original qualities that may be remarked in Bodies, are Solidity, Extent,
Figure, Number, Motion or Rest. In whatever quality the Bodies may be, these
qualities cannot be separated from them, and therefore I call them original or
first qualities.

What we ought to consider after that, is the manner whereby Bodies act upon
one another. For my part, I conceive nothing in it but an Impulse. When
therefore they produce in us the Ideas of some of their original qualities,
which are really in them, as those of the Extension and the Figure that Senses
perceive, when the Object we look upon is at a certain distance, they must
needs press our Organs by means of some insensible Particles which come from
the Object to our Eyes, and which by a continuation of Motion that they have
caused therein, shake our Brains and produce in us these Ideas. Thus we cannot
find any thing but the Impulse and the Motion of some insensible Bodies which
produce in our Mind the Ideas of these original qualities. Thus we may conceive
after what manner the Idea of the Color and Odor of a Violet can be produced
in us, as well as that of the Figure. It Is by a particular Motion produced in
the Organ by the Impulse of Particles of a certain bigness, Figure, Number and
Motion, and continued even unto the Brain: For it is not more difficult to
conceive that God can stick the Idea of a Color, or of an Odor, to Motions,
to which they have no resemblance; than it is to conceive that he has applied
the Idea of pains to the Motion of a bit of Iron, which divides our Flesh, to
which Motion the pain bears no resemblance.

What I have said of Colors and Odours may be applied to the Sounds and Tastes
and to some tangible qualities, as the Heat and Cold; for the Ideas of these
qualities and some others like them, being perfectly distinguished from every
perception of Bigness, Figure, Motion, etc. cannot be resemblances of any
thing, that may be really in the Object which produces in us these Ideas.
Therefore I call second qualities the power that Bodies have of producing them
in us, according to the order God has established, by the different
combinations of their first qualities, which are imperceptible to us.

Hence we may draw this Consequence, that the Ideas of the first qualities of
Bodies do resemble them; but that the Ideas produced in us by the second
qualities resemble them not in any wise, and that there is nothing in Bodies
themselves, that can have any conformity with these Ideas; there is only in
them the power of producing in us Sensations, like unto them. That which is
blew, sweet or hot in the Idea, is nothing else in the Bodies, to which these
Names are given, than the Bigness, the Figure and the Motion, of insensible
Particles.

8. The operations of the Mind, are ideas harder to be known, than those that
come from the exterior Objects which strike our Senses; I have treated at large
of some of the principal ones in other Chapters, I shall here speak of
perception which is the first of all.

9. In the following I have considered what I name Retention, which is
twofold: The first I call Contemplation, which retains a present Idea in his
Mind, who considers it without dis-continuation. To the second, I give the Name
of Reminiscence, which recalleth and brings back to the Mind an Idea that had
been there once, but which it had ceased to consider. The Power or Faculty of
renewing and re-establishing an Idea which is no more present with us, is that
which is called Memory.

10. I also consider the operations of the Mind upon its Ideas: 1. To discern
or distinguish them: 2. To compare them: 3. To compose and extend them: 4. To
form Abstractions therefrom.

Having said how the Soul receives all these simple Ideas, I shall show after
what manner these Ideas are as the subject of all our Notions, and compose by
their diverse combinations all our complete Ideas.

Although the Mind cannot produce to it self any simple Idea, besides those
which it receives by the means of Sensation and Reflection, where it is purely
passive; yet these Ideas being placed in the Memory, it can, by repeating and
composing 'em of diverse matters, produce a very great variety of other Ideas,
as well as it can receive like Compositions by the Senses. I shall give some
Examples of this in things that appear most abstruse, after which I shall
consider others.

12. I believe no Body will deny that the Sight and Touching do furnish us with
the Idea of Space. We can neither open our Eyes nor move our Body, nor lean it
against any thing whatever, without being convinced hereof. Having, by the
Observation of some Bodies, which often present themselves to us and which are
well imprinted in our Memory, the Idea of the greatness of a Span, of a Foot,
of a Cubit, or some other Measure that is familiar to us, we can repeat this
Idea in our Minds as often as we please, and so magnify it; adding thereto the
like Extent, or another double to that of the Precedent. In this manner, though
the Sensation furnishes us but with the Idea of a Foot, we may by this
Repetition form to our selves, the Idea of a Space as great as we will. And as
we feel in our selves the power to repeat these Ideas of Space, we may form to
our selves thereby the Idea of Immensity, which is founded nevertheless upon
the Idea of Space that we have received from the Senses.

I shall not relate here what I have written at large, to show the clear
difference which is betwixt the Idea of a Body and that of Space, which some
have endeavored to confound. It shall suffice to say, That when we consider by
Abstraction the distance that is between two Bodies, without having regard to
those that may fill this Interval, it may properly be named Space: And when we
consider the distance that is between the extremities of a solid Body, we may
give it the name of Extent. If we apply, as it should be, these two Terms, that
will perhaps serve to avoid Confusion, which we meet with in Discourse
concerning Bodies and Space.

13. Time and Duration have much conformity with Extent and Space. If Men had
well considered the source whence the Idea of Duration comes to us, I am
persuaded they would never have defined it mensura motus, since it has no
Relation with Motion, and should be always the same, though there should be no
Motion in the World. Those that are willing closely to consider, and mark what
passes in their Mind, shall find that diverse Ideas will appear and dis-appear
to them successively, during the whole time they are awake. And that is so
true, that though we never are without some Idea, whilst we are awake, it is
not one Idea alone that remains in possession of our Mind, but there are
several which succeed incessantly one another. If any one doubt hereof, let him
make a trial of fixing his Mind upon one only Idea, without any other coming
between: For if the least change is made in the Thought, by Addition or
Substraction, or any other manner whatever, it is a new Idea.

It Is by this perpetual change of Ideas that we make Remarks, and by this chain
of new appearances, that we have a clear Idea of the Succession. We call
Duration the existence of a thing equal to some part of this Succession; and we
give the name of Time, to the distance which is between two points of Duration.
It Is visible that the Ideas we have of Time and Duration, draw their original
from this Reflection; because the very Time that this Succession of Ideas
cease in our Mind, we have no perception of the Duration, and it becomes
altogether null in respect to us. Therefore a Person, which has no Dream in
his sleep, perceives not the distance that there was between the moment he
fell asleep in, and that in which he awoke. But if his Dream present him a
Chain of different Ideas, the perception of the Duration accompanies it, and it
is thereby he measures Time.

Although Mankind has chosen the Revolutions of the Sun and Moon as the most
proper measure of Time, by reason they may every where be seen, and because it
is not easy to observe any Inequality in their courses; yet it is not because
there was any connection between Duration and Motion. Every other periodick
appearance, which would have been common to the whole Earth, would as well have
measured the Time, without any sensible Motion whatever.

14. Although the word Time be commonly taken for that part of Duration, by
which the Existence of things natural, or the Motion of the Heavens does
measure: Even as Extent is taken for the part of Space, which is measured and
filled with Bodies; notwithstanding the Mind, having conceived the Idea of some
portion of Time, as of a Day, or of a Year, can repeat the same as often as it
will, and thus extend the Idea that it has of Duration beyond the Existence or
the Motion of the Sun, and to have an Idea as clear of the 763 years of the
Julian period, which pr^ceed the beginning of the World, as of the 763 years
that are since past. By this power which the Mind has to extend and repeat the
Idea of the Duration, as often as it pleases, without ever coming to the end,
it forms to it self the Idea of Eternity. So likewise in the power of still
extending the Idea of Space, it finds the Idea of Immensity, as we have
already shown.

15. All the Objects, as well of Sensation as Reflection, furnish us with the
Idea of Numbers. For we reckon our Thoughts and the actions of our Mind, as
easily as of Bodies and their Qualities. Having formed the Idea of Unity, we
only need to repeat it, or to add several thereof together to make what product
of Numbers we shall think fit.

16. As the Mind never can come to the end of these additions, and that it
finds in it self the Power of always adding more, according to what
proportion it pleases to make, so we come thereby to form the Idea of
Infinite; which, whether it be applied to Space or to Duration, seems to be
nothing else than this Infinity of Numbers; with this difference only, that in
the subject of Numbers, when we begin by the Unity, we are at the extremity of
one line, which we may continue to Infinity on the other side. But in the
Duration we extend the Infinity of Numbers or Additions on two sides, in regard
of the Duration past, and in regard of that which is to come. As for Space, we
find our selves as placed in a Center, whence we may add, from all Parts,
Leagues or Diameters of the Earth, or of the Orbis magnus, with this Infinity
of Numbers, which can never fail us.

Thus we form the Idea of Infinite by Additions, which always leave an
unfathomable multitude of Unities when it concerns Numbers; and we have no
positive Idea that comprehends Infinity. I cannot relate at large, in the
briefness I have proposed, the proofs I have thereof; but let every one examine
his own Thoughts, and let him see if he has other Ideas of Infinite, than those
I mentioned. I shall only say that if we did put any distinction betwixt the
Idea of an infinite Number and that of the Infinity of Numbers, it would help
to clear the Idea that we have of Infinity. We can have the Idea of the
Infinity of Numbers, but we cannot have that of an infinite Number. The reason
of that, is, that the Idea of Infinite consists in an innexhaustible
Remainder, which never can enter into a positive Idea; and the Mind in this
Remainder, which is always beyond its positive Idea, be it never so great, can
always go further by the repetition of Ideas of the same kind, or whatever
greatness it pleases. It suffices here, to have shown how the Idea of Infinite
is formed of simple Ideas, which draw their beginning from Sensation and
Reflection.

17. Although Solidity is a simple Idea, which we must constantly receive from
a Body, and even so simple, that it is not capable of any Modification, because
every part of a Body which has no Pores, is equally solid; nevertheless it
being that which distinguishes the Idea of a Body from the Idea of Space, I
shall again come to consider it, after I have examined that of Space, that it
may the better be seen how these two simple Ideas, so different in themselves,
do form a Complex Idea of a Body. This simple Idea is also called
Impenetrability; and though this Name marks the same Idea as that of Solidity,
I thought it was necessary here to make use of this latter, because a positive
Name agrees better with a positive Idea, than a Name that is only Negative.

18. Compositions formed of diverse Ideas of the same sort, are those that I
call simple Moods. It is not only Numbers of Extent and Duration that can form
these Compositions; but also all other simple Ideas, in which are considered
diverse degrees, whereof all that may therein be distinguished, form distinct
Ideas. Several of these Ideas joined together, make a simple Mood. Thus diverse
Notes of Music that compose one only Tune, or diverse degrees of a Color,
which make but one Idea, are likewise simple Moods. But these Combinations
being not of any great use, there are but a very few that have Names, excepting
those of Motion, as to Slide, to Roll, to Turn round, to Crawl, to Walk, to
Run, to Dance, to Leap, to Leap over.

19. The Ideas of Reflection have also their simple Moods: Recollection,
Attention, Meditation, and a hundred others that may be named, are but diverse
Moods of Thought. But I shall only examine a few of them here, which are of a
very great Importance.

20. Among the simple Ideas that come to us by Sensation and Reflection, those
of Pleasure and Grief are not least considerable. They are to us of an infinite
Consequence* and often accompany our other Sensations and our other Thoughts.
As there are but few Sensations of the Body, which carry not with them some
Pleasure or some Grief; there are likewise few Thoughts that are so indifferent
to us, as not to give us some Joy or some Sorrow. I comprise all under the
Names of Pleasure and Grief, whether Satisfaction and Joy, Sorrow and
Irksomness, etc. which our Mind resents, since they come from without, or from
some inward Thought.

Every thing that is a proper Cause to continue and augment Pleasure in us, or
to diminish and shorten any Grief, is called Good, and the contrary we call
Evil. It Is upon this Good and this Evil that run all our Passions; and the
Reflections that our Mind has made thereupon, produce in us the Ideas of the
Passions. Thus any one reflecting upon the Thought he has of Pleasure (which
something present or absent may produce in him) is the Idea that we call Love.
For when any says in Autumn, there are Raisons; and in the Spring, there are
none, that he Loves them; he would say nothing else, but that the taste of
Raisons does give him delight. The Existence and Prosperity of our Children and
Friends affording us constantly Delight, we say we love them constantly. On the
contrary, the thought of Sorrow, which a thing present or absent may produce in
us, is that which we call Hatred.

The Irksomness we feel when a thing is absent, which would give us Pleasure if
it were present, is that which is called Desire, which is more or less great,
according as this Longing augmenteth or diminishes.

Joy is a Pleasure that the Soul feels, when it considers as certain the
Possession of a good Present, or to come. Thus a Man half dead feels Joy when
Succor arriveth to him, even before he receives the Effect thereof. We are in
possession of a Good, when we have it so in our Power that we may enjoy it when
we please. A Father, to whom the prosperity of his Children gives Joy, is in
possession of this Good, as long as his Children are in this State, for he only
needs to think thereupon that he may take Delight.

Fear is an Irksomness of the Soul, when it thinks on an Evil to come, which
may befall us.

I will not run over all the Passions; it is not the Subject I propose. What I
have said suffices, to show after what manner the Ideas we have, draw their
beginning from Sensation and Reflection.

21. I shall now speak of a simple Idea, to show how it is formed, and to give
Examples of some of its Modifications; after which I shall end this part
touching simple Ideas and their Moods. Every one feels in himself that he can
move his Hand or his Tongue, which were before at rest: That he can apply his
Mind to other Thoughts, and abandon those with which he was at present taken
up. Hence is formed the Idea of Power or of Faculty.

Every Power respects an Action, and we have no Ideas as I believe, but of
two sorts of actions, to move and to think.

The Power that we find in our selves to prefer the presence of a particular
Thought to its absence, or of a particular Motion to Rest, is that which we
call Volition or Willing.

The Power that we find in us to act or not to act, conformly to the preference
that our Mind has given of Action, furnishes us with the Idea of that which we
call Liberty.

22. Having thus briefly remarked the Source of our simple Ideas, and shown in
some Examples how the Soul can, by the means of their Modifications, come to
those that first seem to be very far off, and which draw their beginning from
some Idea received by Sensation, or from some operations of the Mind upon these
Ideas; I now proceed to the Complex, and I shall show that all the Ideas we
have, whether of Natural Things or Moral, Corporal or Spiritual, are only
Combinations of simple Ideas, that come to us by Sensation and Reflection,
beyond which our Thoughts cannot reach, though they should raise themselves to
the highest Heavens.

The Complex Ideas we have, may, I believe, be reduced to these three sorts. 1.
The Moods: 2. The Substances: 3. The Relatives. What I call Moods are nothing
else than certain Combinations of simple Ideas, which do not include the
obscure Notion that we have of Substance. Of these Moods are three sorts; the
one is a Combination of simple Ideas of the same kind, as four, five, which are
formed by the Conjunction of a certain number of Units. The other is a
combination of Ideas of different kinds, such as are the Ideas that are marked
by words of Obligation, Friendship, etc. I shall give the Name of simple Moods
to the first kind, whereof I have already brought diverse Examples; and to the
second that of mixed Moods.

Although there is an infinite variety of mixed Maods, notwithstanding they are
composed of nothing else but simple Ideas, which draw their Origin from
Sensation or Reflection, as every one may remark by examining them a little
attentively. For Example, if by the word Lie, we understand Discourse contrary
to a known Truth; it compriseth simple Ideas: 1. From the Articulated Sounds:
2. The Relation that is betwixt these Sounds and the Ideas whereof they are
Signs: 3. The Union of these Signs, different from that which is between the
Ideas that they represent in the Mind of him that speaks: 4. The Knowledge,
he that speaks has, in that he abuses these Signs. These are but simple
Ideas, or such as may easily be reduced thereto. So it is with all the other
mixed Moods which consist but in Combinations of simple Ideas. We should never
have done, and it would be also unprofitable to undertake to make an
Enumeration of all the mixed Moods which are in the minds of Men, seeing they
include in their Extent all the matters that make the subject of Divinity,
Morality, Law, of the Politics, and diverse other Sciences.

23. No body doubts but that there is in the World a very great variety of
Substances. Let us then see what Ideas we have of Substances: Let us begin with
the most general ones, as are those of the Body and Mind. I ask if any thing
else be seen in the Idea that we have of the Body but Solidity, Extent and
Motion joined together, which are the simple Ideas that come to us by the
Senses? It may be some Body will say, that for to have a complete Idea of a
Body, the Idea of a Substance must be added to that of Motion and Extent. But I
ask of those that should make this Objection, what Idea have they of Substance,
and whether they have a clear Idea of the Substance of Bodies, distinct from
Solidity, Extent and Motion?

The Idea we have of the Mind is of a Being which has the power of thinking
and of moving the Body, whence I conclude, by the bye, That we have an Idea as
clear of the Mind as of the Body. In the one we have clear Ideas of Solidity,
Extent and Motion, though we know not what its Substance is. In the other we
see with an equal clearness two Ideas, to wit, Thought, and the Power of
moving, though we know not the Substance: For the Substance is in both of them
the Subject in which is supposed to be these Qualities, that is to say, some I
know not what, which upholds them and in which they exist; so that all the Idea
that we have of Substance, is an obscure Idea of what it makes, and not an
Idea of what it is. Thus all the Idea we have of the Substance of a thing, be
it corporal or spiritual, being equally obscure, and the Motion and power of
Moving being as clear the one as the other; we have nothing left to compare,
but Extent and Thought. These two Ideas are both of them very clear, and the
difficulty that some have formed against the Idea of the Mind, consists in that
they said that they conceived not a thing that thinks, without Extent. I
maintain on the contrary, that they can as easily conceive a thing that
thinks without Extent, as they conceive a solid Extent. For to conceive a
solid Extent, we must have an Idea of Cohesion of parts; but it is as easy to
conceive how a Mind thinks, as it is to conceive how solid parts do stay
stickt the one to the other, that is to say, how a Body is extended. For where
there are no parts that are tied together, there are no parts extra parts, as
Men speak, and consequently no Extent. If the Body is divisible, there must be
parts that are united one with the other, and if there was no union betwixt
them, the Body would be quite destroyed and would cease to be. Whosoever can
tell what holds the united parts of Iron, or of the Diamond, shall expound to
me one of the capital difficulties of Physic. M. Barmuli, who has endeavored
to give the reason of the Cohesion of the Particles of all Bodies, by the
pressure of the Either, has omitted two things of great Importance.

1. He has not considered that how great soever the pressure of a flued
Ambient may be, if there is nothing else to keep joined the parts of Bodies,
though they cannot be distant the one from the other perpendicularly,
nevertheless we may demonstrate that the one may be pushed off the other, as
easily as if there was no pressure at all. The experience of two polished
Marbles put upon one another (which the pressure of the Atmosphere hold in this
state) shows to the Eye what I would say, seeing they can be very easily
separated, in pushing them on one side, whereas they cannot be so
perpendicularly.

2. He has no regard to the Particles of the Either, which being themselves
Particles of Bodies formed of other Particles, ought to have something that may
hold them united, which cannot come of themselves; for it is as difficult to
conceive how the parts of the least Moth of matter stay united one to the
other, as those of the greatest Masses. But without that, it is as difficult to
conceive a Body as a Spirit, a thing extended as a thing that thinks.

But suppose the notion of the Mind is more or less obscure than that of the
Body, it is certain we do not receive it by any other way, than that whereby we
receive the notion of the Body. For even as after having received by our Senses
the Ideas of Solidity, Extent, Motion and Rest, we form to our selves the Idea
of the Body, in supposing that these four things are inherent in an unknown
Substance: So in joining together the simple Ideas that we have formed, in
reflecting upon the operations of our own Minds, which every day we feel in our
selves, as, to think, to understand, to will, to know, and to be able to move
Bodies: In joining, I say, these Ideas, and supposing that these operations of
our Mind and all others coexist in a certain Substance which we likewise do not
know, we come to have an Idea of the Beings, which we call Spirits.

The Ideas that we have of the Intellect and of the power formed by the
Reflection, which we have made upon that which passes in our selves, joined to
that Duration, and all that augmented by the Idea that we have of Infinity,
gives us the Idea of the supreme Being that we call God.

To convince our selves that all the Complex Ideas contain nothing but what the
simple Ideas do, which come to us by Sensation or Reflection, we only need to
think on the different sorts of Minds which are existent, or might exist. For
though it were likely that there are more different kinds of Spiritual Beings,
in ascending from us to God, than there of Material, in descending from us to
Naught; because we are at a distance more great from the Infinite Perfection,
than from the lowest degree of the Being; nevertheless it is certain that we
cannot conceive any difference between the diverse natures of Angels, saving
different degrees of Intellect and of Power, which are but diverse Modifications
of two simple Ideas, formed by Reflection upon that which passes in our selves.

As to what concerns the Ideas that we have of natural Substances, it is
evident that they are only Combinations of simple Ideas, which we have
acknowledged to exist together by Sensation; for Example, What is the Idea of
Gold, but a certain bright Color, a certain degree of Weight, of Malleability,
of Fusibility, and perhaps, as the Chemists speak, of Fixation, or of other
simple Ideas that our Mind uniteth as coexistent all along in the same
Substance? This Complex Idea includes more or less simple Ideas, according as
he that makes this Conjunction is more or less exact in the Observations he
has made touching Gold. Such are our Ideas of the different kinds of
Substances, which are nothing else than different Combinations of the simple
Ideas which come to us by Sensation and Reflection, and which we suppose
coexistent in I know not what Substance.

24. There is yet another sort of the Ideas of Substances, where the Mind
joineth together diverse Substances distinct, and makes but one Idea thereof.
Thus an Army composed of 10000 Men, and a Flock of several hundreds of Sheep is
as well one only Idea, as that of one Man or one Sheep. I call these Ideas,
collective Ideas of Substances, and they deserve our Observation, though it were
for nothing else, but to show the Power that the Mind has of re-uniting in one
only Idea, things in themselves very different, and distant the one from the
other. To satisfy fully those that may have some difficulty upon this Subject,
we need but simply to name the Universe, and to remark that this word
signifies but one only Idea, be it never so compounded.

25, 26, 27. Besides the Ideas, whether Simple or Complex, that the Mind has
of things considered in themselves; it has others that it forms of the
Comparison that it makes of these things betwixt themselves, and which are
called Relatives. A Relative therefore is the consideration of a thing that
marketh, or includes in it self the consideration of another. Seeing all our
Ideas may be considered, in as much as they lead our Thoughts to something
else, it follows, that all simple and complex Ideas may serve for the
foundation of a Relative. And whatever Extent those Ideas may have that are
Relatives, it may be seen how they draw their Origin from Reflection and
Sensation, seeing they have no other foundation than the Ideas that come to us
from thence. It Is needless I should enlarge upon every sort of Relatives to
show it. I shall only mark that a Relative supposes two Ideas or things,
really separated the one from the other, or at least considered as distinct. We
do not always regard these two things or these two Ideas, which is the cause
why we pass over diverse Terms for Signs of absolute Ideas which are effectively
Relatives. For Example, great and old are Terms, as Relative, as more great,
and more old, though it is not always believed. When we say that Peter is older
than John, these two Persons are compared in the Idea of Duration, and we would
say that the one has more than the other: And when we say that John is old,
his Duration is compared with that which we look upon as the ordinary Extent of
the Life of Men. Hence it comes that we should be offended to hear one say,
That a Diamond or the Sun are old, because we have no Idea of the length of an
ordinary Duration that belongs to them. So we have no Idea to which we may
compare it as we have in respect to the things which we commonly call old.
There is a great deal of these Terms, which under an absolute Form or
Termination, hide a relative Idea; and to examine nearly our Ideas they are in a
great part a Relative.

This is what I briefly conceive of the different sorts of complex Ideas we
have, and which may all be reduced to these three, Subctances, Moods and
Relatives. As they include nothing else than diverse Combinanations of simple
Ideas, that we have received by Sensation and Reflection, so I conclude that in
all our Thoughts, Contemplations and Reasonings, how abstract and extended
soever they be, our Mind never goes beyond the simple Ideas that we have
received by the way of Sensation and Reflection.

28. One thing may be considered in all the Ideas I have spoken of, whether
Simple or Complex; it is that they may be clear and distinct, or obscure and
confused. The simple Ideas are clear, when they are very lively in the Mind,
such are those which we have from the Senses Object: Again, the Organs being in
a good disposition, and all the circumstances requisite for a clear Sensation;
it is this clearness that renders the Ideas distinct. The complex Ideas are
distinct not only when the simple Ideas whereof they are composed are clear;
but also when their Number and their Order is clearly fixed and regulated in
the Mind. Then the Mind sees after a clear and constant manner, when his
complex Idea as often as it is named, as often as it is thought upon, perfectly
distinguishes from all the others to which it may have any resemblance.

29. Real Ideas are those that are conform to that which is considered as their
Architypes, or to the real existence of things. Fantastic or Chimerical Ideas
are those in which is not found this Conformity.

According to this Rule, 1. No simple Idea can be Chimerical, because they all
answer to that Power of producing them in our Minds, which God has placed in
things; and that this is the reality which is proper unto them: 2. The Moods
and Relatives, unless we join incompatible Ideas, cannot be Chimerical, because
they themselves being Architypes, they cannot but resemble their Originals: 3.
The Ideas of Substances may be and often are Chimerical, to wit, when the Mind
forms them of a certain Combination of Ideas, which are not allied to Nature.
For the Ideas of Substances being formed, to represent them such as they are,
really existent without us, these Ideas cannot be real but in as much as they
agree with their Originals. So the Idea that we commonly have of a Man or of a
Horse, is a real Idea, and the Idea of a Center is a chimerical Idea.

30. Among real Ideas some are Complete, (in Latin adaequata) and some other
Vncompleat ( inadaequata.) The simple Ideas and those of the Moods and of the
Relatives are all complete, for nothing is omitted there that may render them
more perfect and more conform to their Originals. But the Ideas of Substances
are all incomplete, because they include but one part of the Qualities which
really are in the very Substances their Architypes.

31. Though, to speak exactly, Truth and Falsehood belong not to Ideas, but to
Propositions; notwithstanding because we often call the Ideas true and false,
it is good to consider which are true and which are false, and why these Names
have been given them. We must therefore first remark that when we look upon any
thing as true or false, there is evermore some kind of a Proposition, though it
is not expressed in formal Terms, and whereof no heed is taken. Secondly, we
often do refer our Ideas to Architypes, which we think they represent, and
consequently when some among them agree with their Architypes, they may be
called true, as they are called false when they resemble them not. Of these
Architypes are two sorts; the one is real, and the other mental. Real
Architypes are those that exist really in the very things. In this respect
there are but the Ideas of the Substances that may be false: The Architypes of
the other sort that we call mental, are the Ideas that are in the Minds of
others. For in Language, Men often do refer the Ideas signified by their Words,
to the Ideas that are in the Minds of other Men, and which are marked by the
same Words. For Example, when we make use of the word Gratitude, we pretend
that the Idea that is in the Mind, and whereof this word is the sign, is
conform to the Idea that others have in their Mind, and to which they apply the
Name of Gratitude: The same way that we pretend that the Idea of a Horse ought
to be conform to this very Animal. Of the first of these two sorts of Ideas
depends the reality of our Notions, and of the latter the property of
Language. Every manner of Idea may be false, in respect of this second sort of
Architypes.

BOOK III.
After having considered the Ideas whereof the Mind of Man is full, and found
out how they come to us; and of how many sorts they are; I soon thought that I
might pass to the examination of our intellectual Faculties, and to see what
use the Mind makes of these materials, or of these Instruments of our Notions
which I had collected in the preceding Book. But when I came to consider a
little nearer the nature and manner of the Notions of Man, I found they had so
much connection with Words, and their Words are so much confounded, either by
custom or necessity, that it is impossible to treat clearly of our Notions,
without first saying something of Words and Language.

I. The Ideas that are in our Mind are so absolutely out of the sight of
others, that we could not communicate our Thoughts without joining some sign to
our Ideas.

II. The most convenient signs for variety and promptitude whereof Men are
acpable, are articulated Sounds, which we call Words. Words then are the signs
of Ideas, but as there is no sound which naturally has any connection with any
Idea of our Mind, except the Idea of this same sound; Words are signs of our
Ideas but by an arbitrary Institution, and they cannot be properly and
immediately signs of any thing but the Ideas which are in the Mind of him that
makes use of these Words. For in employing them to express what he thinks,
he cannot make use thereof to mark Ideas that he has not, seeing thus he would
render them signs of nothing. It Is true, we commonly make use of Words in two
other Suppositions. 1. We suppose for the most part that Words are the signs of
Ideas that are in the Mind of him with whom we discourse. This is supposed with
reason, because without that he that speaks could not be understood. But as
it does not always happen that the Ideas that are in the Mind of him to whom we
speak, answer exactly to those, to which he that speaks applies his Words,
this signification is not always true.

2. It Is commonly supposed that Words are substituted not only in the place of
Ideas, but also of things themselves; but it is impossible they should signify
immediately the things themselves. For seeing they cannot immediately be the
signs of any thing but that which is in the Mind of him that speaks, where
there is nothing but Ideas only, they cannot hold the place of things, but
where there are Ideas whereto they are conform.

3. Words are of two sorts: There are general Terms, and Names to particular
things. All that Exist, some will say, being particular, what need have we of
general Terms? Where are these universal Natures that these Terms signify? for
the most part of Words that are employed in common, are general Terms. To
answer to the first of these Demands, we must remark that there is such a great
number of particular things, that the Mind cannot retain as many Words, as
would be necessary to mark them all; and though the Memory could retain them,
they would be unprofitable; because particular Beings known to one Man are
often absolutely unknown to another. So their Names could not serve us, to
communicate our Thoughts, because they would not be signs of Ideas common to
him that speaks and to him that hears. Moreover, the progress we make in
Knowledge, being got by means of the general Notions, we have need of general
Terms. As to the second Demand, General Natures, whereof general Terms are
signs, are but general Ideas, and Ideas become general only by abstracting
time, place, and other particularities, which are the cause that these signs
only represent individual Natures. An Idea formed in this wife by Abstraction,
and by being disengaged from all that rendered it individual, is capable to
represent equally many individual things: And as much as each of them has all
that remains in this abstracted Idea, it is in that alone that consists the
general Nature, upon which so many unprofitable Questions have been proposed,
and so many vain Subtilties published. Ideas come thus to represent not a
particular Being, but a sort of Things; and the Names of these Ideas signify
that which the Logicians usually call Genus and Species, whereof it is supposed
each has its particular Essence. Though there be great Disputes touching the
Genus and Species and their Essences, the truth is, That the Essence of each
Genus and each Species, is nothing else than an abstract Idea in the Mind of
him that speaks, and whereof the general Term he makes use of is the sign.
It Is also true that each particular Thing has a real constitution, by which it
is what it is and it is that which properly is called Essence. But this Word
having changed its first signification, and being applied to the Species and
Genus of Schools, Essences have been commonly looked upon, as belonging to the
different orders of Beings, ranged under diverse general denominations. In this
sense, Essences are truly nothing else than abstract Ideas, whereof general
Terms are signs. We may call the first Essences, whereof we speak real, and the
second ones nominal; sometimes they are the same, and sometimes they are quite
different the one from the other, in the same thing.

4. We shall more clearly conceive the Nature and Signification of Words, if we
consider the Relation they have with these three sorts of Ideas whereof I have
already spoken; to wit, the simple Ideas, the Substances and the Moods, under
the which I comprise the Relatives: 1. The names of simple Ideas and of
Substances denote some Beings really existent, whence they are drawn as from
their Original. But the name of the mixed Moods do terminate in the Mind; and I
believe it is for that reason that they are particularly called Notions. 2. The
names of simple Ideas and of Moods always signify the real Essence, as well as
the nominal. The names of Substances seldom signify (though sometimes they
have another signification) any thing else but the nominal Essence. 3. Of all
things the names of simple Ideas are the least doubtful and uncertain. 4. But
what I believe to be of a great use, and that no Body, as I know, has
remarked, is that we must distinguish the Terms that can and that cannot be
defined. I observe therefore that we cannot define the names of the simple
Ideas, whereas we may those of the complex. For to define, being no more than
to make known an Idea, which is marked by a certain Word, by means of some
Terms, that are not synonimous, the Definition cannot have place but in the
complex Ideas. It Is well known how much the Peripateticks, and even the modern
Philosophers, not knowing what Names could or could not be defined, have vainly
discoursed, and published such Gallimauphry, whilst they went about to define
the Names of some few simple Ideas, because for the most part they thought it
not for their purpose to undertake the same thing. Though they have defined
Motion and Light; they have nevertheless waved the definition of the greatest
part of simple Ideas, and the definitions of Light and Motion that they have
hazarded to produce, will appear, if they are thoroughly examined, to have as
little sense, as what may be said in expounding the terms of Red and Sweet.
When a Man born blind shall be made to understand what Idea the word Blew will
bear, we may likewise make a Man to comprehend, by the means of Definition,
what Motion and Light signify to a Man, who till then shall not know what it
is, but by another way. The Names of simple Ideas have but a very few
subordinations in that which Logicians call Linea Praedicamentis, because these
Ideas being not composed, nothing can be retrenched from them, to render it
more general and to give it more extent. Therefore the word Color, which
comprehends Red and Blew, etc. only makes a simple Idea, which we have by
means of the Sight.

5. As to the Names of mixed Moods and of Relatives, which are all general
Terms, we must note, 1. That the Essence of their different sorts are all
formed by the Intellect: 2. That they are arbitrarily and with a great liberty
formed, the Mind not relating here to the real Existence of any Original: 3.
Though the Essences or the Kinds of mixed Moods are formed without Models, yet
they are not formed at all Adventures and without Reason.

It is not only the signification of Words, but also the brevity, which is one
of the greatest advantages of Language. Therefore the end that we propose to
our selves, is, not only to employ the Sounds significant of signs to certain
Ideas, but also to make use of short Sounds, to signify many distinct Ideas,
which by their combinations form thereof one Complex Idea conformable hereunto,
Men do reunite in one only complex Idea several separated Ideas, depending of
one another, and give it a name when they have occasion to think of proper
Compositions, and of discoursing thereupon together.

Thus it is that Men do arbitrarily from different kinds of mixed Moods, in
giving names to certain Compositions of Ideas, which have no more connection in
themselves, than others that are not united by any like denomation. This
evidently appears in the diversity of Tongues, where is nothing more ordinary
than to find several Words in one Tongue, which have none to answer 'em in
another.

6. The names of Substances signify their nominal Essences, and not their real
Essences, which in Substances are very different from the Nominals. For
Example, Color, Weight, Malleability, Fusibility, Fixation, and perhaps some
other sensible Qualities, form a complex Idea, which we have in our Mind, and
to which we give the name of Gold, are the nominal Essence of Gold. But the
disposition of the sensible Particles, or the Constitution, whereof these
sensible Qualities do depend, whatever it may be, is the real Essence of Gold.
It is in nothing like the nominal, and would give us quite another Idea of
Gold, if we knew it. But seeing we know it not, and that our words express but
the Ideas that we have, the word Gold cannot signify a real Essence. It is
then by their nominal Essence, that we range Substances under different kinds,
and under diverse denominations. These nominal Essences, being nothing else than
complex and abstract Ideas, formed of diverse Persons of different combinations
of simple Ideas, which they have observed or imagined to exist together, it is
visible that the Essences of the kinds of Substances, and consequently the
kinds themselves, in as much as they are ranged under different Names, are of
the invention of Men. I do not say that Substances themselves, or the
resemblance and conformity that is betwixt them have been made by Men; but only
that the limits of the kinds, as marked by certain names, have been established
by Men.

But notwithstanding Men are Authors of Essences, which limit and distinguish
the kinds of Substances, they do not here make use of them so arbitrarily as in
the Moods. In Substances they propose to themselves things really existing, as
of the Models they design to follow. But by the diversity we find in their
ability or in their attention, their complex Ideas formed of a mass of sensible
Qualities, and marked with the name Specific, are very different in different
Persons, one comprehending therein a simple Idea, which the other omits. But
the real Essence which we suppose to be in each kind of things, if there be any
like Essence, would unalterably be the same.

If the first distribution of Beings in their lowest kinds depends upon the
Mind of Man, as we have shown, it is much more clear that it is so in the
highest Classes, which we call Genus in Logical Terms. For they are but
imperfect complex Ideas, whose diverse Qualities are on purpose omitted, which
are constantly found in the things themselves. As the Mind, to form general
Ideas, which comprise diverse particular Beings, excludes from it Time, Place,
and other Circumstances, which cannot be common to several Individuals: So to
form Ideas still more general, and which comprise different kinds, the Mind
excludes from them the Qualities, that distinguish these kinds from one
another, and includes in this new combination of Ideas, those only that are
common to different kinds. Thence it follows, That in this matter of Genus
and Species, the Genus that is most extended is nothing else but a partial
conception of what is in the Species, and the Species is nothing but a partial
Idea of what is in each indivdual. It Is conformable to the true intent of
Language, to mark by a short sound a great number of particular things, in as
much as they agree in a common conception. The Genus and Species then seem to
me to be nothing else but a distribution of Beings, to give them general
denominations; and the Essence of each Genus and of each Species is but an
abstract Idea, to which this denomination is applied. The least attention will
show us that there is nothing Essential in the particular or individual Beings;
but that as soon as they are ranged under a general Name, or that which is the
same thing, reduced to a certain kind, there is somewhat that becomes essential
to them, to wit, all that is comprehended in the complex Idea, marked by this
general Name.

We must further remark, in regard of the Substances, that they only have
proper Names, to which we may add, that although the Specific names of
Substances can signify nothing else but abstract Ideas, which are in the Mind
of him that speaks, and consequently the Substances, in as much as they are
conformable to these Ideas; nevertheless it often falls out that Men do
ordinarily substitute these Names to things, which they pretend to have the
real Essence of the Species whereof we speak, and that they would have the
names of Substances to signify 'em as distinguished in kinds, by real
Essences; which causes a great confusion and a great incertainty in the usage
of Words.

7. Words have a double usage: 1. They help to Register (if we may so say) or
retain our proper Thoughts, to which all manner of Words, whatever they be, may
commodiously enough serve, provided we hold them constantly applied to the same
Ideas. 2. The Words do serve to communicate our Thoughts to others, and for
that reason they must be common Signs, and applied on all parts to the same
Ideas, by those that discourse.

They have likewise a double usage in the communication they have of our
Thoughts. The one is Civil, and the other Philosophical. The first serves for
the Commerce and ordinary Conversation: The Philosophical usage is to give
precise notions of Things, and to expound in general Propositions certain and
undoubtful Truths, whereof the Mind may be satisfied in the search of Truth. In
this last usage particularly, Words are subject to a great uncertainty, and
much obscurity in their Significations.

Words signifying naturally nothing, it is necessary that their signification,
that is to say, the precise Idea for which they are employed, be fixed and
steadfast; which is difficult: 1. When the Ideas, whereof they are Signs, are
extremely complex: 2. When the simple Ideas, whereof these Complex are
composed, have no natural connection with one another; so that in Nature there
is no ^ixt measure, nor any model to ratify and regulate them: 3. When the
signification of a Word relates to an Original which existeth, but which is not
easy to be known: 4. When the signification of a Word, or the real Essence of
a thing, are not exactly the same. The names of the mixed Moods are subject to
Equivocation, for the two first of these Reasons, and the names of Substances,
particularly for the two latter. Conformable to these Rules, as well as to
Experience, we shall first find that the names of simple Ideas are the least
subject to Equivocation, because they are simple, and that it is easy to form
them and to retain them; and because they relate to nothing but to the same
perception, which things that exist produce in us.

Secondly, We shall find that the names of mixed Moods are very equivocal,
because the complex Ideas, whereof they are the signs, having no fixed and
existent models in Nature, upon which we may regulate their Architypes, are
nowhere but in the Minds of Men, and for that reason are uncertain. Moreover
these Ideas being often very much compounded, its very difficult for them to
agree exactly with one another, though they all are marked by the same name.
Neither is it easy for a Man to keep the same precise Idea constantly applied
to the same name, when it is very much compounded. Where shall one find a
Conjunction of all the Ideas that the word Glory signifies at once? The
complex and precise Idea, which the word Justice marketh, is seldom fixed, or
always the same.

Thirdly, The names of Substances are very equivocal, because their complex
Ideas are not arbitrary Compositions, but related models that are existing;
nevertheless it is impossible to know after any other manner, even very
imperfectly. 1. We have shown that sometime it was supposed that the names of
Substances do signify themselves, in as much as they have certain real
Essences. Every thing having a real constitution, by which it is what it is; it
has been usual to call this constitution its Essence, as if it were the
Essence of a kind. But whether that be so or not, its certain that it being
altogether unknown, it is impossible to know what the signification is of this
word in this usage, or what thing it notes: 2. Sometimes those Ideas, which
the names of Substances denote, are formed upon like Qualities, which are
observed in Bodies in which they solely do exist. And though that be the proper
usage of these names, it is notwithstanding very easy to make true remarks of
their significations in that sense; because the Qualities that we find in
Substances, and whereof we form the complex Ideas that we have thereof, being
for the most part Powers, or Faculties, they are almost infinite. The one
having no more right than the other to be included in our complex Ideas, which
are the Copies of these Originals, it is very difficult to mark justly by means
of these models, the signification of their names. And therefore the same name
of a Substance, seldom denotes in the Mouth of two Men the same complex Idea.

8. Besides this natural Imperfection of Language, Men do herein commit diverse
voluntary Abuses that are observed. 1. They make use of Words, to which they
apply any clear and determinate Signification. All Sects in Philosphy and in
Religion, are very often guilty hereof, there being very few but by an
affectation to singularity, or to hide some weak place of Systems, make use of
some Terms to which it is visible they have applied no clear and determinate
Idea. Besides these Terms that have no signification, and which are proper to
each part, there are others whereof we make use in our ordinary Language,
though in the Mind there be no precise Idea, to which they are applied. It
suffices to have learned the Words, that are in use in every one's Country,
and that they may be employed in Conversation, though Men take but little pains
to apply thereto a clear signification. If it were asked of those who have at
every moment in their Mouths the words Reason and Grace, what they understand
thereby? It should often be found that they have in their Mind no distinct
Idea, which may answer to these or other like Words.

2. Another Abuse that is committed here, is, That in the same Discourse, one
only Word is at one time the signification of one Idea, and at another time
that of another. There is nothing more common in Controversies, wherein seldom
we miss finding the same word in diverse significations; not only in incident
matters, but in places that are most essential, and concerning which the
Question in dispute is.

3. We may add to that an affected obscurity, suppose in the usage of Words
received, or in the invention of some new Terms. There is nothing that has so
much contributed to that as the Method and Instruction of Schools, where all
has been accommodated to Dispute. This Method unavoidably casts into a
multiplication and strange entangling of obscure Terms. This dangerous Abuse of
the Language having passed for Subtilty, and having obtained the reputation and
recompense due to true Knowledge, has hindered Men to make true progresses in
Sciences, as we all sufficiently do know.

4. The Language is yet abused, in taking Words for things, which particularly
happens in relation to the names of Substances: For Men having formed to
themselves particular Ideas and without ground, as they have thought it fit, to
invent or uphold certain Physical Systems, have accommodated thereto certain
Words. After that, these Words becoming familiar to them have, been looked upon
by their Followers, as signifying something real, and as necessary signs of
things themselves. Thus substantial Forms, intentional Kinds, and a great many
such Terms, by a frequent and uncontested usage, have made several People to
believe that there were real Beings meant by these Terms. It did not appear
credible to them that their Fathers, their Masters, their Divines, and their
learned Men, had made use of words which signify nothing but mere Chimera's,
and which have no relation to any real Being in the World. I have already
spoken of the abuse that is committed, in supposing that Words do signify the
real Essences of Substances.

5. Another more general abuse of Words, though less considerable, is, to
suppose that their signification is so clear and constant, that one cannot be
mistaken in the Idea that they signify. Hence it is that Men find it strange,
that they should be obliged to inform themselves of the signification of Words
which they make use of, or that it should be asked of them; though it be
visible that very often the sense cannot be assuredly understood in which a
Word is taken, how they can tell in what precise Idea it has been used.

6. Figured Terms, and all the sought for Ornaments of Rhetoric, are likewise
a true abuse of Language: But with this it is even as it is with the fair Sex.
Eloquence is sustained with too powerful Charms, to be endured in speaking
against it. In vain should we mark the defects in certain deceiving Arts, by
which Men delight to be deceived.

7. The imperfection and abuses of Language being the principal sources of
Disputes and Errors, which are come into the World, it would not a little
contribute to the Truth and Ease of Men, if they would seriously apply
themselves to speak after a more exact and serious manner. I shall show here
for this word, some easy Precautions to those that pretend to Sincerity; for I
am not so vain as to imagine I can reform so rooted an Abuse, and where so many
would be found in the account. I believe nevertheless that no Body will deny,
1. But that every one ought to take care that he make not use of a Word without
a signification; or any sound, without having some Idea in his Mind that he
would express thereby: 2. That the Idea that we mark by this sign should be
clear and distinct, and that all the simple Ideas whereof it is composed, if it
is complex, should be fixed and constant. This is necessary in the Names of all
complex Ideas; but we ought to take a particular care in Words that express the
Ideas of Morality, which being composed of diverse simple Ideas, are not as they
should be, till we have fixed in our Mind the complex Idea, which we would
denote by every Word. We ought to endeavor to be in a capacity of an easy
Enumeration of all that enters into this Idea, and to resolve it into all the
simple Ideas which compose it. For want of this it happens that our Words
become so obscure and equivocal, that neither others nor our selves can tell
what we would say. 3. One ought to accommodate his Ideas as much as possible to
the common signification that the words have in the ordinary usage. The usage
is that which determines the signification of the Words, and every particular
Person ought not to make such change as he pleases therein. But because the
common usage has left a great part of Words, not to say the most part, in a
very extravagant signification, and Men often are constrained to make use of a
common word, in a sense somewhat particular, it is often necessary to mark in
what sense we make use of Words, especially when they belong to the principal
Subject of the Discourse or of the Question. This Interpretation of our Terms,
if we would be correct, ought to be conformable to the different kinds of the
Ideas that they signify. The best and even, in several occasions, the only way
of making known the signification of the name of a simple Idea is to present it
to the Senses. The only means to mark the sense of the most part of the names
of mixed Moods, at least of the Words that belong to Morality, is Definition;
and the best means to understand the names of the most part of Bodies, is to
show the Bodies we discourse on, and in the mean while to define the names
whereof we make use; because on the one side several of the Qualities, which
distinguish them from other Bodies, are not easy to be expressed by words; and
on the other, since many other things among them cannot, without much pain and
preparations, be discovered by the Senses.

10. I have shown what the signification is of Words, and what care we ought to
take, that we may not suffer our selves to be thereby deceived, that being
necessary before we enter into the consideration of our Notions, which makes
the subject of the following Book. Before I finish this, I shall say only one
word of the common distinction of Terms, because I believe it may serve for the
clearing our Ideas. It is the distinction of the Terms Abstract and Concrete,
upon which we may mark, 1. That two abstract Ideas are never affirmed at once.
2. That simple Ideas and Moods have concrete Names, as well as abstract; but
that Substances have but concretes, saving some few abstract Words affected by
Scholasticks, which they never could bring into common use, as Corporeity,
Animality, etc. The first of these two Remarks teaches us, as it seems to
me, that two distinct Ideas are two distinct Essences, which cannot be affirmed
both at once. The second includes a clear Assertion, that Men have no Idea of
the real Essences of the kinds of Substances, seeing they have in their Tongues
no Terms to express them.

BOOK IV.
We have treated in the two preceding Books of the Ideas and Words; in this we
treat of Knowledge.

1. It Is shown in the first Chapter, That Knowledge is nothing else but the
perception of Agreement or of Dis-agreement, which is between two Ideas. This
convenience or dis-convenience may be reduced, for a greater clearness, to
these four, 1. Identity. 2. Coexistence. 3. Real Existence. 4. Relation.

The first and principal act of our Intellect is to perceive the Ideas it has,
to see what each of them is, and in what they differ from others. Without that
the Mind could not either have variety of Thoughts nor Discourse, nor judge nor
reason upon what it thinks. It Is by this faculty that the Mind perceives
what Idea it has, when it sees a Violet, and by which it knows that Blew is
not Yellow. Secondly, our Idea of Substances consists, as I have shown, in a
certain mass of simple Ideas, which is noted by a Specific Name. The most part
of our disquisitions touching Substances, tends to know what other Qualities
they have, which refer to this; to wit, what other Ideas do coexist, and are
found united with other our complex Ideas. Thus to seek, if Gold is fixed, is
to seek if being able to be in the fire without being consumed, is an Idea that
coexisteth in the same subject with the Ideas of yellow Color, of Weight, of
Malleability and Fusibility, whereof our Idea of Gold is composed. The third
sort of Agreement, is to know if a real existence agrees or not to some thing,
whereof we have an Idea in our Mind. The last sort of Agreement or
Dis-agreement of the Ideas, consists in some other Relation which may be
between two Ideas. Thus this Enunciation, Sweetness is not Bitterness, marketh
a dis-convenience of Idendity: Thus, Iron is susceptible of the Impressions of
the Loadstone, signifies an agreeing of coexistence: These words, God existeth,
inlcude an agreeing of real Existence: This Proposition, Two Triangles whereof
the Base is equal, and which are betwixt two parallel Lines are equal, marketh
a convenience of Relation.

2. According to the different manner wherewith we perceive the convenience or
the dis-convenience of our Ideas, the evidence wherewith we know them is
different. Sometimes the Mind perceives the convenience or dis-convenience of
two Ideas immediately. Thus it sees that Red is not Yellow, that a Circle is
not a Triangle, that three is more than two, and is equal to two and one. That
is, what may be called intuitive Knowledge, or of a simple view. It is upon
this simple view that is founded all the certitude and all the evidences of our
Notions; and indeed every one finds that this evidence is so great, that he
cannot imagine nor consequently require a greater one. For no Body can believe
himself capable of a greater certitude, than to know that an Idea which he has
in his Mind is such, as he perceives it, and that two Ideas, among which he
sees a difference are different, and are not really the same. Therefore in the
following degree of our Knowledge, which I call Demonstration, this intuition
or simple view, is necessary in all the connections of middle Ideas, without
which we cannot come at any general Knowledge, nor to any certainty. 2. When
the Agreement or Dis-agreement of two Ideas cannot immediately be perceived,
but the Mind makes some other Idea to intervene, to show it, this is that
which is called Demonstration. Therefore the Mind not being able to join three
Angles of a Triangle with two strait ones, so that it may perceive immediately
their Equality, it makes use of some other Angles to measure them.

For to produce a Knowledge of this Nature, we must know with a simple view,
the Agreement or Dis-agreement of two middle Ideas, whereof we make use in each
degree of Deduction; for without that there can be no Demonstration, and one
cannot show the Agreement or Dis-agreement of two Ideas that he considers.
For either the Agreement or Dis-agreement of two Ideas is not evident by it
self, that is to say, cannot be perceived immediately, we still need Proofs to
show it. This kind of Knowledge may be called a reasoned or demonstrative
Knowledge, and how certain soever it may be, it is never so clear nor so evident
as the Knowledge of a simple view. The reason of it is this, The Memory must
intervene, to retain the connection of all the parts of a Demonstration
together, and we must be sure we omit none thereof; which in a long Deduction
demands an extraordinary Attention, if we design to avoid Error. I will not
speak in this little Abridgment of what is commonly believed, That
Demonstration belongs but to Ideas which regard Quantity.

These are the two sorts of Knowledge that we have of general Truths. As for
the Existence of some particular finite Beings, we perceive 'em by our Senses,
and we can call this Knowledge, sensible Knowledge. Though it has not all the
certitude of the two first degrees of Knowledge, notwithstanding it must be
granted that it has something more than simple probability.

3. From what has now been said it follows, 1. That we can have no
Knowledge, where we have no Idea. 2. That our Knowledge of a simple view
extends not it self so far as our Ideas, because we cannot compare the
greatest part of them after a manner so immediate, that we may discover the
Agreement that we look for. 3. That our reasoned Knowledge cannot make us to
perceive the Agreement or Disagreement of all the Ideas, where the knowledge of
a simple view fails us, because we cannot find middle Ideas that may unite
them after an intuitive manner. 4. That the sensible knowledge not extending it
self further than the actual presence of the particular objects that strike our
Senses, it has a great deal less extention than the two preceding ones.

What I pretend to conclude from all this, is that our Knowledge is not only
infinitely below the Extent of Beings, but that it also fails us in the
greatest part of the disquisitions that we can make upon the Ideas we have.
First of all, as to what regards the whole Extent of Beings, if we compare this
small Corner of Earth upon which we are confined, with this part of the
Universe, whereof we have some knowledge, we shall find that the Earth is but
as a Point; but if we carry our thoughts yet further, we shall find that it is
more than probable, that this part of the Universe whereof we have some
knowledge, is in it self, how immense soever it seems, but as a Point in regard
to that which is altogether beyond our discoveries. And if we consider the
vegetable, the reasonable and corporal Animals (not to speak of the different
orders of Minds) and the other things with their different qualities, more
proportionable perhaps to others Senses than ours, and whereof we have no
Notion; if we make, I say, a little Reflection upon the number, the variety and
excellency of Beings, that may exist, and which without doubt do exist in an
Extent as immense as is that of the Universe, we shall with reason conclude,
that the things whereof we have some Idea, are in a very small number, in
comparison to those that we do not at all know. In the second place, if we
consider in what a small number, how imperfect and superficial are the Ideas,
that we have of the things which are near us, that we can know them better, and
which in effect are the best known to us. In fine, if we mark, by how little,
we can discover by those Ideas we have, of Agreement or Disagreement, we have
cause enough to infer from thence that our Minds are extremely limited, that
they are no way proportionable to the whole extent of Beings, and that Men are
not capable of knowing all things.

Its true, that in regard of Identity and of diversity our Knowledge of a
simple view is as much extended as our very Ideas: But on the other side, we
scarcely have any general knowledge of the coexistence of Ideas, because not
being able to discover the causes whereof the second qualities of the
substances do depend, nor to see any connection between these causes and our
Ideas, there are very few cases in the which we can know the coexistence of any
other Idea, with the complex Idea that we have of some sort of substances; and
thereby the knowledge we have of Substances is reduced almost to nothing. As
for what concerns other Relations of our Ideas, it does not yet appear how
far our Knowledge can reach I believe nevertheless that if we studied well
Morality, which consists in the Relations of Moods, it would be as capable of
Demonstration as the Mathematics, as to the Existence we have our own, a
knowledge of simple view, a demonstrative knowledge of the Existence of God,
and a sensible knowledge of the Existence of some few other things.

I shall not put in this little Abridgment the particular Examples that I gave
to show the small extent of our Knowledges. What I have said here suffices, I
think, for to convince us that there is no proportion betwe^^ what we know, and
those things of whi^^ we are in an irreparable ignorance.

B^^^des the Extent of our Knowledge in the Species of things, we may therein
consider another sort of Extent in regard of its Universality: When our Ideas
are abstract the knowledge we have of 'em is general. The abstract Ideas are
the Essences of Kinds, what names soever are given them, and are the
foundations of the general and eternal Truths.

4. It will perhaps be said that this Knowledge which we make to consist in the
consideration of Ideas, may be Chimerical, and leave us in an entire ignorance
of what things really are in themselves; seeing we see that Men can, and even
often have, Ideas altogether extravagant. To that I answer, that our Knowledge
is as real, as our Ideas are conformable to things, and no more. To be able to
know what Ideas are conformable to the reality of things, we must consider the
different sorts of Ideas whereof I have spoken above.

1. We can not doubt but simple Ideas are conformable to the things (I do not
mean a conformity of Resemblance, but the conformity that is between a constant
effect and its cause) because the Mind being not able to form any simple Idea,
those it has must be conformable to the Powers of producing them, which are in
things; and this conformity is sufficient to give a real knowledge.

2. Nevertheless our Complex Ideas, excepting those of Substances, are
conformable to the reality of things; and we can assure our selves, because
they are Architypes, which the Mind has formed, and not Copies by which it
pretends to represent something existent out of it self: We have a design in
our discourses and in our reasonings, touching this sort of Ideas, to mark any
thing that existeth, but only as it is conformable to these Ideas.

3. But our complex Ideas of substances being formed upon design to represe^t
the Architypes existent without us, we cannot be assured that our knowledge
touching these Ideas is real, but in as much as it appears by the real
Existence of things themselves, (which the simple Ideas included in a
combination, such as is that whereof our complex Ideas are formed) it may
coexist together. The reason of this is, that not knowing the real constitution
whereof these qualities depend, we cannot know but by experience what qualities
can, or cannot exist together in one same subject. If we gather in a complex
Idea other qualities than those that can exist together, the knowledge of the
substance which this Idea shall represent, shall be only the knowledge of a
Chimera, which we shall have formed our selves, and not of any real Being.

5. According to this Description of Knowledge, we may come to discover what
Truth is, which is nothing else but the conjunction or the separation of Signs,
according as things themselves agree or disagree. By conjunction or separation
of the Si^^s I mean that which is made in affirm^^g or in denying, and that
which is called position. As the Signs, whereof we (...) use, are of two sorts,
Ideas and words; the Propositions are likewise of two sorts, Mental and Verbal.
Truth is likewise of two kinds, real or purely verbal. A real Truth is found in
a Proposition when it is Affirmative or Negative, according as the Ideas
themselves are conformable to their Architypes. A Verbal Truth is included in a
Proposition, when it is Affirmative or Negative, according to the agreement or
disagreement of our Ideas, tho these Ideas have no agreement with their
Architypes.

6. Truth represents it self commonly to our Mind, or in being considered as
included in certain Propositions: Its of importance to examine what Propositions
are capable to bring into our Mind a certain knowledge of general Truths. 1. In
general Propositions, where we suppose that the Terms signify Kinds which
consist in real Existences, and distinct from nominals, we are capable of no
certain Knowledge, because not knowing this real Essence, we cannot know what
qualities have an agreement or disagreement with this unknown Essence; nor even
ever discover that the Beings belong to this kind. And this is it which
happens often in the Propositions which regard Substances, and not in those
that concern the other things, because we do not suppose that the other things
have a real Essence distinct from the Nominal. 2. In all the general
Propositions, where are substituted Terms in place only of the Nominal Essence,
or from the abstract Idea, so that the kind is determined by that only, we are
capable of Certainty as far as we perceive the agreement or disagreement of
these abstract Ideas. But this very little regards Substances, because we
cannot discover but in very few reincounters the necessary coexistence, or the
incompatibility of the other Ideas, with those that compose the complex Idea
which we have of some kind of Substances.

7. There are certain Propositions, which are called Maxims, which some do
look, upon as born with us, and which the most part look upon as the foundation
of all Knowledge. But if we consider well what we have said touching the
knowledge of simple view, or self-evidence, we shall find that these Axioms, so
much boasted of, are not innate, and have no more evidence by themselves, than
a thousand other Propositions, whereof some are known before (...) Axioms, and
whereof others are known as readily and as clearly; whence it follows that
they are not innate, and that they are not the foundation of all our Knowledge
and reasonings, as some believe.

It is allowed that these Maxims are evident in themselves: All that is is, and
it is impossible a thing should be, and should not be at the same time. But if
we consider the nature of the Intellect, and of the Ideas it has, and if we
think that the Intellect cannot but know its proper Ideas, and not know that
the Ideas that are distinct in it are so, we shall of necessity remark, that
these Axioms, that are believed to be the fundamental Principles of Knowledge
and Reasoning, are no more evident in themselves than these Propositions, One
is one, Red is Red, and it is impossible that one should be two, and that Red
should be Blew. We also know evidently and even sooner these Propositions, and
a thousand such others, that those that are commonly called Maxims. Is there
any one that could imagine that a Child knows not that a Seed of Herbs against
Worms is not Sugar, but by virtue of this Axiom, It is impossible that the same
thing should be and not be at the same time? Our knowledge of simple view
extends to all our Ideas in regard of the Agreement or disagreement of
identity, and consequently all the Propositions, which regard this sort of
agreement or disagreement, whether they be conceived in more or less general
Terms, if the Ideas that they signify are known; these Propositions I say, are
equally evident by themselves.

As we know very few things with a knowledge of a simple view, in respect to
the Agreement or Disagreement of Coexistence; so we cannot form thereupon but
very few general Propositions evident by themselves, and a very small number of
Axioms.

In the third sort of agreement, to wit in the agreement of Relation,
Mathematicians have formed diverse general Propositions, touching the equality,
to which they have given the names of Axioms; tho these Propositions have no
other certainty than that which is found in all the other general Propositions,
evident by themselves. Although when one has rendered to himself these Axioms
familiar, Men often make use thereof, to show the absurdity of false reasonings
and of erroneous opinions, in the less general Ideas; notwithstanding the
manner, wherewith our Mind has acquired Knowledge, is not by beginning with
these general Propositions, and thence drawing Consequences; but on the
contrary, by beginning by particular observations, and thence extending by
degrees its knowledge to more general Views.

8. Besides these Propositions, there are others, whereof several are certain,
but it teaches us no real Truth, because they regard only the signification of
Words. 1. When we affirm some part of a complex Idea of the name of this same
Idea; or, which is the same thing, when we affirm a part of a Definition of the
name of the thing defined; this Proposition only regards the signification of
Terms, and such are all the Propositions, in which the most general Terms are
affirmed by Terms which are so less; as when we affirm the Genera of Species,
or of the Individuals. 2. When two abstract Ideas are affirmed by one another,
the Proposition includes no real truth, but only regards the signification of
Words. If all these ridiculous Propositions were banished from discourse, the
way to come at some knowledge would be much less entangled with disputes than
it is.

9. Universal Propositions which include a truth or a certain falsehood, concern
the Essences only. The knowledge of Existence extends not it self beyond
particular Beings. It is visible we have a knowledge of simple view of our
Existence, and that nothing can be more evident.

10. There is a Demonstration of the Existence of God, that we may find without
being obliged to go out of our selves, to seek proofs, 1. Although God has
given us no Idea of himself which is innate, tho he has not imprinted in our
Souls any original Characters, that may make us read his Existence, having
given to our Minds the faculties they have, yet he has not left himself
without Testimony, seeing we have Senses, Intellect and Reason, which cannot
want Proofs of his Existence whilst we subsist. We cannot justly complain of
our ignorance in this regard, seeing he has furnished us so abundantly with
means whereby to know him, as much as it is necessary for the end for which we
exist, and for our Felicity, which is the greatest of all our interests. But
tho the Existence of God be a truth the most easy to be discovered by Reason,
yet his own evidence is equal, if I am not mistaken, to that of Mathematical
Demonstration; nevertheless it requires attention, and the Mind must apply it
self to draw it from some uncontestable part of our knowledge by a regular
deduction. Otherwise we should be in as great an uncertainty and in as great an
ignorance in respect to this truth, as in respect to the other Propositions,
which may evidently be Demonstrated. To show that we are capable to know, and
to know with certainty that there is God, and to show how we come to this
knowledge, I believe we only need to reflect upon our selves, and upon the
undoubted knowledge we have of our own Existence.

2. I believe it is Uncontestable, that Man knows certainly that he Existeth,
and that he is something. If there be any that can doubt thereof, I declare
it is not to him that I speak, no more than I should be willing to dispute
against pure Naught, and to undertake to convince a Non-Being to be something.

3. Besides, Man knows by a knowledge of simple view that pure Naught can no
more produce a real Being, than the same Naught can be equal to two strait
Angles. If there by any that know that Non-Being, or absence of every Being
cannot be equal to two strait Angles, its impossible he should conceive any of
Euclides Demonstrations. If we know that some real Being Existeth, and that
Non-Being can produce nothing, its by a Mathematical evidence that there is
something from all Eternity, seeing that which is not of all Eternity has a
beginning, and that every thing that has a beginning has been produced by some
other thing.

4. It is by the same evidence that every Being, which draws its Existence
and its beginning from another, deriveth also from another all that it has and
all that belongs to it. We ought to know that all these Faculties draw their
Origin from some place: Therefore the Eternal Source of all the Beings, must
also be the Source and Principle of all their Powers or Faculties, so that this
Being must be Almighty.

5. Besides, this Man finds in himself some perception and knowledge. We may
therefore yet advance from one degree, and assure our selves, not only that
some Being exists, but that there is in the World some intelligent Being.

6. There has then been a time in which there was no intelligent Being, and in
which Knowledge has begun to exist; or there also has been an intelligent
being from all Eternity. If it is said, there has been a time, in which No
Being had knowledge, and in which the eternal Being was destitute of
intelligence; I reply, that it is then impossible that any knowledge should ever
have existed. For its as impossible that a thing absolutely destitute of
knowledge, and which blindly acts without any perception, should produce an
intelligent Being, as its impossible that a Triangle should make for it self
three Angles that should be bigger than two strait ones. It is so contrary to
the Idea of a matter without sense, that it should produce to it self sense,
perception, and knowledge, as it is contrary to the Idea of a Triangle that it
should make to it self Angles which should be bigger than two strait ones.

7. Therefore by the consideration of our selves and of what we infallibly find
in our Nature, Reason leads us to the knowledge of this certain and evident
Truth, that there is an Eternal Being, most powerful and most intelligent, what
name soever we give it; whether we call God, or otherwise, there is nothing
more evident; and in considering well this Idea, 'twill be easy thence to draw
all the Attributes that we ought to acknowledge in this Eternal Being.

It seems clear to me, by what I have said, that we have a knowledge more
certain of the Existence of a God, than of any thing else whatever, that our
Senses have not immediately discovered to us. I believe I may say even that we
know more certainly that there is a God, than that we know there is something
else without us. When I say that we know, I mean that we have in our power this
knowledge which cannot fail us, if we apply our selves to it as we do in other
disquisitions.

11. We cannot know the Existence of other things but by the Testimony of the
Senses. In this our knowledge extends it self not beyond that which we perceive
by their means. The Existence of any other thing whatever having no necessary
connection with any of the Ideas which are in our Memory, we cannot infer
thence the Existence of any particular Idea, and we can have no knowledge
thereof but by an actual perception of our Senses.

12. To augment our knowledge, we must regulate our Ideas in the same method
whereof we make use in a search of truth. As to the substances, where our Ideas
are but imperfect Copies, we can have but a very little general knowledge of
'em, because few of our Abstract Ideas have an Agreement or Disagreement of a
Coexistence that may be discovered; and therefore upon this consideration, we
must endeavor to augment our knowledges by particular Experiences and
Observations. But when we speak of Moods and Relations, our Ideas being
Architypes, and being the Real as well as the Nominal Essences of Kinds, we may
acquire a general knowledge by the only consideration of our Abstract Ideas.

And as to these Ideas, our Searches regarding not the Agreement or
Disagreement of Coexistance, but respecting other Relations, more easy to be
discovered than that of Coexistence, we are capable of making further
Progresses. To augment this knowledge, we must establish in our Mind clear and
constant Ideas, with their Names, or Signs, and after that exactly consider
their Connections, their Agreements and their Dependencies. As to know, if we
could not find some Method, as profitable in regard to the other Moods, as
Algebra in regard to the Ideas of quantity, to discover their Relations. It Is
they that cannot be determined aforehand, yet we ought never to despair of it.
Notwithstanding I doubt not but Morality may be brought to a much greater
degree of Certainty, than it has been hitherto, if after having applied the
Term of Morality to clear and constant Ideas, we examine them freely and without
prejudice.

13. Knowledge is not innate, nor presents not it self always to our Intellect.
We must often bring in our Searches both Application and Study, and it is that
which depends upon our Will; but when we have examined some Ideas with their
Agreements and Disagreements, by all Means that we have, and with all the
exactness whereof we are capable, it depends not upon our Will to know, or not
to know the Truths that concern these Ideas.

14. Our knowledge extending not it self to every thing that belongs to us, we
supply it by what we call judgment, by which our Mind concludes that Ideas
agree or disagree, to wit that a Proposition is true or false, without having
an evidence that may produce a certain knowledge.

15. The foundation upon which we receive these Propositions as true, is what
we call probability; and the manner wherewith the Mind receives these
Propositions is that which is called Consent, Belief or Opinion; that which
consists to receive an Opinion as true, without having a certain knowledge
that it is so effectively. Here are the foundations of probability. 1. The
conformity of something with that which we know, or with our Experience. 2. The
Testimony of others founded upon what they know, or what they have experienced.

16. In this Chapter we treat of the different degrees of Assurance, or of
Doubt, which depend upon these two things, diversified by Circumstances that
concur with others, or that counterbalance them; but they are in too great a
number for to be noted in particulars in this Extract.

17. Error is not the failure of knowledge, but a fault of judgment, which
causes Men to give their consent to things that are not true. The causes ares,
1. Want of proofs, such as may or may not be had. 2. The little ability Men
have to make use thereof. 3. The want of Will to make use thereof. 4. The false
rules of probability, which may be reduced to these 4. Doubtless Opinions
supposed as Principles; Hypotheses received; unruly Passions, and Authority.

18. Reasoning, by which we know Demonstrations and probabilities has, as it
seems to me, four parts. The first consists in discovery of proofs: The second
in ranging them in such order as is necessary to find the truth: The third in
clear perception, or an evident connection of Ideas in each part of the
Consequence: The fourth, in carrying strait Judgment, and drawing a just
conclusion from the whole. It appears by this, that Syllogism is not the
great instrument of Reason; that is serves but in the third part, and only to
show to others that the connection of two Ideas, or rather of two Words, by the
interposition of a third one, is good or bad. But it is not at all subservient
to Reason, when it seeks for some new knowledge, or would discover some unknow
Truth, and the proofs upon which it is grounded, which is the principal use
which we ought to make of Reason, and not to Triumph in Dispute, or to reduce
to silence those that would be Litigious.

19. Some Men oppose so often, Faith to Reason, that if we knew not distinctly
their limits, we should run a hazard to entangle our selves in our Searches
about matters of Religion.

The Subject of reasoning is Propositions, which we may know by the natural use
of our Faculties, and which are drawn from Ideas that we have by Sensation, by
Reflection: The matters of Faith are those which are discovered to us by a
Supernatural Revelation. If we carefully consider the distinct Principles of
these two things, we shall know in what Faith excludes Reason, or imposes
Silence to it, and in what we ought to hearken to Reason as a lawful Judge of a
matter.

1. A Proposition, which we pretend to have received by an original and
immediate Revelation, cannot be admitted as an undoubted matter of Faith, if it
be contrary to the clear and evident Principles of our natural Knowledges;
because that though God cannot lie, notwithstanding it is impossible that a Man,
to whom the Revelation is made, should know it comes from God with more
certainty, than he knows the truth of these Principles of Reason.

2. But an original Revelation can impose Silence upon Reason in a Proposition,
wherein Reason gives but a probable assurance; because the assurance that we
have that this Revelation comes from God, is clearer than the thing that is
most probable.

3. If it cannot be granted that original Revelation may contradict our clear
and evident natural Knowledge, it can yet be less granted to what we know by
Tradition only, because that although that which God reveals cannot be called
in Question, nevertheless he to whom the Revelation has not been immediately
made, but who holds it from the Relation of other Men, can never know that God
has made this Revelation; nor that he understands well the Words in which they
are proposed to him, nor even that he ever had read or heard this Proposition,
which we suppose to be revealed to another, with as much certainty as he
knows the truths of Reason which are evident by themselves. It has been
revealed, That the Trumpet shall sound and the Dead shall rise; but I see not
how those that hold that Revelation only is the object of Faith, can say, that
it is a matter of Faith, and not of Reason, to believe that this Proposition is
a Revelation, if it be not revealed that such a Proposition advanced by such a
Man is a Revelation. The Question recurs, to wit, Whether I understand this
Proposition in its true Sense?

20. In fine, conformable to these Principles, I conclude, in dividing the
Sciences into three kinds. The first, which I call (...), is the knowledge of
Things, whether Spiritual or Corporal, or some of their Proprieties, in their
true Nature: We propose in this no other end than simple Speculation. The
second which I name (...), contains the Rules of all our Operations,
comprehends the things that are in our power, and chiefly that which belongs to
the conduct of our Manners. This second Science proposes the action for its
end. The third, to which I give the name of (...), is the knowledge of Signs, to
wit, of Ideas and Words, as also serving to other sorts of Sciences. It may be,
if this last was well considered, it would produce a Logic and Critic
different from those we have seen till now.

That Beasts are mere Machines, divided into two Dissertations: At Amsterdam by
J. Darmanson, in his Philosophical Conferences in Twelves, without the name of
a Printer, 1684.
IF any thing can mortify the Mind of Man, it is certainly the Controversy
which has been raised not long since betwixt the Cartesians and other
Philosophers, touching the Soul of Beasts. All Men believed, without
contestation, until the time of Mr. Descartes, That Beasts had Knowledge.
Philosophers in that had no different Thoughts from the People; they believed,
as well as the Vulgar, that there was the utmost evidence for it. They only
disputed among themselves, whether the Knowledge of Animals extended it self to
Reason or no, and to universal Ideas? Or if it was limited by the perception of
sensible Objects? Most of the ancient Philosophers have believed that Beasts
reasoned; but among Christian Philosophers, the most common Opinion was the
contrary. They were contented almost all to attribute a Sentiment unto them. I
say almost all, for there have been always some, who have maintained, that they
were not deprived of the faculty of Reasoning. Mr. De la Chamber, one of the
most illustrious Peripateticks of this Age, has openly declared for this
Party, in which undoubtedly he has been incomparably more judicious than any
other of Aristotle's Followers, because perhaps never any Opinion was more
unlikely to be maintained than this, That the actions of Beasts issue from a
knowing Principle, and nevertheless that Beasts have not the Strength to
conclude one thing from another. However it is in this particular Dispute, all
Men were united in this fixed point, and in this Article of Belief, That Beasts
have a Sentiment. The most Subtle would have engaged, That there would never
have been any Man so foolish, as to dare to maintain the contrary.

There has nevertheless been one in the last Age, who durst assert this
Paradox in a place, wherein it would be the least suspected that so new a
Doctrine should take Birth. I shall be well understood if I add only, That it
was a Spanish Physician that published this Doctrine, a Medina del Campo in
1554. in a Book which had cost him 30 years Labor, and which he Entitled,
Antoniana Margarita, to honor his Fathers Mothers Name. Who should ever guess
that Spain, where the liberty of Opinions is less suffered, than that of the
Body is in Turkey, should produce so rash a Philosopher, as to maintain that
Animals feel not? It deserves to be spoken of here and every where for the
Rarity of the Subject; and it is just that we should not suppress the Name of
this Gallant Man, who has been the first Author, as we know of, of this
unheard Paradox. He was called Gamesius Pereira, and lived in the last Age, and
not in the twelfth, as a Doctor of Divinity has affirmed, who places the
quality of Abbot Gerard at the head of his Discourse, upon the Courtiers
Philosophy. This Gamesius Pereira was briskly attacked by a Divine of Salamanca
named Michael de Palacios, and answered him as sharply without losing any
Argument that he had advanced, For Beasts being Machines. But he made no Sect,
his Opinion immediately fell. He had not the Honor done him as to fear him, so
that he was not much more known to our Age, than if he had never come into the
World; and there is a great Likelihood that Mr. Descartes, who read but little,
never heard talk of him. Yet Men will have that he has drawn from this Spanish
Physician, the Opinion which he had concerning Beasts; for in saying so, People
think to take away from him the Glory of the Invention, and that it is still so
much gained upon him.

But what is most certain is, That Gamesius Pereira having not drawn his
Paradox from true Principles, and not having penetrated into its Consequences,
could not hinder Mr. Descartes from finding it first by a Philosophical Method.
It is notwithstanding very probable that he found it without seeking for it;
very likely he begun and ended his Meditations, without thinking upon the Soul
of Beasts, and without abandoning the Opinion which he had received thereof in
his Infancy; and it was only in considering the sequel of that Principle,
concerning the distinction of the Cogitive Substance from that of the extended
Substance, that he perceived the knowledge of Animals overturned all the
economy of his System. It may perhaps be, that he had then need that this
Objection should be made him, and that before it did not come into his Mind. It
is therefore through mere necessity that he maintained that Beasts cannot feel.
If he could have defended his Principles without it, he had never concerned
himself with an Opinion, which not only had always appeared undoubtful to all
the World, but which was also clothed with almost an invincible Evidence. This
Evidence made me say at first, That there is nothing more likely to mortify
the Mind of Man, than the Controversy concerning the Knowledge of Beasts.

For in fine, what can be more mortifying, than to see the State wherein this
Controversy is now? On the one side by Mr. Descartes an Opinion upheld which
never appeared before in the World but once, and which took Birth rather
through Capriciousness than Reason; (for, as I have already said, Gamesius
Pereira knew not very well himself, why he maintained it) which Opinion has
been adopted by Mr. Descartes, only because he was constrained to throw himself
into this Precipice, to confirm what he had once advanced. In fine, what so
readily contradicts the natural light of many Persons, that it is said openly
in a thousand Places, it is a shame for France and for our Age, to have
produced a Philosopher, who has been able with Success to put off that
monstrous Opinion, that Beasts are Machines? What do we see on the other side?
An Opinion generally approved of all Men who have been since Adam, until these
latter years, and which so possesses our Minds by I know not what Evidence
that accompanies it, that Men are not more persuaded, that they enjoy a
pleasure in eating, than they are, that Beasts do feel some likewise when they
feed. Yet in spite of all these great advantages of the Opinion which the
Cartesians have been forced to strive against, they boast of having after three
or four years Dispute, reduced it into so poor a condition, that it can be no
longer preserved but by an Appeal to the People, and to what Hunters and
Fishermen will say on it. As for Philosophical Reasons, they say it cannot
bring any, either for its Defense, or to oppose the contrary. This is very
humbling, and what may make us trouble for Opinions, which appear the most
certain to us. A time will come, perhaps, that those who will maintain them,
shall see themselves more encumbered, than the Peripateticks at this day are, to
defend the Soul of Beasts.

The Cartesians (I am here but a simple Historian of their Thoughts) say that
it will appear, that they use no exaggeration, if the Preface be read which
has been put by Mr. Schuyl, before his Latin Translation of Monsieur
Descartes; the Treatise of F. Pardies of the Knowledge of Beasts; another
Treatise of Mr. le Grand, de carentia Sensus and cognitionis in Brutis; and a
Book of the Soul of Beasts which was Printed at Lions, in 1676. approved by two
Doctors of Divinity, and composed by a Priest of Ambrum, named d' Illy, who
died a little while after. All the World suspected F. Pardies, of designing to
establish the Opinion of Descartes, in only pretending to refute it. And in
effect he answers so well himself to his Objections, and those which he leaves
without Answer are so weak, that it is not hard to guess what he intended. And
Mr. d' Illy having answered the Reasons which this Jesuit had not refuted, it
follows that nothing has been left undone, that could destroy the Opinion of
Mr. Descartes. But those who maintain that Beasts have Senses, cannot boast of
it, for they do not solidly answer the Objections of the Cartesians if we
belive the latter. It is a wonderful thing, that the Tenet of the Automata
should so speedily come to perfection. It must needs have fallen into good
Hands, and that 3 or 4 good Wits make more progress in 10 years, than others
have done in diverse Ages.

Religion was immediately interested in this cause by the hopes that the
Anti-Cartesians conceived of ruining thereby the Machins of Mr. Descartes; but
the advantage cannot be related which has accrewed from thence to the Sect of
this Philosopher. For they think they have shown that in giving Beasts a Soul
capable of knowledge, all the natural proofs of the Immortality of the Soul are
ruined. They have shown that their opinion had no other obstinate Enemies than
the Impious, and Epicureans, and that no greater diskindness could be done to
those Philosophers, than to disarm them of all the false reasons, which they
borrow from the Soul of Beasts, to conclude that there is betwixt them and us,
the difference only of the greatest to the least. It is a certain thing that
there are no People who affect more than the Impious do, to make Beasts
approach near to the perfection of Man. Thus Mr. Descartes has cunningly
Engaged Religion in his interest. But they are not satisfied with this reason.
They have exalted their Search unto the nature of God, for invincible arguments
against the knowledge of Beasts, and it must be confessed that they have found
pretty good ones. The Author of the Disquisition of Truth has spread the
Draught thereof in some places of his Works. F. Poisson of the Oratory has
thoroughly treated of that which is founded upon the Principle of St. Augustine,
that God being just, misery in a necessary proof of Sin; whence it follows,
that Beast having not Sinned, are not subject to misery, but they would be
subject thereunto, if they had a Feeling, therefore they have no Sense.

The Book of Darmanson, which occasioned our making these general Remarks,
chiefly endeavors to destroy the knowledge of Beasts, by Reasons borrowed from
Divinity. For this effect he shows in his first discourse, that if Beasts are
not Automata, it follows first, that God is not God; secondly, that our Soul
is not Immortal. He has the equity of remarking that these Consequences ought
not to be imputed to those who hold the Doctrine from whence they arose. It is
another thing to make a certain Judgment and to admit of all the Consequences,
which may be thence deduced in good Philosophy.

For to prove the First of these, observe, that if Beasts have such a Soul as
is imagined, it follows, First, that God loves not himself; Secondly, that
he is neither constant nor wise; Thirdly, he is cruel and unjust.

He proves the first of these three things by some Principles which F.
Malebranch has exposed in his Treatise of Nature and Grace, and elsewhere; for
Example, that God would have never Determined to produce any thing without
himself, if his Eternal Wisdom, and his Word had not rendered Creatures by his
Oblation, worthy of the Infinite Action of God; whence it results, that God
refers to his Glory, all that he does, But he would not do it, if he created
Souls capable of knowledge, and love, without obliging them to love him and to
know him; therefore, etc.

This Reason will appear stronger if we consider, that in the common Opinion
the capacity which Beasts have of knowing Things, and to Love them, is
terminated solely in the Body; whence it follows, that God has created them
but to enjoy the Bodies; yet according to the Principles of St. Augustine, Sin
is nothing else but aversio a Deo and Conversio ad Creaturam, or else uti
fruendis and frui utendis, to wit, to swerve from God to turn toward
Creatures, to stop at the Creature as our utmost end, and to make use of God
himself, as a means whereby we may enjoy Creatures when as all thing ought to
serve us only as a help to our enjoyment of God; therefore Beasts have been
created in the State of Sin, and Consequently God would have dispensed with the
Law of order, which is notwithstanding the Soverain and Indispensable Law of
God. The Author shows how dangerous it is to let the Impious believe that God
can Create Souls in disorder, to wit, without any Obligation of loving him,
because if that was once supposed, it would be no more possible to prove unto
them, that our Soul is in a disorder. It is certain that the Principles of St.
Augustine are incompatible with the ordinary Doctrine, concerning the Soul of
Beasts, as Ambros Victor has fully proved.

As to the two other things, the Author proves 'em in showing that the Soul of
Beasts perishing when they dye, God destroys his proper work, which is a mark
of inconstancy according to this Author. Moreover, as the Soul of the Beasts is
more perfect than the Body, and that the Body never cease to exist, tho the
Soul is destroyed, it follows that God preserves the Substances less perfect,
whilst he Annihilates the most perfect, which is not like a wife Agent, no more
than to unite two Substances to produce but the same effects, which one of them
could do without the help of the other. But he pretends that the Machin of the
Animals alone sufficient to produce what is necessary to their beings,
therefore it would be a Superfluity unworthy a wise Agent, to join a Soul to
this Machin. It will easily be guessed in what manner he proves that God would
be cruel and unjust if Beasts had a Soul, for we may perceive that it can be
only by the Reason which we have heretofore mentioned; to wit, that this Soul
never having offended God, would notwithstanding be subject to all manner of
miseries, and that without ever expecting a recompense for the Evils, which
they should have suffered. For again, could one conceive, that God imprints
sentiments of grief in an innocent Creature, provided it was with a design to
make it deserve Eternal Felicity, by it is acquiescing in the pain. To this the
Author adds this consideration, that the Soul of Beasts being innocent, would
nevertheless be submitted to all the unmeasured desires of Man, which is a
disorder contrary to natural Light. Which will be easily comprehended if we
imagine two different Kinds of Men, whereof the one, to wit the Posterity of
Adam, should have reserved his Innocence, and the other become criminal. If the
Posterity of Adam being innocent, was submitted to the desires of these
Criminal Men, so that they should treat us as we treat Beasts, that they should
make us tear one another for their pleasure, that they should kill us to feed
their Bodies, that they should seek into our Entrails during our Life, to
satisfy their curiosity, and all this in Virtue of the Empire which they
should receive from God over us; who is it that does not herein easily perceive
a disorder which offends all the Principles of sound Sense? We must then
conclude (say the Cartesians) that if Beasts had a Soul, God would not have
given to sinful Man the Empire which he has over them. Let it be denied as
much as they will with a Physician of Paris, named Lami, a provoked Epicurean,
That Man has over Beasts any other Empire, but that which Industry or strength
procures unto him, it will be still true, and this Physician has not the
considence to deny it, that God has suffered Man after the Flood to kill
Beasts to feed upon them. Which is to grant him an Empire, great enough, to
preserve all the force of the Objection of the Cartesians.

As to what concerns the second Consequence, to wit, that if Beasts have a
Soul, the Immortality of ours can no more be proved; the Author clears it very
pertinently. He expounds the Equivocation of the Word Immortality, and shows
that in a certain Sense, Bodies partake thereof; but that there is another
signification according to which Immortality belongs but to the Soul. It were
to be wished that this Author should refute those who give an Immortal Soul to
Animals; for it is unto this that some of those are now reduced who embrace not
the Hypothesis of Mr. DesCartes, being Combated by the purest Ideas of
Divinity, and forced in their Retrenchments, they say that the Souls of Beasts
perish not. As that enervates the greatest part of the Reasons of this Author,
his interest is to refute this new Hypothesis. The Cartesians would willingly
have Men to examine if it be just to make so much ado against their Doctrine
concerning the Soul of Beasts, seeing they maintain it by Reasons, which reduce
their Adversaries to the greatest Extremities; the Public may judge whether
they have Reason or not. This is what concerns the first Conference.

The second contains the Mechanic Explication of several actions of Animals.
Descartes, de la Forge, de Cordemoy, d' Illy and Rohault in their Discourses,
have spoken of the same thing much finer; therefore I shall omit it.

If there is a second Edition made of these Conferences, it will be a great
deal better to correct the Trials. It Is advice which the Dutch Stationers have
great need of.

A Collection of some curious Pieces concerning the Philosophy of Mr. Descartes
in 12. At Amsterdam, Sold by Henry Desbordes, 1684.
THis Collection contains six Pieces. The first is an Extract of the Acts of an
Assembly of the Fathers of the Oratory, which was held at Paris in the Month of
September, 1680. This Assembly willing to give us an undoubted proof of their
Submission to the King, caused a Writing to be presented unto him, by which
they engaged to Teach nothing which should smell of Iansenism, or Cartesianism.
They observe in this Writing after what manner they think, Grace should be
taught in Seminaries, Colleges, and in other Houses of the Congregation. And
as they would have it on the one Hand permitted to every one to Teach
Predestination, and Efficacious Grace by it self, they desire on the other,
that Men have a particular care to show that the Efficacy of Grace leaves Man
in his Power of Acting, or not Acting, and that in every state there are Graces
truly sufficient. As for the Professors of Philosophy, the same Writing
dictates unto them certain things which they ought, or ought not to teach. They
require that in Physic Men take great heed not to swerve from the Principles
of Aristotle, commonly received in Colleges, and that they teach that the
Essence of the Matter consists not in the extent; That there is a substantial
Form really distinct from the Matter in each natural Body; That there are
absolute Accidents; That a Vacuum is not impossible, etc. This is what was
understood by this Concordat of the Jesuits and the Fathers of the Oratory, of
which there has been so much talk, and whereof there were no more Printed
Copies in France.

The second Piece contains remarks upon this Concordat. The Author pretends
that the Fathers of the Oratory have done great wrong to the Doctrine of St.
Augustine, in that which they had given for a Model to their Professors, in the
preceding Assemblies. He maintains that they have been taken for Fools, and
that they have not seen the Artifice of some Clauses inserted in their
Writings. He shows also it is dangerous to Captivate the Mind of Man, in
regard to natural Truths, and to give an occasion to think that the Catholic
Church, and Aristotle are really tied together, that the one cannot be
overthrown without shaking the other.

The third Piece is Entitled, An Explanation of the Book of Mr. de la Ville.
Mr. Bernieris the Author thereof* Mr. de la Ville pretends that all new
Philosophers, whether Cartesians or Gassendists, ruin the Mystery of
Transubstantiation, by maintaining that the Essence of Matter consists in the
Extent. As his Book dedicated to the Clergy of France made a noise, and injured
the Cartesians. Mr. Bernier who is known to be a great follower of Gassendus
was afraid himself, and Composed the Explanation whereof we speak, in which he
endeavors to reconcile the Principles of his Philosophy with the Decisions of
the Church. He pretends that Real-presence may be more commodiously expounded
by the Hypothesis of the new Philosophers, than by the Principles of Schools,
and assures us that he has made the experience thereof in the Indies, For,
says he, when I saw some of those new Christians in trouble about the mystery
of the Eucharist, as not being able to conceive that upon the Altar where there
seemed to be Bread with all its Extent, and being no Bread, that the same Body
of Jesus Christ, which had been stretched upon the Cross, was upon the Altar,
and his not appearing to be there; Do you think, that I stood to tell them all
that in all Bodies there are small Entities vulgarly called Accidents, and that
amongst these Entities there is principally one called Quantity which extends
the Body, without being always extended it self of the Body, or the Essence of
the Body, or the Moods of the Body, and that God in the Eucharist depriving the
Body of Jesus Christ of this Entity, made it to stay without Extention? Do you
think, I say, that I went to tell them all this fine Discourse? Truly I was far
from it: I should have embraced them again; and even as they have a very subtle
Wit, and more fit for Sciences than we, when they are minded to apply
themselves thereunto, it may be I should have given them a distaste. I was
satisfied to tell them simply and in three Words, That God who had made that
World of nothing, could as well make that a Body should appear where there was
none, and that there should appear no Body, where there was one. He adds, that
these good People went away with this more contented, and more submissive, than
if the Thing had been expounded to them after the ordinary manner. He is not
only contented to defend himself, he besides attacks the Cartesians, upon the
infinity of the World, the Soul of Beasts, the cause of Motion, and Free Will,
etc.

The fourth Piece is the Work of a Cartesian against the same Mr. de la Ville,
and in favor of the excellent Philosopher who has made the Disquisition of
Truth. Mr. de la Ville had witnessed some particular Spleen against him, and
had by the by attackt his Exposition of Original Sin. He is answered, and
accused of relating the passage fasly. After that he is told, that the Counsels
have not decided all the particular Tenets; that the Philosophers of Schools
have advanced to expound the Mysteries of the Eucharist, and that one may be a
very good Catholic without adopting all these Tenets: That also it is not
apparent that the Bishop of Condom spoke thereof in exposing the Doctrine of the
Church. It is maintained against him that these Tenets were unknown to the
Ancient Fathers, and consequently that Tradition and Reason are for those who
are called Cartesians. There is added a Memorial to expound the possibility of
Transubstantiation. It deserves to be read, for it is a different manner of
explication to all those which have been seen hitherto.

After these four Pieces in French, comes a Dissertation in Latin Composed by a
Protestant against the same Mr. de la Ville, The Protestant is so wife as to
intrude into the dispute which the Catholics have amongst themselves upon the
Tenet of the Real presence. He lets them go on, he supposes that his mediation
would displease both of 'em, and that it would be thought he rather endeavored
to put the evil forward, than allay it. He is content to examine that place of
the Book of Mr. de la Ville where this Author endeavors to prove by natural
Reasons, that the Extent is not of the Essence of the Body; and because Mr. de
la Ville to bring this about only weakeneth as much as he can the Reasons by
which Cherselier, Rohault, and the Author of the Disquisition of the Truth have
maintained that the Extent is the Essence of the Matter: The Protestant is
contented to Restablish the Reasons of these Gentlemen in all their strength,
in ruining all the Exceptions, and all the subtility of Mr. de la Ville. He
applies himself chiefly to show that the penetration of Matter is impossible.
The Printer has added to this Dissertation some Theses of Philosophy, which
come from the same Hand, and where it is maintained amongst other things, that
Place, Motion and Time have not as yet been defined but after an unexplicable
manner. It is also remarked that the Reflection of Bodies must needs proceed
from their Elastick Virtue, being Motion is Divisible to Infinity, and that by
Reason of this Divisibility any fixed Body cannot hinder that which is in Motion
to continue in its Motion in a right Line. Mr. Descartes had not taken care of
this.

Lastly, at the end of this Collection are the Meditations upon Metaphysics,
which appeared in 1678. Under the name of William Wanduis. In this is the
quintessence of the Cartesian Metaphysics, and all the best things which are
in the Meditations of Mr. Descartes: It even appears to be much better digested
in it, more short, and pertinent than in that of Mr. Descartes, and that he is
surpassed in it. The French Author of the Learned Mercury of the Month of
February speaks of these Meditations of William Wanduis, and refutes some
places thereof; but his Remarks tho good in his System, have no very great
strength, when they are used against the Principles of the Author of the
Meditations.

Of the Agreement of Specific Remedies with the Corpuscular Philosophy: To
which is added, A Dissertation about the various usefulness of Simple
Medicaments: By Robert Boil, Esquire Fellow of the Royal Society.
WHEN the Ancient Philosophers were asked the Reason of any Natural Effect,
their Custom was, always to have recourse to certain occult Qualities, whereof
they had no Idea at all. It was but in this latter Age, that People began to
Discourse according to the Rules of Geometry, and to explain by Properties; by
which we clearly conceive the different Effects of Bodies, the most universal
Properties of Body and Extension, Figure and Motion. And whereas Bodies do not
always act by their whole Bulk, but sometimes by their insensible Particles, it
is necessary to speak of the Figure and Motion of these Particles. There have
been an infinite number of Conjectures made upon these little Bodies, and some
have made it their endeavor to draw hence Consequences, not only for Natural
and Experimental Philosophy, but also for Medicine. As for Example, when some
were satisfied that the mass of Blood was in a disposition that disagreed with
its Nature, they thought that particle of a certain Shape and Figure should be
made use of, to bring this Blood back to its due and natural Temper. And there
were some that believed that universal Remedies might be found out which would
produce this Effect, let the Distemper be what it would, and so have insensibly
fallen into an Opinion, That what is said commonly of Specificks, is but mere
Fancy, and an effect of our own Brain.

1. Mr. Boil intends to show in the first of these two short Dissertations,
That the common Opinion concerning Specificks, is not at all incompatible or
inconsistent with the Modern Philosopher's Thoughts of the Operation of the
insensible Particles of Bodies. To avoid Obscurity and Equivocation, Mr. Boil
takes notice from the very beginning, That three kind of Remedies may be termed
Specificks. 1. Such as may serve for the Cure of some Member of the Body. 2.
Such as purge out some particular Humor, as it is believed. 3. Such as ease or
cure certain Distempers, though we do not know how they operate. It Is in this
last Sense that the Author takes this way of Speaking.

Then he goes on, and proves that there are Specificks, against those which
deny that there are any; after which, he makes it his Business to show, That
this agrees very well with those that give Mechanic and Sensible Reasons of
the Effects of insensible Particles.

Here are his chief Reasons to prove that the first are mistaken: 1. Because
Gallen and all the ancient Physicians, and an infinite number of the Modern,
have constantly assured it. And though in Matters of Philosophy, Authority ought
not to be made use of, yet great Prejudices are derived hence in favor of
Specificks, because they are things whereof the forementioned might have had
many Experiences. Besides this, there is no more reason to deny that there are
Specific Remedies, than there is to deny that there are Poisons that cause
certain Diseases and Symptoms: These Poisons act in such small quantities, that
their Effect cannot be attributed to any sensible cause, much less to the
first, second or third Qualities, speaking like a Physician, which they
themselves cannot explain clearly. It Is well known, what terrible Symptoms the
biting of a Viper causes, though perhaps a Pin's-head is a hundred times bigger
than the quantity of Venom that it casts in the Wound. And Mr. Boil relates as
strange an Example, which he says he has learned of an Occulist: It is of a Man
into whose Eye a Spider let fall a small drop of Liquor, which without causing
any sensible Pain, took away his Sight immediately.

If there are Poisons which produce in so short a time certain Effects, and
whereof we cannot understand the Cause, it is not improbable but there may be
Remedies that may work after the same manner, and it is what Experience shows
clearly. The biting of a Scorpion is quickly cured, in putting some of the Oil
of Scorpion, or bruising the Body of the Scorpion on the Wound. There are
Serpents in America which make a noise with their Tail, and for that reason are
called Rattle Snakes; their biting is very dangerous, but is happily cured by
an Herb, which is for that reason called Serpentaria in that Country. Moreover
the Kinkina is a Specific against Agues, and especially against the Quartan.
It Is true, they say, that Specificks which are taken in small quantities, will
lose their force by the digestion of the Stomach; and that if any Particle has
any Virtue left, that this Virtue is so little, that it is quite insignificant;
but there is no necessity of a great deal of Matter to act with the greatest
Violence. It Is true that the Smell of Civet or Musk produces strange Symptoms
in Hysterical Fits, which are immediately cured by other Smells, as of that of
Sal Ammoniac, etc. and yet the Particles that cause the Smell and ascend to the
Nostrils, are not perhaps the hundredth nor the thousandth part of a Grain.

The Crocus Metallorum makes a great quantity of Emetick Wine without the least
diminution of its Weight: Quicksilver communicates to Water by infusion, a
Virtue against Worms, without changing its Taste or Color, and without losing
or diminishing its own Weight.

Mr. Boil applies himself after this to prove, That the Opinion of those that
are for Specific Remedies, does agree well enough with the System of
insensible Particles, in giving a Sensible and Mechanical Explication of the
manner that Specificks do Work.

First of all he supposes a Principle, which he has proved in another Work, and
which is of the greatest Importance that can be, both in Natural Philosophy and
Physic, which is, That the Body of a living Man is not to be looked upon as a
simple Structure, consisting of a lump of Flesh, Blood, Bones, Fat, Nerves,
Veins and Arteries; but as an admirable Machine, wherein the solid Liquid and
spirituous Bodies are disposed, with so much Art for the uses they are destined
to, that the Effect of any Remedy upon Man's Body is not so much to be judged
of, in relation to the intrinsic Virtue of the Remedy it self, as to what
comes of the mutual action of the parts of this living Machine in one another,
and of their position, if one may properly speak so, when they are once put in
Motion.

This being so, one may perceive, that according to Mr. Boil, Specificks work
sometimes in disposing the Matter which causes the Distemper, so that this
Matter may be divided with the proper Excrements, or be vented by insensible
Transpiration: As for Example, The Blood impregnated with certain Particles may
become a proper Menstruum to dissolve the morbifick Matter, as Water
impregnated with Sal Ammoniac is proper to dissolve Brass and Iron; and all
such Menstruums act by their Figure, Bigness or Solidity, or by some other such
like sensible Property, which is manifestly included in our Notion of a Body,
and not by certain sensible Qualities of their Humidity and Acidity. An
infinite number of Experiences persuade us that this is so; for whereas cold
Water dissolves the White of an Egg, which the Spirit of Vinegar, of Salt, or
the Oil of Vitreal coagulates; the Spirit of Urine dissolves in a trice the
filings of Brass, which the Spirit of Vinegar does but slowly; and on the
contrary, the Spirit of Vinegar dissolves Crabs Eyes in a moment, upon which
the Spirit of Piss had no Effect at all: Quicksilver, which is insipid,
dissolves Gold, which Aqua fortis leaves entire; and on the contrary,
Quicksilver cannot dissolve Iron, which Aqua fortis does easily. Common Oil,
that cannot dissolve a very Egg-Shell, dissolves Brimstone, which is more than
Aqua fortis can do. If there was nothing but Humidity and Acidity required for
the dissolution of Bodies, Aqua fortis and Aqua regalis would be universal
Dissolvers, whose Force few Bodies could resist. They would dissolve all such
as are not extraordinary Solid. Whereas the quite contrary happens, because
Dissolvers act by the figure of their Particles, it is not always proper to
disunite the Particles of all sorts of Bodies.

Mr. Boil concludes, That since Specificks may work in the same manner in our
Bodies, that it follows, That the Opinion of those who admit them, is not at
all contrary to our Modern Philosophy. Nor does he only place among Specificks
such as are taken inwardly, but also external Medicines, which are applied to
the Arms, or hung about the Neck, as Camphyre, Ambergris, etc. for these
Bodies work by the little Particles that dis-engage themselves from them, and
enter our Bodies by the Pores.

2. Specificks may act in mortifying Humors that are too acid, or that are
hurtful by some other Excess; and they mortify by the different Figures of
their Particles as Alcalis mortifies Acids; or in covering the mortified Parts
with a kind of cover. It Is thus that Cinnaber dulls the Spirit of Vinegar, and
that quick Lime destroys the acidity of Aqua fortis, and Calamine that of the
Spirit of Nitre and Salt; the Particles of these Acids engaging themselves in
those that mortify them.

3. They sometimes precipitate a peccant Matter, which may happen otherwise
than by the combat of Acids and Alcalies, as when after the dissolution of
Siver by Aqua fortis the Silver falls to the bottom, when a piece of Brass is
dipped in the dissolution; and it is so that Mr. Boil sweetens a very stinking
Water, and makes it very clear, by means of a Body which he does not name, that
only precipitates a certain kind of Mud, which being taken away, leaves the
Water without the least ill Smell; and what is very remarkable, is, That this
precipitant is neither Bitter nor Acid, nor Urinous.

4. They may straiten the Heart or part affected, in joining themselves to
them, and in lancing the morbifick Matter, and casting it out of the Body, or
in strengthening the Fibers of the distempered Part, or dilating the Pores, or
irritating the infirm part, as Cantharides do the Bladder, though it does not
irritate other parts that are quite as tender. And the Example of Ostecolla is
mentioned as an experienced Specific Remedy, to engender a thick Skin over
broken Bones.

5. Sometimes they correct the Disorders of the Blood, as when they quicken its
motion with Cordials, or correct its bad consistency in thickning or
attenuating it according as the Sick need it.

6. They may unite to this peccant Matter, and alter its Nature so much, that
it will not have the same sensible Qualities, and make it cease to be hurtful,
and dispose it to that, so as it might be easily carried off; as when the
Spirit of Wine and Aqua fortis are mixed together, of these two violent Liquors
is made a third, which is Sweet.

It is thus that Mr. Boil reconciles the ancient Opinion concerning Specific
Remedies, with the Mechanical Explications that our Modern Philosophers will
have, and the Effects of Nature. He cites all along a great number of
Experiences, which could not be mentioned here, without transcribing almost a
whole Dissertation, wherein all is useful, and where the abundance of the
Matter answers very well the Solidness of the Discourse.

The second Dissertation of the Benefit of simple Remedies, is, an Advice to
Physicians; wherein the Author exhorts them not to use other but simple
Remedies, or at least very few Compounds; and to observe this Method as much as
they can possibly. These are his Reasons for it.

In the first place it is easier to guess what Effect a simple Remedy will
produce, than a compounded one; for Compositions change so much the nature of
Medicines, that it is not easy to foresee the Effect. A Glass of Antimony
dissolved in the Spirit of Vinegar, does not Purge or cause Vomiting; but very
seldom unprepared Antimony, which some take without either being Purged or
Vomited by it, if it be mixed either with Saltpeter or Tartar, it becomes a
violent Purgative and causes great Vomiting; and mixed with Tartar becomes
Diaphoretick and sometimes Diuretic.

In the second place simple Remedies are the surest; but what made them lose
part of their Reputation and their Use, is, That those who have writ of them,
applied themselves wholly to speak of their Virtues and good Qualities, without
mentioning in the least the Evil they do on certain Occasions, which makes
People not to be able to foresee always their Effect when mixed with other
Ingredients. Mr. Boil was acquainted with a Person of Quality, whom Honey
disordered almost as much as Poison would have done: Wormwood which is very
wholesome for a great many, is found by Experience, to annoy the Sight of others;
and there are an infinite of such simple Remedies, which are not always wholesome.

In the third place one may take a greater Dose of a simple Remedy; when it is
taken alone, it does not cause so much distaste nor inconveniency to the
Stomach. Wh^at, Rye, Barley and Oats, are all nourishing, but if there were
Bread made of these four Grains for a Sick Man, it would not be so good as
Bread made of Wheat only. If one had a mind to make Strong Waters, that should
recover People from Sounding Fits in small quantity, he would not mix the
Spirit of Wine with new Wine, or such as did not purify it self by Working,
nor would he mix it with strong Beer. It is affirmed that Gum Arabic is very
excellent against the Heat of Urine; but if it be mixed in a little Quantity
among other Ingredients, it will do nothing; but if it be given alone, and to
the Weight of a Dram, it will produce great Effects. The Juice of Wild Thyme
or Mother Thyme, is admirable for Children's Coughs; and the Infusion of the
Herb called, Paronychia foliis rutaceis, or Whitlow Grass, dissipates the
Swelling of the King's Evil.

In the fourth place all other things being equal, it is easier to find simple
Remedies than such as are made of many Ingredients. Mr. Boil shows some of
these Remedies that are easy to be had, and serve to cure very desperate
Distempers. Linseed Oil is excellent to ripen pluritick Imposthumes; that of
Turpentine to stop the Blood in Wounds, and conduces infinitely to their Cure,
and cures Gangreens; Oil of Nuts is good against the Stone, as Spanish Soap is
against the Jaundise.

In fine, one may draw from the use of simple Remedies, a more perfect Knowledge
of the true Effects, than of such Remedies as are used now. It is very hard to
know the Virtue of each Drug, when there are many mixed together; since it is
not easy to know it, when each Ingredient is examined by it self. The Soil,
the Clymate, the Seasons, and many other Circumstances, cause a very great
change. The Author has experienced that some Seeds which are used in Physic,
yield an acid Spirit when distilled at one time of the year, and an Urinous
when distilled at another time.

Mr. Boil pretends that the most part of these Arguments used in favor of
simple Remedies, which are now mentioned, ought to be applied to Chimick
Preparations, which though simple enough, produce admirable Effects. What is
particular in these Remedies, is, That the change of Operation may supply the
place of Composition. According to the different preparations of Antimony, it
is Vomitative, Purgative, Diaphoretick and Diuretic, etc. and if one did mix
two or three such like Things, and that it were done dexterously, one might
make far better Remedies than are composed with much Ostentation, and with a
great number of Drugs. The Spirit of Vinegar corrects the Emetick and purging
Virtue of the Glass of Antimony, much better than all the Cordials, Elixirs,
and other difficult preparations. Quicksilver makes such a considerable change
in the Corrosive Sublimate, that of a most violent Poison, it becomes a very
good Remedy, and among other Virtues may be of great help in the Cure of
Dyssenteries.

Some object against this Opinion of Mr. Boil, that simple Remedies cannot
prevail against Distempers that proceed from the concourse of diverse Causes,
which produce many and differing Symptoms. But it is answered first to this,
That it is not designed to throw away all manner of compound Medicaments: And
secondly, That simple Remedies do not fail in the Cure of Diseases that proceed
from different Causes, as is seen by the Kinkina which cures tertian and
quartan Agues; and that the cause of the Distemper being taken away, the
different Symptoms cease; as the different Symptoms of the Rickets cease, the
cause being taken away by a Remedy drawn from Vitriol, which Mr. Boil calls
E^s Veneris. 3. That Nature it self has formed the Bodies which we call Simple,
of diverse parts, endowed with different Qualities whereof some are Refreshing,
others Hot, some Sweet, others Sour, as in Rhuharb, there are parts that purge,
and others that bind. In the same Marcarito or Excrement of Metal, are found an
acid Salt, two sorts of Sulphurous Earth, some Brass and some Iron, which are
all composed of different parts. 4. The Dissolutions of Chimistry show that the
Bodies that seem to the Eye the most Homogenial and all of the same nature are
extremely composed; and this is what may be proved with an Infinite number of
Experiences. And its perhaps for this Reason that Remedies thought by some to
be the most simple, are often proper for several Distempers. Mr. Boil brings
for example Mineral Waters, Bolearmeniack, etc.

By this extract may be seen that Mr. Boyle's two Treatises concerning
Specific and simple Remedies, may be very useful to all sorts of People: But
it would have been received better beyond Seas, If the Latin Interpreter had
taken more pains to express the Original better; for there are not only
Babarisms in the Translation, but also Words taken in a Sense far from their
own signification. The Author says, that Limon-Iuyce hinders the cutting of a
Knife; but the Translator tells us, that a File is very contrary or injurious
to the Edge of a Knife. Lima cultri aciei contraria est, p. 14. Elkium is
according to him what others call Alce, a kind of little Coal. p. 95. Morbus
comitialis and Morbus regius, the Falling Sickness and the Yellow-Jandies, are
but one and the same thing in his Dictionary. 121. and p. 101. he calls
Cornelian Lapis Cornelianus.

Reflections upon Ancient and Modern Philosophy, and the use that may be made
thereof: Translated out of French. To be Sold at the New Exchange London.
THe Inclination Princes had to make great Collections of Books, made them
without Distinction give great reward to all who brought them in the Books of
Aristotle, as Galen tells us: On that account such was the Industry of
Booksellers that Quarto Volumes of Analyticks bearing the name of Aristotle,
were Collected, though he never Composed but 4. which confusion was the Cause
the Interpreters of that Philosopher were so puzzled about the true Distinction
of his Books.

The ancient Philosophy is more founded on Authority, and the modern on
Experience; the ancient is simple and natural, the modern artificial and
elaborate; the former is more modest and grave, the latter more imperious and
pedantic: The ancient is peaceable and calm; for it was so far from Disputing,
that it would have the Minds of Youth prepared by the Mathematics, that they
might be accustomed to submit to Demonstration without Hesitation; the modern
is of a strain of Disputing every thing, of training up Youth to noise and the
tumult of the Schools. The ancient enquires into Truth only out of a sincere
desire to find it, the modern takes pleasure to dispute it, even when it is
discovered: The one advances more securely in its Method, because it has
always the Metaphysics for a Guide; the other is unsure in its Steps when it is
once deprived of that Conduct. Constancy, Fidelity, sound Judgment, and
Stedfastness, were that which Men called Philosophy in the Days of Plato; and
the dislike of Business, Peevishness, and the renouncing of Pleasures, when the
use of them is lost through the Conquest of the Passions. I know not what
Authority that is which is derived from the Gray Beard, counterfeit Audacity,
flegmatic Sullenness, moderation, and all that Wisdom which springs from the
weakness of Age and Constitution, which is the Philosophy of a great many
nowadays: The ancient is universally more learned, it aims at all: Tho the
modern confines it self to the sole consideration of Nature resting satisfied
to be a mear Naturalist. In fine, the ancient is more addicted to Study, more
laborious and indefatigable in what it undertakes; for the primitive
Philosophers spent their lives in Study: The modern is less constant in its
Application, more superficial in its Pains, and more precipitate in its
Studies, and the Precipitation accustoms it self by little and little to ground
too easily Reasonings not very exact, upon uncertain Rumors, Testimonies of
little credit, and Experiments not well agreed upon. It pronounces boldly upon
Doubts and uncertainties, to satisfy in some manner the eagerness, that it
sometimes has to vent its imaginations, and to give Vogue to Novelties: So
that to make a decision between both, I am of the Opinion of an intelligent
Philosopher of these last Ages, who, all things being well considered, was
resolved to stick to the Ancients, and leave the Moderns to themselves: For the
plain common Sense of the Primitive Philosophers, is preferable to all the Art
and Quaintness of the New. Tho from what part soever Truth comes, it ought to
be esteemed. Then let us not distinguish Ancient Reason from New, for on what
side so'ere we find it, and what color soever we give it, it is still the same.
For in thinking nothing Truth but what is Truth, and nothing probable but what
is so, says Epicurus in Cicero, consists all the prudence of the wise Man.

Through their various Opinions Disputation became the fruits of Philosophy,
and 'twas more made use of to try the Wit than to Cure the Mind.

It is greatness of Soul, to speak as one thinks, and think as one speaks.

Logic may be said to be the first Ray of evidence, and the first Draught of
Method, that is displayed on Sciences: Because its business is to form the
Judgment, which is the usual Instrument the Mind employs in Reasoning truly,
and in discerning Truth and Falsehood exactly, by distinguishing what is simple
from what is compound, and what is contingent from what is necessary. And since
this Art is the Source from whence flows Certainty, there is little security in
all the Reasonings of Men without its assistance.

Alcuinus who explains exactly enough the Dialectick of Plato, says, that that
Philosopher made use of Division, Definition, and Induction, to come back to
the Fountainhead of first Truth, from whence he drew his Principles, to the end
he might think and speak wisely of every thing; and that was his most usual
Method. Division was as a Ladder, whereby to ascend from sensible things to
things intellectual. Definition was a way to lead from things demonstrated, to
those that were not: and Induction the means to find the Truth by the
Principles of Suppositions. For by Division he came to Definition, and by
Definition to Induction and Demonstration.

The Two Rules which Aristotle Establishes for the perfect composition of a
Syllogism, are, That there ought to be nothing false in the Matter, or faulty
in the Form.

The Principles of Epicurus's Doctrine are, 1. That Sense cannot be deceived;
because the Impression that it receives from the Object is always true, being
wrought by a sensible Species: but that the Reasoning which the Soul makes upon
that Impression may be false. 2. That the Opinion which is drawn from sentation
may be true or false. That it is true, when the judgment of the Senses is made
in form, without Let, and with such Evidence as Reason cannot resist; and that
it may be false when it wants that Evidence. These are the Principal Maxims of
the Logic of Epicurus; upon which he grounds the different reasonings of the
Soul that are made in the Mind, according to the Sympathy that there is between
the Spirit and the Senses.

I hold with Plato, who says in his Phedrus, That the end of Moral Philosophy
is to purify the Mind from the Errors of Imagination, by the Reflections that
Philosophy suggests to one. The two most Essential Points in it, are the End
and the Means to attain it.

Not to receive for Truth, what is but probable is a necessary Caution, to make
one walk discreetly, in so obcsure a Path as is that of natural Philosophy, the
Ways where of are uncertain.

Descartes's first Principle is, I think therefore I am, which he proposes as
the first evident and sensible Truth; but narrowly examined has in it somewhat
defective: For the Proposition, I think, being to be reduced to that, I am
thinking; that is to say, I am, therefore I am, makes frivolous Sense.
Descartes's Natural Philosophy is one of the most learned and accomplished
Pieces of Modern Physics; in it there are Curious Idea's, and quaint
Imaginations; and if minded well, there is to be found in it a more regular
Doctrine, than in Galilaeus or the English; and even more Novelty and Invention
than is Gassendus himself. It is a Work whereof the order is not excogitated:
His Method is altogether Geometrical, which leads from Principles to
Principles, and from Propositions to Propositions. However this is a fault in
him, that he settles for the Principle of a natural Body, Motion, Figure and
Extension, which are much the same with the Principles of Democritus and
Epicurus. Father Mersenne, who was resident at Paris, having one day given out
in an Assemoy of the learned, that Monsieur Descartes, who had gained
reputation by his Geometry, was projecting of Natural Philosophy, wherein he
admitted Vacuity: That Project was hissed at by Robertval and some others, who
from thence forward thought it would prove no great Achievement. Father
Mersenne wrote to him that Vacuity was not at a-la-Mode at Paris; which obliged
Descartes to devise measures to keep in good Terms with the new Naturalists,
whose Suffrage he courted, and to admit the Plenitude of Leucippus: So through
Policy the exclusion of Vacuity became one of his Principles. This made
Gassendus start new difficulties to him; showing that if there were no Vacuity,
Motion, which was one of his Principles, would be impossible; because nothing
moves if there be no Void for it. Descartes, to save that Inconvenience,
invented his thin subtle matter, whereof he made a kind of Engine which he
applied to many things; and thereby he reconciled the Opinion of Plentitude and
Vacuity, according as he stood in need of either. But as Plenitude, and that
thin subtle Matter got place in the System of Descartes, mearly out of
complaisance to the relish of the Age, and as an after-game; so his Philosophy
seemed weak in respect to Motion, which is one of his Principles. For that
Philosopher taught that all Motion was created with the World, that there was
no new Motion produced, and that it did no more than shift from one Body to
another; that the thin subtle Matter by its impulse, caused all the gravity or
levity of Bodies; that the alteration of heavy Bodies toward the Center,
proceeded from the same impulse; that Heat was nothing but the agitation of the
particles of the Air put in Motion by the subtle Matter, which in his Doctrine
was a Kind of a Spring fit for all things. That the Vegetation of Plants, and
Generation of Animals is performed only by a fortuitous Motion of his little
Bodies, as a Palace might be erected by a heap of Stones moved by Chance; that
there is no sentation in Animals; That these Demonstrations of joy, Sadness,
Amity, and Aversion, and the impressions of pain and pleasure, that appear in
them, are but the effects of a kind of Spring and Engine, that plays according
as the Matter is disposed; that Heat is not in the Fire, Hardness in the
Marble, Humidity in the Water; That these things are only in the Soul, which
finds Fire hot, Marble hard, and Water humid, by its thought, and not at all by
these qualities which are but Chimera's. In fine, Descartes, who would have us
begin, by doubting of every thing, to lay aside all our Notices, strip our
selves of our Sentiments, Custom, Education, Opinion, of our very Senses, and
all other Impressions, that we may but learn some small inconsiderable matter,
demands more than he promises. And when, to give the Reason of things, he says,
they happen by a certain Figure, Motion, or Extension, he has said all; for he
dives into nothing; for all he pretends to be so great a Democritist, he
understands not the true Doctrine of Democritus, His System of the Loadstone
with these little hooked Bodies, these hallowed Spiral parts, is without
Foundation. His Opinion of the Flux and Reflux of the Sea, by the Impression
and Atmosphere of the Moon, is found false by experience; for the parts of
Water that are under the Moon, swell instead of sinking, us he says. The
Explication which he gives to all the Motions of the Soul in its passions by
the Conjunction of Nerves and Fibers (which are inserted in the Glandula
Pinealis) is a Dream; for there are no Nerves which terminate at that Glandule.
He says nothing rational concerning Sounds. In short, he may be said to be like
those Pithagoreans, of whom Aristotle speaks, who did not so much endeavor to
give a Reason of the things they explained, as to reduce every thing to their
own Principle and System.

The natural Philosophy of the Chemists with their three Principles, Salt,
Sulphur, and Mercury, has no solidity: They are narrow Spirited Philosophers,
who being unable to comprehend Universal Philosophy, have stinted themselves to
limited Subjects, and their own Genius. They may be reduced to three orders.
The first, such as pretend to the knowledge of Nature in general. The second,
those who prepare Remedies. The third, those who apply themselves to the
finding out of the Art of changing Metals, by giving them Figures, new Colors,
or new Consistence: The first and second may be rational, as Albertus Magnus,
Vanhelmont, and the Distillers are. The third are extravagant; for to pretend
to make new Creatures, is to invade the Right of the Creator. And as for the
Cabalists and Judicial Astrologers, there is nothing more frivolous than their
natural Philosophy.

Unhappy are the Philosophers of that Genius who subtilize on the knowledge of
the Creature, and stick at the belief of the Creator. That was not the
Character of the Ancient Philosophers, who had not only higher Thoughts than
we, but raised themselves above themselves, that they might acknowledge a
Sovereign Reason, which they made the rule of all their Reasonings, and to
which they submitted their Minds.

The end of Metaphysics is the finding out of pure and abstracted Verity:
Thereby it perceives things in their Original; that it may fully know them it
ente^s into the Retail of all particular Species, which it reduces to their
Principles; and that Retail is almost infinite: This is the Reason that without
it all the Knowledges of Men are but Superficial and Imperfect, because there
is not almost any true Demonstration without its Principles.

It is not that one must needs be a Philosopher to be a Christian; nor that the
Wisdom of the World is a Rule to the Wisdom of Heaven; but that this Reason of
Man being submitted to Faith, Faith how Divine soever it be, condescends to
make use of humane Reasoning, to bring Reason to its obedience. Wherefore, that
we may not mistake our selves, let us begin to study what is to be believed,
before we set our selves on Reasoning.

Let us regulate the use of our Faith, that we may regulate the use of our
Reason: Let us be Christians before we be Philosophers: Let our first Wisdom
and our chief Philosophy be our Religion: Men learn to Reason by Philosophy;
but they learn to submit their Minds to Reason and eternal Verity, by
Christianity. Religion is then the first Principle, according to which human
Wisdom is to take its Measures: So that all the different Methods of Ancient or
Modern Philosophy, all the new Systems of Natural, and all the new Maxims of
Moral Philosophy, may be good, if they be not contrary to it. For the Gospel
ought to be the Rule of our Sentiments. And what is not conform to that Rule,
leads to Disorder.

Cicero's Offices, with Notes of Mr. Graevius. At Amsterdam. Sold by P. and J.
Blaeuw. 1688. in Octavo.
MR. Graevius Professor at Vtretcht and the Author of this Commentary, is so
famous amongst the Learned, that our Praises would add nothing to the Opinion
that the Public have conceived of his desert: His Works and the Liberalities
of the King which came to seek for him into the end of these Provinces, bear an
Illustrious Testimony of his Capacity. He does therefore continue here to give
us his Corrections and his Notes upon all the Works of Cicero; and truly he
could not make a better use of his Ability in these Sorts of matters, than in
exercising it upon the Offices which are so fit to qualify the Mind and Heart
for the reception of Virtue. As his Works will be put in the Rank of the
Dauphin's Commentaries, so it is dedicated to the Dauphin; and in his Epistle
he assures him, that how famous soever his Ancestors have been, the Beauty of
his Nature, and the Extraordinary Education he has got, do promise to the
Universe, that he will add a new Luster to the Glory of his Predecessors. He
represents to him, that the true Happiness and most solid Glory of Kings
consist in rendering their People happy; and that under him is expected a Reign
as that of Titus, who was the love and delight of a Mankind.

The Author admonishes us in this short Preface that he has joined to the
Offices of Cicero, Laelius, Cato, the Paradoxes and the Dream of Scipio. His
first care was to reestablish the purity of the Text, and then to Illustrate it
every where, by what Ancient and Modern Philosophers have Writ most fine upon
this part of Philosophy. For this purpose he made use of the Edition of Lange,
which is the most correct; and he also has consulted several Manuscripts,
whereof he gives here the detail. He by the bye inveigheth against those who
despise the pains that is taken in correcting ancient Authors, and against
those that entirely destroy the sense of them by too bold Corrections. These
are two Extremities that must equally be avoided. We owe respect enough to the
Ancients for not to pull asunder their Thoughts and Sentiments, and not to
substitute our Suspicions and Conjectures. But there is Superstition
scrupulously to keep all their Words, or to spend our selves in finding a fine
Sense in their most obscure Expressions. Notwithstanding it has been seen that
Expositors were more proud for re-establishing one Word in the Text of an
Ancient Author, after having sweated much upon a Manuscript, than if they had
discovered some secret of Nature, or put forth some fine Precept of Morality.

Mr. Graevius, who perceived the Study of Scholiasts to be commonly dry and
barren, has intermixed with his Notes, very fine Lessons for the Conduct of
Life; and to render the Matter more airy, he adds some Tracts of Literature.
For Example, Cicero says, That Anger ought to have no share in the correction
of Superiors: Upon this the Author tells us this fine saying of Plato to his
Man, I would beat you if I were not in Anger. He teaches us that we must look
upon Person's Faults with much Indulgence, and hate the Crime, without hating
him that commits it: Upon these Words, Quae Natura occultavit eadem omnes qui
sana mente sunt, removent ab Oceulis: He tells us, Modesty is given to Man to
preserve his Honor and Reputation, because it includes a secret fear of
Contempt and Infamy. And this fear is very often a stronger Bar than love to
Virtue. Such is he, who fears not the Reproaches of his own Heart, yet dreads
the Judgments of the Public; Shame perplexeth and presses him, and this Maxim
is as true as it is Ingenuous, That Virtue would not go far, if Vanity did not
keep her Company. He adds very curious things upon Nakedness, which offends
Decency only by Custom, and that Idea that Men have of this State. In fine, the
Reader is not wearied by perpetual Corrections, and a certain variety is found
here which occurs very seldom in these sorts of Works.

The History of PHILOSOPHY, containing the Lives, Opinions, Actions and
Discourses of the Philosophers of every Sect: By Tho. Stanley, Esquire The second
Edition, at London, 1687.
THERE are many among the Ancients who have Writ upon the Lives of
Philosophers, and we have explained their Sentiments; but there are very few
whose Writings are come to our Hands, besides the Titles of Works which have
been published upon this Subject, by Aetius, Anaxilides, Antigonus, Antisthens,
Aristocles, Aristoxenes, Callimachus, Clitomachus, Diocles, Heraclides,
Hermippus, Idomeneus, Nicandre, Panaetius, Paphiras, Sotion and Theodorus.
There remains only three entire Works on the History of Philosophy, viz.
Diogenes Laertes, upon the Old, Eunapius upon the New, and an alphabetical
Abridgment of Hesychius de Milet upon both together. It Is an hard Task to form
a complete History out of these three Authors, who have not spoken of all the
Celebrated Philosophers of Greece, and who have not mentioned every thing that
might be said even of those Lives which themselves have chosen to write upon;
nor have they once mentioned the Eastern Philosophy, to which the Greeks have,
according to their own Confession, been indebted for all their Knowledge.

Mr. Stanley, Nephew of the famous Marsham, Author of the Aegyptiac Canon, has
undertaken to supply the defect as far as is possible, by collecting out of
ancient Writtings all that he could find touching the Lives and Opinions of the
ancient Philosophers, and joining 'em to the Collections of those three Authors
we have already mentioned: Our Author treats of the Philosophy of the Caldeans,
Persians and Sabeans; the History of Egypt is only wanting to complete the
Eastern Philosophy; but he would not meddle with that, since his Uncle (whom we
have spoke of) has largly handled it in his Aegyptiac Canon.

This Work is divided into 14 Parts, in every one of which our Author treats of
some Sect, whereof he makes an History, and explains their Opinions. The 1.
treats of the Seven Sags, of Sosiades who collected their Precepts, and of
Anacharsis. The 2. treats of the Ionick Sect, whereof Anaximandre was the
Chief. The 3. of Socrates, and his Followers. The 4. of the Cyreneick Megarick,
Elian and Eretrian Sects, which had but few Followers. The 5. of the Ancient
and New Academy. The 6. of the Peripateticks. The 7. of the Cinics, of which he
relates Nine, whereof Antisthenes was the first. The 8. of Zenon and other
Stoics. The 9. of the Italic Sect, to which Pythagoras gave place. The 10. of
Heraclitus the Ephesian Philosopher, whose Writings were so obscure that he had
no Followers. The 11. of Zenophares, Parmenides, Melisses, Zenon of Elea,
Democrites, Putagores, and of Anarchus. The 12. of Skeptic Philosophers. The
13. of the Epicureans. The 14. and 15. following, of the Caldean, Persian and
Sabean Philosophy, which we shall be more large on; but to be more particular
in these we have named, especially the 12 Sects, of which we shall begin with
the Ionic, whereof Thales his Scholar Anaximenos was the Chief.

Therefore we shall speak in the first place of Thales, who first deserved the
Name of Wise in Greece. Cities had as honorable a Quarrel for him, as that
which fell out about Homer; for they disputed of the Honor of having given
birth to him. Herodotus says that he was a Phoenician, but Plutarch would have
it that not one of the seven Wise Men should be born in Greece; and the most
common Opinion is, that he was of Milot. He would never Marry, because without
it Life is divided by a sufficient number of Cares, without entering into a Bond
which draws so many Sorrows after it. His Principle was, That Water is a
Matter whose first Cause formed all Things; and he figured to himself this
great Universe as a floating Vessel upon the Extent of Waters. He believed
there was a God who had given Motion to every thing in Nature, and who animated
the whole Machine. According to him there were two sorts of Souls, and his
Sentiments thereupon were so obscure, that he gave a Soul to Amber and the
Loadstone. To him it is that the Glory of the first Elements of Geometry is
due, and the Invention of measuring the Pyramides of Egypt by their Shadow. He
it was that made the division of the five Zones, and that first gave natural
Reasons for the Eclypses which so lone a time passed for fatal Signs of the
Anger of Heaven. They also add, That he foretold that which ended the War
betwixt the Lydians and Medians: For these People frighted at this Accident,
believed that the Sun would no more give Light to their Battles, and laid down
their Arms. He found out very fine Sciences for the Phoenicians, and among
others, the Art of Writing, which is pretended to be an Invention of this
People, as Mr. Brebaeuf has so pompously expressed in his Translation of
Lucan. He was one day asked, What Recompense he would have for his rare
Discoveries? And he declared, with the Gravity of Wise Men, That he expected
but that of taking share of it with the Public. Another asked him, What was
most strong in Nature? He answered, Necessity: It Is a hard Law more powerful
than Reason, which draggeth with Violence and Rapidity. He lived in the 35
Olympiad, which answers, as I take it, to the year of the World 3310.

I. Anaxander, who began the Stoic Sect, was Disciple to Thales; though he
admitted not of the Principles of his Master, he never cleared well his
Sentiments. They pretend that he discovered the obliquity of the Zodiac. Mr.
De Saumaise contests with him about Clocks, and maintains that Hours were not
in use till a long time after.

II. Socrates was the Head of the second Sect, and the first that cultivated
Morality, that part of Philosophy, so necessary for the ruling our Manners. He
was the Son of a Statuary of Athens; but he raised himself above his Birth by
the Beauty of his Genius. He had an Opinion of God very pure, and withstood
with all his Might the Plurality of Gods. It was in effect the principal
Accusation that his Enemies formed against him, and we may say that he was one
of the first Martyrs for the Unity of God: Wherefore some Fathers of the Church
have believed that he is saved. And learned Erasmus says very pleasantly, That
at every time he read the fine end of this Philosopher, he was ready to cry
out, St. Socrates pray to God for us. So he dyed with a Tranquillity which
marked the Calmness of his Soul, and the Empire of his Reason over his
Passions. Notwithstanding some have said, That he being by Honor engaged not
to fear Death, he out-braved it valiantly, that the Emotion he inwardly feit
might not outwardly appear: He was very much laughed at by Aristophanes upon
the Theater of Athens, and he dyed in the 88 Olympiad, to wit, in the year of
the World, 3522.

III. Aristippus was the Head of that which is called Cyrenaick, and Disciple
to Socrates. He would have the Sovereign Good to consist in Pleasure, and he
led his Life upon these Sentiments, for he passed it in Delights and Pastimes.
He fell in Love with that famous Lais, who would sell so dear one Nights
Lodging to Demosthenes. So being one day Imbarqued to go to see her, and seeing
the Ship terribly tossed by foul Weather, he gave up himself to Lamentations
and Complaints: As an Amorous Design conducted him, perhaps he would have
greived less to dye at his Return. Howbeit the Pilot less frighted, began to
make him Remonstrances, and to propose himself as an Example of Firmness, which
made this Philosopher ashamed. But Aristippus scornfully answered him, Thou
hazardest but a vile and mercenary Soul, but I hazard a Soul of the first
Degree, and a Life accompanied with Prosperities. He acknowledged but two
Passions as two great Springs which give Motion to all the rest, Grief and
Pleasure; and these two Passions are diversified in all Men according to their
Temperaments. He would reject the Tranquillity of the Soul so much boasted of by
other Philosophers, as an Imaginary good: 'Twas according to him a tedious
Indolence. Does it not seem that he had Reason? For what is there more
Languishing, than to wish for nothing and even to fear nothing? The Passions do
spread a certain Fire over all the Actions, which render them more lively and
more acceptable. In a word, nothing was so offensive to the Gust of this
Philosopher, than that austere Virtue which makes the Sovereign Good to consist
in the privation of Evil, and in a certain Firmness which deserves but the
Name of Insensibility.

IV. Plato was the Head of the Academists, who have drawn their Name from the
place he first established his School. Some relate, That his Mother conceived
him by strength of Imagination, because she had looked on a Statue of Apollo
with too much Curiosity: Others have said, That as Women often had the Art to
make their Husbands believe that Gods were willing to accompany with Mortals,
the Mother of Plato failed not to make her self Honor by a Visit from Apollo
in her Husbands Mind: That is to say, he was a Young Man as handsome as Apollo.
Howbe^t, it is most certain he was of a most Illustrious Birth, and as he had
not much hardship of Fortune, his Heart was thereby the more peaceable and his
Conduct the more virtuous. After having sometime heard Socrates, he travailed
every where to hear the most famous Orators. It Is presumed that he had much
Light out of the Books of Moses; therefore he was named the Athenian Moses, and
that he was the Inventer of the Dialogue. But Mr. Stanley maintains that he
only refined it, because it was then very dry and insipid; he conceived the
Earth to be of a round Figure; he found out that it was necessary there should
be Antipodes, and invented the Name of it. He distinguished the Elements, which
Thales had confounded, and was the first that made use of the Term Providence.
He said that God was an Eternal Principle, ineffable, and the immovable source
of Truth. And that which caused this great Veneration which Men had for him in
the first Ages of Christianity, is, That he attributed to God a Son, whose
Power reached over all Creatures. He added, That God had formed the World of a
Matter before confused, but Eternal, and settled this fine order in the
Elements. Yet he gave the World a Soul which from the Center reaches unto
Extremities. Finally he held, That as Man was the Masterpiece of the Works of
God, so he had taken a particular care to form him. He furnished him with the
five Senses, to procure him Pleasures and to defend him from exterior Bodies;
and has placed the Soul in the Brains as upon the Throne, to rule over the
Senses and Passions. He was persuaded that the Soul was Immortal, Free,
Independent, and yet submitted to the necessity of Fat^, which the Pagans would
not exempt Jupiter himself from. He is upbraided with his Amors, and an
Epigram so much talked of for a young Man he loved. It was Homicide, in his
Opinion, to embrace an old Woman, because she was but as a Ground that was
barren, and could make no Return. Yet they say, that he becoming amorous of an
old Woman, pushed Gallantry so far, as to tell her, That Love, as in an
Ambuscade, had hid it self under her Wrinkles. Mr. Sarazin said more justly,
That old Women were the Graves of Love. The Genius of Plato was clear and
polite: He surpriseth the Mind by an Eloquent Style and ^n Abounding
Imagination, to which he gave himself sometimes too much.

V. Neither the Birth nor the Education of Aristotle, the Head of the
Peripaticks, were altogether so happy as those of Plato his Master. Mr. Stanley
notwithstanding justifies his Memory from the Reproaches that were cast on him,
of having been reduced to sell Medicines, and of following the Trade of an
Empyrick in the City of Athens. He is also charged with having a Hand in the
Conspiration of Antipater against Alexander the Great; and of having so much
Love for Pythias his Wife, that he made Sacrifices to her as to the Goddess
Ceres. If our Author may be believed, they are all Calumnies, wherewith any
great Man might be blackned. He denies not but that he was eager and
enterprizing, so as to raise a great Party against Plato; and he relates, as a
piece of History very suspicious, that he cried out dying, Cause of Causes have
pity on me. He it was that perfected Logic, and formed Syllogisms, in
including an Argument in proper Terms. But Modern Philosophy is so like it,
that it is not necessary to expound his Tenets and Opinions. All the World
knows how different the Fortune of this Philosopher was. His Adventures have
been so various, that it is a hard thing to comprehend that so different
Judgments have been given on the same Men. He saw himself, in a manner, raised
unto the Clouds, and afterward precipitated into the lowest Stations.
According to the Relation of Baronius, the Aetians were excommunicated for
having made their Disciples to read him. Yet he is come into so high a degree
of respect with Men, that Doctor Ramus was banished by the King's Declaration,
for having written against him. Boileau jeers at the Understanding of our Age,
in which a thousand People think that without Aristotle, Reason can do nothing,
and good Sense is Madness.

VI. Aristhenes was another of Socrates's Branches, and one of his most able
Disciples; he was the Head of the Sect of the Cynicks, which Diogenes his
Disciple has rendered so famous. The Origin of the Name of Cynick does not a
little perplex Men: Mr. Stanley thinks it comes from (...), because of the
place where Antisthenes held his School, and where a Dog had brought a piece of
Victim that was Sacrificed. Others have believed, That it came from the hot and
biting Humor of these Philosophers, because commonly Satyricks are compared to
Dogs that bark at all the World. Diogenes was named the Prince of this Sect,
and made so much noise by the sigularity of his Maxims, that Alexander had the
curiosity of seeing him. Yet how great Glory soever Antiquity would have for
this Philosopher, he can be scarcely admired seriously. The common Abode he
made in a Tub, and the Lanthorn he carried at Noonday to look for a Man of
Worth, have something so conceited, that a very high Idea cannot be conceived
of his Sentiments. Riches and Grandeurs are often despised by Vain Glory, for
the consolation of not possessing them. So they relate that Diogenes going to
dine at Plato's, said, in treading upon his Tapestries, I trample upon the
Pride of Plato: To which Plato answered, Yes, with a greater. He had a pleasant
Maxim, That every thing that is good is necessary to Man, and may be done every
where. Upon this Account, a Woman instructed at his School regaled a crowd of
Spectatours with an Adventure like unto that of Dido and Aeneas in the Grott
whereinto Virgil had care to conduct them, and where it is said was a kind of
Hymeneus.

VII. Zeno was the head of the Stoics, and taught in the Porch of Athens. This
Philosophy has formed great Men, and has charmed many by the Haughtiness and
Pride of its Sentences. It pretended to render its Proselytes happy in the
midst of Torments, and unshaken against all the Darts of Fortune. Zeno did
establish a God, whose Virtues are all expressed differently according to the
different Idea of People. He was Neptune at Sea, Mars in Battles, and Vulcan in
the Fire. In his Opinion Virtue was the Supreme Good, because it has goods
more lasting, and that it is it only that renders Men Immortal. He held that the
Machin of the World will be one day destroyed, and that it will perish by
Flames. The proud Empire he gave Man over himself and Reason, was the Source of
this dangerous Maxim, that Men may kill themselves. We must notwithstanding
confess that in this was some I know not what grandeur of the Soul, capable of
dazzling those who seek but the brightness of Pagan Virtues. Must not one have
an undaunted Courage to insult Death, this frightfull image that terrifieth the
most resolute? After what way did Zeno instruct his followers for Glory and
Virtue? He would have 'em wrestle against Evils, and to harden themselves under
Stripes to become Invincible: As Prosperities were only proper for low Souls,
so it belongs only to great Souls to trample under Foot all Calamities and
Disgraces. He dyed in the 129. Olympiad, about the Year of the World, 3690.

VIII. Phythagoras was the head of the Pythagoreans or the Stalian Sect. It Is
believed he was of Samos and a Jew by birth. He lived a long time with the
Egyptians to be instructed in their Mysteries. Mr. Stanley relates that he was
made Prisoner there by Cambyses, who sent him into Babylon, where he had a
great commerce with the Magi and Chaldeans, and even with the Prophet Ezekiel.
He was of all Men the best shaped and drew the Veneration of all People by his
fair appearance. He of all Philosophers had the greatest number of Disciples.
His Principal Opinion was the Metempsychosis or Transmigration of Souls. As he
believed the Soul Immortal, he could not conceive it could subsist separate
from the Body. Therefore he thought expedient to make the Souls of Men to
return into Beasts, and them of Beasts into Men, tho these Revolutions had no
certain order. We know the Ridiculous History that he told of himself, that he
had been Euphorbes at the War of Troy. He particularly applied himself to the
study of Mathematics, as a Science sit to give extent to the Mind. He tried
his Disciples by a Rigorous Silence of two years, to make 'em more grave and
retentive. Temperance was the Virtue he recommended with most care, because it
is necessary to tame the Body. Therefore he used to get a Table full of
Dainties for his Disciples, and making them to sit down, they should rise from
it without touching any thing, to exercise their Virtue by so strong a
temptation. He lived in the time that Brutus delivered Rome from the Tyranny of
it is Kings in the Year of the World 3440.

IX. Heraclitus had so fine Temper that he had all his Learning of himself
without the help of any Instruction. But he conceived so high an Opinion of
himself, that he had nothing but contempt for the rest of Men. His Humor being
accompanied with Pride and Distaste, gave him so much hatred for all Mankind,
that he retired all alone unto a Mountain to be free from the commerce of any.
Therefore he was called the Dark Philosopher. Darius Hydaspis writ to him to
come to Court; but he answered him after an abrupt and saucy manner. Such a
Temper as is troublesome to other Men must be afflicting to it self; a sad
Delicatness suffers every where. It is better to have a tractable Virtue, and
let things go as they will, than on purpose to quarrel with all Mankind.

X. Democritus was the Head of the Eleatick Sect. He had a Countenance always
smiling, and made the Sovereign Good consist in a Position of Mind that was
always at rest. It has been said, that he looked on the World with a Jearing
Laughter, which made his Wisdom to be doubted of, and caused his
Fellow-Citizens the Abderites to send for Hypocrates to cure him. But having
shown his Diacosmus, the finest of his Works, the Opinion that they had of his
Folly was turned into Admiration. The cause of his immoderat Laughters was the
vanity of this World, and the pains that Men take to run after perishable
things. It was he that invented Atoms, adding that they wandered in a Vacuum,
and were afterward entangled with one another, whence the Universe was
composed. So that Atoms and a Vacuum were the beginning of all things.

XI. Pyrrhon, chief of the Pyrrhonians or Scepticks, pretended that Man only
judged of all things by the appearance of Truth and Falsehood. Upon that he
established a suspension of Mind that hindered himself from determining. It
seems that all his Subtilty consisted in finding out pretty Reasons of
doubting: But there was danger that this incertainty should extend it self to
things which are not permitted to be Questioned, as the Power of the Laws. He
lived in the time of Epicurus in the 120. Olympiad, to wit the year of the
World 3650.

XII. Epicurus, an Athenian, head of the Sect which bore his name, has
composed more Books than the other Philosophers. He made the supreme Good to
consist in the Pleasure accompanied with Virtue. His Opinion is ill
interpreted, and his Disciples have abused it, which has made this Philosophy
to be discried as a Source of Debauch and Impurities. But, says Mr. Stanley,
the weakness of his Complexion, and his extreme Sobriety, drive away altogether
such unjust Suspicions. The Altars that were builded to him after his Death do
not agree with the Repute of Voluptuous. It Is true he attributed much to the
Empire of Sense, and maintained that when the Sense judged of simple Objects we
ought not to doubt of their fidelity. But he would not have Reason to be
subject to their Will. He used to moderate the severity of Wisdom by honest
Recreations, to render it amiable, and would not have Virtue to be painted with
an Austere Face and with a Forehead always wrinkled. In short, the Soul is so
engaged in Sense and Matter, that this Philosophy is too fine, which in a
manner, unmans a Man, and deprives him of all his Senses. This has made his
followers nothing but Idea; for they often perceive that they have a Body as
other Men have, which troubles and hinders them so much the more as they have
a desire of giving all to the Mind. It must therefore be allowed that Wisdom it
self may sometimes Laugh without offense. Every one knows that he admitted
for Principle a Vacuum and Atoms. The Vacuum, because if all was full, there
would have been no Motion. The Atoms, because according to him, nothing is made
of nothing. He maintained that the World cannot be eternal, because it bears
sensible Marks of Novelty: We know, for Example, the birth and progress of Arts
and Sciences. He pretended that Providence meddled with nothing, but leaves all
things to Chance.

The Ancients agreed not amongst themselves about the time in which Zoroaster
lived, and our Author relates all along and at the same time resutes their
Sentiments: After all he subscribes to the Opinion of those which place it 600.
Years before the Expedition of Zerxes against the Greeks, which goes back to
the Year 3634 from the Julian Period, that is to say, about the times of Samuel.

Very little as yet is known concerning the Life of Zoroaster. Plato calls him
the Son of Oromazes, but this is the Name which Zoroaster of Persia, gave to
the Divinity, (whose Son it is said he was.) for the Veneration he had for him.
Plin. lib. 36. c. 1. says, that he laughed the same day he was born, and that
his Brain beat with such Violence that it lift up the Hands of such as touched
it; a presage of Learning which one day he was to be Master of. He lived 20
Years in a Desert without growing aged; for having wished to dye by Thunder,
Heaven heard his Prayer: But before that, he advertised the Syrians to keep his
Ashes very carefully, assuring them, that their Empire should continue so long
as they regarded that Injunction. Suidas attributes this Advertisment to
Zoroaster of the Chaldeans, and Cedrenus to him of the Persians. He composed
two Millions of Verses, which were delivered in Greek, and upon which Hermippus
made a Commentary. But some say, that the Oracles upon which Syrianus wrote 12
Books, made some of these Verses. There are some other Books attributed to him,
which are evidently supposititious.

Africanus says that 'twas Belus who invented Astronomy, and that this Prince
lived in the times of Deborah; according to this Author, Belus began his Reign
Anno Mundi 2682. There were yet some other Magi of the Chaldeans who were
sufficiently celebrated amongst the Greeks, but the Names of 'em are only
remaining.

He who first brought the Sciences of the Chaldees into Greece, was Berose, a
Priest of Belus; he taught 'em Astronomy and Philosophy in the Isle of Co, and
composed three Books, in which he finished the History of the Medes. Josephus
preserved some of his Fragments in his Books against Appion; they were
dedicated to Antiochus under the name of GOD KING OF ASSYRIA, under whom he
lived, as Mr. Vossius believes; tho other Authors say that he lived under
Antiochus Soter. We ought yet to take care, that we confound not this Berose
with that of Annius of Viterbe, which every Body knows to be fictitious and
full of ridiculous Fables.

Justin Martyr assures us, that the Babylonian Sybil, who gave her Oracles at
Cames, was his Daughter; if it is true, then there was another Sybil besides
that which lived in the times of Tarquin the Old, who lived two hundred and
fifty Years before Berose. Onuphrius proves that there had been many Sybils.

Although the name of Chaldeans properly belonged to a whole Nation, yet it was
given in particular to certain Philosophers who lived retired in separate
places, and were exempt from Imposts and public Charges: They were particular
Families which communicated their Knowledge to their Children, after such a
manner, that it spread not to other Families, but only passed from Father to
Son. They might thus perfect their Sciences better than by admitting Strangers
in their Schools; and it is said that this practice is now used amongst the
Chinese in respect of their Trades.

The Greeks, who have spoken thereof, as Strabo, distinguish the different
Sects of the Chaldeans according to the places where they lived. There was of
'em at Hipparena, Orchoe, Babylon and Borsippa, Cities of Mesopotamia and
Chaldea. They were not all of the same Opinion, if we may believe Strabo and
Lucretius, who says ( lib. 5.) that in case there was no fault of the Copiest
in this Work, the Babylonians refuted the Doctrine of the Chaldeans touching
Astrology Vt Babylonica Caldaeam Doctrina refutans
Astrologorum Artem contra convincere tendit.


The Babylonians gave diverse Names to these Sects, and some of 'em may be seen
in the Prophet Daniel, but the signification thereof is very uncertain: Our
Author tells us the Conjectures of the Rabbis upon teefe Names.

2. He divides their whole Doctrine into four parts: The first thereof contains
their Speculative Divinity, and their Phisicks. There was a study, as Mr.
Stanley believes, appropriated to those which were called Chartummim (...) The
second includes their Astrology and art of Divination, in which those were
employed who were called Chasdim (...). And Mechasephim (...). The third treats
of Theurgie, or Natural Magic. And the fourth of Divine Worship, which was the
study of the Asaphim (...).

Psellu^ tells us, that Zoroaster divided all Beings into three Orders. There
is one, says he, which is Eternal without beginning or end. Some have had a
beginning, which will never end; But others shall have an end as they have a
beginning. Divinity has for its object the two first Orders; And Natural
Philosophy the last.

The Chaldeans affirmed but one only Principle of all things, full of Goodness,
and Wisdom. To represent its perfections they gave it the Name of Fire and of
Light, which is the Reason that in those Oracles that yet remain amongst us, we
often find God spoken of in these Synonimous terms, The Light, the Rays, the
Brightness of the Father, Paternal Fire, the only Fire, the first and supreme
of all Fires. When any one demanded of 'em after what manner they apprehended
the Divinity, He Answered, that his Body resembled Fire, and his Soul the
Truth. From whence it may be, they understood that God was Goodness it self, or
the Chaldean word which they Translate for Truth, signifies Goodness: and that
it appeared adorned with Fire. The Hebrews speak after the same manner, when
they say God is a Consuming Fire, that he is full of Goodness and Truth, as is
plain by many places of Scripture. It seems its for that Reason the Ancient
Persians adored him under the form of a Fire, without erecting any Statue to
him, as will evidently appear by what follows.

Besides the Unity of the first Fire, they acknowledged a kind of Trinity; and
were used to say, that there was a Triple Trinity, each whereof had a Father, a
Power, and a Spirit. They called the first kind of Beings (...) Intelligibles.
They said we must not strive to apprehend this Chief Intelligible. But yet we
may entertain the desire of so vast a Spirit as would measure every thing
besides it.

The second Order of things which have no end was the Beings which were called
Intelligibles and Intelligents, which were yet subdivided into three Species.
I. the Iyngues. II. The Synoques. III. The Teletarques. The Oracles which
remain amongst us call these Iyngues, Ideas; and say, that they were the
Intelligible Models upon which the World was made by other Idea's, which were
called the second Ideas, as also the first, Original Ideas. The Synoques, which
the Oracles called Anoques, are also of three orders, according to the three
Worlds which they Govern; the Empirean, which Govern the Empirean World; the
Ethereal, which Rule the Ethereal World, and the Material which animate the
Material World. A little after we shall explain the Nature of these Worlds. 3.
The third Degree contains intelligent things, which were also called
Cosmogogues, Governors of the World. There were diverse Ranks of 'em, according
to the Chaldeans. The first Supreme; Hecate, the second supreme: The three
Amilictes, that is to say, which cannot be softened, and the last called
Hypezoces, that is to say, Girt underneath, which the Oracles called Flower of
Fire: These are in the Material World to preserve it and give it those regular
Motions which it has. Under these Cosmogogues are other Intelligent Beings,
which the Chaldees call Fountains or Sources. In the Number of which they agree
not. Under these Fountains are the Hyperarques, or Principalities. They call
some of these Spiritual Beings the Fountains or Architypes of Souls and Virtues.

After the Hyperarques are the Gods without Zone, and the Gods tied to a Zone,
both of 'em are in the Material World; but the first have an equal Power above
all Zones, whereas the last, are confined in a certain Extension in which they
Circulate with Matter.

The Chaldees place next, the Angels and immaterial Demons. They believe that
of these there are both good and bad; they say that the good are Light, and the
bad Darkness.

In fine, this last Range of Beings contains Souls: There are of three sorts in
this Divinity, the Celestial Intelligences, which are never united to Matter;
others which are united to Matter, and which are independent, being Indivisible
and Immortal, capable to will and determine of themselves. And lastly, others,
which depend upon Matter, and which may be destroyed with it.

There are two Causes or Origines of Humane Souls, the Paternal Spirit, and the
Fountain of Souls, which produces them by order of the Spirit. As they believed
that there were places in the World distinct for the habitation of
Intelligences, which we have spoken of, so they say that Souls come from Spaces
which are above the Moon, and which are wholly replete with Light; whereas the
Region of this Planet is partly Light and party Dark, as an Extent which is
always covered with Clouds and Night.

It Is from these places of Darkness that Humane Souls descend, because their
Wings have lost their force; that is to say, because these Souls have not kept
their Primitive Perfection, and obeyed the Will of the Father, they never leave
an Ethereal Body in which they are invested, and which is as their Vehicle.
This Body is yet animated by another Species of Soul, which is without Reason,
and which contains the Sense, the Imagination, and all the Faculties which do
not necessarily belong to Reason; the Sages called this Soul an Idol or Image
of the Rational Soul. It Is by this that the reasonable Soul is untied to the
Body, which we take from our Mother's Breasts; this unites the Ethereal Body to
that of the Foetus, to which it stays conjoined until the grosser Body be
destroyed.

Thus if the Souls thrown Headlong down from the Spaces which are above the
Moon into the Places which we inhabit, do well acquit the Duty they owe to the
Sovereign Divinity, then they are restored unto the same place from whence they
came. On the contrary, if they corrupt themselves more, they are sent into yet
darker Aboads.

We have said, That these Intelligences had Places destined for their
Habitation: And thus 'twas the Chaldeans divided the World, and the Limits
where they placed those Eternal Spirits. They believed, That above the Corporal
World was in Infinite extended Light, which they called, The Light above the
World, that was properly the residence of Spirits. This Light they called an
Image of the Paternal Profundity, that is, the Immensity of the first Being.

Temporal, or Corporal Things, held the third and last Rank in the general
division of Beings. All included in seven corporal Worlds, situate under that
Light just beforementioned, according to this Order, 1. The Empyrean, or World
of Fire: Three Etherial Worlds. 2. The Supreme Ether. 3. The Sphere of the
fixed Stars. 4. The Orbs or Planets: Three Sublunary Worlds. 5. The Air. 6. The
Earth. And 7. the Waters. Some Christian Divines have confounded the Empyreal
Heaven, which they make the Abode of God and of the Blessed, with that Light
above the World; but the Chaldeans distinguish them very carefully. According
to their Opinion, the Empyreal World is very different from the Ethereal,
although this last is less pure and subtle than the Precedent. As for the
Sublunary Worlds, Psellus tells us, That the Chaldeans sometimes gave them a
Name which the Greeks translated by the word Hades, or Hell.

The Chaldeans acknowledged two sorts of Demons, one Good, the other Bad;
Hostanus a Persian Magi, called the first, The Ministers and Messengers of God,
who continued in his Presence. But the second, Terrestrial Demons, who
incessantly committed Error in this Sublunary World, and which are Enemies to
Mankind. They called their Head (...) Ariman, which signifies The Enemy of Men;
for (...) which properly signifies a Vessel, may Metaphorically signify a Man.

There are six sorts of 'em, 1. Those which they call Fiery, inhabiting the
upper Region of the Air, above which they cannot ascend, although they are chased
by the Intelligences which reside about the Moon. 2. Those that are in the
Inferior Air in which we live, and which is called Aereal. The Terrestrial. 4.
Those of the Sea, which abide in the Water. 5. The Subterraneous. 6. Those that
sly the Light, and such as are very seldom visible. Although they are all Enemies
to God and Man, some are much more Wicked than the rest. The three last kinds
particularly are very pernicious, and not only deceive Men by Fantoms and
Illusions, but also sometimes even enter into 'em. Those of the Water, causing
Shipwrecks; such as are under the Earth, and who fly the Light, often possess
Men, causing Epilepses and Frensies: The Terrestrial and Aereal Spirits
precipitate Men into unlawful Passions, and deceive them by appearances.

They act, says Psellus, by disturbing our Imaginations, entertaining us
without any Voice or Noise. Those which speak to us afar off must raise a Voice
to move our Ears, but such as are near may make us hear by speaking very low;
but those which can possess our Brain make us understand without any Noise,
tracing certain Objects into our Imaginations without affecting our Ears. That
is, that Souls separated from Mortal Bodies, entertain themselves without Voice
or Words.

They make their Bodies what they please, and assume what Forms most agreeable
unto 'em; some enter into Beasts, not that they hate them, but because the
Natural Heat of Animals please them as well as the Humidity they meet with
there, for their ordinary Habitations are cold and dry Places. The
Subterreanean Spirits cause those Persons to speak which they possess, and make
use of their Mouths to give out their pretended Oracles. Those which fly the
Light render their Patients Deaf and Dumb; and often make them fall into
Soundings.

All have not the same Extent of Power, but it is diminished much according to
the degrees I have observed. The Demons that fly the Light have the least of
all. They transfer themselves so much the more diversely as their Power is less
or more: It Is believed that from one of these Transformations proceeded what
the Greeks relate of Proteus, the Nexeiades, Naides, and other Nymphs. The
Chaldeans fancied the Demons suffered when they hurt their Bodies, although the
Wound was cured again immediately; for their Bodies are like the Water, the
parts whereof are no sooner separated but they join again in a Moment.

We may see by these Particulars of the Chaldaick Divinity, that their Thoughts
concerning Good and Evil, were not very different from the Opinion of the
Hebrews. For Example, in respect to the Good they had diverse Orders of them, As
Angels, Archangels, Thrones, Dominations, Principalities and Powers, which are
spoken of in the New Testament. The Hebrews, as well as the Chaldeans, gave
Kingdoms and certain Extents of the Earth, to the Government of Angels, as
appears by Daniel. And like to them they placed the Evil Spirits in the Air,
from when they are called Powers of the Air, Princes of this World, that is, of
the sublunary World, Princes of Darknes^, that is, this extended Darkness which
we inhabit. The Hebrews also determined the ordinary abode of the Divinity to
be above the fixed Stars, and represented God dwelling in an inaccessible
Light, environed with Ministers, which they called, as the Chaldeans did,
Angels of Light. They acknowledged three Heavens or three Worlds, so the
Chaldeans divided the Universe into the Terrestrial, Ethereal, and Empyreal. As
for the Evil Angels, its well known that the Jews believed diverse Orders, and
that they formerly attributed unto them the cause of many Diseases, as is
evident by the great number of the Demoniacks, which is spoken of in the
Evangelists, where also several other things may be observed concerning Demons,
which agrees not ill with the Doctrine of the Chaldeans. According to the
Conjectures of some learned Men the Jews received these Opinions, and some
resembling ones from them in the Babilonian Captivity. All that can be objected
against this supposition is, that perhaps the Chaldean Oracles, whereof we have
spoken, were always suspected by the Jews and Christians and that the
Explication of Plethon and Psellus were not true. This may be particularly
opposed to this last authority, because he is said to have learnt from a
converted Chaldean, what we have related of the Chaldaick Divinity. But for the
Oracles we shall afterward show the Reasons why our Author believes they were
not Supposititious; and as for the Doctrine, it may easily be proved that the
Greek Philosophers who made Voyages into the East, brought Opinions from thence
perfectly like the Chaldeans: As may be demonstrated without much trouble in
respect to Pythagoras and Plato.

III. To return again to our Author, he afterward gives an Abridgment of the
Astronomy and Physics of the Chaldeans. As the Heavens in that Country are
very rarely troubled with Mists or Clouds, so the Learned applied themselves to
Astronomy which they pretend to have invented. But if what Diodorus of Sicily
says is true, they were not so expert in the Art as the Greeks were, after
they would learnt the Principles of 'em. Because the Chaldeans gave very ill
Reasons for the Eclipses of the Sun, and durst not predict, nor reduce them to
certain Periods. For Astrology, or Apotelesmaticks, that is to say, the Art of
prediction, wherein it was more easy to impose upon the Credulous, if they
attributed it only to their Knowledge, and boasted to have read such and such
Events in the Stars.

Mr. Stanly gives here an Abridgment of their Doctrine drawn from Diodorus of
Sicily, and fom Sextus Empiricus. They believed there was a great Sympathy
between the Stars, and what inhabits the Earth, so that Terrestrial Bodies
depended upon the Course and Virtue of the Celestial. They join the Planets,
sixth Stars, and Signs of the Zodiac together; And maintain that our whole life
had a dependence thereon, and that nothing happened to us, whereof they were
not the Cause. The Chaldeans placed twelve Gods in the Zodiac, to each of
which they assigned a Month, and a Sign of the Zodiac. They said also that
there were twenty four Constellations, one half whereof was in the Northern
Hemisphere; and the other in the Southern. The twelve which appeared upon our
Hemisphere, presided over the living, and the twelve which were invisible, over
the Dead. They called these last the Judges of all things. But they had a great
regard to the Planets, the unequal course whereof, according to their Opinion,
caused the inequality of Life. They much observed their rising, and setting,
and their Color, etc. and pretended to predict all things by that. Under the
Planets they held there were thirty Stars, which they called the Counselors of
the Gods: Whereof one half that was under the Earth, presided over what passed
therein; and the other half that was above regarded what was done in Heaven and
upon the Earth. Every tenth day one of the Superior Gods, went to relate to
those below what was done above, and they made use of the same Convenience on
the other side. These Stars had these regulated Motions according to the
Eternal Revolutions.

In our Author are the particulars of their Opinion concerning the divisions of
the Zodiac* with the agreement they thought it had with the Planets from their
Aspects, and with their manner of drawing Horoscopes.

Besides the Art of foretelling by the Stars, the Chaldeans knew how to Divine
by the Flight and Notes of Birds, by Dreams, Prodigies, and Entrails of
Victims, according to the report of Diodorus. R. Moses Son of Maimon affirms
the same thing in his More Nebochim, and also attributes to 'em other ways of
divining, the Names whereof are in Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11.

The Physics of the Chaldeans was called Magic. There was two Sorts thereof,
one Natural, and the other Theurgick; The first was only a knowledge of the
Virtue of Simples, of the disposition of Animals, and of the Power of Minerals.
But this knowledge was mixed with many Superstitious Opinions, if we may believe
Maimonides, who has discoursed their Operations at large, and in our Author we
may read his Words. Such was their Opinions concerning the Talismans, which are
certain Figures, or Letters graved at certain times, that they believed 'em
able to defend 'em from diverse Evils. In the Persian Tongue they are called
Tsilmenaja, and in Arabic Tsalima, Words that come from the same root with the
Hebrew Tselein, which signifies an Image. This may be seen in Gaffarel's Book,
entitled, Unheard of Curiosities* They also called that Tsilmenaja, that the
Hebrews called Teraphim, which were little Statues, that answered to what they
said when they consulted them, concerning the event of things to come. Onkelas,
a Chaldean Paraphrast always Translated the Word Teraphim, for that of
Tsilmenaia, and the seventy Translated it by the Words (...) Speaking, (...)
Evident or Significant, (...), Illuminations. Spencer may be consulted upon
this, of Vrim and Thummim. The Theurgick Magic of the Chaldeans consisted only
in the knowledge of the Ceremonies that ought to be observed in the Worship of
the Gods, to be agreeable and pleasing to 'em, and to obtain what they desired
of 'em. Julian the Father, and Julian the Son, Chaldean Philosophers who lived
under Mr. Antoninus, explained this Science in many Greek Books, both in Verse
and Prose, as Suidas tells us. They thought by the means of these Ceremonies
they were able to entertain the Celestial Intelligences, and even cure all
Indispositions both of Body and Mind. We shall observe one of these Ceremonies,
the Sacrifice whereof is very Considerable.

There was two sorts of Apparitions, one of which was called (...), a
Superficial View by the Greek Interpreters of this Philosophy. It was when the
Gods appeared under some Figure. Then they ought to have no respect to, nor
receive any advertisement from 'em as true. The same Author calls the second
(...) a view of the same thing, when they saw a pure light without any form,
and the Answer they received from it was true: Thus the Oracles speak in these
Terms.

(...). When you shall see the Sacred Fire without Form, Burning from place to
place, by all the Mysteries of Heaven, hearken to the voice of it.

As the Theurgy had Apparitions of good Demons, so they served to Chase away
Material ones, and hinder them from Injuring them.

4. One may reduce the Religion of the Chaldeans to three kinds. The first is a
worship of the true God, but after an Idolatrous Manner. The second, the
Worship of Demons and Spirits; and the third is that of Celestial Bodies, and
the Elements.

The Chaldeans, as has been already observed, acknowledging one only Principle
of all things, all powerful and good, it follows, that they must acknowledge the
true God: and it is for this Reason that an Oracle that Porphiry cites, joins
them to the Jews, and says, that there is none but the Chaldeans and the Jews
that adore that God and King who subsists by himself. But the Chaldeans adored
him under the Name of an Idol, that they called Bell, which is the same as Baal
of the Phenicians. The Jews also Worshipped him under the same Name, in the time
of the Kings, and were reprehended for it by the Prophet Hosea, who tells them
in the Name of the God of Israel, you shall no more call me, My Baali, Chapter
2.16. Those who instructed the Greeks in the Opinions and Customs of the
Chaldeans, would have it that they called the Supreme Divinity Bell, they gave
him the Name of Zeus, which was the Name that the Greeks gave to the Chief of
their God's. Although Bell or Belus might be an Ancient King, the same with Zeus it
happened in length of time, that these Names were joined to the Idea of the first
Principle of all things, that is to say, to the Idea of the true God. Hence
Aratus speaking of Jupiter, says, (...). we are of his Offspring. St. Paul
makes it no difficulty to apply these Words to the true God. Acts. 17. Thus
Clement Alexandrinus remarks upon these Words of St. Peter, Serve God, but not
as the Gentiles. Thus this Apostle does not say, serve not the God that the
Gentiles Worship; but serve him not after the manner that they do; he would
have us to change the manner of Worship, but not the Object of it. -- One may
see in the first Book of Herodotus, who was at Babylon, the Description of the
Temple of Jupiter B^lus; He says that the Priests thereof were Chaldeans; and
Maimonides affirms that the Idolaters of Chaldea were the same with the
Prophets of Baal which were in Palestine.

In the second place, the Chaldeans Worshipped Demons and Spirits; and it is to
these Subaltern Divinities, to which they addressed themselves by means of the
Theurgy whereof we have spoken.

In the third place they believed, that the seven Planets were animated by the
Divinities, which they made use of, as if they were Bodies; the greatest were
those which inhabited the Sun and Moon; they had the same thoughts in respect
to the sixth Stars. But they confessed they could not prove this Worship of the
Stars so distinctly as the rest; as the Readers may see more at large in Mr.
Stanley.

Some Ancients say that they Worshipped the Air and the Earth, as Julius
Firmicus and Macrobius; but these Authors, and particularly the last, do very
much Confound the Divinity of all Nations without either Reason or Necessity,
and might have attributed the Sentiments of the Greeks and Romans to the
Chaldeans. Even some of 'em to maintain Paganism have taken great pains to
show, that all the Worshippers of many Gods did agree, and they also hoped to
answer the Objection of the Christians who accused them of the Diversity of
Opinions. But without doubt the Chaldeans did Worship the Fire or the Supreme
Divinity under the Emblem of Fire Hist. Eccl. lib. 2.
Ruffinus and In voce (...).
Suidas relate something to this effect, which deserves to be taken notice of
here. It Is, that in the times of Constantine certain Chaldean Priests ran
through all the Empire, to show to other Pagans, that the God of Chaldea was
mightier than all the Gods, because the Fire that they Worship consumed all the
Statues of other Gods. In fine, being come into Egypt, and having deify'd the
Egyptian Priests to expose to the Fire the Statues of their Gods, one of these
Priests triumphed over their Vanity by this Artifice. He took a Statue of the
Nile, made it hollow within, and pierced it in diverse Places: He closed up
these Holes with Wax, so exactly, that they could not be perceived, and filled
the Statue with Water. Afterward he took the Chaldeans at their Word, and
surrounded his Statue with Fire, so that the Wax melting left free passage to
the Water, which soon issued out and extinguished the Fire.

Mr. Stanley employs the 16th and 17th Part of his Work, in giving an Account
of the Philosophy of the Persians, which we shall make an Abridgment of in few
Words.

1. In speaking of the Origin of the Philosophy of the Chaldeans, it was
observed there were many Zoroasters: And so it was they called the ancient
Sages of the Persians, who Instituted the Order of the Magi. Dion Chrysostom in
his Dorysthenick Harangue, said, That the Persians affirmed that Love, Wisdom
and Justice had quitted the Commerce of Men, and that they were retired into a
Mountain, continuing there alone a long time: But when they had quitted it, a
great Fire came down from Heaven, which environed it from all Parts: That the
King and Nobility of the Persians, going thither to invoke the Divinity,
Zoroaster came out of this Fire, without receiving any Damage, and offered a
Sacrifice, as if God had been present with him: That from that time he
conversed no more with any sort of Men, but only those that were naturally more
inclined to seek the Truth, and capable of knowing the Gods, as were those that
the Persians called Magi.

The certain time of this Zorasters's Life is not known. Another wise Man
called Hystaspes, that lived in the Court of Cyrus, much augmented the Learning
of the Magi of Persia, by the Sciences that he learnt of the Brachmans, when he
went into India. He that discovered these Sciences to the Greeks was one
Otanes, who accompanied Zerxes in the Enterprise he made upon Greece. The Greek
Philosophers that frequented the Persians before that time, either concealed
what they had learnt, or else had not penetrated into their Mysteries.

The Magi were applied wholly to the Service of the Gods, and their Name
according to some Ancients signifies the same as that of Priest. They mingled
not themselves with other Persians, nor never Married but to Persons of their
own Sect, and lived in Towns separate from others. They were in very great
Esteem; they Instructed the Kings before they took the Government upon them,
and were called to their Councils. Their Life as to the rest, was very simple:
They lived only upon Milk, Wheat, Fruits and Bread.

2. As to what regarded the Supreme Divinity, they seemed to have had the same
Thoughts of the Chaldeans; for Zoroaster in his Sacred Collections, affirms,
according to the Report of Eusebius, That God is Incorruptible, Eternal,
Indivisible, most Wise, most Good, Father of Equity and Justice, etc. He
divided all Things into three Orders: The first Eternal, without Beginning or
End; others that have had a Beginning, but shall have no End: The last, which
are Corruptible. Oromazes was the Head of the first: Mithra, or the Sun,
presided over the Second; and Arimanes over the Third.

It Is Plutarch that tells us that of Zoroaster; but it is dangerous to trust
wholly to the Greeks in these sort of Things which they understood but by
halves, and wherein they might easily confound the Doctrine of a People with
that of its Neighbors.

However, be it as it will, the same Author relates, That the Sages of Persia
established two Principles, the one opposite to the other, whereof one was Good
and the other Evil. He called the first Oromazes, and the second Arimanes, and
said, That among sensible things, nothing so well represented Oromazes, as
Knowledge and the Light; nor Arimanes, as Ignorance and Darkness. They made
certain Sacrifices to this last, that he might not afflict them; and to the
first to obtain Happiness and good Fortune.

The Persians also said that Oromazes was Son of the Day* and Arimanes Child of
the Night, and that they had a perpetual War: That Oromazes had made six Gods,
The 1. the God of Benevolence. The 2. of Truth. The 3. of Equity. The 4. of
Wisdom. The 5. of Riches. The 6. of Pleasure; Divinities, which all submitted
to him that made 'em. That after that, Oromazes became three times greater, and
was as far from the Sun, as the Sun was from the Earth: That he made Heaven and
the Stars; and established the Dog Star to keep the rest: They say likewise
that he made twenty four Gods, which he placed in an Egg, but that Arimanes had
made as many; but they broke the Egg, and from thence it happened that the Evil
Ones were mingled among the Good: That the time drew near in which the
mischievous Beings, and Arimanes himself should be entirely destroyed by
Pestilence and Famine; and that the Earth should be wholly united; and that
there should be only one manner of Living, and one only Society of all Mankind;
and there should be but one Language among 'em.

The Magi pretended they knew the Art of Divination as well as the Chaldeans.
Herodotus tells us, They had neither Temples, nor Altars, nor Images, and that
they looked upon all such as had 'em as Fools: Moreover Strabo says the same.
Herodotus supposed that the occasion of this Custom was, because they did not
believe with the Greeks, That the Gods had Human Shapes; and Cicero, because
they hold that the whole World was but a House or Temple for them, and
therefore they could not be confined within Walls. Nevertheless Strabo often
speaks of their Temples, their Altars and their Statues, which perhaps only
regarded the time that they were submitted to the Greeks, in which they learnt
part of their Customs; whereas in the beginning they had nothing resembling
them, as appears by that Action of Zerxes, in burning all the Temples of
Greece, for Reasons which have been related.

Cicero de leg. lib. 2. p. 1197. Ed. Elzeoir.
Magis Auctoribus Zerxes inflammasse Templa Graeciae dicitur, quod parietibus
includerent Deos, quibus omnia deberent esse patentia, ac libera, quorumque hic
Mundus omnis Templum esset and domus.

When they Herod. lib. 1. c. 131.
Sacrificed they erected no Altars, they light no Fires, neither had they
Libations, nor Flutes, nor Crowns, nor Meal, but he that would Sacrifice went
into a clean Place, whither he led the Victim. There he invoked the Divinity,
having a Branch of Myrtle upon his A round Ornament for the Head which in
Persia they wore upon such Occasions.
Tyara. He begged not the favor of Heaven particularly for himself, but for all
the Persians (in the number of which he was comprehended) and for the King in
an especial manner. After dismembring his Victim, having boiled its Flesh, and
afterward spread it upon the Grass, and particularly upon the sweetest
Flowers, then the Magus that was present, (for without one of them no Sacrifice
was permitted) sung a An Hymn which contained the Genealogy o'th'Gods.
Theogonia, by the means of which they believed they might prevail with the
Gods. In short, he that sacrificed, carried away the Flesh of the Victim, and
did what he pleased with it. Strabo says, That the Magus who officiated, having
cut the Victim in pieces, each Person that assisted took his part and went his
way, without leaving any thereof to the Gods. For they say, God would have only
the Soul of the Victim. Others left upon the Fire a part of the Omentum. As may
be seen in the same Book of Strabo, with diverse of their Religious Ceremonies.

He tells us also, That the Magi adored Jupiter, the Sun, the Moon, Venus, the
Fire, the Earth, the Winds and the Water. But that which is the most perplexing
in their Relations is, That they give the Names of the Grecian Gods to those of
the East, because they conjectured they were the same Gods with theirs.
Wherefore we shall not stand to relate what our Author says thereon, but the
Curious may consult them if they think it to the purpose.

The 18th and 19th Parts of this Work, contains an Historical Abridgment of the
Philosophy of the Sabeans.

1. The Sabeans were a People of Arabia, who have had among them great
Philosophers, if we may credit some Arabian and Jewish Authors. But these
Authors are not of an ancient date, and living in a time wherein this
Philosophy was extinct, it is not easy to know whether they were mistaken or
no. Some say, That the Head of the Sect of the Sabeans was named Zaradast,
which seems to be the same Name with Zoroaster: Others say, Tachmurat King of
Persia, was the first Founder thereof: There are also many other Opinions about
it. The Rabbis pretended 'twas in a flourishing condition in Chaldea from the
time of Abraham, and fail not to relate the History of that time, with as great
an Air of Assurance as if they had been Witnesses thereof, or had drawn it from
Contemporary Authors. Some of which may be seen in the 2d and 18th Chapters of
Mr. Stanley.

Maimonides says, he had seen diverse of their Books which our Author gives the
Names of, that were full of Superstitions, conjurations of Demons, secrets for
the Talisans, and other Extravagancies of this Nature, Live. 1. cap. 8.
Hottingar in his History of the East, assures us, That he had some of 'em in
his Possession, composed by Abulfark Son of Abi-Iacub, and he wished that it
had been made public.

2. The Sabeans, according to the Relation of Maimonides, believed the Stars to
be Divinities, but that the Sun was greater than all the rest, and governed
both Worlds, Superior and Inferior. They attributed their Opinions to Adam and
to the first Patriarchs, and thereupon related Histories like to those that we
find in the Alcoran and in diverse Mohammedan Authors; which is a very good
Reason to make us suspect those Books to be Supposititious, partly from the
Mohammedan Superstitions, and partly from Cheats, which have often affixed the
Names of the first Patriarchs, the better to sell their Books to the Credulous.

They gave to each Day of the Week the Name of one of the seven Planets, to
which they rendered certain Worship every Day and every Month. Their Monthly
Devotions are described at length in the Manuscript of Hottinger, whereof our
Author gives a very circumstantial Extract. They are only Fasts, Sacrifices,
and Anniversary Solemnities in Honor of the Planets, and particularly in
Honor of Belta, to whom the sixth Day of the Week was Consecrated, so that
this Name marked the Planet Venus, and of Sammael, a Name that the Jews to this
day give to the evil Angel, whom they call, The Angel of Death. They called
their Months after the same Names as the Chaldeans did, whose Language they
much speak, or one very near it, because they were Neighbors. This also has
been the reason that the Ancients gave the Name of Arabia to one part of
Mesopotamia; and that the Eastern People comprehended the Nabatheans and
Sabeans, under the general Name of Chaldeans, as our Author observes in his
Preamble to the 18th Part.

In the last Chapter he relates diverse Customs of the Sabeans, contrary to many
of the Injunctions of the Law of Moses, as Maimonides observes. But those that
would be instructed in the Original of the Opinions of the Sabeans, may read
the second Book of that Work of the Learned Spencer, Entitled, De legibus
Hebraeorum Ritualibus. Since what has been said of the Divinity of the
Chaldeans is only founded upon those Oracles that yet remain among us, it is
necessary to relate here the Reasons that persuaded Mr. Stanley they are not
Supposititious. 1. These Fragments are not drawn from one Book only, which
might have been composed by any Ancient Heretic; but from diverse Platonic
Authors, who had them in great Veneration; whereas they show the falsness of
some Books writ by the Gnostics under the Name of Zoroaster. This Porphyry
has acknowledged in the Life of Plotinus, where he makes a great difference
between these Oracles and those that were Supposititious.

2. They are all full of Cracked and Eastern Expressions, although it is true
there are many also that are purely Greek, which ought to be attributed to
those that Translated it from the Chaldeans.

3. Picus de la Mirandula in a Letter to Marcilius Fieinus says, he had these
Oracles in the Chaldean Tongue much compleater, and larger than those they had
in the Greek, with some Explications of the Doctrine of the Chaldeans in the
same Tongue. This Manuscript was found in his Closet after his Death, but so
spoiled and difficult to be read, that nothing could be decifer'd of them.

4. It Is probable that these Oracles were Extracts of the Books of Berosus, who
carried the Chaldean Philosophy and Astronomy into Greece, or at least of
Julian the Son who had published several of the Oracles and Secrets of the
Theurgy in Verse, for Proclus cites some of 'em under his Name.

5. It may be the Name of Oracles was not given to these Verses only to mark
their Excellency, but because they thought it was the proper Terms of an Oracle.
Stephanus affirms that the Chaldeans had one of them, for which they had not
less Veneration, than the Greeks had for the Oracle of Delphos.

This Opinion may be confirmed by the esteem some Platonicks expressed of this
Verse, as Proclus, who calls them in his Commentary upon Timeus: The Assyrian
Divinity revealed from God, a Divinity received from God. In other places he
also attributes them directly to the Divinity.

Some of these Oracles that had escaped the Barbarity of passed Ages, were
published by Louis du Fillet at Paris, in 1563. under the Title of the Oracles
of the Magi, descended from Zoroaster, with the Commentary of Gemisthus
Plethon. And afterward Translated by James Marthamus, and published by
Opsopaeus at Paris, in 1607. with the Commentary of Psellus. Francis Patricius
had also published them with many Additions drawn from Proclus, Hermias,
Simplicius, Damascius, Synesius, Olimpiodorus, Nicephorus, and from Arnobius,
so that he augmented them unto the number of 324. He reduced them likewise
under certain Heads, and put them into Latin in 1593. Otton Heurnius Translated
and Published them also in his Book, Entitled, Philosophia Barbarica, in 1619.
but under a pretext of putting them into better Latin, and making a following
Discourse upon them, he corrupted the Sense of 'em. He was laughed at for
adding Fragments drawn from different Authors, which had no Relation to each
other. Thus Heurnius spoiled what Patricius had well done, although this last did
not take sufficient care to publish them correctly, but wholly neglected the
Measure of the Verse; even without observing, except in the beginning, the
Authors from whence he had taken them, so that it was not easy to re-establish
them. Mr. Stanley has mentioned some which are Translated into English, and
also adds his Conjectures upon such Places as are corrupted.

Some of these Oracles appeared so obscure and intricate, that they seemed
absurd: But we ought to consider that Psellus and Plethon have explained many,
which without that would not have appeared more reasonable, and those that find
them good, may very rationally presume that those they understand not, have not
less reason to be supposed so. This made some believe they might publish them
among the rest, without diminishing the high Esteem which was formerly had of
the Wisdom of the Chaldeans: And it is this also engaged the Author to Translate
the Commentaries of Psellus and Plethon into English.

These Oracles are placed under eleven Titles, the five first whereof regard
the Supreme and Subaltern God; and the rest the World, Man, and the Sacrifices.
To make the Reader sensible of the Eastern Style of these Fragments, I shall
relate some here as exactly as I can. For Example, what they say of the Spirit
((...)) that is, the second Being: Light is born of the Father. It Is it only
that has drawn the chief of the Spirit, in great abunance to the Paternal
Power. The Paternal Spirit having conceived its Works, disperses through the
whole an ardent Love, to the end that all Things loving one another, they might
subsist for a time without any Restriction. The Consequences of the Fathers
Thoughts were not discovered to the Eyes of all things, because the Elements of
the World subsist, being preserved by Love. It might by thinking, give
Intelligence of its Father to each Source and Principle. It is the limits of
the Pro^oundness of its Father, and the Source of intellectual Things. It goes
not out from, but continues in the Paternal Depth, and in his Sanctuary, by a
silence wholly Divine, etc.

Another Being is also spoken of in these Terms: Under two Spirits is the
quickening source of Souls, and the Artist who himself made the World, being all
Fire, clothed with Fire, preserving the most refined part of his Fire, to
qualify the Sources of Union.

It Is easily discerned by this, That the Style of these Oracles bears no
resemblance to that of the Greek Poets, nor to that of the Oracles of Delphos.
There Is a kind of Light and Obscurity very particular. Besides, it is easily
seen that there is neither the Sentiments of the Platonicks, nor those of the
Jews, but I know not what something very singular, which has entirely the Air
of the Original, as will be more easily granted by those that read the
Interpretations of Plethon and Psellus.

A Disquisition about the Final Causes of Natural Things; wherein is examined
if there be any, and with what Precaution a Naturalist ought to admit thereof:
By Mr. Boil, Fellow of the Royal Society. With an Appendix, wherein are some
uncommon Remarks touching sore Eyes: By the same Author. London, 1688. in
Octavo, p. 274.
MR. Boil composed this Work several years since, at the Entreaty of Mr.
Oldenburgh, Secretary to the Royal Society. It remained among the Author's
Papers until 88. when he Published it, without adding to it any new Remarks,
which he might have drawn from the Discoveries that have been made in Anatomy
since it was composed, because he believed that what he had said, was
sufficient to decide the Questions which are proposed. It is undoubtedly of a
great Consequence to know if the Final Causes of Natural Things can be found;
that is to say, to know why Bodies are formed after a certain manner, and upon
what design they are disposed in certain Places? If in this there was a design,
and we should neglect to inform our selves thereof, we run the risk of not
rendering unto the Author the Honor due for that Reason; and of not drawing
from those Beings the Uses which we should, both in regard to Philosophy and
Religion. If there was no design in all this, it is very profitable to know it,
that we may not lose our time in vainly seeking for the same. Epicurus denied
there were any in the Thought he had, That all Things were formed by chance;
and Descartes has maintained, That it was impossible to know any of the ends
of God, unless he had himself revealed them to us. Mr. Boil undertakes not
here directly to refute Epicurus, he applies himself solely to Descartes;
whose Opinion cannot nevertheless be refuted, without destroying at the same
time that of Epicurus. To proceed more Methodically, he has divided his Work
into four Sections, in each of which he examins a particular Question; after
which he concludes, That the Disquisition of Final Causes ought not altogether
to be banished from Physic, though in this there must be certain Precautions
used which he observes.

I. The first question is, if (generally speaking) Physicians can know the end
and design of corporal Beings? If Descartes affirmed simply that we cannot know
all the ends, which God proposed to himself in the Creation of the World, or
that we ought not to imagine that they all relate to Man, Mr. Boil would not
undertake to refute him: But as Descartes speaks in General Terms, its
maintained that his Opinion is false, taking him without exceptions. The Reason
of it is, that suppose God is an intelligent Being, and that some of the things
he has made be perfectly proper to produce a certain considerable effect, and
that they produce it necessarily, we ought to judge that God, who has foreseen
this effect, has produced his Work, at least partly, for that Reason. So when
the admirable disposition of the Eye is considered, and the effect it
produces, to wit Vision, there is nothing more reasonable than to say that the
Eye was made for to see, tho it may be it was made for some other end, which we
know not. So also the Sun, which is, according to Descartes, disposed in a
proper place to illuminate all the Planets that turn in its Vortex, and which
unavoidably produces this effect, has been undoubtedly created partly to give
us Light and Heat. It cannot be said here that all the ends of God are hidden
in his Wisdom, because that would be to allow that we have no Testimony of his
Works which should teach us that God is Wise. Yet this is no impediment to
Physicians seeking out the mechanical reasons of these effects, as nothing
hinders but that we may say a Clock has been made to show the Hours, and to
expound at the same time mechanically, how its Wheels and its Springs produce
this effect. Thus Descartes himself after having said that the Immutability of
God requires there should be always a like quantity of Motion in matter,
shows how that may suffice to render a Reason of natural effects.

Although Mr. Boil is not of that Number who believe that Descartes had a design
to favor Atheism, since he finds his proof of the Existence of God, to be
conclusive, he maintains, that to say none of the ends which he proposed to
himself can be known, is to deny that we can see his Wisdom and Goodness in the
Creatures, and consequently to take from Mankind the proof of the Existence of
God, which is drawn from the order of the Universe. It is moreover to take from
Men one of the greatest Reasons which they have of blessing and admiring the
supreme Being. For in fine, according to Descartes, God perhaps proposed to
himself in the Creation none of these admirable effects, which are observed in
the Universe; and if we enjoy any good therein, it does not teach us that he
designed to do us any. So that we cannot from thence conclude, that God is
either wise, or a benefactor to us, and we have no Reason from thence to admire
and praise him.

II. p. 39.
The second Question is in these Terms, Suppose we should affirmatively answer
to the first, whether the ends of God can be considered in all sorts of Bodies,
or only in some? To resolve this Query, we must divide Bodies, into inanimate
and animate, The most considerable inanimate Bodies are the Sun and Stars. When
we consider their Motions so regulate, and so necessary to the Earth: And on
the other hand we suppose with Descartes, that they were produced by an
intelligent Being, why should we not believe that we may place the use we draw
from them amongst the Causes for which this Being created them?

But there is much wanting in inanimate Bodies, to render them as perfect as
animate Bodies. The Disposition of our Muscle, is much more admirable than that
of the Celestial Orbs; and the Eye of a Fly, includes a thousand times more Art
than the Body of the Sun. Tho there is no absurdity to think that Stones,
Metals and other Bodies of this Nature are made for the use of Man; their
inward Disposition is so simple, that it might be believed they were formed by
the Simple Rules of Motion, even as we see that the Cristallizations, and
Sublimations of Chymistries produce effects sufficiently wonderful. But there
is no comparison betwixt these sorts of things, and Animals, as Mr. Boil
proves at large; p. 45. etc.
for not to enter into an examination of the entire Bodies of Animals, he
chiefly applies himself to the structure of the Eye, by which its clearly seen
that it was made for to see. And this not only in regard to the Eye of Man that
it may be proved; but we may besides observe particular Dispositions in those
of other Animals, which render this truth very plain. Frogs, for example,
besides what their Eyes have common with ours, have also a Membrane or Gristle,
wherewith they cover them, without it is hindering their sight; for tho this
Membrane is very strong, it is transparent, and may pass for a kind of Horny
Movable. These Animals living not only in Water, but also upon the Water side,
where there are often Shrubs and Bull-Rushes, and moving themselves by Leaps;
if they had not these Fenses to their Eyes they would be in danger of putting
them out at all times. It may be observed by holding a Frog so that it cannot
turn his Head, if one strives to put out it is Eyes, 'twill soon be perceived
that at the very instant it will cover them with this Membrane, and that as
soon as the danger is over the Frog will draw it back without trouble. The same
thing is found in several small Birds who Fly and hop in thick Trees and Bushes
whose Thorns might easily put out their Eyes without an Horny substance
wherewith they cover them.

We know that Men, and the most part of four Footed Beasts and Birds, have
diverse Muscles, by means of which they turn their Eyes where they please,
according to the occasion they have for 'em. Flies on the contrary have none,
but in recompense have on their Eyes, which are unequal enough, a great number
of little Eminences capable of receiving the Rays which come from all Parts.
These Inequalities are particularly observed in the Eyes of Flies, (which fly
upon Flesh) by making use of a good Microscope. Although Bees and other great
Flies have immovable Eyes, yet the same thing is not seen in them.

To these Remarks may be opposed, That the Eyes of Men being the most perfect,
the Eyes of all Animals should resemble it. Mr. Boil answers to that first,
That since diverse Organs of Animals are perfectly well disposed for the Uses
for which they are destined, we ought to believe at least that it may be the
same with Organs, whose Structure and Use are not well known to us. Secondly,
we ought not to consider the Eye after an abstract manner, and simply as the
Instrument of Vision, but as the Organ of a certain Animal to whom it ought to
serve in certain Circumstances. And this, far from doing any wrong to the
Creator of the Universe, renders him on the contrary much Honor, if we
consider that in the infinite variety of Animals which he has produced, he
has given them such Eyes as were needful, to preserve themselves in such
places of the Earth as they live in, and to nourish themselves after the manner
that is most natural to 'em. Thus tho diverse Beasts, as Horses, Oxen, and some
others, have a seventh Muscle to turn their Eyes, besides the six which they
have common with Men; we must not conclude that their Eyes are more perfect
than those of Man, or that they have any superfluous part: For these Animals
having their Head stooping, to seek out the Forage they eat, could not have
their Eyes turned downwards so long to the ground without great Weariness, if
they had not this seventh Muscle which serves them for that purpose. But Men
having no need thereof, such another Muscle would but trouble them. On the
contrary it ought not to be thought that Animals, whose Eyes have not all that
is observed in that of Men, are destitute of any part that may be necessary for
them. Moles, for Example, have Eyes so little that it is commonly believed they
have none, although those who have made a Dissertation of them, have found they
had Eyes. But being obliged to remain in the Ground, they needed not great
Eyes, which would be in danger of receiving Injury.

It is known that the Camelion, among several remarkable Things which it has
in its Eyes, can move them independently the one from the other; so that he can
look with the one on what is before him, and with the other on what is behind,
to see with one what is above, and with the other what is below, etc. Therefore
he is a sloathful Animal, which lives upon Trees or Shrubs, where Flies are
nourished, which he can see coming what side soever they are. Fishes have a
Crystalline Humor almost Spherical, because the Water in which they live,
causing in the Sunbeams a Refraction much greater than the Air, they would see
nothing in the Water, if the Convexity of the Crystalline Humor caused not a
Refraction in the Light great enough, to reunite these Beams in the bottom of
the Eye.

Mr. Boil is persuaded, that those who might have Time and Means to examine
after the same manner the Eyes of a greater number of Animals, would without
difficulty observe that they have them so disposed, as that the Places wherein
they keep, and their manner of Living require it. Besides this, he makes a
Remark upon the form of the Eye-ball of some Animals, which serves to confirm
his Thought; which is, That although Horses, Oxen, and diverse other Creatures,
have a long Ball as well as Cats, yet in the first it is placed transversely,
and extends from the right to the left: Whereas in Cats, it is situate
perpendicularly. A Friend of Mr. Boyles, well skilled in Optics, conjectured
upon this Observation, that the reason of this is, That Horses and Oxen seeking
their Food upon the Ground, can thus receive more easily the Images of the
Forage, which presents it self to them from diverse Parts in their transversal
Ball: As Cats living upon Mice and Rats, which run along the Walls, can more
easily observe them by the perpendicular situation of their Balls, than if it
was otherwise disposed.

Thus this variety of Dispositions, in the Eyes of Animals, is far from giving
us any disadvantageous Idea of him that has produced them, we cannot but
admire his Power and Wisdom: For it cannot be doubted but that a Mechanist who
makes a great number of Machines, is of a greater Capacity, than another who
could make but one sort. There is even much likelihood, according to Mr. Boil,
considering Things but as a simple Philosopher, that the Author of the Universe
has produced so great a variety of Animals, but to let intelligent Creatures
see his Power and his Wisdom. Therefore does Revelation teach us, that this was
one of the Designs of God in the Creation of the World, as Mr. Boil shows,
from p. 78. unto the end of the Section.

But before that, he makes some Remarks upon that which is called Chance, which
deserves our Observation. As to the corporeal World, it is easily believed that
nothing falls out in it by Chance, but all by the Rules of Motion, when any
free Intelligence comes in for a share. But because we consider certain parts
of the World, as being particularly governed by the Divinity, or at least by
what others call Nature, and as being destined to certain ends; if it happens
that by the Intervention of some other Causes, which we foresee not, the things
in Question produce a contrary Effect to that which we believe they were
destined, we are accustomed to say, That this Effect is produced by Chance.
Thus Chance is nothing else but an Idea of our making, and which only
subsisteth in our Brains. There is therefore no Reason to wonder why the
Philosophers, which lived before Aristotle, have not put Chance among Natural
Causes, as we learn of Aristotle himself, who justly reprehends them because of
this pretended Omission.

Those who favor Epicurus, are used to bring for Examples Things that are
formed by Chance, of certain Stones whose Structure is admirable, as the
Astroites. But besides what we have said of Chance, its answered, that Learned
Men have of late maintained, with likelihood enough, That curious Stones of
this Nature are really Animals, petrified by some Moisture in which they have
lain. But by supposing that these sorts of Stones are formed in the Ground, it
might be said, without advancing any Absurdity, That there are Seminal
Principles in some of the Fossils, whose disposition is most composed, not to
mention that there is no Comparison betwixt this Disposition and that of
Animals. We ought in it not only to consider the solid parts, but also the
Liquors, the Spirits, the Digestions, the Secretions, the Regulations and
Motions of the whole Body; and though it were allowed that the Stones, which we
speak of, are formed by Chance, it could not be inferred that Animals are thus
formed, for if a Smith shall give a certain Shape to a piece of Iron without
thinking of it, yet it cannot be concluded that this Smith can, without
thinking, make a Clock.

III. The third Question is, If it may be said that a Being destitute of
Intelligence acts for some end, and in what Sense it may be said? It Is said
that a Being tends to certain ends, in two Senses. The one is when the Agent
knows a certain end, and that he acts purposely, to arrive at it. The other,
when the action of the near cause is directed to this end, yet by an
Intelligent Cause more distant. It Is evident that we cannot say, in the first
of these Senses, that any Cause destitute of Intelligence acts in order to
some end; therefore it must be the second: To which the Sentiment of Mr. Boil
has Relation; which is, That God having proposed to himself certain ends has
produced a World proper for the producing such ends. For Example, an able
Mechanist who proposes to himself to make a Mill to turn round, and to raise
Hammers to forge Iron, by the means of Water, he forms thereof an Idea which he
afterward executes, and whose Execution produces the Effect he had proposed to
himself: Even so God having proposed to himself certain ends, has created the
World, so that he inevitably comes at it that way.

Mr. Boil admonishes here p. 81.
That if he has said any Thing by the bye against the common Opinion, That all
the Material World was made for Man; he thinks only that this Question ought
not to be decided after a too Dogmatick or Exclusive Manner. Although the Reasons
which are brought to show that all the World, and particularly the vast Extent
in which the fixed Stars are placed, was not made for Man alone, yet it
appeared to him more probable than those which favor the contrary Opinion;
notwithstanding he willingly grants that among the ends which the Author of
Nature proposed to himself in diverse of his Works, as Plants, Animals, Metals,
etc. he had a Design to produce them for the use of Man, and that this perhaps
was his principal Design. He has even an inclination to believe, that there
being a great many Things made for our use, and which notwithstanding we do not
know; and that the Things whereof we actually make use, may have other uses
which are besides unknown to us.

Libertines have long since objected, That if other Animals had been made for
Man, they would not come into the World in a better State than he: Whereas
there are several produced in a condition of defending themselves from the
Injury of the Air, and of seeking their livelihood without the help of another.
To these slight Advantages is opposed that of Reason, which has enabled Men to
form Societies, and to become Masters of all other Animals by their Policy.
This Reason evinces, That Man is more excellent than the whole Globe of the
World, or an Extent of much greater Matter without Intelligence. So that do but
look upon the outside of Things with regard only to the littleness of the Body
of Man, deny that the Earth and some of the Celestial Bodies were made for
him, because they are infinitely greater, and because an Intelligence, such as
the Soul of Man, is much more excellent than all these Bodies.

Mr. Boil moreover draws from this Consideration an important Consequence,
which is, That though Man receives no use from some distant parts of his Body, he
can nevertheless receive a very great one in regard of the Intelligence which
animates it; which raises it self by the consideration of the more distant
Objects to the knowledge of their Author, and acknowledges in a thousand ways
his Power and his Wisdom, and also renders him the Homage that is due unto him.
Why should we not believe that among the ends of God, in producing these vast
Bodies, which their excessive distance has not robbed from our Sight, he has
proposed to make himself known to the innumerable Intelligences, which he has
covered with Human Bodies? This is the most probable Inference that Men have
ever made thereof, as Mr. Boil shows.

But if we will yet consider Man, as covered with a Body, we must take heed of
committing a gross Fault, whereinto we fall by Imagining, That nothing can go
under the notion of having been made for Man, but that which all Men have
always made use of; we ought to look upon Man, from his Origin upon this Earth,
until his Dissolution, he changes Habitation, as does a Family, which in diverse
times makes use of diverse things, although none of his Members do immediately
participate of these Uses. Thus an Infinity of Things, whence much Profit is
drawn of late, have notwithstanding been made for Man, though he made no use of
them some Ages before us. We may see particularly Examples thereof in the
Original.

IV. p. 103.
The fourth Question is to know, With what Precaution Physicians ought to make
use of the Supposition of Final Causes? Thence two sorts of Consequences may be
drawn; the one relates to the Author of Nature, as when from the constant use
of a thing, it is concluded that it was made for that. So after having
acknowledged the use of Eyes, we ascend to the Creator, by saying that in
creating the Eyes, he had a Design to make a Machine, as proper to produce that
which we call Vision. The other Consequences conclude from the Supposition of
certain ends, That Bodies ought to be disposed after a certain manner, because
otherwise they would not be proper to produce the Effect for which they are
created.

Mr. Boil reduces what he has to say upon this Question, to five Propositions,
upon which he makes diverse Remarks which are briefly there; as also some of the
most considerable Reflections which are made upon them.

1. p. 107.
As for Celestial Bodies in general, it is Folly to conclude any thing about
their Nature, from the Supposition that God has produced them for the use of
Man.

Those who say, That the Earth being the Place which Man Inhabits, and the Sun
having been created to light this Earth; it follows from thence, That the Sun
turns round the Earth, and not the Earth about the Sun, against the Rules we
have related. They suppose that the only end which God proposed to himself, in
creating the Sun, is to light the Earth; and though that was so, their
Consequence may be denied. As to what regards the fixed Stars, whereof some are
so distant that there is no use of the Telescope to discern them, it is yet
more rash to suppose that they were only produced for our Earth; though we do not
deny but that we may draw from them both Moral and and Physical Uses.

It would be also a mere Presumption, to conclude from thence that they are
disposed after such a certain manner, because that would seem more commodious
for the use of the pretended King of the Universe. It is much more reasonable
to think, that God might have proposed Ends which we see not in the Symmetry of
the World. Can it be said that the Angels, which are more excellent Beings than
we are, take no share therein, and that God in creating it had no regard to
them? On the contrary it is well known, that several Divines have conjectured,
with Mr. Boil, That the Angels were created before the Material World, that
they might render God the Praises due to him, for the Creation of the Universe.
It may be these Intelligences perceive at first sight in this part of the
Heaven, what we discover only with difficulty by the Telescope, and in other
Bodies which we know not, a profound Wisdom, and as admirable Ends, as those
which we observe in Bodies which are nearest and most known to us.

To descend from Heaven upon Earth; though it is very rationally believed that
God made, for the use of Man, Metals and Minerals being such Things as he can
procure; there would be no Reason to believe, that that which is round the
Center of the Earth, more than fifteen hundred Leagues below our Feet, is made
for us, and even only for that end. There could never yet a thousand Steps be
dugg into a strait Line, nor is there any appearance that the Industry of Men
should ever find the means to pierce the Earth Diametrically for a Mile; and
without that they can neither see, nor apply to their use what it hides in its
Center. We may notwithstanding judge, by the knowledge we have of some other
parts of the World, that what the Earth includes in its Bulk, may contribute
something to the Order and Symmetry of its Vortex wherein it is placed. It
might also be said, that there are diverse Things in the World, which were
produced, not for themselves, or upon a Design of immediately receiving some
Benefit; but because they were necessary Subjects of what God had directly
designed to create. So God it may be is the remote cause of Eclypses, but yet
they are a necessary Series of the Motion of the Planets, and he did not think
but that this Motion should be changed, to avoid Eclypses.

2. p. 142.
It is permitted to a Physician to gather from the use of some parts of the
Body of Animals, some of the particular ends to which they were destined. We
may even, in some occasions, upon the Knowledge which we have of Nature, and of
the Disposition of certain Parts, establish probable Conjectures about the use
of these Parts.

Mr. Boil speaks here only of such ends which regard the good and preservation
of Animals in particular. Those who have any Knowledge in Anatomy cannot doubt
of it if they consider the whole Machine of Human Bodies and the regular
Functions, which an infinite number of Parts perform therein, without the one
hindering the other, though their Offices are very different. It evidently appears
that several Parts are destined to certain Effects, and that they are justly
disposed, as they ought to be to that intent, because if there happens any
change, this Effect either ceases entirely, or is not produced without much
difficulty.

The Epicureans object, That Men make use of their Members in many things, not
that they had them given 'em for that Design, but because we have found out by
Experience that they were proper for them.

Nil Ideo quoniam Natum est in Corpore, ut uti
Possemus, sed quod Natum est id procreat usum.
Lucret. lib. 4. But chiefly there are several Parts of our Body, which perform
their Functions, without our being sensible of it, and without our knowing how*
Such are our inward Parts, the Heart, the Liver, the Spleen, etc. and as to the
Members which we move as we please, although we cannot employ them before they
are formed, it follows not in any respect from thence that a blind Power has
presided over their Formation, without knowing what they should be good for.
That is only a Supposition as little reasonable, as that of a Man would be, who
should maintain, that a Book was not made to be read, but that we read it,
because Chance has formed it and writ it, after such a manner as we have Power
to read it.

Suppose we knew well the Structure of one part, we might often affirm or deny
certain Uses which are attributed to it. Those who writ formerly of Anatomy and
Optics, believed, as well as the Philosophers of the Schools, That Vision is
made in the Cristalline Humor; but the Jesuit Scheiner has shown, the first
Thing in his Treatise of the Eyes, That this part of the Eye, not being proper
for that purpose, another should be sought for, which might be only the Coat or
Membrane of the Eye. My. Boil affirms, that having demanded of the famous
Harvey, a little before his Death, what it was that might have given him
occasion to find the Circulation of the Blood? He answered him, That it was the
Disposition of the Valvulae or Folds, which permit the Veins to bring back the
Blood to the Heart, but suffer it not to go to the Extremities of the Body,
only by the Arteries.

3. p. 180.
There are Things so proper and so well disposed for certain Uses, either in
the Universe, considered in its utmost Extent, or in the Bodies of Animals, so
that we may justly conclude, that Bodies were made by an Intelligent Being,
which has thus designedly disposed them.

Mr. Boil demonstrates this Thesis by a great number of Examples drawn from
diverse Animals of Europe, America and Asia; where he examins only the exterior
Actions, without engaging himself into any refined Disquisition, because what
we see is sufficient to convince a rational Man, that an Intelligent Being
formed the World. We shall not stop at it, because every Person can present to
himself an infinite number of convincing Examples, and like unto those which
our Author relates. There is no Body this day in Europe, who has any Learning,
that believes pure Chance was able to produce Animals; but there are Men who
believe that they are formed by the known Rules of Motion, or at least by Rules
which we know not. Yet they must grant, that an Intelligent Being established
these Rules, as Descartes does, or say that they are from all Eternity, in
Matter as well as in Motion; whence it would follow that there have been
Animals on Earth from all Eternity, which is contrary to History and good
Sense; moreover the supposing that Matter moves of it self, is to suppose as
incomprehensible a thing as the greatest Absurdities of the most ridiculous
Religion. So that the Proofs of Mr. Boil may serve to destroy this Sentiment,
though it does not directly aim at it.

4. p. 214.
We ought not precipitately to conclude, nor assert too affirmatively that a
Thing is, or ought to be the particular end, for which any Body has been
formed, or the Motive which induced the Author of Nature to produce it.

It is true, there are some Ends that were designed in the Creation of Bodies,
which are so clear and remarkable, that it cannot be doubted but these Bodies
were effectively formed for these Uses, as the Eye to see; but there are
several Effects either necessary or profitable for the conservation of Animals,
to which Effects one part is not sensibly more proper than the other. It is
very difficult likewise to observe the chief and the most considerable Use of
each Part, as appears by these Reasons. 1. The whole Animal, whose Members are
examined, is itself but a part of the Universe, and consequently it cannot be
affirmed that his Members have no Relation but to himself only, and not with
the whole Creation, whereof it makes a Part. 2. There is Danger in affirming,
That a Member was not designed to such an Use, because it seems as if it could
better perform this Function, if it was otherwise disposed, without considering
whether this Structure, which is judged the best for this particular Effect,
would not be more disadvantagious to the Animal, in some other regard; or if it
would not be contrary to some other End that the Author of Nature might have
proposed to himself, in the Production of this Animal: 3. It is hard to
determine what the principal Use of a Member is, because it may be equally
destined to several. 4. Nature can accomplish the same End, by diverse ways,
equally sufficient for that Intent, though they are not all equally commodious.
Mr. Boil believes, That these two Considerations ought to be joined together,
because they are often found to be united. We imagine sometimes, without
Reason, That Nature employeth but a Part in some one Function, whereas the
Effect which she proposes to herself is often produced by a Series of
Operations, which succeed one another, and to which different Members do
diversely concontribute. Besides, that an Animal cannot subsist only by the
means either of the Solid or Liquid Parts, which are seen in it when it is
opened. It is a Machine that may be called Hydraulico-pneumatick, whose
Functions (and perhaps the principal ones) are not simply performed by means of
the Blood, or other sensible Liquors, because they are Liquors; but partly by
their Motion, partly by an Invisible Fluid, which is called the Spirits, and
partly, perhaps by little Particles, which are suddenly loosened from the rest,
or by a Portion of Air enclosed in our Body, or by some kinds of Ferments; all
which things cease to act with Life, and cannot be discovered by the means of
Anatomy.

5. A Physician ought not to apply himself so much to the Disquisition of the
Ends of the Author of Nature, as to neglect examining the manner whereby
Natural Effects do happen, and the Causes which produce them more immediately.

In effect the one is not incompatible with the other; as nothing hinders us
from knowing by what Springs and Wheels a Watch plays, when we have learned
for what Design it was made. A Physician, who would not be unworthy of this
Name, ought to add the first of these Knowledges to the second.

The Book whereof we have given an Extract, though full of Matter (being little
enough) Mr. Boil has added p. 245.
fourteen Curious Observations, about diverse Infirmities of the Eyes. It has
been already observed, That he insisted much upon this part of the Animals, to
prove that their Bodies were formed designedly; so that these Remarks may serve
only to confirm what he has said: There is but one Power, and one Wisdom so
great as is that of God, which could have included so many things in so little
an Organ: And we have an occasion still to admire his Providence, in that this
Organ being composed of so many Parts, and so easy to be spoiled: It
nevertheless is found to remain in the greatest part of Mankind in the same
state from their Birth to their Death. The Observations which Mr. Boil gives
us here, are so much the more remarkable, because he has seen most of those
Persons, whose Unhappiness he relates: This is the last, which was translated
Word for Word.

Men, it may be, may be persuaded, That those who perceive Objects in a Light
much less than it ought to be, for others to discern it, may rather be
accounted to have an excellent Sight, than to have infirm Eyes. But although
this Delicacy of the Organs of the Sight, may be looked upon as a Perfection in
Bats and Owls, which cannot take hold of their Prey but in the Twilight; yet in
regard to Man, who ought principally to act in full Day, or in a Light almost
equivalent; we may be sensible of the Bounty of the Author of Nature, in that
he has given him Eyes so qualified as they commonly are; if he had the Coat or
Membrane too tender, it would be an Imperfection, or at least a great
Inconveniency, as appears by the following Observation.

In the Army of Charles the First, King of England, there was an Ingenious
Gentleman, who was Major of a Regiment, and being forced by the Victory of the
Usurper to go seek his Fortune out of the Kingdom, hazarded himself, at Madrid,
to render his Prince a Service of very great Consequence, after such a manner
as was judged in Spain to be altogether void of Prudence; he was seized and put
into a Dungeon, where there were no Windows, but only a Hole in the Wall, by
which they gave the Prisoner his Victuals, after which they shut it, although
perhaps not very exactly. This Gentleman remained some Weeks without seeing any
thing whatever, and in a very deep Melancholy: But after that it seemed to him
as if he saw a weak Light, which afterward augmented from Day to Day, so that
he could discover his Bed, or any thing of a like Bigness. At last he came to
discern Objects so little, that he saw Rats, which came to eat the Crumbs of
his Bread that fell on the Ground, and distinctly observed their Motions. He
related several other effects of his Sight in this obscure Place: Which shows
that this proceeded chiefly from his Organs, which became tender, staying so
long a Time in such a dark Place, as it was. But his Affairs being changed, and
having recovered his Liberty, he durst not immediately expose himself to a full
Sight, fearing left a too sudden Brightness should make him lose his Sight, but
thought he should accustom his Eyes thereto by little and little. I add here,
continues Mr. Boil, this strange History with much the less Difficulty,
because I have it from the very Mouth of this Gentleman. He told me besides,
other Particulars, which I dare not to mention here, because I have not those
Memorandums I took of'm to refresh my Memory.

An Extract of a Letter, written from London, about the Description of a Ship,
built after a new Form, by Sir William Petti.
AS all Men expected the Success of Sir William Petti's Enterprise, of Building
a Ship after a new Make; so there ran a multitude of People to the Thames-Side,
to see this Ship Launched, being empty when it was tried: It drew Water but
seven Foot and an half. They were going to name it Gemini, because it was
composed of two small Ships, but at last it was called the Experiment, because
of the uncertainty of the Event it would produce.

To apprehend its Structure we must imagine two little Ships joined together by
a Platform, so that between the two there may be a Space almost as large as
the two Ships together, through which the Water has an entire Liberty to pass.
The Keel of each Vessel is eighty Foot long: The bigness with the Platform is
only thirty two Foot: The height from the Keel unto the Platform is fourteen
Foot.

If this Ship is used in War, it will carry fifty Pieces of Cannon, two hundred
Men, and three Months Provision. If it be used as a Merchant Ship, it will
carry three hundred Tuns.

The Advantages which are expected from this Ship, are First, That it will be
swifter than those hitherto used. 1. Because it will carry twice or thrice as
many Sails as others do. 2. Having no Ballast, it will be lighter, and
consequently swifter.

Secondly, They pretend that this Ship will be surer than others. 1. Because
the Figure of its Sides, with the Water which runs between the two Ships, will
keep it from running aground. 2. And having no Ballast, it cannot sink, what
Breaches soever it may meet with, especially if it be assisted by some Pieces
of Cannon. 3. Its Keel being supported by a great many straight Planks, will
defend it, if it should touch the Ground with all its Weight. 4. Because it
will not carry its Noses under the Water, and that its Mast will be sooner
Break in the Tempest.

Thirdly, They say, this Ship is still more commodious than others. 1. In that
the Water passing with its full Force to the Rudder, along its direct Sides, it
will make the Ship turn more speedily than others do, whose Rudder receives
only the broken Water by the Sides of those Ships, which are rounder. 2. This
Ship not being so round as others, will toss less in a Tempest; and as it will
not Rise or Fall but very little, so they may make use even in a Tempest of its
Cannons, which are placed very low, which cannot be done in other Ships. 3.
When it is calm the Ship will go with Oars betwixt these two little ones,
beneath the Platform: Besides the Oars, which may be used without-Side, as it
happens every Day to others. 4. Because this Ship will be equally proper to
serve in War or Merchandise: And as it will be lighter than others, it is very
useful to carry News to any Place, that they have occasion to convey it to;
Relieve a Besieged Place, or go to spy out the Enemy, and even in Battle it
will have many Advantages as easily may be imagined.

That which is the most feared in this Vessel, is breaking asunder: For, in
fine, a considerable Space being betwixt the two Vessels (whereof the Ship is
composed) it is feared the Waves which meet there with great Force, will
separate them. But as this Objection was made as soon as the Structure of this
Ship was proposed; he that undertook it, has, as he says, taken such Care to
provide against this Accident, that he thinks it is the least thing to be
feared. And certainly if there is no secret Cause that retards its Course, or
renders its Navigation more perilous, there is no apparent Reason which hinders
the succeeding of the Enterprise. In this Case a great many things must be
changed in Naval Architecture, which has been hitherto observed: And Wits will
have Subject enough to exercise themselves in the Disquisition of the Causes of
the Motion, which will meet in the Agitation of this Ship.

An Extract of two Letters, one written from London, and the other from the
Hague, concerning the Use of Pendulums, to find out the Longitude upon the Sea.
BEfore I give the Extract of these two Letters, we must say two or three Words
of the Longitude, in favor of those who are not well acquainted with these
kinds of Subjects.

One of the greatest Philosophers of these latter Ages has observed, That of
all Arts, Navigation is the most Perfect, and that which can receive the least
Addition: Yet, nevertheless, there are many Defects observed in it. The chief
is, That Pilots having lost sight of the Land, and knowing not where they are,
run the hazard of loosing themselves; for if the Compass and the height
observed teach at what Distance they are from the North and South, and that so
the Latitude is easily distinguished, yet no means could hitherto be invented,
by which the Longitude could be precisely known; viz. what Distance one is from
the East or West. Nevertheless, seeing it would be impossible to Navigate, if
there was not at least an imperfect Knowledge thereof; Pilots are reduced to
make a Journal from Hour to Hour, to mark what Wind they have made use of, and
observe the Violence and Impetuosity of Currents, through which they have
passed. Therefore they hold a very exact Register of these things; and
afterward computing their Journals, they judge by the Estimation of the Way
which they have gone toward the East or West; and thus they conjecture at what
Distance they are from it. But as this manner is very uncertain, and that the
best Pilots agree but very seldom in their Reckoning, they often lose
themselves in Places against Rocks, which they think themselves very far from:
So that it may be judged of what consequence it would be to discover a certain
Means to find out the Longitude, seeing after that the Place may be precisely
known in what part of the Sea soever one is; and so we might Sail in great
Security. This is what Mr. Huggens has found out, by means of the Pendulum.
All the World knows its Exactness, that it fails not one Moment: And as soon as
it appeared, it was not doubted but it would serve to find out the Longitude,
provided a means could be invented of carrying it on the Sea, without its
losing any thing of the Regularity of its Motion. For suppose this exactness,
it is certain, that if in parting from the Port, the Pendulum's adjusted to the
Hour it is in the Port, from which the Longitude and Latitude is known, when
one is on the Main Sea, it will be easy to know by the Sun or the Stars the
Hour of the Day, at the Place where one is; and in comparing this Hour with the
Hour it was at the Port whence one parted, as it is given by the Pendulum, the
Longitude will be found without Trouble: For as it is known how many Degrees of
Longitude the Sun makes in one Hour, one may infallibly determine by the
Difference of the Hours, how far one is toward the East or West; and then to
judge by the Map of the Distance of the Place where one is, from all the other
Places, which are marked in the Map.

An Extract of a Letter written from London, January 1665.
CAptain Holmes is at last arrived, and the Relation he made us of the
Experiment of the Pendulums, makes us confident they will succeed. He parted
from the Isle of St. Thomas, which is under the Line, accompanied with four
Vessels: He was obliged to gain the Wind proper for his Return, toward the
West, and to sail six hundred Leagues without changing his Road: After which,
finding the Wind favorable, he drew toward the Coasts of Africa, directly to
North-North-East. But as he had made about four or five hundred Leagues upon
this Rumb, the Pilots of the three Ships, which were under his Conduct, fearing
they should lack Water before they arrived at the Place intended, proposed to
him to go and take Water in at the Barbados. Hereupon this Captain having
assembled them, and made them bring their Journals, they found themselves
distant, in their Reckoning from his, one eighty Leagues, the other one
hundred, and the other one hundred and twenty; for this Captain judged by the
Pendulums, that he was not much more than thirty Leagues from the Isle of
Fuego, which is one of those of the Green-Cape, which these Pilots judged then
to be very far off: And because he had an entire Confidence in these Clocks, he
maintained that they should continue their Road; and the next Day in the
Morning the Isle appeared, according to his Expectation.

An Extract of a Letter, written from the Hague, the fifth of February, 1665.
CAptain Holmes, at his Return, has given such Relations concerning the
Usefulness of Pendulums, as surpassed my Expectation. I did not imagine that
the Clocks of this first Construction would succeed so well, and I reserved my
chief Hope for the New. But seeing those have already been so successful, and
that the others are more exact, I have the more reason to believe, that the
Invention of the Longitude will be in its utmost Perfection. Nevertheless I
shall inform you concerning what you desired to know of the manner wherewith
the Gentlemen of the States received my Proposition, when I asked them for the
Privilege of New Clocks, and such a settled Price on the Invention, in case of
Success, that they have without Difficulty granted me my Request, and willed
that I should cause one of these Clocks to be carried into their Assembly, to
expound the Invention thereof unto them, and then the Application to
Longitudes: Which I did with great Approbation. I have published this Week,
That the same Clocks will be exposed to Sale, with necessary Instruction to use
them at Sea; and thus I have opened the way. The Objection was made me here,
which had also been made by you, against the Exactness of the Pendulums, to
wit, though they agreed together, they might both fail, because the Air at one
Time would be more thick than at another. But I answered, That this Difference,
if there be any, is not at all felt by the Pendulums; seeing the Observations
made from Day to Day, and continually from Winter to Summer, always showed that
they agreed with the Sun. As to the printing the Figure of my Clock, I shall
defer it as yet for some Time; yet it shall appear nevertheless with all its
Demonstrations, and a Treatise of Pendulums, which I have written some Days
past, and which is of a very subtle Speculation.

The Public is obliged for the Communication of these two Letters, to the
unparalled Mr. Chaplain, who adding to his other fine Knowledges that of the
most Curious Philosophy, kept a Correspondence in all Europe, to be advertised
of the New Discoveries which are made therein.

An Extract of an English Iournal.
MR. Boil has communicated a Letter to the Royal Society, by which he is
advertised of a Monster, born at Limmington, in Hampshire.

A Butcher having killed a Cow, found she was big with a Calf, which began to
be Hairy. Its Hind-Legs had no Joints, and its Feet were divided like the Claws
of a Dog. His Tongue was triple, and after the manner that Cerberus's is
described, one in the middle of its Mouth, and two others on the Sides. Between
the Fore and Hind Feet, there was a great Stone, upon which it was laid: This
Stone weighed twenty Pounds and an half; its Color was greyish, like to a Cut
Stone, which is commonly called the Grison; the Superficies thereof was
unequal, and full of little Cavities; when it was broken they perceived small
Grains of Stone, of an oval Figure, and its Color was mixed with Yellow and
Black Veins, which were all over it. Dr. Haughtein of Salisbury keeps very
carefully this Stone, of which he has sent a Part to Mr. Boil, who has
shown it to the Royal Society.

An Extract of an English Iournal.
MR. Moray has told the Royal Society, That Brimstone and Vitriol are taken
from the same Minerals, and that it has some resemblance of the Lead-mine,
which often separate by rubbing when they meet together. Sometimes the Mine is
dug fifteen or twenty Fathoms or more, according as the Vein leads the
Workmen, or the Subterranean Waters permit them.

When Men are minded to make Brimstone, it is broken by little bits, which are
put into little Pots of Earth five Foot long, of a Pyramidal Figure, the two
parts whereof must be disposed after a leaning manner, and are placed one upon
another: There are eight underneath, and seven above, ordered so that there is
an emptiness betwixt, through which the Fire passes, which by this means
touches them all. The Brimstone, which is melted through the violence of the
Fire, droppeth, and coming out by the lesser end of the Pot, falls into a
Trough of Lead, which is common to all of them, and through which there
continually runs a little Brook of cold Water, carried thither by Pipes, to
congeal the liquefied Brimstone, which is commonly four Hours melting. When
that is done, the Ashes are drawn out with an Hook of Iron, they are carried in
an Iron Wheel Barrow without the Place, and are broken to bits, and covered
with other Lye-Ashes which are dry, to keep them the warmer, which is done so
long as they yield Brimstone.

When Persons are minded to make Copperas or Vitriol, they take a quantity of
these Ashes, which are put into a square Hole made in the Ground, about four
Foot deep and eight Foot in bigness, which is every where covered with Boards
of Wood well joined together. After that, they throw Water upon it till it
swims, and so it is commonly lest twenty four Hours, or else until an Egg swims
on the top of it, which is a mark that the Water is strong enough. So when they
are minded to boil it, they make it run through Pipes into Kettles, and add
thereto one half of the Mother Water (as they call it) which is that which
remains when the Vitriol is made. These Kettles are of Lead, and are four Foot
and an half high, six Foot in length, and three Foot broad; and they lay 'em on
Iron Grates, and boil this Liquor in the Kettles with a great Cole Fire, for
twenty four Hours or more, according as the Grounds are stronger or weaker.
When the Water is well consumed, the Fire is taken from under it; they let it
cool a little, and draw it from the Kettles by holes which are on the sides,
and by wooden Pipes whereby they make it pass into Recipients, which are three
Foot deep and four long, where they leave it fourteen or fifteen days, and
longer if it may be necessary, until the Vitriol is separated from the Water,
becoming clear and hard. The Water which remains, when the Vitriol is drawn
off, is that which is called the Mother Water, and the Lye-Ashes which remained
at the bottom of this boared Hole, are the Faeces which the Water leaves, when
the Vitriol is made.

An Extract of an English Iournal.
'TWas attempted a long while ago, to take the Whales which are in the American
Sea near to Bermudas, but the Attempt was altogether given over as Fruitless,
because of the Fury and extraordinary Swiftness of these Fishes. But it was
begun again sometime since with more Success, as a very able Mariner told us,
who was present at the taking of some of 'em: The last time he was at Sea, two
old Females were taken, and three young Males.

One of these old Whales was eighty eight Foot in length from the Head to the
Tail; it is Tail was twenty three Foot in bigness, the Fins twenty six Foot in
length, and it is Gills three Foot; it had great Beards hanging under the Nose
unto the Navel, and toward the end of the back Parts, a Crest upon its Back;
within it was full of Fat like the leaf of an Hog.

The other was about sixty Foot in length; one of the young Ones was thirty
three Foot, and each of the two others about twenty five and twenty seven Foot
in length.

The Fish is of a very sharp Figure behind, much like the ridge of an House;
near the side of it is Head are several little Lumps, its Back is extremely
black, and its Belly white.

He says that the Swiftness of these Fishes is incredible: And that having
hooked one, it dragged the Vessel wherein he was, six or seven Leagues in three
quarters of an Hour.

When these Whales are Wounded, they make a horrid Cry, to which all the rest
that are within Hearing, immediately swim thither, but without hurting any Body.

He struck one of them one day, which by estimation was more than one hundred
Foot in length. He believes that these Fish are like those which are called
Iubartes; they have no Teeth, and are of a greater length than the Whales of
Greenland, but not so thick.

They feed on the Herbs which grow in the bottom of the Sea, which is apparent
by the opening of their great Sack or Stomach, in one of which there have been
found two or three Hampers full of green Stuff, like to Herbs.

He thinks seven or eight Tuns of Oil may be drawn from the biggest of these
Whales, though all those he took, afforded him but eleven Tuns: But he believes
the Reason was, because he had not a Skilful Cooper to hoop them well. The
young Ones give but little, and it is more like Jelly than Oil. That of the old
Ones is curdled, and yet burns very well. That which is drawn from the Fat, is
as clear as Whey; but that which is drawn from the interlarded Leanness,
becomes hard as Tallow, and sparkles in burning. As to that which is made of
the Leaf, it is like the Fat of an Hog. This Oil, he says, has a marvelous
Quality; for though it is boiling hot, one may dip ones Hand in it without being
burned. It is Sovereign for Wounds and several other sorts of Evils, being
applied to the afflicted part.

Upon what he first said, That the catching of these Whales lasts from the
beginning of March unto the end of May; he was asked, where they might be the
rest of the time, seeing they were not in the Sea? To which he replied, That
the common Opinion was, that they withdrew into the Weedy Caves of the Gulf of
Florida, because it has been observed, that upon their Fins and Tails there
were quantities of Viscosities, upon which there grew Shells; and there has
been seen upon 'em Shells bigger than Oysters, many of which have been ranged
upon the Palisadoes of the Governor of Bermudas.

An Extract of an English Iournal. A new Invention which they use in Virginia
to kill Bell-Serpents.
THere are in several Places of America a kind of Serpents, most dangerous,
which is called the Bell-Snake, because with the End of their Tail they make a
Noise very like that which Bells do, when they are moved. This Animal is very
big, about five Feet long, and of Brown Color* mixed with Yellow: It has a
forked Tongue, and long sharp Teeth, and moves with as much Swiftness, that it
seems to Fly.

As there was Discourse in the Royal Society of this kind of Serpents, Captain
Silas Tailor gave there the Relation of the manner how they are killed in
Virginia, and afterward gave it in by Writing, attested by two Persons worthy
of Credit, in whose Presence the Experience had been made: These are their own
Words.

The wild Pouliot, or the Dictam of Virginia, is about a Foot high, the Leaves
are like unto those of the Pouliot, and little blue Knots, at the Places where
the Branches are joined to the Trunk; and though the Leaves are of a Red
Color, inclining to Green, the Water, which is distilled thence, is of a fine
Yellow, and is like Brandy. When these Leaves are opened and put upon the
Tongue, they seem very hot and pricking. They take of these Leaves, which they
tie to the End of a splitted Stick, and some one puts it very near the Nose of
the Bell-Serpent, which uses all its Endeavors to draw away from it, but the
Smell, as it is believed, kills it in less than half an Hour.

This Experiment was made in July 1651. at which Time it is thought the Venom
of these Animals is in its greatest Strength. This Gentleman also assured the
Royal Society, That where ever the wild Pouliot grows, or the Dictam of
Virginia, there are no Bell-Serpents to be seen.

An Extract of an English Iournal, about a remarkable Spring, which is near
Paderborn in Germany.
NEar the City of Paderborn there is a Spring or Source, which is called
Methorne, whence there comes three different Brooks. There are chiefly two,
which, though they are not distant from one another above about a Foot and a
half, yet have very contrary Qualities; for the Water of the one is Clear, but
bluish, Blood-warm and Boiling, which seems to partake of an Ammoniac Salt, of
Oker, of Iron, of Vitriol, of Alum, of Brimstone, of Niter and Arsnick, which
they usefully make Use of against the Epilepsie, the Pains of the Spleen and
Worms. The other has a Water as cold as Ice, Muddy, Whitish, more Heavy, and of
a Stronger Taste than the former, and imbibes much of Arsnick, Salt, Iron,
Nitre, and a little of Ammoniac Salt, Alum and Vitriol; and it is said, That
all Birds that drink on'^ do dye suddenly: Which gave an Occasion to a curious
Person to make Trial thereof, by himself, upon Hens, to which he gave of this
Water to drink, after they had been fed: He remarked, That all those which
after having fed upon Barley, Oats, or Crumbs of Bread, drank thereof, did
immediately stagger and fall, being attacked with strange Convulsions, in which
they dyed a little after, and became Stiff almost like Sticks. But those which
he made to swallow a little Common Salt, immediately after they had drunk,
lived a little longer: Others, which he made to swallow Vinegar, lived almost
seven or eight Days, being very much incommoded thereby, and about that Time
dyed. He had the Curiosity of opening all those which dyed, and found that they
all had the Entrals and Lungs withdrawn, and gathered together.
Notwithstanding, it is certain, that several Persons have been cured of the
Worms in taking a little of this Water, which they mixed with other common
Water; for though most of them became thereby Sick, yet none of them d^ed, and
they have been delivered from Worms, after having voided a great Quantity of
them.

As to the third Brook, which is a little below the others, about twenty Paces
from them, it has a Water Greenish, Clear, of an Acid Taste, and agreeable
enough: It is not as Light as the first, nor so Heavy as the second, but it
seems to keep a medium betwixt both; which makes those who have examined it to
believe, That this Brook is formed, and comes from the Mixture of the others,
which come to join together. This is principally known, in that if they mix an
equal Quantity of the Water of these two first Brooks, and if there is a little
Well-water put thereto, shaking them altogether, it falls out that after they
settle, there is a Water which has the same Taste and the same Color as that
of the third Brook.

An Extract of an English Iournal. An Opinion of the Astronomers of England
upon the Contestation happened betwixt two Learned Men, about an Observation
made of the First of the Two last Comets.
THere happened a Difference betwixt these two Famous Philosophers Mr.
Hevelius, and Mr. Auzout, upon the Subject of the Observation made by the
former, upon the 18th of February, 1665. and afterward some famous Astronomers
of England, considering the Importance of this Dispute, resolved to examine it;
we have thought, that those who have heard it spoken of, would not be
displeased to know what they have done and remarked on this Subject. Having
then compared the Printed Writings of these two Gentlemen with one another, and
consulted carefully the Observations which have been made here with
Prospectives, by some of the most Learned Astronomers amongst them, who have
exactly observed the Position of this Comet with the Telescopick Stars which
are in its way; they have unanimously concluded, That whatever this Appearance
was, which Mr. Hevelius has seen, near the first Star of the Ram (of the Truth
of which Appearance they would not doubt) the aforesaid Comet has not
approached near this Star, which is in the Left-Ear of the Ram; by which Mr.
Hevelius supposes it has passed, but that it took its Course near the shining
Star, which is in its Left-Horn, according to the Tables of Bayerus. And
whereas the Observations which have been made by very Judicious French,
Italian, and German Astronomers, which are come to the Knowledge of the English,
do entirely agree with that of theirs; they doubt not but a Consent so
unanimous meeting, between so many Persons, concerning what we have said, and
the Dispute being a Question of Fact, wherein Authority, Number and Reputation
ought to prevail, Mr. Hevelius, whose Knowledge and Sincerity are known of all
Men, joyneth to them, and is of their Opinion.

An Extract of an English Iournal, concerning a Mine of Mercury, which is in
Frioul; and the manner of making Wind by the Falling of the Water.
THE Mines of Mercury, which are in Frioul, are situated a Day and a half's
Journey, or thereabouts, from Coritia, drawing toward the North. The Mine,
wherein we entered, which is the Richest and Greatest of all, is more than six
hundred Foot in Depth. It is descended into with much Pains, by Ladders placed
perpendicularly: But there is one of the Descents, where there are from Space
to Space Boards laid across, to rest upon them. When we were at the Bottom, we
saw the Mine, which is dug out with Picks, because it is for the most part as
hard as a Stone. It is of the Color of Livers, or of Crocus metallorum. In
these Mines is a soft Earth, in which the Mercury is all by little parcels.
There are besides, round Stones found in them like Flint of different Bigness,
and resembling little Balls of Hair, which I have often seen taken out of the
Bellies of Oxen in England. This is the manner how Mercury is got. They take
the Earth, which has been dug from the bottom of the Mine, and brought up in
Baskets, which is put into Sacks, whose Bottom is made of Wire, so disposed
that one may put his Finger betwixt two: Thence they carry it into a Brook of
running Water, where it is washed until nothing more can pass through the Sack.
The Earth which passes not is put apart in a Heap, and that which has passed
through the Sack is put into the Hole, whence a second Man draws it, and puts
it into another Sack, and from that into ten or twelve others, which are more
bruised the one than the other. It happens often that there is Mercury at the
bottom of the first Hole, whence the second Man draws his Earth; but in any
Place where the Iron Wyers of the Sacks are nearest one to another they find
Mercury in a greater Quantity. The Earth is laid in a Heap, which was set
aside, and they begin again the same Operation. The fine and thin Earth which
remains after that, and from which the Mercury can no more be separated, by
means of the Water, is put into Retorts of Iron, proper for the luting of the
Recipients, in which the Violence of the Fire pusheth on the Mercury. The
Officer who had the Conduct thereof, deluted several of 'em in our Presence, to
show them to us; and I observed in all, that there immediately issued out
perfect Mercury very fluently, and afterward a black Dust, which being wetted
with Water, appeared to be nothing else but Mercury, like the other. They piled
up the Caput Mortuum, and began again the Operation, until they can get no more
Mercury from it. The Water which imbibes the Qualities of the Mercury cures the
Itch and Ulcers.

This is the manner they draw, what they call, Common Mercury; for that which
they call Virgin, is found either perfect in the Mines, or drawn by Lotions and
Washings of the Earth. The Virgin Mercury is much more esteemed than the other.
I asked some of the Officers of the Mine, What Virtue it had in particular?
they told me, That when Gold was mingled with Virgin Mercury, this Mixture
being put over the Fire, the Mercury volatilizes the Gold, which common Mercury
does not.

Common Mercury is in far greater Quantity than Virgin Mercury; for we saw by
the Account these Officers had given the Emperor, That of 695334 Pounds of
Mercury, which was drawn out of these Mines, in the Years 1661, 1662, 1663,
there were 667666 of Common Mercury, and only 27668 of Virgin Mercury.

The Machines which are used in these Mines are admirable; the Wheels are the
greatest that I ever saw in my Life, and are all moved by the Force of the
Water, which for little Cost is brought from a Mountain that is three Miles
from thence. The Water which is drawn from the Mine, by the means of fifty two
Pumps, twenty six on each Side, is employed to move other Wheels, which serve
for different Uses.

The Workmen are paid but one Iules a Day, and stay not long at this Work: For
although there is none who is more than six Hours under Ground, they become all
Paralytick, and dye Hectical, some sooner, and some later.

We saw there a Man, who wrought at these Mines but six Months, so full of
Mercury, that immediately after he had put a bit of Brass into his Mouth, or
that he had rubbed it betwixt his Fingers, it became as white as Silver, and as
if he had rubbed it with Mercury it self. He was so very Paralytick, that he
could not carry to his Mouth a Glass half full of Wine, without spilling it. I
have learned since, That at Venice, those who work behind Lo^king-Glasses, are
also subject to the Palsy. ^ did not observe that these Men had black Teeth,
and it may be we unjustly accuse Mercury of spoiling the Teeth, when it is
given in Venereal Distempers. It is true, I did not make this Observation upon
the Place; but as black Teeth are very rare in that Country, if they had been
so I should undoubtedly have remarked it.

I am willing yet to impart to you an Invention that I find new, which they
make use of to blow the Fire in the Brass Forges of Friouli, near Rome. It is
the Water which blows the Fire, not in moving the Bellows, as is commonly
done, but by making a Wind. There is a River, from whence proceeds a Fall of
Water, which is received into a Tub; out of the Side of this Tub comes a Pipe,
like the Nose of a Pair of Bellows; on the upper-side of the Pipe there is a
Hole, with a Stopple, to stop or unstop it at pleasure; the Tub empties itself
under Ground when the Hole in the Pipe is stopped; at its Mouth comes out
incessantly a great Wind; and when the Mouth of it is stopped, the Wind comes
out with such Violence, by the unstopped Hole, in the Top of the Pipe, that I
believe it would make a Ball leap, as that does of Frescati.

An Extract of an English Iournal, containing Instructions for those who take
great Voyages upon the Sea.
THE Design of the Royal Society, being, according to its Establishment, to
apply it self to the Search of Nature, and conformably unto the Observations
made upon diverse Phoenomenas, and the effects thereof, which were observed by
'em, to compose a Natural History, that might serve for a Foundation to
establish a solid and profitable Philosophy, they have from Time to Time given
Orders to diverse of their Members, not only to labor after the Search of
Remarkable Things, which they might meet with in Foreign Countries, but also to
give some Instructions for Private Men, who should have the same Curiosity. It
is for this End, that considering the great Advantages which might be drawn
from Voyages that shall be made for the future into all Parts of the World, Mr.
Rooke was heretofore chosen and charged with the Care of giving some Advice to
those who go to the East or West Indies, the better to enable them to make such
Remarks as might contribute to the Accomplishment of their Design. After which
they desired the Mariners to keep an exact Register of these Observations,
which at their Return they should give two Copies of, one to the High Admiral,
and the other to Trinity-House, to be revised by the Royal Society. Therefore
Mr. Rooke, before he dyed, acquitting himself of his Commission, and having
made up a Memorial, according to the Order which he had received thereupon, it
was thought fit to publish it, and to give a Copy thereof to all the Mariners,
in the ensuing Form.

I. To observe the Declination of the Compass, or the Variation of the Needle
to the Meridian, marking as exactly as possible, the Place wherein the
Observation shall be made, and the Method which shall be used to make it.

II. That they should carry with them Needles of a good Temper, and
well-touched with a Lodestone, and to remark after the same manner the
Inclination of the Needle.

III. To observe carefully the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, in as many Places
as they are able, with all the Ordinary and Extraordinary Accidents of the
Tide, as what is the prefixed Time of its Ebbing and Flowing in the Rivers, or
Promontories or Capes, what way the Current of the Water takes, what
perpendicular Distance there is betwixt the highest and lowest Tide, what Day
of the Moon, and what Time of the Year falls out the highest or lowest Tide;
so of the other Accidents which may be observed in the Tides, chiefly near the
Ports, and about the Isles.

IV. To make Draughts and Descriptions of the Aspect of the Coasts,
Promontories of the Isles and Ports, marking the Approaches and Distances as
exactly as possible.

V. To Sound and Observe the Depth of the Coasts, Ports, and other such like
Places near the Shore, as they shall think fit.

VI. To endeavor to know the Nature of the Earth, which is at the Bottom of
the Sea, and to sound it after all the ways, to know if it be Mud, Sand or Rock.

VII. To make a Memorandum of all the Changes of Winds and Tides which happen
at every Hour of Day and Night, marking the Point or the Place whence the Wind
comes, and if it be strong or weak; as also the Rains, Hails, Snow, and such
like Things, with the precise Time of their beginning and continuance; but
chiefly to have a great Care to remark regular Winds, in what Degree of
Longitude and Latitude they begin at first, where or when they cease or change,
and become stronger or weaker, and by how much; which ought to be done as
exactly as possible.

VIII. To observe and put in Writing all the extraordinary Meteors, such as are
Lightnings, Thunders, Comets, and false Fires, always remarking the Place and
Time of their Apparition and Duration.

IX. To carry about them good Balances and Viols, that contain near a Pint,
and have a very narrow Neck, which shall be filled with Seawater, in different
Degrees of Latitude, as shall be thought convenient; and to remark carefully
the Heaviness of the Viol full of Water taken at each Time, and especially the
Degree of Latitude, and the Day of the Month.

An Extract of an English Iournal, containing some Observations made by Mr.
Boil, and taken from one of his Letters, about the Baroscope, and the manner
of Weighing the Air.
I Shall make no Difficulty to say, That I have hitherto found nothing that
presages more certainly, and makes known so exactly the Changes of the Time,
which happen after a long and constant serenity, than the Baroscope. I know not
also whether in the most clear and serene Climates this Instrument might not be
absolutely infallible; for in these Northern Isles the Clouds are so little,
and discharge sometimes so suddenly, that often the Weight of the whole
Atmosphere of the Air receives thereby so small an Alteration, that we are
deceived therein, and cannot find out the true Causes of the Constancy or
Change of Air: Therefore I should desire to see some good Calendar or Journal
made at Tangiers, or in some other of our Northern Places or meridional ones of
America. At least I can affirm, That after having tried all sorts of
Hydroscopes, whereof I have a great Quantity, and observed carefully the
sweating of Marble, and as many other famous Prognostics, as I have heard
spoken of, I have at last found out, That there is none which comes near the
Excellency of the Barometer, to signify the Changes of the Times which are to
happen

2. To confirm what I have advanced, I am willing here to give some Remarks
which I have made. The Weather appeared extremely charged the fourth of last
January, but yet more on the seventh, and it remained the following Days so
gloomy, that all the World believed certainly that we should have Rain;
nevertheless, I observed then, That the Mercury of my Baroscope did not fall
down, and that, notwithstanding the Mists, which sometime appeared pretty
Thick, and some Drops of Rain which fell, it remained very high; which made me
know certainly, That there would not happen any great Change in the Weather. It
is true, that when there fell some small Drops of Rain, it would fall a little,
but this was not considerable, and rather confirms my Assertion than destroys
it. And in the last cloudy Weather, which we have had, I have not been Mistaken
in my Judgment thereof, upon this same Foundation.

3. Another Time, seeing that after a small Rain, the Mercury rose very high, I
thought that we should have a Serenity that would last; but, on the contrary,
having remarked that it descended after it had rained, I was in much Doubt
whether we should have Cloudy and Rainy Weather.

4. I believe that the Principal Reason for which we become more chilly and
more weak when the Mercury appears at the lowest, and the Air is the highest,
is because the Air serves to our Bodies for Nourishment, even as Water serves
for Aliment to Fish; when we are deprived of the ordinary Quantity of this
Nuurture, it happens to us as it does with Fish, when Water fails them.

5. That the lowest I ever saw the Mercury fall, since the Time I remarkt it,
was the twenty eighth of October, 1665. toward Evening, for it appeared to me
then fallen twenty seven Inches and an half, as I find it in my Remarks with
these Circumstances.

The twenty fifth of October, in the Morning, the Mercury was twenty eight
Inches and an half; great Storm and Rain.

The twenty sixth of October, in the Morning, the Mercury was twenty eight
Inches; Wind without Noise, with gloomy and very thick Clouds.

The twenty sixth of October, at Evening, the Mercury was twenty seven Inches
and an half; that Day and the following ones an unconstant Time, and frequent
Rains: The Mercury was lower than it used to be.

6. To be still more exact, I laid over the Place where my Baroscope was, a
Weathercock, disposed so that one may easily take each of the thirty two Points
of the Wind, from the half Points and quarter Points, pretty far off; otherwise
all our Conjectures would be found false, as Experience informed us: By this
means, when some Cloud draws nigh, or some other Meteor gets higher or lower,
or when there rises some Storm or Fresh Wind, be it Night or Day a Servant may
bring certain News of the Weight of the Air, as easily and surely as he might
the precise Hours, after having consulted a Sun-Dial.

The Baroscope or Barometer, whereof we have spoken, is nothing else but a long
Pipe of Glass, having about four Feet in length, and a large Cavity of about
the fourth part of an Inch. This Pipe is hermetically stopped at one of the
Ends, and the other is filled with Quicksilver: Afterward it is prepared,
turning down the End which is not stopped, and sinks into other Mercury,
exposed to the Air, and contained in a larger Vessel, which is under it. By
this means the Quicksilver, which is in this Pipe, striving to escape, as much
as it can, and to run into the Mercury, in which, as we have said, the Stoppage
of this Pipe is thrust, it follows of necessity (as all those know, who have
seen this Experiment) that what remains of the Quicksilver stays suspended
in this Pipe, at the height of about twenty eight or thirty Inches (more or
less, according as the Air, to which this Mercury is exposed, is more Light or
Heavy) leaving the Superior Part of this Pipe empty.

That which the Iournal of England calls Baroscope or Barometer, is no new
thing in France, where it is almost as Ancient as the Suspension of Mercury;
for the Experience of the Tute, which having been invented in Italy by Galileus
of Toricelli, was first used in France in 1646. by Monsieur Petit, Intendent of
the Fortifications, as appears by the Discourses which he printed thereupon at
Seb. Cramo^sy 's in 1647. Afterward it was augmented by Mr. Pascal and several
others, who left the Mercury suspended in the Pipe, for continual Experience,
as they called it, to see the Change which would happen, as to the height of
the Mercury, according to the Diversity of Time and Seasons. It is more than
nineteen Years since Mr. Merseune had one, according to the Relation of Mr.
Pascal, in his Treatise of the Equi-librium of Liquors: We see that in 1649.
the same Experiment was made in several Places, which has been continued here
in diverse Times, and is so yet by Mr. A^zout and Tycho; but finding hitherto no
certain Rule of the Difference which happens to the Height of the
Quicksilver, according to the Change of the Air, they had not thought fit to
publish any thing on it.

An Extract of an English Iournal, concerning a new Method, how to sound the
Depth of the Sea without a Cord; and to discover the Nature of the Water at
bottom of the Sea.
MR. Hook is the Author of these two new Inventions; from whence Advantages may
be drawn for Physics as well as Navigation.

1. To found the depth of the Sea without a Cord, one must have a Globe, or
Bowl of Fir, Maple, or some other light Wood; it must be rubd over with Varnish
of Pitch, or some such like Matter, to preserve it from the Water; then take a
piece of Lead or Stone, the weight whereof must be sufficient to sink the said
Globe, which must have a Staple made of Wire-Thread, and a Spring also of the
same Wire, whose end must be crooked or bent; into this Staple must be drawn
the Wire-Spring, which presses the crooked or bended end, to which a Weight
must be hanged by its Ring, to let the Globe and all the rest fall into the
bottom of the Water, where the Weight touching, the Globe also stays there;
whence it follows, that the Globe of Wood which is dragged to the bottom, only
by the violence of the Motion which it acquired in descending, must also unbend
the Spring, and set it self at liberty to ascend again to the top of the Water;
so that if it be observed how long this Bowl tarries under Water, it is easy to
discover the depth of the Sea, by means of some Tackle that may may be made for
that end.

He says we must take great care that the Heaviness and Figure of the Leaden
Weight, be proportionable to the Bigness, Weight and Figure of the Wooden
Globe, in such manner as Experience shall discover what is most covenient.

In some Essays which have been already made of this Instrument, the Globe,
which was of Maple, and well covered with Pitch, was 5 13/16 Inches Diameter,
and weighed 2 Pounds. The Lead weighed 4 and was Pyramidal, and 11 Inches in
length, the Point turned downwards: The Basis was 1 2/16 Inches Diameter, and
the Point was 1/16: In the Thames, where these Experiments were made, where it
was 19 Foot deep, there was only six Seconds of an Hour betwixt the Immersion
and Emersion of the Globe: And in another place, where the Water was but 10
Foot deep, 'twas but about two Seconds and an half. When there shall be more
Experiments of this Nature made, without doubt 'twill not be very difficult to
find out a Method for the Computation of the depth of Water, according to the
length of time which these Globes stay under Water.

It Is also Remarked, that in making new Experiments in the Thames, this Globe
being cast into a place where the Water was deepest, it was not longer in
ascending to the top, than in passing the length of two Boats from the place
where it was cast in, being carried so far by the Stream.

The other Instrument, which was to draw in the Water that was at the bottom of
the Sea, was a Pail of Square Wood, whose top and bottom were made after such a
manner, that a Weight coming to sink the Iron (to which the Pail is fastened by
two Ears, 'having at both ends moveable Bottoms, in the form of two folding
Doors) and by this means drawing in the Water at the bottom, the resistance of
the Water taking hold of the Pail in such a Posture, so that the Water might
easily pass over it whilst it descended. But so soon as the Pail is drawn up
again by a Cord, the resistance which the Water makes to this Motion carries
the Pail to the bottom, and keeps it in a close Posture, so that Water that is
without cannot get in; nor that which is shut up within, cannot get out.

By means of this Instrument it may easily be perceived, whether the Water at
the bottom of the Sea is salter than that on the Surface; as also whether the
Water is fresh in any place of the bottom of the Sea, as the Industrious John
Hugh van Linschoten assures us, who in his Relation of the Voyage into the
East Indies, tells us, That near the Isle of Barem in the Persian Gulf, with
certain Instruments ( of which however he gives us no Description) they drew
out of the Sea from under the Salt Water, four or five Fathom deep, some Water
that was as fresh as that of a Fountain.

An Extract of a Letter written by Mr. Peti, Intendant of the Fortifications,
to Mr. Galloys P. concerning the Depth of the Sea, the Nature of the Water
which is at the Bottom of the Sea; and some other Curiosities.
IT will be hard to judge right of the Depth of the Sea by the Machine
mentioned in the English Iournal, and which was related in a Journal of the
third of May: For neither the Figure nor the Discourse explain intelligibly the
turning and situation of the Spring, which ought to be unbent when the Lead
touches the bottom, and how the wooden Bowl is disingaged from that of the
Lead. But suppose, that the Lead remaining at the Bottom of the Water, the
light Body should Ascend, and that the Time of the Descent and Ascent of these
two Bowls together, was well observed, as it is easy to do; besides that one
ought to know many things which are yet unknown, to be able to judge of the
Depth of the Water.

1. How much Time a Heavy Body requires to descend into the Water, according to
such a certain Depth.

2. If it descends with the same Proportion of Swiftness as it would do in the
Air: I do not say Swiftness, but only in the same Proportion of Swiftness; for
Experience shows us, That when a heavy Body falls in the Air, it falls unequal
Spaces in the same Distance of Time; as for instance, suppose it falls twelve
Foot for the first Second of Time, in the next Second it will fall thirty six
Foot, in the third Second it will fall sixty Foot, and so on. By this means one
may know the Highth of a Tower, or the Depth of a Well, in letting a Stone fall
from the Top, or another heavy Body, and measuring the time of its fall with a
Pendulum of a String of nine Inches and a quarter long, which shall mark the
half Seconds; as a String of 37 Inches marks the Seconds, 60 whereof makes a
Minute.

This is very near the proportion of the fall of heavy Bodies in the Air,
according to the Observations which I have made thereof in times past. But to
know whether the same Bodies falling into the Water, and in the Water of the
Sea, and if they keep the same proportion, is the difficulty; and this
difficulty is increased, when a heavier Body than the Water is joined to the
lighter.

We should besides this, know when a light Body ascends from the bottom of the
Water unto the top, in what proportion of Time and Swiftness it mounts. For to
assert that it is the same as that by which it descends in the Air, which I have
now expounded, is what will never be determined. And though, for my own
Curiosity, and that of Father Mersenne, I have in times past made several
Experiments, to know if a Dart perpendicularly shot by a Bow, would descend in
the same equality or proportion of Time and Swiftness in which it mounted; and
if a Bomb or an Iron Ball as big as one's Fist, cast by a small Mortar, would
take more or less time to fall in, than it would to mount by the violence of
the Powder, I can determine nothing on it, if I did not again make the same
Experiments several times; though I remember there was but little difference
betwixt the one and the other, and that the time of the natural Descent of
Arrows was to their Assent, as 7 is to 5: But for the Bullet of a Canon or
Mortar, we judged that it descended almost with the same Impetuosity as it
mounted; and to inform our selves the better, we overturned the Mortar, and put
it is Britch upwards, shooting into the Ground, and we found that the Bullet
sunk but a little deeper by the violence of the Powder, than it did by its
natural force, when it fell on the Ground. This proportion of swiftness of a
Body mounting and descending, being not yet given by Mr. Hook nor known by the
Experience which is related thereof, which marks but the time of the Motion of
these two Bodies together, to wit, the Descent of the heavy joined with the
light, and the mounting of the light alone, there remain still many Things to
be known, before any use can be drawn from this Invention.

Besides, it is not a new Invention. For several have written, that for to
^ound the depth of the Sea, one needed only to take a Lead of eight or nine
Inches long, made into a Cone or a figure like a Horn, at the top of which
there must be tied a Spike of Iron about the length and thickness of a Finger,
a little inclined upon the Lead. So that this Machine may represent a Figure of
Seven, whose long Leg is a weight of Lead, and the Spike of Iron the Head. If
in this Spike there is a Ring well fastened to a wooden Bowl, and this Machine
is cast into the Water, as soon as the Lead comes to touch the Earth, it must
fall, not being able to keep up, being pointed at the end like a Sugar Loaf,
and the wooden Bowl being raised up by the Water will make its Ring to
disengage from the small Iron Spike, and then it will ascend with such
proportion of swiftness as I believe to be unknown. Thus without other
Artifice, one may, it seems, do the same thing, supposing the bottom was firm,
and that there should be no Vessel.

As for the other Invention, of drawing Water from the bottom of the Sea, it is
so darkly expounded, that it can scarcely be understood; one must guess that
there were Pails at the two Handles, that they were moveable, and made like a
Spring. But without all this ado, I have done the same thing before now, with a
Brazen Pump of about a foot long, which I let fall into the Sea with a Cord,
and which had the same effect as your Pail with its Lead and all its Apparel;
for the lower Pipes opened themselves in descending, and shut themselves in
ascending; and brought up Water from the bottom of the Sea.

But I have always found this Water Salt, for five or six Fathom deep, having
made no Experiment lower. And certainly if Experience and good Physics were
consulted, the Sea should be more Salt in the bottom than at the Surface,
seeing the Salt being more heavy than the Water, it would stay at the bottom,
and the lightest and sweetest would always rise uppermost, as we see by the
Rain, by Lembicks, and by all sorts of Evaporations; and I do not believe that
one can doubt of this. For the Authority of John Hugh van Linschoten a
Hollander, which says, in Chap. 6. of his Voyages (that writ in his own Tongue,
not in English) That in the Isle of Baharem, which is in the Persian Gulf,
there is fresh Water found four or five Fathom below the Salt. We should doubt
this to be Matter of Fact, had it not been related by this Author. For he knows
it not by Experience, and relates it by Hearsay, as he does many other false
Things; were it nothing but what he says of the Tomb of Mahomet, whom he
pretends to be in a Coffin of Iron suspended in the Air, by a Vault of Stones
made of Loadstone, which all the World knows to be false.

But though fresh Water should be found at the bottom of the Sea near the Isle of
Baharem, four or five Fathom under the Salt Water, it follows not that one
should find it elsewhere. For the cause related by Texeira, in his Relation De
los Reyes de Harmuz, where he says, That the Isle of Baharem has much Water,
whereof the best is that of certain Wells, very deep in the midst of the Isle;
and that there are great Veins of pure and fresh Water which spring in the next
Sea, where the Diverse go for it above three Fathoms, or thereabouts; and that
they are of Opinion, these Fountains were in times past in fi^m Ground pretty
far from the Sea, which has since covered them. So you see that it is a Fact
altogether particular; from which we ought to not conclude, That under 4 or 5
Fathoms of Salt Water, there is commonly sweet Water found; but only by such
Causes, or by the Springing up of some Rivers which are lost under Ground, and
come out into the Sea by Subterranean Channels, which are sometimes to be found.

An Extract of an English Iournal, Communicated by Mr. Hook; how to cause a
Plano-convex Glass of a small Sphere, to retort the Rays of the Sun upon a
Focus of a greater distance than its Convexity requires.
TAKE two Glasses, whereof the one is perfectly flat on both sides, the other
of one side only, and Unequal of the other of what Sphere soever, so that the
flat Glass may be a little larger than the other. Afterward take a Ring of
Brass made very round, in which you must cement these two so that their
Superficies may be exactly parallel, and the Unequal side of the Planeconvex
Glass may be turned inward, yet without its touching the flat Superficies of
the other Glass. Being thus well cemented in the Ring all round, pour into a
little hole that must be at the brim of the Brass-ring some Oil of Turpentine,
Spirit of Wine, Salt and acid Liquors, etc. and having filled the empty Space
which is betwixt the two Glasses, stop this hole with a Vice, and according to
the different refraction of the Liquors put betwixt the two Glasses, the Focus
of this Prospective shall become either longer or shorter.

Mr. Hook adds, That he wished he had examined a Trial, among several which may
be made, upon the possibility of making a Glass wrought in a little Sphere to
serve a Prospective of a very great length; though for fear of promising too
much, he ought to add, That among the Spherick Objects those which are
greatest, and whose Matter has a greater Refraction, are the best.

It Is long since that Mr. Hook proposed to Mr. Azout this Problem, to lengthen
the Focus of Prospectives. Mr. Azout gave them a general Solution of it for
every length given, by the disposition of a second Glass, whose Figure he
determined; as may be seen in his Letters, printed by I. Cusson, and whereof
mention was formerly made in the French Journals. But Mr. Hook having informed
him, that the Invention which he had found was very different from what was
before thought upon; Mr. Picard, very understanding in these sorts of Matters,
proposed about five Months ago, the means of lengthning the Focus of
Prospectives by Liquors, after the same manner as has been seen in the Journal
of England. Notwithstanding, the Glory of this Invention is always due unto Mr.
Hook, who has had the first Thought thereof. It Is true, there will not be much
use drawn from it; yet it is very Fine and Curious.

An Extract of a Letter written from Oxford, May 12. 1666. by Mr. Wallis; and
inserted in the Iournal of England, about a Visit to a dead Body. struck with
Thunder.
THERE was here a frightful Thunder the 10 of May, wherewith two Scholars, who
were alone in a Boat without a Water-man, were unhapily struck, and cast out of
the Boat into the Water. One of them was killed outright, and though he was
taken out of the Water, where he scarcely stayed one Moment, yet there appeared
no mark of Life, Sense or Motion in him: The other was very well, yet fallen
down in the Boat, without being able any way to help himself, and as immovable
as a Stake; but there appeared no Wound in his Body; and all the harm he had,
was, that he remained so troubled in himself, that he could not remember how he
fell into the Water; and whether it was the Thunder or some Lightning which was
the cause. He remained in this State the Night following, and I know not what
became of him since.

As for him who dyed, as soon as he was drawn up, we endeavored to bring him
to Life by all manner of Remedies, but all was in vain. Therefore he was
brought the next Day Morning into the City to be Buried. Dr. Willis, Dr.
Mellington, Dr. Lower, and I, had the Curiosity to visit this dead Body, to
remark the Particularities thereof.

We found no considerable Wound in all the Skin. His Face and Neck were black
and livid; on the right side of his Neck there was a small blackish Spot an
Inch long, and a quarter of an Inch large at most, like unto a mark made as if
it had been with a hot Iron, an Inch long and a quarter of an Inch broad; there
was another a little bigger, I think, on the other side of his Neck under the
left Ear; and below on the left side of his Breast, there was a place which was
about nine Inches long and two Inches broad; in some places more, in others
less, which appeared burnt, dry, and like the Skin of a roasted Hog: On the
forepart of the left Shoulder, there was such another Spot almost of the
breadth of a Sixpence, yet it was not so black nor so much marked as that of
the Neck; from the top of the left Shoulder downwards toward this part of the
Breast, there was a little place of the Skin which was, as it were, broiled, as
if by that something entered into the Neck, which went down toward the Breast,
and which afterward extended further.

The most part of his Buttons were carried away, the Neck of his Doublet was
broken in two, just before the left Shoulder, and in some places the Stuff of
his Doublet appeared as if it were cut off or taken away by a blunt Instrument,
but the Fashion with which it was lined, did not appear to be broken.

His Hat was strangely torn round about the edges; there was among other things
on the Side, a Hole big enough to put ones Fist through. There were in other
places deep Cuts to be seen, which appeared to be made by an obtuse Instrument.
As for the rest of the Clothes we perceived nothing more, and they had no smell
of Brimstone.

The following Night we opened the Head, where we found no sign of Contusion.
The Brains were entire and in a good State, the Nerves whole and without any
hurt, the Veins and Arteries sufficiently full of Blood, so that none of the
Company could say any thing against it. It is true, that this was done by a
Candle, and that each part could not be examined with all the exactness which
could be wished for, partly because of the Concourse of People, partly because
the Body was to be buried a little Time after: Notwithstanding, I believe if
there had been a considerable Defect among so many Spectators some one would
have discovered it. There were some who imagined to see a little Cleft on the
Scull, and those who held him whilst it was sawed, said, That then they had
felt some cracking, but it was such a small Business that nothing certain could
be known of it by the Candle.

On the right-Temple were seen some Hairs, manifestly burned, and the lower
part of the Ear was a little blacker than that which was round about the upper
part of the left Shoulder; and the left Side of the Neck was yet Blacker than
the rest of the Body, yet without dryness, as if this Color had not been
caused but by the sediment of Blood.

After having thus examined the Head, the Breast was opened; and it was found
that the Burning traversed almost the whole Skin, which was scorched in these
Places, hard and like a Horn: Yet there appeared nothing else under the Skin.
The Muscles were in their natural situation, and had lost nothing of their
ordinary Color. The Lungs and the Heart, which we afterward drew out of the
Breast, had their ordinary Color, and seemed nothing altered.

This is what was chiefly remarked: To which I shall add, That in the Night the
Body swelled much more than it did in the Morning, and that it had a strong and
stinking Smell; which, notwithstanding might come from the Heat of the Weather,
and the multitude of People which was continually in the Chamber.

We have carefully related all the Particulars of the Visit of this Body,
because it being made by several most Learned and Experienced Physicians, it
may serve for a certain Ground, to reason upon the Nature and the Qualities of
Thunder.

An Extract of an English Iournal: An Experiment to examine what Figure and
Swiftness of Motion Produces, or Augments Light and Flame.
THis Experiment was communicated by Doctor Beale as follows.

The fifth of May 1665. fresh Mackarels were boiled in Water with Salt and fine
Herbs, and when the Water was cooled very well, the Mackarels, the next Day,
were left in the Water to be seasoned.

On the sixth, other Mackarels were boiled, which were fresher, in a like
Water, and on the seventh both the Water and Mackarels were put with the first
Water, and with the first Mackarels. I relate particularly all these
Circumstances, because whether it be the Mixture of the Pickle, made after one
another, or something else that was necessary was wanting, the Experiment
succeeded not another Time with the same Trial.

On Monday the eighth, toward the Evening, the Cook moving the Water, to take
some of the Mackarels out, observed, That at the first Motion it became very
luminous, and the Fishes shining through the Water much increased the Light,
although this Water, by reason of the Salt and Herbs, which they had boiled in
it, was rather Thick and Black than of a Clear and Transparent Color;
notwithstanding, being moved, it was Luminous, and the Fishes appeared through
it altogether whole, and very shining.

Wherever Drops of this Water fell, they shone after they had been moved, and
the Children took Drops in their Hands, as large as a Penny, and carried them
up and down the House; and the luster of this Light made each Drop show far and
near, as large as a six Penny-piece.

That Side of the Fish that was downwards was turned upwards, but there came no
Light from it; and after the Water had rested long enough, it shined no more.

Tuesday Night we began the same Experiment again, and we saw the same things.
The Water showed no Brightness before it was stirred, and it appeared even
obscure and thick in the Day as well as by Candle: But so soon as a Hand was
put into it, it begun to show Bright. When it was strongly stirred it shined so
that those who looked upon it at some Distance from thence, even as far as the
other End of the Chamber, thought it was the Light of the Moon which came in at
the Window upon a Vessel full of Milk: And when it was stirred round more
swiftly, it seemed to be a Flame, and there was a great Brightness both within
and without these Fishes, but chiefly about the Throat and some other Places,
which seemed to be broken in Boiling.

I took a bit thereof, which shined most, and adjusted it the best I could, in
the Night, to my great Microscope, and then to another that was less; but I
could not find any Light by the means of these Instruments, neither in this
Bit, nor in any of the Drops of Water, which shined before, and which I had put
into Glasses.

The tenth of May I examined a little Bit of this Fish, with my great
Telescope, at the brightest Beams of the Sun, which shined most of the
preceding Night, but we remarked nothing considerable. Its Surface seemed
whitish and dry with deep Inequalities; and the rest, as well as I, thought
they saw a Vapor, rather obscure than luminous, which raised from this Fish
after the manner of small Dust and small Sparkles, which were almost
imperceptible; notwithstanding we are very certain of having seen them, for we
reckoned them, and we all agreed in their Number, their Order and their Place;
yet I am not so assured of this Vapor, whereof I have spoken, but that I am
afraid the Light of the Sun deceived us, and that this Vapor was the Dust of
the Air.

Having made Trial, in the Day, with a great Microscope, upon this Bit, we
examined it at Night, but it gave no more Light, whether it was looked upon
with Glasses or otherwise.

Seeing it was dry, I thought, that by wetting it with Spittle and handling it,
I could make it shine a little, which also happened; but this Luster lasted not
long, and besides, there were seen some small Sparkles, which disappeared
immediately: We perceived them with our Eyes, without making Use of Spectacles.

The Fishes as yet had no ill Smell, and had not lost their Savor, according
to the Judgment even of the most delicate Palates; therefore I caused two to be
kept, to make other Experiments two or three Days afterward, when they should
begin to be corrupted, hoping to find more Light therein; but I found nothing
of what I expected, neither in stirring the Water, nor in drawing out the
Fishes.

An Extract of an English Iournal, containing diverse Experiments about
Petrification.
THough there has been already much written of the manner how Stones are
formed, notwithstanding we have not as yet a perfect History; therefore the
Curious ought to apply themselves to this matter, to perfect it, and to
discover the Cause of this Transmutation; for besides other Advantages which
might be drawn from this Knowledge, it would be of great Use to hinder a Stone
from generating in Human Body, or to dissolve it when it is formed.

To this End there has already been given, in diverse Places of the English
Journal, several Relations touching this Matter, as the History of a Monstrous
Calf, which was found in the Belly of its Dam, laid upon a great Stone, which
weighed more than twenty Pounds: As also that a certain sandy Earth in England
converts into a Stone such Wood as is put therein, although there is no
petrifying Spring in it. There is also mention made of two Stones which were
found in the left Ventricle of the Earl of Belcarras, one of which was of the
bigness of an Almond, and the other was one Inch broad and two in length. Mr.
Boil relates in his Essay of Firmness, several such Histories, upon which he
makes very curious Reflections. There are also several other Examples in the
Micrography of Mr. Hook, and in the Book of Helmont, entitled, De Lithiasi;
where, among other things, he relates what Pareus says of a Child petrified,
that was to be seen formerly at Paris, and which served for a Whetting Stone to
him that kept it. There might several other Histories be added, still more
surprising, if they were suspected, as that of an entire Company of Men, and of
a Company of Beasts, which, according to the Relation of Aventius and Purchase,
were converted into a Stone; and what Acosta speaks, of a Company of Spanish
Cavaliers, to whom a like Accident happened.

Dr. Beale tells us, upon this Subject, That there was an Inspection about the
Time of Easter into the Matrix of a Woman, whence a Stone was drawn, which she
carried for eight or nine Years with unsufferable Torments, of which she was
since entirely well cured. He assures, That he has seen the Stone, and that
having then weighed it in excellent Balances, he found it weighed near four
Ounces, but that its Weight is since a great deal diminished, and is become
very Light for a Stone of the Bigness. He adds, That it is of a whitish Color,
a little clearer than that of Ashes: He believes it is not much different from
that which Scaliger speaks of, and after him Mr. Boil, in his Essay of
Firmness, which being exposed to the Air, became like Plaster, as much in
Consistence as Color. It has no considerable unevennesses, and its Figure is
almost Oval, but one of the Ends is not so much like a Hen's Egg as the other,
which is bigger and more obtuse than that of a Goose-Egg. This Stone is now
given to the Royal Society, with the Certificate of the Surgeon who made the
Operation, and of several credible Persons, who were present thereat.

Micrographia: or, some Philosophical Descriptions of minute Bodies, made by
Magnifying Glasses, with Observations and Enquiries thereupon by R. Hook,
Fellow of the Royal Society; in Fol. Land.
ONE of the greatest Obstacles which is in the Progress of Natural Science, is,
that the Ancients being entirely taken up to perfect Reason, have neglected the
Knowledge of the Senses, having rather chosen to guess the most part of things,
than to see them. Notwithstanding, as the Soul knows nothing, but by the
Interposition of the Organs of the Body, the Operations of the Senses serve not
less to acquire a perfect Knowledge of Nature than those of the Mind; and they
are even more necessary, that the Wisdom of God being infinitely above the Reach
of our Imagination, it is more easy to know what it has done, than to imagine
what he has been willing to make.

To remedy this Defect, the Moderns having endeavored to perfect the
Operation, of the Senses, particularly that of Sight, which is the most
necessary of all, as it is the noblest, have invented two kinds of Glasses, the
Telescope, to draw near the Objects, which are invisible because of their
Distance; and the Microscope, to magnify those which are imperceptible,
because of their Smalness. And with these two Instruments they have discovered
more things in a few Years, than the Ancients had done with all their Reasons
for the Course of many Ages. By this means all Nature has appeared New unto us.
For the Telescope has showed us in the Firmament new Motions, new Stars, and
new Meteors: And the Microscope has discovered unto us, upon the Earth, a
little World, altogether new, and has made us perceive in each thing an
infinity of small Creatures, which are not less admirable than all those which
have been known hitherto.

The Ingenious Mr. Hook having made several curious Observations with both the
one and the other of these Instruments, but particularly with the Microscope,
has gathered them together, and communicated them to the Public in this Book,
which he has entitled Micrography, to wit, a description of small Bodies,
because he principally examines what is least in Nature.

He begins with the Point of a very fine Needle, which though it seems
imperceptible, appears by the Microscope, which he made use of, as large as the
fourth part of an Inch. The Extremity of this Point does not terminate in a
Cone, as People imagine, nor is it round or flat, but obtuse, unequal and
irregular, and resembleeth a Pin, whose End is broken. Moreover its Sides are
not eaven, as our Eyes do represent them unto us, but knotty and full of little
Cavities and Risings.

He says also, That having considered, with his Microscope, the Edge of a
Razor, well set, it appeared as thick as the Back of a Penknife, and observed
several Teeth in it. That the Surface of a Looking-glass, well polished,
appeared to him, before the Sun, to be full of Rays, and composed of an
infinity of unequal Bodies, which reflected a Light of several different
Colors. And that the best made Points, which serve in printed Books, at the
separation of Periods, appear like uneven Ovals, and not rounder^han Chestnuts.
And it is not to be wondered at, because the Files, the Stones and other Things,
which are used to polish or to make round, being composed of unequal Parts,
they must also of necessity leave several unequalities on the Surface of those
Bodies upon which they act.

He also examined some very fine Linen-Cloath, whose Threads, through the
Microscope, appeared unto him as great as Ropes; and he has observed, That
that which renders those thin Clothes so transparent, is, That there are many
Holes betwixt the Thread, almost like to the Bars which are put in the Grate of
a Window. He found out, That the Waves which appear in diverse Stuffs, upon the
highest Parts, cause a different Reflection of Light; and he remarked, That in
the Siphons and Tears of Glass: There were several curious Things, which the
brevity of this Journal will not permit to relate.

After having spoken of the Works of Art, he comes to those of Nature, to which
the Microscope is much more advantageous than to the others: For there is this
difference betwixt them, That the Works of Art being always very imperfect, and
will be only seen afar off, and the more exactly they are considered, the more
Defects are found in them: But as the Works of Nature are the Effects of an
infinite Wisdom, they do not fear to be examined, and always appear the more
admirable as they are the nearer looked upon. Mr. Hook, in this Treatise gives
several Descriptions thereof, of which there is none but what is surprising;
but as they cannot all be related here, I shall only remark some of the most
Curious.

1. He describes the Foot of a Fly, and expounds how these small Animals can
suspend themselves upon the top of a Ceiling, and thus to walk without falling.
Some have believed, that their Feet were full of a sticking Moisture, by means
of which they adhere to whatever they touch; but the true Reason is, as it has
been found out by the Microscope, That Flies have at the End of each Foot two
Talons, which easily enter into the least Pores of all Sorts of Bodies; and
moreover the Soles of their Feet are covered with an infinity of little Points,
like to the Combs of Carders, with which they easily stick to the least
unequality of the most polished Bodies.

There is nothing uglier than a Lowse, and yet the manner wherewith it is
represented unto us by a Microscope, is as curious as this Insect is hedious in
it self. Mr. Hook has drawn the Figure of it with the Microscope, because it
being a Foot and a half long, if shows better than others how far this
Instrument can enlarge Objects.

2. A Lowse has two Eyes placed behind its Horns, quite contrary to other
Animals; for as it has no Eyelids, the Hairs through which it passes, would
hurt its Sight continually. It seems to have some Appearance of Chops. Its Paws
are covered with a Shell, as that of Lobst^^s, and have two Talons, with which
it graspeth the Hair, when it walks on the Head. It has upon its Breast a
light transparent Substance like unto Horn, and upon its Belly a Skin spotted,
through which may be seen, that the white Spot, which perhaps is the Liver of
this Insect, is agitated with a continual Motion. Mr. Hook having shut up in a
Box one of these Animals for two Days, without giving him any thing to eat, and
having afterward put it upon his Hand, this Insect thrust its Snout into the
Skin, without seeming to open any Chop, and immediately a little Torrent of
Blood was perceived, which passed directly and speedily from its Snout into its
Belly by means of a kind of Pump, which seemed to be the Heart or the Lungs.
Through the Scale of the Breast were plainly seen several Vessels, which
swelled up with this Blood, which was carried and distributed into diverse
Parts. Mr. Hook remarks, that the Digestion is made in the Body of this Insect
with a marvelous quickness: For the black and thick Blood was seen, whilst it
sucked it; when it was in it is Guts, it appeared of a fair red; and the Part
which was distributed in the Veins, was all white. He adds, that although its
Snout was not the 25th part as long as Line, and that it did not thrust it
quite through the Skin; yet the Blood was seen to come out not only in the
Skin, but even unto the very Cuticle.

3. The Structure of the Sting of a Be, is not less marvelous. It is composed
of two parts, whereof the first has several Knots or Joints, and besides that
several Pricks which perfectly resemble the Nails of a Cat, and which the Fly
stretches or draws in as it lists. The other part is the point of a Sting
which is shut up in the first as a Sword in its Scabbord, and which is also
armed on each side with Nails. It is they which stop the Sting in the Wound
which the Fly has made, and which hinder that it cannot draw it back. But that
which chiefly makes the Pain, is a corrosive and venemons Liquor which is shut
up in the Scabbord, and which being pushed into the Wound gnaweth the Fibers,
and causes the Inflammation.

4. The Leaf of a Nettle has much Relation with a Sting. For this Author
remarks, that it is covered with very sharp Pricks, whose Base, which is a
little Sack or Bladder of a flexible Substance, and almost of the Figure of a
wild Cucumber, includes a sharp and venomous Liquor; but the Point is of a
very hard and strong Substance, and has a hole in the middle, by which this
venomous Liquor runs into the part which is pricked, and excites Pain therein:
Which may be easily perceived with a Microscope, if one presses with a Finger
the end of these Pricks against its Base: For then through these Pricks which
are transparent, this Liquor is manifestly seen to mount and to descend, as Mr.
Hook assures he has often made Experiment.

5. This Author having examined with the Microscope several of its Hairs, has
found that they were all almost round. That at the End they were bigger than
toward the Root; that from one End to another they appeared transparent as a
Horn; and that there are no Threads to be seen in their Root, as in that of
several Plants. He adds, that they are solid, and that he has discovered no
Cavity in them, no more than in the Bristles of an Hog. But that the Beard of a
Cat being cut, has just as the Elder-Tree, a large Marrow in the middle; yet
the Weaving thereof is so close, that there can be no appearance of Pores
perceived therein.

6. As the Opinions of Philosophers are very different, touching the manner
whereby Fire is produced when one strikes Fire, this Au^hor made several
Experiments to find out the Truth of it. Having then for this Design struck
Fire upon a leaf of white Paper, he found at the place where the Sparkles were
fallen, little black Spots, but Luminous; and having considered them each in
particular with a good Microscope, he found that they were little Bowls round
and shining, among which there were two different from the others; the one
whereof was stuck by one end to little bit of Steel pretty long; the other was
but a Blade of Steel very small. Thereupon this Author makes diverse Arguments,
and lastly he concludes, That these Sparkles are nothing else but Particles of
Steel or of a Flint Stone, which are sometimes made red, sometimes melted, and
even often vitrified, according to the different degrees of Heat, which Motion
produces. And to confirm this Opinion, he after having made some File-dust of
Steel to pass over the Flame of a Candle, he saw shining Particles fall from
them like unto Sparkles of a Flint, only that they were a little bigger.

7. But there is nothing more admirable, nor which better shows the Excellency
of a Mircroscope, than what this Author says of Mouldiness. It was never
thought that it was a heap of small Plants, and that all the Things which
appear moldy, were as so many small Meadows enamelled with diverse Flowers.
Some had round Buttons, and which seemed not to be opened; others were half
Budded; some were altogether Flowered; and there were some whose end appeared
to be broken, as if they had begun to cast their Flowers. Though they were very
near one another, each had its Root apart. Their Stalks were red, long,
cylindrick and transparent. Their Substance was very tender, and almost like
that of Mushrooms; for in touching them with a Pin they broke easily, and being
put to the Flame of a Candle three or four times, they remained whole. As for
their Odor it was strong and unpleasant, as well as their Taste.

8. A Flea has six Legs, which has three Joints each, whose Disposition is
altogether different. For the Joints of the two fore Legs enter and are
entirely trust into one another; those of the Thighs of the middle have their
Extent quite separate; but the hind Thighs have their Joints folded upon one
another as the Leg and Thigh of a Man. When the Flea leaps, it stretches at
the same time all its Legs, and its different Joints coming to unbind together
as so many Springs, cause this Leap, which some have attributed to Imaginary
Wings.

9. It is wonderful to see the quantity of small Pores, which the Microscope
discovers in a Coal. They are disposed in order, and white all over, so that
there is no Coal, how long soever it is, through which one may not blow; and if
a bit of it is broken a little short, the Light is seen through with a
Microscope. Their number is so great, that in a rank, the 18th part of an Inch
long, Mr. Hook has reckoned 150. whence he concludes, that in a Coal of an
Inch Diameter, there ought not to be less than five Millions, seven hundred,
fourscore and four thousand. It is to this great quantity of Pores, that he
attributes the blackness of a Coal: For he says, when a Body has many Pores
in which the Light is not reflected, it appears necessarily black; whereas
Blackness is nothing else but a privation of Light, or a de^ect of Reflection.

10. He says, that the other Senses may be perfected even as the Sight, by
Instruments like unto a Microscope, he pretends he has already made several
Experiments of it which have succeeded with him.

11. He makes an Infinity of fine Remarks about Colors, Light, the Moon and
the Stars, etc. which I should relate, if I had not already enlarged upon this
Book much more than usually: But as it contains many curious Things, I thought
the World would be glad to have an ample Extract thereof in this Journal.

An Extract of an English Iournal, containing some Curious Observations made by
means of the Microscope.
IN a late Journal we have spoken at large of the Observations which Mr. Hook
made with the Microscope. Mr. Lewenha^k imparts now those which he has made
with the same Instrument.

1. He examined certain yellow Grounds of England and Flanders, near the City
of Tournay, whereof China is made, and he found that it was composed of several
small Globes a great deal less than the least Grains of Sand. Those of the
Earth of Flanders, were less than those of the Earth of England; but he
observed yet less near Esphen, whereof they make pretty strong Pots, and which
is easily changed into Glass. This Ground cannot be used to make China, because
it is too red; but it is good, being mixed with the two other Earths whereof we
have spoken. This Earth is not so pure as the others, it is mixed with other
parts which it seems are of rotten Wood, and Particles of Sand.

2. He found that in the white of the Eye of a Beef there were some little
Globes. That the Cristallin was also composed as round Scales laid upon one
another; and that these Scales were composed also of small Globes. He
discovered the Vitriol Humor was much fuller of little Globes than the Watery
Humor. The Cartilage being dried, he saw also that it was composed of
Cristallin little Globes very even among themselves; and if this Membrane
suffers some Separation, it seems to him as if it was wet. These little
transparent parts appear white when they are laid upon one another, as
Cristalling appears white when it is dry or broken, and appears so no more when
it is wet. And he has found out that all the other Tunicles were also composed
of even little Globes united to one another.

3. The Optic Nerves in which he has remarked small Arteries, appeared to him
to be composed of Threads pretty tender and a little strait. These Threads are
like wise composed of little Globes.

4. What he has remarked upon the SeaWater which is on the side of
Berkelse-Sea, is also very Curious. The bottom of the Sea is very marshy in
that place: In Winter it appears very clear; in the middle of Summer it begins
to whiten, and in the midst are seen as it were small green Clouds. Mr.
Lewenhook having filled a Glass with this Cloudy Water, and stirred it, after
having let it settle a whole day, has remarked in it as it were Strings of a
Spiral Figure, and thick as Hairs, composed of small green G^obules, where were
also an Infinity of small Animals, round or oval figured, which were of
different Color, and moved on all sides, but very slowly, and which appeared a
thousand times less than the least of those which are seen in Cheese, Fruits,
or in Moldiness.

5. Finally, having exhaled the Solution of Salt, he found that the Saline
Particles were either Round, Pyramidal, or Quadrangular and very polished.

An Extract of an English Iournal, containing some Observations made upon the
Salts and Oils of mixed Bodies.
MR. Coxes, who made these Observations, finds much probability in the Opinion
of Vanhelmont, who says, That the variety of Brimstone commonly makes the
diversity of Species in the Mixed; and that the most considerable Changes are
made by the Separation of a Sulphurous Nature, and by the Introduction of a new
one. This Brimstone is not a simple Body, but inflamable and in form of Oil.
This Oil, which is drawn commonly with the Water, includes the principal
Qualities of the mixed. But the Salts, as well fixed as volatile, restore the
Earth and Water to their elementary Simplicity, if they retain not something of
this Specific Oil. So the fixed or volatile Salts are different among
themselves, but proportionably as they yet retain some mixture of these Oils.

Let one take some volatile Salt whatever, let it be sublimated in a Vessel of
Glass high enough for a gentle Heat, let this Operation be reiterated several
times, it shall be found that there still remains some Oil at the bottom of
the Vessel, and the Salts being deprived of this Oil, shall become very
homogenious. But because it is hard to rule the Fire so justly, that no Oil
shall be mixed with Salts, they may all be reduced to a certain Simplicity by a
more easy way.

Spirit of Salt well rectified, must be poured upon a certain quantity of
volatile Salt a little purified. When there shall be no more Ebullition, and
that the Salt shall be enough, the Phlegm must be separated from it, which is
done with a mild Heat. This Phlegm will carry with it some portion of the
volatile Salt. Sublimate what remains, and you shall have good Armoniack Salt.
Mix it with an equal quantity of good Alcali Salt well calcined, or pour upon
it good and strong Grounds of an Alcali, because the volatile Salts do not so
well mix with the fixed as the Acids do, the least degree of Heat shall
sublimate the volatile Salt deprived of all its Oil, and by this means all the
volatile Salts are reduced to certain common Proprieties.

What all these Artificial Operations do, is yet more easily effected in the
Air, which is full of volatile Salts which are sublimated from Subterranean
Places, from Plants, from Animals. The Air depriveth these Salts of their Oil;
but being dissolved in the Rain or in the Dew, and carried in Vegetables, they
are specified by the other Principles, though they may be easily reduced by
Nature or Art to their first Simplicity.

The same Uniformity is the Spirits that have the taste of Wine, which are
nothing but the most subtle Oil of Vegetables, which are as it were pounded by
Fermentation into lesser Branches than the Oil: For before the Fermentation
there is Oil drawn from it, but not Winy Spirits; after the Fermentation there
remains a little Oil; and even after the Fermentation of a Plant, when you
draw the Oil from it, you will scarcely have any thing of the Winy Spirit. When
this Spirit takes with it some part of this Oil whose Branches remain whole, it
puts difference among the Spirits; but when after several Digestions or
reiterated Distillations, these oleagenous parts are cut into lesser Branches,
or that the degree of Heat which raises the Winy Spirits cannot raise those
grosser Oils, what difference soever there was in the whole Bodies, these
Spirits became very homogenious; and this is seen in changing the Oils of
Vegetables into a Winy Spirit, which is done in several manners. Put upon an
Ounce of the essential Oil of a Vegetable, two or three Pounds of the Spirit of
Wine well dephlegmed; the Spirit immediately, by a simple Agitation, devoureth
this Oil and changes it in its Nature.

New Experiments drawn from the English Iournal.
ONE of the principal Virtues of Salts which are drawn from Plants, is to make
the Image of these Plants to revive and appear in all its Beauty. It has been
doubted a long time whether the Thing can be done. Some do even as yet doubt
thereof: But the Experiments which have been made in France, Italy, Denmark,
and elsewhere, suffer us no more to doubt on it. Mr. Coxes has lately made some
in England upon this Subject, and he writes that having drawn a great deal of
Salt of Fern, and dissolved a part thereof by the damp Air, after having dried
it, the rest of the Grounds being filtred became as red as pure Blood. This
color denoted, that there remained many Sulphurous Parts. He put this Solution
into a great Vessel or Bottle of Glass, where after it had rested five or six
Weeks, a great part of the Salt fell to the bottom and became browner, whereas
the upper remained white. And then it was that upon the Surface of this Salt,
there was seen to rise up a Fern in great quantity.

When the Fern was burned, it was as yet betwixt dry and green: So the Salt
was, as it were, Tartarous and Essential; being dried by a great Fire it
diminished much in Weight, and became whiter, because there had been before
some Oil and some Acid.

Having mixed equal Parts of these Ashes which came from the North, and which
are called in English Potashes, with Armoniack Salt, there arose immediately a
volatile Salt; and some time after he saw appear a Forest of Pines, Deals, and
of another kind of Trees, which he knew not.

An Extract of a Letter of Mr. Hugens of the Royal Academy of Sciences, to the
Author of the Iournal of the Learned, concerning the Catoptrick Glass of Mr.
Newton.
I Send you the Figure and Description of Mr. Newton's Telescope. As to my
Opinion, which you desire to know touching this new Invention, though I have
not as yet seen its effect, I think I may say it is Fine and Ingenious, and
that it will succeed, provided there be Matter found for the Concave
Looking-Glasses, which may be capable of a lively and even polishing, as that
of Glass, which I do not despair of.

The Advantages of this Glass, over those wherein nothing but Glass is
employed, are first, That the Concave LookingGlass, though of a Spherick
Figure, gathers much better the paralleled Beams toward one Point, than our
Spherick Glasses do; as this may be Geometrically demonstrated. Whence it
follows, that of two Glasses of the same length, whereof the one shall be of
this new manner, and the other an objective Glass as usual; the first bearing a
greater opening, may unite much more Beams coming from the Objects, though the
little Looking Glass hinders some of them; and yet it may be made to magnify
much more than the other. So that with the half or the third part of the length
of the old Glasses, or perhaps less, the usual Effect may be had.

The second Advantage, is, That by this Invention an unseparable Inconveniency
of the objective Glasses is avoided, which is the Inclination of both their
Surfaces to one another. For though this Inclination is little, yet it hinders
the Beams which pass toward the sides of the Glass, and it would hinder still
more, if we should make use of Hyperbolick or Elliptick Glasses, which would
require greater Overtures.

I reckon for a third Advantage, That by the Reflection of a Metalline Looking
Glass, there are no Beams lost, as in the Glasses which reflect a notable
quantity thereof by each of their Surfaces; and besides that, do not intercept
one part by the obscurity of their Matter.

And this Matter being also so difficult to meet with the Goodness which is
requisite for long Glasses, because for the most part it is not altogether
homogenious, is a fourth Advantage of this Catroptick Glass, that in the Metal
there needed no other Goodness but that of the Surface.

Those who have seen Mr. Newton's Glass, do observe, that there is a little
difficulty to order it toward the Objects. But this may be easily remedied by
fastening thereto a Glass which may be exactly parallel to it, by which the
Object may first be sought for: It is true that for this there needs a second
Observator, if the Catropick Glass is big; because that he that looks at it,
ought to be at the end which is raised on high: But this Incommodity is
inconsiderable, considering the usefulness of the Invention. If instead of
Spherick Looking Glasses, there could be had parabolick ones, exactly formed
and polished, these Glasses would have the effect which were hoped for from the
Ecliptic or Hyperbolick Glasses; and I believe it much easier to succeed in
Looking Glasses.

Experiments about Freezing of Water, made by Mr. Mariotte, of the Royal
Academy of Sciences.
AS the Royal Academy make every Winter Observations of the Cold, Mr. Mariotte,
to contribute to the Design of the Assembly, has applied himself to examine
how Ice is formed; and for that end he has made several curious Experiments,
whose principal ones I shall relate.

EXPERIMENT I.
He put common Water into a Vessel of Brass which was about 8 Inches broad and
6 high, and having exposed it to the Air during a hard Frost, some time after
he perceived, that long Shreds of Ice begun to form, some whereof did go from
the Top to the Bottom, others ran across, some more fastened to the Bottom and
Sides of the Vessel, and others crossed in diverse Places. Afterward he saw
these Shreds to widen into very thin Blades; and having softly poured out the
Water, by stooping the Vessel, that so he might the better see the Blades of
Ice, which were formed at the Bottom, he found that they all had the Breadth of
about three Lines, and that they were separated from one another by equal
Intervals, whose Breadth was also about three Lines.

EXPERIMENT II.
The same Vessel having been filled again with new fresh Water, and exposed to
the Frost, there formed immediately Ropes and Blades of Ice as before; and
afterward the Blades of Ice, which were at the bottom, grew large by little
and little, and composed a continued Ice, which covered all the Bottom of the
Vessel. The Blades of Ice which were on the Top of the Water, were also joined
together; but there was about the middle of the Surface of the Water a little
Place which froze not, and the Ice was more than an Inch thick when this little
Place not frozen. The Water went out by little and little through this Hole,
and freez'd round it according as it was spread; so that the Hole became still
narrower, and there was was made round about it a Rising of Ice, about an Inch
high, which formed a little Channel. Finally, the Hole being quite stopped, the
Ice some time after broke with a Noise, before all the Water which was in the
middle was frozen.

EXPERIMENT III.
To find out what made the Water come but by this little Channel, and what
broke the Ice, Mr. Mariotte took a great Glass, of a Conick Figure, and having
filled it up with Water, within three or four Lines of the Brim, he carefully
considered the Progress of the Congelation. After that small Ropes were formed,
and then small Bars of Ice, whereof some were cut like Parsley Leaves, and
others dented as a Saw, several small Bubbles of Air began to appear at the
Bottom and at the Sides of the Glass, and magnified by little and little: Some
of these stayed engaged in the Ice, others were loosed and raised up to the
Top. The more the Water freezed the more Bubbles were formed; yet the Water
came still forth by the little Channel, and as it freezed so it spread: The Ice
in fine became so high round about the small Channel, that on one Side it
passed the Brims of the Glass, so that the Water ran over it. Then he made
another Channel with a Pin at the other Side, where the Ice was less thick, and
the Water immediately went that way. This Channel was renewed from Time to
Time, and the first Hole, by which the Water passed no more, was entirely shut
up. Afterward the Water stopped also the second Channel, which was no more
renewed; and yet there were Bubbles that were formed in the Water, which was
not as yet frozen, and raised unto the Top of the Water. Some time after the
second Hole was stopped, he heard the Ice crack, and found that it was cleft at
the Top at two Places; that about two thirds of the height of the Glass the
Ice above was entirely separated from that which was under, by a Space of about
two Lines; and that in the midst of the Ice there was a little Water, which was
not yet frozen. He remarked also, That in all this Ice there was an infinite
Number of little Bubbles, which ended in a Point, and which extended almost all
toward the middle of the Glass; and that at the Place which the Water had
frozen last, the Ice was whitish, and a little transparent, almost as Snow.

By these Experiments we judged, That the reason why the Water included in the
Ice raised and spreaded at the Top, was, That the Bubbles which were formed,
coming to stretch, pressed and pushed it out; that the little Channel had
remained a long while without freezing, because the Water which continually
passed through it, kept it open: That when the Ice had at last stopped this
Passage, the Bubbles, whose number always increased, was at last too much
pressed, and by the Strife they made to extend themselves, had broke the Ice:
That it was also this same Strife, which had made the Ice above to part from
that beneath; and that the whiteness of the Ice, which was last formed,
happened because there were many of these Bubbles mixed with it.

If it be asked, Whence these Bubbles come? he answers, That they are formed of
an Aerial Matter, with which the Water is all full, as is seen by Experiment of
the Void; for if there is a Glass full of Water put into a Recipient, there are
seen many such Bubbles come out of the Water when the Air is pumped: And the
same thing happens when there is Water put to boil on the Fire. It will
perhaps be said, That in boiling Water these Bubbles come from the Fire: But
Mr. Mariotte has seen several of these Bubbles stay more than six Weeks at the
Bottom of a Dish filled with Water, without any notable diminishing in bulk,
although the Dish was no more on the Fire, but exposed to a pretty cold Air;
whence he concludes, That these Bubbles are not Particles of the Fire. It might
also be doubted whether they come from the Matter of the Vessel, or from the
Air which is contained in these Pores. This Doubt, which seems pretty well
grounded, gave him an occasion of making a curious Experiment: He poured Oil
into a little Vessel, and with the Head of a Pin he put softly a Drop of Water
over this Oil. Having afterward put the Vessel on the Fire, he saw no Bubbles
come from the Oil, but he saw a great many come from the Drop of Water: When
the Oil was more warmed, the Drop of Water fell to the Bottom, and Bubbles
continued to come from it. But what is wonderful, a little after there fell out
a kind of Fulmination, and at the same instant the Top of the Oil was all
covered with Bubbles, whereof some were bigger than the whole Drop of Water.
This Experiment made him to judge, That the Matter, of which the Bubbles were
formed was contained in the Water, and that it changes into Air when the Water
is frozen, or boiled, or that the Air about it is pumped out, in making the
Experiment in the Void.

It remains to know how the Bubbles are formed, why they swell, and how the
Ropes are made, which appear at the beginning of Freezing; which he also easily
expounds, according to the same Principles. He says, There is a great
likelihood that the fluidity of the watery Liquors comes from that their Parts
are continually agitated by the Motion of this Aerial Matter, and that this
Motion is maintained by Heat; whence it follows, that when there happens a
great Cold, this Motion becomes so weak that it can no longer agitate the Parts
of the Water, so that they stick to the Vessel, and then they join to one
another; and thence comes these Ropes and Bars of Ice, which are seen to appear
when the Water begins to freeze: Then the Aerial Matter is disingaged from the
Water, which freezeth; and as the Spirits of new Wine, being separated from the
Gross Matters of the Wine, put themselves into Motion, and make the Wine come
out by the Bung-Hole or Break the Barrel, if they have not Passage given them;
so this Aerial Matter in dilating makes the Water come out by the little Hole,
which remains open, and where this Hole is stopped, it breaks the Ice, which
keeps it too pressed. To show that there is no other Cause of this Rupture, Mr.
Mariotte made the following Experiment.

EXPERIMENT IV.
He put fresh cold Water into the Vessel, which he had made use of in the two
first Experiments, and when the Water was altogether frozen above, so that
there remained no Channel, he pierced the Ice with a big Pin; there came
immediately out a Spout of Water more than two Inches high, which took away the
Pin which remained in the Hole. He continued to pierce the Ice from Time to
Time, until the water was altogether frozen, and after that he left it exposed
to a very cold Air, two Days and two Nights successively; but the Ice burst
not, though other Ice which had not been pierced, burst just by it.

EXPERIMENT V.
He was minded to see if there needed many of these Bubbles to break the Ice;
and for that end having set another Water to freeze in the same Vessel, he
pierced the Ice from Time to Time: When the Water was frozen almost all over,
he drew the whole Ice out of the Vessel, having heated it a little, and left it
exposed to the Air, without piercing it any more. A quarter of an Hour
afterward he heard it break, and found it separated into two Parts, almost
equal; in each of which there was a Cavity of about an Inch diameter, which was
the Space occupied by the Bubbles, and the rest of the Water which remained
unfrozen. The Ice was above the Fingers thick, all round about; and yet the
Bubbles which were formed of the little Water which remained, did nevertheless
break it.

EXPERIMENT VI.
Many Persons have endeavored to make Burning-Glasses of Ice, but it is hard
to succeed, because Ice is commonly imperfectly Transparent. Mr. Mariotte
having judged by the precedent Experiments, That if the Aerial Matter was
exhausted, which is in the Water before it was exposed to the Frost, one might
have very pure Ice; and he was minded to make a Trial of it: Wherefore he
boiled some clean Water upon the Fire, for about the Space of half an Hour, to
make the Aerial Matter evaporate, and then exposed it to a very cold Air. Very
near this hot Water, he put as much cold into another Vessel, to compare them
together: The cold Water begun to freeze before the hot Water had as much as
cooled, and there were formed a great many Bubbles. The hot Water also freezed
at last, but the Ice was two Inches thick on all Sides, before any Bubles were
formed, so that it was perfectly transparent: He put a bit of this Ice into a
little Concave Spherick Vessel, and having set this Vessel near the Fire, he
made the Ice on one Side to melt by little and little, until it had taken a
Unequal Spherick Figure: He did as much on the other side, turning the Ice
often, and pouring the Water on it from Time to Time, according as the Ice
melted. When the Ice had a Unequal Figure, pretty uniform, he took it by the two
Edges with a Glove, that the heat of his Hand might not so soon melt it; and he
exposed it to the Sun. This Experiment had the Success he expected, for in a
very short Time, by the Heap of this Ice he made some fine Powder to take Fire,
which he had placed in its Focus or Point where the Rays met together. It is
true, that notwithstanding all the Care which may be taken, it is impossible to
make all the Aerial Matter to evaporate from the Water, and to hinder that some
Bubbles do not form in the middle of the Ice; yet there is always a
considerable Part on it which is perfectly Transparent.

An Extract of a Letter of Mr. Hugens, of the Royal Accademy of Sciences, to
the Author of the Journal of the Learned, touching the Figure of the Planet
Saturn.
THE last Conjunction of this Planet with the Sun happened the twelfth of March
past of 22 Degrees 35 Minutes of Pisces, and the great Obliquities of this
Place from the Zodiac to our Horizon, when it rises, is the Reason why it was
almost three Months before it was seen in a clear Morning; for it was but the
fifth of June when Mr. Cassini observed it the first Time, the Arms of Saturn
being already visible and large, it was judged they were re-established a long
Time before. He remarked also upon the North Side of the Descus of Saturn a
little Tract of Shadow, which agrees as well as the re-establishment of the
Arms, with what is mentioned elsewhere, concerning the Ring with which, I
suppose, Saturn is surrounded. But because this Hypothesis is chiefly confirmed
by the Observations which have been lately made, whereof some have not been as
yet published, you will suffer me to relate them on this occasion, with the
Reflections I have made thereupon.

In the Year 1671. Saturn appeared round, without Arms or Handles, as I had
foretold it fourteen years ago, when I published my System; though this
happened two Months sooner than I expected, to wit, from the beginning of the
Month of May. Afterward an Intermission was perceived in the round Figure,
which I had not seen before, and it had been hard for me to do it, having
observed Saturn but for one Year only, when I writ these Predictions: But you
know that as soon as I heard that the Arms were returned, which Mr. Cassini
observed on the eleventh and fourteenth of August, I said, that assuredly he
would take them up again in a little Time, which was also found to be true; for
about the fourth of November the Arms of Saturn were to obscure that I doubted
whether they appeared as yet, though Mr. Cassini assures he had seen them the
thirteenth of December following, after which the round Figure continued until
Saturn hid himself in the Beams of the Sun. This Last Eclipse of the Arms
proves chiefly the Truth of my Hypothesis, seeing it may well be judged, it
would have been hard for me to foresee this second Change so near the first, if
I had not known what had been its true Cause. Besides, that the manner it self
wherewith the Arms were lost this second Time, was precisely such as I have
established in my System; for they were seen to lose by little and little their
Brightness, though they remained always large enough to be seen; which was a
certain Mark that the Beams of the Sun lighted very obliquely the Surface of
the Ring of Saturn, which was turned toward us, and that at last they lighted
no more, but the other opposite Surface. In the Precedent Apparition of the
round Figure, from the end of May unto the fourteenth of August, the Arms were
not become invisible for want of being lighted, but because our Sight was very
little or not at all raised upon the Surface of the Ring, which the Sun looked
upon.

All these Reasons cannot be understood but by those who have taken the Pains
to examine attentively what I have written thereof in the System of Saturn; and
it is for them that I shall adhere yet, that as to the Lines of the Equinoxes
or of the round Apparition of Saturn, which Line is made by the Intersection of
the Ring, and of the Draught of the Orb of this Planet, there have been
hitherto no Observations made, which oblige me to place it elsewhere, but at the
20* Degree of Pisces and the Balance, which is the situation I have given it in
Writing the System. Every Time that the Place of Saturn meets in these Places
of the Zodiac, it ought to appear round and even, it is only two Degrees or
thereabouts from it. For the Observations of the last Year, 1671. oblige me to
straiten thus these Limits, which I had in Times past established six Degrees;
which I had done to save some Observations of Galileus and Gassandus, whose
Prospects have been of less effect than I had dared to suppose them. According
to these last Limitations the Appearances of the round Form of Saturn ought to
last less than by my former Predictions, so that in 1685. it will not be at the
beginning of March but only at the Month of July, about the End of the
Appearance of Saturn, that he shall be seen to lose his Arms, which he shall
recover in the Month of November; and so in the Year 1701. it cannot be seen
round but in June, at the beginning of his Appearance, and from the Month of
August his Arms will begin to grow again.

Before I end, I shall add, That the Table which I have given of the Motion of
the small Moon or Star, which accompanies Saturn, and which turns round about
him in sixteen Days forty seven Minutes, has been hitherto found so
conformable to the Observations, that I cannot as yet see whether I ought to
add to it or diminish from it.

An Extract of the Registers of the Royal Accademy of Sciences, containing some
Observations which Mr. Perrault made concerning two remarkable things which
were found in Eggs.
THE first Observation is upon a little Egg, which was found in a great one,
and was about as large as a little Olive; it was also of the Form of an Egg,
only a little longer in Proportion than Eggs commonly are; but the End which is
the sharpest in Eggs, was so much more in this: When it was first found in the
big one, which enclosed it, it had no Shell; it was only covered with a hard
and thick Membrane, which became hard in a very small Time as the Shell of all
Eggs. The Matter wherewith it was filled was not Yellow, as it is common in
other Eggs, but White and Serous, such as is that of Eggs which are found in an
Ostrich, when she is near laying, or such as are those that are Barren and
Corrupted.

Another Observation is, of an Egg, in which a Pin was found enclosed; and the
Place by which it got in was not to be seen. This Pin was covered with a
whitish Crust, of the thickness of the third Part of a Line, which gave it the
Form of a Bone of a Frog's Thigh. Under this Crust the Pin was Black and a
little Rusty.

The great Number of Examples which we have of the easy Penetration which
Living Bodies are capable of suffering by the Dilatation of their Pores, may
make it credible, that the Small Egg entered the Covering of the Great one
without Difficulty, notwithstanding the little Disposition which its blunt
Figure gave it for penetrating; and that the Pin passed through the Body of the
Hen without wounding her, though its pointed Figure was very capable of doing
it.

It appears that the insensible Motion of Things which are pushed by little and
little produces these two marvelous Effects. It is seen, that the Parts of the
Plants, although blunt (such as the Points of Sparrow-grass) penetrate the most
hard Earth by the slow Strife they make; and there are Persons who thrust
sharp-pointed Pins up to the Head in their Arms and Legs, without Pain, because
they are used to it by little and little. It seems, nevertheless, That nature
finds more safety to make blunt things pass, which are capable only of dilating
the Pores of Living Bodies, than those which by their Figures are more sharp;
and this is seen by the Care it has to make, as it were, a Case to the Point
of a Pin, which we speak of: And we have, moreover, observed a like Providence
in the Dissection of a Duck, in whose Ventricle we have found a great Knot of
Ribbons, made of Thread and Gold-Lace, which being a Weaving of small Bars of
Metal, capable of tearing the Skin of the Ventricle and Intestines, each Bar
was covered as with a little Leather, which took the Roughness away; yet we
have further remarked in the Ventricle of an Ostrich, That two coined Pieces,
which it had swallowed, seemed only to have been kept a long Time, and were not
covered with this Crust, so much as in the very Places of their Cavity, because
perhaps these Pieces of Metal were not capable of hurting the Body their
Figure; there being some Reason to believe, That things which hurt the Parts by
their asperity, make a Salt come out capable of causing the Coagulation of the
Humor, whence this Crust is produced.

Howbeit the Examples of Penetration, which blunt Bodies may make, and the
Histories which we have of this Nature, about Bodies swallowed and entered, by
Places where there is no apparent opening; render this Thought probable, That
the little Part, which was found harder about the Point than the Film of an Egg
is, ready to descend into the Channel called Oviductus, might penetrate these
Films, being pushed on softly and insensibly.

An Extract of an English Iournal, containing some very Curious Remarks made by
Dr. Grew, about the Structure and Vegetation of Plants.
THE First of these Remarks is, That in Plants there are organick Parts,
somewhat like those of Animals; so that according to him one may say, they have
Entrails, a Heart, a Liver, etc.

2. That all the Entrails are not of the same kind, but that they contain
diverse Liquors, and that the Concurrence of two Liquors particularly different,
is not less necessary for the Vegetation and Nourishment of Plants than for
that of Animals.

3. That the whole Body of a Plant, in respect to its Structure, is like a
Piece of Lace, in the same Form as it appears upon the Cusheon. The Substance
of the Liver and the Parts which are about it, are like so many small Threads;
those which are nea^ unto the Heart turn on both Sides, and form diverse little
Bladders of the Barks, like to small Threads that are turned and moved in making
Lace, and cause the little Holes which appear in it.

4 That the Juice supplying the Place of Blood in Plants, there is a continual
Profusion made on it, and a Circulation very much like the Blood in Animals.

5. That the Motion of the Air in Plants is not less necessary for their
Vegetation than the Motion of the Juice; that it enters into it by the Trunk,
and particularly by the Root, from whence it is distributed into all the Parts
of the Plant.

6. That the Juice is not always the same, that it is at first like Oil,
afterward like Milk; and that it is apparent from the grosest Parts of the
Juice, which are thus found, the Matter of Rosin and Gum are produced upon the
Body of Trees.

7. That the Motion of the Juice ascends up to the Top of the Branches by the
newest Fibers, which compose the last Circle which is formed in the Body of the
Tree; and he pretends, That there are so few of them in the oldest Fibers, that
it may be said they are rather filled with a kind of Vapor than a true Liquor:
Notwithstanding as this Vapor moistens the sides of these old Fibers, yet it
does not nourish them; and it is for this Reason that Onions and other such
like Roots, being only placed in a moist Air, increase and grow.

An Extract of a Letter written from Florence, concerning a prodigious Fire in
the Air.
AN Hour after Sunset, there appeared in the City of Florence, in Tuscany, so
great a Brightness, by the means of a prodigious Fire which run in the Air,
that it was thought, by a new Miracle, the Day would re-appear. Every one spoke
as he thought of this new Prodigy, and gave it a Name according to his Fancy.
Some affirmed they had seen a Flying Dragon which vomited Flames, and heard his
Hissings; others called it a Column, a Beam, or a great Club of Fire; others
gave it the Name of a Fatal Comet, which foretold very great Misfortunes. But
intelligent Persons agreed, that in the middle Regions of the Air there was
seen, at the beginning, a little whitish Flame like unto a little Cloud, which
immediately darkened the Moon, and which kindling still stronger, became in a
little time of a considerable greatness and thickness.

It Is Course lasted not long. It first appeared under Arcturus, thence running
with a surprising Impetuosity against the Motion of the first Mobile, and
whistling after a frightful manner it came to the vertical Circle, and
traversed the Zodiac under the Lines of the Lobsters and Gemini; but coming at
the right Shoulder of Orion, it fell into a Cloud which was at the West, as if
it had been entirely quenched, there was no more Fire nor Brightness seen; but
during the Space of eight Minutes a great noise was heard, much stronger in
some places than in others, and which might pass for an Earthquake.

This Prodigy ought not to go for a new one in Italy; for we find that in the
same City of Florence, in 1325. a Figure, as it were a Spindle of Fire, was
seen to fly at Night in the Air, which was very big. In 1352. there was
likewise seen in the Air after Sunsetting, a great Mass of gathered Vapors,
which was accompanied with a noise as great as a Thunderclap. In 1353, and 54.
there appeared two more: The first as a great Serpent all in Fire, about one of
the Clock at Night; and the other about six at Night, like flying Fire.
Finally, in 1557. there appeared in the Air a great Vapor kindled, which was
seen throughout all Italy, and which was followed by three different Noises.

There may be a Physical Reason given for this Meteor, which ought to be put
into the number of those which are called burning Torches. It arose from the
great Heat which was at Florence about the end of that Winter, which had less
of the rigor of this Season than of the mildness of the Spring, and was warmer
than usually. For the preceding Summer having been almost without any warmth,
the Exhalations remained spread in the low Region of the Air, not being able to
rise up to the middle one. They were balanced and preserved in this first
Region by the great Humidity of Autumn. But the last forty days of the Winter
having been very dry, as we have already said, there was Heat enough for these
Exhalations to be raised higher, where they were easily inflamed, and aided by
the violence of the Winds which reigned then, by means of which they made a
violent Passage through the Clouds, which enclosed them.

Mr. Cassini had Advice that the same Phoenomen was seen at Rome, at Genoa and
Bologne, and Imola, and several other Places, the same Day and about the same
Hour that it appeared at Florence. The Relation which Mr. Vittori has sent him
from Bologne upon the Observation which he made of it himself, is almost like
to that of Florence: But as it specifieth many things which the Relation of
Florence does not, it will not be unagreeable to give here a little Abridgment
of it, which Mr. Cassini has had the goodness to communicate to me.

Mr. Vittori observed this Phoenomen at Bologne, at a quarter past one of the
common Clock, which was then an hour and three quarters after Sunsetting. It
was as large as the Moon in its full, of the color of pale Fire, and inclining
a little to Green, bright as the Sun when it is among Vapors after Rain, with
a long Tail as a sparkling Flame, its Head being a little obscure, as if it
were lighted Iron. It had a very quick Motion from the East to the West. It
lasted but a Minute of Time, and in less than a quarter of a Minute it passed
from the Constellation of Orion to Venus which was at the West, it augmented in
apparent bigness, and made a noise like to that which several Serpents do when
they are cast into the Air. Several Persons smelled an odor of Brimstone and
Bitumen.

The Tail of the Phoenomen was followed with some black Clouds, which
afterward covered the Heaven, and the same Night there happened a small Rain
which was much expected for four Months.

What Mr. Cassini finds remarkable in all this, is, that this Phoenomen was
seen at the same time from Bologne and Florence, to pass through the
Constellation of Orion: Whence he conjectures that it was very much raised, yet
it could not be said how much, because the Constellation of Orion is great, and
the Observation of Bologne marks not the Star by which it passed, as that of
Florence, even as the latter tells us nothing of the Clouds, wherewith the
Tail of this Phoenomen was followed, as we learn by that of Bologne.

An Extract of the Iournal of England, containing some new Experiments made and
communicated by Mr. Boil, concerning the Course of the Air weakened, and the
Change of Colors which are produced by its Operation, in some Dissolutions and
Precipitations.
THESE Experiments are but a Series of the Design which Mr. Boil had proposed
to himself in the Conjectures which he gave us upon some Qualities of the Air
which had not yet been observed. The two principal Things which he proposed in
these new Observations, are, to discover, 1. If even as the Corruption of some
Bodies enclosed in Vessels makes the Air to augment, as he has already marked
elsewhere, so some other Corruptions might not also weaken it by some contrary
manner. If in some Dissolutions or Precipitations, the Air might not produce
some new Phoenomen, by some Quality which had not as yet been observed.

EXPERIMENT I.
Having taken some Leaves or Dust of pure Brass, and put them into a Cristal
Glass of a Conick Figure, into which very good Spirit of Salt had been cast for
about the height of three Fingers above the Brass, the Glass was neatly shut
with a Stopper which had been made for this effect. Then it was left for some
Days upon a Window without stirring it, and some time afterward was perceived
in the Liquor a brown and obscure Color by the Dissolution of the Brass. But
this Color being vanished, the Liquor appeared like clear Water; which is also
a certain considerable Phoenomen; and then taking away the Stopper without
troubling the Liquor with any Motion, and giving thus a free axcess to the
exterior Air, the Surface of the Liquor regained in a few Minutes its first
Color, and having insensibly penetrated more deeply, all the Body of the
Liquor appeared a quarter of an Hour after, colored after the same manner. The
Glass being well restopped, the Menstruum in a few Days lost its Color; and
when it was again unstopped, it retook its first Tincture.

EXPERIMENT II.
The Liquor became more clear than usually in this second Experiment, which was
made after the same Method as the first; but the Glass having been unstopped
and the Liquor thus exposed to the exterior Air for half an Hour, the Surface
of the Liquor was found more colored than the rest: This perhaps was not
because it was exposed to the exterior Air, but because it might be doubted
whether the Air had made some Operation upon the rest of the Liquor, though it
appeared not at first to try it.

EXPERIMENT III.
The Vessel was stopped, and having left it thus two or three Hours, there was
perceived in the Liquor a Color something like Green, pretty thick, and
indifferently transparent, which it lost not, even when it was exposed to the
open Air after that the Glass had been unstopped, and that it had been left so
24 Hours. But because they might, in part, attribute this slow and imperfect
Success to the Season of the Year, which was a little too late, since 'twas
toward the middle of October, he made the following Experiment, for better
Information.

EXPERIMENT IV.
A little of the strong Spirit of Salt being preserved upon the Brass until the
Dissolution was come to a Color intermingled with red and black, he put about
three Spoonfuls of it into a Recipient which held eight times as much: The
whole having been preserved in a Void for about half an Hour, kept the same
Color; but the Vessel being opened, and the exterior Air having free Access,
the Dissolution appeared in half an Hours time turned to a very clear and
transparent Green, although we saw no precipitation of the Substance disturbed
by the Faeces.

As for the Influence of the Air, and the Knowledge of weakening and diminishing
it, by any other Method than that of Cold and Compression, just as we see it
increases by Heat and Dilatation; having often found the Menstruum which breaks
and spoils some Metals after such a manner, that it produces small Bottles or
Bubbles capable of exciting the Spring of the Air, shut up in Vessels where the
Dissolution is made: Mr. Boil found it worth his Labor to examine, whether in
some Metalic Dissolutions, where he only observed a few Bubbles almost
imperceptible, the Springs of the Neighboring enclosed Air might be satisfied.
See his Experiments.

EXPERIMENT V.
After having taken some thin Pieces of Brass, and put them with Mercury into a
Conic Glass stopped up exactly with a Clod of Earth, he turned so much of the
fermented Spirit of Urine upwards, that it swam above to the height of three or
four Fingers, and then he carefully closed up the Glass. After this he
perceived that the Mercury was much depressed, and the Stoppage having been
taken out for the Admission of the exterior Air, he saw that by this entrance
of the Air it had a manifest Effect upon the Mercury.

EXPERIMENT VI.
A certain quantity of good Brass being put into a Conic Glass, with as much
Spirit of fermented Urine as will make it swim above the Brass the breadth of a
Finger, he stopped up the Glass very exactly, placing a crooked Pipe about it,
wherein there was Mercury after such a manner as it leaned upon the bottom and
sides of the Glass: And they observed that the Quicksilver was set down in the
side of the Pipe sealed Hermetically; and that the Menstruum began to operate
very slowly upon the Brass in a very silent manner, without making any Noise or
sensible Bubbles, producing a very agreeable green Color, which continued so
the space of two or three days; but every day afterward became paler till the
Glass was unstopp'd, and the enterior Air having a free Access, the Surface of
the Liquor in four or five Minutes time reassumed an agreeable and livly Green,
which gently insinuated it self to the bottom, and in ten Minutes space changed
into a rich blue Color which worked through all the Liquor, and intermixed it
self so with the Green, that in a little time it became very dark. The Glass
being unstop'd again, the Liquor began to lose something of its Color; this
Experiment, after several Repetitions, always produced the same Effect, even
during the Night: Without one might attribute it to the Agitation of the Liquor
when the Glass is shook, following the Opinion of some, that one might raise a
fine and subtle Powder, which being precipitated from the Tincture, and thus
mingled again with the Liquor gives it its first Color.

EXPERIMENT VII.
The strong Spirit of Sal Ammoniac made without Quick Lime operates also more
easily and strongly upon the Brass than Spirit of Urine. An Experiment having
been made after the same manner as we just before related, the same Phoenomen
was not only observed for Color, but also that the same Mercury, which was
placed according to the precedent Experiment, descended, although very slowly,
for two or three days in the sealed side, until it appeared to be the fourth
part of an Inch lower than it was; and probably the descent of Quicksilver
would be greater if the Glass had not been touched, by which the completing of
the Experiment was hindered. The Event whereof, nevertheless, seemed
sufficiently to declare, that the Spring of the Air enclosed in the Concavity
of the Glass, and mixing with that which is contained in the open side of the
Pipe where the Mercury was, was weak in respect to that which was enclosed,
where it could have no Communication, since the Quicksilver hinders it on one
side, and the Glass that was sealed Hermetically, on the other.

EXPERIMENT VIII.
The same Spirit of Sal Ammoniac made without quick Lime, produces the same
Effect upon Leaves of Brass; the Glass in which they are both put being stopped
up, the Liquor assumes a gross blue Tincture; which it lost in a little time,
becoming pale and almost like common Water; whereas the Glass being opened, the
top of the Liquor appeared of a perfect Blue in a Moment; and this Tincture was
not only dispersed throughout the whole Liquor, but also continued for many
days after the Glass was stopped.

EXPERIMENT IX.
The Experiment being often showed to Mr. Boil, that the Spirit of Vinegar
with Minium of Lead, works very gently without producing any Scum, although upon
Coral and many other Bodies, it causes not only a great quantity of Bubbles,
but also a kind of strong Elasticks; He had a mind to prove if this gentle and
quiet Dissolution of the Minium would be attended with a permanent changing of
the Spring of the Air.

He one day placed the crooked Pipe with the Mercury in a Conic Glass, the
bottom of which was covered with beaten Coral and stopped it very carefully,
after having poured some Spirit of Vinegar upon the Coral; and there appeared a
quantity of Bubbles, which for some little space of time were very considerably
produced, as soon as the Menstruum began to operate upon the Coral. But these
Bubbles successively dissipated in the concavity of the Glass, and this
continual Succession so strongly shut up the Air, that that which was in the
sealed side of the Pipe also felt the Effect. After the Corrosion had ceased,
and the Compression that this new Air had made became manifestly more feeble,
and the Air shut up within the Pipe forced its way below the Mercury to a
certain Mark, it continued the space of five or six Hours; so that in this
Operation, it seemed as if Nature exercised a double compressive Power. The
first might be called Transitory and of little duration, through the agitation
of Exhalations and Vapors: The other Permanent, by the means of the Air and of
the Parts which went out, and were produced from it, excited by the Action of
the Spirit of Vinegar upon the Coral.

An Extract of an English Iournal. Some natural and remarkable Particularities
taken out of a Letter written from Dublin.
WE every day see new Effects of Thunder. But Mr. Havard relates one that was
not a little surprising. He says, that in a Vessel that went to the Barbado's,
the Compass was strangly disordered by a Clap of Thunder, which however touched
it not, but threw down one of the Masts, broke the Cords and tore the Sails, so
that this Vessel changed its Course and returned again for England, just as
they were in sight of Burmudas; Grofton that commanded, always conducting it by
this Compass, in which he could not observe the alteration that was made in the
Needle, whereof the position of both ends was changed. He had thus continued
his Course, if Mr. Havard, in the Company of whom he made his Voyage, and whose
Vessel had not been injured by Thunder, had not recalled him, and corrected by
his Compass the Change that the Thunder had made in those of Grofton. But what
was yet stranger in this Accident, was, that the new turn which the Thunder had
given to all the Needles that were in Grofton's Vessel was so strong, that though
they were turned with ones Finger to the first Situation, it would always
return with great violence to that Position which it received by means of the
Thunder, and these Compasses could never be recovered.

2. 'Twas observable that there was a notable Change in the Temperature of the
Air of America, since the Europeans went thither, and especially such Places as
the English have rendered themselves Masters of: Either it is to be attributed
to the Cutting down of the Wood, or the cultivating the Earth, which the Savage
Inhabitants took no care of, or to some unknown Cause: As it has happened in
Ireland, which being less cultivated than it was before the late and bloody
Wars of England, there being fewer People than there was, is however much more
Temperate; for it has been sometimes two or three Year without either Snow or
Ice during the Winter; whereas before that, it used to be two or three several
times in a Winter, and continue fifteen Days or three Weeks together, with so
much Violence, that not only the Lakes, but the most rapid Rivers, were covered
with Ice.

3. There is nothing more rare than a Horned Beetle. That which is found in the
Woods of Virginia, has this Particular only proper to it self, That where it
tarries upon the Body of a Tree, or ordinarily rests it self, it begins to sing
with a very shrill Voice, raising it by little and little with so much force,
till all the Wood ecchos with the sound; and afterward it diminishes with the
same proportion until it makes so gentle a Murmur that it seems almost asleep;
and then flying upon another Tree, it begins and ends his Song after the same
manner.

4. Those who believed it was a particular Quality of the Thames, only to
recover its natural Sweetness after it has been putrified, and that this wonder
is to be met with no where else, know not that the Water of New London in New
England, has the same Virtue of recovering its first Sweetness after an
Insupportable stinking.

5. M. Iosselin affirms, That the Testicles of the Animals that we call
Musquash, smells as well as Musk it self; and he pretends to maintain it by
Experience.

The Art of Navigation demonstrated by Principles, and confirmed by many
Observations drawn from Experience: By Father Deschalles, etc.
IT cannot be denied that the Ancients allowed the Loadstone to attract Iron:
But it is certain they were Ignorant of its propriety in causing the Needle
that is touched with it, to turn toward the North and the South. This Wonder
of Nature was not observed till toward the end of the twelfth Age; and one may
affirm, that the true Science of Navigation begun but since this happy
Discovery. And this is likewise the Reason why we have no Account of the
Ancient Authors that writ upon this Subject.

The time is not precisely known in which they begun in Europe to make use of
the Loadstone for Navigation. Some believe that Paul Venetian having made a
Voyage into China, about the year 1260. he brought this Invention from thence:
And that which confirms their Opinion, is, That in the beginning they made use
of 'em in Europe after the same manner; that the Chinese did also about the end
of the last Age; which was a kind of little Frog made of Linen, upon which
they let the Loadstone swim in the Water, to give it the more facility to turn
toward the North. The general Opinion is, That John Gira, Native of Amalphi,
who was a Citizen of Naples, by searching into this new Knowledge, invented the
Compass about the year, 1300. This Author pretends that its likely he might
find out the manner of using the Needle; but that the Flower de luce, which in
all Countries is placed beneath the Compass to mark the North, sufficiently
shows that the French have brought it to this Perfection. Let it be how it
will, it is certain that the great Navigations were made only in the following
Ages, by Christopher Columbus, in 1492. by Americ Vesputius some time after;
and by Magellan, in 1519. but never endeavored with more Ardour than in these
two last Ages, to bring the Art of Navigation into its utmost Perfection.

F. Deschales has collected all that has been said of it, and has treated of
it in Latin in his Mathematical Course; but as this Language is not always
familiar to those who have the Conduct of Vessels, no more than to many others
who are curious to have some Intelligence of this Art, he has voluntarily
rendered it into French much better, than those who have written since Petrus
Nonus, that famous Portuguese Mathematician, who began in the year 1530. and
have done it after an obscure, perplexed and untelligible manner.

He first establishes four Principles, upon which the whole Science depends.
The 1. whereof is the Course or Rumb that the Compass corrects, which must be
given very exactly. 2. How much way the Ship makes. 3. The Observation of the
height of the Stars. And 4. to describe the Line that the Compass makes. In
explaining these Principles, he touches all other things that regard this
Matter, so well, that in seven Books whereof this Treatise is composed, it
contains whatsoever is necessary for the Knowledge of Navigation.

He teaches, for Example, in the second Book, the manner of observing the
height of the Stars with the common Instruments, and with others which may be
very serviceable upon the Sea: To which end he gives, in the beginning of his
Book, the Principles of the Sphere necessary to Navigation.

In the third, he forgets nothing that belongs to the Compass; and in the
fourth, he explains the Nature, Proprieties and Use of the Loxodromick Lines,
that is, the secret Principle of this Art, which few Persons understand. How to
make a right estimation of the way which the Ship steers, is the Subject of the
fifth Book. In the sixth, this Author explains all the Methods of correcting
it, by the different manners of observing the Latitude. Upon which he likewise
proposes the famous Problem of the Longitude, for which the French, English and
Dutch, have profer'd so considerable a Recompense; and examins the Means that
have been made use of all along to accomplish it.

In fine, in his seventh, he teaches many practical Rules very useful upon the
Sea, as the Method of keeping a Journal, of raising the Plan of a Port, or of a
Coast all entire, the means of knowing the Hour when it is full Sea on each
Coast, the History of the Periodic and running Winds, that of the Flux and
Reflux of the Sea, etc.

He stops particularly upon this last Subject, and after having examined and
refuted the Opinions of all those that have yet treated on it, he establishes
his, which attributes the Flux and Reflux of the Sea to one of the most common
Principles, which is that of Fermentation, made in the Sea like all others of
Levin, of Wine, of Beer, etc. by the Spirits that agitate it and throw it up.
He says, that the Motion and Agitation of these Spirits ought to have its
Periods even independently of all exterior Causes, as we see in Critical Days,
and in all sorts of Fermentations: So Winds blow by Gusts and the Surges of the
Sea are unequal, the tenth being more violent than the others. And by that he
gives a Reason why Lakes have not a Flux and Reflux, the Water being very pure,
and by consequence have not these Spirits that agitate it from time to time;
and why Tides are greater in some places than others, is more difficult to
conceive, in his Opinion, than the Reason why Vines thrive more in some places
than in others.

The Moon, according to his Judgment, may determine these Spirits, and
contribute to their Agitation; from whence it comes that the Periods of the
Tides agree so exactly with those of this Planet: And he pretends it is as
probable as to say, That the Moon concurs to the Effects which cause Melancholy
in Lunaticks, by the Temperament that it produces in the Air, which is
dispersed every where; but he does not think that the Moon excites these
Spirits precisely by its Heat; for we see that an extraordinary Heat often
hinders these Fermentations. It may be, adds he, that it mingles some Spirits
with the Light which are devolved with those of the Sea: Thus we see it is not
Cold only which produces Ice upon the Water, but that certain Vapors mingling
themselves therewith, assist in the Coagulation.

An Extract of an English Iournal; containing Remarks upon Mr. Plot's History
of Oxfordshire.
THE Remarks upon Oxfordshire are only the Inventions which many Learned Men of
that Province have at diverse times made known to the Public.

The First is, An Instrument, invented by Sir Christopher Wren, to know the
Changing of the Weather, which therefore is called the Weather-Clock. This
Instrument serves also to discover the Cause of the Good or Bad Air, and to
prevent the mischievous Accidents which proceed from the last.

The Second is, Another Instrument, invented by the same Person, to know
exactly the Quantity of Rain which falls in a Years Time, in such a Space of
Earth as shall be determined.

The Third is, A Striking Clock, invented by Mr. John Jones, the Motion whereof
is caused by the Air of a Pair of Bellows; and this Air has the same Effect as
the best Spring in the World.

The Fourth is, A way how to prevent Stacks of Hay from taking Fire, and Rats
and Mice Eating of Corn.

The Fifth is, A Mill which Grinds Corn, Breaks Stones, and does other things,
all at the same Time.

The Sixth and Last is, Also a Mill which at the same Time makes Cider and
Mustard, Grinds Corn, and passes Meal through four different Shutters
altogether or separately, by the Labor of one Man and an Horse.

An Extract of an English Iournal, containing many Experiments made with
Phosphorus, prepared by Dr. Slare, of the Royal Society.
THere are two Sorts of Phosphorus, the Liquid and the Solid, which are not
materially different, being both drawn from the Body of Man.

That which is Liquid is a Substance mixed with a Liquor, which although
burning, when it is in a Solid Mass, cannot spoil, nor even heat a Hand, how
delicate soever it may be, when it is washed therewith.

If this Phosphorus be stopped very close, it preserves not its Light much
longer; nevertheless, in one of those Experiments that I have made, I observed
for five or six different and successive Times a kind of Darting, although the
Vial was close-stop'd; which made me conclude, The Experiment was the same with
the shining Phosphorus of Dr. Esholt, its Darting bearing some Resemblance to
Lightning.

The Solid Phosphorus is not materially different from the Liquid, as I have
already said, being made chiefly of Urine. I am convinced one might do as much
with the Blood, if it could be had as easily, and in as great a Quantity, since
Urine is only the Serum of the Blood, passed by the Reins.

The Substance of this Phosphorus may be made as Transparent as any Rosinous
Body, and melts in hot Water like Wax. When it is covered all over in Water, it
cease to shine, but as soon as any little part thereof escapes, and gains the
Air, it shines again, although the Vial was sealed Hermetically.

I have kept it without Water many Days in a very large Vial, and although it
always shined, its Brightness or Weight diminished not at all, or so little
that it was not discernable.

The Pieces of this solid Phosphorus are some of 'em much more inflamable than
others. Some of them one may take in ones Hand without Danger; but others, that
take Fire and burn as soon as ever they are touched, if the Hand be never so
little warm. We have seen a Piece weighing about two Drachms, which taking Fire
in a Chamber, where there was no Candle, and distant from us, light like a
Faggot, and burnt the Carpit and Table whereon it was laid. This Sort of
Phosphorus ought to be managed only by Men of Experience and Wisdom.

With that which is not so inflamable one may make Characters upon a blank
Paper, which in the Dark appear like Rays of Light; but if it comes near the
Fire these same Characters, as soon as they are warm change Dark, and continue
so for as long a Time as good Ink will.

This Light is very diffusive of it self. I have made with this new manner of
Pencil above an hundred Characters, without wasting a twentieth part of it.
Half a Grain laid upon my Hand, communicated its Brightness to the utmost
extent of it, and so continued all Night, the Hand shining also the next Day. A
Grain of this Substance exposed to the open Air flamed for seven or eight Days,
so that during the Day, shutting the Windows of my Closet, I could always
perceive it stiring, and when I looked very earnestly, I could see a whitish
Flame come out of it into the circumambient Air.

After all the Matter was consumed there remained no Cinders, but only a little
Moisture, which had an acid Taste; but having left off to consume the more
gross Portion, there was found much more Moisture, which had the Taste of the
Oil of Sulphur: This made me remember, That the greatest part of my Friends,
who saw this Experiment, called it a Sulphurous Flame. Indeed it seemed, that
in all its Proprieties it had more relation to Sulphur than Saline Concretes,
chiefly because of its inflammability, and because it did not destroy itself
nor dissolve in Water.

An Extract of an English Iournal, containing the manner how, with many
singular Experiments of Preserving Fish, Butter, Flesh, Fowls, Fruits and Roots
in a very good Estate, and for a long Time.
THis is done only by the means of Salt; upon which he observes.

1. That refined Salt is the best of all to salt Fish, because that by that it
loses its Hot, Dry, Burning, Corrosive, Mortifying Quality, so that it will
never give any Ill Taste to the Fish: And as this Salt, on the contrary is more
Lively, Sharp and Piercing than if it were not refined; it preserves the Fish
more Fresh and Cool; and even in the Hottest Country prevents its Fermenting,
which is so apt to spoil the Fish.

2. That the Brine in which they keep Herrings ought to be strong enough to
bear them up upon it; for then this Pickle surmounts and overcomes the Nature
of the Herring so strongly, that it makes it very stiff and preserves it:
Whereas on the contrary, if it is weaker, then the Nature of this Fish, it is
overcome by it, and so the Herring wastes and is spoiled.

As for the Experiments, some have been made of Eggs, Flesh, Wine and of
Fruits. Eggs being put intoa Barrel of Salt keep a long time; whereas those
that are kept in Meal soon decay and grow Musty.

Having put a Leg of Mutton and a whole Salmon into a heap of Salt, they kept
good, agreeable and fresh, for three Months together.

Wine is preserved so even in Bottles for a long time, because that the Salt
defends it in the Winter against Frosts, in the Summer against the Heat, and at
all times against such Particles of Air as are very well known to corrupt and
decay all Material Bodies.

One may, by the same means, preserve Fruits, as Oranges, if they are wrapped up
in Paper and so put into Salt.

Some have, after this manner, also preserved Artichokes, Sparra-grass, and
other such Things.

Some Curious Observations upon Insects.
ABundance of very fine Remarks may be made upon Insects; we shall only speak
here of the different manners they make use of to preserve themselves from the
rigor of the Winter.

1. Insects continue all the Winter without any Motion; so that if they are
cast out of their Places where they hide themselves in the Winter, they have
not strength enough to transport themselves* thither again; but if they are a
little warmed they assume their Motion, and rest not till they find some place
where they may continue in Security; or that the cold Air again making their
Bodies stiff, hinders them from Moving. This Cessation from Motion or Rest, is
not common to all Insects. For Bees open and shut the Gates of their little
Habitations all the Winter; and even the coldest Weather hinders them not from
seeking Food for their young Ones, which they breed in that Season. Therefore
we see their young Ones in the beginning of the Spring, which has made some say
that has kept them, that little Bees appeared in the same time as Swallows did.

2. They continue in the form of Worms not only upon and under the Earth, in
hollow Trees, between Leaves which stick together, and in Fruits, but even in
the Water, under which they are often found to be Froze and without any Motion.
But what is still more surprising, is, that Insects are of a much stronger
Constitution when they are in the form of Worms, than after their changing, and
when they become peculiar to their kind. Hence it is that the Aquatick Worm,
whereof the Fly Ephemeris is engendered, is so vigorous, that after having been
run through with a Pin it nevertheless lives some Days; whereas after its
Change without receiving any hurt, it cannot live four Hours.

3. When Insects cannot find a place that agrees with their natural
Constitution, they suffer not that little Strength they have, to decay
presently. Thus we see it happens to Worms which are found in Nut-shells. For
unless they are kept in moist Sand or Dirt, where they are hid for the Winter,
they dye not only in a little time after, but in one Night in the Air become so
hard and dry, that they may easily be reduced to Powder: The same thing happens
to the Worms that are upon the Leaves; but they make no holes in the Earth,
they only spin a kind of a Web which serves to cover them, and defend them from
the Severity of the Cold.

4. There are some which subsist in the Water only, where they continue three
entire Months without taking any Food: But if they are not capable of taking
Nourishment, it proceeds from the Weakness of their Members, or that the
Coldness of the Air congeals them, or else that the superfluous Humidity that
environs them, not being sufficiently agitated, renders them incapable of
taking any Food. From thence it comes also that they eject no Excrements;
because they taking no Nourishment, have no superfluous Humors to evacuate.

Tentamen Porologicum, sive ad Porositatem Corporum tum Animalium, tum
Solidorum detegendam: Auth. R. Boil, etc. Land. 1685.
THE Observations of Mr. Boil in proving the Existence of Pores in Animate
Bodies is very Curious; as also what he has said about the Pores of solid
Bodies.

He observes, that an equal quantity of Powder of Brimstone, Sal Ammoniac and
good quick Lime, being pulverised and mixed together in a Horn, and pounded by
little and little, until the Dust become red, it raises a Spirit, the
penetrating Fume whereof, changes the color of Brass or Silver, although covered
with a double Skin: And the same Vapor has penetrated through a Skin glued
upon Egg-shells, though there is nothing so close; and made a piece of Brass
black, which was enclosed in it. It has had the same Effect also upon this
Metal, on a piece of Silver covered with a Calves Bladder that was wet; which
has not happened when the Bladder has been dry.

A notable Example, according to this Author, of the Porosity of the Membranes
of a Man's Body, is, that of a young Gentleman, that Harvey gives the Relation
of, who had a received such a Wound in the Breast that a Hole was made thereby,
through which one might see the Motion of the Heart. He nevertheless recovered
his Health, and was afterward a General of an Army. Mr. Boil, to whom he one
day showed his Breast, which gave him an opportunity to perceive the Motion of
his Heart, said that this Gentleman gave him to observe, among other things,
that as from time to time an Injection of a certain vulnerary Liquor was made
into this Hole, the Smell and Taste of this Medicament ascended immediately to
his Mouth; and that his Breath was always touched with the Odor of some
Aromatic Powders, which he wore in a Bag upon this place, to preserve the
neighboring Parts, and keep it warm.

This agrees with what Galen himself observed of the Injection of a Hydromel
into a Wound in the Breast, that the sick Person vomited up again with a Cough:
To which Mr. Boil adds, that a strong and vigorous Man being strangled, it was
believed upon it, that there was observed in him no other Indisposition than a
little dry Cough, that he found some putrefaction in one of the Lobes of his
Lungs; but that he found them very healthful, and only in one place of the
Pleura there was white purulent Matter about the breadth of a Crown, shut up
between the Pleura and the Sides; which gave them occasion to suppose, that the
corrupted Humor had penetrated the Pleura, and produced in the Branches of the
Lungs the Irritation that had caused this little dry Cough.

The two following Matters served also as Proofs to Mr. Boil. The first is,
That a Person that had the Dropsy, attributed his Sickness to a Schirrus in the
Spleen, having been counseled by a Surgeon, to whom he complained, to apply
upon it a Sponge dipped in Limewater, and afterward squees'd out, was cured in
a little time by this means. And the second, That Mercury has been found in the
Bones of some of those that have been cured of the Venereal Distemper, by the
Frications of Quicksilver; and even in the Teeth, which a certain Person had
caused to be drawn out, after he had used some of the same Remedy.

A Treatise of the Loadstone, divided into two Parts: The first, containing
Experiments; and the second, the Reasons that may be given for it: By M. D. At
Amsterdam, in Twelves, 1687.
AS the Effects of the Loadstone were discovered before the Reasons thereof
were sought after, so the Author of this Treatise believed he ought first to
relate the most considerable Experiments that have been made concerning the
Virtue of the Loadstone; and afterward proposes the most probable means that
may be made use of to explain these Effects. He had no design to give us a new
Hypothesis for this, nor to show us any new Properties in the Loadstone; but
only to relate with as much clearness and brevity as he could, the most curious
and likely Arguments that have been hitherto Written by all the Philosophers
that have treated on it. Indeed we have not yet seen any Treatise upon this
Matter, so short, complete, and clear all at once.

p. 1. c. 1. and Seq.
After some Reflections upon the Names that the Greeks, Latins, Germans,
Italians, Spaniards, English and French, have given to the Loadstone, it is
observed, although it is to be found wherever there are Iron Mines, yet it is
not every where of the same Color. He saw some which had the Color of Iron
before it is forged, some reddish, and some that were blackish, but 'twas very
rare to find any which had much Power. The Ancients had some Knowledge of it,
and agreed that it joined it self to the Iron, but were entirely ignorant of
the Propriety it had of turning toward the Pole, because they never spoke a
word of this Propriety, and often made mention of the first. He affirms also,
that the Inventer of the Needle was one John Goia de Melphi, a Citizen of the
Kingdom of Naples near Salern; that he lived about the year, 1300. Others
attribute the Invention thereof to the Chinese, from whom Paul Venetian, a
famous Voyager, that lived in the year, 1260. brought it into Europe.

c. 5. and so on to the 17.
This is what is known concerning the Original of the Compass; he afterward
passes to the propriety of the Loadstone, which shall be related here in brief.
1. The Loadstone's uniting it self to the Iron, which is falsely called its
Virtue of attracting the Iron, since this Union is made by a true Impulsion,
and that properly speaking there is no Attraction, as the Author proves. But
that is not true that Ptolomy said, Lib. 7.
that there were Isles in the Indies, where Vessels, which have in some Parts
been joined together with Nails, have stopped, because of the great quantity of
the Stone of Hercules (a Name that is given to the Loadstone in Greek) that is
there to be found. The Author reprehends Gonzales d'Oviedo, and Olaus Magnus,
with many others, that have said something like it. 2. The Loadstone can keep
Iron or Steel suspended at a certain distance, although it never touches it. Its
false however, that the Mosque wherein Mahomet's Body is kept, is incrusted
with a Loadstone; and that his Tomb is suspended in the middle, as some
fabulous Voyagers have related: Whereas on the contrary, this Tomb is placed
upon a piece of Earth in the middle of this Mosque. The Author believes what
gave Birth to this Fable was this, that in the same Mosque there is a great
Loadstone fastened to one of the sides of the Wall, to which hangs a piece of
Silver across, that is kept there by a Chain of Steel. 3. That the Union of the
Iron to the Loadstone is reciprocal, and that one may as properly say that the
Iron unites it self to the Loadstone, as that one piece of Loadstone unites it
self to another. He proves it by diverse Experiments, that he makes very clear
and sensible by Figures, which he has taken care to give, as often as he
relates any Experiment. 4. The Loadstone always presents one side to the North,
and the other side to the South. It seems this Property of the Loadstone had
not been discovered, only by chance, leaving it floating upon the Water in a
little Gondula. Having thus observed the Poles of the Loadstone, he confirms
himself in his Thought, by throwing upon it the Filings of Steel, which are
otherwise disposed toward these places than others; and by other Experiments,
whereof the Author relates some. 5. The Poles of the Loadstone are ordinarily
unequal in respect to their Power, and also very often diametrically opposite,
although it sometimes happens that they are situated irregularly enough. 6. The
Loadstone communicates its Virtue to Iron that it is rubbed with, although
removed from it to a certain distance. The Author shows what Method must be
taken to touch a piece of Iron well with the Loadstone. 7. The Loadstone does
not only communicate to Iron its Property of drawing other Iron, but also gives
it Poles which direct it toward those of the World, as is clearly seen by the
Compass: Upon which he observes, that these Poles differ from those of the
Loadstone, that is, that the point of the Needle which should be touched on
that side of the Loadstone, which they call the North, as the Loadstone does,
but toward the South, and so the other on the contrary. 8. When a Loadstone is
cut in two Parts following its Axis, when they join it together again, one part
turns almost perfectly to a Situation opposite to what it did before it was
cut, and when it is cut perpendicularly to the Axis, new Poles are made in the
Faces of the Section. 9. Having presented to the Poles of one Loadstone the
Poles of another Loadstone, they join themselves together, offering the
opposite Pole it seems to shun it; this happens also in respect to Needles
touched with the Loadstone. 10. A Needle being in Aequilibrio before it be
touched, it loses this Property, after having been touched by the Loadstone. Of
this side of the Line the Point which respects the Northern Pole is inclined
toward the Earth, and the contrary happens as soon as it is passed the Line:
Which obliges Pilots to add to that side which appears to be the lightest, a
little Wax, to render the Needle in Aequilibrio, and for the augmenting or
diminishing the weight of the Wax, as they are nearer or more distant from the
Line where the Needle has no need of Wax to keep it in Aequilibrio. The Author
gives some Methods to find out how many degrees the Needle is inclined, and
observes that in Countries that are 49 or 50 degrees of Elevation, the Needle
is inclined to the Horison about 70 Degrees. 11. The Power of the Loadstone may
be augmented or diminished, by diverse means which the Author observes, but if
it is entirely lost it cannot be re-established. 12. In fine, although the Needle
always turns one of its ends toward the North, it is observed that they often
decline in some degrees toward the East or the West. 'Twas above a hundred
years that it declined six degrees toward the East; sixty years after, its
Declination was hardly one degree of the same side. Mr. De la Hire of the Royal
Academy of Sciences, and Royal Professor in the Mathematics, observed at
Paris, toward the end of the year, 1684. that it declined four Degrees ten
Minutes North-West: Now it declines there but a little more than one Degree.

2. These are the Experiments which he relates concerning the Loadstone, here
follow the chief Generals by which he explains Chapter 1, 2.
all these Effects. 1. That the Earth is made after such a manner, that out of
its Poles continually issues a very subtle Matter, both impalpable and
invisible, which circulates within and about it self, till it reenters by the
opposite Pole to that which it went out of, and passes by parallel Pores ito
its Axis. 2. That the Pores by which this Matter passes, are furnished with
certain Particles like small Hairs, which are so disposed as easily permits
this Matter to pass over after a certain manner, but which stands upright and
stops the Pores, if the Matter presents it self to pass over after a contrary
manner. 3. That each Loadstone has two Poles like the Earth, and is disposed
after the same manner as it is.

Those who have any knowledge of the manner whereby the Cartesians apply their
Supposition of an effluvious Matter to the effects of the Loadstone, may
without any trouble apply the Principle of the Author to the Phoenomena's that
have any relation thereto; and those who are not sufficiently acquainted with
this Matter, to be able of 'emselves to make an Application of this Principle,
may in less than two hours time read all that the Author has said of it. As
the Chapters of the second part answer to that of the first, so Things are
there more at large explained than in the first, with an addition of diverse new
Experiments concerning the same things. For Example, there is in the XIII
Chapter the particular manner of arming the Loadstone, that is, the furnishing
each of its Poles with a little plate of Iron, to augment the force thereof.
From this place also may be learnt something of the Configuration of the
insensible parts of Iron and Steel. The Author observes, that when the Iron is
forged, the little parts whereof it is composed, dispose themselves at length,
and range themselves like little Needles all of the same manner the length of
the Iron, and that they must take the Armor of the Loadstone, in such a manner
that the length of its little parts answer to the extremity of the Armor,
which must lift up the other Iron that they shall present unto it. The Author
having made one after this manner, and taken an other and applied it directly
contrary, that is, in which the little parts were traversed, found that the
first raised up a fourth part heavier than the other. p. 97.
He also observed that a Blade of Iron which is not soaked in Water, breaks
very difficultly, and when it is broken the place where it breaks, looked upon
with a Microscope, appears like the small points of Needles, which pierce the
Hand with the least touch. The other on the contrary (adds the Author) is
easily broke, and the broken place resembles little Balls or Cubes, and is not
sharp at all. He afterward gives Philosophical Reasons thereof, which is best
read in the Original.

As the declination and varation of the Loadstone can only be perceived by the
means of a Meridional Line, so the Author has in the XV Chapter given six
different manners of tracing it. The first is, to cut a Body of a Tree that has
been much exposed to the Wind and the Sun horizontally, and to observe in what
place the Excentrick Circles are closest, and the place where they are the most
distant one from the other. The last notes the South, and the first the North.
But as one cannot always rely upon this Experiment, so he only relates it by
the by; and says also, that those who concern themselves with Agriculture ought
to observe it, and that when they transplant a Tree, care must be taken to
place it in the same Situation as it was in before in respect to the North and
South. The three following ways of finding out the Meridional Line, are done by
the Points of the Shadow. The fifth manner is practiced by two Shadows of a
Thread raised perpendiculy; and taken with two equal Lights from the Sun. And
in fine, he shows how the Meridional Line may be found, by two equal Heights of
two Stars.

He finishes this Work, by the Description of some Curious Machines made with
the Loadstone; and those who desire to know more thereof, he sends them to
Bettinus, Kirker, Schotus, and some others, that have treated of this Matter. I
shall say no more of this Book, only that the Author endeavored to proportion
it to the Capacity of all sorts of Persons. He has not taken it for granted,
that every one that reads his Book, should be a Physician or Geometer; on the
contrary, he has endeavored to render himself Intelligible, to those even that
are Ignorant both of Physic and Geometry 100.

An Extract of an English Iournal, containing an Estimation of the quantity of
Vapors that the Heat of the Sun exhales from the Sea: By Edmond Halley.
THE quantity of Vapors that the Earth is charged with, is very considerable,
since the Rains and Snows fall sometimes in so great an abundance, that it is
observed, that this Water descending from the Intervals, which the Particles of
the Air leave among themselves, make a very sensible part of the Weight of the
Atmosphere. But no Person that I know of, has examined to the purpose the
proportion that is between the Sea and these Vapors, which are the original,
not only of Rains, but also of Fountains. This Search is nevertheless one of
the most necessary, of that part of Philosophy that treats of Meteors, and
deserves to be examined by the Royal Society. I believe none will be sorry to
know the manner how I essayed to determine the quantity of Vapors which are
exhaled by Heat.

'Twas thus: I took a Vessel full of Water, the depth of four Inches, the
Diameter whereof was seven inches 2/10, in which I placed a Thermometer.
Afterward, by the means of a Cha^ing-Dish full of hot Coals, I brought the
Water to the same degree of Heat as we feel in the hottest Summer, as appeared
by the Thermometer. That being done, I tied this Vessel, without taking any
thing out of it, to one end of the Beam of a Balance, and put on the other
side Weights exactly of the same heaviness. It was easy to preserve the same
Degree of Heat in the Water, by the Chafing Dish of Coals, either drawing it
nearer or putting it at a farther distance. I soon observed, that the Weight of
the Water sensibly diminished; and in about 2 Hours space 233 Grains of Water
was evaporated, although no Fume was observed to ascend, and the Water appeared
not hot to the touch. This quantity of Water evaporating in so small a time,
seems very considerable; for it follows from thence, that in 24 Hours it would
evaporate six Ounces of Water from so small a Surface, which was a Circle of 8
Inches Diameter.

To draw an exact Computation from this Experiment, and to determine the
greatness of the quantity of the Water that is thus evaporated, I made use of
the Experiment that Doctor Bernard affirmed to have been made at Oxford. It is,
That the quantity of Water of the bigness of a Cubic Foot, weighs 76 Pounds of
Troy weight. This number being divided by 1728. which is the Number of the
Cubic Inches contained in this Foot, gives 253 Grains and or one Ounce, 13
Grains for the weight of a Cubic Inch of Water. The weight then of 233 Grains,
is 233/253 or 35 parts of a Cubic Inch divided into 38. Now the Area of a
Circle, the Diameter whereof is 7 Inches, 2/10 contains 49 Inches square, by
which dividing the quantity of the evaporated Water, viz. 35/38 of an Inch, the
Quotient is 38/1862 or 1/5.3; from whence it appears, the quantity of this
Water is the 53 part of an Inch; but for the facility of the Calculation, we
will suppose it is but the 60 part. If then the Water (as hot as the Air is in
Summer) exhales the 60 part of an Inch in two Hours from the Surface described;
in twelve Hours it will exhale the 10 part, a sufficient quantity to furnish
all Rains, Fountains and Dews. This Calculation may even suppose the Sea
without its diminishing or overflowing, like the Caspian Sea, which is always
of an equal height; and supposing also the Current, which they say is always in
the Streights of Gibralter, although the Mediterranean Sea receives a great
number of considerable Rivers.

To make an estimation of the quantity of Water which is exhaled by Vapors
from the Sea, I believe one need only consider it during the time the Sun is
up; for as for the Night, as much Water falls in Dews or even more, than it
draws up in Vapors during that time. It is true, that the Summer days are
above 12 Hours, but this length of the day is counter-ballanced by the weakness
of the action of the Sun when it is up, and before the Water is hot. Thus if I
suppose that if it raises every day in Vapors 1/10 of an Inch (the Extent
already observed) from the Sea, this Supposition cannot be rejected.

According to this Hypothesis, 10 Inches square from the Surface of the Water,
will furnish every day in Vapors a Cubic Inch of Water; each Foot, the square
whereof, produces half a Pint; 4 Feet square Gallon; a Mile square, 6914 Tuns;
and a Degree square, supposing it to be 60 English Miles, will exhale in
Vapors 33 Millions of Tuns. If we give to the Mediterranean 40 Degrees in
length and 4 Degrees in breadth, in respect to those Places that are broader
and those that are narrower, the least without doubt that can be given, will be
a 160 Degrees square; and by consequence, all the Mediterranean Sea, in a
Summers day, will emit in Vapors 5280 Millions of Tuns. This quantity of
Vapors, although very great, is however the least that can be supposed,
according to the Experiment that I have related. It is true, there is another
thing that one cannot reduce to certain Rules; it is the Winds, which from the
Surface of the Water, take more Particles than the Heat of the Sun evaporates;
as may be easily conceived, if we do but reflect on the Winds which sometimes
blow.

It is very difficult to make a true estimation of the quantity of Water that
the Mediterranean Sea receives from the Rivers that fall into it; unless one
had some way to measure the Mouths of the Rivers and their Rapidity. All that
can be done in this Affair, is, rather to give 'em a greater quantity of Water,
than indeed they have, than to take from them; that is, to suppose 'em greater
than they are, according to all appearance, and afterward to compare the
quantity of Water that the Thames carries into the Sea, with that of those
Rivers which we shall calculate.

The Mediterranean Sea receives these nine considerable Rivers; the Eber, The
Author says nothing of the Rivers of Greece and of Asia, which are in as great
number, although they are not so big nor celebrated, as those he names.
the Rhone, Tyber, the Po, the Danube, the Nester, the Boristhenus, the Tanais
and the Nile, others being neither so celebrated, nor so large. We Will suppose
that each of these nine Rivers have ten times as much Water as the Thames, not
that there are any that have really ten times as much, but to comprehend in our
Calculation other Rivers that are less, which discharge themselves into the
Mediterranean, the bigness of which we can no otherwise make any estimation of.

To measure the Water of the Thames, I take it at Kingston Bridge, where the
Reflux never happens, and where the Water always runs downwards. The breadth of
it is 100 Yards, and its depth 3, supposing it every where equal; in which
computation, I am certain I give it rather more Extent than it really has. The
Water is then in this place 300 Yards square, that multiplied by 48 thousand
(is I believe the quantity of Water that is drawn up, admitting 2000 each Hour)
or 84480 Yards, give 25344000 Yards of Water which will be drained in a day,
that is 2030000 Tuns each day. I am persuaded that by what I have added more to
the Channel of this River than it really has, I have sufficiently compensated,
by comprehending therein the Rivers of Brent, Lea, Wandal and of Darwent, which
are of some Consideration, and which discharge themselves into the Thames below
Kingston Bridge.

Now if every one of these nine Rivers had ten times more Water than the
Thames, it would it follow that from each River would every day run into the
Sea, 203 Millions of Tuns; and that the whole will be but 1827 Millions of
Tuns, which is but a little more than the third part of what I have shown is
evaporated out of the Mediterranean Sea, in 12 Hours time.

The Knowledge is still wanting what becomes of these Vapors when they are
raised in the Air, and from whence comes that Current which always appears at
the entrance of the Straits of Gibralter; but Mr. Halley sends us back once
more to examine it; only advertises the Reader, that to make the Experiment
which he has spoken of, he must make use of Water which has been Salted, to
the same Degree that the common Sea Water is, dissolving therein one fortieth
part of Salt. Next to this 3d. Alphabet must be placed the 5th, beginning with
Page 321. for the 4th. being the beginning of this Book, is therefore placed
there, and should have been Letter A, had it not been for the Printer's Mistake.


(...) SEU, De Punctorum Origin, Antiquitate and Authoritate: OR, A DISCOURSE
Concerning the ANTIQUITY, DIVINE ORIGINAL AND AUTHORITY OF THE Points, Uowels,
and Accents, That are placed to the HEBREW BIBLE. In TWO PARTS.

By a Member of the ATHENIAN SOCIETY.

Quod superest de Vocalium and Accentuum Antiquitate, eorum sententiae
subscribo, qui Linguam Hebraeam tamquam, etc. -- i. e. As for the Antiquity of
the Vowels and Accents, I am of their Opinion who maintain the Hebrew Language,
as the exact Pattern of all others, to have been plainly written (with them)
from the Beginning; seeing that they who are otherwise minded, do not only make
Doubtful the Authority of the Scriptures, but (in my Judgment) wholly pluck it
up by the Roots; for without the Vowels, and Notes of Distinction, it has
nothing firm and certain.

Anton. Rodulph. Cevallerius Rudimenta Hebraicae Linguae, cap. 4. page 16.
LONDON, Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven in the Poultrey, MDCXCII.

(...) OR, A Discourse concerning the Antiquity and Original of the Points,
Vowels and Accents that are placed to the Hebrew Bible. In Two Parts.
The FIRST PART.
WHEREIN The Opinions of Elias Levita, Ludivicus Capellus, Dr. Walton, and
Others for the Novelty of the Points, are considered, their Evidences for the
same examined; and the Improbability of their Conceit, that the Masorites of
Tiberias Pointed the Text, is at large discovered from the Silence of the Jews
about it, their Testimonies against it; the Unfitness of the Time, Place and
Persons of late assigned for the Invention of the Points, from the Nature of
the Masora, and of the Masoretick Notes on the Verses, Words, Letters, Points,
Vowels and Accents of the Old Testament: Their Observations on all the Kinds of
the Keri, U, Ketib; the Words written Full, or Defective; the Ittur Sopherim
the Tikkun Sopherim, and the rest of the Parts of the Masora, and from other
Considerations.

The SECOND PART,
Containing the Principal Testimonies and Arguments of Jews and Christians, for
the Proof of the Antiquity, Divine Original and Authority of the Points, Vowels
and Accents: Wherein the chiefest Objections of Elias, Capellus, and Others,
are either Obviated, or briefly Answered.

The Cause, Occasion and Method of the ensuing Discourse is declared in the
Prooemium, or Introduction.
AMongst our Abstracts of Books, that have a more particular Relation to
Ecclesiastics, such as the various Editions of the Bible, Iurieu's System of
the Church, etc. we have thought fit to insert this our own following
Collection; which perhaps may more particularly treat of the Parts of the
Masora, than any Piece yet extant. It will be of great Use to all Scholars that
are designed for the Study of the Original Tongues; and will help to make good
our Title Page, The Young Students Library. We have herein endeavored to
remove some Prejudices, and reconcile the Differences of the Learned on this
great and weighty Subject; which is of no less Consequence than the receiving
or rejecting the Bible it self. We must not enlarge in Prefacing to any Work,
where the Works themselves are to be Absteacts, but referr you to the Subject
it self.

Advice to the Young Students of Divinity, Recommending the Study of the
Scriptures in their Original Languages; together with the Writings and
Commentaries of the Rabbis thereupon; with Directions for the Knowledge
thereof.
Men and Brethren,
YOur Work is the greatest, as St. Paul says, Who is sufficient for these
things? Consider what Knowledge the Work you must account for at the last
Tribunal, does most require, and attend it, Hoc age: You are to have the Care
of Souls, and to your Trust are committed the Oracles of God. Your great
Concern therefore is, to know the Mind of God, as it is revealed in his Word,
that you may teach it others, and defend it against all Opposers: This is all
you are entrusted with, and shall be judged by, to wit, the Bible. This Word or
Mind of God is contained perfectly in the Hebrew Bible, and Greek Testament
only. Translations are no further God's Word, than they do express the sense
thereof; which in all places they cannot perfectly do, without more words than
are allowed to to be in a Translation: These Sacred Originals are the Standard
and Rule of our Life, Worship and Doctrine; and the Fate of all Translations
depends on their Preservation. If therefore the Teachers need not know, nor be
able to defend the Original, none else need: Then were the Translation of it
needless, and so the Scripture it self, and thereby all Religion and Ministry
to boot; if any of these things are needful, they are all so, for they stand or
fall together.

Now that we may know the Mind of God in his Word, we must first know what the
words themselves do signify, and properly and literally mean: This we cannot
do in many places, without the help of the Rabbis, or of those who have been
taught by them, which is much the same, and that on several Accounts; which
renders their Work needful, as Leusden in Philologus Hebraeo-mixtus, page 115,
etc. and others do manifest: As,

1 st. Because many words, as to the Grammar and sense of them, could not be
known without the help of those Masters of the Hebrew Tongue; as (...), Joel
2.5. (...), Joel 2.8, etc.

2. There are many words but once used in Scripture, especially in such a
sense, and are called the Apax legomena, or ein lo chober bemikr^, which we
cannot know the meaning of without their help; and herein they are singular,
though they lament the loss they have been put to about them; vid. Kimchi in
his Preface on Miklol. Also Kimchi in his Preface on Sepher Sherashim, tells a
Story, how they knew not the meaning of that word a Besom, in the Prophet's
sweeping with the Beesom of Destruction, till in Arabia a Rabbin heard a Woman
say to her Daughter, Take the Besom, and sweep the House. So Joel 2.8. (...), a
Sword. To conclude, There are very many such words but once used; which, as
they cannot be known by the Bible alone, so neither can the sense of the place
be known wherein they are, till they are first known; and this is in many
places.

3. Many Phrases, and diverse ways of Speech, are very dubious in the Old and
New Testament, which are well illustrated and explained by the Rabbis, as Joel
1.20. Jonah 1.5. Judge. 12.7. Genesis 2.2, etc. And in the New Testament, Mark 9.1.
Mat. 16.19. and 11.11. and 10.25. John 3.5.

4. Many Rites and Ceremonies, Ordinances and Customs but slightly mentioned in
the Scripture, are fully explained by the Rabbis; as Circumcision, Genesis 17.
and 1 Cor. 7.18. becoming uncircumcised again. So Anathema Maran atha, 1 Cor.
16.22. So the Fron^le^s, Deuteronomy. 6.8. Phylacteries, Numb. 15.38. Mat. 23.5. their
zizith fringes. So the Passover and Lord's Supper, Mat. 27.34. Korban, Mat.
15.5.39 Stripes, 2 Cor. 11.24. So for the Manner of their Sacrifices, which
typifie the Grace of the Gospel, and the like.

5. To be able to Answer and Convince the Jews, requires good skill in their
Writings, and thereby great advantage may be made of their own Concessions; as
the Apostle does frequently practice in his Epistle to the Hebrews, where he
often argues from their Conc^ssions. And they had need know the Jews Principles,
who would Expound that Epistle.

6. Many difficult and v^ry obscure places of Scripture, whose Explication is
sought for in vain among other Commentaries, are clearly explained by the
Rabbin^, as Numb. 3.39. compared with ver. 22, 28, 34, 43, 46, 49. vid. Pref.
Cartwright and Menasseh in Council. Quaest. 3. on Numbers. And indeed the Books
of Psalms, Job, Proverbs, Isaiah, etc. are in many places so elliptical, that
render them inaccessible to any that are not well acquainted with the Language:
And in explaining these Difficulties the Rabbis are most excellent, having
spent all their time therein: As for Instance, Numb. 24.17. it is said, The Star
that shall arise out of Jacob, shall destroy all the Children of Sheth. Now
Noah was of Sheth's Posterity, and thereby all the World since the Flood are
Sheth's Children. But it is hard to think, Jesus Christ will destroy all
Mankind, good and bad. Abarbinel in Mashmiah Ieshuah, fol. 7. says the word is
Vnwall, not Destroy; and says the sense is, that the Governments of the Nations
shall be unhinged, that the Lord's Rule over all Nations may be established.

So Deuteronomy. 32.36. the Lord says he will help his People, when he sees that their
power is gone, and there is none shut up or left. Now what is meant by none
shut up or left, Abarbinel, ibid. fol. 6 and 7. shows; where he says, that
the word Shut up, ought to be read Ruler; and the word Left, is to be read
Helper; and proves the sense of the word is, That when God sees his People are
brought so low, that they have no Ruler to head them, and no Helper to defend
them, then God himself will arise for their help.

So Mat. 27.9. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremiah the Prophet
about the thirty pieces of Silver: Which was not spoken by Jeremiah, but
Zachariah, cap. 11. ver. 12. The Talmudists divide the Bible into Three Parts;
viz. 1. The Law: 2. The Prophets: 3. The Cetubim, or Hagiographi, vid. Masoret
Hammasoret, page lat. 40. The first of the latter Prophets the Talmud makes to
be Jeremiah; and the Masorites, Isaiah* and when they allege a thing out of
any of the Prophets in that Volume, as the twelve minor Prophets, they say, So
says Jeremiah; though not Jeremiah, but Zachariah says it: For so the
Masorites, who put Isaiah first, say such a place is in Isaiah, which is not in
Isaiah, but in some other of the Prophets that are in that Volume, which begins
with Isaiah: As for Instance, The seventh Keri u lo Ketib, baim, is twice said
to be in Isaiah; which it is not, but in Jeremiah 31.38. vid. the Masora on the
first word of Deuteronomy: And on Lam 3.13. So Luke 24.44. All that is written
in the Law, the Prophets, and the Psalms. And why the Psalms only, and no more
of the Hagiography? Because, as Elias observes, some place the Psalms first in
the Hagiography, and so the whole Volume is intended thereby, vid. Otho Lexicon
Rabbinnico-Philologicum, p. 261. Lightfoot, Kimchi's Preface on Jeremiah. So
Psalm. 118.27. Bind the Sacrifice with Cords unto the Horns of the Altar: As
Kimchi says, it is, Bring the Lamb that is bound with Cords, the Blood whereof
is sprinkled on the Horns of the Altar: But never is Sacrifice bound with Cords
to the Hornsof the Altar. So Romans 9.3. the Apostle's wishing himself cursed
from Christ for the Jews, is supposed only to be the common Expression of
Affection used by the Jews to Persons departed: Anu Cipperoti kai; Would we
were an Atonement for thee, Masecat Sanhedrim, cap. 2. ver. 1. So to bind or to
loose, is no more than to forbid or permit. The Kingdom of Heaven, the Days of
the Messiah, to walk with Christ in White, alludeth to their searching the
Persons of the Priests: If they were perfect, and approved for the Priesthood,
they were sent forth apparelled in White; if not, they came forth in Black,
vid. Masecat Middoth, cap. ult. So, Blessed is he that watches, and keeps
his Garments; alluding to the Rulers of the Temple, who went the Round at
Night; and if they found a Priest asleep on the watch, they beat him, and burnt
his Garments: vid. Middoth, cap. 11. also the Good Eye and the Evil Eye;
alluding to those that gave bountifully or niggardly in their Offerings. So
Isa. 12.3. to the Feast of Booths: Psalm. 116.13. to the Passover; and the like.

7. Hence, Seventhly, The Commentaries of the Rabbis have been a great help to
all that Translate or Expound the Text: As Munster says in his Preface on the
Bible, That no one can well Explain the Scripture, without the Commentaries of
the Rabbis. And Ierom says, He therefore hired a Jew to help him in the
difficult places, (which he durst not attempt without:) And the best
Commentaries amongst Christians, are those who have plowed with the Rabbis
Heifer. What were the Critics on the Bible, but Men best skilled in the
Rabbis? as Munster, Mercer, Fagius, and the rest.

8. Many Parts of the History of the New Testament are well explained by the
Rabbinical Writings; as 2 Timothy 3.8. Iannes and Iambres, mentioned by Ionathan's
Paraphrase on Exodus 7.11. and the like.

9. Many Proverbial Speeches are best explained by them, even of the
New Testament; as Mat. 19.24. Mark 10.25. Mat. 10.25. and 7.2. 2 These. 3.10.
etc.

10. Many Names of Places, Sects, Moneys, Weights, Measures, even in the
New Testament, are best explained from their Writings: They have indeed many
Traditions very foolish, but still they know their Language best, and their own
Affairs.

11. The Law of Moses, Moral, Judicial and Ceremonial, is fully explained by
them only, as to many Laws.

12. To conclude: As they are helpful to explain the Text; so is the Knowledge
of the Rabbis very needful to defend and maintain the Purity, Perspicuity, and
Divine Authority of the Text it self, as to the true Copy, the Character, the
Points, Vowels, and Accents, and the like. Without some knowledge of the
Rabbis, Persons will find themselves very unable to judge of the Arguments
themselves that are used on such Subjects: Nay, they will be little the better
for the very places of Scripture we most frequently allege; because they most
commonly respect the Masoretick Bible, which we have not room to explain to
those who know nothing of these things. If therefore such Subjects are fit for
Divines to understand, then must the Knowledge of the Rabbinical Writings be so
likewise.

It Is peculiarly incumbent on the Ministry by their Office, to defend the
Doctrines they teach, by the Scriptures: But if they are unable to defend the
Scriptures, the only Evidence and Proof of their Doctrines, the Christian
Religion, with the Doctrines thereof, must fall to the ground. And yet this
Position, That the present Hebrew Bible, and Greek Testament, in the Words,
Letters, Points, Vowels and Accents we now enjoy, is the same uncorrupted Word
of God which was delivered of old by the holy Penmen of it to the Church:
This, we say, cannot well be defended against all Opposers, without the
Rabbinical Knowledge we speak of.

And so much for the need of this Knowledge: We shall only give some Directions
about this Study.

First, He must well understand the Hebrew Bible, in the first place, who would
know the Rabbis, before he look after them: And for this, if he has no Latin,
he must get William Robertson's First and Second Gate to the Holy Tongue; His
Key to the Bible: Iessey's English Greek Lexicon, etc. But we suppose most have
the Latin Tongue, and such have Grammars and Lexicons enough, as Buxtorf's
Epitome; his Thesaurus; His Lexicon: And many other Authors, especially
Bythner's Lyra Prophetica in Psalmos: Leusden's Compendium Biblicum, Arius
Montanus his Interlineary Bible, etc. Let him read the Hebrew Bible much. And
then for the Rabbis, take this brief Account and Direction: The ancient
Chaldee Paraphrasts are most of them translated, and thereby easy to learn:
The ancient Cabalistical Writings, as the Zohar, Bahir, etc. are both most
difficult, and least useful: Their Oral Law, or Traditions, were collected,
after the Destruction of the Temple, A.D. 150. by Rabbi Judah the Holy, as they
call him: This they prefer before the Scripture, and suppose it was Orally
delivered by Moses to Israel, and unlawful to be written; but when Jerusalem
was destroyed, they were constrained to write it, lest it should be lost; but
yet 'twas so written, as that none but themselves might understand it: This
Book is called Mishnaioth, comprizing all their Religion with the Bible: It Is
divided into Two Parts; each Part, into Three Seders, or Books; each Seder,
into many Masecats, or Tracts; each Masecat into Chapters and Verses. A brief
Account of the Contents of the Mishna, and all the Parts of it, is given by
Martinus Raimundus, in his Prooemium to his Pugio Fidei, a very Learned and
Useful Book; which also gives an Account of the Tosaphot, the Gemara, and the
Commen^^ries thereon; which complete the Talmuds, both that of Jerusalem, A.D.
230. and that of Babylon, Five hundred Years after Christ; which Gemara is but
a Comment and Dispute on the Mishna, which is the Text of the Talmud. There are
several Masecats, or Tracts of the Mishna, translated, as the Nine first
Masecats, viz. Beracoth, etc. So also Masecat Middoth, by Le Empereur,
Sanhedrin and Maccoth; by Cock, Megillath; by Otho, Codex, Ioma, and others:
But as the very Learned Ludivicus de Campeigne du Veil observes, He that would
know the Mishna, must learn Maimonides: This Moses Maimonides, Physician to the
King of Egypt, about Five hundred Years ago, wrote his Iad Chaseka, or Mishna
Torah; wherein he has comprised the Substance of the Mishna and Talmud, in a
pure, pleasant, plain and easy style, if compared with the Mishna and Talmud;
and yet he that has read him, may with ease and pleasure understand all the
Mishna. And then for the Talmud, There is Clavis Talmudica, Cock's Excerpta,
etc.

This Maimonides, of whom the Jews say, from Moses the Lawgiver, to Moses
Maimonides, there was never another Moses like this Moses. Several of his
Tracts are translated also, as Iesudee Hatorah, the First Masecat of all: and
Deoth, Aboda Zara, the 1 st. entitled, De Fundamentis Legis: 2. Canones
Ethicae: 3. Idololatria: 4. De Iure Pauperis: 5. De Poenitentia, etc. But most
are translated by the excellent Ludivicus de Campeigne du Veil; as, De
Sacrificiis, one of the fourteen Books which he has divided this Work into;
and De Cultu Divino, another of the fourteen Books, comprizing several Tracts:
Also his Tracts about Unleavened Bread, about the Passover, about a Fast, etc.
As to other Rabbis, several are translated, as Cosri, etc. and that on various
Subjects; as Logic, by R. Simeon; Physic, by Aben Tibbon; with Maimonides's
Epistle against Judiciary Astrology. So of Arithmetic, and Intercalating the
Month, by Munster, and that of Maimonides, by Duveil; with many other Books, as
Ietsirah, Bachinath, Olam, etc. And of History, as Seder Olam, Zutha and Seder
Olam, Rabba, Tsemach, David, etc.

And as to Rabbinical Commentaries, the best and chief are R. Sal. Iarchi, or
Isaac; R. Aben Ezra; R. David Kimchi; all these upon the Proverbs are
translated by Antony Giggeius upon several minor Prophets, by Mercer; viz. on
Hosea, Joel, Amos, etc. on Joel and Iona by Leusden, (as also a Masecat on the
Misbna, called Pirke Abbot.) Kimchi on the Psalms is likewise translated. These
Rabbis lived about Five hundred Years ago, and do excellently explain the
Text, where Grammar and Jewish History are necessary.

But several of the abovementioned Books being scarce, we shall be ready to
Translate and Print in two Colums, the one Hebrew, the other English, either
any Masecat of the Mishna, or any Hilcoth or Tract of Maimonides, or the
Commentaries of the Rabbis on any part of the Bible, if our Bookseller receive
Encouragement; which with Buxtorf's Great Lexicon Talmudicum, and his Book de
Abbreviaturis, would no doubt enable one that has read the Hebrew Bible, to
understand the Rabbis: Which is all the Direction we have room to give here,
and therefore conclude with our hearty Wishes, That our Young Students may be
mighty in the Scriptures, Acts 18.24. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16. and thereby they will,
by the Grace of God, become Able Divines; according to the Old Proverb, Bonus
Textuarius, Bonus Theologus.

The PROEM. Containing the Cause, Occasion and Method of the ensuing Debate.
IN this Introduction we shall take notice of Three things; wherein are
contained the Cause and Occasion of the following Discourse, with the Method of
proceeding therein.

1. The Weight and Moment of the Subject in Controversy. 2. The many
Circumstances that render its Consideration at this time necessary and
seasonable. 3. The Method and Order of manageing the same.
First, As to the Weight and Moment of the Matter in Controversy, it is small
in quantity, about no more than a Point or Tittle; but great in quality, about
no less a Cause than the Keeping or Rejecting of the Bible. For,

1 st. The Old Testament being Originally written by the Holy Penmen of it in
the Hebrew Tongue, in and by the same God has made and preserved the whole
Revelation of his Will, from the Beginning, unto the coming of Jesus Christ;
and it has been received as the only Foundation, Rule and Standard of all
Translations, by Jews and Christians.

2. The Hebrew Bible is so received, and does so reveal the Mind of God
according as it is at present pointed; for without Points, it is either mute,
and speaks nothing, or else speaks whatever Men please to have it say, or is
most dubious, having diverse and contrary senses. Hence the Jews say of it, That
the Points are to the Letters, as the Soul is to the Body, (the one without the
other has neither Life nor Motion,) and as Garments to a Person, without which
none can come forth in public. And so are Vowels to Consonants; with them they
may sound and signify; without them they cannot: And as they say, He that
reads without Points, is like one that rides a Horse without a Bridle, and
knows not whither he goes. And as Marcus Marinus Brixianus says, in his
Preface to Arca Noae, There would be more Confusion in this one Book without
Points, than was at Babel. The Oracles of Apollo were not more dubious, nor any
Lesbian Rule more crooked. It would be a mere Nose of Wax, whereby Men may make
quidlibet ex quolibet, what they please of any thing in it. For the Vowel
letters, (...), Ehevi, are omitted in innumerable places, where their Presence
is indispensably necessary, if there were no Points; the like is no where found
in any Language or Book besides: And in many places where they are used, they
are to signify quite contrary to what they import, as (...) for (...) etc. And
yet the Matter is most sublime, consisting of Divine Revelation; the Style more
elyptical, concise, and abstruse, in Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Isaiah, etc. and in
many places, without any Connection of Antecedents and Consequents, as in
Proverbs, etc. that there is left no means to understand the Mind of God in it
without Points. On this Account the Papists tell us, we must fly to the
Infallibility of their Pope; and the Atheistical profane sort say, that we may
live as we list, there being no certain Rule of Faith at this day amongst us.

Now the Opinion under debate leaves the Bible in this confused Condition, by
assigning the Invention of the Points to such an Original as render them fitter
to be blotted out of the Bible, than kept in it any longer, as being the work
of the blind hardened Jews of Tiberias, A.D. 500. For it is impossible that the
whole Pronunciation of the Bible could be preserved so long as a Thousand Years
from Ezra, until A. D. 500. under that calamitous state of the Jews, whilst the
Tongue ceased to be vulgarly pronounced or known amongst them. The Rabbis
themselves (the only supposed Preservers of it) lamenting they had so lost it
in this time, that they found great difficulty to explain the Apax Legomenon,
or words that are but once used in Scripture; of which there are many, as
Kimchi's Preface to Miklol, and to Sepher. Shereshim declares, the most being
kept by the Mishna; which was unlawful, in their Opinion, to have been written,
being their Oral Law of unwritten Traditions, but only to prevent its being
quite lost by the Calamities of those Times. How then was it possible to keep,
from Age to Age, the true sound of all the Points, Vowels and Accents of the
Old Testament, without the Shapes, when multitudes of them cannot be
distinguished by their Sound at all? and no memory of Man is able so much as
once to receive the very Pauses or Notes of Distinction, nor yet the very
Anomalies of the Punctation; nor can the greatest Rabbi, by all his Skill and
Custom to read by Points, be able to Point an Unpointed Bible truly, from end
to end, without a Copy before him.

Therefore, to suppose that for a Thousand Years before they had the Shapes of
the Points, they could infallibly and perfectly preserve all the Pronuciation
of it by Oral Tradition, or Use and Custom, is to build Castles in the Air: And
therefore Dr. Broughton says of this Opinion, page 169. that Elias Levita
lies for the Whetstone, when he says, That the Jews of Tiberias, and their
Ancestors, were so cunning, that from Age to Age, they remembered how Moses
pronounced all the fourteen Vowels; as though God would have a dull People to
torment their Souls with the memory of Sounds.

2. But Secondly, If that were possible, that the Pronunciation might be so
long preserved true, even until A. D. 500. what Trust or Belief is there to be
had in these Masorites, not only for their Ability at this time, but especially
for their Fidelity, which at best could be but Humane? Nay, what Evidence is
there that these Masorites of Tiberias, A. D. 500. were the Inventors of the
Points, if they could be trusted? For no History says so of them; the Jews
universally deny it of them, Elias only excepted: The Work of the Masorites,
which is the Masora, proves the contrary. The absurdity of this Opinion is
compendiously expressed by Dr. John Owen, in his Considerations on the
Prolegomena to the Pollyglott Bible, page 243. Of all the Fables that are in
the Talmud (says he,) I know none more incredible than this Story, That Men
who cannot by any Story, or other Record, be made to appear that they ever
were, in rerum natura; Men obscure, unobserved, not taken notice of by any
Learned Man, Jew or Christian, should, in a time of deep Ignorance, in the
place where they lived, amongst a People wholly addicted to monstrous Fables
themselves, blinded under the Curse of God, find out so great, so excellent a
work, of such unspeakable usefulness, not once advising with the Men of their
own Profession and Religion, who then flourished in great abundance at Babylon,
and the places adjacent; and impose it on all the World (that receive the
Scriptures,) and have every tittle of their work received, without any
opposition or question from any Person or Persons, of any Principle whatever;
yea, so as to have their Invention made the constant Rule of all following
Expositions, Comments and Interpretations; Credat Apella. And as Dr. Lightfoot
says, in his Centuria Chorograph. cap. 61. page 146. If you can believe the
Points of the Bible to proceed from such a School, believe also all their
Talmuds: The Pointing of the Bible favors of the work of the Holy Spirit, not
of wicked, blind, and mad Men.

To conclude: The Unpointed Bible has not that plainness, perspicuity and
agreement with it self, which is indispensably necessary to render it meet to
be a Rule of Faith and Worship; and the present Punctation would deservedly be
rejected, if it had no better O^iginal than to be the Invention of some
Post-Talmudical Rabbis. It is therefore of the greatest moment, to discover
the improbability and absurdity of this Novel Opinion, which so directly tends
to the Overthrow of the Divine Authority of the Scriptures. And though some of
the Patrons of it do not themselves reject the Bible, yet they well know others
of them do on this Account: So that we must defend the Divine Original of the
Points, as we desire to maintain the Divine Authority of the Bible. And so much
for the weight and moment of the Matter in controversy.

Secondly, As to the seasonableness of debating this Controversy at this time,
there are Six Circumstances that in Conjunction attending it, do render it
seasonable. The First is, the Place of it, that it is broug^t home to our own
door. We concern not our selves with the Controversies of Foreign Countries;
but our own Nation is the Stage where this Opinion of the Novelty of the Points
has been more publicly espoused, than would have been suffered in any other
Protestant State. And therefore, Secondly, It does not creep in corners, as in
other places; but has received the public Approbation of the Nation, so far
as to be solemnly espoused in the English Polyglott Bible. Wherein, Thirdly, We
have not faint Motions of it, but powerful and mighty Efforts by the most
Learned among them. And this, Fourthly, is attended with answerable success,
the generality of the springing Youth embracing it. And Fifthly, Yet not
content with this Victory, Success and Credit in England, the Patrons of it
have of late put forth their greatest strength afresh for the promoting of
their Cause, in the Vindiciae of Ludovicus* Capellus, lately published in
Answer to Buxtorf de Origin Punctorum. And, Sixthly, Notwithstanding this
Opposition to the Truth, by the great Champion for the Novelty of the Points,
and its suitable Success, yet there has been no Answer returned to this
Treatise as yet, that we hear of: And it is fit it should be Answered, lest
this Vindiciae do as much mischief as the former Treatise, entitled, Arcanum
Punctationis Revelatum, whereof this last is a Defense, that being justly
accountable for the Success this Opinion has had in England, as by a brief
Narrative of the Rise, Progress and Issue of this Controversy amongst us will
appear: Which in short is this: One Elius Lovita, a learned Gramma^ian and Jew,
about the beginning of the Reformation, fell upon this Conceit, That certain
Jews (...) Tiberias, A. D. 500. placed the Points as they had received them by
Oral Tradition. This he defends in his Masoret Hammasoret, Preface 3 d. But
herein he is contrary to all the Jews, either in his time, or before, or after
him: And therefore he was answered by them, as in particular by R. Sam.
Are^^olti, in his Arugath Habbosem, c. 26. And also by F. Azarias, in his Meor
Enaim in Imre Birtah, cap. 59. And out of the Rabbis, by Buxtorfius the Elder,
in his Thesaurus Grammaticus, Print, ed in 1609. And in his Tiberias, 1620.

Thus amongst the Jews the Error ended where it began, even in Elias himself,
none being left of his Opinion amongst them. But it will not so end with
Christians; several Reformers, whether moved by the Authority of Elias the
famous Doctor and Master of the Hebrew Tongue of their time; or else, it may
be, at first not well examining of it, embraced it. This Advantage the Papists
lay hold on with both Hands; for they find their Accounts in it, and improve it
according^y.

Amongst Protestants, Ludovicus* Capellus becomes the main and greatest
Champion for the Novelty of the Points, and ex professo defends the same in his
Treatise, entitled Arcanum Punctationis Revelatum, published by Erpenius, the
Author for some Reasons concealing his own Name at the first. This Book was
fully Answered, and the Truth amply defended by Buxtorf the Younger, in his
Treatise entitled, De Punctorum Origin and Antiquitate, published A. D. 1648.
But at length, in the Prolegomena to the Biblia Polyglotta, we have this
Opinion of Capellus, which did but slily creep before, publicly owned by Dr.
Walton, the Compiler of that Bible, and defended with Capellus's Arguments;
whereby Capellus is deservedly answerable for the Success of this Opinion, by
its Station in the Polyglott Bible upon his Shoulders.

Hereupon Dr. I. O. writes some Considerations on the Prolegomena aforesaid;
and by the way, Answers the Heads of Arguments brought for the Novelty of the
Points. But hereunto Dr. Walton returns a Reply, entitled, The Considerator
Considered, A. D. 1659. But in the Year 1661. Dr. I. O. in his Treatise De
Natura Theologiae, does concisely defend his Opinion of the Divine Original of
the Points. The like does Mr. William Cooper defend the Antiquity of the
Points, in his Domus Masaicae Clavis, 1673: And so does Wasmuth, in his
Vindiciae S. Hebraeae Scripturae, 1664.

And thus stood the Cause for some time, until now at last Ludovicus Capellus
his Vindiciae comes out, in Answer to Buxtorf's Treatise, De Origin Punctorum;
as also his former Treatise, Arcanum Punctationis Revelatum, is reprinted with
it, together with other Critical Discourses, in a large Folio, published A. D.
1689. and dedicated to the then Archbishop of Canterbury, the rest of the
Bishops, and all the Clergy of the Church of England: By which Dedication is
made as bold a Challenge, and earnest Invitation to the Defense of the Truth in
Controversy, as could well he made; and, together with the foregoing
Considerations, render it seasonable at this time, as the weight and moment of
the Subject do make the present Defense thereof necessary.

Thirdly, As to the Method of the ensuing Discourse, we have divided the same
into Two Parts.

In the First Part, we examine the Evidences for the Opinion, that the Points
were invented, A. D. 500. Or since that time by the Masorites of Tiberias, or
Others, and discover the Improbability thereof.

In the Second Part, we Prove and Maintain the Antiquity and Divine Original of
the Shapes of the Points, Vowels and Accents, against the Cavils and Objections
of Capellus, and Others.

But the First of the Two is what we begin withal, for several Reasons.

First, Because we are in Possession of the present Punctation, as being of
Divine Original, and have peaceably enjoyed it in all Ages to this time, all
Translations amongst us being taken out of it: It Is our Inheritance, and
therefore unfit to call the Antiquity of the Points into question, until we
first see sufficient Evidence, or at least great Probality that they were a
Novel Invention: Which if of so late date, may be more easily proved than what
was a Thousand Years before that time: And the Rejecting or Answering of the
Arguments for their Novel Invention, is a Proof of their Antiquity, and Divine
Original; for the Points were placed either since A. D. 500. or between the
time of Ezra, and A. D. 500. or else by the time of Ezra. But we shall here
prove in the First place, that they were not placed since A. D. 500. and there
are none that pretend they were between the time of Ezra and A. D. 500.
Therefore the Points were placed by the time of Ezra, which is all we contend
for.

Secondly, The Old Foundation must be removed, before a New Structure can be
erected. Many have been so prepossessed with so high a conceit of the Novelty
of the Points, that 'twould be bootless to prove their Antiquity, until the
improbability of their late Invention be discovered: for they admire that any
Learned or Judicious Person should believe their Antiquity, (although all the
Protestant States and Churches in the World (except what has been lately
suffered in England) do religiously maintain it.) Scaltger says, That nothing
can be more foolishly spoken, that to say the Points were coaevous with the
Letters, Ep. 243. Grotius, on Mat. 5.18. affirms, That it is nothing but
pertinacious Obstinacy in any, to deny that the Scriptures were used to be
written without Points after Ezra's time. And Schikard, in his Iure Reg. Heb.
lib. 2. page 41. asserteth, That he greatly wonders that any can seriously
believe the Antiquity of the Points. Vid. Considerator Considered, page 234,
235. So that till the Absurdity of their beloved Opinion be manifested, it is in
vain to prove the other whilst they disdain to consider it.

3. Our Antagonists spend their greatest strength in opposing our Opinion, to
render it but Improbable; and it is but quit with them, to show the
Improbability of theirs; and more fair, seeing it is easier for them to prove a
Fact done but a Thousand Years ago, than for us to prove what was done at Two
Thousand Years distance from the present time.

4. This Discourse being principally designed to Answer Capellus, Dr. Walton,
etc. who take this method, first defending their own Opinion, and then Replying
unto the Arguments for ours, it is convenient to follow them herein, and keep
their Order so far.

And for these Reasons, we observe the Method here propounded, and begin with
the First General Head; which is, The discovery of the Improbability of the
Opinion, That the Shapes of the Points, Vowels and Accents of the Hebrew Bible,
were first invented and placed to the Text, A. D. 500. or since that time,
either by the Masorites of Tiberias, or Others; and for the Reasons aforesaid,
we shall largely insist hereon, according to the best of our poor Ability, and
that small Reading which frequent Avocations from Study on necessary Occasions
would permit.

A Discourse concerning the Original and Antiquity of the Hebrew Points, Vowels
and Accents. The FIRST PART.
Containing the Discovery of the Improbability of their Novel and Humane
Invention and Original.
CHAP. I. The Question stated. The Four different Opinions about the First
Period of Time whereunto the Invention of the Points is assigned, are
enumerated. The Three several Opinions of those who suppose the Points were a
Novel Invention, related: The Two last examined.
THE Question under Consideration, is, Concerning the Time when the Shapes of
the Points, Vowels and Accents were first invented, and placed to the Hebrew
Bible.

There are Two periods of Time particularly fixed unto the one or the other, of
which all Parties do in some respect ascribe their Original.

The one is, the Time of Ezra; the other is, A. D. 500. The one makes them of
Divine the other of Humane Original and Authority.

So that the Question is, Whether the Shapes or Figures of the Points, Vowels
and Accents which are joined to the Text of the Hebrew Bible, were invented and
placed to the Text as early as the time of Ezra, er else not until the Talmuds
were finished, A. D. 500?

1. Those that place them to the First Period, viz. that say they were as
ancient as the time of Ezra, are all the Jews, one (only Elias) excepted,
though they differ as to the positive precise time of their first Invention, as
R. Samuel Arkuvolti reckons them up. For, 1 st. Some say they are coaevous with
the Letters. 2. Others, That they were given to Moses on Sinai with the Oral
Law, and kept by Tradition till Ezra's time. 3. Others say, That they were
placed to the Law, and the rest of the Scriptures, as they were first written.
4. But all the rest, except Elias only, say that Ezra, and the great Sanhedrim
of his time, first invented and placed them to the Text. So that in this they
all agree, That by the time of Ezra, at latest, they were invented and placed
to the Scripture; and thereby they own their Divine Original and Authority, as
do the generality of Christians likewise.

2. Those that place their Original to the Second Period, affirm that they were
not invented before A. D. 500. though they also differ as to the precise time
of their first Invention: About which they hold Three different Opinions. 1 st.
That they were began and ended, simul and semel, A. D. 500. as Elias says was
his Opinion, in Tob taam lettar page tsade, cap. 2. I think (says he) that
those who found out the Points, found out also the Accents, and placed both of
them to the Letters at one time. Which in his Masoret Hammasoret, Pref. 2. he
declares was about the Year 500. The Evidences which he brings for his Opinion,
and the Testimony he produces out of Aben Ezra, Cosri, Kimchi, and Tsak
Sephataim, shall be at large examined in the following Chapters, and the
Improbability and Absurdity of his Opinion fully discovered afterward in its
proper place. A brief Relation of the Two other Opinions, and Examination of
them (by the way,) is the Work of this Chapter: And they are these.

2. The Second different Opinion about their Novel Invention, is that of
Ludovicus Capellus, who supposes they were began A. D. 500. and ended A. D.
1030. by Ben Asher, and Ben Naphthali, Arcanum Punctationis Revelatum, cap. 17.
But for this Opinion he brings no Testimony nor Reason, as Buxtorf observes, de
Punct. Orig. page 267. Hanc vero cum in libris and authoribus nullis ^eperiret
suopte mart, and ingenio eam hoc pacto nobis procudit. And all that Capellus
pretends to allege, is only what Elias Levita mentions out of Maimonides on
another account, about Ben Asher's Copy, the Jews leaning upon it, because he
spent many Years in Correcting of it: The words of Maimonides are these: And
the Book that we lean upon in these things, is a Book that is known in Egypt,
comprizing the Twenty four Books of Scripture, which was in Jerusalem many
Years ago, to Correct Books by it; and all lean upon it, because Ben Asher
Corrected it, who was exact therein many years, and Corrected it many times as
he Transcribed it; and and on him I lean in the Book of the Law, which I have
written after his manner. This Elias repeats, and adds, And so we lean upon
his Reading in all these Countries; and the Men of the East lean on the Reading
of Ben Naphthali; and the differences between them are only about little
Accents, as Metheg and Makkaph, and Munach, and Pashta, single and double: And
the divisions about the Points, are only about Holem and Kamets, Katuph and
Kamets, Gadol and Pathak, and Sheva, and Kateph Pathak; and so of Dagesh, and
Raphah, and Milhill, and Milrah, etc. But does Elias suppose these in whole, or
in part to be the Authors of the Punctation? Nay, he says the quite contrary
is evident in the words immediately before these of Maimonides: And thus says
Elias, But as to the Divisions that are between Ben Asher and Ben Naphthali,
being only about Points and Accents, there is no doubt but that they were
written after the Points and the Accents were founded: And this (says he) is
easy to understand. Masoret Hamasoret, Pref. 3. page (...) 3. as indeed it is;
for the differences being about the several Parts of the Punctation, both
Points, Vowels and Accents, all those Parts must needs have been before in
being, or they could not have been the matter of division or difference between
them.

Obj. What made Ben Asher so long about it, if he only Corrected it?

Sol. The Nature and Weight of the thing, to make it a Standard; by which, to
try all Copies of their only Rule of Faith, wherein it was needful to observe
exactly, and compare faithfully, by the best Copies, every Letter, Point and
Accent of the Scripture; and after that, to write it over, until that there
neither wanted, nor yet abounded one Letter, Point or Accent of all the Bible;
was a work wherein many Years might be taken up, without supposing him to be
the Author of any part of the Punctation, because he was long in exact
Correcting of it.

So that here, as Elias leaves Capellus; so also the Testimony does not help
him at all, and others he has none.

2. As Capellus leaves Elias, about the Sense of Maimonides; so they differ
greatly in the Method and Order wherein they suppose the several parts of the
Punctation were invented. Capellus conceiteth they were 500 years in compiling,
after this manner: (1.) They distinguished the Verses by two thick strokes, for
Soph pasuk. (2.) Next to that, they placed the five long Vowels, a, e, i, o, u.
(3.) Then the Pauses, or great Stops, by the Accents. (4.) Then the lesser
Stops, etc. -- But he brings no Testimony to prove it, and it is no more than
his own single Conjecture. Now Elias says they were all made at one time, A.
D. 500. and that in another manner: For Elias says, that next unto the placing
of the Period, they placed the Colon, or Athnack; and then the Sakeph: And it
was necessary (says Elias) that they should do all this before they placed the
Points, because that many of the Points are changed, by reason of Athnack and
Soph pasuk; as (...) to (...) etc.

And indeed, on this Account, Capellus his Opinion is absurd; for the Vowels
could not be placed before Athnack, and the other Accents (which change the
Vowels one into another) were fixed.

And that the Points cannot be 500 years in composing ( viz. from A. D. 500.
until A. D. 1040. as Capellus thinks they were,) the Nature of the Masoretick
Notes, and the Time unavoidably to be allotted for the same, do evince.

For the Masorites have made their Notes on the Anomalies of all the parts of
the Punctation: So that the whole of the Punctation must needs have been
finished long before their time; who yet must needs have been before the time
of Ben Asher; because the Grammarians succeeded him, and take no notice of any
Masorites of their time; which they could not have omitted, if there had been
any such Critics in Grammar-learning among them, as the Masorites were. And
yet it is as absurd to suppose these Masorites to be before Ben Asher, as it was
to suppose them since his time. Because,

(1.) They had then been Contemporary with the Authors of some part of the
Punctation, and before the Authors of the last part of the Punctation: Which is
most absurd, as shall be made to appear from the Nature of the Masoretick
Notes, which do manifestly show that the whole of the Punctation was long
before those Observations: For else we must suppose there were several sets of
Masorites that did successively arise after every Set of Authors of each part
of the Punctation, as it was gradually invented and placed. But this we cannot
imagine: Because,

1. The First Set of Masorites must then have been so near the Authors of that
part of the Punctation which was invented before their time, as to have been
able to know the Reasons of the Anomalies; which if they had known, no doubt
but they would have mentioned them, there being no way like it to restrain
Posterity from altering of them: Which was the main End of all their
Observations, so to keep them even as they found them: And the same may be said
of every Set of Masorites successively.

2. Then the First Set of Masorites must have been Authors of the Punctation it
self, rather than bare Annnotators on it, being much more fit than after Ages
so to be: For if they durst only observe the Anomalies of that part of the
Punctation which was before them; how then durst any who came after their time
become Authors, who had no more, nor yet so much skill and ability for the
same? For the succeeding Authors must place the parts of the Punctation, of
which they were the Authors of the Shapes thereof, according as they had
received the knowledge of the Force, Sound or Pronunciation thereof, from these
Masotites, who were their Predecessors, who yet durst not attempt any such
things themselves.

3. If the Masorites were of such distant and diverse Ages, there would then be
a proportionable difference in their Style and Dialect; and those who made
Notes on the First Part of the Punctation, would have been known by their
Style, Dialect, or Authority, from those who made their Notes on the Last Part
of it. But there is no Mark or Means left whereby we can dis^ern who were
first, or who were last, by any difference of Style, Dialect or Authority, in
any one part of the Masoretick Notes, from another part of it: So that these
Masorites could not be before the whole of the Punctation was finished, nor yet
since Ben Asher's time; and therefore the Punctation must needs have been
finished before Ben Asher's time: Which holds good against the Third Opinion,
which is, That they were begun and ended by Ben Asher. As also does what Elias
has said before about it: And therefore no Testimony being brought by any for
this Opinion, and few or none at this time contending for it, we need not
enlarge upon it.

But seeing Capellus would be accounted to be, for the main, of Elias his
Opinion, though he differs from him in these Particulars, as to the time taken
up in Composing the Punctation, and the like; yet seeing he pleads for his
Opinion with all Elias's Arguments, which Elias brings for his own Opinion, and
chideth Buxtorf for stating his Opinion, as if it were different from that of
Elias, seeing he agrees with him, that they might be begun by the Masorites, A.
D. 500. Therefore we shall examine the Arguments and Objections of Capellus
more at large, together with the Opinion and Arguments of Elias, which we shall
begin to take in hand in the following Chapter.

CPAP. II. The Evidences for the Novelty of the Points considered, in the
Examination of the Opinion of Elias Levita, and of the Testimonies produced by
him and his Followers, Capellus and Others, for the same; in General.
WHereas there is no Testimony produced by any, for the Proof of the Time,
Place and Persons, when, where, or by whom the Points were invented or placed,
A. D. 500. or since that time, but only those Expressions that Elias Levita
has gathered out of Aben Ezra, Cosri, Kimki, Tsak Sephataim, etc. as he
supposes, in favor of his Opinion, That the Points were invented, Simul and
Semel, A. D. 500. and then placed by the Masorites of Tiberias: It will be
convenient therefore to examine the Evidences for the Novelty of the Points,
under this Opinion of Elias, seeing they were first brought by him for the
Proof of his own Notion. But we must distinguish between the Arguments which
are brought, or Objections made against the Antiquity of the Points; and the
Evidences for the ubi, quando, and a quibus, when, where, and by whom precisely
they were invented: For most of the strength of Capellus, and Others, is placed
in making Objections against the Antiquity of the Points, which we intend to
consider in the SECOND PART: And such are the Objections: (1.) Of Reading an
Vnpointed Copy of the Law in the Synagogue: (2.) The Samaritan, and other
Eastern Languages, being without Points: (3.) The LXX. and other Versions, not
following the present Punctation: (4.) The Silence of Jerome, and the Fathers:
(5.) The Silence of the Caballistical Writers: (6.) The Silence of the Talmuds,
the Mishna, and Gemara, about the Points: (7) The Novelty of the Names of them:
(8.) The Redundancy, Superfluity and Anomalies of the Punctation, and the like,
do only conclude a bare Conjecture against their Antiquity, but do not so much
as touch the Time, Place and Persons, when, where, and by whom positively the
Punctation was invented and placed; which alone is our present Enquiry. Nay,
indeed they tell us they do not insist much, when, where, and by whom the
Points were invented, whether A. D. 500, 600, 700, or 800. whether by the
Mosorites, or Others at Tiberias, or elsewhere, so it be granted the Points be
not of Divine but Humane Original. Vid. Considerator Considered, p. 219.
Capellus Arcanum and Vindicia, in the Prooemium; and yet do say that Elias has
proved they were invented, A. D. 500. by the Masorites of Tiberias, Prol. 3..
42.

But we say we'll not be so served; for before we quit the Punctation, we'll
know when, where, and by whom it was invented within this last Thousand Years,
then we'll yield it. But if they cannot prove this, we'll abide by our own: For
if it were invented so lately, they might be able to show us when, where, and
by whom it was invented, and placed to the Text; for it is impossible the whole
World of Jews and Christians should universally receive it, without taking
notice when, where, and by whom it came. So that will they or nill they, we
must examine what they can say to this Point, When, where, and by whom the
Points were first invented, and placed to the Text. Now if they were placed
since A. D. 500. it must be done by the Jews; they would never have received it
at the Hands of Christians, had any been able to have done it.

This must then have been best known to the Jews; and none of them would have
done more, to gather up the Evidences hereof, than Elias, the first and last of
this Opinion among them. This he has done as well as he could, which we shall
now examine, seeing his Followers have added nothing to what he has produced
in this Matter: Which amounts to no more than some dubious Expressions of four
Rabbis about the Punctation, viz. Aben Ezra, Kimki, Cosri, and Tsak Sephataim;
and what they say in Commendation of the Skill of the Masorites of Tiberias.
Now we shall examine the Quotations out of the four Rabbis, about the
Punctation: And we say in General,

1. We deny that any one of these Rabbis do speak one Word for the Novelty of
the Points: But if they did all four speak positively for it, what could be
thence concluded more than this, That four Jews were of this Opinion, contrary
to the universal Belief of all their own People.

2. Our Adversaries say the Jews are not fit to be heard, when they speak in
the Praise of their own Nation; for they are partial to their own Glory. But
nothing could be said more to their own Honor than this, That they were
enabled by the Lord to perform so great, so useful and admirable a Work as the
present Punctation is; even then when the Christians said they were under the
Curse of God, for Crucifying of Christ. The Time of Ezra needed not the Honor,
it had as much besides as this was, there being several Books of Scripture then
written by Men divinely inspired; but the poor ignorant Jews, A. D. 500.
despised of all the World, and rejected of God for their Unbelief, wanted such
an Encomium. So that by their own Argument, their Testimony is to be rejected;
because it is in their own Cause, and for their own Glory, of which they are
too ambitious.

3. But we deny that Aben Ezra, Kimki, Cosri, and the Author of Tsak Sephataim,
do suppose the Points to be a Novel Invention. For,

First, We shall produce plainer Testimonies out of these very Authors, wherein
they plainly express themselves for the Antiquity of the Points.

Secondly, We shall prove they have wrested those places they have collected;
and that the genuine Sense of the Authors, in those very places they have
alleged out of them, is very consonant unto, and does well agree with what the
same Authors say elsewhere for the Antiquity of the Points.

We shall begin, in the First place, with Aben Ezra; who, by Elias and his
Followers, is esteemed Instar Omnium; none being, in their Opinion, so fully of
their mind in this Matter.

CHAP. III. The Opinion of Aben Ezra for the Antiquity of the Points,
particularly considered.
IN the Consideration of Aben Ezra's Opinion, we shall, First, Produce plain
Testimony out of him, for the Antiquity of the Points. And then, Secondly,
Discover the Frauds and Violence which Elias and his Followers have used to
wrest his words; in the places they allege out of him.

First then, We shall produce what he says for the Antiquity of the Points;
and to this purpose we shall translate a full Testimony out of his Book,
entitled, Mozenee haleshon hakkodesh, toward the beginning of it, as it is
delivered by Buxtorf, De Punct. Origin, page 13. The words are these, or to
this effect, viz. The words of the Lord are pure Words, or Sayings, preserved
by the hands of holy Men, one Generation after another: For they were
sanctified from the Womb; they heard the holy words at the Mouth of him who is
most excellent in Holiness; and they were Interpeters between him ( viz. the
Lord,) and between Jacob. The holy People and these were before the building of
that holy House ( viz. the Temple,) and when it stood upon its Basis, or
Foundation; and after it, until the Vision and Prophecy was sealed up. But
after a few years, about the time of the building of the holy House the second
time, at that time the Spirit of the Lord, the Spirit of Wisdom and
Understanding rested upon the Men of that House that were called, Anashee
keneset haggedolah, The Men of the great Synagogue, or Sanhedrim, to explain
all that was sealed up in the Command.And the words that are translated by the
Mouth of the Just Men from the Mouth of the former and latter Prophets, (that
is, delivered by Oral Tradition, from hand to hand.) Also they were rendering a
Reason, (or restoring the Accent Meshebe taam, Prove. 26.16.) and taught their
Posterity, Chephets Colinian, the sense of every word or thing; al jad taamee
hamikra, by the hand or means of the Accents of the Scripture: And the Kings
and the Ministers they taught their Posterity; and the closed Sections, and the
open Sections: And what continues, carries on the sense (in opposition to the
Pause,) and the Verses or Pauses that stop the sense; and they were Eyes to the
Blind; therefore we go in their steps, and follow after them, and lean upon
them in all the Expositions of Scripture. And after the Captivity of our
Fathers from the Holy City, the Lord stirred up the Spirit of his Saints; and
the Chief of them was our holy Rabbi (viz. Judah) to compose what was noted in
loose Writings of the Commands of our God, and that is the Mishna; whereunto
nothing may be added, nor may any thing be taken away from it. Also after them,
came other holy Princes, and pious Hero's, and they are the Men of the Talmud (
viz. the Gemarists,) and they went on in their paths ( viz. of the Masters of
the Mishna,) and they took up the Stones out of the Highways of the Testimony,
and they removed every Stumbling-stone out of the paths of the Lord. And after
this, stood up in Israel, according to the good Hand of our God upon us, two
great Rows, or Orders, ( Neh. 12.31.) the one keeping the Walls of the
Sanctuary of Strength, Dan. 11.31. (founded by the Hand of our God,) that no
Stranger may be able to destroy it. Now this Sanctuary, is the Holy Books of
Scripture; and the Men of this Row or Order, are the Men of the Masora, or the
Masorites, who separated all the mixed Multitude from the holy People,
(alluding to Nehem. 13.3. and meaning what is Humane from what is Divine, in
Correcting the Copy:) And they numbered the Men of the Sanctuary, from Two or
Eleven, to the end that no Stranger might draw near to the Gates of
Righteousness. Blessed be the Lord our God, who has put such a thing as this
in the heart of the rest of the Kingdom of his Priests, to beautify his House,
which is a House of Wisdom; as Solomon says, Wisdom has built her House. And
the second Row, that goes over against it, And I go after it, Neh. 12.38. are
those that are expert in War, alluding unto Cant. 3.8. in the Law, or about the
Law; and they are the Grammarians. -- Thus far Aben Ezra.

In this place (says Buxtorf) Aben Ezra does elegantly and discreetly Expound
in what manner, and by whom the holy Word of God was preserved from the
Beginning, quite down to the Time of the Grammarians; and what was done in
every Age about the Preservation thereof, and by whom it was done.

For, First, he says, The true and genuine Sense of the Word of God was
preserved (without Points) by holy Men, such as Moses, and the Prophets, unto
the time of the Second Temple, and the time wherein Vision and Prophecy were
sealed up.

Secondly, After the building of the Second House, about the ending of
Prophecy, or the Prophetic Gift and Ministry, God raised up other holy Men, to
wit, the Men of the Great Synagogue, (that is to say, Ezra, with his Council,)
who preserved the Word of God, which was brought to them by Oral Tradition.
This Holy Scripture they did by other means than Tradition, with great care and
study deliver down to Posterity: But how they did this, and what in particular
it was that the Men of the Great Synagogue did about the Preservation of the
Scripture; this he does teach particularly, and by Parts.

For, First, he says, That this was done, Al jad taamee hamikra, By the means
of the Accents of the Scripture.

Secondly, By the Kings and Ministers, that is the Vowels. The Kings he calls
afterward seven, viz. Holem, Shurek, Chirek, Pathak, Segol, Kamets, Tsere: And
the Ministers, Sheva, Mute, Mobile, and Compound: And he does not mean the
Accents which the Grammarians divided into Kings and Ministers. (Vid. Balmes,
cap. 3. of the Points, more of this.)

Thirdly, By the Doctrine concerning the Sections that are close, open, or
continued; Hasetumim, Vpetuchim, Vdebikim.

Fourthly, By Hapesukim, the Verses, or the Distinction of the Scripture into
Verses; by these helps he says they are like Eyes to the Blind, and in their
Steps we go, in Reading and Expounding the Scripture at this time: He says, we
every where lean on their Exposition of the Scripture, and therefore not of the
Tiberian Masorites.

Thirdly, In the Third place, after the Men of the Great Synagogue, he proceeds
to the Masters of the Mishna, and to them he chiefly ascribes the true
Explication of the Precepts of God.

Fourthly, He makes the Talmudists, or Gemarists, succeed the Masters of the
Mishna; and to these he ascribes the Illustration and Explication of the
Doctrine of the Mishna, and their Disputations.

Fifthly, He says, By the good Hand of God to Israel, he raised up Two other
Orders of Men, laboring profitably for the Preservation of the Scripture. The
First Order he ascribes to the Masorites; but unto these he ascribes no
Invention, either of the Points, or of the Accents, or of the Distinctions. But
he principally commends these, for Two things.

First, That they did separate every thing that was strange (that is, Foreign
or Humane) from the Books of Scripture, if any thing had by hap crept into it.

Secondly, That they numbered the Words and Letters of the Books of Scripture,
that so there might be no way left whereby the Text could be corrupted in time
to come. And agreeing to this, is what he writes of the Masorites, in his Book
entitled, Iesudee Mora, -- Truly there is a Reward to the Works of the
Masorites, who are like those who keep the Walls of a City: For by reason of
them, the Law of the Lord, and the holy Books of Scripture, do stand in their
Form, without any Addition, or Diminution. This is the sum and substance of
Aben Ezra's words: From whence it appears (says Buxtorf) as clear as the
Noonday:

First, That he did not make the Tiberian Masorites, but the Men of the Great
Synagogue (the Head of whom was Ezra,) to be the Authors of the Invention of
all the Points, Accents and Distinctions: For he reckons up the Tiberian
Masorites long after the Authors of the Points, Accents and Distinctions. Nor
is there left any room for that Exception, That he speaks only of the Power and
Force of the Points and Accents: For his Words are too manifest, and the order
of his Speech will not allow this; for he shows what was done in every Age, for
the Preservation of the Scripture: But if he had spoken here of the Oral
Explication of the Scripture only, what then did the Men of the Great Synagogue
do, other than those before them? Did not they do this, and for this were
commended by him? And if he thought the Masorites invented them first, why did
he not expressly ascribe it to them, when he made mention of them? In vain
therefore does Capellus, in his Vindiciae, make the Objection, That the Sound,
and not the Shapes, were meant by him of Ezra, when he knew Buxtorf had already
Answered it. Moreover, Capellus says, Aben Ezra is as much for him elsewhere,
and so no witness against him.

Resp. This we deny: But if he were, he is for us here, and therefore can be no
Witness against us: We can spare him, having all besides him for us; better
than they can, who have not another for them.

Secondly, He says, Why did not Ezra as well Write the Oral Law, as Point the
Text?

Reply: Because the Scripture is the only Rule of Faith, and so esteemed by
them; but the Oral Law was but Humane Tradition, of no account then, however it
were afterward admired; and it then became needful to Point the Text, that it
might be plain, seeing they had in part forgotten their Tongue in Captivity,
and was never since restored to be Vulgar.

Capellus asks, Why might not Ezra deliver the Sounds of the Points to Israel,
as well as the Oral Law, by Tradition?

Resp. We deny the Oral Law was delivered by Ezra to Israel; but if it were, as
the Jews imagine, yet was there not that need to write one as the other: They
could keep their Oral Traditions, notwithstanding any Alteration of their
Language; but so could they not preserve the true Punctation of the Language,
when it ceased to be vulgarly spoken or understood. But when through their many
Dispersions they were in danger of losing their Traditions, then they wrote
them; as R. Samuel Arcuvolti declares in Arugath Habosem, who says also, It was
necessary that the Points were placed in Ezra's time, though it had been
unlawful before; because the Sound could not be preserved longer than that time
without them.

Capellus Vindiciae, lib. 1. cap. 1. 11. objects, Was not Ezra enough, with a
Prophetic Spirit, what need of the Sanhedrin?

Resp. (1.) The Sanhedrin was instituted. (2.) Others were Prophets, as Haggai,
etc. and why must they be excluded? (3.) This is the General Opinion of Jews
and Christians, That Ezra, and the Prophets did act in Conjunction with the
Great Sanhedrin, in the Reformation of the Church, as they were commanded. But
of this more elsewhere may be spoken.

Capellus Vindiciae, lib. 1. cap. 1.. 9. says, What Aben Ezra says of Ezra, is
no more than is due to any skilful Grammarian.

Resp. Not so. For, First, as Cosri says, It Is a Work Divine, and requires
Divine Aid, to give the true Sense of Scripture infallibly and truly.

2. That might be done by Ezra, by Humane Ability, whilst the Language and the
Text was rightly read and pronounced, that could not be done, after the Tongue
ceased to be vulgarly understood, without Divine Aid: And therefore, though it
were no more than Humane Skill, yet none since Ezra could be supposed to have
that, and therefore it might well enough belong to him on that account.

So that here is an express Testimony of Aben Ezra for the Antiquity of the
Points, notwithstanding all the Exceptions made by Capellus against it.

CHAP. IV. The several places of Aben Ezra wrested by Elias and his Followers,
considered: Their genuine Sense declared.
WE are now to discover the Fraud and Violence used by Elias and his Followers,
to wrest the places of Aben Ezra, in the places they allege out of him, in
favor of their Opinion; and to show, that what he says in those places, does
well enough agree with what he has elsewhere said for the Antiquity of the
Points.

The First place we shall take notice of, is in his Book, entitled, Tsakooth,
alleged by Elias, and after him by Capellus: Wherein Aben Ezra says, There
are many Interpreters, who charge the Author of the Distinction of the Text
into Verses, with Error therein, but they do not speak what is right, and
Rabbi Moses the Priest is one of them, etc. But I admire at this greatly, how
the Author of the Stops or Verses should err, ve aph ki im hu Ezra hasopher,
seeing he was Ezra the Scribe. The Novelists read it, And if he were Ezra the
Scribe. This in general he says, That there has arisen no Man so wise as the
Author of the Pauses since his time; for we see that throughout the whole
Scripture he has made the stops no where but where they should be placed. Thus
far Aben Ezra.

Here Elias owneth, that Hamaphsik, the Author of the Stops, is meant the
Punctator; but he wonders why he is called so in the Singular Number, being
elsewhere in this Book mentioned in the Plural. But this Buxorf denies is any
where mentioned in the Plural in this Book, though the Matter is small, whether
the one, or the other; for the Singular might mean Ezra, as the Head of the
Sanhedrin; and the Plural might mean Ezra, in Conjunction with the Sanhedrin.

Elias inferrs from this place, That Aben Ezra did not believe the Points were
given by Moses on Sinai.

Resp. We grant it: For we say it was his Opinion that Ezra placed them: And
that Opinion does well agree with this place.

Capellus objecteth, It Is too mean a Commendation of the Author of the Points,
to suppose he meant Ezra, when he says, There has been none so wise since him,
and that it was done perfectly right.

Resp. It Is Praise enough for Ezra or Moses either, to say, That none has
arisen like him: And, That the Punctation is exactly according to the Mind of
God, and in all the Parts of it true and right. And as to Others, who charge
the Punctator with Error, he reproves them for the same, seeing (as he says)
that Ezra the Scribe made it.

Capellus infers hence, That some, as this R. Moses, etc had no such esteem for
the Points, and did not think they were made by Ezra.

Resp. First, But Aben Ezra is not of that mind; which is the thing that is to
be proved: For he reproves it in them, and they want Witnesses who seek after
those who are convicted of Error therein. But they might charge the Punctator
with Error, and yet allow Ezra to be the Author of it, by supposing, as
Capellus himself does, that there might be crept into the Text some Mistakes,
through the length of Time, and humane Frailty of the Scribes, who wrote the
Bible from the Copies that were before them: And it is more likely, that both
Aben Ezra, and these Persons, owned Ezra to be the Author of the Points,
because he makes that an Argument, seeing Ezra made it, or if Ezra made it;
either way show it was a received Principle among them, and therefore goes not
to prove it, but improves it, and infers from it, as a thing acknowledged,
especially by those he reproves.

Secondly, That Aben Ezra does call the Punctator Hamaphsik, and means Ezra
thereby, appears by what he says elsewhere, as on Esther 9.27. on the words
Keketabam, according to their writing: The sense is (says he,) that the Volume
of Esther should be read even just as it was written, without Points; and that
because Ezra the Scribe, Hiphsick Hapesukim, distinguished the Verses, which
was not done till many years after the writing of this Volume: Therefore, our
Wise Man, of happy memory, commanded, That he that reads this Volume of Esther,
should not stop at the end of a Verse. -- Hence Buxtorf observes, He saw the
Volume of Esther Unpointed.

Now in this place he expressly names Ezra the Hammappesik, or Pauser, or
Punctator: And in other places it is manifest, that the Hammappesik, or maker
of the Verses, was also the Maker of the Points, Vowels and Accents: Which
Elias himself allows, saying, Vpeerush hammappesik mi shesam happesikat
hattaamim: And the meaning of Hammappesick, the Pauser, the Punctator, is he
that places the Pausing of the Accents.

Hence Dr. Walton and Capellus are mistaken, who suppose that by Hammappesik,
no more is intended, than he that placed the two thick Strokes, or divided the
Text into Verses; which they allow to be much more ancient than the Points,
Vowels and Accents: For, as Buxtorf observes, Aben Ezra, in Tsakooth, does
often use the Verb Hiphsik, not only to distinguish the Verses by two Points or
Strokes, but also to distinguish Verses by distinguishing Accents and Pauses:
As he says in Tsakooth, before the words last alleged, Behold (says he) we
see that he ( viz. Hammappesik the Punctator) has put the Accent in the word
Sham, Genesis 21.33. which joyneth that with the word Shem that follows: But in
Exodus 34.5 there Hiphsiko he makes a Stop, (that is, makes an Athnak,) which
distinguishes it from the following words. So that Hammappesick the
Accentator, or Punctator, is the same with Baal Hattaamim, the Author of the
Accents or Punctation. For so Aben Ezra, in his Commentary on this very place,
Exodus 34.5. calls him there Baal Hattaamim, the Author of the Accents; who is
here called Hammappesik, the Punctator.

Capellus in Vind. lib. 1. cap. 1.. 5. would suppose Hammaphsik to be he that
placed the Sounds and Force, but not the Shape.

Resp. But, First, Elias plainly affirms that it is he that placed the Shapes:
And so does Capellus himself allow the same elsewhere, viz. in his Arcanum,
lib. 1. cap. 2.. 5. he says there, That none may think because it is said
Maphsick in the Singular Number, the Punctator; therefore it was Ezra, and not
the Masorites, that Pointed the Text: Says he, Aben Ezra does elsewhere call
them Maphsikim, the Punctators, in the Plural, in his Book Mozenaim. So that
here he allows Maphsik to be the Placer of the Shapes, where he can but bring
it to the Masorites of Tiberias.

Capellus objects, It Is not said, Which was not done till many years after the
writing of Esther; but, Which was done not many years after the writing of
Esther.

Resp. First, It matters not which way it be read, as to the Point in debate;
it is brought to prove that Ezra was the Maphsik, the Punctator; which it
proves plainly whether way it be read, long after, or not long after; Ezra
Pointed it after both senses allow.

Capellus would fain suppose the Sound might be kept by Tradition, or Custom,
to the time of the Masorites. But this we have elsewhere showed cannot be.

Secondly, The rest of the places alleged by Elias and his Followers, out of
Aben Ezra, for the Novelty of the Points, are principally Two that commend the
Skill and Fidelity of the Masorites of Tiberias, about the Punctation. We shall
therefore,

First, Consider the scope of the places themselves, to find thereby whether he
esteemed the Masorites to be the Inventors, or Reformers and Correctors of the
Punctation. And,

Secondly, We shall consider what Aben Ezra, and Others say, in Commendation of
the Masorites of Tiberias; wherein lies all the strength of the Evidence that
Elias or his Followers do bring for the precise Time, Place and Persons, when,
where, and by whom it is supposed the Points were first invented: And we shall
here consider, whether what is spoken in Commendation of them, do belong to
them as Inventors, or as Restorers, or Correctors of the Punctation.

Thirdly, We shall show that Aben Ezra does not ascribe the Invention of the
Points to the Masorites; because he often differs from them, and opposes them;
but always follows the Punctuation, and enjoins all others so to do.

First then, We are to consider the places themselves, and the scope, and true
meaning of them.

The First is this, taken out of Aben Ezra's Book, Tsakooth, page 138. col. 2.
alleged by Elias Masoret Hammasoret, Prefat. 3. page (...) 6. The words are
these: And this is the Custom of the wise Men of Tiberias, and they are the
Foundation; for from them were the Men of the Masora, and we have from them
received all the Punctation. The place more at large is this: The Punctators
(says Aben Ezra immediately before the words alleged) are used to point Sheva
under Tau, in the word (...), Asit, which is the Second Person Feminine, that
it might not be confounded with the Masculine. Then he brings an Objection,
saying, If any one objects, What need was there to place Sheva there? for
seeing that Kamets was not under the letter Tau, was it not easily understood
that there was to be a quiescent Sheva, because it was the last letter of the
word; (for the last letter of every word that is without its own proper
moveable Vowel, Sheva, belongs to them, whether it be expressed or not.) Now
the Answer to this Objection contains the words of the Quotation; viz. And thus
the Wise Men of Tiberias have used; or thus is their Manner or Custom: And they
are the Foundation; for from them were the Men of the Masora, and from them
have we received all the Punctation. He goes on further, and says, Perhaps
they did so, that no Man might think that the Punctator had forgotten, (that is
to Point that Tau,) and doubted about it, (that is to say, how he should read
it.) This is the place at large; we are now to examine the sense and meaning of
it.

First then, he says, That there were certain Punctators that had a custom to
place Sheva under Tau, at the end of a word. Then he tells who these were that
did use so to do; and they were not all the Punctators, but those of Tiberias,
the same also who were the Masorites; Ergo, there were others who did not use
so to do, (though not of the like esteem for Skill herein as the Masorites.)
Therefore, Thirdly, He shows what value this Tiberian Punctation ought to be of
with us; which is by him expressed to be of such worth, as that we ought to
follow them in all things, as being the most diligent of the Punctators.

What Capellus objects here, is, That Buxtorf translates, (...), There are some
Punctators: And thence inferrs, there were other Punctators than the Masorites.

Resp. He does not translate the word, nor does he infer from that word; but
what he says, There are some Punctators, relates to the scope of the place;
and from the same he draws this Inference, as very well he may; as might easily
be plainly demonstrated, were it worth while to enlarge upon the Point. But to
proceed:

Fourthly, He shows the End why the Masorites did thus: Which was this, lest
the Reader should think that here was something wanting, and might stick in
doubt how it should be read: Lest (says he) any one should think that the
Punctator had forgotten something. This certainly he does not say of the same
Tiberian Masorites, but of some other former Punctator: For if he had meant the
same Masorites here, he should have said, Shelo jakshob Adam ki shakachu; That
no Man might think that they had forgotten: And not Shakach; That He had
forgotten. So that Aben Ezra did not reckon the Tiberian Masorites to be the
Authors of the Punctation, but the Correctors and the Preservers thereof in its
Original Purity, as we may perceive by the scope of the place.

The Second place, the sense whereof is to be considered, is what Aben Ezra
says in his Commentary on Exodus 25.31. on the word (...), Teaseh raiti
Sepherim shebedakom Chokmee Tiberia, etc. I have seen (says he) the Books
which the Wise Men of Tiberias searched, examined, corrected, and swore their
fifteen Elders; that they had thrice considered every Word, and every Point,
and every word that is written full or defective, and behold, Iod is written in
the word (...), Teaseh; but I have not found it so in the Books of Spain,
France, or beyond the Seas, etc.' --

Now as to the sense of this place, what is more plainly spoken by these words
than this, That they had three times searched or examined the Pointed Copies?
Therefore the Pointed Copies must be in being before their time, which they
took and examined others by, and not their own invented Shapes of the Points
examined, as Dr. Walton supposes: For Aben Ezra (says he) saw the Book which
the Tiberian Masorites Badaku, searched or examined: He does not say, which
they made or invented. Of these Books he says, they swore the fifteen Elders;
that they had thrice considered every Word, and every Point, and every Word
that was written full or defective. Here we see their Consideration was as much
on the Words as the Points; and of the words written full or defective, as
either; and they can be no more thought hereby to be the Authors of the
Punctation, than of the Letters and Words, and of the Words full and defective;
for as much is said of the one as of the other. If therefore they only
searched, examined, or tried the one, they did no more to the other.

Again, What is it that Aben Ezra found in these Books thus examined by the
Masorites of Tiberias? Why it is this, That the letter Jod is there written in
the word (...), Teaseh, which he did not find in other Copies, in Spain,
France, or beyond Sea. Can we hence suppose that Aben Ezra did reckon that the
Masorites were the Inventors or Authors of the letter Iod! Or of the placing it
to the word? No one will say we can. No more can we suppose it of the Points,
not yet so much, seeing the Instance alleged is a Letter, and not a Point. So
that the only thing that appears by his words, is, That he accounted the Books
or Copies which they had examined by the best they had, to be the most exactly
corrected, and therefore fittest to be the Standard: And on this account he
might well say of them, they were, (...), The Foundation, or Standard; for we
still keep to their Copy, and all our Bibles now have Iod in (...), Teaseh, as
the Masorites have, without supposing them to be the Authors of any part of the
Scripture.

CHAP. V. What Aben Ezra, and other Jews, do say of the Masorites Skill, That
they did not suppose them to be the Authors of the Points, is proved.
WE come now to the Second thing to be discussed: And that is what Aben Ezra,
and the rest of the Rabbis, do say of the Masorites of Tiberias, in
Commendation of their Skill and Accuracy in the Pronunciation of their Tongue,
and about the Punctation. And here we are to enquire, Whether what they speak
concerning them, does belong to the Masorites, as Authors, or Correctors and
Restorers only of the Punctation.

The Testimonies which Buxtorf collects, in Commendation of the Masorites
Accuracy, are these:

First, Aben Ezra says, in his Book Tsakooth, fol. 136. col. 1. where speaking
of long Kamets, he says, The Men of Tiberias, also the Wise Men of Egypt and
Africa, knew how to read Kamets Gadol. And fol. 135. col. 1. and says that
wise Man beforementioned, (viz. R. Judah Chi^g, the first Hebrew Grammarian,)
That the Men of Tiberias read Sheva Mobile, if Iod follow after it, with the
Vowel Chirek, as (...), Iichesiahu Iermiahu: And if Kamets Gadol follow Sheva,
as in (...), it is read as Pathak short, as Barakah Shamarim, etc. In his Book
Mozenaiim, fol. 221. col. 2. Rabbi Judah the Grammarian, whose rest (says he)
be in Eden, says, That Daleth in the word (...), Deu, is read as if with
Shurek; because it has after it a Guttural letter with Shurek, and so is
(...), Deeh; or (...), Dei; and so are all like unto it: And they say that so
the Men of Tiberias did pronounce.

Ephodeus, in his Grammar, cap. 5. fol. 35. col. 2. speaking of the true
Pronunciation of the Hebrew Tongue, and that it is unknown at this time, he
says, And Rabbi Jonah (the next Grammarian to R. Judah) has already written,
that Resh has certain peculiar Properties, according to the way of the Men of
Tiberias; for they are more clear (or elegant) in the Holy Tongue, than all the
Hebrews. The same he repeateth, cap. 32.

Balmesius, in his Grammar, under letter F 3. page 2. writes thus: And the
Tiberian Readers read it like the Pronunciation of Aleph with Shurek; but I
know not the reason (says he) why they so read it; speaking of Vau in the
beginning of a word before a letter, with Sheva Mobile marked, which should be
pronounced with Shurek, but here has no other sound than a gentle Aleph.

And of this Pronunciation of Vau as Aleph, Aben Ezra says, fol. 135. col. 2.
I sakooth, So have we received of our Fathers, one age after another, that it
should be so pronounced. So Kimchi in Miklol, fol. 62. a.

Again, Balmesius says, in letter F 1. page 1. speaking of the letters (...)
and (...) Cheth and Ain, in the end of words, he says: For many Grammarians
which I have seen, lean upon the Readers of Tiberias, who pronounce it as if
there were Aleph. For Example: They read (...), Misbeach; as if it were written
(...).

In the Book entitled, Keneh binah, fol. 33. ^ And in all the Variations (or
diverse Pronunciations of the Points,) which are oftentimes diverse ways
pronounced, The Men of Tiberias are clear, more accurate and skilful, (...),
than all the Hebrews that are in other Countries.

In the Book Leviath Chen, whose Author is R. Immanuel, Son of Iekutiel, (...)
Benevontine, cap. 3. fol. 5. And although there does not appear any difference
in our present reading between Koph and Caph with Dagesh, and between Teth and
Tau daggesh'd, and between Vau and Beth raphated; the Men of Tiberias, which
were in those days, were more expert in our Language than all the Jews: They
made a difference between them; and so they made a difference between the
reading of Pathak and Kamets, and between Segol and Tsere, and between Kibbuez
and Shurek. -- Again, cap. 18. fol. 19. col. 1. where treating of the
Pronunciation of the letter Resh, he says, In the reading of this letter Resh
dageshed and raphated, the Men of Tiberias were expert (bekiim, skilful,) in
those days, and in that time. And in fol. 105. col. 2. treating of the
difference that is between diverse Letters and Vowels in Verse, he says, And we
are not skillful in the difference of their Sound (or Pronunciation,) like the
Men of Tiberias, who were of old time more clear or skilful in the Language
than all the Hebrews, even as the best Grammarians have testified concerning
them.

Rabbi David Kimchi in Michlol, fol. 108. col. 2. treating of the letters
Begadkephat, says, That the Author of the Book Ietsirah, has written Resh
with them: For he says there are seven Letters that double, as Begadkephrat;
but the pronouncing of Resh raphated and dageshed, we do not hear or sound: But
I have found (says Kimki) in a Book of one Eli, the Son of Judah Hannasir, who
says, That the sign or difference between Resh dageshed or raphated, or hard
and gentle, belongs only to the Sons of Mesia, which is Tiberias; for they
speak them in their Talk, and read them in reading the Scripture; and it is in
the Mouths of Men, Women and Children; it departs not from them, and without
any difference they read and speak Resh: Where it should be pronounced h^rd,
there they use to speak or read it with Dagesh, and where it should be gentle
or soft with Rapha, etc.

Rabbi Iehudah Mulcatus, in his Commentary on the Book of Cosri, part 2. sect.
80. fol. 130. a. on those words of the Author Cosri, Or to hasten the reading,
he says these words, Teach the properties of right Reading, which were known
to him, although they are now strange to us; as also many the like are in the
reading of the Men of Tiberias, which is different from our reading. Vid Buxt.
de Punct. Orig. par. 1. page 24, 25.

From all which Testimonies, it appears, says Buxtorf, page 25. That the Men
of Tiberias were no otherwise famous among the Jews, who were but Five hundred,
or Six hundred years at most after them. Then,

First, For their skill at decently reading and pronouncing the Hebrew Tongue.

Secondly, And also for their study and care to preserve the true reading of
the Scripture.

For if they had believed them to have been the Authors of the Points,
doubtless they would not have passed over that with such negligent silence, as
not to speak a word about it, when they speak of them, and of their
Commendation.

Nor can their being praised for Skill und Accuracy in the Punctation, suppose
them the Authors of it: For none need be told, that the Inventors of any Art
are well acquainted with their own Invention; and it is a slender Encomium to
say of such, That they understand there own Invention: For if they should not
well understand their own Device, how should others? or who else should?

Of their Skill and Accuracy Ierom seems to have knowledge, alluding thereunto
on Genesis 49.21. and that he hired a Jew of Tiberias to teach him to read: And as
neither He nor the Rabbis ascribe the Invention of the Points to them; so the
Pointed Bible of Hillel, in being long before their time, proves the contrary.
And so much for the Second thing; that is, What Aben Ezra, and the rest of the
Rabbis say in Commendation of the Skill and Accuracy of the Tiberian
Masorites, in the Pronunciation of the Hebrew Tongue; and whether what they say
of them, does belong unto them as Authors, or as Correctors of the Punctation.

Thirdly, The Third thing to be proved, is, That Aben Ezra does not ascribe the
Invention of the Points to the Masorites; because he often differs from them,
and opposes them, but always follows the Punctation, and enjoins all others so
to do: As may be seen not only in the places before alleged; where he reproves
those who charge the Punctator with Error; and says, He has Pointed right in
every place: And not only in his Comment on Exodus 34.5. but also in other
places he expresses the same esteem of the Authority and Perfection of the
Punctation: As for Instance: in his Book Tsakooth, page 179. where he brings
Hosea 4.10. They left off to take heed; he there says, If we should say so, we
should thereby accuse Hammappesik Happesukim the Punctator, that he did not
know the reason of the Accents; but far be it from us so to do: Chalilah,
Chalilah. And in his Comment on Exodus 6.28. where our Translation ends that
Verse, as also Deuteronomy. 2.16. with a Comma, the sense not making a Period: About
which matter he says, It is to be admired, that the Orderer of the Parasha's
should here divide into two Verses, that which by the sense seems to be but
one: And the like is done, Deuteronomy. 2.16. We know not why it is done; but (says
he) it is like Baal Hahapesakoth, the Punctator, did know the reason why he did
so; for his Knowledge is larger than ours. -- Hence he advises us to follow
the Punctator always, as in his Book Mosenaim, fol. 19. b. And before I expound
unto thee all these things already mentioned (says he,) I must admonish thee,
that thou do go after Baal Hataamim, the Punctator: And whatsoever Exposition
is not according to the Exposition of the Accents, do not agree to it, nor
hearken to it; and do not mind the words concerning the Ten Verses that one of
the Geonim says do belong to the Verses following, or coming after them; for
they are all right, and they are distinguished or divided according as the
sense requires. -- And page 198. col. 1. disputing against some, he says, And
moreover, if their words were true, Lo hajah baal hateamim maphsik beathnak,
besoph bemillath vejiphol, etc. the Baal Hateamim, who is Hammappesik, the
Punctator, would not have made the Stop or Pause with Athnak in the end in the
word Vejiphol, Genesis 45.14. -- So page 200. b. He knows (says he) the Secret
of Baal Hateamim, the Punctator. -- And elsewhere says Buxtorf, He says it is
of great moment to keep the way of the Accents.

Now that Aben Ezra does not suppose the Punctator, or Punctators, to be the
Masorites, appears by this, That he treats the Masorites quite otherwise than
he has done the Punctator.

For, First, When he speaks of the Masorites, he does not call them, Baal
hateamim and hammappesik, the Punctator; but he calls them, The Wise Men of the
Masora; The Men of the Masora; and Baal Hammasoret, the Author of the Masora.
And,

Secondly, He often differs from, and opposes the Masorites, but he never
opposes the Punctator. And that he often differs from the Masorites, appears by
these Instances.

In Tsakooth, 149. concerning the word (...), Vehinnehhu, Jer. 18.3. which the
Keri reads, divided into two words, (...), Vehinneh hu, with Aleph added: As he
reckons by the Masorites, he says, This is not defective of Aleph, (that is,
wanting Aleph;) for it is one word, though the Men of the Masora do say it is
defective.

And fol. 150. col. 2. Ve taam anishee hammasoret eno taam; And the Reason of
the Men of the Masora, is no Reason.

So fol. 190. he says concerning a Masoretick Observation, Ein tserik; There
is not need of it. And so of others, fol. 191.2. fol 192.1. and elsewhere.

In the end of the Preface prefixed to the great Bibles, thus he says,
speaking of the Fifth way of Expounding Scripture, which he follows himself:
And I will not (says he) mention the Reasons of the Men of the Masora, why
this word is written full, and why the other word is written defective; for all
their Reasons are allegorical, their Reasons are only good for Children; for
sometimes the Writer writes a word full, which he does to make it plain; and
sometimes he writes a word more obscurely, by the defect of a letter, for
brevity sake, etc. but their Reasons are only good for Children. -- So that we
see he contemns and often opposes the Masorites; but we showed before, he
honors, and always follows the Punctator: Therefore we conclude that Aben
Ezra does not suppose the Masorites to be the Punctator or Authors of the
Punctation.

Capellus Vind. lib. 1. cap. 1. sect. 10. objecteth, There might be two sorts
of Masorites: First, the Tiberian Punctators; and long after them, those that
numbered the Letters, and counted the Keri Uketib.

Resp. (1.) Neither Aben Ezra, nor any other Jew, make any such distinction.
(2.) A posse ad esse non valet consequentia. (3.) 'Twould injure the former
Masorites; for he opposes and despises the Masorites in General; and if the
Punctators, whom he reverenceth so much, were Masorites also, he would no doubt
have excepted them particularly. (4.) Capellus has hereby lost his Cause, by
supposing the Authors of the Punctation, or Shapes of the Points, were long
before those that numbered the Letters, seeing the Talmuds, made before A. D.
500. do call those that numbered the Letters, the Ancients, as being long before
their time; whereas Capellus his Opinion, is, That the Authors of the Points
were not till after the Talmuds.

Capellus Vind. cap. 1. sect. 12. says, If the Masorites restored and
corrected the Punctation, our Faith is humane, if built thereon, as much as if
they invented it.

Resp. Not so: For no more is required to preserve the Text incorrupt, from Age
to Age, than humane Care and Industry, under the conduct of Divine Providence;
but the giving forth of the Scripture, and the ascertaining the Sense of
Scripture, requires Divine Assistance, and Evidence of Divine Authority.

Capellus objects, sect. 13. ibid. Vind. The Masorites had few Pointed Copies
to correct by, or many: If few, how came they to differ? And if many, they were
either about great Matters, or small: If about great Matters, then we stand on
Humane Authority; if about small, then 'twas not worth their labor.

Resp. (1.) Themselves say nothing can be certainly spoken of those Times, by
reason of the darkness of the History thereof, and therefore they should not
press us in this Point. (2.) How many Pointed Copies were then, we matter not;
but that there were very great and many differences in the Copies, we deny; the
Providence of God watching over his Word, to preserve it to the end of Time:
The Superstitious care of the Jews, and the Religious Care of the Christians,
would not consist with it; but some small difference might be suffered, to
quicken the diligence of those whose duty and concern it was to preserve it;
which might be well worth their time to Correct, and justly deserve the Praise
of Posterity for the same.

Capellus objecteth, They must destroy all other Copies besides that which they
corrected; and this was impossible to be done.

Resp. No more need for this, than for to burn Heretics, and destroy all that
differ from us: No, Truth is Light, the shining whereof dispelleth Darkness;
and so is their Copy universally embraced as the Standard.

Capellus, Vind. cap. 1. sect. 17. says, How know we that the Masorites did
correct the Copies, seeing there is no History of it? And if they did correct
them, (2.) It might be fallacious, and stuffed with many things in favor of
their own Nation. (3.) Who can believe that these Men chose the best and most
genuine sense always, and never mistook, either by Error, Negligence or
Design? (4.) Who can believe that our present Copies are the same as those
which the Masorites corrected?

Resp. They most need to Answer these Questions themselves, who say they are
the Authors of the Punctation: We allow them no more than to be Examiners or
Correctors of it; which their superstitious Care of the Text, and the general
Esteem of the Jews of those Masorites, is enough to evidence the Truth of, as
much as we need to lean on them for. But how do they solve these Doubts? Why,
they say the Punctation yields generally a genuine and right Sense. If
therefore this be strong enough to satisfy those who make them the Authors of
the Punctation, that they were able and faithful in Pointing the Text; much
more may it be a sufficient Satisfaction to those who allow them no further
hand about the Punctation, than barely to examine the Copies, and follow the
most and best Approved in their time. These are the faint Efforts of Persons
engaged in a desperate Cause.

And thus we have proved at large, that Aben Ezra is not of the Opinion that
the Masorites Pointed the Text; and all that he says about the Points, and the
Punctation, proves the contrary: As also all that Aben Ezra, and the other
Rabbis, say in Commendation of the Skill and Accuracy of the Tiberian
Masorites, proves no more than that they were skilful and faithful Correctors,
or Collaters and Examiners of the Copies of their time; and does not at all
belong to them as Authors, or Inventors of the Punctation.

We are nextly to consider what other Rabbis, Elias and his Followers, bring
to countenance their Opinion; though not one of the places they allege speak
one word about the Masorites of Tiberias, much less of their being the
Inventors of the Punctation.

CHAP. VI. The Testimonies of Cosri, R. David Kimchi, and Tsak Sephataim,
considered. Inferences from the Silence of the Jews, and the Insufficiency of
the Evidences for the Novelty of the Points.
2. The Testimony of Cosri considered.
ELias in Masoret Hammasoret, (...) 2. col. 2. says, Thus says the Author of
Cosri, Without doubt it was kept in their Hearts, (that is, the Points from the
time of Moses was,) with Pathak, and Kamets, and Sheva, and Chirek, and the
Accents, etc. And they put seven Kings and Accents, which were Signs to express
those Sounds which they had received of Moses from Sinai. And what think
thou of their ordering the Scripture first with Verses, and after that with
Points, and then with Accents, and then with the Masora, with the Observation
of the Words that are full or defective, until they had numbered the Letters?
etc. --

Now, Quid sibi vult Elias? What does Elias infer from hence? Why says he,
Behold, it was not his mind that Moses wrote them. We grant it: What then? Why
says Elias, Oh that the Author of Cosri had explained to us who he meant, when
he says, Vesamu! and they put, or placed them ( viz. the Points,) whether he
meant the Men of the Great Synagogue, or the Masorites! But I think he meant
the Masorites, says Elias. But why he thinks so, he says not. Well, be it so,
the Jews think otherwise: And We think otherwise, that he meant the Men of the
Great Synagogue, both by the sense of the place in Cosri, and by the Exposition
of Muscatus upon the place.

First, As to the sense of the place, the Author of Cosri says in the place
alleged, That the Punctation was certainly made by Men divinely assisted, or
it had never been so universally received as it is, and else Men of like
ability might be able to do the like: And it was done (says he) with admirable
Wisdom; for it appears that in the fixing of the Points and Accents, there is
such an Order therein, that cannot be done but by Divine Assistance; which is
far otherwise than our Wisdom can attain unto, in every respect, etc.

Now all the Jews acknowledge that none have been Divinely Inspired, and
Infallibly Assisted, since the time of Ezra, that Prophecy ceased: And
therefore Cosri must needs mean the time of Ezra by Vesamu, And they put them.
And Secondly, so R. Judah Muscatus, upon the place, Vesamu, And they put them,
does expound it, where he says, It appears to me, that by this indefinite
Speech, he means the Men of the Great Synagogue; for unto that time the
Antecedents and Consequents, or what is spoken before it and after it, does
agree.

And thus we see the Father-in-Law, Cosri, is of the same mind with his
Son-in-Law, Aben Ezra, that the Points were as ancient as Ezra's time.

3. R. David Kimchi's Testimony examined.
Elias in Masoret Hammasoret, (...) 7 th. 2 d. alleges what Kimchi says in
Miklol, page 69, 70. (...) And the Orderers of the Pointing have put a
difference between the Third Pers. Sing. of the Preterperfect Tense of Niphal,
and the Participle Benoni Sing. for their reading is the same, viz. Niphkad,
alike in both; and they have Pointed the middle radical letter of the
Preterperfect Tense with Pathak, and the Participle Benoni with Kamets.

Now all that is hence objected, is, That if Kimchi had thought that Moses or
Ezra had Pointed the Text, he would not have spoken in the Plural Numb.
Metakkenim, the Orderers; but in the Singular.

Res. (1.) That does not follow; for he might mean Ezra, in Conjunction with
the Men of the Great Synagogue collectively.

(2.) Other places of Kimchi show what his Opinion is herein; though, as
Buxtorf observes, the Jews speak of Ezra, and the Sanh^drin, in the Singular or
Plural Number indifferently: Ezra is called the Head of the Scribes; and Aben
Ezra, speaking of the 18. Tikkun Sopherim on Numb. 12.12. He calls them there,
Tikkun Ezra.

But to ^ind Kimchi's Mind plainly, we shall view the places where he speaks
his Thoughts about it: As,

First, In his Preface on Joshua; where speaking of the Keri and Ketib, he
says, It appears that these words were found thus, (...) that in the former
Captivity the (...), and the Wise Men were disper^ed; and they that knew the
Law, were dead: And the Men of the Great Sanhedrin, who restored the Law to its
old Estate, they found some difference between some Copies; and they followed
the agreement of the majority of Copies, according to their knowledge; and in
the place that they could not well understand clearly which was the rightest
and truest, there they wrote one, and did not Poin^ it; or else they wrote it
without, and did not write it within: That is, in the line; and so they wrote
one way in the Line, and another in the Margin.

Now (says Buxtorf) in that Kimchi says of the Men of the Great Sanhedrin,
that restored the Law to its pristine state, That the one of these words that
have a different reading, they did not Point: Does it not plainly follow then,
in his Opinion, that they Pointed the other? Or else how was the not Pointing
the one, a Mark to distinguish it from the other? And so by Consequence the
Points were then in use.

Capellus Vind. lib. 1. cap. 1. sect. 27. says, What if he say Kimki here
contradicts what he says elsewhere?

Resp. Then he should prove it: But this he does not attempt to do.

He objects, The words, And they did not Point it, are not necessarily to be
understood of the Great Sanhedrin.

Resp. But they are necessarily to be understood of them; for none else are
spoken of but them only.

Capellus, after all his Cavils, says, Sed esto fuerit and Kimchi, and Aben
Ezra, and Auctor Cosri, in ea sententia Esdram Auctorem esse and Inventorem
Punctorum; id nihil Officit Sententiae meae ^orum enim testimonia eo tantum
Adduxi, ut probarem Mosem non esse eorum Auctorem: But be it so, that Kimchi,
Aben Ezra, and the Author of Cosri, were of that Opinion, That Ezra was the
Author and Inventor of the Points; that nothing hurts my Position; for I
brought their Testimony to this intent only, that I might prove that Moses was
not their Author.

Resp. And this we do not here debate: In vain then are all his Cavils, and all
the Evidences for the Time, Place and Persons, when, where, and by whom the
Points were invented; for they have no other, and no other does Elias bring to
prove the Masorites of Tiberias Pointed the Text. And yet Capellus Arcanum,
cap. 1. sect. 2, 3. cap. 2. sect. 2. cap. 3. And after him Walton, Proleg. 3.
Consider. page 228. stick not to affirm that Elias has proved this; and
therefore, whilst our hand is in, we'll produce one place more out of Kimchi,
to show his Mind about the Authors of the Points; which Elias has curtailed,
to signify the Sound, and not the Shape, but very unfairly: the place is in
Miklol, page mihi 96. For also our Rabbi's, of happy memory (says Kimchi,)
when they say, that it is necessary to give a space between words that are
joined together, (that is, apt to sound as one word, though they are two,) as
Gnal-lebabeka, be Col-lebabe^em; they do not speak this, to make a Stop or
Pause, so as that Makkaph should not be put between the two Lameds, as it is
put: But although that he do read them with Makkaph, yet he should put such a
space between them, in pronouncing them, that it may sound as if he read two
Lameds: For behold, Becol-lebabkem, Becol is pointed with Kamets, because of
Makkaph; and if it were read without Makkaph, it should be pointed with Holem:
But this our Rabbis, of happy memory, do not say; as if thereby they intended
to change the Vowels which were given to Moses on Sinai. So that here he speaks
of the Shapes of the Points, Cholem, Kamets, and Makkaph: And says, They were
given of Moses on Sinai, and must not be changed therefore.

4. The Author of Tsak Sephataim considered.
The last Testimony of Elias, is in these words of the Author of Tsak
Sephataim: We must know (says the Author) that the Punctation was given at
Sinai; not that the Tables were Pointed, but as the Holy Blessed God spoke the
Holy Tongue, those that heard it, did understand all the Motions and Sounds,
little and great, even exactly as they were pronounced out of the Mouth,
whether it was hard or gentle; so they could discern out of the Mouth of him
that read, between A Kamets and A Pathak, between E Tsere and E Segol, and
between O Cholem and O Kamets Kataph; and between V with Vau, and V without
Vau; and I with Iod, and I without Iod, etc. Masoret Hammasoret, (...) 2.

Now seeing neither Elias, nor yet Capellus, do infer from hence, either that
Esra did not Point the Text, or that the Masorites, A. D. 500. did Point it, we
need say no more about it, and therefore shall draw our Conclusions from the
Premises.

The Inferences from the Silence of the Jews, and the Insufficiency of the
Evidence for the Novelty of the Points.
First, then, we say, If the Punctation were invented and placed, A. D. 500. or
since to the Text, by the Jews, as they say it was, then without doubt the Jews
would have frequently taken notice of it, being a thing so much for their
Honor.

But there is not one Jew that takes any notice of it, Elias only excepted;
and all those he alleges, appear to be silent in the Case.

Therefore the Points were not invented, and placed to the Text by the Jews, A.
D. 500. or since that time.

This Argument they cannot refuse, seeing it is of the same kind with what they
rely most upon: For they say, if the Points were before A. D. 500. then
certainly the Talmudick Jews would have taken notice of it; and therefore we
may well say, if the Points were since A. D. 500, the succeeding Jews must
needs have taken notice of it; which they have not done, though the
Commentators and Grammarians had better ability, and more frequent occasion so
to do, than the Talmudists had of Ez^a's Punctation.

Again, We will not believe the Points were placed by the Masorites of
Tiberias, A. D. 500. or since that time; because the Evidence thereof is
insufficient, and mute. For,

That Opinion does not deserve to be embraced, the Evidences whereon it is
built being destroyed, and discovered to be insufficient, and totally silent in
the case.

But such is the Opinion, That the Points were Invented by the Masorites of
Tiberias, A. D. 500. For all the Evidence that Elias and his Followers bring to
prove the Time, Place and Persons, when, where, and by whom the Points were
invented, is no more than a few Expressions of the Rabbis, in Commendation of
the Skill and Accuracy of the Masorites of Tiberias, in the Pronu^ciation of
the Hebrew Tongue, and in examining the Punctation; which say not one word that
the Masorites invented or placed the Punctation, or that the Masorites they
speak of lived A. D. 500.

And thus have we finished the First thing that we undertook to discuss; having
at large examined the Evidences that are brought for the Novelty of the Points,
and proved them to be against their late and Novel Invention.

The Second Part of the First Part of this Discourse.
Consisting of Arguments against the Novelty of the Points, discovering the
Improbability and Impossibility of their Novel Invention.
CPAP. VII. The Improbability of the Time and Place assigned for the Invention
of the Points.
WE are now to prove, That it is very unlikely the Punctation was invented and
placed to the Text by the Jewish Masorites of Tiberias, A. D. 500. which may be
made to appear from several Considerations.

FIRST, From the several Circumstances of that People of the Jews, at and
before A. D. 500. in the Land of Iudeah, which render them very unfit for such
an Undertaking, then and there, as the Punctation is.

Now these Circumstances relate to the state, either, (1.) Of their Learning,
and its decrease at that time, as Buxtorf describes it in his Tiberias. Or,
(2.) Of their Civil and Temporal Calamities, at and before that time, as Dr.
Owen relates them. Vid. Considerations, page 224.

First, As to the state wherein their Jewish Learning stood at that time, it
was briefly this:

First, The Jewish Historians have kept the Succession of their Learned Men for
a Thousand Years, from the time of our Savior; and by their Account, as well
as all other History of those Times, there remained neither Learning, nor
Learned Men of any Eminency, in Iudeah, any longer than A. D. 340, or
thereabouts; for about the Year of Christ, 340. in the Person of R. Hillel,
ceased the Promotion to the Dignity of Rabbi in the Land of Israel, Tsemach
David, fol. 47. And if the Dignity ceased, it is unlikely the Profession should
flourish any longer; and from that time and onward they give us an Account of
their Learning and Learned Men in Babylon.

Secondly, Seeing the Jewish Writers have been so careful to preserve the
History of the Mishna, of the Jerusalem and Babylon Talmuds, it is very
unlikely they should pass over so great and glorious an Invention as was this
of the Authors of the Punctation, in so deep silence, had there been any such.
And the rather, because,

Thirdly, The Jews flourished at that time in Babylon, whilst those of
Palestine were very low; and therefore it is most improbable to imagine that the
Wealthy and Famous Babylonian Jews should leave the eternal Praise of this Work
to the poor Jews of Tiberias only. And that because,

Fourthly, The Jews Talmud of Babylon has not only obscured, but even
extinguished that of Jerusalem; so that the Jews, to this day, are governed by
the Babylonian Talmud. It is therefore very unlikely that any such Masoretick
Curiosity as might oblige all their Nation, should not have the Honor drawn to
those of Babylon also.

Fifthly, It is very unlikely, that what required the Approbation of the whole
Nation, should be so silently imposed on them all by some Men of Tiberias, at
such a time, when for that present, and many hundred years after, the
flourishing Schools of the Jews were at Babylon.

Elias Levita confesses the Masorites were of diverse Ages, as in page ^^3. And
the truth is, the Masorites were Hundreds, and Thousands, for many years, one
Generation after another; and we know not the time of their beginning, nor the
time of their ending.

How likely then is it to be, that those of Tiberias, A. D. 500. must invent
and place all the Punctation; when all he brings to prove it, is no more than
this, That some Rabbis commend the Skill and Accuracy of the Masorites of
Tiberias; but proves not what time those Masorites of Tiberias lived in,
whether A. D. 500. or before.

Secondly, As to the state of the Jewish Nation, with respect to their
Calamities, at and before A. D. 500. rendering them unfit for such a work as the
Punctation; which requires such Leisure, Ability and Learning, as is only
produced under a prosperous state.

Now these are briefly the Scenes of their Misery, before A. D. 500.

First, From A.D. 68. until A.D. 72. were hundreds of thousands of Jews
destroyed, as the Translator of Eusebius reckons up out of Josephus, ( Eusebius.
Hist. lib. 3. cap. 8.) And that the Captives, at the taking of Jerusalem, were
Ninety seven thousand. And the number of all that died during the Siege within
Jerusalem, were Ten hundred thousand. (Vid. Iosephus's Wars, lib. 7. cap. 17.)

Secondly, Another Scene of Misery was under Adrian, A. D. 136. ( Eusebius. Chron.
ad Ann. 136.)

Of this Eusebius. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 6. says, When the Jewish Rebellion waxed
vehement and grievous, Ruffus, Lieutenant of Iudeah, being sent with a great
Power from the Emperor, forthwith slew an innumerable multitude of Men, Women
and Children, destroying their Regions and Countries. ( With a Destruction,
says Dr. Owen, seeming equal to that of Jerusalem under Titus Vespasianus.)

This was most violent at the City Bitter, not far from Jerusalem, and
belonging to it; which when taken, and Barchocheba their Seducer destroyed,
This whole Nation (says Eusebius) was banished, and generally the whole
Country of Jerusalem, by the Laws, Decrees and Appointment of Adrian: So that
by his Commandment it was not lawful for these silly Souls to behold their
Native Soil; no, not afar off, from the top of an Hill. This City (viz.
Jerusalem,) then, to the utter Ruin of the Jewish Nation, and the manifold
Overthrow of the ancient Inhabitants, being brought to Confusion, began to be
inhabited of strange Nations; and after that it was subdued to the Roman
Empire, the Name was quite changed; for unto the Honor of the Conqueror Elias
Adrianus, it was called Elia. By this Second Desolation, (as Dr. I. O.
observes) they were brought very low, made weak and contemptible; unspeakably
diminished in their Numbers, and driven into obscurity all the World over.

Now (says Dr. I. O. page 224.) that there was formerly a School, and Learned
Men at Tiberias, is granted; Ierom hired one Learned from thence: But that they
continued there in any Esteem, Number, or Reputation, unto the time designed by
our Authors for this Work, is not made to appear from any History of Jews or
Christians: Yea, it is certain, that about the time mentioned, the chiefest
flourishing of the Jewish Doctors was at Babylon, and some other Cities in the
East, where they had newly completed their Talmud, the Great Pandect of the
Jewish Laws, as themselves every where declare. That any Persons considerably
learned were then in Tiberias, is a mere Conjecture; and it is most improbable,
considering what Destruction had been made of them at Diocaesaria and Tiberias,
about the Year of Christ 352. by Gallus, at the Command of Constantius, (
Socrates Scholasticus, lib. 2. cap. 27.) by whom the Jews were overthrown in
Battle, and the City Diocaesaria laid level with the Ground. Now that there
should, after all these Destructions of the Jews, be such a Collection of them,
so Learned, so Authorized, as to invent this Work, and impose it on all the
World, no Man once taking notice that any such Persons ever were, is beyond all
belief, page 224.

Object. 1. Capellus answers, First, He is not precise, when, where, and by
whom the Points were invented.

Resp. Then he should not insist on those words of Aben Ezra, [ From them we
have all the Punctation;] nor should he so often contend for it, and suppose it
proved.

Object. 2. Capellus says, They might come from all Parts to Tiberias.

Resp. This is said, without and against all History or Testimony of those
Times.

2. But the Argument is, That so Noble a Work is not mentioned in History: And
he does not attempt to prove it is.

Object. 3. He says, Yet there may be some one learned Man or other there, to
begin this Work unobserved.

Resp. But how could the private Work of one Rabbi be forthwith embraced by all
the World that receive the Scriptures? And placed through all Bibles, and yet
no notice taken of the Author in the History of those Times?

Object. 4. But there were Schools at Tiberias, A. D. 374.

Resp. 1. And yet there might be none by A. D. 500.

2. And if there were Schools then, yet no History says they pointed the Bible.

Object. 5. Jerome hired a Jew from Tiberias, learned in the Tongue, who died A.
D. 400.

Resp. 1. There might be a learned Jew there, and yet no School there.

2. There might be a School, A. D. 400. and yet none A. D. 500.

3. Or if there were a School, still they might not be in a condition to be
able to Point the Bible.

Object. 6. Jewish Histories are late, fabulous, and to be suspected.

Resp. Unless they are for Capellus: But what is this to the Point? We say
there is no History takes any notice of these things, and they are the Dreams of
Elias and Capellus; which we have no reason to embrace, were the Jewish History
worse than it is.

Object. 7. Why was there no History of the Tiberian Masorites Reforming or
Correcting the Punctation, as well as of their being the Authors of it?

Resp. 1. There was more need to have the Authors who de novo Pointed all the
Bible, to be very well known and approved too, before their Work was
universally received, than there was need of having those who did only Collate
and Compare the Copies that were received, to be so much known. But,

Secondly, There is notice taken of the Skill and Accuracy of the Masorites of
Tiberias, about the Correcting the Punctation, though there be none about their
being Authors of the Punctation; as was observed from the Testimony of Aben
Ezra, and Others.

Object. 8. It Is not strange, that the first Inventors of Noble Arts have been
unknown; as the Use of the Lodestone, the Mariners-Compass, Bells, Guns,
Printing; the Greek Accents; the Stops, such as Comma, Colon, etc. the New
Greek and Latin Letters, etc..

Resp. 1 st. Our Wonder is not barely, That the Author of this Noble Work of
the Punctation is unknown: But our Wonder is, That if they were known to be the
Masorites of Tiberias, A. D. 500. as Elias says they were, that all the World
should receive it from them, and yet no History give any Account of them. And,

2 dly. If, as Capellus fancieth, it were 500 Years in composing, it is the more
a Wonder, that none of these Artists, for Five hundred Years successively,
should be taken notice of, and yet their Work universally received, as they did
complete it gradatim.

3 dly. His Instances are not to our Point; for our Reasons do principally show
who they were not, rather than who they were: And our Arguments tend to show,
that whoever invented them, whether the Authors were known or unknown, it is
very unlikely that the Masorites of Tiberias, A. D. 500. were the Authors.

4 thly. Men are more ready to receive a Gift in the dark, than they are to
Obey, without knowing who Commands them, and what is Commanded them: The Arts
instanced in, are of real profit and advantage; and who refuses their Profit
till they know the Author? Nay, many are so ungrateful, as to forget their
Master, and would be thought to be the Authors of what they have learnt from
Others: But the Punctation renders the Scripture to be a Law, a Rule of
Obedience; and all Men will know who commands them, before they will obey; and
will see what it is they are commanded too.

Object. 9. Capellus says, The Usefulness of it might introduce it.

Resp. Then were the Jews better than Capellus would have had them; for he
wants to be rid of it, that he may have room for his Critical Amendments of the
Text: However, it remains very improbable, that it was Invented at the time and
place assigned for it, a^ we have showed; which was the business of this
Chapter.

CHAP. VIII. The Improbability of the Persons to whom the Invention of the
Points is assigned, manifested from several Considerations. First, From the
Nature and Principles of the Masorites of Tiberias, the supposed Authors of
them, compared with the Nature of the Punctation it self.
THE Jewish Masorites are said to be the Authors of the Points: But this, we
say, is very improbable, if not impossible to be; which appears, by comparing
the Punctation it self with these Masorites.

The Punctation is certainly a most Divine and Excellent thing, and what was
far abov^ the Wit of Man to make since Ezra's time: Nothing less than the
Infallible Influence of the same Spirit by which the Scriptures were first
given forth, being able to produce the certain sense of all the most obscure
Prophecies, and difficult places of Scripture, as we shall manifest in the
Second Part: We are here only to enquire who, and what kind of Men these
Masorites were, and how they could be thought meet or able for such a Work; an
Account hereof being already given to our hands by Dr. I. O. on the Integrity
of the Hebrew, etc. page 240, 241, 242. And by Dr. Light^oot, in his Centuria
Chorograph. We need only collect in brief the Substance of them.

First, Men they were, (if any such were, says Dr. I. O.) who had not the Word
of God committed to them in a peculiar manner, as their Forefathers had of
old, being no part of his Church or People; but were only outwardly Possessors
of the Letter, without just Right or Title to it: utterly uninterested in the
Promise of the Communication of the Spirit, which is the Great Charter of the
Churches Preservation of Truth, Isa. 59.21.

Secondly, Men so remote from a right understanding of the Word or Mind of God
therein, that they were desperately engaged to oppose his Truth, in the Pooks
which themselves enjoyed in all Matters of Importance, unto the Glory of God,
from the beginning to the ending: The Foundation of whose Religion was
Infidelity, and one of their chief Fundamentals an Opposition to the Gospel.

Thirdly, Men under the special Curse of God, and his Vengeance, upon the
account of the Blood of his dear Son.

Fourthly, Men all their days feeding themselves with vain Fables, and
mischievous Devices against the Gospel, laboring to set up a New Religion
under the Name of the Old, in despite of God.

Fifthly, Men of a profound Ignorance in all manner of Learning and Knowledge,
but only what concerned their own Dunghill Traditions; as appears in their
Stories, wherein they make Pirrhus, King of Epirus, help Nebuchadnezzar against
Jerusalem; with innumerable the like Fopperies

Sixthly, Men so addicted to such monstrous Figments, as appears in their
Talmuds, as their Successors of after Ages are ashamed of, and seek to palliate
what they are able; yea, for the most part, Idolaters and Magicians.

And to the same purpose, Dr. Lightfoot, in his Cent. Chorograph. (speaking of
this Opinion, That the Masorites pointed the Text,) says, I do not admire the
Jews Impudence, who found out that Fable; I admire Christians Credulity, who
applaud it: Recount, I pray, the Names of the Tiberians, from the first
Foundation of a University there, to the Expiring thereof, and what do you find
but a sort of Men, being mad with, or above the Pharisees, bewitching and
bewitched with Traditions, Blind, Crafty Raging; Pardon me if I say Magical and
Monstrous? What Fools, what Sots, as to such a Divine Work! Read over the
Talmud of Jerusalem: Consider how R. Judah, R. Chanina, R. Chajia, Bar, Ba, R.
Iochanan, R. Jonathan, and the rest of the great Doctors among the Tiberians,
do behave themselves: How seriously they do of nothing? How childish they are
in serious things? How much Deceitfulness, Froth Venom, Smoke, nothing in their
Disputations, etc. If you can believe the Points of the Bible to proceed from
such a School, believe also all their Talmuds: The Pointing of the Bible
savours of the Work of the Holy Spirit, not of Wicked, Blind, and Mad Men. --
Thus far Dr. Lightfoot. This Account is full and sufficient at present; we
shall only consider the Exceptions to this Argument.

Object. It Is said, They do not ascribe the Punctation to the Masorites, but
only suppose they placed the Shapes of the Points, etc, according as they had
received the true Sound of all the Punctation, by Tradition, Use and Custom, by
which they might have been able to Point it truly. (Vid. Considerator
Considered, page 200, 206, 207, 210, 211, 212.)

Resp. (1.) We have briefly showed already in our PROEMIVM, that this was
impossible to be done; for multitudes of the Shapes are not distinguished by
the Sounds at all.

(2.) No memory of Man can once receive or take up so much as the very
Anomalies of the Punctation: How much less all the Pauses, and the whole
Punctation? And how could all this be kept, from Age to Age, without Points,
when now we have Points, no one is able to Point the Bible without a Copy? The
Rabbis acknowledge they have lost the knowledge of the sense and meaning of
many words in the Bible, in that time; and how was it possible they could
preserve the true Sound of every Point in the Bible, when they had so lost
their Tongue, and the true Sense and Meaning of many words in it?

2 dly. We Answer them out of their own Objections: For they say,

First, The LXX. and Chaldee Paraphrase, read otherwise than we or the
Masorites do read; which they do not, as to the Shape, but the Sound of the
Points, etc. and hence conclude the Points were not in their time.

Now we may better conclude from hence, that the Sounds which the Masorites
expressed by the Punctation, were not in the time of the LXX. or the Chaldee
Paraphrase; but since their time they are very greatly altered.

Again: When Buxtorf says, as to the Chaldee Paraphrase, That that on the Law,
agrees well with our Punctation; but those on the Prophets, go off most from
the present Punctation:

Capellus replies, The Reason of that might be, because, First, They were more
used to read the Law, and it was written plainer; but it was more difficult to
understand, and so rightly to sound, the words of the Prophets being more dark.

Resp. But if the true Sound had been kept, there had been no difference; and
yet we see the present Punctation does all alike true; but if through such
difficulty in the Prophets they had missed the right Pronunciation, and lost it
in many places by that time, it was then impossible it should be preserved to
the time of the Masorites, so pure and entire as it is pretended.

In vain therefore is the Succession of their Learned Men alleged, and that
the Bible was constantly read by them: For it is known, the Language had ceased
to be vulgarly spoken or understood for a Thousand Years; the LXX, etc. (as
themselves say) had lost the Pronunciation long before. The Learned Men of each
Country differed from each other in the Sound of Vowels and Letters too, as
those of Galilee, etc. in Christ's time: And we see, where a Language is
vulgar, the Pronunciation and Sound used in one Age and County, differs from
that of another, as here in England, etc. And so in Scotland, though the Scots
do read our English Bible, yet they give it a very different Tone or Sound than
we do; how much more when a Language is lost, the first part of it that
departs, is the Tone or Sound: It is fabulous therefore to imagine that that
part should continue longest, which always is gone first; and to suppose that a
few Priests, that esteemed the Mishna above the Bible, should or could preserve
the true Sound of the Text for a Thousand Years; when nothing is more
unconstant in all Nations, than the sameness of sounding their Vowels, and
wherein every Age and County makes an Alteration.

So that after all these Evasions, if the Masorites invented the Shapes of the
Points, etc. the Sounds could have no better Original than the Shapes have, or
their variable Custom, which is equivalent; and the Punctation it self, on that
account, could have no better Foundation than their Reputation: Which how unfit
they were for such a Work, and how unsuitable the Work it self (to wit, the
Punctation) is to such Workmen, let all Men judge.

CHAP. IX. The Improbability of those Persons Pointing the Text, to whom the
Invention thereof is assigned, further manifested from the Nature of the
Masora, and the Design of their Masoretick Observations in General: And in
Particular, from the Nature of their Notes on the Verses of the Bible.
HAving discovered the Improbability of the Opinion of the Novelty of the
Points, from the Insufficiency of the Evidence that is brought for the same,
from the Silen^e of the Jews about the Matter; and from the Improbability of
the Time and Place assigned by this Opinion for their Invention; as also of the
Persons compared with the Nature of the Punctation it self: We are now to
consider the Improbability of the Persons to whom the Invention of the Points
is ascribed, they being supposed to be the Masorites, from the Nature of the
Masora, and their Notes on it.

Now these Masorites are the Authors of the Masora, or the Masoretick Notes and
Observations on the Text of the Old Testament; which is their Work, and all
that is left concerning them whereby they may be known; so that such as this
their Work is, such are they themselves; and no otherwise can we conjecture of
or concerning them, but only according to and by this their Work, the Masora.

Our Second Reason therefore, for the Improbability of the Persons to whom the
Invention of the Points is assigned, is taken from the Consideration of the
Nature of the Masora, which is their Work; and the Design of their Masoretick
Observations on the Text of the Old Testament, compared with the Punctation,
and the attempt of intruding the same upon the Scripture; and this in General
we say, and shall prove by an Induction of particular Instances throughout all
the Parts of the Masora.

That the Masora, and all the Parts of it, consists only of Critical Notes or
Observations about the Text of the Old Testament, and the Form of writing the
same as they had found it received by the Jews in their time, with this single
end or design, That no Persons whatsoever in time to come, should presume to
make the least Alteration of the Text, on any Pretense, or for any Reason
whatever: (And hence the Masora is said to be Sig Letorah, An Hedge to the
Law:) And this shall be made appear by Instances throughout all the Parts of
the Masora. On the other hand, the Punctation determins the sense of all the
Scripture; it speaks what that makes it say, and nothing else: This might be
placed by Ezra well enough, while the right Sound was known, and Men divinely
inspired were among them: But for the Post-Talmudick Masorites to presume to
introduce the Shapes of innumerable significant Points upon the Text, thereby
determining the sense of every word in the Bible, is a thing more contrary and
opposite to the whole Nature and only Design of all the Masora, and of all
their Masoretick Notes, than ever was done: And therefore; it is altogether
improbable that the Masorit^s, or the Authors of the Masora, should be the
Inventors of the Punctation, and the Intruders of the same upon the Text.

Now to prove the Truth of what is here asserted in General, about the Nature
and Design of the Masora, we shall produce Instances out of all the Parts of
the Masora; the very Proposal whereof will evince what we affirm, That as they
do no where own themselves to be the Authors of the Points, so their work was
only to observe what de facto they found the Text to be; and their only design
thereby, was to preserve it from being altered in any thing.

As to the matter of the Masora, wherein it consists, Buxtorf in Tib. cap.
12. says, They are Critical Annotations concerning the Hebrew Text of Sacred
Scripture.

The Text is considered, (1.) As to the Verses, (2.) The Words. And (3.) The
Letters of it.

First, As to the Verses.

(1.) The Verses are all numbered through every Book of the Bible, and the
middle Verse of each Book is noted. Also the Verses in every Section of the
Law, and of every Book of Scripture, are numbered by themselves: As for Instance,

Genesis has 1534 Verses: The middle Verse of it is in cap. 27. ver. 40. And
thou shall live by thy Sword.

Exodus has 1209 Verses: The middle Verse of it is in cap. 22. ver. 28.

^

All the Pentateuch 5845. Though the precise numb. is questioned. -- And so of
the rest. Vid. Buxtorf. Tib. and Parkhurst's Canon of Scripture, part 1. page
88. According to which Account the Masorites reckon the Verses in all the Bible
to be 23206. Hence they are called Sopherim Numberers, and are herein a Hedge
to the Law, that not a Verse should be lost: So that in this part of the Masora
their Work is only to note what they found the Text to be de facto. And (2.)
Their Design is to preserve it entire from Alteration. And (3.) We may observe,
that the Verses were distinguished before their time, or they could not have
been numbered by them, as being found by them so to be.

Secondly, The Verses are considered with respect to some Words and Letters
that are found in them.

As for Instance; one Verse is noted, consisting of 42 Words, and 160 Letters;
and that is Ier. 21. 7. Which Note, if they had made the Verses themselves, had
been no very wise Observation.

And they note two Verses only in the Law that begin with the l^tter Samech,
viz. Exodus 32.8. Numb. 14.19. And two Verses end with Samech, viz. Genesis 32.14.
Numb. 19.33. And there are two Verses, they say, wherein Vajomar is four times
used, viz. Genesis 22.7. 1 King. 20.14. with many such like: The Nature and Design
of which, is, as we have observed on the number of the Verses, to observe what
they sound the Text de facto to be; and to pr^serve it from Alteration, the
Verses themselves being distinguished before their time; for 'twere absurd to
make such Notes on Verses of their own making.

CHAP. X. The Improbability of the Masorites Pointing the Text, further
discovered, from the Nature of their Notes on the Keri U Ketib, and the seven
kinds of them.
AS the Masorites consider the Text, as to the Verses of it; so they consider
it with respect to the words of it likewise. And their Observations herein also
are only about what they found the Text de facto to be, with design to preserve
it from any Alteration in time to come; which appears by a view of the several
sorts or kinds of Observations about the words of the Text of the Old Testament.

The first sort of Observations about the words of the Text, is concerning
their genuine and true Writing and Reading, called Keri, and Ketib: These Elias
reckons in all to be 848; viz. 65 in the Law, 454 in the Prophets, and 229 in
the Hagiography. But Buxtorf, and Others, reckon more of them.

The Antiquity of these Keri and Ketib are not only expressly owned to be as
ancient as Ezra's time, by R.D. Kimchi, in Pref. on Joshua; Abarbinel on
Jeremiah, and the rest of the Jews, but also by Elias Levita himself, and
therefore needs not be here proved.

We shall therefore, for our present purpose, only consider the several sorts
of the Keri and Ketib, as the Masorites have sorted them, and summed them up
under each sort severally by themselves.

Now these Keri and Ketib, Elias Levita has divided into Seven Sorts or Kinds,
as the Masorites have summed them up, and noted how they found them, that they
might not be alter^d hereafter. (Vid. Elias in Maamar (...) or his First
Section.)

The First kind is of Letters that are read in words, and not written; and
written in words, and not read: And these are mostly the Letters jehu, a, h, u,
j, which are so found at the beginning, middle and end of words: Only it is to
be observed, says Elias, that Vau and Iod are not to be found so when they are
quiescent in the midst of a word; that is to say, Vau after Holem, and Shurek,
and Iod, after Chirek and Tsere; for these are in the Order of Chesarim and
Melaim, viz. words Defective and Full. But Vau is often written, and not read
after Kamets, or Kateph Kamets: As (...) Jos. 9.6, 7. (...) Isai. 18.4. and
many the like. And Elias says, that the letter that is written, but not read,
there that letter is not Pointed in the word wherein it is written; as Ier.
50.8. from the Land of the Chaldeans, (...), They came forth. And also Ezekiel.
46.9. there Iod is written, but not read: As the Keri says, Iod is not read:
And so Baal (...), HE is not read, says the Keri, therefore it is not Pointed
in the Ketib, Eccles. 10.20.

And as to the keri u lo ketib, Elias observes, That all the words in which a
letter is read, but not written, that letter is Pointed in the line without
writing the letter at all; and the same letter is written in the Keri, or
Margin, without any Point at all; as Lam. 5.7. Our fathers sinned, are not, we,
(...). In the Keri, (...) And they are not, and we, etc. And of such as these
there are twelve in number.

Now these Unpointed Letters they eieither made so, or found them so: If
themselves made them so, their Notes thereon were very silly, and would not
have been valued by any without Reasons alleged for the same, having Pointed
all the rest: And if they found them so written, as no doubt but they did, then
the Points were in being before their time.

Moreover, had they ventured to Point all the Bible, they would never have
scrupled either to have Pointed these individual Letters, or have left them out
of the Text. But the truth is, by the not Pointing these Letters, the keri and
ketib of them is preserved, which has been kept since Ezra's time; and
therefore the means whereby they are preserved, (and that is, the Pointing the
one, and not the other, has been as ancient likewise, as R. D. Kimchi in Pref.
on Joshua observes.)

Secondly, The Second kind of Keri u Ketib, is of Letters that are changed one
into another; and these are mostly the Vowel Letters, jehu, a, h, u, j: As for
Instance, there are fifty two words that are written with Iod at the beginning
of the word, and read as if with Vau, as in Job 10.20. Iachedal and Iashit in
the Ketib; and the Keri, it is Vachedal, and Vashit. And there are Fifty six
words contrary; that is, with Vau in the line, and Iod in the Keri; as in Psalm.
10.10. it is written Videke and Vashuak, and read Iidekeh and Iashuak. And there
are seventy words written with Iod in the midst of words, and read Vau; and all
these Iods are Pointed with Holem, or Shurek; when it is written with Holem,
then the Holem is Pointed upon the letter which goes before Iod; as in Psalm.
77.11. Az^ir is read Ezcor; and in Genesis 25.23. But Shurek is Pointed in the
midst of Iod, in Genesis 24.33. and in Number. 1.16. And so in the end of words, as
in Ier. 6.25. But words that are written with He in the end, and read with Vau,
they are Pointed with Kibbu^. in the letter before He; as in Lev. 21.5. They
shall not make baldness, etc. And Deuteronomy. 21.7. And there are fourteen such. And
says Elias, There are many letters Ehevi, Iehu, a, h, u, i, that change the
one into the other.

And there are other letters that change one into another; but they are only of
letters that are either, First, Of like Shape; as (...) into (...) into (...)
into (...) into (...) into (...) final, and (...) into (...). Or else,
Secondly, of like Sound; as (...) into (...) into (...) into (...) into (...)
into (...). As for Example of all these, First, There are eleven words written
(...), and read (...), as in Esther 3.4. And three, on the contrary, are written
(...), and read (...); as in Prove. 21.29. Ezra 8.14. Where also (...) is read
(...); as also in Ier. 2.20. And there are four words written with (...), and
read with (...); as in Ier. 31.40. And of words that change (...) into (...)
final; as Iak Nashagnar read Iad, and (...) into (...); Song 1.17. ult. Of
these are four. And so (...) into (...), 1 Samuel 14.32. (...) into (...),
Eccles. 12.6. (...) into (...), Ios. 3.16. And of these are six, (...) into
(...), Isa. 65.4. (...) into (...), 1 Samuel 17.7. (...) into (...) are two.
(...) into (...), 2 Samuel 21.18. (...) into (...), Isa. 66.17. and are three and
two contrarily, 2 Samuel 17.12. 1 King. 19.4. (...) into (...) are two, as Ier.
49.30. (...) into (...), and (...) into (...), Ezekiel. 3.15. (...) into (...),
Ezekiel. 25.7. and 47.13. (...) not is put for (...) to him in fifteen places, say
the lesser Masora on 1 Samuel 2.2. that (...) is fifteen times writ for (...),
viz. (1) Exodus 21.8. (2) Lev. 11.21. Here the greater Masora reckons them up.
(3) Lev. 25.30. (4) 1. Sam. 2.3. (6) 2 King. 8.10. (7) Ezra 4.2. (8) Job 13.15.
(9) Job 41.12. (10) Prove. 19.7. (11) Prove. 26.2. (12) Psalm. 100.3. (13) Psalm.
139.16. (14) Isa. 9.3. (15) Isa. 63.9.

Now certainly, had these Men ventured to place all the Punctation, they would
have made bold to take the letter that best agreed with the sense of the place;
and left the other, as most Translations do, who dare not Point the Bible, this
were to strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel: Not to alter one Vowel Letter,
and yet place all the Punctation. And the same may be said of all the other
sorts of Keri u Ketib.

Thirdly, The Third kind of Keru u Ketib is of letters transposed.

There are words wherein one letter is written beyond its place out of Rule,
and read in its due place by Rule; and these are sixty two, but not one of them
in the Law.

Fifty one of them are of the letters Iehu, a, h, u, i, as Judge. 16.26. (...)
read (...) with the first Iod transposed; so Josh. 6.13. and in 2 King. 25.16.
( But I find it not so.) And there are eleven words wherein other letters are
transposed, besides a, h, u, i; as, (1) Eccles. 9.4. (2) 1 Samuel 27.8. (3) 2 Samuel 15.28. (4) 2 Samuel 20.14. (5) 1 King. 7.45. (6) Ezekiel. 42.16. (7) Prove.
23.26. (8) Ezra 2.46. (9) Ezra 4.4. (10) Ezra 8.14, 17. (11) 1 Chronicles. 27.29.

Of these sixty two, the final Masora directs to the place where they are
reckoned up under Caph ^^ Ketib.

What was said under the former kinds of the Keri and Ketib], may be said under
this and every other of the seven kinds that follow; viz. That the Masorites
would never have observed and kept these little Niceties as a Law upon their
Posterity, not to add, alter, or rectify so much as a Letter, where our
Printers, and all Translators, make no scruple to do as the sense directs, if
they had added all the Punctation.

Fourthly, The Fourth kind of Keri and Ketib, is about placing the letter He
(...): That is to say, where there are two words so joined, that the first word
takes for its last letter the first letter of the second word, being (...),
He; or on the contrary, the second word taking to it self for its first letter
the last letter of the foregoing word. And, First, Where the first word takes
to it self the first letter of the following word, being (...) pointed in the
line with Pathak; and in the Keri is (...) Emphatick, or (...) Hajadajah at the
beginning of the word: And of these there are three in all, thus written; viz.
2 Samuel 5.2. Job 38.12. Ezekiel. 42.9. And in two places it is contrarily used; that
is, the second word taking for its first letter the last letter of the word
before it; as 2 Samuel 21. 9, 12. Ezra 4.12. Of this Fourth kind, the final
Masora directs to the sum under Caph on Ketib. And of this Fourth kind, the
same may be said as was observed on the Third kind before it.

Fifthly, The Fifth kind of Keri u Ketib, is of perfect words which are written
and not read, and read and not written.

First, The words which are read and not written, Elias counts Eight: But the
Masora round the first word of Deuteronomy reckon Ten; viz. (1) Judge. 20.13.
(2) 2 Samuel 8.3. (3) 2 Samuel 16. ult. (4) 2 Samuel 18.20. (5) 2 King. 19.37. (6) 2
King. 19.31. (7) Ier. 31.38. (8) Ier. 50.29. (9) Ruth 3.5. (10) Ruth 3.17.

Secondly, Eight words are written, but not read, as the greater Masora on Ruth
3.13. have collected them; viz. (1) 2 King. 5.18. (2) Ier. 38.16. (3) Ier.
51.3. (4) Ezekiel. 48.16. (5, 6, 7, 8,) ins four times written and not read: (1)
Ruth 3.13. (2) 2 Samuel 15.21. (3) 2 Samuel 13.33. (4) Ier. 39.12. The final Masora
under Caph on Ketib directs to the places where the Keri u lo Ketib, and the
Ketib u lo Keri are reckoned up. The words written, but not read, have no Point
at all; and the words read, but not written, have no Letters, but Points only
in the line. So that this sort of Keri and Ketib, as indeed all the rest, are
preserved by the help of the Points, and not without them.

And this Keri u lo Ketib, and Ketib u lo Keri, is not only owned by Elias
himself to be as ancient as Ezra; but the Talmud it self says of it, That it
was of Moses from Sinai: that is, of Divine Original, and thereby as Ancient as
Ezra; and therefore the Points whereby alone it is preserved, must be as
Ancient likewise.

Sixthly, The Sixth kind of Keri u Ketib, is of words that are written one
word, and read two; or written two words, and read one.

First, Of the words written one word, and read two, are Fifteen, as Elias and
the lesser Masora on Genesis 30.11. reckon them up: (1) Genesis 30.11. (2) Exodus 4.2.
(3) Isai. 3.15. (4) Ezekiel. 8.6. (5) Ier. 6.29. (6) Ier. 18.3. (7) Psalm. ^0.10.
(8) Psalm. 55.15. (9) 1 Chronicles. 9.4. (10) Psalm. 123.4. (11) 1 Chronicles. 27.12. On
this 1 Chronicles. 27.12. the greater Masora reckon up the words foregoing, and the
four following: (12) Deuteronomy. 33.2. (13) Job 38.1. (14) Job 40.6. (15) Neh. 2.13.

Secondly, The words that are written two words, and read but one, are Eight,
says Elias, and the final Masora under Caph in Ketib; and says that they are
reckoned up in the greater Masora on 2 Chronicles. 34.6. as they are; viz. (1) 2 Chronicles. 34.6. (2) 1 Samuel 9.1. (3) 1 Samuel 24.8. (4) 1 King. 18.5. (5) Lam. 1.6.
(6) Lam. 4.3. (7) Isa. 9.7. (8) Isa. 44.24. (9) Judge. 16.25. Of this kind, the
same may be said as was before spoken on the former.

Seventhly, The Seventh kind of Keri u Ketib, is of words that are used for
Modesty sake: As, First, Shegel is four times to be read as Shacab, says the
final Masora, under Shegel in Shin; and reckons them up in the greater Masora
on Isai. 13.16. viz. (1) Deuteronomy. 28.30. (2) Isai. 13.16. (3) Ier. 3.2. (4) Zech.
14.2.

Secondly, The word Ophelim is read Techorim five times; as the final Masora
mentions on Techorim in Teth, and directs to 1 Samuel 5.12. where they are
found, (1) 1 Samuel 5.12. (2) 1 Samuel 5.6. (3) 1 Samuel 5.9. (4) 1 Samuel 6.9. (5) 1 Samuel 6.5. (6) Deuteronomy. 28.27. And 1 Samuel 5.11^ 17. it is written as it is read, as
the Masorites observe.

Thirdly, The word Chrihem, their Dung, is read T^oihem; their Excrement; and
Seenihem, their Piss, is read Me regleehem, the Waters of their Feet. As, (1)
2 King. 18.27. (2) Isa. 36.12. (3) 2 King. 10.27. (4) 2 King. 6.25.

Now it is very improbable that these Men, who dare not leave out an Immodest
word, when there is one Modest in the place of it of the same Antiquity; nor
make the least Omission of any one useless letter that they found in a former
Copy, and yet cannot tell what it signifies to retain it: It is, I say, very
Improbable, that these very Men should dare to Invent and Intrude all the
Shapes of the Points, Vowels and Accents, upon the Text of Scripture, whose
business is to observe every little difference of a letter or word; and to
preserve the same, that no Alteration might be made in time to come.

Again, Elias himself, in Masor. Hammas. Pref. 3. owns the Keri u Ketib to be
as ancient as Ezra. So does Kimchi in Pref. on Joshua; and Abarbinel on
Jeremiah: And the Eight hundred forty eight words are preserved by the help of
the Points, as Kimchi Pref. on Joshua observes; for the Points under the word
in the Line, are not its own, but do belong to the word in the Margin; so that
without the Points the Keri and Ketib could not be preserved, but it is
preserved as we see: Therefore the Points were as ancient as the time of Ezra,
seeing the Keri and Ketib which they preserve, is so ancient. And so Kimchi on
Joshua says, that Ezra, and the Men of the Great Synagogue, put the Keri in the
Margin and did not Point it to distinguish it thereby from the word in the
line: And as R. Sal. Arcuv^lti says, cap. 26. The Keri lies hid in the Points
of the Ketib.

And so much for the Original, Nature and Kinds of the Keri u Ketib, and the
Masoretick Notes thereon.

CHAP. XI. The Improbability of the Masorites Pointing the Text, further
discovered from the Nature of their Observations on the words written Full or
Defective, called Meleim and Chaserim: And also from their Notes on the Ittur
Sopherim seu ablatio Scribarum; that is, what the Scribes have taken away: And
from the Tikkun Sopherim seu correctio scribarum, or the eighteen places
amended by the Scribes: And from other Masoretick Notes on the words of the
Bible; and their Sibbirin, or Conjectures.
THE Second sort of Masoretick Observations upon the words of the Text, is
about the words that are written Full or Defective; the Original whereof, Elias
himself, in Pref. 3. with the rest of the Jews, owneth to the Divine, and
thereby as ancient as Ezra.

The Nature of these words Elias describes in Masoret Hammasoret Dibbur
Haroshon, 1. As also does Buxtorf, in his Tiberias from him; which is this:
Know (says Elias, that the chief and most of those words which the Masorites
observe concerning them, that they are Defective or Full, they are most
commonly such words that have Vau or Iod quiescent in the middle of a word;
that is, Vau after Holem or Shurek, and Iod after Chirek or Tsere; and it is but
a few that they observe defective with Aleph or He: And (says Elias) I will
begin with those that are defective, or wanting Vau with Holem, which are many:
Now know (says he,) that most of the Holems in Scripture want Vau; but yet
they do not observe of every Holem in Scripture that is without Vau, that it is
defective; nor yet of every Holem that is with Vau, do they say it is full:
Only those words whose manner is to have Holem with Vau most commonly, when
they come at any time without Vau, then they observe concerning them, that such
a word is defective: And so likewise those words whose manner is to have Holem
come most commonly without Vau, then whenever such a word comes with Vau, they
observe concerning such a word, that it is written full: So that (says Elias)
this is a Rule, That only those words which are for the most part written full,
they only are said by them to be defective, when they are written defective:
And on the other hand, Only those words that for the most part are written
defective, when they are written full, concerning them, only it is, That the
Masorites observe that such a word is written full.

Now of these Meleim ve Chaserim, or words written full or defective, the
Masorites make innumerable Observations; for they note them wherever they
meet them, which is almost every where. Now what had it been for them to have
made them all full or defective, had they Pointed the Text? But they
religiously note every place where a word that is usually written full, that
is, where the Vowel Letter is added to the Point most commonly, if that word be
ever written without the Vowel Letter, they observe concerning it, that it is
defective; but dare not make it full, by adding to it the Vowel Letter, though
they know it is so written most commonly. Now can any one imagine that these
Men did venture to place the whole Punctation, who durst neither add nor yet
omit one single Vowel Letter, where the Use of the word shows it should be
added or omitted?

Thirdly, The Third sort of Masoretick Observations upon the words of the Text,
is about the words that are called Ittur sopherim seu ablatio scribarum, or,
What the Scribes have taken away, the Antiquity whereof the Talmud it self
owneth to be of Divine Original, and Elias does not deny it so to be. Now these
Ittur Sopherim are five words that might seem as to the sense to have required
the letter Vau to signify And at the beginning of them; but being written
without them, are to be read without them. Of these the final Masora on Ittur
under Ain mention four, and direct to Psalm. 36.6. where they are reckoned up;
viz. (1) Genesis 18.5. (2) Genesis 24.55. (3) Numb. 12.14. (4) Psalm. 36.6. (5) Psalm.
68.26. Vid. R. Chaim. in Pref. on the Bible.

Now can any think that these are the Men who made so bold with the Text, as to
Point all the Scripture of the Old Testament, and yet did not venture to put a
Vau, one Vowel Letter, where the sense seemed to require it; and observed these
places, that none might presume to add or alter a Vowel Letter upon their own
Judgment, even there where they thought the sense did require it so to be.

Fourthly, The Fourth sort of Masoretick Observations upon the words of the
Text, is about the Eighteen places Transposed, called Tikkun sopherim seu
correctio scribarum; or, The Amendments of the Scribes; otherwise called by
Aben Ezra, Tikkun Ezra, The Amendments made by Ezra: For Elias, the Talmud, and
the Jews, generally own their Divine Original; only Aben Ezra, Iarchi, etc.
sometimes say there was no Tikkun; but the Text always was as now it is, and
the Masorites curse any that dare alter these places, which they reckon up
round the beginning of Numbers. (1) Genesis 18.22. (2) Numb. 11.15. (3) Numb.
12.12. (4) Ier. 2.11. (5) 1 Samuel 3.13. (6) 2 Samuel 16.12. (7) Hos. 4.7. (8) 2 Chronicles. 10.16. 1 King. 12.16. 2 Samuel 20.1. (9) Ezekiel. 8.17. (10) Hab. 1.12. (11)
Mal. 1.13. (12) Zech. 2.8. (13) Job 7.20. (14) Job 32.3. (15) Lam. 3.20. (16)
Psalm. 106.20. Of these the Masorites say, on Numbers, cap. 1. A Curse shall
come upon every one that writes an Accusation against these Tikkum Sopherim.
And if so, what must they have expected would have befallen themselves, had
they intruded the whole Punctation, who esteemed the least part of Scripture to
be so complete and sacred.

Fifthly, There are other sorts of Masoretick Observations upon the words of
the Text; which manifest likewise that the Authors of such Notes were very
unlikely to be the Inventors of the Points and Verses: Such as these:

1. They note the Place or Position of words, as they are found in the
beginning or end of a Verse: As in Genesis 1. 2. they say Vehaarets, and the
Earth, is eight times at the beginning of a Verse, and the eight places are
there collected: But if they had made the Verses, they would never have made such
Notes on their own Invention; for they had other work to do, and 'twas their
own Fancy to have them eight times at the beginning, if they made the Verses.

2. They observe also when a Verb is used with one certain Noun, or
Preposition, and how often; as how often Amar, said, is joined with the words
El Elohim, unto God, which they found to be nine times: so the Verb Iareh, to
fear, is seven times joined with Eth Elohim, the Lord, as they observe on Genesis
42.18. Certainly the Authors of the Punctation had somewhat else to do, than
make such Notes.

3. They observe the signification of the ambiguity of a word, as to its
various senses on Genesis 6.11. Gnaleh, a Leaf; the Masora there says it is six
times used to signify a Leaf. And why might it not have been six score times
in that sense, had they so Pointed it? For it is fixed by the Points to the
several senses wherein it is used; for Gnaleh in other places so Pointed,
signifies to Ascend; and if in six places they found it so pointed, and yet
signified a Leaf, certainly the Text must be pointed before such Notes could be
made; or they would have made some difference in the Points of Gnaleh to
Ascend, and Gnaleh a Leaf, had they Pointed the Text. So Genesis 19.8. (...),
Ha^l, in eight places signifies these, and not the Name of God; which in all
other places it signifies as it is so pointed: This they could not observe
before the word was Pointed.

Sixthly The Masorites make many Conjectures about the truest Forms of words
that seem to be irregular; which they call Sibbirim, or Conjectures; that is,
about words that do seem at first view, that they might more conveniently be
written otherwise than they are, as to the sense of the place, or usual form of
the words; as on Genesis 19.23. the Masorites say there are three places where
they think Iatsa is used in the Masculine Gender, when by Grammar-rule it
should have been used in the Feminine, being joined with a word Feminine; and
of this kind are many such, to restrain Persons from altering the least letter
of the Text, upon never so great appearance of its being more agreeing to the
Nature or Manner of the Language so to be, or Use of the words in Construction
with it. Now if notwithstanding their admirable Skill in the Nature and Use of
the Language, they did not dare to alter one Letter or Point, where they
thought the Nature and Use of the Language required they should; who can
imagine they would venture to place all the Punctation? And so much for the
Masoretick Notes on the words of the Text.

CHAP. XII. The Improbability of the Masorites Pointing the Text, further
showed from the Nature of their Observations on the Letters of the Bible that
are found Greater or Lesser than ordinary, or that are Inverted or Suspended,
or that are Open or Shut, or extraordinarily Pointed.
AS the Masorites consider the Text, with respect unto the Verses and Words of
it; so they do in the next place consider it with respect unto the Letters of
it: Which that not one Letter might be lost, they have counted how often each
letter is found in the Bible.

Now as to the Letters, their Observations respect either, (1.) The Quality:
Or, (2.) The Quantity or Number of them.

First, As to their Quality: They consider their different Figure or Shape,
wherever they are found in an unusual manner. And these are either, (1.)
Greater than ordinarily they are: Or, (2.) Lesser than ordinary: Or, (3.)
Inverted: Or, (4.) Suspended: (5.) Open or Shut, Or, (6.) Extraordinarily
Pointed.

First, As to the Letters that are Greater than ordinary, they only observe
that so they are written, that none may bring them into their ordinary form;
but they dare not alter them: Whence we may conclude, that these are not the
Men that intruded the Punctation upon the Text. Now the Masorites have
collected these great Letters both at the beginning of Genesis, and of the
First Book of Chronicles, but with some difference: The Great Letters are in
these places following. (...) in the word Adam, 1 Chronicles. 1.1. (...) in
Bereshit, Genesis 1.1. (...) in hit Galak, Lev. 13.33. (...) in achaD, Deuteronomy. 6.4.
(...) in Halejovah, Deuteronomy. 32.6. (...) in gihOn, Lev. 11.42. And so (...) Mal.
3.32. (...) Esther 1.6. (...) Job 9.34. and Eccles. 7.1. (...) Numb. 14.17.
(...) Psalm. 8.16. (...) Deuteronomy. 29.8. (...) Prove. 1.1. (...) Exodus 34.7. (...)
Eccles. 12.13. (...) Deuteronomy. 6.4. (...) Dan. 6.20. (...) Isa. 56.10. and Deuteronomy.
32.4 (...) Psalm. 84.4. (...) Exodus 34.14. (...) Cant. 1.1. (...) Deuteronomy. 18.13.

Secondly, The Lesser Letters are those that are lesser than the common Form:
And of these there are Thirty three collected Alphabetically by the Masorites
in the beginning of Leviticus, and in the beginning of the final Masora, but a
little different the one from the other. Now of these Little and Great Letters,
both the Talmuds make mention of them, as being before their time, and
therefore can be no late Innovation: And they are these: (...) in the word
VEIIKRa, Lev. 1.1. (...) in HAb, Prove. 30.15. (...) Job 7.5. (...) Prove. 28.17.
(...) Genesis 2.4. (...) Numb. 25.12. and Psalm. 24.4. (...) Esther 9.9. (...) Job
33.9. (...) Lam. 2.9. and Numb. 31.24. (...) Deuteronomy. 32.18. (...) Genesis 23.2.
(...) Lam. 1.12. (...) Deuteronomy. 31.27. and Lev. 6.2. and final Neh. 13.30. (...)
Lam. 4.14. (...) final three times, Isai. 44.14. Ier. 39.13. Prove. 16.28. (...)
Nahum 1.3. and Psalm. 27.5. (...) Lam. 3.36. (...) Dan. 6.20. (...) Ier. 14.2.
and final Job 16.14. (...) Exodus 32.25. and Genesis 27.47. (...) as some, Exodus
23.19. and 34.26. say the final Masora; but that on Levit. say, 2 Samuel 21.19.
Esth. 9.9. (...) Esth. 9.7. (...) Esth. 9. The Name of one of Haman's Sons also.

Now what a small matter had it been for them to have made a letter that was
too little, to be as big as his fellows? But this they durst not do, but took
this care to prevent any others doing of it after their time: And therefore
these are not likely to be the Men that placed the Punctation, seeing they did
not dare to mend a letter. The like may be said of the Letters Inverted,
Suspended, Open, or Shut; which do follow: As,

The Masorites on Number. 10.35. do say there are Nine Verses wherein this Mark
(...) Nun is found inverted, but they dare not alter them; and they there
collect them; as (1) The letter (...) in the word (...), Numb. 10.35. (2) Numb.
11.1. (...) The other seven are in Psalm. 107. as ver. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28,
and ver. 40. In our Bible Nun is not found inverted in some of these places:
But (as Buxtorf says,) we should seek for them in Masoretick Manuscripts of
the Bible. How is it likely the Masorites intruded the Points, who durst not
put (...) the right way?

Fourthly, They observe that (...) is final in the word (...), Isa. 9.7. And
(...) is open at the end of the word (...), Neh. 2.13. but dare not alter them.

Fifthly, That (...) is written, Job 38.1. in the end of the word, as it is
usually written in the beginning or middle, but alter it not.

Sixthly, The Masora on Judge. 18.30. say there are four words that have in them
a letter suspended or hanged; and they are these: (1) (...), Judge. 18.30. which
is (...): But the second, third and fourth are (...); as, (2) Psalm. 80.14. (3)
Job 38.13. (4) Job 38.15. The Talmud gives a Reason why these letters are so
written; which shows their Ancient Original. Now if the Masorites durst not
put right these letters which appear wrong placed, how can we imagine they
placed the Punctation?

Seventhly, The like may be said of their Notes on the Taggin, or little
strokes on letters.

Eighthly, There are Fifteen words that have a letter Pointed at the top
extraordinarily, not to signify a Vowel, but some Mystery; as the Point over
the last Iod in the word (...): As, (1) Genesis 16.5. The Masora note this to be
one of the ten words in the Law that are Pointed, and four in the Prophets, and
one in the Ketubim. (2) Genesis 18.9. Hascuni says this Point was in Ezra's time,
and placed by Moses: See Bereshit Rabba, R. Solomon, R. Bechai. (3) Genesis 19.33.
This Ierom observes, and the Talmudists in Nazer, cap. 4. fol. 23. So does
Tanchuma, Ialkut, Baal Hatturim, Zohar, and Others. (4) Genesis 33.4. (5) Genesis
37.12. (6) Number. 31.39. (7) Number. 9.10. (8) Number. 21.30. (9) Numb. 29.15. (10)
Deuteronomy. 29.29. (11) 2 Samuel 19.19. (12) Isa. 44.9. (13) Ezekiel. 46.2. (14) Ezekiel.
46.22. (15) Psalm. 27.13. The Talmudists in Berachoth, cap. 1 fol. 4. give the
Reason of this. Hence we observe,

First, That these Points are of great Antiquity, being taken notice of in
Zohar, and other ancient Books before the Talmud. And it is very unlikely they
should be before the Points, Vowels and Accents, being of unspeakably less use
and necessity; seeing, as Capellus himself acknowledges, that the most
necessary part of the Punctation was made first.

Secondly, We observe that the Masorites who made these Notes on the Points,
cannot be the Authors of the Points themselves, but must be long after them;
and if they had been the Authors of them, they must have been long before the
Talmud.

CHAP. XIII. The Improbability of the Masorites being the Inventors of the
Punctation, more particularly considered from the Nature of the Masoretick
Notes on the Punctation, and on all the Parts of it; and more especially on the
Anomalies thereof.
THe Masorites have observed all the Anomalies that are in all the Parts of the
Punctation; which are very many, almost innumerable, and barely observe that so
it is: Whereas had they been the Authors of the Punctation, they either needed
not have made one Anomalous Point, Vowel, or Accent; but might have made them
all uniform and regular; or else could, and it is likely would have given some
Reason of the Anomalies; which they wholly omitted to do. We shall therefore
produce a few of the many Instances of the Anomalies that are in all the Parts
of the Punctation, together with some of their Observations thereon, that by
them it may be judged whether those Masorites placed the Punctation or not.

Now the Punctation consists of Three Parts: (1.) The Vowels. (2.) the Points
Dagesh and Mappek. (3.) The Accents; as Buxtorf in his Tiberias, page 13.
collects some of them, it being endless to mention all.

First, The Anolmalies or Irregularities that are found in the Vowels; as in
Genesis 16. ver. 13. (...); and ver. 15. (...), there the Masorites observe that
every Shem is written with Tsere, except six with Segol, which they there
reckon up. Now why should this word be but six times so pointed, of the many
hundreds of times it is written? And why in these six places? If they had
Pointed the Bible, they could have made these regular, or given us a Reason why
they did not so do. Certainly these Notes show they only observed the Anomalies
they found, that none might alter them in time to come. So Genesis 19.2. (...)
Hinneh: On this the Masorites say every Hinneh signifying Hen, Behold, is
written with Tsere, except this one, which is with Segol. In the places
following, the Masorites observe how often each word is irregularly used; that
is, one Vowel for another in the same word, viz. Exodus 32.1, 6. Exodus 33.3.
Lev. 5.22. and 10.19. Numb. 9.2. Deuteronomy. 18.17. and 30.4. Josh. 2.14. 2 Samuel
23.6. Ier. 17.17. cap. 31.33. Ezekiel. 9.8. Dan. 1.13. Joel 1.4. Amos 9.13. Hab.
2.17. Zech. 7.14. Psalm. 128.3. Prove. 3.12. Eccles. 3.18. cap. 7.28. Isa. 27.12.

Secondly, the Anomalies that are found in the Points Dagesh and Mappik.

(1.) Of Dagesh. It Is a general Rule, that the four Gutturals, (...), do not
admit of Dagesh forte; nor does the letter (...) Resh for its roughness: Yet
contrary to this Rule, the Masorites observe that (...) has Dagesh four times,
viz. Ezra 8.16. Genesis 43.26. Lev. 23.17. Job 33.21. And the letter (...) Resh,
they say, has Dagesh thrice, viz. 1 Samuel 10.24. and 1.6. and 17.25. Song 5.2.
Kimchi Miklol, fol. 73. says (...) is seven times with Dagesh. (2.) Dagesh is
often used Euphonia gratia, but in some places it cannot be; as in Exodus 15.17.
and Deuteronomy. 23.11. (...) is sometimes written with Dagesh in Mem, and sometimes
without it, as in Psalm. 43.2.

(2.) Of Mappik. This has its use too: As, 1 st. In (...) the Third Pers. Fem.
Pron. as (...), to her. The Masorites observe it is thrice without Mappik, as
Number. 32.42. Zech. 5.10. Ruth 2.14. 2 dly. They observe there are Eighteen words
in Scripture wherein Mappik is omitted; as Exodus 2.3. cap. 9.18. The rest are
in the final Masora in (...) under (...).

(3.) The Anomalies that are found in the Accents, with the Masorites Notes
thereon, prove they were not the Authors of them; but only observed how the
Books were Pointed before their days.

First, Pathak and Segol are commonly changed into Kamets, by the great Pauses,
Athnak, Soph, Pasuk, or Silluk: (How then could the Vowels be placed so long
before these Accents? as Capellus fancieth.)

Now in some Books sometimes they remain, and are not altered by these Accents:
And these places the Masorites do note; as Genesis 21.8. cap. 21.13. cap. 30.19.
Deuteronomy. 32.48. Exodus 8.24. cap. 26.5, 9. Isa. 47.1. Psalm. 27.4. and 4.3. and
35.20. and 66.12. and 84.11. And multitudes of the like, it being a great part
of the Masora.

Here we find are multitudes of Anomalies in all Parts of the Punctation; and
the Masorites note them all, but do no more than barely note them. Hence we
conclude the Punctation, and all the Parts of it, were long before the
Masorites, and before these Masoretick Notes; else they would have made no
Anomalies, or given a Reason why they did make any. If now the whole Punctation
were not finished until A. D. 1030. as Capellus supposes, then there is no
time left for the Masorites to live in; for the Grammarians succeeded Ben
Asher, A.D. 1030. and take no notice of them; which they would not have
omitted, had any such Critics in their Learning been in their time. But if the
Punctation were finished, A. D. 500. as Elias supposes, then these Masorites
who made the Points, could not make these Notes on the Anomalies thereof also,
as he imagines they did, but were long after them. Vtrum horum mavis accipe.

Capellus says, If the Masorites did not Point the Text, it follows not the
Points were before A.D. 500.

Resp. None else besides the Masorites are pretended to be the Authors of the
Points since Ezra's time: If therefore the Masorites did not Point the Text, it
must have been Pointed in Ezra's time.

Capellus supposes the Anomalies may be either from Use against Grammar, or by
Error or Design.

In supposing it was by following Use and Custom, against Grammar-Rule; it must
then be allowed, 1 st. That all the Points, Vowels and Accents are usefully
distinct from each other; which elsewhere he denies; for they must distinguish
all these Anomalies in their Sound by the Ear, till the Punctation was placed.

His other Conjectures, That it may be it was done by Error, shows how little
he regards the Providential Care of God over his Word, to be a perfect Rule to
the Worlds end, so he can get but an it may be it was Error; and then it may
be it was Design; and yet a Posse ad esse non valet consequentia, as before was
observed: We cannot conclude that every thing is actually, whatever it may
possibly be.

It may be (says Capellus) the first Authors of the Points made these
Anomalies by mistake; but the succeeding Masorites finding of them, supposed
they were designedly made at first, and so left and noted them.

Resp. 1 st. Then the Points, Vowels and Accents were made long before these
Notes on the Anomalies of all the Parts of the Punctation.

2. Then the Punctation was not 500 years in composing; for all on it was
finished before these Notes were made, which yet were many Ages in making.

3. Then the first Masorites were the greatest blundering Blockheads that ever
were, to make such innumerable palpable Mistakes in what they had invented
themselves: And yet their Successors must be supposed to esteem them so
infallibly exact, as to follow them universally against their own Sense and
Reason, not daring to rectify one Mistake.

4. If Ben Asher, A. D. 1040. finished the Punctation, why did he not rectify
these Mistakes or Anomalies in all the Parts of it? And then let him produce
some Evidence, that this Masora, or the Notes on these Anomalies, were made by
Masorites that lived since Ben Asher's time; whereas the Grammarians succeeded
Ben Asher, and take no notice of any such.

Secondly, Capelius says (if this will not do, that 'twas done by Mistake then,)
It may be it was done at first designedly by the first Masorites, the Causes
whereof we may not know; which the following Masorites, to prevent any
Alterarion of them through inadvertency, have made those Notes on them: And
this is not strange, seeing we must suppose Ezra did it designedly; nor yet
absurd, seeing we suppose Ezra did the same.

Resp. 1 st. Still the Punctation was all finished by the first Masorites,
contrary to his Opinion elsewhere.

2. Ezra was a public Person, and divinely inspired; but the Masorites were
private Persons, and had neither ordinary nor extraordinary Call or Authority
to place innumerable Points, contrary to all Grammar-Rule, without rendering an
Account of the Reason why they did so. And therefore,

2 ly. It Is absurd in them, though it was not so in Ezra; for (as Capellus
says) the cause of these Anomalies might be, that such was the Use and Custom
of the Tongue, so to express some words different from Grammar-Rule: This might
be known and done by Ezra, but could not be done by the Masorites, because the
knowledge of such Niceties as the Anomalous Sounds, were lost long before their
time. In short, this we say from hence, (1.) The Masorites are the Authors of
the Masora; we know no other of their Works than this. (2.) These have made the
Notes that are made on the Anomalous Punctation. And, (3.) They who made these
Notes, we have proved were not the Authors of the Punctation; because all the
Punctation must have been made long before these Notes could be made thereon,
and therefore we conclude that the Masorites were not the Authors of the
Punctation.

CHAP. XIV. The Absurdity of the Opinion, That the Masorites Pointed the Text,
A. D. 500. discovered from the Evidence there is that the Masora which the
Masorites made, was long before A. D. 500.
THe Masorites, or Authors of the Masora, must by all means be accounted for
the Authors of the Punctation; and yet it will not be allowed that the Points
were invented before A. D. 500. after the Talmuds: We shall therefore prove
that the Masora it self, or the principal Parts of it, were before the Talmuds,
being owned as such in the Talmuds themselves.

Now as to the Parts of the Masora, the Antiquity whereof we are to examine, we
agree with the Account that Elias himself gives us thereof in Masoret
Hammasoret, page (...), who tells us, That by the Masorites the Scriptures are
preserved so well, that no change can befall them in time to come in the least:
And hence they are called a Hedge to the Law, which otherwise had been lost:
These Masorites, he says, numbered all the Verses, Words and Letters of every
Book of the Bible; and hence were called Sopherim, or Numberers; and hereby
they found that Vau in the word Gihon was the middle of the Law; as to the
Letters, Darash in Darash Moshe was the middlemost word: And he put on him the
Breast Plate, Lev. 8.8. was the middlemost Verse in the Law: And the like was
done of every Book of the Bible, (or twenty four Books:) As also they numbered
the Verses, Words and Letters in every Parasha, or Section of the Law, as well
as the whole Law,, which had 60045 Letters. Also they reckoned how often every
Letter in the Alphabet was found in the Scriptures: As for Instance, (...)
Aleph was found (says he) 42377 times in the Bible, (...) Beth 38218 times,
(...) 29537 times, and so of the rest. Thus far Elias.

Now we shall prove that the Parts of the Masora here mentioned, were long
before the Talmuds; and yet the Authors of these Parts of the Masora, are here
called the Masorites by Elias himself.

First, As to the Name of the Masora; that is, not only mentioned by both the
Talmuds, but spoken of, as being as ancient as Ezra's time, in the Jerusalem
Talmud, in Megilla, cap. 4. And in the Babylon Talmud, in Masecat Nedarim, cap.
4. fol. 37. In explaining Neh. 8.8. And caused them to understand the reading;
that is, the Masora, say both the Talmuds: That is (says Elias) By Oral
Tradition the Masora was then used. Not so (says R. Azarias,) they speak of
what was written, and not of Tradition. Again, The common Saying of the Talmuds
show the Name of the Masora was then known; viz. There is a Mother to the
Scripture, and there is a Mother to the Masora. And as to the Work of the
Masorites, Elias supposes, cap. 2. that they made the Verses. And yet the
Mishna it self, not long after the Destruction of Jerusalem, mentions the
Verses; as in Masecat Megilla cap. 3. it says. He that reads in the Law, must
not read less than three Verses; and in the Paraphrase, not more than one. And
as the Talmud on Megilla, cap. 3. fol. 32. says, What Verse Moses did not make
a Verse, we must not make a Verse.

Secondly, Again, As to the Parts of the Masora, their readings Ittur Sopherim,
Keri u lo Ketib, thus says the Talmud in Masecat Nedarim, fol. 37. Rabbi Isaac
says, the reading of the Scribes, and Ittur Sopherim, and the Keri u lo Ketib,
and the Ketib u lo Keri, is a Constitution of Moses from Sinai.

Thirdly, But the main Work that Elias ascribes to the Masorites, was the
numbering the Verses, Words and Letters of Scripture; and telling which is the
middle Verse, Word and Letter of the Law; and the like. Now of these the Talmud
makes mention most plainly, in Masecat Kedushin, cap. 1. fol. 30. it is thus
written: Therefore Roshonim, the Ancients, were called Sopherim, Numberers,
because they numbered all the Letters which were in the Law; and these said that
Vau in the word Gihon, is the middlemost Letter of the Law, Lev. 11.42. That
Darash, Lev. 10.16. is the middlemost word of the Law: And Hitgalach, Lev.
13.35. is the middlemost Verse in the Law, etc. The Ancients (they say) knew
well the Letters full and defective; and that the Verses of the Law were 5888.

The Talmud indeed often refuteth the Masora, as Elias confesses in Table 1.
Speech 5. but then the Masora must needs be in being. The Talmud takes notice
of the Great and Small Letters, which is also a Part of the Masora; as on
Sopherim, cap. 9. it says, (...) is Great, Deuteronomy. 29.28. What Argument (says
Buxtorf) can be plainer than this, the Name, and Work, and Parts of the Masora,
were long before A. D. 500. Therefore they were not first made, A. D. 500. as
Elias thinks: Indeed he allows them to be by Tradition before, a thing most
absurd and impossible, but not written until after the Talmuds, A. D. 500.

Now we say, if the Masorites Pointed the Text, they were these Masorites who
wrote the Notes about the number of the Letters, Words and Verses of the Bible,
of the Ittur Sopherim, the Keri u lo Ketib, the Reading of the Scribes, the
Letters Greater, or Lesser than ordinary, the Letters and Words Full and
Defective, and the like; all which the Talmuds plainly say were made by the
Ancients, their Ancestors, long before their time, or else the Punctation was
made by other Masorites than these the Talmud speaks of: if the Punctation was
made by these Men, then it was made long before A. D. 500. even as ancient as
Ezra; for so ancient is this Masora esteemed by the Jews to be. Elias his
Fancy, That this Masora was Orally preserved from Ezra 's time, till A. D. 500.
is refuted by R. Azarias, and R. S. Arcuvolti.

But if the Masorites who Pointed the Text were not these ancient Masorites the
Talmuds speak of, then they were either those that made the Notes on the
Anomalous Punctation, and upon the rest of the things that are the Subject of
the Masoretick Observations which compose the present Masora, or else they were
some others. But they were not these Masorites neither; for we have at large
proved that those who made the Notes on the Punctation, were long after the
Punctation was made: And that those who made the other Notes on the other Parts
of the Masora, did only observe what they found the Text to be; but placed
nothing to the Text, their only design being to prevent any from so doing in
time to come. If therefore the Masorites Pointed the Text, they were other
Masorites than either of these before mentioned: But other than the one or the
other sort of Masorits already mentioned, we neither read nor hear of; and till
some other can be found out, we conclude the Masorites, A. D. 500. or since
that time, did not Point the Text. And so much for the discovery of the
Improbability of those Persons Pointing the Text, to whom the Invention of the
Punctation is ascribed.

CPAP. XV. The Absurdity of the Opinion, That the Text was first Pointed A D.
500 further discovered from the Evidences of the Points, Vowels, Accents and
Verses being long before that time; and the Instance of a Pointed Copy of R.
Hillel, A. D. 340. and from the Account we have of these things in the Zoar,
Bahir, Mishna and Talmuds.
WE shall conclude this FIRST PART with the Evidences of the mention that is
made of all the Parts of the Punctation, in the ancient Writings of the Jews
that were before A. D. 500. and the Instance of a Pointed Copy of R. Hillel, of
great Antiquity.

We shall begin with the Book entitled Habahir, made by R. Nechoniah, fifty
years before Christ. (Vid. Buxtorf Thesaurus, A. D. 1609. page 66, 67.
Iuchasin, page 20. Tsemach David, part 1. page 35. R. Azarias Meor Enaim, cap.
59.) The words of Bahir are these: The Points in the Letters of the Law of
Moses, are like unto the Breath of Life in the Body of a Man.

And in the Book called Zohar, made by R. Simeon ben Iochai, a hundred years
after Christ. (Vid. Buxtorf, ibid. and Bibliothaeca Rabbinica on (...).
Iuchasin, page 42. R. Azarias, Meor Enaim in imre bina, cap. 59.) The words of
Zohar are these: Not one Letter is able to signify one thing or another
without the Points: All the Letters without the Points, are like the Body
without the Soul; when the Points come, then the Body stands in its Station.

And so in the Tikkunim, or Explications of the Zohar, says R. Azarias, ibid.
And in the Preface of Tikkunim, it is said, The Accents are as the Breath, and
the Points as the Spirit, and the Letters as the Soul, the one come after the
other.

And this, as R. Azarias, ibid. observes, is not meant of the Sounds only, but
of the Shapes of the Points, Vowels and Accents, as he there gives Instances.
See more of the ancient Caballistical Writers expressly mentioning the very
Names also of the Points, Vowels and Accents in Buxtorf's Tiberias; and De
Punctorum Origin, page 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59. together with the Answer to
the impertinent Cavils of Capellus, as to the Antiquity and Integrity of the
Books Zohar, Bahir, and the Pointed Copy of Hillel; who objecteth, It may be
that they have forged Titles of Antiquity, to advance the Price in the Sale of
them.

Resp. And it may not be so: But if it may be so, that does not prove it was
so. Nor does Capellus produce any thing that renders the Antiquity of these
Books so much as suspected; for the Antiquity of these Books is universally
owned by the Jews: Those of them who write about these things, plainly declare
their Antiquity to be what we say it is.

3. The Mishna, about A. D. 150. takes notice of the Verses in Masecat Megilla,
cap. 3. and says, He that reads in the Law, must not read less than three
Verses; nor more than one Verse in the Chaldee Paraphrase.

4. The Jerusalem Talmud, about A. D. 230. in Megilla, cap. 4. on Neh. 8.8. And
they read in the Book, in the Law of God: That is (say they,) the Scripture
distinctly; that is, with the Targum, or Chaldee Paraphrase, and gave the
sense: These (say they) are the Accents which they placed, Samu taam, they put
the Accents to it; and Some say these are the Pauses: Others say these are the
Beginnings of the Verses.

5. The Babylon Talmud, in Masecat Nedarim, cap. 4. fol. 37. and in Masecat
Megilla, cap. 1. fol. 3. on Neh. 8.8. they say likewise: And they read in the
Book of the Law of God, that is, the Scripture, distinctly that is, with the
Targum, and gave the sense, These are the Verses; and cause them to understand
the reading, This is the Stops of the Accents; And others say these were the
Masora, for they were forgotten, and they then restored them.

And in Masecat Nedarim, fol. 37. ibid. Rabbi Isaac says, The reading of the
Scribes, and Ittur Sopherim, and Keri u lo Ketib, and Ketib u lo Keri, is a
Constitution of Moses on Sinai.

First, says R. Isaac, The reading of the Scribes, as Erets Shamajim Mitsraim;
that is, The Scribes taught the People how they had received from Moses to read
these words, and the like; one way in one place, and another way in another, as
sometimes Arets, sometimes Erets, etc. For, as R. Nissin says, Erets is
changed, by reason of Athnak, into Arets; and so of Shammajim Mitsraim, etc.

And as R. Sal. Iarchi says, The Scribes taught them how they ought to read
the Words without the Vowel-Letters being added in all places; as Erets,
without writing Aleph between Resh and ^sade: And so Shamajim, without writing
Aleph between Shin and Mem: And all this (say the Talmud) is a Constitution of
Moses from Sinai.

And as it is impossible that the Sounds of all the Punctation could be
preserved without the Shapes of them were written to the Text: So R. Azarias,
in Meor. Enaim, cap. 59. shows, that what the Talmuds speak on Neh. 8.8. is
all of it about what was written, and no part of it was spoken about what was
kept by Oral Tradition. As,

First, The Book of the Law which they read, that was Mikra, the Scripture,
distinctly, with Targum, or the Chaldee Paraphrase, which (says he) was then
written; and so (says he) were the Points, and Accents, and Masora, which they
there speak of, was then written, as well as the Scripture: And the Chaldee
Paraphrase was Written, and not kept by Oral Tradition only, as Elias fancieth;
a thing most absurd and impossible.

Capellus objects, That R. Sal. Iarchi, R. Azarias, etc. are Modern Rabbis:
But what says Rabboth, and the Ancient Writers?

Resp. They cannot expound the Talmud, which was made long after they were
dead; but the Ancient Writers speak plain enough of the Points, as Bahir,
Zohar, etc. And why may not the Talmuds speak of the Shapes of the Points?
There is not one place of Scripture (says Buxtorf) in all the Talmud, any
otherwise read than our present Punctation reads it: Which could not have been,
had not the Bible been then Pointed; for the Sounds could not be kept without
the Shapes, as we have already showed in the PROEMIVM; and as themselves say,
the LXX. and Chaldee differ from our Copy, because they had no Points; and we
may as well say the Talmud universally agrees with our Punctation, because
they had Points, which they could not have done without. And as to the LXX.
etc. they differ from the Letters and Words, as well as about the Points; and
therefore Capellus reckons their Copy differed from ours in Letters, as well as
Points: But these things we may examine hereafter, the Punctation is all we are
now concerned about. And hereby all those Objections of the silence of the
ancient Caballistical Writings, and of the Talmuds about the Points, are
obviated. (Vid. Pugio Fidei, page 92. the former Edition: And page 111. of the
last Edition. See also Buxtorf. de Punct. Orig. part 1. cap. 5, and cap. 6.) We
shall only add the Instance of a Pointed Copy of R. Hillel, which was before A.
D. 500. as ancient as A. D. 340.

It Is said in Iuchasin, fol. 132. col. 1. 'In the year 956, or 984, there was a
great Persecution in Lions, and then they brought out from thence the twenty
four Books called the Bible, which R. Hillel wrote, and by them they corrected
all their Books; and I have seen a Part of them that were sold in Africa, and
in my time they had been written nine hundred years. And Kimchi says in his
Grammar, That the Pentateuch of it was at Toletola, in Spain, in his time.

Object. It Is not said here 'twas Pointed.

Resp. But it is said Kimchi speaks of it in his Grammar. And Kimchi, speaking
of it, says it is Pointed; as in Michlol, fol. 93. col. 1. he says That R.
Jacob, the Son of Eleazer, writes, That in the Book of Hillel, which is in
Toledolid, the word Tideru (...), in Deuteronomy. 12.11. is found without a Dagesh
lene in Daleth, that is, Daleth raphated. So on (...) Vedareshu in Psalm.
109.10. he says, That the word Vedareshu is read with broad Kamets, like (...)
Veshameru, and so we have received the reading of it: And in the Book of
Hillel, which is kept at Toledolid, the Masorites make this Note upon it, viz.
This is no where else found with Ka^uph Kamets: and so Nagid writes, That he
found it likewise in the Masora so written with Katuph Kamets.

So in his Book of Roots, Sepher Sherashim, on the Radix (...) about the word
(...), Tesomet, There Mem is with Segol, contrary to Rule, and is as if it were
with Pathack: And in the Book of Hillel, which is in Toledolid, it is with
Pathack.

So Mercer, on Prove. 24.14. on the word (...), Dech, he says, In a Manuscript
it is writ with Tsere; but in the Margin it is noted, that in Hillel's Copy
it is written with Segol. The same faith R. Moses Bar Nachman, in his Commentary
on the Book of Ietsir, or Iezirah.

Capellus objects, It may be Hillel's Copy was not so ancient as is pretended.
But gives no Reason why we should suspect its Antiquity, which is generally
owned by the Jews, as Iuchasin, Kimchi. (Vid. Buxt. de Punct. Orig. part 2.
cap. 7.)

So that the Points were before A. D. 500. being found in Hillel's Copy, A. D.
340. and mentioned in the Bahir, Zohar, Mishna and Talmuds.

And hence we conclude the FIRST PART of this Discourse, That the Text was not
Pointed by the Masorites, A. D. 500. or since that time at Tiberias, or
elsewhere.

And thus have we collected what others have written, and our selves observed
about the Novelty of the Points; the like we intend about their Antiquity in
the SECOND PART, but more briefly, if possible.

The End of the FIRST PART.
(...) OR, A Discourse concerning the Antiquity and Original of the Points,
Vowels and Accents that are placed to the Hebrew Bible. The SECOND PART.
WHEREIN The Antiquity, Divine Original and Authority of the present
Punctation, is proved, By the Testimony of Jews and Christians, The Universal
Consent of all Nations that receive the Scriptures; Their quiet Possession of
the Text, as it is now Pointed by Prescription, from Age to Age. The Vowels (an
Essential part of Speech) often expressed by the Punctation only. The Obscurity
of the Scripture without Points, which yet was commanded to be written very
plainly. The Old Testament evidencing it self to be the Word of God, in and by
the Punctation only. The Anomalies thereof manifesting its Antiquity. The
Promise of Christ, Mat. 5.18. That nothing shall be lost out of the Law or the
Prophets, whereof the Points are so great a part. The manifest Absurdity of the
contrary Opinion: And other Considerations.

TOGETHER WITH Answers to the several Objections of Elias Levita, Ludovicus
Capellus, Dr. Walton, and Others, against their Antiquity. Such as are, The
Testimonies of some Jews about the Points. The Unpointed Copy of the Law so
kept in the Synagogue. The Silence of the ancient Caballistical Writings of the
Mishna and Talmuds about them. The LXX. and Chaldee Paraphrase reading
otherwise than our Punctation directs. The Samaritan Character, (supposed to
be the ancient Hebrew,) never Pointed. The Novelty of their Names, The
Superfluity of their Numbers, The possibility of preserving the Sound without
the Shapes; and of reading the Bible without Points, (as well as the Rabbinical
Commentaries, the Talmuds, and other Oriental Languages, are read without
them,) By the help of the Matres Lectionis, or Letters Evi, a, h, v, i, By the
scope of the place, etc. The Silence of Ierom, and the Fathers about them. The
Opinion of diverse Modern Divines, both Papists and Protestants, against the
Antiquity of the Shapes of the present Punctation, The Keri u Ketib being about
the Letters, and never about the Points, and the like.

In TWO PARTS.

The FIRST PART containing the Testimonies: The SECOND, the Arguments of Jews
and Christians, for their Antiquity and Divine Authority; wherein the
Objections against the same are Answered.

The FIRST PART of the SECOND PART. Containing the Testimonies of Jews and
Christians for the Antiquity of the Points; with the Answer to the several
Objections that are made thereunto.
CHAP. I.. 1. The Question stated.. 2. The several Opinions of those who own
the Antiquity of the Points, enumerated: Their Divine Original proved by the
Testimony of all the Jews, Elias only excepted: The extent and weight of this
Testimony, in part considered.. 3. The Objections of express Testimonies
against the Antiquity of the Points, answered.. 4. The Objection of the Law
being kept in the Synagogue without Points, answered.. 5. The Silence^ of the
ancient Caballistical Writings, the Mishna and Talmuds, about the Points,
answered.
1. IN the FIRST PART of this Discourse, Chap. 1. we declared that there were
two Periods of Time particularly fixed unto the one or the other, of which all
Parties do in some respect ascribe the Original of the Points: The one is the
time of Ezra, the other is A. D. 500. The one makes them of Divine, the other
of Humane Original and Authority. So that the Question is,

Whether the Shapes or Figures of the Points, Vowels and Accents which are
joined to the Text of the Hebrew Bible, were invented and placed to the Text as
early as the time of Ezra, or else not until the Talmuds were finished A. D.
500?

And having at large discovered the Improbability and Absurdity of the Opinion,
That the Points were first invented, after the Talmuds were finished, A. D.
500. in the First Part; we are now to prove,

That the Shapes or Figures of the Points, Vowels and Accents which are joined
to the Text of the Hebrew Bible, were invented and placed to the Text as early
as the time of Ezra. Not that we need to enlarge upon this position, having
proved it in proving the other: For none doubt of the Points being placed by
Ezra, but those who suppose them first invented A. D. 500. Which Opinion being
already refuted, there is no other time assigned by any for their Original
since the time of Ezra: And having largely showed that they were not first
invented and placed, A. D. 500. or since that time, nor yet at any other time
since Ezra; it follows, they were placed by the time of Ezra. So that what is
further alleged for the Antiquity of the Points, is ex abundanti, and more
than could be required; not but that we intend to produce sufficient Proof for
their Antiquity, and Divine Authority.

. 2. We have moreover observed already, Part 1. Chap. 1. That those who
acknowledge the Antiquity and Divine Authority of the Points, etc. do yet
differ among themselves about the precise time of their first Invention. For,

1. Some suppose they are coaevous with the Letters, and as ancient as Adam:
This is the Opinion of R. Azarias in Meor Enaim, cap. 59 of Antonius Rodulphus,
Cevallerius in Rudamentis Linguae Hebraicae, cap. 4. Petrus Cevallerius, ibid.
in Annotationibus Matthias Flacius Illiricus Clavis Scripturae, part 2. tract
6. page 644. Marcus Marinus in Pref. to Arca Noae. Vid. Buxt. de Punct. Orig.
part 2. cap. 1. R. Samuel Arcuvolti Arugath Habbosem, cap. 26.

2. Others imagine that they were Orally delivered by Moses on Sinai, but not
placed to the Text till Ezra's time. So the Author of Cosri thinks, part. 3.
sect. 31. The Talmudists, the Author of Tsak Sephataim, and Others, say the
same.

3. Others believe the Points were placed together with the Letters, as the
Scripture was at first written by the Penmen of it. So says Baal Samadar, and
Others. Vid. Arugath Habbosem, cap. 26. and Masoret Hammasoret, Pref. 3.

4. But the most of the Jews affirm that Ezra, and the Men of the Great
Synagogue, first invented and placed the Shapes of the Points to the Text; as
Elias Levita himself, in Masoret Hammasoret, at the beginning of Pref. 3.
observes; and Ephodeus, cap. 5. and cap. 7.

Now all these several Opinions agree in this, That the Shapes of the Points
were placed to the Text by the Time of Ezra; and that they are of Divine
Original and Authority therefore; which is all we are concerned to prove.

And herein we have the universal Consent of the Jews, one (only Elias)
excepted, as has been proved in the First Part; for had another been of his
Opinion, either himself or his Followers would have produced him; which they
have not done to this day.

Now if we consider this Testimony in all its Circumstances, it will appear
very full and pertinent.

First, As to its quantity: It Is the universal Consent of all the Jews, in all
Places, Times and Ages.

Secondly, As to its quality; they are of all sorts.

(1.) The ancient Caballistical Writers and Philosophers. (2.) The Talmudists.
(3.) The Grammarians; they are the most Learned, both ancient and modern.

Thirdly, As to the History and the Age of these Witnesses, none are so fit;
for from them we have received the Hebrew Bible, by them it is preserved, and
they are fittest to give the best Account of their own Affairs.

Fourthly, As to the Form of this Testimony, here is their plain, loud, full
and open Voice for the Antiquity of the Points; and their deep Silence as to
the Novelty of the Points: So that in all respects the Testimony is full, plain
and Authentic.

. 3. But hereunto it is objected, That there are express and mute Testimonies
of the Jews against the Antiquity of the Points.

1. As to express Testimony, it is said and objected, That Aben Ezra, R. D.
Kimchi, Cosri, and the Author of Tsak Sephataim, together with Elias Levita,
are against the Antiquity of the Points.

Resp. We have at large proved in the First Part, that all these Testimonies
are wrested, and that all these Rabbis are for the Antiquity of the Points, (
Elias Levita only excepted;) which proves the universal Consent of the Jews for
the Antiquity of the Points, seeing Elias Levita and his Followers cannot pick
up one single Jew that does so much as question or doubt of it.

Object. But the Jews are partial to the Praise of their own Nation, and so
unfit Witnesses; only Elias, speaking against their Glory, is of more moment
than six hundred on the other side.

Resp. (1.) Elias speaks most in his own Cause, and for the Glory of his own
Nation, in ascribing the Punctation to the Masorites, A. D. 500. when we say
the Jews were rejected, and under the Curse of God, that as such a time they
should be owned of God, so as to be able to produce so excellent a Work as the
Punctation; which is the Rule of all our Translations, and Expositions of
Scriptures: This Opinion is most their interest to espouse, and most to their
Praise; whereas the other Opinion belongs not to their Praise any more than
ours; for the Christian Church succeeded the Church of the Jews: What Ezra did,
was whilst they were God's Church and People; which not the Jews, but the
Christians now are: And Ezra had as much Honor as that did amount to besides,
as being one of the Penmen of the Scripture; and did not so need it as the poor
Masorites, who had nothing else to boast of.

(2.) But if the Jewish Nation were herein partial to their own Glory, yet
still they are fittest to give the best Account of their own Affairs: All
Nations are partial to their own Praise, and yet the Records of every Nation
are the best Evidences of their Affairs, and their own Transactions.

. 4. Secondly, It Is objected by Capellus, and Others, That the Jews preserve
the Law which they publicly read in the Synagogue without Points, thereby to
represent the Autographon of Moses, being without Points; which it is said
Buxtorf confesses, does prove that the Autographon of Moses was without
Points. (Vid. Considerat. Consid. page 242.)

Resp. Buxtorf does not confess any such thing, but the contrary. (Vid. Bux^.
de Punct. Orig. page 49, 50.) And tells the several Opinions of the Jews about
the Law of Moses: Some suppose it was Pointed at first: Others suppose there
were two Copies in Moses's his time, one Pointed, the other without Points.
That the Law is judged polluted, if one Point be put to it, is owned; but that
it was without Points, to represent the Autographon of Moses, does not appear:
They who would know why the Jews read and keep it without Points, may hear what
themselves say to it, who own the Antiquity of the Points; and therefore if
their Testimony be good in one thing, it is so in another.

But the Jews give Three Reasons why the Law is kept without Points in the
Synagogue: (1.) Because of the difficulty of Transcribing Copies so exactly as
is required for public use, the least defect rendering it profane; which indeed
with Points were almost impossible to be done. (2.) That they might have the
liberty of drawing many and diverse senses; whereas the Points consine it to one
only, but they wou^d have many more mysterious. (3.) That all Learners might be
kept in dependence upon their Teachers; and it is not unlikely but they preserve
the Law Unpointed, that none might be permitted to read it in the Synagogue,
until he were able to read it perfectly without Points. Moreover, if it were
so, this hinders not but that it might be Pointed by Ezra, as Megilla, or
Esther, read without Points; which yet they own that Ezra Pointed, and is of
Divine Authority. However, the rest of the Scripture is read in their Synagogue
with Points; and the Law it self is read exactly according to the Punctation,
to a tittle; which sufficiently shows their esteem of the Punctation, as
being of Divine Authority.

Object. It Is said, If the Jews did believe that Moses or Ezra either had
Pointed the Law, they would not have used it without Points.

Resp. They all believe that Moses or else Ezra Pointed the Law; yet none of
them Point it in the Synagogue, but give other Reasons why they omit the
Points, though they read by them: And had Elias thought there had been any
Argument in this Objection, it is like he would have used it; which he does not,
but acknowledges the Jews own their Antiquity.

. 5. Thirdly, It Is objected, That the ancient Caballistical Writings make no
mention of the Points, or their Names; nor yet do they draw any Mysteries from
them, as they do from the Letters; which if they had been of Divine Authority,
no doubt but they would have done: Also the Mishna and Gemara; yea, both the
Talmuds, are very silent about the Points, even there where they had necessary
occasion to have made mention of them, if they had been in their time.

Resp. We have produced Instances out of the Caballistical Writings, as the
Zohar, and the Bahir; and out of the Mishna; and both the Talmuds, viz. that of
Jerusalem, and that of Babylon; wherein the Points are not only mentioned, but
their Necessity and Antiquity is owned, in part 1. cap. 15. And so has
Buxtorf. de Punct. Orig. part 1. cap. 5, 6. at large; where he produces full
Testimonies out of several Caballistical Books that mention very many of the
Names of the Points, as does his Father in his Tiberias.

(2.) The Points might be then, and yet they might not have occasion to mention
them, as well as many voluminous Rabbinical Commentaries since the Masorites,
Alsheeck, Abarbinel, etc. who make no mention of the Points.

(3.) In the Points they were not like to find such Mysteries as in the
Letters, seeing the Points hinder the design of raising many Mysterious senses,
because they confine the Text to one certain sense.

(4.) They might look for greater Mysteries in the Letters, which they believe
were given by the Lord himself, than by the Points, if they thought that Ezra
invented them.

(5.) And as to the Mishna and Talmuds, there is not a Text, (as Buxtorf
observes, de Punct. Orig. par. 1. page 77.) in all the Mishna or Talmuds, any
otherwise read than according to our present Punctation.

Now if Capellus places so much stress in the Argument, that the LXX. read
otherwise than the Points direct, therefore the Points were not then; we may
well lay as much stress on this, The Mishna and both the Talmuds read all
places according to the present Punctation, therefore the Punctation was in
their time.

Elias objects, The Talmuds often say, Read not so, but So; as not Beneecha, but
Boneecha: And there is a Mother to the Mikra, or Scripture; and a Mother to the
Masora; and that Joab slew his Master, about the reading of the word Zacar;
which, as it is Pointed, may be either the Male or the Memorial: Now (says he)
if the Points were Divine, they durst not say Read not so, but So.

Resp. R. S. Arc^volti, in Arugath Habbosem, cap. 26. answers this, and says,
Their Rabbis had received many Doctrines and Laws by Tradition; which that
they might preserve to Posterity, they set up Tsionim, Marks; as it is said,
Sima be-pyhem, Put it in their Mouths: They say, read not Sima, but Simanah
Signs. So that they alter the Letters as well as the Points hereby; and we may
as well say the Letters were not in their time, as that the Points were not on
this account; for they say, read not so, but so, of the Letters as well as of
the Points.

Moreover, R. Azarias shows that the Story of Ioab, and the Saying, Read not
so, but so, are Allusive, and Allegorical Expressions: Which he shows are never
to be allowed to prove any Doctrine by; for their Midrash and Hagoda prove no
Doctrine, and must be took for no other use than that for which it is brought;
and must never be taken or used against Scripture, or Sense and Reason, as the
Jews acknowledge. (Vid. R. Azarias, Meor Enaim, cap. 59. page 92. Maim. More
Nebochim, book 3. cap. 43. Pugio Fidei, page 92. or 111. ult. Edit.) So Deuteronomy.
23.13. A Paddle on thine Arm; read not so (says the Talmud,) but read, Put thy
Finger to thine Ear. This none can suppose they design to be the meaning of it,
but is Allegorical, as Poets use to speak in Metaphors and Symbols. (Vid. Pugio
Fidei, ut supra.) So that these Notes were only to help the Memory by such
Allusions; as R. S. Arcuvoli^ observes.

CHAP. II.. 1. The Objection of the ancient Translations of the LXX. and the
Chaldee Paraphrase using an Vnpointed Copy, Answered.. 2. The Objection, That
the Ancient Character was the Samaritan, and had no Points, Answered.. 3. The
Validity of the Testimony of the Jews not impaired in the least by any of the
Objections.
. 1. (4.) It Is objected, That the LXX. read otherwise than our Punctation
directs, and therefore it is supposed the Points were not in their time.

Resp. 1. They also read with other Letters, Words and Sentences, in many
places, than our present Hebrew Copy directs: And we may as well suppose our
Copy was not in their time, or that they used another Copy, as Capellus openly
avoweth, Vind. lib. 1. cap. 4. sect. 6. page 822. And in his Critica, and
elsewhere, goes to mend our Bible, by Conjectures at what words were in the
Copy by which the LXX. translated; but will not say ours is corrupted, when yet
it is to be mended by his Conjectures in innumerable places; which cannot be
admitted, without supposing it corrupted, and grossly too: And we may here see
whither this Opinion of the Novelty of the Points, and this Argument about the
LXX. does tend at last, not only to deprive us of the Points, but also of the
Letters, Words and Sentences, even the Copy it self which we enjoy.

Hence Vossius more honestly rejects our Hebrew Bible, and prefers the LXX. as
Authentic. And the Papists on this account reject our Bible, and prefer the
Vulgar Latin. But both are more kind than Capellus: For though they take away
our Bible as well as he does, yet they give us another in its stead; which he
does not, only leaves us to conjecture by ancient Translations what our Bible
was of old.

And of this Argument of the LXX. Dr. Broughton says in his Positions touching
the Hebrew Tongue, page 669. Our late Men (says he) help Elias his most deadly
Error, with an Argument hard for the Unlearned to Answer, ( viz. this of the
LXX.) of which he says, Good Men used this Reason, to help the Pope to
disannull the Authority of Scripture, and to betray their own strong Hold: This
Answer is sure, the LXX. never meant to open the Law to Heathen, where they
would play the Hogs or Dogs.

Christ has promised, Mat. 5.18. That not one jot of the Law shall perish.
That the Copy we now enjoy, is the true Authentic Original, we are ready to
prove when it is necessary so to do: But seeing those in England, who embrace
Capellus his Opinion about the Points, do yet reject this Notion about our
Copy, we need not here enlarge upon this Subject:

2. Some who use this Argument of the LXX. would nevertheless state the
Question so smoothly, as if they did not deny the Antiquity of the Sound and
Force of the Punctation, but of the Shapes only; which the Masorites (say they)
placed right according to the Sound, which had been kept by Use to that time.
(Vid. Considerat. Consid. cap. 10. sect. 6. page 206, 207, 208, etc.) Whereas
they yet use this Argument of the LXX. the Chaldee Paraphrase, and Ierom's
going off from the Punctation: Which they do as much in the Sound as Shape, or
rather solely in the Sounds and Force of the Points, which by this Argument
then were not at that time; and hereby Sound as well as Shape is discarded,
whatever elsewhere be pretended.

3. That the LXX. altered Letters as well as Vowels appears, as in innumerable
places elsewhere, so in particular by the thirteen which the Jews own they
designedly did corrupt; viz. (1) Genesis 1.1. (2) and 1.26. (3) and 2.2. (4) and
5.2. (5) and 11.7. (6) and 18.12. (7) and 45.6. (8) Exodus 4.20. (9) and 12.40.
(10) 24.5, 11. (11) Deuteronomy. 4.9. (12) and 17.3. (13) Lev. 11.6. Not that all
these places are found now so altered, but some of them only: So in Genesis 5. the
Flood was A. M. 1656. but by the LXX. 'twas 2262. or 2242. as they have altered
the Age of the Fathers.

It Is well known how uncertain all things are about the LXX. Josephus expressly
affirms, That not the whole Bible, but the Law only was translated by them:
in his Proaem. (Vid. Drusius Observat. lib. 6. cap. 9. Scal. ad Eusebius. fol.
123. Wouwer. Syntag. c. 11. Dr. I. O. of the Integrity of the Hebrew and Greek
Text, page 335, 336, 337, 338, 339. En Esrael, on Megillah, page 132. says,
The Law only was permitted in Greek, and that too for Ptololomy' s sake only.
(Vid. Ludovicus de Compeigne de Veil de Sacrificiis, page 449, and 450.)

5. Whatever was translated by them, it is certain that the Autographon of it,
if left at Alexandria, was consumed to Ashes in Caesar's Wars; and that Ierom
could not find a Standard for to mend the Various Readings of it hy: And it is
observed, they show such Ignorance of the Hebrew Tongue as is unmeet to be
ascribed to such Persons as they are supposed to be. (Vid. Munster. Pref. ad
Bib.) And it is known they frequently read as they please; for no Copy is found
by which they can be supposed to translate.

6. Let them show therefore that our Greek Bible is the true and genuine LXX.
before they tell us they had no Points. (Vid. Cooper, Dom. Moj. page 223, 224,
etc.)

And as to the Chaldee Paraphrase, which is objected also:

Resp. 1. It Is a Cento of diverse Persons and Ages: That on the Law agrees best
with the Letters, and so likewise with the Vowels; but that on the Prophets
differs alike from both; so that the Letters as well as the Points would be
rejected on this account.

2. It Is a Paraphrase, and not a Translation, and so not tied to the Rules of a
Translation; nor do they always make a Litteral Interpretation.

. 5. It Is objected, That the Ancient Hebrew Character was the same with the
present Samaritan, which never had any Points or Vowels.

Resp. 1. Though it be not now known to have Vowels, it follows not therefore
that they never had any.

2. Postellus shows that Ierom owned that they had Vowels.

3. This Objection would have lead us, if we had room enough, to prove which
was the First Tongue and Character; but at present we can but refer to those
who have so done.

(1.) Those that affirm the Hebrew to have been the First Tongue, are Josephus
contra Appionem, lib. 1. Eusebius. Caesariens. de Preparatione Evang. Joseph.
Scalig. Epist. ad Thomasonum; Buxtorf. Fill. de Linguae Hebraeae Antiquitate and
Origin Desertationem; I. Oweit Theologoumenon, lib. 3. cap. 2. Cooper Dom.
Mos. cap. 3. Hieron. Com. in Zephan. cap. 3. ver. 18. Orig. in Number. Hom. 11.
Aug. de Civ. Dei, lib. 16. cap. 11. Ambros. in Phil. cap. 3. Nicol. Lyr. in
Isa. cap. 19. ver. 18. Mercer. in Genesis 11.9. Pagn. Inst. Heb. cap. 1, etc. The
Names of Adam, Sheth, Cain, Noah, etc. properly signifying what they were at
first used to import in the Hebrew Tongue only, etc.

2. That the present Hebrew Character, and not the Samaritan, was the first and
most ancient of all, is proved and owned, (1.) By the Jews; as Aben Ezrain
Tsakooth; Rabbi Sal. Iarchi, Com. in Est. 9.27. R. Moses ben Maimon. in Com. on
Mishnaioth; R. Ephodeus in Maase Ephod. R. Jacob ben Schelomoh Ben Chabib in
Ein Israel on Megillah, page 142. Balmes Gram. cap. 1. R. Azarias in Meor.
Enaim, cap. 58. (2.) By the Christians: Picus Mirandul. in Epist. ad Ignotum
Theodor. Bibliander Com. de Optimo Genesis Gram. page 76. Gulielmus Postel. lib.
de Orig. cap. 5. Marcus Marinus Brixianus in Arca Noae ab initio let. (...);
Franciscus Iunius ad lib. 2. Bellar. de Verbo Del, cap. 1. Nicol. Fuller in
Miscel. Sacris, lib. 4. cap. 4. Schickard in Bechina Happerushim, page 82.
Broughton Consent, page 126. Caesar Baron. Analium, tom. 2. page 293. Buxtorf's
Diss^rtati^nem de Litteris Hebraeorum; Thomas Bangus Hauniensis Coelum Orientis
Excert. Literaria, page 209. (Vid. Cooper Dom. Mos. page 23. Dr. I. O.
Theologoumenon.

3. So that we deny that the Samaritan was the Ancient Character: But though we
should grant that it were so, and that Ezra altered it, and brought in this New
Character:

4. This very well agrees with Ezra's introducing the Points: Which fits this
Character well enough, though it did not suit the other; and had it been
possible to have pre^erved the Sounds of the Punctation to that time without
the Shapes; yet from that time it could not be done, which made the Punctation
necessary. But,

5. We deny that Ezra did alter the Character, as they suppose; and shall
enquire why they think he did; and examine the strength of their Reasons for
such a Conceit.

First then, they say, 'Twas because the Jews had forgotten their Old Tongue
and Character in the Captivity, and learned the New.

Resp. This is most unlikely: For,

(1.) The same Men were alive at the burning of the first, and at the building
of the second Temple; and so many of them too, as confounded the Shout of the
Young Men by the Cry of the Old, Ezra 3.12, 13. Enough, doubtless, to keep
their Tongue, at least the Character of it: And it is incredible that the Men of
the same Age should forget their own Character, wherein they were so much
exercised, having their Bibles with them always, and that in their own
Character only; and dwelling together in the same Cities, without any converse
with others in Matters of Religion, about which the Scriptures treat, and very
little in Civil Matters: No Marriages were made with others; they had their
Bibles, Dan. 9.2. but 'twas unlawful for them to learn the Arts of the
Chaldeans: And it cannot be proved that they commonly had or learned other
Books or Characters: They held Correspondence with the Jews in Iudeah, and
elsewhere, as Ieremiah's Letters show, being sent unto them; which must needs
be done in their own Tongue and Character. The Priests and Levites were with
them, to instruct them; which must be done out of the Old Law, by Reading and
Expounding it. They were also in continual Expectation of returning to their
own Land, Language and Worship: And can we imagine they should then forget the
Tongue of Canaan, whereby they hoped to converse with their Contrymen, and
serve God at Jerusalem, and learn the Language of a People whom they hoped to
see destroyed, and their Tongue with them. Also Daniel, and the Prophets of
that time, wrote their Prophecies mostly in the Hebrew Tongue, and altogether
in the Old Character, as none doubts; it is then most irrational to suppose
that Ezra should reject them, whilst they were even wet, and newly written, to
introduce another Character. And that they commonly spoke their own Tongue
after their return, appears in that it was accounted a strange thing, that the
Children spoke partly the Tongue of Canaan, and partly that of Ashdod; which
they learnt of their Mothers, who were newly married there to the Jews; so that
there was no occasion of this Alteration of the Character.

Some say 'twas done, that the Scripture should be dispersed and spread through
the East.

Resp. This helps it not: Why then was it not put in the Chaldean Tongue? They
are little the better for its being in their Character only.

Some say the Jews, in hatred to the Samaritans, left their ancient Chracter,
because they would have nothing in common with them.

Resp. Why then did they not reject the Law also which the Samaritans held
likewise? Would they thus give the Samaritans cause for ever to triumph over
them, for having left the Ancient Character, wherein the Law was first given in
its Original Purity, to the Care of the Samaritans their Enemies, whilst
themselves had rejected it for that of Babylon? Were these the Acts of those
Jews whom (they say) dare not put one Point to the Law, that they might
represent the first Autographon of it as it was written by Moses? And who
account the Bible unfit for Public Use, by the least misplacing of a Letter,
or making a letter that is larger or lesser than his fellows, but equal to the
rest?

But so it was, though they know not why, as Eusebius, Jerome, the Talmuds, and
some Coyns found with the Samaritan Character, do testify.

Resp. 1. These Witnesses were born five hundred years after the Fact about
which they testify; which impairs their Authority: The Fathers had little
knowledge of that Tongue, especially Eusebius; and Ierom, who knew most, might
easily be mislead by the darkness of that time. The sense of the Talmuds is
disputed by the Jews, who say the Talmuds do not intend any such thing as is
here fathered upon them; but say their Opinion was, That the Character we now
have, was the first ancient Character wherein the Law was at first written by
Moses; but not commonly understood till Ezra ordained the writing of the Law in
that Character only. ( Jacob ben Chabib on Ein Is. p. 142.

And as to the Old Coyns; as there might be, (1.) Several sorts of Characters,
some fittest for Embossing or Engraving, and yet the same Hebrew Tongue: So,
(2.) The Story is fabulous. But be it so, if they were so ancient, must it
needs follow, that because these Letters were then known, and in use, that they
only were so? Or that the Bible was written with them, and those now in use,
unknown? (3.) It Is as confidently affirmed that there were Coyns as anas
Solomon's time taken up, with the same Hebrew Letters wherein the Bible is now
written. (Vid. Schickard Bechin. Hap. Hottinger. Cip. Heb.) So that this
Testimony is as much for the present Character, as for the Samaritan being the
Ancient Character. But the truth is, as Dr. Broughton declares in his Positions
touching the Hebrew Tongue; speaking against this Assertion, That Ezra invented
the Characters which now we have, page 668. he says, The Trojans were not
willinger to betray their own City, than our loytering Fathers, and loytering
Selves, to give Machmad all strength of victory. -- Jews by Fables have
overwrought us, etc.

. 3. And thus have we examined the Exceptions to the Testimony of the Jews for
the Antiquity of the Points; by all which it is faintly suggested, That the Jews
do not own their Antiquity; when at the same time it is known that all the Jews
who at any time have written or expressed their Opinion about the Points, have
plainly owned their Divine Antiquity, Elias only excepted, who nevertheless
believes that all the Punctation is perfectly the very same that was at first
expressed by the holy Penmen of the Scripture; that only the Shapes were placed
by the Masorites; not one Jew can be produced that does so much as doubt of the
Antiquity of the Points, etc. All the People of the Jews, to this day, follow
the Punctation; and do still universally publicly profess they believe the
Antiquity and Divine Authority of the Points; nor is there one Man left alive
so much as of Elias his Opinion among the Jews.

And so much for the Testimony of the Jews for the Antiquity of the Points.
CHAP. III.. 1. The Testimony of all Christian States and Churches, Ancient and
Modern, Considered. 2. The Objection of Jerome's Translation, and the Fathers,
and some Modern Divines not owning the Points Answered.. 3. Wherein the stres^
and strenght of the Testimony of Jews and Christians does consists.
. 1. AS to the Testimony of Christians, this likewise is Universal of all Ages,
Places and Parties; as appears by their received Translations taken out of the
Hebrew as it is now Pointed. But hereunto is objected the silence of Ierom and
the Fathers, as to the Points, the Translation of Ierom differing from the
present Punctation; the Fathers having recourse to the LXX. the Opinion of many
Eminent Modern Divines, both Papist and Protestant, for the Novelty of the
Points, etc.

Whereunto we Reply, First, As to the Silence of Jerome about the Points, and
that therefore they were not in his time, it is Answered:

1. Ierom's Translation, for the main of it, shows he had the Sound and Force
of the Punctation. Whether Pointed Copies were as common then as they are now,
we do not debate; nor whether he could get one or not, though they were in
being then with the Jews; nor yet whether the Names of them were then the same
they are now; nor what need he had to mention them, though he had them, when
many large Rabbinical Commentaries since the Masorites, take no notice of the
Points neither, as Alsheech, Abarbinel, etc. Yet some will dispute several
places of Ierom, wherein they affirm he speaks of them: But grant he were
silent about them, were they not in being therefore? Ierom is as silent about
the Keri and Ketib, and the Chaldee Paraphrase, and yet both were before his
^ime. Ierom saw not all things, nor is it proved that he mentioned all he saw:
None else but Origin among the Fathers saw or knew any thing considerable of
the Hebrew in those dark times; and they were often constrained to conceal their
Esteem of the Hebrew Original, because of the Ignorance and Obstinacy of those
times: Hence it is no wonder the rest of the Fathers take no notice of the
Points, when they generally understood not Hebrew.

And as to the Opinion of many Modern Divines, both Papist and Protestant,
about the Novelty of the Points, there is no cause to wonder at it: For,

(1.) For the Papists, it is their great Interest to have the Bible rendered
unmeet to be a perfect Rule of Faith, that some necessity thereby might be
supposed for the Infallibility of their Pope, and it is no marvel if they
embrace this Advantage. And as to Protestants, it is known, the Authority of
Elias, the Great, if not Only Master of the Hebrew Tongue of their time, was
very greatly esteemed among them: And how easy is it for so great a Master to
instill his own Notions into the Minds of those that depend upon his
Instruction: He lived with Paulus Eligius for some time; and when some few
Eminent Men among the Christians are at first infected with such an Opinion,
not at first, it may be, well considering the Consequences that do attend it;
jow readily do Others who esteem them for Leaders in that kind of Learning,
follow them, without duly examining the Merits of the Cause? as is the practice
of most Scholars that do not penetrate very far into a particular part of
Learning, to embrace the common Notions about it, without examining of the
them. But moreover, whilst these very Divines themselves, together with all
Christian States, Nations and Churches, do follow the Hebrew Bible as it is at
present Pointed, and publicly embrace those Translations of the Bible into the
Vulgar Tongue of each Nation, as are taken either from the Original Hebrew
Bible as it is Pointed, or from those Translations that are so translated, or
pretended so to be, which is the present state of Affairs throughout
Christendom: We have an ample, full, and sufficient Testimony of all Christian
States, Churches and People, Learned and Unlearned for the Antiquity and Divine
Authority of the Points. For though some Protestant Divines deny the Antiquity
of the Shapes, they all own the Divine Authority of the Sounds of the Points,
and thereby follow the Punctation.

But the generality of Protestants own the Antiquity of the Shapes, as well as
the Sounds of the Points. And that this is the public professed Opinion of all
or most of the Protestant Universities, Colleges, Doctors of Divinity, and
Professors of the Hebrew Tongue, in most of the Protestant States and Churches
beyond Sea, is proved by a large Collection of their several Suffrages and
Judgments about the Antiquity of the Points, lately delivered and Printed by
Matthias Wasmuth, in the end of his Treatise, entitled, Vindiciae Hebraeae
Scripterae, etc. adversus Impia and Imperita multorum prejudicia imprimis
contra Capelli, Vossii, F. and Waltoni Autoris Operis Anglicani Polyglotton
Assertiones falsissimas pariter as pernitiosas.

So that we have herein the full and ample Testimony of the Christian States
and Churches of all Ages and Places, as well as of all the Jews, for the
Antiquity of the Points.

. 3. Now the strength of this Argument lies in this, That the Hebrew Bible, as
it is Pointed, is become the peaceable Possession, Treasure and Inheritance of
the Church and People of God by Prescription: It has always, in all Ages, been
enjoyed; and under the Conduct and Guidance of it, they have safely arrived at
Glory, when all others wandered in darkness who have been totally without it,
or some Translations taken from it, or from those that were so taken, as is the
LXX. the Syriack, Vulgar Latin, and all others, only some more, and some less
truly and exactly.

Hereupon we have sufficient ground to acquiesce in it; and all that can be
desired of us, is, That when any accuse it of being a Novelty, we fairly
examine what Evidence they can produce to prove their Charge.

This we have done at large in the FIRST PART, and showed the Accusations and
Charges brought in against the Antiquity of the Points, are all False,
altogether Improbable in every respect, and on several accounts Impossible:
That all the Evidence is totally silent in what it is brought to testify, and
witnesses to the quite contrary of what it is brought to prove, declaring the
Antiquity, instead of the Novelty of the Points. So that hereby the Antiquity
of the Points appears with the greater luster, having passed the Fire of Trial
and Examination. Nay, Dr. Walton himself confesses, ( Considerator Considered,
page 208.) the Text was generally so read by the Christian Church as it is now,
as appears both by the Hebrew Copies among them, and by the Comments, and
Expositions, and Translations of the ancient Writers of the Church. And indeed
our Debate is not with any Protestants about the Divine Authority of the
Punctation directly; for they universally own it, even those who suppose that
the Shapes of the Points were first invented by the Masorites of Tiberias, A.
D. 500.

The Hebrew Bible, as it is Pointed, is enjoyed and owned by all Jews
universally, even Elias Levita himself; and by all Christians too, a few
Papists only excepted, to be the only Standard whereby all Translations and
Doctrins are to be tried, (unless what Capellus and Vossius hold to the
contrary.)

And we have already proved in the Prooemium, and in Chap. 8. of the First
Part, and elsewhere, That the Opinion of those who suppose the Shapes of the
Points to be first invented, A. D. 500. by the Masorites, is utterly
inconsistent with their own Opinion of the Antiquity and Divine Authority of
the Sound and Force of the Points, it being impossible to preserve the true
Sound until that time without the Shapes of them. So that we must either reject
the Punctation, and then we have neither Standard nor Bible left us; or else we
must own the Antiquity of the Shapes, as well as the Sounds of the Points,
Vowels and Accents; as all the Jews, and the generality of Christians
acknowledge.

And so much for the Testimony of Jews, and Christians for the Antiquity of the
Points, together with Answers to the several Objections that are made thereunto.
The Second Part of the Second Part of this Discourse: WHEREIN The Reasons of
Jews and Christians for the Antiquity of the Points, are Stated; and the
Objections against them Answered.
CHAP. IV.. 1. The First Reason for the Antiquity of the Points stated and
maintained: That the Vowels are often expressed in the Bible by the Punctation
only; and yet are so essential to Speech, that all Languages are constrained to
express them in one shape or other.. 2. The Objection, That the Bible may be
read without Points, because the Rabbininical Commentaries, the Mishna, the
Talmuds, and the Oriental Tongues may be so read, and the Greek without
Accents, Answered: The Bible often expresses the Vowels only by the Points,
which the Rabbis, and other Tongues, express by the Vowel Letters.. 3. As is
evinced by several Instances.. 4. And the Argument thereby proved.
. 1. WE proceed in the next place to Artificial Arguments or Reasons: And these
are of Two sorts:

First, Such Reasons which the Jews have first used, and the Christians from
them And,

Secondly, Such as the Christians only have invented and used.

We shall begin with the First sort, viz. Such the Jews first made

The First Reason for the Antiquity of the Points, is that which R. Azarias in
Meor Enaim, cap. 59. brings to prove his Opinion, That the Points were
coaevous with the Letters: And that is this: Because the Sounds of the Vowels
(which are often expressed in the Bible by the Points only,) are so essential
to Speech, that all Languages have them in one shape or other, either in
Letters, or Lines, or Points; either in, or between, or above, or below the
Letters: And it is not to be imagined that the Hebrew Tongue, which is the
First, and the Mother of all the rest, should want that Essential part which
all others enjoy.

And indeed, for this Reason Letters are called Consonants; because they can
sound with, but they cannot found without Vowels.

And as R. Azarias, ibid. gives Instances of the Occidental Languages, as the
Latin, Italian, Grecian, etc. having Vowel-Letters; so he mentions the Oriental
Languages also; and in particular, he caught R. Elias, in his Story about the
Men of the Country of Prester John, reading without Points, by showing that
they had Letters to express their Vowels.

. 2. Now it is granted us, that Vowels are coaevous with the Letters. (Vid. Dr.
Walton, afterward Bishop of Chester, in his Considerate Considered, cap. 10.
page 201.) But then it is said that they are expressed by the Vowel Letters,
Evi, a, b, u, i, in the Bible, which may be read without Points, as well as the
Rabbinical Commentaries, the Talmuds, the other Eastern Languages, and as the
Greek is read without Accents; and where they are wanting, there the scope of
the place may help the Skillful. ( ibid. c. 10. page 215, 216, 217.)

Resp. Here Is no Proportion in the Comparisons; the Rabbis, the Eastern
Languages, the Talmud, the Greek Testament, etc. express their Vowels by
Letters: But the Hebrew Bible, in innumerable places, does not but by Points
only.

They grant us, the Vowels of the Bible were expressed coaevous with the
Consonants: And we'll prove this was done only by the Points in innumerable
places; and thence conclude the Points were coaevous with the Letters, at least
of Divine Antiquity and Authority.

And as to the scope of the place, the Matter is too Sublime, Divine and
Mysterious; the Language too Elyptical and Abstruce in many places, to yield
that relief.

And as to the Argument, That the Bible was of old without Points, because the
Eastern Languages were of old without Points: We reply,

They always used Vowel Letters; and so do the Syriack, Chaldee and Arabic
Translations, where our Bible uses Points only, and not Vowel Letters; which
manifests that our Bible had Points from the beginning, as theirs had Vowel
Letters.

To make this plain, we could produce innumerable Instances out of the Rabbis,
and all the Oriental Tongues, had we room to place them; but one or two at
present taken out of the Rabbis, may suffice to show that the Bible expresses
those Vowels by Points only, which the Rabbis, the Chaldee Paraphrase, the
Syriac, and the rest of the Oriental Languages express by the Vowel Letters.

As for Example: R. David Kimchi, when he repeateth these Bible words, Hos.
^.8. And Loruhamah was weaned, (...), he thus expresses them, (...); where the
short o* and the short u* are expressed by (...), the Vowel Letter by Kimchi;
but by the Points only by the Bible; so ver. 3. (...), Kimchi reads (...): And
so cap. 2. ver. 3. (...), Kimchi reads (...): And ver. 5. (...) he reads (...):
And ver. 10 (...), he reads (...): And ver. 14. (...), he reads (...): And ver.
17. (...), he reads (...): And cap. 3. ver. 1. (...), he reads (...): And
(...), he reads (...): And ver. 2. (...), he reads (...): And ver. 5. (...), he
reads (...): Cum multis aliis.

Now though the Hebrew Tongue expresses their Vowels either by Vowel Letters
only, or by Points and Vowel Letters together, or else by the Points only; yet
it is essential to that Tongue, and all others, to express the Vowels one way or
other.

And seeing the Vowels in the Bible are expressed by the Punctation only in
innumerable places, where they are essentially necessary to Speech, that they
be expressed some way or other.

We may conclude that the Points are an essential part of the Text, and thereby
of Divine Authority and Antiquity:

Because the Vowels, which are an Essential part of Speech, are expressed only
by them in innumerable places; as has been already in part, and shall be more
fully under the next Argument made to appear.

And so much for the First Reason; which leads us to the Second. And that is,
The Argument of Semadar, to prove that the Vowels were as ancient as the time
of Moses.
CHAP. V.. 1. The Second Reason for the Antiquity of the Points, stated, That
the Scripture was written very plain; but without Points, 'twould be very
obscure.. 2. This is evinced by a Collection of diverse places where the Vowels
are expressed by the Punctation only, and that in such places as would be
unintelligible without the Points.. 3. The Objection of Capellus, That it is not
Impossible, though it be Difficult to read without Points, Answered: The
Objection, That it is the Office of the Ministry to Read, as well as to Expound,
Answered.. 4. The Argument from the whole proved.
. 1. THe Opinion and Argument of Samadar, for the Divine Original of the
Points, is related by R. Samuel Arcuvolti (who agrees with him) in his Arugath
Habbosem, cap. 26. And by R. Azarias in Meor Enaim, cap. 59. And also by Elias
Levita himself, Masoret Hammasoret, Pref. 3. fol. 78. and it is to this effect:
If (says he) it be asked, Whence shall we know that the Punctation was from
God? It Is answered, From hence we know it; because it is said by the Lord in the
Scripture very fully, Deuteronomy. 27.8. And thou shall write upon the stones all the
words of the Law VERY PLAINLY: Now (says he) unless it were for the help of
the Points and Accents, whereby the words are made plain, no Man could be able
to understand the meaning of them; as (...). Thus far Samadar, as Elias reports
his words; and all he says to it, is only this, See if it be fit to lean upon:
Which we shall now see accordingly.

The Scriptures were always delivered in the Vulgar Tongue of the People of
God, in Hebrew, when they understood Hebrew; in Chaldee, when they understood
Chaldee, as parts of Ezra, Daniel, etc. and in Greek, when that was understood
by them, as is the New Testament. All sorts are commanded to read and know the
Scriptures; Wise and Simple, Men and Children, it being their Rule by which
they shall be Judged: It was therefore required to be written very plainly, as
apears in the place mentioned, Deuteronomy. 27.8. So also Hab. 2.2. And the Lord said,
Write the Vision, and make it PLAIN upon Tables, that he may run that reads
it.

Now it is granted us by most of our Adversaries, That the present Hebrew
Bible, as to the Words and Letters of it, are for the main the same which God
gave at first: These were required to be written very plain, and were
accordingly so written and kept; but without Points, they are most dubious,
most obscure and uncertain; therefore they were at first written with Points.

. 2. The Obscurity of the Text without Points, as it has been evidenced in the
Prooemium; so also at large it is demonstrated by Buxtorf, de Punct. Orig. par.
2. cap. 8. Cooper, Domus Mosaicae; and Wasmuth's Vindiciae, where many
Instances are produced which evidence its Obscurity without Points.

As for Example: Vau is defective in Verbs Plur. Third Pers. and in the Pronoun
Third Pers. which renders the word very dubious; as in Genesis 1.28. (...) for
(...); and Josh. 11.8. (...) for (...); and Deuteronomy. 2.21. (...), Genesis 19.16.
(...), ibid. (...) for (...); and Genesis 26.7. (...), Zech. 11.5. (...) for
(...), 2 Samuel 14.15. (...), 2 King. 22.5. (...) for (...); and innumerable such
like.

2. Vau is often defective, where in the Conjugation Hiphil, it should be put to
supply Iod the first Radical; and also it is wanting, as the mark of the
Conjugation; as (...) for (...), Ier. 32.21. (...), 2 King. 17.6. (...), Ezra
16.2. (...), 2 King. 24.7.

3. Vau is often omitted where Vau is the second Radical Letter, where it ought
not to be, did not the Points supply it; as (...) for (...); and (...) for
(...); and (...) for (...); and the like.

4. So in Nouns Femin. Plur. as (...), Genesis 1.14. (...), Genesis 5.4. and Genesis
3.1. (...), Genesis 3.7. (...), etc. So in others, as (...), Lev. 5.12

5. So Iod is often omitted; as (...), etc.

6. He is defective in the end; as (...), Ruth. 1.9. and (...), ver. 12. and
(...), ver. 20.

7. He is often very ambiguously put for Vau, to signify Shurck or Holem: First,
for Holem; as (...), Hab. 3.3. (...), Genesis 13.3. (...), Ezekiel. 12.14. (...),
Psalm. 42.9. (...), Josh. 11.16. So for Shurck; as (...) (Vid. Buxt. de Orig.
Punct. par. 2. cap. 8.) These words may be read with Points, but without they
cannot: I never (says he) saw any so writing without Points: And (says he) I
can easier read all other Rabbinical Books without Points, than the Bible,
though I never saw them before, and yet have read the Bible often.

If we give up the Points, we have little left of the Old Testament worth
contending for. Grant the Text to be a Nose of Wax, of dubious and uncertain
Sense, and then prove it to be a Rule of Faith and Worship if you can. The Old
Serpent does breath deadlier Poison (says Dr. Broughton) against the Authority
of God's Word, by teaching that the Vowels are not from God. (Vid. Positions
touching the Hebrew Tongue, page 669.) The Law is called a Light, and a Lamp;
but without Points, 'twould be Darkness it self.

It must needs therefore have had Points from the first, for it was plainly
written; but this it could not be without either Points or Vowel Letters: And
yet none pretend to imagine that there ever were any other Vowel Letters in the
Bible than there are now; and it is now so obscure for want of Vowel Letters or
Points, that none can understand it in very many places. If therefore it were
written plainly at first, it was written with Points.

As for Instance: (...) is plainly expressed by the Points only thus, (...),
the Moon; (...), a Brick or Pavement; (...), Frankincence; (...), the
Poplar-tree. So (...), Days; (...), Mules; (...), Seas. So (...), he praised;
(...), he was mad. And so of Dabar; which, as it is Pointed, has Eight several
Significations, As he spoke, a Pestilence, a Be, a Word, a Thing, and the like
innumerable, which without Points are most dubious, and render the Scripture
so; as Isa. 24. ult. (...), And the Moon shall be Confounded; (...), and the
Sun Ashamed: Which the LXX. read, The Brick shall be confounded, and the Wall
ashamed; by the change of a Point. So Exodus 32.18. it is not the Voice (...) of
them that Cry, but (...) of them that Sing; where the same word expresses two
contrary senses, as it is Pointed.

. 3. Capellus Vind. lib. 2. cap. 8. confesses the Rabbis are easier read
without Points than the Bible, but yet the Mishna and Talmuds and Cabalistical
Writings are very difficult, though understood by some Persons, and though the
Bible be more difficult, yet it is not altogether impossible to every one.

Resp. The Mishna, etc. was written on purpose in such a style as that none but
the Jewish Rabbis might understand it; but the Law was written that all Men
might understand and keep it.

2. The Matter being often purely Divine, where there is left no humane help to
find the sense, as often falls out in Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Isaiah, etc. where
the Words are Elyptical no where else used, without Antecedents and
Consequents, etc. there it is plainly impossible to understand the Text without
Points or immediate inspiration.

Obj. The same difficulties are in Expounding the Pointed Text as in reading
the unpointed, but the Ministry serves for one, and may so do for the other.

Resp. If it be obscure when Pointed, why then would they reject the Points,
but that the Bible might thereby be rejected for its Obscurity?

2. We must know the reading of the Text our selves, because thereby we must
try the Exposition of it by the Ministry, but to commit the Reading as
peculiarly as the Expounding the Text to the Ministry, is plain Popery.

. 4. But to conclude this Chapter, we have proved that the Text was written
very plain, and that without Points 'twould be very obscure, as they are
constrained to Confess; and therefore we say the Text was written with Points,

and so much for the second Reason.
CHAP. VI.. 1. The third Reason stated, the Points evidence their own Antiquity
and Divine Authority.. 2. The Objection that there are superfluities in the
Puncta^ion Answered.. 3. The Objection about the Keri and Ketib, being only
about the Letters, and never about Points, Answered.. 4. The Objection of the
insignificancy of the Musical Accents Answered.. 5. The Objection of the
Chaldee Names of the Points, Vowels and Accents, Answered.. 6. The sum of the
Arguments of the Jews for the Antiquity of the Points, Declared.
. 1. A Third Reason for the Divine Authority of the Points, is taken from what
the Author of Cosri says, part 3. sect. 32. as to the Nature of the Punctation
it self, being Divine.

Now we say that for the same Reason why we believe the Text to be God's Word,
for the same do we believe the Points to be from God.

We believe the Scripture to be God's Word, because it evidenceth its self to
be from God by certain Tekmeria, or Proofs of the Power, Light, Purity and
Majesty that appears in it, manifesting its self to proceed from a Holy, Wise,
Glorious, Gracicious God: But this it does only as it is Pointed; for without
Points the Text speaks either nothing, or else contrary and diverse things, of
which no judgment can be made whether they are good or bad: Now says the
Author of Cosri, part 3. sect. 32. There appears in the fixing of the Points
and Accents to be such an Order as cannot be made without Divine Aid, which is
far beyond the reach of humane Skill: Nor had it otherwise been so universally
received in all times by all the People of God without alteration; because as
wise men as they could have Pointed otherwise, had it been done by humane Art
only; and so say we.

Now to fix and ascertain the sense of the Text universally infallibly right,
which is the Work of the Punctation, requires no less ability than the
infallible guidance of the same Spirit of God that first gave forth the
Scriptures. Men may know the things of men, and may rectify any litteral
mistakes in Writings about Arts and Sciences, the Matter and Subject whereof
they treat being first well known and understood by them; but no Man knows the
things of God, nor can know them, but the Spirit of God, and he to whom the
Spirit reveals them, 1 Cor. 2.11. The matter of the Scripture consists of such
Mysteries that were hid from all Men, 'till revealed by the Scripture only: The
Prophesies of future Events, as Isaiah, etc. are delivered in such cloudy and
figurative Expressions, and in such Elyptical Sentences as posed the very
Penmen of Scripture themselves to interpret; it must needs therefore be
impossible for any infallibly to fix and ascertain the right sense of the words
of Scripture without Divine Assistance.

But in all the most deep and dark places of Scripture the Punctation is as
complete and perfect as in the plainest, and every where shows it self and the
Striptures thereby to be from God, by the Divine and Heavenly Subjects that are
delivered by the Text as it is at present Pointed.

We say then, that we believe the Bible is God's Word, with Faith Divine,
because of the Authority and Veracity of God, who has declared it so to be
therein: And we believe that God did indeed declare it so to be, as is therein
affirmed, because the Bible evidenceth its self to our Consciences by
infallible Tekmeria or Characters, that it did proceed from no other but God
himself.

All God's Works wear his Name, and bear some mark upon them of God their
Author; but his Word is herein exalted above all other Works that bear his
Name, Psalm. 138.2. Thou have magnified thy Word above all they Name; for there
no where remains so many and so great prints of the immediate Finger of God as
is on the Scripture; none but God can make that Revelation of the invisible
Nature and Being of God as is in the Scripture, nor declare those Counsels
which before were hid in God that are plainly expressed in the Scriptures,
which things the Angels desire to look into: Nothing in Heaven or Earth does
bear so much of the Image of God as does the Scriptures, (but God himself;) by
nothing has the great God revealed his Will, and given forth to the Sons of
Men a Law of Obedience, but only by the Scripture; nothing evidenceth it self
so to be, in the least degree, but the Scriptures, and all this the Bible does
in and by the Punctation only, without which it would be nothing at all, but
whatever wicked men have a mind it should be.

sect;. 2. It Is Objected 1 st. There are multitudes of impertinent
superfluities in the Punctation, very unfit to ascribe to a Divine Original.

Resp. The Jews best know the usefulness of all parts of the Punctation, and as
much as they know they highly value, bu^ they lament that they are ignorant of
a great deal of it, as the Musical Use of the Accents, which has been lost,
and the like; but for every one to Condemn every thing he does not understand,
would put a final end to Knowledge.

Mathias Wasmuth in his Vindicia does at large show the great usefulness of the
most minute parts of the Punctation, and in particular of the Accents; and so
does Buxtorf. de Orig. Punct. par. 1. cap. 14. from page 200. to page 262. and
others: And if some are ignorant of them, and yet will not learn, who can help
it, the Punctation is never the worse in it self, because some do not, or will
not understand it all.

. 3. Obj. 2. It Is said the Keri u Ketib are only about Letters, never about
Vowels and Points, therefore says Elias the Points were not when they were
first made.

Resp. 1. Many Jews say Ezra made them, and the Points after them, and so they
agree.

2. It Is Objected the Anomalous pointing of the Ketib with the Points that are
proper to the Keri, could not be of Ezra.

Resp. But Kimchi's Preface on Iosh^ah says it was done by Ezra; for as he
there says, they set one word in the Margen, and did not Point it. Now all the
Jews own the Keri and Kerib to be as ancient as Ezra, and they likewise own
that the Ketib is to be always pointed with the Points that do belong to the
Keri, which are properly and regularly belonging to the Keri, and as R. S.
Arcuvolti says, the Keri lies hid in the Points of the Ketib, and indeed this
Objection is so far from hurting, that it helps the Antiquity of the Points;
for if Ezra placed the Keri and Ketib, or if they were fixed in his time, then
so must the Punctation be likewise, whereby alone the Keri is distinguished
from the Ketib, and so preserved, as Kimchi observes.

So that here is no Anomaly in this Punctation, but it is Regular, according to
the Keri. And this Keri and Ketib is not only owned by Jews, but Christians
also; most Translations following some times the one, and some times the other,
as they think best. (Vid. Ainsworth, at the end of Deuteronomy, etc.)

. 4, So also do some, from the Objection about the Musical Accents, bring an
Argument for the Antiquity of the Points: For these Accents direct to the
Modulation of the Voice, for the uniform singing the Psalms which were most
peculiar to the Ezraitical state of the Church: For since that time, the Skill
and Practice has declined, till it is at length lost, and thereby the
Knowledge of the Musical Use of the Accents. Hence it is most likely these
Accents were then placed, when the Tunes they teach were sung and understood,
and not since, by Persons who knew not what they placed them for.

. 5. Elias objects, The Points have Chaldee Names, therefore are not from Moses.

Resp. 1. Yet they may be from Ezra well enough; for then they were understood.

2. Elias answers himself, saying, The Names have changed since the Masorites
and Grammarians; as Chirek called Shibber, Holem called Malo Pum, etc. Pathak
Katon for Segol, etc.

And as R. S. Arcuvolti, and R. Azarias observe, the Names changed with the
Dialect and Speech of each Age and Place; but the Shapes have been always the
same, and the Sound, and it matters not what their Names are or have been.

And so much for the Three Arguments used by the Jews: Viz. (1.) Vowels are
granted to be an Essential part of Speech: These are frequently expressed by
the Points only in the Bible; therefore the Points are an Essential part of the
Text, and so of Divine Authority. (2.) The Scripture was written very plainly;
but without Points 'twere more obscure and unintelligible than ever was any
Writing, therefore 'twas written with the Points. (3.) The Old Testament
evidenceth it self to be God's Word only by, that Divine Sense of it which is
expressed by the Points: The Points therefore have the same Evidence of their
Divine Authority as the Scripture it self has.


These are the principal Argments used by the Jews for the Antiquity of the
Points, and the Objections against the same: Which we have either Obviated, or
briefly Answered, are the chiefest Objections that are made, and such that are
of greatest moment: To Answer every little Cavil, would swell the Discourse
into a large Volume, and waste the Readers time and patience.

CPAP. VII.. 1. The Heads of Arguments used by Christians for the Antiquity of
the Points, briefly mentioned.. 2. The First Argument, That we are in peaceable
Possession of the Punctation.. 3. The Second Argument, That the Anomalies in
the Punctation were before the Art and Grammar of it.. 4. The Third Argument,
taken from Mat. 5.18. That not a Tittle of the Law shall fail.. 5. The
Conclusion of this Discourse.
. 1. HAving related the principal Arguments that are used by the Jews, for the
Antiquity of the Points, in the Three foregoing Chapters; and plainly proved
them, and the Divine Authority of the Points thereby:

We are in the Second and Last place to mention the Heads of Arguments that are
used by Christians for the Antiquity of the Points.

Now these are, for the most part, Rational Improvements of those that are
collected by the Jews: Though they have much increased their number, yet some
do seem to derive their Original from the Christians more particularly; which
we can but briefly mention, having already far exceeded the Limits of this
Discourse.

. 2. First then: Among other things, they plead lawful, peaceable possession,
by Prescription, under these several Circumstances.

(1.) The Bible, as it is now Pointed, is a Possession of Inestimable Value; the
Rule of Life, from whence all Ancient and Modern Translations are taken, and
that whereon our Faith and Religion is founded. (2.) It has been but of late
called into question: And that, (3.) Upon the most frivolous Pretenses that
ever any thing of such Importance was questioned about. (4.) The Interest and
Design of many herein, being to pervert us to a False Religion thereby: And
therefore 'twould be great folly to deliver our Defensive Weapons to our
Enemies, only because they come to destroy us: So that it is thought but
reasonable to hold our Bible till some cause be assigned why we should reject
it, besides the bare desire of the Papists, or any Others, to deprive us of it
for their own Ends.
. 3. Secondly, Another Argument more peculiarly used by Christians for the
Antiquity of the Points, is taken from the Anomalous Punctation thereof, (from
whence some raise an Objection against their Antiquity,) and it is briefly this:

The Points are either coaevous with the Letters, and a part of the Language;
or else they are an Art invented by Men: Which if they were, the Authors might,
and would have made them all uniform and regular; there was no occasion for one
Anomaly: The only Reason why there are any Anomalies in Grammar, is, because
all Grammar is made after Languages, and by their Use; whereas had Grammar been
first, all Speech and Words had been regular and uniform.

If then the Art of the Punctation had been first invented, there had been no
Anomalies in it, or any occasion for the same.

But because there are innumerable Anomalies in the Punctation equal to what
are in any Language, we therefore conclude the Punctation it self was before
the Art of it, and as Ancient as is the Language it self.

What is objected, Considerat. Consid. c. 11. p. 251, 252, 253. That the
Anomalies were not Consilio, but Casu; not Designedly made by the Masorites,
but by Mistake; is not only without any color of Reason or Testimony, but
against it: For neither the Providence which attends the Preservation of
Scripture, nor yet supposing of common, ordinary, and very indifferent
attendance on the Work of Pointing the Scripture by the Authors thereof, will
admit of such a Conceit; the Anomalies being so innumerable and obvious to Any,
much more to the Inventors of them, that they could not but observe them.

And whereas it is further objected, Why are not the Points that are placed to
the Syriack, Chaldee, Arabic, etc. coaevous with those Languages also?

Resp. Had he produced the like Anomalies in the Punctation of them, and their
Religious Observation thereof, he had said something; till then he says
nothing against us, but argues for us: For all those Points are either always
Regular, or may so be; and yet as Novel as those Points are, they change
several Letters one into another by their presence.

. 4. Thirdly, The Third Christian Argument is taken from the New Testament; and
that is Mat. 5.18. For verily I say unto you, till Heaven and Earth pass, one
Jot, or one Tittle, shall in no wise pass from the Law till all be fulfilled.

Two different Opinions are raised from these words.

(1.) Of those who say the words, One Jot, or One Tittle, relate to the least
Letter, or least Point or Tittle. And thereby the Punctation is owned by our
Savior, and its continuance to the worlds end promised. (2.) The Second
Opinion, supposes the least Letter, and the least Horn or Corner of a Letter,
to be intended by the words.
In which Opinion it is granted us, That by this Text Christ has promised,
that the least Letter, or Corner of a Letter of the Scripture, shall not be
lost or changed as long as Heaven and Earth endure.

Hereupon we say, The Vowels are a great part of the Scripture, and an
Essential part of it; whereas many Letters are redundant, and might be spared,
without impairing the sense, but the Vowels cannot.

Now these Vowels, in innumerable places, are kept and expressed by the Points
only: If then the Points are a Novel Invention, then the Vowels in many places,
and thereby a great part of the Scripture, is lost; but if it be not lost, then
it must be in the Points, and then are the Points of Divine Authority.

And so much for the Heads of Arguments that are used by Christians for the
Antiquity of the Points, which we could but barely mention; nor yet have we
room so much as to mention all of them, being confined to brevity.

. 5. And thus have we, as briefly as possibly we could, plainly proved, That
the Shapes or Figures of the Points, Vowels and Accents which are joined to the
Text of the Hebrew Bible, were Invented and placed thereunto as early as the
time of Ezra, and thereby are of Divine Authority.

We thought to have presented in one View the Sum of this Treatise; but being
informed that Mr. De la Crose intends to give himself the trouble of Abridging
the same, who is more able so to do; we shall conclude this Discourse, and
commit it to the Blessing of God, being to render an Account of our sincere Aim
at his Glory alone in all our Undertakings.

(...)
ERRATA.
Page 243. for Cipperotikal read Kipperoneeka, p. 245. for Pronuciation r.
Pronuntiation, p. 247. for Masaice r. Mosaicae, p. 249. for (...) r. (...), p.
253. for Punctation r. Pronunciation, p. 254. for places r. placed, page 256.
for (...) r. (...), p. 266. for Section r. Oration, p. 267. for fify r. fifty
p. 281. for desertationem r. dissertationem, p. 283. for an r. ancient, p. 284.
for Polyglotton r. Polyglotton.

DISQUISITIONES CRITICAE de variis per diversa loca and tempora Bibliorum
editionibus, quibus accedunt castigationes Theologi cujusdam Parisiensis ad
Opusculum Isa. Vossii de Sibyllinis oraculis and ejusdem Responsionem ad
Objectiones nuperae Criticae Sacrae. Londini impensis Richardi Chiswell, in
Coemeterio Paulino, in Quarto, 1684.
THere is much Order, Exactness and Learning in this Work: In short, it is a
very good Abridgment of the Critical History of the Old Testament. It first
speaks of the principal Manuscripts of the Hebrew Texts of the Bible, those
that the Jews made for the Use of their Synagogue requiring a thousand
Superstitious Precautions. They must be written upon a very neat Parchment, and
prepared by a Jew that was neither Apostate nor Heretic: There must be little
Crowns upon certain Letters: The Parchment must be folded in a Roll, and diverse
Collumns or Pages thereof marked very exactly, and all the Lines ruled before
that they are written: A certain Ink also must be made use of, which they
believe Moses gave the Composition of. In fine, The Letters must not touch one
another, but have always between 'em the space of a Thread, and between each
Line the space of a Line, and neither more nor less than thirty Letters in each
Line. What Patience is requisite to observe all this! As to the Copies designed
for a Domestic Use, they observe not all these Circumstances: Many Copies of
them have been found in the Libraries of the Christians, the best are those
which were made in Spain: The Jews make a great account of that of Hillel; he
was a Rabbin much esteemed; and according to the Relation of some, lived before
the coming of Jesus Christ; but the Author is not of their Opinion, he believes
he was a Spanish Rabbin, who lived a long time since the Jewish Doctors of the
School of Tiberiades, who Composed the Masora; and that he Corrected the most
ancient Copies of the Edition that these Masorite Doctors had published.

In the Second place, it speaks of the Copies printed from the Hebrew Texts of
the Bible; and says that they are formed after the Edition of the Masorites:
From thence it is that there is so much conformity between them, and that they
are so much admired. He does not believe that the Masora was begun in the time
of Moses, or in the time of Esdras; but on the contrary, that it was a Work of
the Seventh Age, and that the Jews borrowed it from the Arabians, to whom they
confess that they are indebted for all that they know of the Grammar and
Critics. He founds his Conjecture upon this, That the Arabians have a Masora
of the Alcoran, resembling that the Jews have of the Bible: He is far from much
esteeming or despising the Masora; for since it is the Work of very able Men in
their own Language, and such as are well versed in the knowledge of the
Manuscripts of the Bible, it may be made use of; but as it is certain the
Masorites were not Inspired from God, it cannot be said their Corrections are
Infallible; their Endeavors were effectual, that the Text should not be
altered hereafter, although the preceding Alterations were not a few. It treats
very learnedly of the Original of the Masora; of its Variae Lectiones; of the
Differences which are found between 'em and the Manuscript Copies of the Bible:
And he pretends that the Hebraic Bibles, printed by the Christians, although in
finer Characters, are not so exact as those published by the Jews: He gives his
Judgment of the most celebrated Editions in Hebrew; and says that of the Rabbin
Jacob Hajim, of the Printing House of Bomberg, was Reprinted at Venice in the
Year 1618. But as it has passed through the hands of the Inquisitors, who
amended and corrected it as much as they thought good; so this Author places it
much below the others.

He is free from that defect so common among Men, of Condemning, through
Passion or Prejudice, those who are not of his Religion; for he takes the part
of the Jews, against the number of Ancient and Modern Christian Doctors, who
have accused him of corrupting the Texts of the Bible: A List of these Accusers
may be seen in the Exercitationes Biblicae of Father Morin, ( cap. 2, 3:) And
in the Treatise Leon de Castre, a Spanish Divine, upon the Translations of the
Bible, which he has placed before his Commentaries on the Bible.

Mr. Vossius is of this Opinion, I mean, he speaks very much against the Jews,
as if they had maliciously altered the Hebrew Text, through a hatred to the
Christian Religion: But the Author thinks himself obliged to do them more
Justice; he maintains that the Fathers of the Church complain not so much of
the Alterations of the Text, as of the bad Interpretations that the Jews give
to the Words of the Scripture, or of the Version of Aquilla, of Theodocian and
Semachus, that the Jews were accustomed to oppose to that of the Seventy
Interpreters: He proves his Pretension by the same Passages of the Fathers as
Leon de Castre, and Father Morin have cited; in this he has almost copied the
other word for word. He adds, That in Matter of Criticisms, the Authority of
the Fathers is nothing near of so great a consequence as in Matters of Faith:
And says very plainly, That many among them did not understand the Hebrew
Tongue enough to be able to judge whether the Jews had falsified the Original
of the Old Testament or not. He answers to the Passages of Origin and St.
Ierom, and tells us we should judge of their Genius, and manner of Writing: He
also refutes the Reasons of Mr. Vossius; and shows, among other things, that
the Testimony of Justin Martyr is not very considerable in this Point, both
because he did not understand Hebrew, and because he was often abused in Matter
of Fact; which destroys the Proof which they would bring for his Testimony,
after this manner, That he would have been sacrificed to public Ridicule, if
he had accused the Jews of a Crime whereof they were not guilty. The Author
believes therefore that the Jews did not alter the Scripture upon any
Deliberation, or through Malice to the Christians; but that the Defects which
were found in their Copies, ought to be imputed to the same Causes which have
produced so much difference between the Manuscripts of the Greek and Roman
Authors: He referrs to the Treatise of Scioppius de Art Critica, and shows by
a passage of the Book, that Leo Allatius composed against the pretended
Antiquities of the Hetruria of Inghiramimus, how easy it was for the Copiests
to take one Letter for another, and by this means alter the sense of an Author;
such an Instance there is in a Book, where if they had put Orbis instead of
Vrbis, it would have been the Cause of many New Opinions or many Learned
Dissertations, and of many Difficulties that would have made the Learned
Doctors sweat. There are some Copiests who not taking sufficient Care of any
one Letter, create a thousand Disputes to the succeeding Ages, of whom it may
be properly said, They prepared Scourges for Posterity.

The Author relates an Example of some Errors that Copiests have Committed: It
was believed for many Ages that Dagobert King of France forced a Nun from her
Cloister to marry him, but Father Sermon and young Mounsieur Vellois, and some
others, having found in the old Manuscripts of Fredigair, Nantechildem unam ex
puellis DE MINISTERIO accipiens Reginam sublimavit; whereas these words were
ill quoted by Aimoion, Nanthildem unam ex puellis DE MONASTERIO in matrimonium
accipiens sublimavit; have saved the Reputation of this Prince, upon a Fact
sufficiently scandalous, which was much spoken of by Authors. As to the rest
the Author maintains, those cannot be accused of a malicious deprivation, which
take a Passage in the sense that is most favorable to 'em, when the words are
equivocal. We owe to our selves this Justice as we are Christians, of not
accusing our selves of falsifying the Scriptures, when we explain it to our
advantage, in places where what precedes and what follows, does not necessarily
determine us to the sense which is against us. What the Author says afterward
about the Samaritan Bible, which only comprehended the five Books of Moses,
because when they separated themselves from the Jews, they had then only
published this part of the Scriprure; (that I say) and what he adds of the
Learning of the same Samaritans, and of the Paraphrases of the Bible, is very
Curious; they had Paraphrases in Chaldaick, Greek and Arabic, according as
those Languages became common among 'em; for as in the Synagogues the Law was
always read in Hebrew, both among the Samaritans as well as among the Jews, so
it was necessary to have a Paraphrase of the Scripture in another Language,
when the Hebrew was only among the Learned; from whence he concludes, contrary
to the Paradoxes of Mr. Mallet, that Moses composed the Scripture in a vulgar
Tongue, and makes the same remarks upon the Paraphrases of the Jews, to wit,
that they were a remedy against the Ignorance of the Hebrew Tongues, the most
ancient of the Chaldaicks, among whom he principally esteems those of Jonathan
and Avonculus; there are others in Arabic, Persian, in the modern Greek, and
in Spanish; this was first Printed at Ferrara, in the Year 1553. and elsewhere
in the Year 1630. The Author believes that the Jews of Alexandria made use of
the LXX. for the same reason that produced the Paraphrases, to wit, because
they did not understand Hebrew, and because the Greek Tongue was become their
proper Language: He nevertheless speaks of this Version but in treating of that
which is made use of by the Christians.

He remarks that the Fathers have said almost nothing of this Version, which
was borrowed from a Roman, falsely, a Tributary to Aristeus; and he imagines
that the Reasons why they called it the Version of the LXX, was because 'twas
undertaken by the Order of the great Sanhedrim, and approved by the seventy two
Senators which Composed it, or because the Jews being willing to reconcile it
with greater Authority, they attributed it to this Honorable Senate, as they
did many other things; which is no impediment (adds he) but that a Version as
ancient as that, and as much honored by the Apostles, ought to be
considerable. We are only to shun the excess of those who by the Example of Mr.
Vossius acknowledge not the other to be authentic, or such as prefer it to the
Hebrew Text: Masius and Eugubinus are not of this Number, for they have spoken
of this Work with much Contempt. Eugubinus observes many Faults in it, but
sometimes his Censures are not over just. St. Ierom is as much deceived
sometimes in Criticizing upon the LXX, as Piersorius has showed in the Preface
to the Version Printed at Cambridge, An. Dom. 1665. The Author himself relates
some Passages which are thought to be little to the purpose, after which he
examines the Hypothesis of Mr. Vossius upon the Version of the LXX, and upon
the Tetraples and Hexaples of Origin.

Here follows an Abridgment of what he says of the Version that was declared
Authentic by the Council of Trent. All the Western Church under the time of
St. Ierom made use of a Version of the Bible that some called Italick, some the
Old, and others the Translation of the LXX; the Author of it was not known, but
only that it was made upon the Version of the LXX. Flemminius Nobillius
re-establisht it as well as possibly he could, and caused it to be Printed at
Rome, An. Dom. 1588. Father Morin reprinted it at Paris, with the Greek Copy of
the Vatican, in the Year 1628. but it was not believed that this was the pure
Latin Version that the Western Church made use of, before that St. Ierom had
made another. This Father Corrects the Translation of the LXX only in some
places, and notwithstanding the Tempests that he raised against him for daring
to have recourse to the Hebrew Text; it is this Version that the Western Church
made use of for many Ages, although some men say that it was not this Author
which is now called the Translation of the Septuagint. When the Council of
Trent declared this Translation Authentic, they did not pretend to declare
that it had no defect, and that it merited more Faith than the Hebrew and Greek
Texts. The Council only Commanded that they should use it preferrably to all
other Latin Versions, which were very numerous. Many Catholic Doctors have not
understood the sense of the Council, for they would not suffer themselves to
believe that there remained any Faults in this Translation of the LXX; some
great men run the risque of their Lives, being imprisoned in the Inquisition,
for having believed it, as Mariana relates. Leo Allatius makes mention of a
Decree of a general Congregation of the Cardinals, Dated the 17 th. of January,
1577. bearing, that there must not be cut off from the Translation of the LXX,
even not so much as one Syllable, or one Iota; but this Decree never being
published, could not Captivate the Faith of any person: And Pope Sixtus the 5
th. and Clement the 8 th. sufficiently evidenced they were not of this Opinion,
since they have endeavored to make a Correction of this Translation. Sixtus
made a Constitution, by which he enjoined the rejecting of all Editions that
were not conformable to that which he Published. But Clement the 8 th.
nevertheless made another, and maintained in his Bull, that he had very exactly
Corrected the Defects of the LXX. An English Protestant, whose Name was Thomas
Iamesius writ a very hot Book against the Church, entitled, Bellum Papalis,
sive Concordia discors Sixti V. and Clementis VIII. circa Hieronymianam
Editionem: Here is some things which are very perplexing to those Persons which
have not much Wit and Learning, for in fine, this Edition of Clement the VIII.
now passes for Authentic, although it is not Conformable to the Edition of
Sixtus the V. who declared all the Editions of the Septuagint void, which
differed from his.

The rest of the Book the Author employes in speaking of the Versions of the
Bible, that have been made for the Eastern Church, and of those that were
published in diverse Languages in these last Ages by the Catholics and by the
Protestants. Afterward he Examines what concerns it in the Treatise of M.
Vossuis de Oraculis Sybillinis.

We soon expect a Work very like to this we have been speaking of, the last
Catalogue of Francfort promised it to us; it is entitled Christiani Kortholti
S. Theol. Doctoris, de variis sacrae Scripturae Editionibus, editio Nova post
primam multo auctior and emendatior, in 40. Kilonii. Keil is a Maritime Town of
Holstein, where there has been a Celebrated Accademy ever since the Year 1665.

Animadversions on The Critical Disquisitions upon the Various Editions of the
Bible: By the Athenian Society.
HAving Translated this Abstract, We think it necessary to make some Remarks
thereon, that our Young Student be not lead into Mistakes and dangerous Errors
by the Learned Papist, whose Interest and Design is to take away our Bible: One
Mistake we impute to the Abridger, and not the Author, who seems to say that
the Jews use many superstitious Precautions about the Writing of the Bible,
which they do about the Law only, as the Author must needs know, though the
Abridger might not.

The Author is a Papist, and affirms that our Hebrew Bible is corrupt in many
places, that the Ancient Versions Translated by a better Copy, and therefore
says he would have it, That those places of Sacred Text which bad Connection
tells us to be false or corrupted, should be restored by the Assistance of the
most Ancient Interpreters, vid. Critical Enquiries into the various Editions of
the Bible, page 52, 53. And to begin with the Service of his Mother the Church
of Rome, who follow the Vulgar Latin, and Translate Genesis 5.15. She shall bruise
thy Head; which they expound of themselves, and not of Christ, (though it is
(...) He in the Hebrew) he tells us, It might be that the Lattin Interpreter
found it (...) She, in his own Copy, for that in the writing of this Pronoun,
the Transcribers might easily mistake, is apparent from the Manuscript
Exemplars; (here he forgot the Jews Care in Writing the Law) and says he cap.
9. page 56. Although there be a very great difference between the Exemplars of
the Hebrew Context which are now extant, and those which the Seventy
Interpreters and St. Jerome made use of, and that in our days they very much
vary one from another, yet we ought not thence to conclude, that the Jewish
Bibles were by themselves corrupted, in hatred of the Christians, as some
Divines -- have been pleased to report. So that though his Opinions are bad and
dangerous, yet there are others who are far worse, both Papists and
Protestants, whose Arguments he Answers, and particularly Dr. Isaac Vossius,
whose Sentiments are abominable, yet published in the English Tongue. We have
not room here to Answer this Learned Critic, the Author of these Critical
Enquiries, but do intend a distinct Discourse upon the Sacred Original Text of
the Old Testament, in Defense of its Purity and Perfection, as it is now enjoyed
by the Protestant Church; wherein we purpose to handle all those Curiosities
that are the Subject of Critical Observation about the same; if our Discourse
about the Original of the Points, Vowels and Accents find that Acceptance as
may encourage such an Undertaking, being very willing to Defend our Religion
and the Rule of our Faith, to the uttermost of our Power. Yet something about
it we intend in this Volume, but very briefly.

Novorum Bibliorum Polyglottorum Synopsis. Ultrajecti, Typis Frederict Arnoldi,
1684. in 8o.
THe Design of this Author is to give an Abridgment of the Polyglot Bibles,
which have been Printed at Paris, and afterward at London, adding thereto
nevertheless many considerable Pieces, which would make a New Polyglot, that
would contain more things, and yet in the same time much shorter. To what end
(says he) is the Pentateuch of the Jews and that of the Samaritans printed
separately, since they hardly differ but in respect of the Letter? and since
it is agreed on, that the Versions of the Syriack, Arabic, Chaldaick, etc. have
been made either upon the Hebrew or upon the Greek of the LXX: To what purpose
(I say) should those places that are Conformed to the Hebrew or Greek Texts, be
reprinted. Nevertheless to preserve the Original of the Scriptures, and the
Version of the Eastern and Western Church, he inserts in his Bible the Hebrew
Text, and that of the Greek of the LXX, and the two Latin Texts of the Western
Church; he makes four Collumns thereof, and in the Margin marks the different
readings of the Text, and at the bottom of each Collumn observes the different
Interpretations of the Versions. This is the general Draught, but I shall give
a more particular one in respect to each of his Collumns.

In the first he places the Hebrew Text, so as we have borrowed it from the
Massorite Jews: But because he would not have it thought that there is none
other in Hebrew but that, he Notes in the Margin the diverse Hebrew Readings
that he has Collected, either of Copies of Manuscripts and Printed, or even of
the Massora, and of the Rabbis, or of the Ancient Interpreters; and by this
means he in some manner re-establishes the Hebrew Text in its ancient Form. He
shows that the Samaritan Text was used much to clear that of the Jews, wherein
he finds above six hundred Sollecisms in the Pentateuch only, which may be
restored by the Hebrew Texts of the Samaritans; the varieties whereof he
Observes in the Margent, and at the same time the Conformity with the Version
of the LXX in many places: He gives us the Numbers of the Copies, and of the
Interpreters that he had Consulted, and remarks that Mr. Cappel, who sometimes
multiplies more than is necessary the differences of the Hebrew Text with the
Version of the Septuagint, has forgot many others which deserve to be taken
Notice of; they appeared in this Edition with diverse other readings, which Mr.
Cappel must necessarily be ignorant of, because that the Syriack, Arabic and
Samaritan, did not appear 'till after he had composed his Critique Sacree.
Besides the Pentateuch he gives its Extracts drawn from an Arabian Version,
which is a very rare Piece.

The second Collumn is destined to the Version that they call the Vulgate; St.
Ierom has made the principal part thereof: The Notes that are at the bottom
show where this Version agrees not with the Hebrew, when it is confined more to
the sense than to the words; when it contains more or less than the Hebrew
Texts; when it twice expresses the same thing, or that it abridges the words,
which often happens, and chiefly upon the Law of Moses. In fine, another Latin
Version is put in the same Notes, when it is necessary without any alteration
of the Septurgint. The third Collumn contains the Greek Version of the LXX,
according to the Edition of Rome, upon the Copy of the Vatican, which was
preferred to other Greek Editions, because it is more simple, and that it comes
nearer to that which was in the Greek Church before Origin. Among the Notes he
has placed diverse readings of the Copies of Compluta, of Alda, of Alexandria;
with the Fragments of this Version, which are preserved in the Works of the
Fathers; and adds upon all this Critical Observations.

The last Collumn is for the Latin Version of the Greek Text, which Nobillius
caused to be Printed at Rome, and called it the Italick, The Author will have
it that it yet retains this Name; but he believes it very different from the
ancient Italick Version, which was formerly received in all the West. The Notes
Correct the places where this Version does not express the Greek well; or else
Correct the Greek Texts which was sometimes changed by the Greek Authors,
because they were ignorant of proper Expressions for the Chaldaick or Syriack
Tongue, which this Text is filled with, and from thence many Faults are slipped
into the Italick Version: The same Marginal Notes contain many Remarques upon
the Methods how the Fathers made Use of this Version.

This being supposed, we shall not be subject to regret the Syriack, Arabic,
Chaldean and Samaritan great Polyglot Bibles, since in the Notes of this
Abridgment all the places are marked where they agree not with themselves, nor
with the Ancient Interpreters; and where they may be made clearer by the Hebrew
Text, and which will be very useful, the Author correcting in many places the
Texts of these Versions, and the Latin Interpretations that have been given of
'em, which he pretends to be more defective.

Here Is in a word the precise Notes: First, They contain the Explication of all
the obscure words that are in the four Collumns, and chiefly in the Hebrew
Text, upon which all the rest depends: Besides that, there is the Judgment of
the Author upon the diverse Interpretations that the Ancients have given upon
the same word. There is also an Observation of what is more or less in the
Versions than in the Hebrew, and the Opinion of the best Rabbis: He speaks
every thing in the Language of the Authors, to which he adds a Latin
Translation.

In respect to the New Testament he follows the same Method as he does in the
Old, but it contains only two Collumns, one for the Greek Text, and the other
for the Version of the Vulgate: He remarks in the Notes the Places where it
does not perfectly agree with the Greek. The same Notes exactly contain all the
differences of other Versions, and the diverse readings of the Greek Texts. The
Author produces many new things that he has taken from Greek Manuscripts, and
adds to it his Critical Remarques. He even pretends to re-establish upon
different Manuscripts the ancient Vulgate, which was in the Church before St.
Ierom. This Version being according to him Translated word for word from the
Greek, he thinks it the most Ancient Greek Manuscript in the World; he has
good reason to believe that the most ancient Greek Manuscripts which are now in
our Libraries were written by the Latins.

An Abridgment of the Hebraick and Chaldaick Grammar, whose Precepts are given
in Flemish by John Leusden, Professor of the Sacred Tongue in the Academy of
Utrecht, 8o. at Utrecht sold by Fra. Halma, 1686. p. 108.
IN 1668. the Author having published an Essay of an Hebraick Grammar in
Flemish, to which he soon after added a small Dictionary, where all the words
of the Bible are expounded in Latin and Flemish, and a Book of Psalms, where
the Hebraick Original is printed at the side of the Flemish Version; it was
observed as we are taught in the Preface which is at the beginning of this
Work, several Persons of either Sex had acquired, without knowing any Latin, a
competent knowledge of the Holy Tongue* such happy Progresses have excited Mr.
Leusden to give us a second Edition of this Grammar, in fairer Characters than
the former, and to get it Translated into French, English, and High Dutch. The
Doctrine of the Accents, and that of the changing of the Vowels, which is
commonly very troublesome, is expounded here in very few Rules, and after a
pretty clear way.

The same Author since the Year 1658. published a Syr^ack Grammar, with an
Abridgment of the Chaldaick Grammar, and a Dissertation upon the Samaritan
Letters and Tongue; this Work was Printed at Vtrecht in 1682. under the Title
of Schola Syriaca.

But as Grammars would be of little use to those who begin, if they had not
Editions of very correct Books to exercise themselves; Mr. Leusden has taken
Care of two Impressions of the Hebraick Bible, which were made at Amsterdam,
the one in 1661. and the other in 1667. where there were added a Margi^ of
Latin distinctions. He also caused to be Printed the Hebrew Sentences which are
called Pirke Abbooth.

Another necessary Assistance to Study Languages, are Dictionaries. Mr. Leusden
has given many to the public; besides the the small Dictionary or Hebrew
Manual, in Latin and Flemish, whereof mention was made before; we have of him
Glavis Hebraica veteris Testamenti, Quarto, Vlirajecti 1613.

Onomasticum sacrum in quo omnia nomina propria Hebraica, Chaldaica, Greca and
Origin Latina, tam in V. and N. Test. quam in libris Apocriphis occurrentia
dilucide explicantur, and singula propriis suis typis describuntur cum
appendice de Vasis, pecunia and ponderibus Sacris. Editio secunda, Octavo,
Luga. Batav. apud Iord. Luchtmans, 1684.

Compendium Biblicum continchs ex 23 202 versiculis totius V.T. versiculis
2289, non ^amen integros, in quibus omnes V.T. voces tam primitivae quam
derivativae, tam Hebraicae quam Chaldaicae, una cum versione Latina
inventuntur, Editio te^tia, in qua omnes radices and voces in simplici for^^^,
qualibet pagina subjictuntur, Octavo, Lug. Ba^. ap. I. Luchtm. 1683.

Lexicon Novum Haebreo* Latinum ad Modum Lexici Sorevelil, etc.
A New Lexicon in Hebrew and Latin, after the Manner of the Greek Lexicon of
Schrevelian, Composed by means of the Hebrew Index, written at first by D.
Robertson; but now Translated into Latin, and enriched with Texts, containing
irregular words and other Animadversions; and augmented with a Chaldaick
Lexicon of the Bible, in Octavo; at Utrecht sold by Fr. Halma, 1687. p. 511.
ALL those who have some Knowledge in Greek and Hebrew, know that nothing is
more troublesome to those who begin, than the investigation of the Theme: It Is
what caused Schreveli^s to make a Greek Dictionary of the Words of the New
Testament, and of those of Homer, where the Word should be found which is
wanted in the Author which one reads, and without being obliged to refer it to
its Root. Mr. Robertson endeavored to do the same thing in regard of the
Hebrew, by giving in his Manipulus an Index of all the Hebrew words, whose
Radix is hard to be found: But there wanted, as its believed, three things in
the Work of this Englishman, which Mr. Leusden has supplied. 1. A Latin
Version of the Hebrew Words of this Index. 2. The Citation of the Passages
where the most anomalous Verbs are, and some other Remarques. 3. An Index of
the Chaldaick Words of the Bible.

This Work is not only useful to those who Study the Holy Language; it may
also be of great help to those who are much advanced. One has not always all
the Rules of Grammar present in mind; there being also Anomalies which suppose
a great Number of Rules, which cannot be retained by a long Use: For example
(...) signifies not always they shall hold their peace, in which Case one may
easily guess it comes from (...); it means also sometimes they shall be cut
off, and then it is in the hithpabel of (...), where (...) is changed into
(...), and this (...) is marked by a Daguesh (...) for (...).

There are even Anomalies which are found but once in the whole Bible, and
which go against all the ordinary Rules: For example, its but Job 11.10. where
the Verb (...) changes its (...) into (...), and where (...) is read for (...),
they are broken.

Although Mr. Leusden is Professor in Hebrew, he has nevertheless wrote in
Favor of those who would learn the Greek of the New Testament; therefore he
has published, Syllabis Pasoris reformatus, Amstel, 12o.

Compendium Graecum N. T. continens ex 7959 V. N. T. tantum versiculos 1900 non
integros in quibus omnes N.T. voces una cum versione Latina inveniuntur. Editio
tertia, 12o. Vltrajecti, 1682.

Novum Testamentum Graecum, una cum annotatione quorandam versicuum afteriscis
distinctorum continentium omnes voces, N. T. in 24o. Ultrajecti.

We owe him besides three Books in Quarto, which Treat of Matters of Critic;
Philogus Hebraeus, Philogus Hebreo-mixtus, Philogus Graecus.

An Essay upon Critics, wherein it is endeavored to show in what the Poesy
of the Hebrews consists.
THose who have some Knowledge of the Hebrew Tongue, and who know the efforts
which have been made since 200 Years, to clear the difficulties thereof, are
not ignorant that diverse Learned Men have endeavovred, with much application,
to seek for the Poetry of the Hebrews. Most have despaired of finding it; and
if some have believed they had discovered it, there are others who have soon
discovered that they were mistaken. Francis Gomarus having published at Leiden
his Book entitled Davidis Lyra, in which he thinks he has found out the Rules
of this Poetry: Lewis Cappel ruined in a small Book all these Discoveries: Here
the like Fate might be feared, if a quite different way had not been taken; but
it is thought nothing is advanced which is not upheld by the very Nature of the
Hebrew Tongue, and upon uncontestable Principles, besides our being assured of
the truth of the Rules which shall be given by the application that has been
made thereof in the Book of Psalms, and in other ancient Pieces of Poetry of
the Hebrews. Nevertheless it may be that one may be taken with that, which is
looked upon as a New Discovery, although entirely false, or at least mistaken
in some respect: We have thought we ought to expose what is done therein to the
Judgment of the Public, that Faults may be Corrected, if any have been
omitted, or that we may be Confirmed in our Judgment by New Reasons, or finally
for ever suppress the Works wherein this Discovery is supposed as true, in case
one was not entirely mistaken.

His Reasons therefore shall be proposed here, with the briefness we are
obliged to keep in an Essay that is to be inserted in our Supplement; to this
will be added the Solution of some Difficulties, which come immediately into
our minds, and may serve to confirm the Hypothesis which we are going to read.

1. The first thing that ought to be remarked, is, that all Languages are not
capable of producing all manner of Verses. There are some, as the Greek and the
Latin, in which Verses may be made, which we call Metricks, to wit, measured by
composed Feet of long and short Syllables. There are on the contrary other
Languages wherein all Poesy cannot consist, but in a certain Number of
Syllables which form a pleasing Cadence to the Ear, whether there are several
Verses which rhyme together or not; such is the French Tongue, and most of the
Moderns. If some French Poets have endeavored to make Metrick Verses, as
Desportes, and some others after him, they were so hard and so contrary to the
Genius of the French Tongue, that they could not be suffered; it is so with the
Hebrew, with the Syriack, and with most of the Eastern Languages, whose Genius
is in this regard conformable to that of the French Tongue. These Tongues may
easily furnish Rhimes, but they cannot suffer Metrick Verses, as Joseph
Scaliger has already observed a long while ago, in his Notes upon Eusebius.

It would have been very grateful if this great Man had produced his Reasons,
by proposing only his Sentiments; he has drawn upon him therefore the Censure
of some Learned Men, who had not penetrated the bottom. One dares not affirm
that Scaliger had in sight the same things which we are about to speak of; but
we believe they are more than sufficient, to show that we can advance the same
thing as he did, without deserving the Censure, which those who have not
examined the matter, have pronounced slightly enough against him. This is what
persuades me that Metrick Verses cannot be made in the Hebrew Tongue, no more
than in the French. To render it more sensible, I shall begin with that which
is the most known, and show that it is the same in all respects with that of
the Hebrews.

1. Metrick Verses cannot be made without the liberty of transposing words, for
without this it is impossible to find out the measure which must be observed.
One has not always different words, or different expressions, whose quantity
is the same, to express one's mind: One must necessarily use such words, which
can be but in a certain situation, by reason of their quantity: So if one
could not transpose the others, these words could not enter into the Verses,
which would be very troublesome for Poets, who would thereby lose an infinite
Number of Words, whereof they do most happily make use, and which would wholly
ruin the Metrick Poesy: For Example, there is nothing better placed than the
word civilia in this Verse of Lucan, Bella per Emathios plusquam civilia Campos.
if one endeavored to put it in another place, the Verse would immediately
lose its Cadence, and that other words must needs be sought for. But this has
no need of Proof, for those who know what quantity is, and those who know it
not, ought not to meddle with judging of these kinds of Questions.

We know that in the French Transpositions are not allowed of, and if there was
nothing else, one might thence conclude that it is not possible to make good
Metrick Verses in this Tongue: They cannot transpose as they would the
Adjectives, there are some which must necessarily precede the Substantive, and
others which ought of necessity to follow it, they say, a great Prince, and not
a Prince great; a Horse black, and not a black Horse: It is not permitted
neither in Poesy nor in Prose to change the Order of these words. In the
Hebrew the Substantive always precedes the Adjective, when nothing is
understood between two things, as (...) ben chacan, a wise Son, and not chacan
ben. In Latin and Greek it is indifferent whether one puts the Adjective before
or after.

It is not permitted in French to transpose Pronouns; one can only say mon
pere, ma more, and so of the rest: It is not even permitted to omit them, but
in certain places, where a long Paraphrase supplyeth this Omission; whereas in
Latin and Greek one may say Pater as well as mi Pater. The Hebrews are as much
restrained as the French, their prefixes, their suffixes and their Pronouns
separated, have constantly the same situation, as it may be seen in the first
Hebrew Grammar; neither do they omit them, excepting the Relatives: As for
Pronouns possessive I believe one would very hardly find examples; where they
have been omitted.

The French cannot transpose a Substantive governed by another; for the Psalms
of David, one cannot say of David the Psalms. If Ronsard, and other Poets of
this time made use of such Transpositions, their French was often but a sorry
kind of Latin. Neither could these sorts of Licenses be long suffered, and they
are now quite banished from the French Poesy. In the Hebrew Tongue, the
Substantive which governs ought always to precede, as (...) dibre schlomo,
the Words of Solomon, and never schlomo dibarim. If by an hypallage they
sometimes change their place, it is by a large License, and what is very rare.

This Order of Words, which ought always to be the same, in most of the Eastern
Tongues, makes it to be impossible to make Metrick Verses in them, which can
have any grace. There is even a likelihood that the Greeks and Latins have not
transposed the Natural Order of their words, but only to make Metrick Verses,
as M. Vossius has remarked it in his Book de Poematum cantu and viribus Rythmi.

2. Another thing, which has more enabled these two Nations to make Metrick
Verses, is the different Termination of their Cases, which is a very great
convenience in this kind of Poesy, and without which I do not know whether
Verses could be made in Greek or in Latin, that might be sufferable. But in
French all their Cases have a like Termination, so that they have all the same
quantity as the Nominative has, and that they could make in Metrick Poesy but
one and the same Foot. It is so with the Hebrew Tongue, whence one ought
necessarily to conclude that it cannot suffer Metrick Verses no more than
French.

Besides this, the Hebrews and other Eastern Tongues have but two Terminations
in the Plural. The Hebrews do make the Masculines end in IM, and the Feminines
in OT; so that if one would make Metrick Verses in this Tongue, the Plurals
wen'd always make the same Feet, which would be an inconveniency capable of it
self to make a Poet despair, who intended to have any delicacy in his Verse.

3. A third thing which hinders the making Metrick Verses in French, is that
they have too great a quantity of long Syllables, and too few short ones, as
one may be convinced in reading some Lines in a French Book, where one shall
soon find it. The same thing may be remarked in the Hebrew Tongue; in which I
call long Syllables, not those under which the Masorites have put one of the
five Vowels, which are called long; for I doubt in this Case whether one may
always confide in their Punctuation; but those which are followed with several
different Consonants can be short in no Tongue, whatsoever Grammarians may say,
as the first Syllable in the word (...) Chephtso, and all the latter Syllables
of the words which would not be the last in a Verse, for they all have two
Consonants after them. It Is true, that one may except words which end by one of
the Letters (...) Ehevi, which it may be could make no Position, but at least
the Rule will be good in respect of the other words ending in Consonants, which
are always changeable: For example, in these words (...) halach bagnatsath,
the second Syllable of Halac cannot be made short, nor a Dactyl made of
halac-ba; upon which Cappel may be seen in his Refutation of Gomarus. And this
being supposed, one may only read what place he will of the Poetic Books of
Scripture, and he shall see that there is such a Number of long Syllables, that
it is impossible to make Metrick Verses of them: Those who have endeavored to
do it, had no respect to this; which is as ridiculous as if on would make Latin
and Greek Verses, without troubling himself with the quantity of Syllables.

It may be some will Object the Verses of the modern Rabbis, whereof Buxtorf
has made a Treatise, which he has joined to his Treasure, because this
Learned Man has sought for Feet there, as in Metrick Verses; but it would be
easy to show that he has been entirely mistaken, that the Rabbis have regard
only to the length and number of Syllables, and that all their Licenses consist
principally in the Pronunciation, and the suppression of the Scheva, simple or
compound. I shall not engage my self here in this matter; and we are besides
assured, that those who do understand a little Hebrew, and who know in what
consists the Cadence of our Verses in Rhyme, will agree hereupon by the only
reading of the Examples which Buxtorf relates. But it falls out, I know not
how, that those who apply themselves to the Study of the Eastern Tongues, do
ordinarily neglect that of their own Language, and it is perhaps one of the
Reasons for which we have not hitherto discovered what the Poesy of the
Hebrews is.

4. What has been said suffices, if I am not mistaken, to show that one
cannot make Metrick Verses in Hebrew: We must remark, that even this in part
renders the Rhyme in this Tongue very easy, for the Cases and suffixe Pronouns
Rhyme together, as do all the Plurals, which causes such a multitude of
Consonancies and Rhimes, that much care and labor would be necessary to write
in Hebrew, without Rhiming at every moment. Thus the easiness of making Verses
after this manner, as is remarkable by what we have observed in the French and
Hebrew, seems to have lead the Hebrews thereunto. Mr. Vossius says very
ingeniously, in the Book which we have cited, that Nature it self has taught
this Poesy to Men, in rendering them capable of singing: If some one, adds he,
gives attention to the Custom of Children, when they begin to sing, and remarks
after what manner they adjust together the words of their Songs, to be able to
sing them, it will be perceived that they often do repeat the same word, and in
this ignorant way of speaking there will be found the Principles of rhiming
Poetry. For it cannot be denied that the same words repeated make a kind of
Hamony, which though it is not very agreeable and very fine, is yet very
natural and very exact, though those who have a little more delicacy keep from
making the same word rhyme with it self.

II. This being so, it cannot be thought strange that we should affirm that the
Poetry of the Hebrews consists only in Rhyme, and is very irregular. The Genius
of the Hebrew Tongue cannot permit, as I have already shown, any other kind of
Verses; and it is easily conceived, that the Hebrews, who were not
extraordinary Polite, took little Pains to reduce Poetry to an Art, as the
Arabians have since done, and the Rabbis after them.

Mr. Vossius has remarked, that not only the Arabians, the Persians and
Affricans, but also the Tartars and Chinois, and several other Nations of
America, know no Poetry but Rhyme. There is a likelihood that the Northern
People, who possessed all Europe in the falling of the Empire, had also such
like Verses, and that it is from them that the Monks of the following Ages
learned to make Latin Verses in Rhyme, whereof so great a Number is found in
the ancient Offices. There remains yet some Fragments of the ancient Poems of
the Brittans, such as is that which Usher relates of one Thalascienus, whom he
calls The Prince of Bards, and who lived in the time of Justinian.

1. But as these Northern Nations had no concern, as we know of, with the
Eastern, no consequence can be thence drawn. We shall then stop at the
Arabians, and shall observe that the advantage they have received from time to
time in their Poems, was long without any Rule, consisting only in Rhimes good
or bad, without observing any constant measure in Verses: Nevertheless it was
looked upon as a more elegant Style than those Books which were solely composed
of irregular Verses. Sometimes there were diverse Rhimes, sometimes all the
Verses of a Poem ended after the same manner. It was in this Condition when the
Alcoran was written, to wit, before the middle of the seventh Age: All this
Book is almost composed with Rhimes, though the Periods are very unequal; and it
appeared in that time so well written, that Mahomet himself boasts in several
places, that neither Angels nor Devils could equal the Elegance of his Style.
We may thence conclude that this Style was established a long time since
amongst the Arabians, else this Impostour would not have chosen it, or it would
not have pleased them as it did. It is true that one Abubeker formed the Style
thereof, but that is nothing to my design, because it is enough for me that, it
should thereby appear in what consisted the Elegancy of the Style amongst the
Arabians: And the Authors who have written since, have endeavored to imitate
it, as diverse Learned Men have observed, and amongst others John Fabricius of
Dantzick, in his Specimen Arabicum, where he has published amongst other
Arabian Pieces, a Discourse of a famous Author in Asia, named El-Herir, who
has perfectly imitated the Style of the Alcoran. Those who will assure
themselves hereof by their Eyes, may only read this Book, and compare it with
the Alcoran, or at least with the Surates XII. and LXIV. which Erpenius printed
in Arabian and Latin.

Some may perhaps say, that those are not so much Verses as Rhimed Prose,
because there are not equal measures; but we are not to dispute about words. We
Answer to this, that this Poesy in the beginning was in effect but a rhimed
Prose, and it's' what appears by the Verses of Ali and other Poets in the time
of Mahomet, which the Arabians have yet, where there is no exact measure
observed. It was since Mahomet that Poetry was reduced into an Art, as I shall
observed, after I have remarked that the Arabians having a very long time
remained separate from others, and without any strange Nations entering into
Arabia, it may be believed that these Customs were very ancient, when Strangers
begun to know them: So though there was no knowledge of their Poesy but of late,
yet it follows not that it had not been a long time amongst 'em. In fine,
they could not learn this Poesy of the Romans, nor of the Greeks, to whom it
was unknown; so that it may be reasonably believed, that the Arabians have had
from unregistred times a Rhiming Poesy. As in these latter times these People
knew not what Study was, and Sciences, we must not marvel if it remained very
imperfect for several Ages.

It was but under Chalife Alraschid, who lived toward the end of the eighth
Age, that a Learned Arabian, Named Al-Chalin Eben Achmed Al-Farachidi, reduced
Poetry into an Art. This Art consists not in any distinction of long Syllables,
or short ones, but solely in the Rhyme, number of Syllables, and in the
observation of certain length which they keep, in carefully distinguishing the
moveable Consonants from the quiescent ones: Those who would be thoroughly
instructed therein, may consult a small Book of Learned Englishman, Named
Samuel Clark, Printed at Oxford in 1661. in 12o* and entitled Scientia Metrica
and Rhythmica, seu Tractatus de Prosodia Arabica.

2. The Ethiopians have also a Rhiming Poetry; but which resembles much more
the ancient Poesy of the Arabians than the new one, if we believe Mr. Ludolf,
who speaks thereof in these Terms: The Verses of the Ethiopians consist in pure
Rhyme, if one can call Rhimes Consonants of the same Order, which end the
Verse, though they have different Vowels. He adds, that they have diverse sorts
thereof, and promises to give examples, in his New Ethiopick Grammar, and in
his Commentary, which is said to be out by this time.

3. If it be now asked with which of these Poetries that of the Hebrews has
most connection, it will be answered with the ancient Poetries of the Arabians.
The Hebrews have never much cultivated Sciences, and never took great Pains to
imbellish their Tongue, nor to write politely: They were all occupied in
Agriculture, and had but little concern with their Neighbors, from whom
perhaps they might have drawn much knowledge. This is confessed by their
ancient Books, wherein no Tract of Erudition is found, as in those of the
Greeks and other Nations, who have applied themselves to Sciences:
Nevertheless, they had had, since the beginning of their Republic, Songs and
Verses, in which they celebrated the Praises of God, and related the History of
their Nation; witness the Songs of Moses, and the Book of the Wars of the Lord,
which was a Collection of Poetry, as it appears by Josh. 10.13. 2 Samuel 1.18.
therefore nothing extraordinary will be advanced: if it is said that their
Poetry was not very regular, nor very polite, no more than that of the ancient
Arabians: If it was known in what consisted the Poetry of the Ancient
Egyptians, one might search into that of the Hebrews for the same Rules; for
it is probable that it could be only there that Moses could learn to make
Verses. But as we know nothing on it, all that can be done on this occasion, is
to seek for the Rules of Poetry of their Neighbors, as we have done, in
respect of the Arabians and Ethiopians, and to see if the Poetry of the Hebrews
is not the same. But we have shown that the Hebrew Tongue can suffer no other
Poesy than that, and it remains now but to mark the principal Rules thereof,
and to apply them to the Poetical Books of the Hebrews.

III. The Poesy of the Hebrews having never been reduced into an Art, there
cannot be many Rules given thereof, because a great Number of Rules is begun to
be observed; but when we have endeavored to form them, all that can be said
on it, is brought to some general Remarks, which suffice to make known the
Nature thereof.

1. It is a Rhiming Poetry like ours, as we have already remarked and as it
shall be still more clearly seen by the sequel.

2. The Rhimes are not always very happy; see the last Chapter of the Prosodia
of the Arabians, already cited. The Rabbis who took their Poesy from them,
distinguish well enough their Rhimes into three sorts. The first is when two
Verses do finish by the same Consonant and the same Vowel, without the
preceding Letters agreeing: They call these sorts of Verses passable, as (...)
Abad and (...) Phakad: The second is when the two latter Consonants do agree,
as (...) Emor, (...) Schomor, this Rhyme according to them is just. The third
is when the three latter Consonants are the same, as (...) spharim and (...)
dbarim, which is a laudab^^ Rhyme. They look upon it as a License, when words
whose Pronunciation is alike are made to rhyme, but whose Letters are not the
same, as (...) succha and (...) tsouka. It is yet another License, but a less
one, to make words to rhyme which end by like Vowels, as if the one finisheth
by a sehurce, and the other by a cholem, as (...) thamouth and (...) thicroth:
These distinctions being founded upon the Nature of the Hebrew Tongue, and
being more simple than that of the Arabians, it is believed they may be applied
to the ancient Poetry of the Hebrews: So it may be remarked that in the ancient
of the Hebrews, although most of their Rhimes are just or laudable, there is
nevertheless a great Number of passables, whereof some are harder than others;
the hardest are those which agree only in the latter Vowel, when the words do
end by a quiescent, the sound whereof is not sensible, for example, (...) tha,
(...) thy, (...) tho, etc. (...) ba, (...) by, (...) bo, etc. If one would have
examples of such Rhimes in some modern Poesy, he may only consult those who
have written of the Spanish Poesies, wherein Assonants are called Rhimes, which
the Rabbis call Passables, and the other Consonants: But both of 'em have
learned from the Arabians the Rules of their Poesy.

3. The Number of the Rimes is not ^ixed, there are sometimes several of a
sort, and fewer of another; so in Psalm. 11, 3, 5. there are five in (...) mo,
which are only separated by two Rhimes in ac of the fourth Verse. There are
Psalms whose Verses do end almost all in the same Rhyme, as the Psalm. 119.
which ends almost all in (...) cha. The Arabians have also such Poesies,
whereof we have several examples, as the Poem entitled Tagrai, which all ends
in LI, that of abu El-ula, which ends all in LA, etc. The Order of the Rhimes
is neither the same in a Psalm, but resembles altogether that of our irregular
Verses, which we dispose as we please. It may likewise be that in some places
they were satisfied with the Cadence, without searching necessarily for a
rhyme. Indeed there are some places in the Psalms, where there are no Rhimes
found, though the sense seems to want nothing, as at the end of Psalm. 111, and
112. There are some modern Tongues, and amongst others the Italian and the
English, where there are very good Verses made without rhyme, in observing only
a certain Cadence.

4. The length of Verses is also seldom the same, and it seems the Hebrews did
not at all matter it. If perchance two Verses of the same measure present
themselves to their mind, they shunned them not, but they did not also seek the
equality of measure, which shows that their Poesy was not very polished.

5. As the Hebrews have not long Periods, their Verses are seldom long, such as
are those of the Psalm 119. The others are so short, that there are of two
Syllables, as in our irregular Verses. It is perhaps for this reason that they
call a Hymn (...) mizmor, from (...) zamar, which signifies to cut, because its
Style is extremely cut, and that for to make the Cadence of the Verses to be
felt, we ought several times to stop at a Period: It is true, that this Verse
signifies to sing in the Piel, but the signification of Piel comes from that of
Kal. This day with the Arabians, who sing their Verses in cutting them into
diverse lengths, zamaria signifies to sing.

6. The Poesy of the Hebrews not being very regular, cannot but be full of
Licenses, as to what concerns the Rhimes, whereof the greatest according to the
Rabbis, are those which make different Letters to Rhyme, but whose
Pronunciation is alike. Nevertheless, as their Poesies were rather made for to
rehearse them or to sing them, than to read them, they did not so much matter
to satisfy the Eyes as the Ears: So though in reading these Verses, one may be
offended to see them rhyme by different Letters, the Ear being not offended
thereat, they made no difficulty to make use of these Rhimes: For example, in
the Psalm. 1.3. (...) jehgueh rhimes with (...) phalgue; and in the 5 th. Verse
(...) mischpat rhimes with (...) adath.

Besides the Rhyme, we also remark in the Verses of the Hebrews the same
Cadence which is seen in our rhimed Verses, only that the lengths are not so
well observed in it as in ours, which without this could not be pronounced. But
they are not absolutely necessary in the Hebrew Verses, because commonly they
are much shorter than ours, and often so short that there can be no cutting off.

7. As almost all Nations put Verses sometime in their Poesies, which are
repeated, and which are called in French le refrein: We find also of them in
the Hebrew Psalms, as in Psalm. 118. and in Psalm. 136. but they have perhaps
this in particular, that the Verses which are placed between those of the
refrein, sometimes rhyme not together, as may be seen in the last of the two
Psalms which we have cited.

8. They affect sometimes to make their Verses begin by a certain Letter. In
Psalm. 119. the first eight Verses begin by an (...), the eight following by
(...), and thus after one another unto the end of the Alphabet: In the 37 th.
the same thing is remarked, only that it is but each Stanza, which begins by a
Letter of the Alphabet, according to the Order they are ranged. This made some
believe that in some of the Psalms there were Acrostick Verses; and indeed it
has been remarked that the first Letters of the Verses of some might form the
sense; but the irregularity of the Verses hindering one to be always assured
that the beginning of each was discovered; and it being besides possible that
these first Letters form a sense by a pure chance, we have dared to determine
nothing thereupon.

9. It Is needless here to enlarge upon the Style of the Hebrew Poesy, because
it has scarcely any thing in particular, and it cannot be remarked in general
of all Poesies. We shall only say, that amongst the Elegancies of the Hebrew
Poesy one thing has been found, which is common to it with that of the
Greeks, viz. it borrows words and ways of speaking of the neighboring
Dialects, as from the Chaldaick Tongue: Examples may be seen in the Psalms,
CIII. 3, 4, 5. CXVI. 7, I2. where there are found Chaldean suffixes. There is a
very remarkable one in Psalm. 11. whereof mention shall be made hereafter. This
Observations is very important, because it serves for the explication of diverse
places, and to Correct some Faults of Copyers, which hinder the Rhyme to be
found, which appears every where else.

These Rules being established, I must relate here some other particular
Proofs, which shall serve to confirm the general ones whereof I have made use,
to show that the Poesy of the Hebrews might have been like the ancient Poesy
of the Arabians.

IV. Some Learned Men have made good remarks in the Poetical Books of the Old
Testament, of rhimed Verses in diverse places; but they believed that pure
chance had produced them, without any Pains taken by the Sacred Writers
thereabouts. 1. For to prove clearly that they are mistaken, it would be
necessary for me to produce here a Work which I have made upon the Psalms,
where they might be seen reduced into rhimed Verses, and where they are
disposed so, that in casting an Eye on them, one may be assured of the truth of
the Hypothesis which we have advanced. I have tried the same thing upon diverse
places of the other Poetical Books, and the Hymns which are in the Pentateuch
and the Judges: It succeeded with me happily enough, though there are some
Places whereof I could never come to an end, for reasons which I shall mark
hereafter. I do not believe that after this one can imagine that these Rhimes
were found by chance in the Poesies of the ancient Hebrews. It would be
impossible for them not to take Notice thereof; and if they did not perceive
it, why did they rhyme every where, if it was not for the sake of their Poesy?
We shall give an Example of it at the end of this Essay.

2. Indeed it is remarked in several places, that the same words are repeated
without necessity, to Rhyme with themselves, as hatelouhou in Psalm. 150. and a
great Number, which cannot be related here.

3. Besides this, there are many words which rhyme together, without having a
particular connection with the sense: So (...) abad, he is perished, rhimes in
diverse places with (...) ad always. This shows clearly that it is not
chance, nor the necessity of expression, which have placed these words near one
another, but the design of making them to rhyme; otherwise they would not be
found to rhyme so often together.

4. There is scarcely any place seen, where a rhyme has not produced such
another, and often times two or three, the Phrase not necessarily requiring
them; as the Rhyme MO in Psalm. 2. whereof I shall put here seven Verses in
Latin Characters, though they are but three in the Psalm.

Eth mosrothe MO,
Venaschliche mimmennou, abothe MO,
Ioscheb baschamajim jisch AK,
Adonei jila AG
La MO
Az jedabber ele MO
Bappho oubacharono jebahale MO.
I believe it cannot be doubted, that the Author of this Psalm has affected
these Rhimes in MO, for the third was in no wise necessary; it sufficed to say
jilAG, vajedabber eleMO; and if it was not even in that the Poesy consisted,
these Rhimes must have been shunned, which without this would extremely offend
the Ears, in making use of the suffix HEM. Besides this, we shall find plain
Examples of this Truth in Psalm. 118.

4. There are places where no Rhyme is in the Hebrew Text, and where also the
sense is very difficult, and the order of the words contrary to the genius of
the Hebrew Tongue: But in putting these words again in their Natural Order,
according to the construction, where they ought to be, the sense of them
becomes not only fine and clear, but also the Rhyme very good; whence we have
reason to conclude that these words had been transposed, and that since the
rhyme agrees with the sense, it is an Argument that it was sought after: Here
is word for word the sense of the 5 th. and 6 th. Verses of Psalm. 9. according
to the Order they are in this day, Thou have destroyed the wicked, thou have
blotted out THEIR Names for ever: O thou Enemy, desolations are come so a
perpetual end, and thou have demolished the Cities, their memory is perished
with them; they (a Feminine) or, they (a Masculine.) All the World may see the
difficulty of this Construction, but those who understand Hebrew, may yet much
better be assured thereof, in reading the Original. Neither can the Rhyme be
found in this place, but in making some slight Changes, which may be supported
by other parallel Passages, and in re-establishing the Rhyme, these words form a
sense clear and easy, and are found in a regular construction: Thou have
destroyed the wicked, thou have blotted out their Name for ever, the Enemy is
perished, the Streets and the Cities are ruined for ever; thou have destroyed
them and their memory: In these words is a clear sense, which is but darkly
represented in the preceding ones. Indeed it has been constantly remarked,
that in the most obscure places, it is the hardest to find the Rhyme, which
makes us reasonably to believe, that the obscurity comes from some
transposition, or from some word forgotten, or a letter omitted, without which
the Rhyme cannot be found. On the contrary, the sense is easy, almost every
where, where the Rhimes are easily found. If the brevity which I am to keep
here admitted me, I could give a sufficient Number of Examples, but we shall
only bring one at the beginning of the 16 th. Psalm, which the Version of
Geneva has rendered thus, in supplying the words which are in Roman
Characters: Keep me, O mighty God, for I have trusted in thee: O my Soul, thou
have said to God, thou art the Lord, my goodness extends not to thee, but to
the Saints who are on the Earth, and to the excellent, in whom I take all my
delight. The sorrows of those who run after another God shall be multiplied,
etc. The sense is obscure enough, and the words are very difficult, in spite of
the Supplements which Interpreters have made herein; but the difficulty is yet
more sensible in the Hebrew, by reason of the Punctuation of some words, and of
some letters which must be ncessarily changed, or added. And this Passage has
given a very great labor to Interpreters, tho'we have seen none of them who
has happily gone through it. It is thought it should be translated thus, after
having made the necessary changes in it: Keep me, O God, for I have hoped in
thee; I have said to God, thou art the Lord, my whole trust is in thee! Men
have gone in multitudes to the Effeminate (Cynaedi) who are in thy Country,
great Persons put all their delight in them, they have eagerly multiplied their
Idols with another God, etc. We shall not undertake to give an account of this
Version, for fear of being too long; it is enough for the present that in the
supposition that this Version is just, People do know that the Rhyme is
excellent, and that it is not otherwise to be found therein.

5. Those who have some knowledge in the Critics of the Old Testament, know
that in diverse places there are found words in the Version of the LXX, which
are not in the Hebrew. There are some in the Psalms, as well as in the other
Books; but what is remarkable, is that in some of these places the Hebrew Text
transmitteth not necessary Rhimes; and that if the words be added which are in
the Greek Version, the Rhyme is found there: By this we see there these words
had been omitted by the Copyers in the Hebrew, and that they ought to be put
there again: So in Psalm. 1.4. the LXX have twice put (...), it is not so;
whereas this Phrase is but once in our present Originals: But it has been
discovered, by means of the Rhyme, that it ought to be twice there. Here is yet
another more remarkable place, which in Psalm. 7.12. where there is according to
the Hebrew, God is a just Judge, and a God who is angry every day: There can be
no Rhyme found in this place, and this description of Divine Justice is not in
the ordinary Terms of Sacred Authors, who describe God not only extremely
patient, but also easy to be appeased, and exercising his Wrath but in a
moment, whilst his Mercy appears for a very long time, see Psalm. 30.6. But
according to the LXX. there is no difficulty, neither for the Rhyme, nor for
the sense, which is here, God is a just Judge, patient, and who is not always
provoked. The same is found Psalm. 134.1. three words in the Version of the LXX.
which are not in the Hebrew, and which yet are necessary for the Rhyme: All ye
Servants of God, who stand in the House of the Lord (in the Porch of the House
of God) lift up your hands toward the Sanctuary: Words included amongst
Crochets are not found in Hebrew, and yet they are necessary for the Rhyme. The
repetition of the words (...) beth jahvoh, House of the Lord, seems to have
been the cause of this Omission, as it is easy to conceive it for those who
have sometimes Copied Writings, where the same words were repeated.

6. There is yet one thing, which may convince those who understand these kinds
of matters, that the Poesy of the Hebrews is a Rhimed Poesy; for there is a
place in the Psalms where the Sacred Authors have made use of certain words not
much in use among the Hebrews, or ways of expressing drawn from the
Neighboring Dialects, in places where the words and expressions common to the
Hebrews would make no Rhyme, whereas these strange words do Rhyme perfectly
well; for example, the Author of Psalm. 2. made use in Ver. 12. of the Chaldean
word (...) bar, Son, which Rhimes very well with the Verb (...) jibar, which is
in the sequel; whereas the Hebrew word (...) ben, which signifies the same
thing, and which in Ver. 7. would make no Rhyme there. So also in Psalm. 103.
the Psalmist speaking to his Soul, viz. to himself, speaks in the Feminine,
because the word (...) nephesch, Soul, is of this Gender, and faith (...) al
thischechi, ne obliviscare tu anima, which obliges him to use the Chaldaick
and Syriack suffixe (...) chi, in the following Rhimes, because in using the
Hebrew suffixe, there would have been no Rhyme. It is true, that this Rhyme in
chi has produced three others, but that same shows that these Rhimes are
sought for, and not lit on by chance.

7. In treating of the Poesy of the other Eastern Tongues, we might mention
that of the Phoenicians, Neighbors to the Hebrews, and whose Tongue was the
same as theirs; but as what has been said of the Poesy of the Arabians and
Ethiopians is so undoubted, and that what can be said of Phoenician Poesy
appears not so evident, we have chosen to speak of it here, only as of a
consequence, and to make use of the same until we had proved another way that
the Poesy of the Hebrews could only be a rhimed Poesy. The Hebrew and
Phoenician Tongues being the same, if the Hebrews could only make rhimed
Verses, it follows that the Phoenicians had none else. There remains no
fragment of Phoenician Poesy amongst us, but ten lines which are in the
Paenulus of Plantus; for the Phoenician Tongue and that of Carthage are looked
upon to be the same: The Verses having never been written but in Latin
Characters, and by Men who understood them not, it cannot be this day promised
to re-establish them wholly. It is true, that Plautus has translated them
afterward into eleven Latin Verses: But first one may conjecture from thence,
that there has been one line lost, because there is a repetition in the Latin
Verses, which undoubtedly comes from the Phoenician, not being conformable to
the Genius of the Latin Tongue, but very common in the Hebrew Tongue.

Measque ut gnatas and mei fratris filium
Reperire me siritis, Dii vestram fidem!
Quae mihi surreptae and sunt, and fratris filium.
Plautus would never have repeated and fratris filium, if this repetition had
not been in the Original. Secondly, Plautus seems to have Translated the rest
with pretty much liberty, as Bochart (who has most happily re-established these
Verses) has shown: So one ought not to be surprised, if there should be no
Vestiges of Rhimes found here: Yet there are such considerable ones found in
them, that we can scarcely doubt but that they have been true Rhimed Verses:
That it may be the more easily known, I shall put them here in Hebrew and Latin
Characters, with an English Version, where each Verse is translated word for
word. I have followed partly Bochart, and partly the Version of Plautus, rather
than the Terms of the Original, as they are in Latin Characters. I shall not
undertake to expound in partcular each Verse, because Bochart has partly done
it already, and because the Version which is added thereunto is sufficient. I
shall only admonish the Reader of three things: The one is, That each Line of
the Phoenician written in Latin, contains two Verses, which were joined
together, because Plautus has expressed two of them in one Latin Verse; so
that for eleven Verses of Plautus there should be twenty two Phoenician ones,
whereas there are but twenty. But, as it has been already said, there is a
Line lost, to wit two Verses, this has been supplied in Translating the Verse
of Plautus into two little Verses, which do rhyme together as the other. The
second thing is, That we know not the Pronunciation of the Punick Tongue, as to
what concerns the Vowels, It might be that it came nearer to the Syriack or
Arabic than the Hebrew, or even that in Afric; some words were pronounced
quite otherwise than in Asia, as it is now seen in the different Dialects of
the Arabic Tongue, and as its known that the Nations of Europe, whose Tongue
comes from the same source; pronounce the same Root quite otherwise in respect
to the Vowels, though it retains the same Consonants. So although we can mark
here the radical Letters, and that they can be punctuated after the way of the
Hebrews, or that of the Syrians, it does not at all follow that that is the
true Pronunciation of the Words. The Consonants principally ought to be taken
heed of, and consider if they might have been pronounced so that they rhyme
together. For example, who could tell if (...) has been pronounced benothai,
or benothi, or benothe? It suffices therefore to make the following Verses by
a word which ends in (...), seeing it is not known after what manner the
Carthaginians pronounced this Termination. The third thing which ought to be
Noted here, regards the places wherein we have swerved from the Conjectures of
Bochart. We have a little disagreed with him in Verses 3, 4, 5, 11, 17, and 32,
besides the 9 th. and 10 th, which have been added. It Is needless to stay to
tell the reason of every change; those who would know, if they are just, need
only to compare these Verses with those disposed by Bochart, as he thought they
should have been. We can only Note that in Ver. 5. (...) is for (...),
according to the Chaldaick Dialect, which changes in (...) the (...) of the
Hebrews. Hanno prays the Gods in this place to do him the Favor of knowing
his Nephew and his Daughters, by some assured mark; because it might be, that
he saw them and spoke to them, without knowing them by any certain sign. Here
the Punick Writing, according to the conjecture of Bochart, goes far from the
Latin of Plautus, and even in some words in Punick, such as it is written in
Latin Characters.

Punick Verses of Poenulus of PLAUTUS, Act. Scene 1.
I.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
5.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
10.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
15.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
20.
(...)
(...)
(...)
Na eth eljonim veljonoth
Schechoreth jismchoun zoth
Chi nittham milchi
Oumithdabbre is ki
Lephochanath oath bimtsoti
Eth bni veth bnothi
Brouah rob schellahem
Eljonim oubimschourathehem
B^oth schenignbon li
Ouben achi
Bterem moth vchanoutho
Tha nhelachti Antidamarco
Isch schejada li bram thippel
Eth chale schchinatham Iophel
Eth ben amits
Dibbiur tham ncot nave Agorastoclis
Chot em chanouthi hacchior hazze
Li chok zoth nose
Ben hachajil hivvou li ligboulam
Lschebeth tham
Bo di ale thra inna hinno
Eschal im manchar lo schmo
In English thus,
I beseech the Gods and Goddesses
Who protect this Country,
That my Design may succeed,
That they may guide my Affair,
And that I may discover a mark to find
My Nephew and my Daughters;
(By the abounding spirit which is in them,
In the Gods, I say, and by their Providence)
My Daughters and my Nephew, who have been taken from me.
Before Antidamarchus dyed,
I went to lodge at his House, in one of his Chambers:
He was a Man whom I knew, but he is gone to join himself to
The Assemblies of those whose Habitation is in darkness.
They constantly affirm
That his Son Agorastocles has established his Residence there.
The Sign upon which I agreed with my Host,
is this engraven board,
Which I carry to serve me as a Mark.
I have been assured that it is in this quarter,
somewhere about the utmost limits that he lives.
Some body comes by this door, there he is,
I will ask him if he knows his Name.
V. After all these Proofs, it is thought it may be concluded without fear of a
mistake, that the Poesy of the Hebrews is nothing else but a rhimed Poesy.
This Essay might end here, if it was not thought necessary to take off some
difficulties, which undoubtedly shall spring in the mind of part of those who
shall read it. The one respects the Music of the Hebrews, and the others the
manner of discovering in what their Poesy consists.

1. As to what concerns Music, as it depends much more on the particular
Genius of each Nation, than of certain constant Rules, so it cannot be guessed
what Times the Hebrews might give to their Songs. It Is well seen by the
multitude of their Hymns, and the History of David, that they had some Passion
for Music, but we do not see that they ever writ any thing on it; and if they
had written on it, it would be hard to understand their meaning: And as we cannot
not as much as conjecture how they might sing their Verses; so what has been
said of their Poesy would not be less certain. We know that the Grecians have
in times past sung their Verses, and that they have been even composed from
their Music, upon which there remains some pieces amongst us: That
notwithstanding has not hindered, but it has been entirely lost, and that it
is impossible to find what Tunes were given to the Odes of Pindarus. If some
Body showed Chinese Verses to the best Musician of Europe, they could not guess
in what their Music consists, even the Chinese could not sing our Verses: That
which is still more surprising in this is, that they laugh at our Music as we
laugh at theirs.

2. If it were said that the Music of the Ancient Hebrews was not very
regular, it is nothing but what is like to be true; it was a Nation given
altogether to the Care of Agriculture, which had neither Theaters nor public
Divertisements of this kind. All the public Use it made of Music, was in the
singing of the Sacred Hymns instituted by David, and nothing obliges us to
believe that this singing was very harmonious, and very methodical. At this day
the Jews do sing in their Synagogues their Prayers very confusedly, and they
read even Scripture in singing, whether it be Prose or Verse. The Mahometans
sing also their Alcoran, because it is all composed of Verse: Nor does the
Hebrew Prose want it, it is apparently for the same reason that the Jews sing
it from an immemorial time, as well as their Books of Poesies, though they know
not in what the Poesy of the Bible consists.

One might even go further, and say downright, that the Music of the Hebrews
was not very fine; suppose that the LXX. and St. Ierom have Translated well a
place of Samuel, and that we understand well the Names of the Instruments
whereof they made use, because these Instruments could not make but a very
confused and disagreeing Music. Thus the Author of this Book describes the
Consort, which David caused to be made in conducting the Ark, according to the
Version of St. Ierom: David autem and omnis Israel ludebant coram Domino in
omnibus lignis fabrefactis, and cytharis, and lyris and tympanis, and sistris
and cymbalis: David and all Israel played before the Lord with all sorts of
Instruments made of Wood, Harps, Lutes, Drums, Tymbrels ( these Instruments
shall be spoken of hereafter) and Cymbals. According to the LXX, one must
Translate thus the Names of these Instruments; Cynares, (an Instrument of ten
Strings, which was touched with an Archet, according to the relation of
Josephus;) Nables, (an Instrument with twelve sounds, which was touched with
Fingers, according to the same;) Drums, (perhaps as our Drums of Basque;)
Cymbals, (Drums of Basque of Brass, which were beaten with Fingers) and Flutes.
But these Interpreters have Translated this place only upon chance, as a great
many more, without knowing exactly what instruments are spoken of here, and the
last words, to wit, Tsiltsel signifies not a Flute, but a Cymbal or a Timbrel.
The Rabbis represent the Music of the Temple in the same manner, upon which
Lightfoot may be consulted in his Book of the Service of the Temple, chapter 7.
sect. 2. they say that Voices were added to these Instruments, and mark the
Psalms which were sung each day of the Week, and on the principal Festivals:
But we cannot much confide in what they say, as several Learned Men have shown.
All that we would conclude from hence, is, that though it should be said that
the Music of the Hebrews was very confused, to judge of it by ours, nothing
would be said but what may be maintained by the very Authority of the Jews.

3. Thus though it were agreed that the singing of the Hebrew Verses, such as
they are conceived, would not be very pleasing to our Ears, if it were possible
to revive their Music, there would be nothing which would appear surprising in
it: But suppose their Music was better than it appears, by the Descriptions
which we have of it, who should have hindered them to give Tunes to their
irregular Verses, like unto those which we give to ours. It will be granted
undoubtedly that their Music had been pretty pleasing, if it had equalled the
Music of our Opera's, which are all composed of irregular Verses. Though the
Music of the Greeks has been so much boasted of, and the Tunes of their
Lyrick Poesy, which is almost all composed of Verses or equal Couplets, or of
Strophes, or of regulated Antistrophes; a Cadence which always returns, and
a Tune which we hear twenty times successively, does not please as much as a
varied Cadence, and a change of Verses almost perpetual, such as ought to be in
irregular Verses.

4. An excellent Musician in reading an Opera, whose Music he should not have
seen, could perhaps sometimes, by the Matter and Cadence of the Verses, find
out very near what sort of Tune should be given in looking for that which would
be most proper unto them. It might also be very well that in some Composures
the Cadence of the Hebrew Verses, which is pretty sensible, by reason of their
smallness and unequality, could make one guess at the Tune they had, or at
least draw near it in some manner: So if we read Psalm. 10^. as it ought, so
that its Cadence may be rendered sensible, there are few Persons who have their
Ear good, who judge not that the words of this Psalm are extremely proper for
that which is called a Tune of Fanfare, [i. e. the sound of Trumpets] hence
arose the Thought of Translating the Hebrew Verses into irregular French
Verses, which have just the same Number of Syllables, and to put thereto a Tune
of this Nature. Not that it is believed it had with the Hebrews that same Tune
which will be found here; but we may conjecture with a great likelihood, that
it had a like one, because the Hebrew words are very proper for a Tune of
Fanfare, and could hardly suffer another.

If the Instruments were well known which the Hebrews used, there might perhaps
be said something more exact upon their Music; but as we have but a very small
knowledge in it, we are obliged to hold to these general Idea's, which are
sufficient for us on this occasion, where we have no other design but to show
that they would easily sing irregular Verses, such as are those which we have
attributed to them.

VI. There remains no more, but some only difficulties which may be objected
upon the manner whereby this Poesy was discovered. It may at first be said,
that it seems strange, that so many ancient and modern learned Persons, who
have sought with Care the Secrecy of the Hebrew Poesy, could not think of a
thing so easy as Rhimes: But this is but a difficulty of Metaphysick, which
proves nothing, but that these Learned Men did bring hereupon the attention
which they ought. It has been observed several times, that by too much seeking
for a Mystery, in a thing easy of it self, has rendered it difficult: It
would suffice thus to answer this difficulty, and to oppose thereto the thing
it self, in producing the whole Book of Psalms, disposed into Rhimed Verses, as
it may be easily done, and as perhaps it may be done some time or other: But
now this difficulty may be resolved by the following Remarks.

1. It is not absolutely true, that all the Learned have not at all perceived
the Rhimes of the Hebrew Poesy, Buxtorf has remarked something thereof, as it
may be seen in the beginning of his Prosodie; but he thought that chance had
formed them, because he has remarked but some, and where the Verses are equal.
There has been besides an Author cited, named Theodorus Herbert, de Poetica
Hebraica, who has remarked more of them, but we have not seen his Book, and it
is judged by the Citation which we read on it, that he has not drawn from these
Rhimes the consequence this Essay has done.

Augustine Steuchus of Engubio, in his Preface upon the Psalms, had remarked
before him, in terms much more express, That the Poesy of the Hebrews is not
the same as that of the Grecians and Latins, as the Italian Poesy is not the
same with the Latin. The Latins do observe after the imitation of the Greeks,
the quantity of the Syllables; the Hebrews do not so, but take heed only of
their Number and Cadence. We see not nevertheless that Steuchus has undertaken
to reduce Poetical Books of the Hebrews into rhimed Verses, no more than Lewis
Cappel, who has not disapproved of the Thought of this learned Man.

Some have also believed that St. Ierom had observed Rhimes in the Hebrew
Poesies, because he has said in his Preface upon Job, Interdum quoque Rythmus
ipse dulcis and tinnulus, fertur numeris pedum solutis. Buxtorf has thought
that Rythmus signified what we now call Rhyme, but he might learn of all those
who have treated of Prosodie, that this word does not only signify Cadence.
Joseph Scaliger also made use of this same word in this Sense, in the place
which has been cited of him, Quantum sententia postulat, rythmus nunc longior,
nunc brevior est: He means that the Verses are more or less long, and
consequently that the Cadence has more or less extent, according as the sense
demands more or less words: Yet Mr. Ferrand censures him in his Preface upon
the Psalms, as if he had understood Rhimes thereby. Scaliger was too good a
Grecian to commit such a Fault as that. Mr. Ferrand then was mistaken in the
sense he gave to the words of Scaliger, as he is also mistaken in what he adds
after Buxtorf, that if there are Rhimes in the Poesies of the Hebrews, it is
but by chance. What has been said, shows sufficiently the contrary, and this
Remark is made but upon the occasion of the Term Rythmus, whereof we thought we
should say a word, fearing that some being mistaken in the sense which is given
it in the modern Languages, should without reason think that we were obliged to
cite St. Ierom and Scaliger. But we have undertaken to refute no body, because
then there should be made a Book on purpose for that, which would be very
unusefull, after the direct Proofs which have been related.

2. When the Psalms shall be seen disposed in form of Rhimed Verses, it will
perhaps be imagined that there was nothing so easy as to find these Rhimes;
But that which appears easy, after it has been expounded, was often very
difficult before the Exposition. Enigma's are clear as the day, when we see the
mystery of them, and we often wonder that we could not understand them at first
sight, when we learn what they signify. It is the same with the Poesy of the
Hebrews, on this occasion; the difficulties which hindered its discovery being
taken away, nothing will appear so easy, but this is what rendered the
discovery. The Verses are not distinguished in the Books of the Hebrews, but
written all after one another, even as Prose, which was the Cause that though we
knew that certain Books are Poesies, yet it has been insensibly forgotten in
what these Verses consisted, and how they could be distinguished. Two things
besides have much contributed to this: The one is, that several of these Verses
are extremely short; and the other is, that their Rhimes are not always very
happy. If one writ at length irregular Spanish Verses composed of assonant
Rhimes, there are very few People who could guess them to be Verses, if the
Style did not make it known, and without a good knowledge in Spanish Poesy, it
would scarcely be possible to distinguish between the beginning and end of
these Verses. It is the same with the Italian irregular Verses, which rhyme
sometimes, and sometimes the rhyme is neglected, as is thought fit. We are well
assured that very few Vltromontans could in the form of Verses write again this
Period of a famous Italian Poesy, Tempesto so furor non fu may Pira in
magnanimo petto; ma un fiato sol di generoso affetto, che spirando ne l'alma,
quando e piu con la ragione unita, la desta e rende a le bell opre ardita. As
in this would appear but four Rhimes amongst so many words, it would be
suspected either that some of them were lost, or that those which are in it
came by chance: Yet these are six Verses which may be read in Scene V. of the
V. Act. of Pastor Fido. To this must be added, that to find out the beginning
and ending of Verses thus written, one must know how to pronounce them, which
is not easy for Strangers, as all those who have some knowleege in Italian
Poesy are sensible. And it is a thing which is yet more difficult as to the
Hebrew Tongue, whose Pronunciation is as rude as that of the Italian Tongue is
sweet: So the manner of writing Poesies without distinction of Verses, their
inequality, the smallness of some, the neglected Rhimes, or omitted, and the
difficulty of the Pronunciation, were Obstacles great enough to hinder the
easy disentangling the Hebrew Verses.

3. Hereby we see that though Copiers should have Committed never a Fault, it
would be still hard to find out these Verses: But we ought to Judge that the
Copyers might have sometimes without thinking on it transpose the Order of
words, not knowing the measure of the Verses they did Copy. So we see that the
ancient Manuscripts, not only of the Greek and Latin Authors, who have written
in Prose, but also Poets, whose Verses have no very sensible Cadence, vary
extremely amongst themselves in the disposition of the words. Hereupon may be
consulted the Lyrick and Dramatick Poets of the Greeks and Latins, where the
Learned have often remarked some Transpositions. If there have happened such
changes in the Books of the Grecians and Latins, which have been carefully
enough Copied, and by Copiers who understood well those two Tongues, it may be
easily judged that the Hebrew Tongue being lost in the Captivity, and the Books
of the Hebrews having been Transcribed by Copyers who understood them but by
halves, there would some slight changes have slipped thereinto, which though
they did nothing to the sense, would yet disorder the Verse. We think we can
show that there are in effect some transpositions of words in the Psalms, which
do quite disorder the Rhyme, and which render the sense more difficult; an
Example on it has been related heretofore, drawn from Psalm. 9. Thus in Psalm.
71. ver. 6, and following, the rhimes are disturbed, and the sense less clear:
The Version of Geneva has thus Translated this place, I shall speak of thy
Justice only: O God, thou have taught me from my Youth, and hitherto have I
declared thy wonders: Now also when I am old and grey-headed, O God, forsake me
not! etc. It Is easily observed, that these words are entangled, but it will be
yet easier, if the Original is read, where one will hardly find out as much as
disjecti membra Poetae: On the contrary, in disposing them so that the Rhyme
may be found, they are Translated thus, Lord, thou art the only God, I will
celebrate thy Justice, I will declare thy wonders: O God, thou have instructed
me from my Childhood until now: O God, for sake me not until Old Age, etc. Not
that there was frequent need of transposing the words, to find the Rhimes, it
has almost always presented it self without that; but a transposition, as that
which offers it self by chance to one who seeks whether the Psalms are composed
of rhimed Verses, is sufficient to make him believe that if there be rhimes in
them, the Hebrew Poets made them without taking any heed thereto.

4. Besides the Transpositions which may happen in the Psalms, there may also
be some places where the Copyers have taken one word for another, or have even
forgotten some. Those who have a little understanding in Critics, or who have
sometimes examined the Varieties of reading of the New Testament, which are in
the Editions of Courcelles, or in that of Oxford, will easily agree hereunto;
and those who would deny the possibility of these kinds of oversights, should
show how that which is happened in respect of the New Testament (transcribed by
Christian Copyers, whose Mother Tongue was the Greek) was impossible, in
respect to the Psalms; which have been Copyed since the Captivity, by Copyers
who only knew the Hebrew by Study. But it is not only very possible that the
Copyers have committed some Faults that indeed happened, as Cappel and several
others have shown: To be convinced hereof, we only need to compare Psalm. 14.
with 53. which certainly are the same, and it will be found that the 14 th. is
the less correct, that there are some words missing in it, and that the Copyers
have been mistaken in some others, which has wholly altered the sense and the
rhyme: Besides, we need but to compare Psalm. 18. such as it is in the
Collection of the Psalms, with the same Psalm, as it is related in chapter 22. of
the 2 d. Book of Samuel. Those who can read Hebrew, may remark there more than
fifty examples of Omissions, of Transpositions, or of words taken one for the
other, because of the resemblance of some Letters.

5. Lewis Cappel has treated on this matter with so much Care in his Sacred
Critics, that it would be useless to stop at it after him: He has also shown
that the Point Vowels of the Hebrews are of the Invention of the Masorites, and
that they have not Pointed well some places, which is also one of the Reasons
for which it has been hard to discover the Secret of the Poesy of the
Hebrews: For Example, in the first Verse of the Psalms, they have put (...)
halach for holech, which lost the rhyme. It is true, one ought not to swerve
from their Punctation without reason, and that if there are formed some rhimes
in Pointing otherwise, it is good to give some Example thereof, as may be done
concerning the Rhyme whereof we speak, and even of a great many more.

Moreover, the true sound of diverse Vowels is not well known, as of the Kamets
magnum, which seems to have been pronounced as an O, perhaps sometimes as an A,
just as the Fa^ha and the Damme of the Arabians, have each two sounds, which
can only be known by Use in diverse obvious places.

The Masorites have purposely changed the Punctation of some words, as that of
(...), which comes into the Psalms very often, and whose true Pronunciation
must be necessarily known, to discover the Rhyme. Cappel has shown that it
ought to be pronounced Iahvoh, and it has been acknowledged by the necessity
of the Rhyme, in seral places of the Psalms.

Thereby we see that the Rhimes have been necessarily very much disordered by
the Punctation of the Masorites, and the same thing ought to be observed
concerning the Cadence. They have diminished or augmented the Number of
Syllables, in putting a Scheva moveable or quiescent, under certain Syllables
which were otherwise Pointed in times past, as appears by an infinity of proper
Names, as (...) schlomo for schalamo, as diverse Learned Men have already
remarked.

These difficulties, which have until now hindered the discovery of the Cadence
and Rhimes of the Hebrew Verses, hinder also our hopes of re-establishing them
perfectly; for although they may be surmounted in part, no man can promise
himself, without a ridiculous temerity, to surmount them all. But it suffices,
I think, to show by clear places, which are in great Number, what may be
supposed of those, which we grant we cannot well go through. There are places
in the Fragments which remain amongst us of the ancient Dramatique Authors,
both Greeks and Latins, which show evidently what sort of Verses they used,
though in some places it is not possible to re-establish them: We therefore do
declare that we in no wise do flatter our selves of having, or of being able to
put in their true Order all the Poesies of Holy Writ: But it may be said, that
it is believed we may apply to three quarters of these Poesies the Rul^s which
we have given, and convince after a sensible manner those who may doubt th^reof.

6. We have nothing more to remark hereupon except one thing, which comes not
from the difficulty of the Hebrew Poesy in it self, as the precedent, but from
a false Judgment which some Ancients have made on this subject; which is, that
knowing no other Poesy but that of the Greeks and Latins, they have falsely
judged that that of the Hebrews should resemble it. It is a Fault which St.
Ierom has committed, as may be seen by what he says on it in his Preface upon
Job and elsewhere: It Is true, it is not he that speaks thus the first, he cites
Origin and Eusebius, who had said the same thing as he; and the last could
defend themselves by the Authority of Philo and Josephus. This Historian
assures, that the Song of Moses, which is in the 15 th. of Exodus, is in
Hexameter Verses: But there is nothing so far from truth, and it is not the
only Mark which Josephus has given, that he understood but very little the
Hebrew of Scripture no more than Philo. It may be also he spoke thus to
accommodate himself with the Heathens, whose Sacred Hymns were ordinarily in
Hexameter Verses, as appears by those which are attributed to Homer, and by
those of Callimachus. Others have already marked in diverse places where this
Author accommodates himself to the relish and Opinions of the Pagans; but
whether it be through ignorance in the Hebrew, or to make himself understood by
the Pagans, that Josephus has spoken thus: It Is certain there is no Hexametrum
in Moses, as those who know a little Hebrew, and know how to scan Hexameter
Verses may assure themselves. On the contrary, all this Song was disposed into
pretty good rhimes, and it might be published so if it were needful.

St. Ierom, who found Lyrick Verses in the Psalms, seems to be of this Opinion,
because others had said it before him: For it was the Custom to Copy Origin,
without too much examining, if what he Copyed was true or not, as he confesses
himself. Some Learned Men have notwithstanding essayed to excuse him, and
amongst others Steuchus and Cappel; but it seems it were better to grant
downright that he was mistaken herein, as in several other things, not being
able in no wise to pass for an exact Author, and one who says nothing but
after a mature examination.

7. What we have said of the Ignorance of Josephus and Philo, and what has
been advanced of the Errors of the Copyers, supposes a thing which we think
should be marked here more distinctly, for to take away the scruples which may
arise from thence in the mind of Persons, who have only a superficial Knowledge
of the Critics of Holy Writ, viz. People imagine commonly that the ancient
Hebrews had a very great Care of their Books, and that the Jews have never
discontinued to Study with application to the Hebrew Tongue; thence it is
concluded that the Originals which we have now, have been so well preserved,
and transcribed by so able men, that the very New Testament is not almost so
Correct as the Old. But these Prejudices will be laid aside, which are founded
upon nothing else but the Authority of the modern Jews, and upon some reasons
of Me^^physicks, if we consider with Attention these six things:

First, The Law of Moses has almost never been observed with any exactness by
the Jews, as their History, and the reproaches the Prophets use against them
thereupon, do clearly show it. So although Moses had Ordered the Kings to have
always a Copy of the Law for their Instruction, this Law was so little
observed, that Josias after having reigned eighteen Years, knew not what the
Book of the Law contained; see 2 King. 22.10. It appears by this History, that
the Copy which was kept in the Temple was not to be found, and that it was not
read, as it should have been; whence it may easily be concluded that the Jews
had no great Care for their Books in that time.

Secondly, Though several Ancients have said that Esdras re-established the
Sacred Books, which had been neglected during the Captivity of Babylon, and
formed thereof a Volume which was preserved from that time in the state wherein
it is; yet if the Genealogies be examined carefully, which are in the Book of
Esdras, there will be Omissions found in it, which can only come from the
Negligence of the Copyers, as that of Chapter 7.3. where there are three
generations omitted in the Genealogy of Esdras. There is moreover so great a
diversity of Calculation betwixt the Books of Esdras and Nehemiah, touching the
Number of those who returned from the Captivity, that there is no means of
resolving this difficulty, but in saying that the Copyers have not been so
exact as they should, in describing these Books.

Thirdly, We ought to remark, that since that time Hebrew was no more spoken,
but Chaldean, amongst the Jews, so that the Hebrew Tongue could not be known,
but is Studying it. In those Ages they had not opportunity to Study a dead
Tongue, by those assistances which have been invented since, seeing there were
neither Dictionaries nor Grammars, and it was but by an Oral Tradition that the
Knowledge thereof was preserved, as the Jews have also done several Ages. It is
manifest that it was impossible to acquire by this means an exact Knowledge of
the Hebrew Tongue; for without a fixed Grammar, one is mistaken at every moment
in the Construction of words, and without a Dictionary one necessarily forgets
the signification of an infinity of terms, and chiefly of those which are but
once in Scripture, or whose sense is not clearly determined by the sequel.

Fourthly, It must be acknowledged, that the Hebrews had not at that time the
Use of Points, so that retaining the Pronunciation of the words of the old
Hebrew Tongue but by heart, it was impossible but a great deal of Changes
should happen therein. Lewis Cappel has clearly proved the one and the other,
in his Treatise of the Points of the Hebrews, and in his Sacred Critics.

Fifthly, If some Books of the Hebrew Text be compared with the Version of the
LXX, it will be found that these Interpreters have Translated an infinity of
places by guessing, without knowing well the meaning of the terms which they
Translated, that they went ill enough through the hard places, where they have
made in their Version nothing but pure gallima^fry, that they have not often
understood the Construction of the words; that finally either they had a Copy
written very neglectfully, or that they have unseasonably taken some words for
other some, in a very great Number of places. I know full well that Learned Men
have endeavored to excuse some of their Faults, and that they have even shown
that they were often censured unreasonably; but its certain there is an
infinity of unexcusable Faults, and its what may be clearly seen in the
Critical Notes of Lewis Cappel, which are now in the Press, where he has
compared the Version of the LXX. with the Hebrew. As he acknowledges justly
that much light may be drawn from this Version, that its manner of reading is
sometimes the best, and that the Copyers have done it much wrong, he remarks so
great a Number of absurdities in it, that it is impossible but to doubt that
the Copy whereof they made use was not of the best, nor they very skillful in
the Hebrew Tongue: Notwithstanding, the Jews used this Version before the
coming of Jesus Christ, and the respect they had for it, shows clearly that
they had extremely neglected the Study of the Holy Tongue.

Sixthly, The Study of the Jews of that time, and in the following Ages,
consisted only in the Ceremonial Law, Tradition and Allegories, nothing being
remarked in their Writings which may make one suspect that they were skillful
in Grammatical Knowledge and Critics, if it be lawful to speak thus of the
Hebrew Tongue. It is seen even in the time of St. Ierom, they had no exact
Grammar, because in his Version he often offends against the common and
undoubted Rules, and commits the same Faults which have been remarked in the
LXX, particularly in the difficult places, he has commonly no regard to any
Construction, and draws himself out of trouble by some obscure Phrase. The
Admirers of St. Ierom and the LXX. will find perhaps these Terms somewhat bold,
but in facts as clear as the day; why should not things be called by their
Names?

It Is needless to extend further upon this matter, because what we have said
suffices to make it understood why the secrecy of the Hebrew Poesy has been
so long hidden. If any one should draw any ill consequence from the Principles
we have set down, we declare we acknowledge none of these consequences; and
those who may believe these consequenc^s are well drawn, are desired to consult
the two Works of Cappel, who has been already cited several times, where he
has shown that Religion can only draw great advantages from the Disquisitions
of Critics, which some Persons either malicious or unskilful, have
unseasonably endeavored to decry: In matters of Fact, as those are, History
ought to be consulted, as also ancient Monuments, and we ought to build
thereupon, and not continually to reason, and then to contradict History,
because it is not conformable to these Arguments.

VII. That the Reader might see an Essay of the Poesy of the Hebrews, we have
chosen. Psalm. CL. which is short, and which is visibly in rhyme, and it has
been put into a Tune proper to the words, as we have already Noted. As to what
concerns the Version in French Verses, the Author was satisfied to keep the
sense in general, and the Number of Syllables, without sticking too much to the
words, because he would but give an example of a Poesy like to that of the
Hebrews. So the Names of the Instruments which are in the French Verses answer
not to those of the Hebrew Verses, but they agree better amongst themselves,
and are chosen according to the Rules of our Music.

It only remains to join some remarks here upon the Hebrew Verses of this
Psalm, and upon the French Version in Prose, we shall show thereby both the
Truth of what has been said of the Hebrew Poesy, and what could be done upon
the Psalms, if we undertook to make Notes upon this Book.

PSALM CL. Disposed according to the Rhimes.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
5.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
10.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
The Version of the CL. Psalm. HALLELOUJAH.
(1.) Praise the Holiness of God. (2.) Praise the extent of his Power. (3.)
Praise his Might. (4.) Praise his extreme greatness. (5.) Praise him in
sounding the Trumpet: (6.) Praise him upon the Lute and Violin: (7.) Praise him
(8.) Upon the Drum and Flute: Praise him (9.) Upon stringed Instruments and
upon the Organ: Praise him (10.) Upon sounding Cymbals: Praise him (11.) Upon
the unequal sounding Timbrel: (12.) Let every thing that breaths (13.) Praise
the Lord: (14.) Praise the Lord.

Remarks upon the CL. Psalm.
HALLELOVIAH. This word seems to be taken from this Psalm, as of some others,
which solely contain the Praises of God, see Psalm. 111.1. therefore the LXX.
have retained it in their Version (...), whence the Christian Church has taken
it. It cannot notwithstanding be concluded from thence that the true
Pronunciation of this word is JA, and not JO, or JAO, because the LXX. may have
read this word otherwise than they ought, out of design to conceal its
Pronunciation from the Pagans, as they did in regard to the whole word (...)
Iahvoh, whereof this is but an Abridgment. Its known, that instead of
Translating (...), they have put every where (...) Lord, by a Judaick
Superstition, which made them believe that this Name, which the Hebrews call
the proper Name of God, should be only pronounced by the High Priest; Drusius
and Amama may be seen thereupon. This word IOH has been printed, because it
was known by the Rhyme that it should be thus punctuated, and because we ought
to pronounce IAHVO. All the Schevas of this Psalm have been also looked upon as
quiescent, excepting those which are under the first Lamed of the Verb Halal,
and under the Thau of the word Thealtel, because of the following He.

1. Praise the Holiness of God. Here are seen six Verses which begin by
Halelouhou, and four which end by this same Word, which is extremely proper for
a Tune of Fanfare. The LXX. have Translated the word bkodscho (...), in his
most holy place, for (...) in the Holy of Holies, as as may be seen by chapter 9.
of Epistle to the Hebrews. True it is, that the Hebrew word signifies that
often, but as it signifies also Holiness, this sense has been preferred by
reason of the following Verses, the last words whereof mark not a place, but a
Propriety of God: But it has not been thought fit to take the turn of the
Hebrew, Praise God in his Holiness, because its visible that it signifies
nothing else but what has been said, and it may even be that the Author has
taken it but for the Rhyme. At least, the ordinary turn of the Hebrew Tongue
would have been (...) halelou eth kodesch jahvoh, Praise the Holiness of the
Lord.

2. Praise the extent of his Power. The LXX. have translated in the firmament
of his power, to wit, in Heaven, which his power has made; huzzo and kodscho
are but assonant Rhimes, to speak as the Spaniards, but they are joined in
other places of the Psalms, as Psalm. 105. 3, 4.

3. Praise his might. The Hebrew word is in the plural, his mights, because
this Number is more emphatick than the singular in this Tongue.

4. Praise his extreme greatness. Word for Word, in the multitude of his
greatness; for (...) gudlo, his greatness, is read here (...) gedoulothaw, his
greatnesses, because of the Rhyme. This word may be seen in the plural, joined
to that of (...) gebouroth, Psalm. 145.4, 5, 6.

5. Praise him in sounding the Trumpet. The Rabbis say, that when the Trumpet
was sounded on, at first it made a long and equal sound, which they call
thekouha (...), afterward a varied sound, which they call (...) therouha, and
finally an equal sound: Some such thing is remarked in the same sound of our
Trumpets, and we see there was a difference betwixt these two sounds by the 10
th. chap. of Numbers. Indeed the root (...) rouah, signifies sometimes to
break, and it may be they had in Hebrew a Phrase like that of the Latins, who
say frangere sonitum, speaking of the Trumpet as in this Verse of Virgil, --
Fractus sonitus imitata tubarum.


6. Praise him upon the Lute and Violin. They are such like Instruments. The
Nebel was, according to the Relation of Josephus, Ant. Iud. l. 7. c. 10. an
Instrument of ten touches, whereupon they played with their Fingers. There are
some properly of ten sounds (...), which seems to mark nothing else but
touches. If these Instruments of the Hebrews were made as the Lyre of the
Greeks, with ten Cords, there may be a Figure on it seen in the Book of M.
Vossius de Poematum Cantu, p. 97. The Chinnor was an Instrument with ten Cords,
and which was touched with an Archet, or a Bow. They make (...) and (...) to
rhyme, because we read Schophor: The same rhyme is found Psalm. 98.5, 6.

7, 8. Praise him upon the Drum and the Flute. (...) Toph seems to be a kind of
Drum, as that of the Basques is, which the very Women beat with their hand (
Exodus 15, 20. Ier. 31.3.) in singing and dancing: It Is what made the LXX.
translate the following word (...) machol, dance, which others translate Flute;
but this latter sense has seemed better, because we speak here of Instruments
of Music.

9. Upon stringed Instruments and upon the Organ. The LXX. have been followed,
who have translated (...), but it cannot be assured whether this Version is
just or not.

10. Upon sounding Cymbals. The Hebrews have two sorts of Tsiltsel, which were
both of Brass; the one was round, and seems to have had bottoms, as our
Kettle-Drums are, excepting that these bottoms were of Brass: The other was in
an Oval Form, after the shape of a Racket without a bottom, with holes on the
sides, whereinto Brass bars passed, longer than the Oval was broad, and which
freely moving in these holes, made a noise when they were moved: This latter
Instrument was called a Timbrel, and its Figure may be seen in diverse
Engravings and Reliefs of the ancient Egyptians, and in p. 214. of the first
part of the Gemme antiche of Leonard Agostino. It may be it is what ought to be
understood by Tsiltsele therouha, from the following Verse, to wit, of the
Timbrel whose sounds are unequal; see Bochart in his Phaleg. l. 4. chapter 2.

This is what we had to say upon the Poesy of the Hebrews, and upon Psalm. 150.
We shall still advertise the Reader of two important things: The first is, that
though we have cited but a few Examples to prove what we have advanced of the
Verses of the Hebrews; not but that we might draw a great Number of them, but
the brevity in which we were bounded to be included, has hindered us to bring
more. The Reader then ought to be assured, that if it was needful, we could
have produced a far greater Number. The second thing is, that we have not
chosen Psalm. 150. because we thought we have gone through it better than in
most of the others, but simply because it is short, and that one may in some
wise conjecture what Tune it might have had.

^ LOu -- ez le Dieu des Dieux, Que sa majes -- te soit be -- ni -- e; Sa pu --
^ ^ issance est in -- fi -- ni-e. Peuples, reve -- rez l'en tous lieux.
Chantres, entonnez des ^ ^ Airs: U -- nis -- sez, u -- nis -- sez pardesaints
concerts La Trompet -- ^ ^ -- te, le Haut -- bo -- is and la Muzet -- te, Le
Cornet, l'Orgue and le Bas -- ^ ^ -- son, Et que la Flute au doux son Leur
reponde. Qu'en ce beau *jour, ^ ^ Tout le monde, tout le monde, tout le monde,
chant a son tour. tour. ^ N. De Rosier.

We have given this CL th. Psalm in the French, Version as we found it, and
have added this English Version, which bearing the same quantity of Syllables,
is also applicable to the same Musical Composure: And as the French took a
little Liberty, as may be seen from the former Translation of this Psalm just
after the Hebrew, so have we; only instead of their repetition at the last, we
have made one Verse in a proportionable length.

That Holy God, whose might is hurld
Throughout this vast material World!
Praise him! Oh, Praise ye him each hour!
Extol his great, his mighty Power:
Awake ye Harps, ye Timbrels sing
Eternal Praises to this King.
Let Trumpets raise
Their Noblest Accents to his Praise:
Drums, Organs, Violins and Lutes,
Cymbals, String'd Instruments and Flutes,
Shall all combine
To Praise the Lord.
Let all the Universe in this great Chorus join,
PRAISE YE THE LORD.
Seldeni Otia Theologica, etc. at Amsterdam: in quatuor Libris.
THis Work is very Curious, and very agreeable to those that don't care for the
trouble of gathering dispersed Materials together: The Author, who is very
Learned, and has read much, spares them the trouble, and gives them his
Opinion, as well as that of many others upon a great Number of Critical
Questions in Divinity. Thus I ought to call the Subject of this great Treatise:
For although he there explains some places of Divinity generally received, he
does it not after the way of the Schools; he very ingeniously discourses upon
sacred and profane Antiquity: Besides that, the generality of the Examinations
entirely respect certain Persons, or matters of Fact, which the Scripture
speaks of, or of certain things which are different from common received
Notions in Divinity.

As to what regards the Sentiments of the Author, we ought to acknowledge this
on his behalf, that he proposes them with much modesty, and makes use of that
honest liberty which Men of Learning may safely do.

He is very exact in citing those that he borrows any thing from, and desires
the Reader not to take this exactness as an Ostentation of his Learning, which
certainly is a better way than barely to cite such Authors as are serviceable
to him.

He divides his Work into four Parts, which in all contain forty one
Dissertations, in each of which many different Subjects are Treated on, as
happens in Persons who know much, or who would divert the Reader with variety
of Objects. We should almost make a Book it self, if we should speak to every
one of the Dissertations: It shall suffice to give the Analysis of the first;
where it is examined who was the first Writer, and a Judgment may be made of
the rest by this Piece.

The first thing this Author does, is to relate the Dispute formerly raised
amongst the Doctors, concerning the Prophecy of Enoch, which the Apostle St.
Jude makes mention of: Some said this Patriarch's Prophecy was committed to
Writing, others maintain the contrary; many Fathers, and especially St.
Augustine, was of the first Opinion, they often spoke of the Book of Enoch: Some
have made no difficulty to hold it as Canonical, and would prove by it that the
Angels begat the Giants, by the Commerce they had with Women. There are some
which say the Prophecy of Enoch contained four thousand and eighty two Lines,
and that it spoke of all that should happen to the Posterity of the Patriarchs,
of the Crimes and Chastisements of the Jews, of the Death that they should make
the Messiah suffer, of their being dispersed through all the World, and of the
second Coming of Jesus Christ to judge Mankind. They also pretended they found
many Mathematical Opinions, and that Noah had taken a great deal of Care to
secure this Work in the Ark.

After that the Author relates also many more ridiculous Fancies; some have
said that the Angel Raziel, Tutor to Adam, gave him a Book containing all
Sciences, and that after he was put out of the Garden of Eden he had it again,
suffering him to touch it at his humble Entreaties. Others say that Adam did
not receive this Book 'till after he had sinned, then having besought God
Almighty to grant him some small Consolation in the unhappy State he had
reduced himself to; they say, that three days after he had thus begged of God,
the Angel Raziel brought him a Book, which discovered to him all the Secrets of
Nature, the Power how to Command both good and bad Angels, and the four parts
of the Earth, of Interpreting Dreams and Prodigies, and foretelling whatsoever
was to happen in the time to come: They say also that this Book passed from
Father to Son, 'till it fell into the Hands of Solomon, and that it gave to
this learned Prince the Virtue of Building the Temple, by means of the Worm
Zamir, without making use of any Instrument of Iron.

Mr. Seldom afterward speaks of those two Celebrated Pillars that some say the
Successors of Seth built, to engrave upon them the Discoveries that they made
in the Sciences. He also speaks of the suppositious Books of Enoch and Noah,
that Postulus forged in the last Age; of the Book that Philo makes mention of
as Abraham's, which was Translated from Hebrew into Latin by Ritangelius; of
the Book that is entitled The Testament of the Twelve Patriarchs, and the
Fable of the Rabbini, who said God writ his Law two thousand Years before the
Creation of the World: He might have added to all these Fabulous Works, the
Testament of Jacob, the Ladder of Jacob, (which was a Book very much esteemed
amongst certain Heretics called Ebionites) the Books of Enoch upon the
Elements, and some other Philosophical Subjects; those of Noah upon the
Mathematics, and Sacred Ceremonies; those that they attributed to Abraham
teaching Philosophy in the Valley of Mamre to those he lead against the five
Kings that had taken Lot his Nephew Prisoner. Father Kircher says, that the
Abyssins pretended to have all these Books, and a great Number of others, in
the Library of the Monastery of the Holy Cross upon Mount Amara, and that the
Queen of Sheba received them as a Present from Solomon. They pretend moreover,
that she Composed many Books that they have in the same Library, and that she
had a Son born by Solomon, who was Prince Melilech, that had also Composed many
Books they had in the same place. Those who cannot get the Works of Father
Kircher, may find what I have said, in a Treatise of Bibliotheques published
1680. If the Abyssines had only said that Solomon gave many Books to the Queen
of Sheba, and that he lay with her, they would have said nothing so very
improbable; for a Prince so Learned as he was, and which is more, an Author of
such a multitude of Books, would not without doubt, send away a Princess so
Curious as the Queen, without giving her a Copy of his Works, and some other
rare Treatises: Besides, he hated not the Sex, and perhaps she was touched with
the same desire, and a long time after that obliged the Queen of the Amazon^ to
make a Visit to Alexander. And it is apparent enough that Solomon had as much
Complaisance as the King of Macedon: But these are things which are so
insignificant, that all the World may be permitted to believe what they please
of it.

The Author then considers the Vanity of the Egyptians, who gave 100000 Years
Antiquity to their Writings, and sends us to St. Augustine, who refutes them in
his eighteenth Book of the City of God, the 29 th. Chapter. He relates what was
said of Zoroaster, concerning the making of a Book entitled The Similitude,
which was edged with Gold, and required for a Covering twelve hundred and sixty
Oxes Hides; some think this Zoroaster was Cham the Son of Noah. He omits not
that it was said of Trismegistus, that he had Composed twenty five thousand
Volumes, or else thirty six thousand five hundred and twenty five; and that the
Science of the Egyptians, in which Moses was so well Versed, was contained in
this great Number of Books, and that Moses himself took some thoughts from 'em
to insert in the Pentateuch. He forgets not likewise to speak of the Sybil,
Daughter (or rather Daughter-in-Law) to Noah, nor the Book of Job, according to
some writ before Moses; for there are some which pretend that Moses found it
perfect at Iethro's his Father-in-Law, in the Land of Midian, and thinking it
proper to Comfort the Israelites in their Misery, he took it with him into
Egypt to show it them. Mr. Huet dissents from this Opinion, and believes only
that Moses Composed the History of Job during the Servitude of his Brethren, to
the end to propose to them a great Example of Patience and Hope.

After all these ridiculous and fabulous Traditions, the Author concludes that
there is great probability that the Custom of writing Books was in use before
Moses's time, but nevertheless that the Pentateuch is the most Ancient of all
Canonical Books, and even of all Books whatsoever that are now extant. He
maintains that the Prophecy of Enoch was not written, and that St. Jude had no
knowledge of it, only by inspiration; that the Book that formerly bore the Name
of this Patriarch, was made by some Cheat, and that St. Augustine did not well
consider the Text of the Apostle, since he makes him say that Enoch writ
Prophecies. He makes the same Judgment of the other Works that go under the
Name of the Patriarchs: As to the two Pillars of the Descendants from Seth, he
is of their Opinion who conclude it to be one of the oversights of Josephus; he
also takes occasion by this to reproach him with having corrupted the sense of
a Passage of Moses to flatter the Idolaters; it is where he Autiquit. Iud. l. 4.
cap. ult.
says that Moses forbid the speaking ill of the Gods of other Nations, and the
destroying their Temples. As to what concerns Zoroaster, the Author says that
we have no certainty, and after having related a long passage of Mr. Huet's,
who believed he should find Moses not only in Zoroaster, but also in all the
false Gods, and in all the first Heathen Poets, he gives his own Judgment upon
this Opinion with much equity. He shows after that by a Passage of Eusebius's,
that Moses having lived in the time of Cecrops, the first King of the
Athenians, he was before the most ancient Greek Poets, Orpheus, Linus and
Museus, and gives the Reason why some maintained that Cecrops and Moses was the
same Person. He says also, that nothing certain can be established concerning
the History of Mercurius Trismegis^us^. He gives the Title of some of his Works
which Clement of Alexandria has spoken on, and sends us to Causabon, where we
may see that instead of Moses's Copying any thing from the Egyptians, it must
be confessed that all the wise Heathens have borrowed something from him: The
Work that he cites of Causabon's is the 10 th. Article of the Exercitations
against the Annals of Baronius; Causabon justifies that the Pimander of
Trismegistus was writ since the Apostles time, by one that was half Christian
and half Platonic. In ^^ne, Mr. Seldom observes, that that Treatise of
Origen's is a suppositious Work, which says the Book of Job was found in the
House of Moses's Father-in-law. Our Author refutes those that believed Job was
the same with Iobab, in the 36 th. Chapter of Genesis, who was the great
Grandson of Esau: He does not believe Job Composed his History himself,
because it is writ in Verse, and he does not disapprove the Opinion of Mr. Huet
upon it, who says that Moses having Collected diverse Memoirs which were in
Manuscript, concerning the Life of Job, and heard upon that the Relation of
many Persons, composed a Work with all these Materials. We shall hardly give
Credit to this Proof that the Author makes use of; for although he had a very
great reason to say, that a Man in such Afflictions as Job was, could not
entertain his Friends in Verse, yet a Poetical Discourse is as likely on this
occasion as in those that are recited in Tragedies, or sung in Opera's; yet it
is not improbable that Job himself, after his Affairs were re-established,
might give the History of his Misfortunes in Verse. This is an Abridgment of
Mr. Selden's first Dissertation, which is about eighteen Pages.

In the second he examines whether Moses was the Author of the Pentateuch, and
answers in the affirmative, and refutes the Objections of Spinoza. He thinks it
very unadvised that some writ in Dutch against this impious Author; because,
says he, this would make us fear, that the Curiosity of the People would be
stirred up, if these Disputes were managed in a Language that they understood
not.

I believe that our Author speaks principally in respect to the Philosophical
Works of Spinoza; many think it strange that some Learned Men have not solidly
refuted them; but others on the contrary say, that it is better to make no
Answer to 'em at all in any Tongue, least a Man indifferently Versed in the
Sciences should oppose him, and not know how to refute what he undertakes; or
if it be an ingenious Man, by discovering this Doctrine he would render it more
dangerous; because all those that have the impertinent Vanity to desire to pass
for followers of Spinoza, although they understand him as little as they do
Arabic, will become in effect what they have yet only the Name of, if these
impieties are made more easy to be apprehended. It is better therefore to
suffer them to continue in that impenetrable darkness which the Author has left
them in, and not to seek any other Antidote than their own Obscurity. Mr.
Seldom also makes many remarks upon the Critical History of the Old Testament:
Least the Extract should be too long, I shall content my self with speaking of
these things, and make an end after having observed the chief Subjects of the
other Dissertations. There is one touching Pre-Adamites, another of Self-Love;
ore upon the Waters of Jealousy, which gives him occasion to speak of many
Proofs of Chastity used in diverse places: One upon the 18 th. Verse of the 23
d. Chapter of Deuteronomy, where God forbids the offering the Hire of an Harlot
or Price of a Dog: One upon the White Stone that Jesus Christ promises in the
Apocalypse to those that shall overcome: One upon the Thorn that St. Paul felt
in the Flesh; another upon the Terrestrial Paradise: One upon the Fratricide of
Cain: One upon Polygamy: One upon Judas Iscariot, in which the Author declaring
for the Opinion of Priceus, incurrs the Censure of Mr. Gronovius: One upon
Excommunication; another upon the Privileges of those that the Jews called
Zelota's, who in certain Cases might unrevenged kill in cool Blood, upon which
the Author speaks very finely according to Seldom: One upon the Divinity of the
Book of Esther: One upon Eunuchs: One upon Godfathers; another upon the
Obligation of an Oath, etc. As Mr. Seldom adds to each of his Questions
whatsoever he has met with that is Curious, we may very well believe that there
is a very fine Mixture. The Dissertation about the White Stone ends with
reflections upon the Philosophers Stone, because some Philosophers have said
that this White Stone was nothing else but that great Work. He relates a
pleasant Story upon Pope Leo X. A certain Chemist presented him with a Stone,
whereby he pretended he had ^ound out the manner of making Gold, in expectation
of receiving a magnificent Reward from him: the Pope sent him a great empty
Purse, with this Message, That since he knew how to make Gold, he had no need
of any thing else but a place to put it in. The Dissertation upon Self-Love
speaks of a Book of the famous Madam Schurman, entitled (...), where she gives
the reason of her retreat, and of her joining her self to the Schism of
Labbidia.

All those who have heard of the extraordinary Qualities of this Gentlewoman,
know not that she died a Schismatic; the World takes occasion from thence, and
some other examples, to insult over all Learned Women; the least thing that
they can say of them is, that they have lost their Wits: The truth is, this can
only be said of 'em, because People generally love 'em better when they have
had a trifling Education, since such Women are more easily mortified than
others.

Iacobi I. F. F. Gronovii Exercitationes Academica, de pernicie and casu Iudae
(...), in Quarto, Lugd. Batav. apud Danielem Gaesbeck. 1683.
THere are but few apparent Contradictions in Scripture, which puzzled
Interpreters more than this of the Death of Judas. St. Matthew tells us that
this Traitor brought into the Temple that Money that he had received to betray
his Master, and then went and strangled himself; but St. Peter tells us, that
he Hanged himself and burst asunder in the middle, and all his Bowels gushed
out; one cannot well see how a strangled Person can have this Accident St. Peter
here mentions. The Critics have endeavored to remove this difficulty, but
says our Author, they have not yet done it. He is a good Judge in these kind of
Matters, his Learning is very profound, and he worthily keeps up the Reputation
which his Father has acquired throughout all Europe, as may be seen in the
Letters of Mounsieur de Balzac: He is a great Honor to the University of
Leyden, where he is the Professor of History and the Greek Tongue.

He first refutes the Sentiments of Theophilact, that Judas did not think to
push on the matter so far against Jesus Christ; and having found, contrary to
his expectation, that he was Condemned to Death, Despair put him upon fastening
an Halter about his Neck, but the Tree which he tied himself to, bended down
with his weight, so that he dyed not; afterward he got so strange a Dropsy
that he took up more room than the breadth of a Chariot, whence it happened
that falling down once he burst insunder: Others say he was run over with a
Chariot. He refutes these and other like things, and maintains that Judas dyed
before Jesus Christ.

Afterward he refutes many Learned Interpreters, who by the Words of St. Luke,
compared with those in the Acts, (...), understand the Posture of an Hanging
Man, he remarks after Mounsieur de Saumasius, that the Custom of Hanging
Criminals was not known in the Empire of Rome before the times of Constantine;
that all the Passages of the most ancient Authors who mention this kind of
Death, ought to be understood of some particular Persons who Hanged themselves.
In mentioning the Posture of Hanging, attributed by some to Judas, he Corrects
a pretty Passage of Petronius, cap. 54. where it is ordinarily read, Et jam
semicinctior stanti ad perietem spondam junxeram; instead of which we must read
according to our Author, Semicinctio insitam ac parieti spondam junxeram, to
signify that he that would Hang himself, tied his Girdle with the Cord which
held up the Bed, and pusht the Bed a little nearer the Wall. He concludes that
St. Peter did not mean by these words, that Judas was Hanged; and he confirms
it, because the sequel of his Discourse touching the broken Entrails of Judas
has so little relation with the Action of Strangling, that we must make a
thousand suppositions to join these two things together.

Next after, the Author examines the Opinion of Causabon, that St. Matthew only
related the beginning of Iudas's Punishment, and that St. Luke mentioned the
rest. Causabon pretends that this Wretch was Hanged, but that the Cord being
broken, he fell ((...)) downwards, upon a sharp Stone, which broke his Belly,
by the immediate hand of the Justice of God. This Opinion was followed by
Conradus Detericus, John Gerrard, Calixtus, and many Authors, but Mr. Gronovius
does not at all approve of it; and shows first, that the term which St. Matthew
makes use of, viz. (...), signifies rather to be Hanged, than to Hang himself;
he proves it after such a manner, as denotes his great Knowledge in the Greek
Tongue; and he inferrs from this proof that it is false, that St. Matthew did
not express the kind of Death which made a full end of destroying Judas at
once. He refutes (in the second place) the Observation that Causabon made upon
the word (...), and says in general, that all the suppositions of this great
Critic upon the breaking of the Cord, the falling with his Belly upon a Stone,
from the Posture of a Hanged Person, don't at all agree.

He refutes, after this, the Opinion of Daniel Heinsius, who says, that St.
Matthew did not say that Judas put a Rope about his Neck, and Hanged himself;
but that the mere Power of his Despair took away his respiration, and Choked
him to Death. Now if the Rage that posess'd him was capable of Suffocating or
Choking him, we may also suppose that it was able to burst his Belly, as
enclosed Vapors in a Vessel being rarified make it burst asunder: He pretends
to Authorities, to prove that the Term which St. Matthew makes use of,
signifies in general that he was Strangled; whether by a Cord or by something
that he had swallowed, or by an Effort of sadness; a Passage in Tobit, cap.
3.10. seems to make for this sense, since it is read (...), She conceived such a
displeasure, that a Suffocation strangled her. He forgets not to cite the Words
of Virgil, -- rumpantur ut ilia Codro;
and many other Passages of ancient Authors; but Mr. Gronovius is not of his
Opinion, but shows clearly that the Book of Tobit does not at all favor the
Opinion of Heinsius, seeing that immediately before the Words alleged, it is
plain that Sarah spoke and prayed fervently to God, (which shows that 'twas not
Grief that strangled her) that because she made a reflection which visibly
denotes that her sadness had inspired the thought of Hanging her self; I am the
only Daughter, says she, and if I do this, it will reproach my Father, and I
shall dye in grief; These Words would be Nonsense if the word (...) signified
that a Suffocation strangled her, for this would not dishonor her Family. As
for the Quotation out of Virgil, it is plain they don't signify a true rupture,
or at least that they signified not an external rending, no more than when we
say, Let him burst himself if he will, he can bear it: We don't precisely mean
a true Laceration of the Skin and Flesh, which cover the Intestines, but it is a
vehement manner of speaking. If we exclude this kind of Death, which is
properly called Bursting asunder, then we have no longer an express Idea of any
thing else. This Author makes many Learned Remarks upon the word (...), and by
the by Censures Pool's Synopsis Criticorum, because in relating the Opinion of
Heinsius, he has so mangled it, that having omitted a Passage of Aristophanes,
which Heinsius made use of, he left out the true Application; the Passage of
Synopsis Critica is this, Quod desperatus pastor apud Theocritum d^scit, mori
me denique cogis (...), Virgilius reddidit mori me denique togis, ex cursu enim
nimio summa Spiritus angustia: He apprehends nothing in these last words,
because he knew not how to apply them to the Passage of Theocritus, or that of
Virgil, which Heinsius also did not apply them; but to another Passage of
Aristophanes, which the Compilers have retrenched, viz. (...), the sense
whereof is, that he ran away to Hang himself, and not that he was Choked for
want of Breath, through the vehemence of his running, as Heinsius understands it.

The Opinion of Grotius comes next under his Examination, but he stays not long
upon it, there being scarce any difference betwixt it and that of Heinsius,
which he refuted before. Next he attacks Saumasius, but with a great deal more
mildness, giving him a very Honorable Encomium, he does not reprehend him for
having said that the Text of St. Luke signifies that Judas fell down headlong,
and that the two Evangelists have given different Relations of this matter,
because they are accommodated to two manners of speaking. He abuses Priceus,
who believed that Judas fell down headlong, and that the Text of St. Matthew
only signifies a Resolution of dying. He flatters not Lightfoot, whose Opinion
was that the Devil lifted up Judas into the Air, strangled him there, and then
cast him down with such a force, that his Entrails burst out; he is certain the
Narration of St. Matthew cannot suffer that sense, since it marks very clearly
that Judas strangled himself, though he forgets what he said before, viz. that
the Original rather signified to be strangled than to strangle.

After having examined the Thoughts of all these great Men, he built upon their
ruins his own Opinion, and having carefully considered the Words of St.
Matthew, he says; 1. That Judas made haste to his Death, after he had given the
Price of his Crime to the High Priests. 2. That the word (...) (according to
the Observation of Saumasius) was never used, but to express that a Man was
strangled with a Halter, the Greeks having other terms, as (...) and (...), to
signify all other manner of stranglings, whether by Hand, a Handkerchief, or
something swallowed. He proves this very learnedly, by many Passages, and
concludes that Judas strangled himself with a Cord. 3. That the Vulgate has
very well translated the Words of St. Luke (...) by suspensus, hanging. 4. That
St. Luke had no design to show the Death of Judas, but only what happened to his
Carcass after his Death, which was thrown upon a Dunghill, where he supposes
there might be sharp Stones, which tore the Body that was cast upon them: He
confirms this Conjecture by many Learned Observations.

Besides he declares upon the Subject of the word (...), that those who are
well acquainted with this Language, may not only say that such a Word signifies
this or that, but also that it was never taken otherwise; and he believed, that
if he was always obliged to speak with this moderation, it seems that this word
has a like signification, this would ill recompense the Labor that is given
to the Studyer of Languages: Absit enim, says he, ut tot laborum qui ad
illustrandas linguas impensi sunt, non alius sit fructus nisi ut tantum dici
possit, hujus and illius vocis hanc videri significationem esse, non vero certo
possumus affirmare, hanc and non illam esse. This is much more commodious for
those who love to decide, than to follow the manners of ancient Rome, where
Judges only pronounced their Sentence in a Videtur, It seems good to us, and
the Witnesses who swore to relate what they had seen with their Eyes, speak not
but an Arbitror, I believe:

Dr. Sprat's History of the Royal Society. Printed at London 1667. in 4o.
THe Author Dedicates it to King Charles the second, who indeed was the fittest
Patron, for he encouraged the Noble Design of this Society by his own Personal
Example.

The Treatise it self, which is writ in an admirable Style, and* very agreeable
to the Modesty of the Author, is composed in three Parts. The first gives a
brief Account of the Ancient and Modern Philosophy, and shows that we owe the
Original of all Science to the Eastern Parts of the World; bringing for Example
the Noble Endeavors after it by the Chaldeans, Egyptians, Arabians and Romans;
the Revivers of the Ancient Sects, and an Account of the Moderns in particular,
with the Authors of each Subject; so that by this method he has observed the
Excellencies and Defects of all our Predecessors, and given us hopes of what
may be expected from this New experimental Method.

The second contains the Narration it self; in which the Dr. (having seen their
Journals) gives an Account of their first Meetings, their Encouragements, with
the particulars of their Society as to their Aim, Ability and Number, the way
of proceeding by Weekly Assemblies; the Method of their Enquiries, their
Registring every Subject under its proper Head; the Progress they have made
from their first beginning. Thus being well established, and having passed all
difficulties, the Author does not doubt but all ingenious Persons will be
pleased with their Performance, since they have already given such good Proofs
of it in their Method, of which by this short Specimen, the rest may be judged
of.

Queries and Directions sent abroad.
Proposals and Recommendations made.
Relations received.
Experiments tried.
Observations taken.
Instruments advanced or effected.
Theories proposed.
Discourses of theirs in Manuscript or Print.
And Histories of Nature or Art.
Each of which Subjects have been very Curiously managed, with all possible
Care to discover and advance the Truth, and perhaps with much better success
than their envious Detractors could imagine. They are This was in An. 1667.
already above 700 in Number; Experiments and Observations together, more than
350; Relations 150; Queries, Directions, Recommendations and Proposals, above
80; Instruments 60; Relations both Artificial and Natural more than 50;
Theories and Discourses as many: And our Author gave us this Account, when the
Society was but little more than just begun; therefore what happy Discoveries
may the World expect from such a Body of Ingenious and Noble Undertakers.

After which he describes the Library and Repository, that the Liberality of
two of their Members bestowed upon them; and adds some Examples of their
Experiments, and whatsoever they have engaged in. The Dr. concludes, that if
this shall not satisfy any Cavillers, they are not worth the refuting, since
nothing would please them (if the search after Nature is not sufficient) but
Proposing to solve such Chimera's as the Philosophers Stone, Squaring the
Circle, etc. which is only an Argument of the Vanity of such Persons
Expectations.

The Third Part declares both the Innocence and Benefit of this Design, on the
Account of all Professions, and especially of Religion it self. The Promoting
of Experiments according to their Method, will be so far from injuring
Education, or the least disadvantage to the Universities, that it will
introduce many profitable things in the stead of such as are no way
advantageous to Youth, and may be laid aside without prejudicing any one
whatsoever; it being evidently the most profitable to secure Truth by
Experiment, and the least danger of ever being deceived; whereas other Methods
make us more fit for Wrangling and Disputation, than the finding out things as
they are in their own Nature, the Theory being always too much, except the
Practick were more observed; the speculative Man always pursuing Airy Notions,
whilst he that Experiments is certain of finding the Truth.

(...) Apostolici, or the History of the Lives, Acts, and Martyrdoms of those
who were Contemporary with, De situ Orbis, l. 2. c. 7. Strab. l. 9.
or immediately succeeded the Apostles, and of the Chief Fathers of the Church
of the three first Ages; to which is added, a Chronology from the Birth of
Jesus Christ unto the end of the Third Century; by William Cave Doctor of
Divinity, and Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty. The Third Edition Corrected.
At London in 1687. Fol. Page 335.

Dr. Cave's History contains an Account of the Chief Fathers of the three first
Ages, with Remarks on their Writings, distinguishing with Care those that have
been Supposititious from the true. These are their Names.

1. St. Stephen, the first Martyr. 2. St. Philip, Deacon and Evangelist. 3. St.
Barnabas, an Apostle. 4. St. Timothy, Apostle and Evangelist. 5. St. Titus,
Bishop of Candia. 6. St. Denis, the Areopagite. 7. St. Clement, Bishop of Rome.
8. St. Simeon, Bishop of Jerusalem. 9. St. Ignatius, Bishop of Antioch. 10. St.
Polycarp, Bishop of Smyrna. 11. St. Quadratus, Bishop of Athens. 12. St.
Justin, Martyr. 13. St. Irenaeus, Bishop of Lions. 14. St. Theophilus, Bishop
of Antioch. 15. St. Melito, Bishop of Sardis. 16. St. Panten, Catechist of
Alexandria. 17. St. Clement, of Alexandria. 18. Tertullian, Presbyter of
Carthage. 19. Origin, Presbyter and Catechist of Alexandria. 20. St. Babylas,
Bishop of Antioch. 21. St. Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage. 22. St. Gregory, Bishop
of Neocesaria. 23. St. Denis, Bishop of Alexandria.
I shall not undertake to give an Abridgment of each of these Lives; yet that
the Reader may in some manner judge of the Usefulness of this Work, I have made
choice of Three, to give an exact Extract thereof, viz. St. Stephen, St. Justin
Martyr, and that of Origin: Wherein may be seen a perfect Sample of the History
of the three first Ages, the Author having added to that of these Fathers, an
Account of the Events, Opinions and Customs of those Times.

Before I enter upon the Work, I must advertise the Reader of a long
Introduction at the beginning of it, where from the Birth of Jesus Christ is an
Abridgment of the History of the Ages wherein these Fathers lived. This Book is
divided into Three Parts, The first containing the Life of our Savior, while
on the Earth; the second that of the Apostles, and the third the Preservation
and Growth of the Christian Religion from their Deaths, until the time of
Constantine.

In the Life of Jesus Christ, a Letter is made mention of from Archar King of
Edessa to our Lord, and the Answer that this Prince received from him, (as
Eusebius relates.) is not contradictory to those pieces which have had the
Reputation of Authentic. There can nothing very solid be opposed to this,
except the Silence of the Evangelists, who have not spoke of it in the short
Account they have given us of the Life of Christ; though perhaps the Reason
that Eusebius was the Person that first takes notice of it, might be this, that
these Letters lying in the hands of the Archbishop of Edessa, were not come to
the knowledge of the Greeks, because they were written in Syriac, and that
Eusebius first Published them in the Greek. He cites also other Pieces that
many Learned Men have censured as Counterfeit, among which are the Acts of
Pilate, from whence Tertullian has taken what he says in his Apologetic,
touching I know not what Design of Tiberius to put Jesus Christ into the Number
of the Roman Deities. See what Mr. Le Feverre says of this History in his
Epistles.

Dr. Cave makes no long stay on the Preaching of the Apostles; but passing to
the Third Part, he there considers first, the Progress that the Christian
Religion has made in the World, after the Apostles time; secondly, What
contributed to so great and swift a Growth as that of Christianity, in spite
of all the Persecutions that it suffered; and then gives a brief History of
them. Of which, according to the common Opinion, he reckons up Ten, and he
advances many other things that the Learned have contested about, as the
silence of the Oracles, etc. It is not long since the Ingenious Dodwell made it
appear, that the number of these Persecutions was very dubious, and that an
Author of the United Provinces shows there was no certainty in the Reason that
was generally given for the pretended silence of the Heathen Oracles.

1. Without rehearsing what all the World knows of Saint Stephen by reading the
Acts of the Apostles, he tells us ancient History teaches nothing certain of
the Extraction, Place, Birth nor Life of this first Martyr. Ad. an. 74. n. 275.
Baronius maintains, as he says, upon the Authority of Lucian Presbyter of
Jerusalem, who lived about the beginning of the Fifth Age, that Saint Stephen
was a Disciple of Gamaliel as well as Saint Paul, who became his Enemy after he
was Converted to Christianity. But Dr. Cave says he found nothing like it in
this Letter. Epiph. Hort. 20.
Others say he was one of the Seventy Disciples. Be it as it will, he was
certainly one of the Seven first Deacons, that the Apostles Established in the
Christian Church, and who were supposed to have been all Greeks by Nation, but
of the Jewish Religion. As Nicholas, one of them, being a Proselyte of Antioch,
'twas thought all the rest might be Proselytes of Jerusalem.

The Apostles being employed about things of greater Importance, were obliged
to remit to other Persons the Care of Serving the Tables, which was to make it
their business to relieve the Poor, and buy sufficient Provisions to refresh
them; this they called Agapes; to manage the Treasure of the Church, and to
distribute to each according to his Necessity. The Office of Deacon answers
very well to the Signification this word has in the Heathen Authors, where
(...) signifies a Servant, whose place it was to wait on Guests at the Table,
or a kind of Carver.

Dr. Cave believes that the Charge of Deacon extended much farther, and that
when the Eucharist was celebrated in these Agapes, the Deacons were employed to
distribute it. As was practiced in the Christian Church in Justin Martyr's
time, which his second Apology sufficiently testifies, where he says, the
Deacons distributed the Bread and Wine to the Assembly, after it had been
consecrated by the President. Besides which, they Preached, Baptized and
Absolved Penitents, especially when they were empowered by the Bishop.

The Apostles established but seven Deacons; the reason is apparent, without
seeking for Mysteries, 'twas because that number was sufficient. Nevertheless
the Fathers of the Council of Can. 15.
Neocesaria ordained there should never be more than seven Deacons in one City,
founding their Canon on this Practice of the Apostles. Lib. c. 13.
Sozomen tells us also, That in his time there was no more at Rome, although in
other Churches they observed not this Rule.

These Deacons made by the Apostles met with violent Opposition, in performing
their Office, from one or other of the Synagogues, whereof, if the Rabbis are
to be credited, there was at Jerusalem to the number of 480, besides Colleges,
in which, Dr. Cave believes, young Persons were instructed in the Law. St.
Stephen was first set upon by those of the Synagogue of the Libertins,
Alexandrians, the Cyrenians of Cilicia and of Asia, on whom the Author makes
some Remarks, and particularly upon the first. To understand who these
Libertins were, it is necessary to know, that Pompey having subdued Judea,
brought from thence a great number of Slaves to Rome; and the Governors of
Syria and Judea, who succeeded Pompey, did the like; there was so many of them,
when the Jews sent Ambassadors to Augustus, that Josephus says there was near
eight thousand of their own Nation that joined themselves to them: They
continued in that Slavish Condition, till by degrees they were all made Free;
which happened in the time of Tiberius, who permitted them to live a little
beyond the Tyber, as Philo informs us. Among these Jews were without doubt no
small number of Libertins, or Freemen, who had their Proseuques, or Chapels,
where they assembled together to pay their Devotions. Every Year they sent a
Sum of Money to Jerusalem, instead of first Fruits, and deputed some among them
to offer Sacrifices in the name of the rest. Ann. lib. 11. c. 85.
Tacitus and Suetonius report, That afterward the Senate sent to Sardina four
thousand young Men of the Jewish Nation, that were Free, to clear that Isle of
the Thieves that were very Incommodious to it. Tacitus likewise says, That all
the other Jews and Proselites were banished from Rome, and even Italy it self.
Dr. Cave supposes, many of these Enfranchised Jews took occasion from thence to
return to Jerusalem, and established a Synagogue there, which was called, The
Synagogue of the Libertins. Of the Members of this Society it is, that St. Luke
speaks, when amongst those that were at Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost, he
says, There were Strangers from Rome, Jews and Proselites.

The Violence of these Men was so great, that they run upon St. Stephen to
Stone him, without observing the accustomed Formalities in the like cases,
Thalm. in Sancheor.
if what the Rabbis report thereof is true. As thus, when they brought the
Delinquent to the place of Punishment, a Man stood at the Door of the Sanhedrin
with a Handkerchief in his Hand, which he waved to an fro, that some one might
undertake to speak in Favor of the Criminal, and by this sign to advertise a
Man on Horseback, which was at some distance, to ride full speed to bring back
the accused Person, and defer his Punishment, till they had heard all that
could be said in his Favor. Sometimes he was brought back four or five times,
if he said he had any thing to represent to his Judges in defense of himself.
But as the Laws of the Thalmud often much resemble those of Plato, it is no
small Difficulty to found any thing thereon. It seems the People sometimes
stoned those that were accused, without staying for any Sentence or Order of
the Judges, Ovid. in Nuce.
according to the Custom of the Romans.

Obruere ista solet manifestos poena nocentes,
Publica cum long as non habe^ ira moras.
Whether it was so or no, they observed no Formalities toward St. Stephen,
except the Witnesses, according to the Law, Deuteronomy. 17.7. The hands of the
Witnesses shall be first upon him, to put him to death, and afterward the
hands of all the People. The Law most wisely established this, That provided he
that was put to Death was Innocent, the Witnesses who were the cause of his
Condemnation, were only guilty of his Death, since he was killed by them before
the rest of the People cast any Stones against him.

Some say the Martyrdom of St. Stephen was three Years after the Death of Jesus
Christ: Eusebius supposed it to be a little afer his Ordination; and the
Excerpta Chronologica published by Scaliger, places his Death at the end of the
eighth Month, after the Ascension of our Lord. Lucian the Presbyter says, St.
Stephen was Stoned in the North of Jerusalem, at the side of the Brook Cedron,
a little without the Gate that has since been called the Gate of St. Stephen,
and formerly according to some, the Gate of Ephraim, after others the Gate of
the Valley, or the Gate of the Fish: Some Travelers to the Holy Land tell us,
that they have seen the place where St. Paul kept the Garments of those that
Stoned this Martyr. The Empress Eudocia had formerly caused to be built near
this place a Temple, which bore the name of St. Stephen. And as those who are
curious after the Search of Relics, never fail to find what they please, so
they have discovered not only the place where St. Stephen was stoned, but also
the very Stone that he kneeled upon, which was afterward carried to Mount
Sion, and placed in the Church that was built in Honor of the Apostles.
Baronius also relates, That some devout Persons kept one of the Stones with
which St. Stephen had been stoned, and that it is still to be seen in the
Treasury of Ancona.

I shall rehearse these things as Dr. Cave has done, without refuting of them,
though he says enough to testify he does not give Credit thereto. He yet reports
other Circumstanc^s drawn from Lucian's Epistle, and from the Menology of the
Greeks, which I shall not repeat, lest it should savor too much of the Legend;
and only relate what Lucian Presbyter of Caphargamala in the Diocese of
Jerusalem, says, that in the 415 th Year of our Savior, that Gamaliel,
formerly Lord of that City, after being converted from the Jewish to the
Christian Religion, had revealed to him in a Vision, that St. Stephen was
buried there. The Bishop of Jerusalem, thus advertised by Lucian, made these
Relics be taken up, and carried to Mount Sion, from whence they were sent to
Constantinople, as Nicephorus informs us, who has been very diligent to relate
all Histories of this Nature.

With a great deal of Reason Dr. Cave observes, that excessive Veneration to
Relics was one of the Defects of that time, by consequence one cannot much
confide in these sort of Histories. He brings another out of Annot. in Mart.
Romans ad Aug. 3.
Baronius, not less Marvelous than the precedent. It Is thus, that a Viol full
of the Blood of St. Stephen, brought to Naples by one Gaudois an African
Bishop, used to boil of it self every third of August, according to the account
of Ancient time, as if it had been just shed. But since that Pope Gregory XIII.
having corrected the Calender, this Blood does the same at the end of the
thirteenth of August, in which day, after the new Reformation, the Feast of St.
Stephen is kept; a manifest Proof, say they, that the Gregorian Calender is
received in Heaven, although in some Countries Heretics have refused to follow
it.

The Author adds not so much Faith to Modern Miracles, as to those who did
them, and to what is spoken of in the time of Honorius. It seems not Irrational
to believe, that there was a great number of Sick Persons, who were cured by
the admirable Odor that proceeded from St. Stephen's Tomb the first time it
was opened, if we may give credit to Lucian and Photius. But he relies more on
what St. Augustine says in his City of God, Live. 22. c. 8. of Miracles done in
a Chapel where some of St. Stephen's Relics were kept, carried from Jerusalem
into Africa by Orosus. Dr. Cave believes God might do Miracles then, to convert
the Heathens which were in great Numbers amongst the Christians in those days;
where although there was no necessity of them, yet he could not tell what might
be done. The Author of the Logic of the 4. p. c. 13.
Port Royal, speaking of the same Miracles, maintains, that all men of Sense,
whether they had Piety or not, must acknowledge them as true. But one of a good
Understanding, and Pious too, could not well think, that St. Augustine should
suffer himself to be deceived in things of that nature, and upon slight ground
would take that for a Miracle which was not so, or that he made use of them as
proper means to convert the Heathens, without examining whether they were
Matter of Fact or not; it is very certain that he relates them with great
Assurance; and at this day apparent Falsehoods are advanced with no less
Confidence: Though this is not a place to examine the Miracles of St. Augustine:
'Twill be more to our purpose to pass to the Life of Justin Martyr; P. 140.
Who was born in a City of Samaria, formerly called Sichem, afterward by the
Inhabitants Mabarta; and in fine by the Romans Neapolis and Flavia Cesarea,
because of a Colony sent thither by Vespasian. His Father, whose Name was
Priscus, brought him up in his own Religion, and took a great deal of care to
have him well instructed in Philosophy. He engaged himself particularly to that
of Plato, which was a means, as he himself has declared, of his embracing
Christianity. Having conceived a dislike against the other Sects of
Philosophers, he becomes a perfect Platonist, and from that a Christian, after
he had some Conference with an Old Man of that Persuasion in Palestine. He
gives an account of his Conversion in his Dialogue with Tryphon, but the
Learned receive this as a feigned History, or at least look upon it to be
extremely imbelish'd. Dr. Cave believes it to have been about the 132 d Year
after our Lord.

Nevertheless he quitted not his Habit of Philosopher, for amongst the Greeks,
they were not attired like other* Men. St. Ierom says the same of Aristides an
Athenian Philosopher, and Origin of Heraclus, who was since Bishop of
Alexandria. The common People generally wore Exorat. 71. Dion. Cries. (...).
a single Tunick without a Cloak; those that were of a better Quality, or
Richer, had always a Cloak besides; which the Philosophers had also, but no
Tunick, so that they were half naked. Besides which they suffered both their
Beard and Hair to grow. This Dress, with their particular manner of Carriage,
drew many Children after them, and exposed them to their Ridicule: Yet for all
the apparent Severity, they were very debauched; as they walked the Streets
this Aspersion was often cast upon them, especially when out of Greece, (...),
Grec imposteur. Their Garments were generally black and dirty, and if any one
was seen to affect the same Slovenliness, he was certain to have the same
Reproaches rendered him, as St. Jerome makes appear in his Epistle to Marcellus,
upon the Infirmity of Blasill. The Christian Monks with their habits inheriting
the Vanity of the Philosophers also, it is believed by some Authors, that the
Heathens called them through Contempt (...), Black Casacks, and said Liban. in
Orat. de Templo.
they were no mark of Virtue; so that it was but wearing a Mourning Dress; and
that it imported not what they appeared outwardly, since Eunap. in vita.
Acdesii.
there was nothing but excessive Vanity within. Now to return to Justin,
Antiquity assures us he lived very conformably to the habit he wore. He went to
Rome in the beginning of the Reign of Antonine the Pious, and fixed his Abode
there; applying himself to the defense of the Christian Religion against the
Heathens, Marcionites, and other Heretics, in pursuit of which, he writ
several Books that have been lost. About the hundred and fortieth Year of the
Blessed Jesus, he Presented to Antonine his Apology for the Christian Religion:
Which seemed to be the Cause that the Emperor published an Edict, and sent into
all Asia, commanding that the Christians should be proceeded against according
to the ordinary Forms of Justice; whereas before they took away their Goods,
banished them, and sometimes put them to death without any Formalities at all.
In Dr. Cave there are some critical Observations on the date of this Edict, by
which he plainly proves that it was Antonine's and not Marcus Aurelius's, as
some Learned Men have supposed.

After having Published this Apology, Justin makes a Voyage into Asia, where he
came acquainted with Trypho the Jew, which Dr. Cave believes to be R. Tarpho,
who was Friend to R. Akiba, that is so often spoke of in the Thalmud. Trypho
had retired from Judea, after the War of Barchocheas, and Justin finding him at
Ephesus disputed with him for two days, of which he gives an account to the
Public, in a Book Entitled, A Dialogue with Trypho.

From thence returning to Rome, he composed that Apology which is called the
First, tho it was really the Second, and Presented it to Marcus Aurelius,
Lucius Verus, for a certainty not being at that time at Rome. Justin had great
Contests also, with one Crescens a Cynic Philosopher, who under the pretended
Austerities of a Philosophical Life, concealed many shameful Disorders:
Wherefore Justin calls him a Philosopher and no Philosopher (...). This Man
enraged against Justin resolved to do his utmost to ruin him; he found it not
difficult to make use of the excessive Superstition of Marcus Aurelius to that
end, who had also a very ill Opinion of the Christians, as is evident by these
words of his Book 11.. 3. Such is the Disposition of the Soul, that it must be
separated from the Body, whether it be extinguished and dissipated like a
Vapor, or whether it Subsists. This Disposition must proceed from its own
Judgment, not from a Passion purely which troubles it, as is often seen in the
Christians, but from a calm and solid Reasoning; such as may be inspired to
another without making use of Discourses full of Figures and Exaggerations.

The Circumstances of Iustin's Death, may be seen in the Account of his
Martyrdom, Ap. sur. ad. 12. Iun. and Baron. ad Ann. 165. n. 2. and seq.
which Dr. Cave believes to be true: Their shortness, he says, being no little
sign, that they have been taken from ancient Memoirs, without being corrected,
and added to in latter Ages, as many things of the like nature have been. It is
true, that some have doubted whether those Acts contained the Martyrdom of
Justin according to matter of Fact; but their Suspicion seems not to be well
grounded, because there is nothing but what agrees very well with it,
especially the Time and Death of this Martyr, which was when Rusticus was
Prefect of Rome, as St. Epiphanius confirms.

Rusticus was a great Man both in the Wars and State, very much inclined to
Philosophy, and particularly that of the Stoics. He had been Governor to
Marcus Aurelius, as may be seen in the First Book of this Emperor, where are
the chief Lessons that he learnt of him. Before this Rusticus, Justin and Six
other Christians were brought, after they had been first put in Prison. He
asked them if they were Christians, they all freely confessing it publicly,
and refusing to Sacrifice to the Roman Deities, were Beheaded. Baronius
concludes it to be in the 165th. Year after Christ, as agrees very well with
the Alexandrian Chronology, that says, a little after Justin had presented his
second Apology to the Emperor, he received the Crown of Martyrdom.

Dr. Cave after the Relation of Iustin's Death, gives a Character of his
Virtues and Learning, in the P. 152.
manner of a Panegyric, as he does to all the Lives he has Written, where, all
along he mingles Eloquence with the Critical part of his History. He tells us,
that although Ancients have extremely praised the Learning of Justin, this Holy
Man had no knowledge of the Hebrew, as appears by the Etymology he gives of the
word Dial. cum. Tryph. p. 331.
Satanas, which he says comes from Sata, and from Nas, that in Hebrew and
Syriac signify an Apostat: Whereas it is known that the Termination in AS, is
from the Greek, and is added to the word Satan, which signifies in Hebrew, an
Enemy. The Etymology that Justin gave to this word, without doubt made Trypho
Laugh; this shows that some Moderns have not been very well acquainted with the
Writings of our Martyr, because that a false Etymology of the word Osanna,
being found in his Book entitled, Questions and Answers to the Orthodox, They
have concluded it to be none of Iustin's, who according to them understood
Hebrew very well, because he was born in Palestine. Mr. Rivet Lib. 2. cap. 5.
also gives this Reason in his Book Entitled, Criticus Sacer, from whence
Sundius has taken it, and added to this Treatise de Scriptoribus
Ecclesiasticis, which consists almost of nothing else, but what others that
have treated of the same matter have said before him. P. 153.
Dr. Cave informs us, that this Author who pretended to have read the Writings
of the Ancients, his Citations of which savor infinitely more of Ostentation,
than Judgment or Fidelity; has sufficiently declared his Ignorance in what
relates to the Fathers, with whom he has pretended to be so well acquainted,
when he made that Remark on Justin. Though Dr. Cave does not look upon this
Work as his, but rejects it for other Reasons, as well as many other that have
been attributed to him.

Mr. Rivet perhaps might be deceived by a popular Prejudice that is received in
favor of these Martyrs, who have always been looked upon as Men of great
Understandings; Supposing he could not Praise their Piety, without having a
good Opinion of their Learning. 'Twas this made Cod. 135.
Photius guilty of the same, who is else a very Judicious Critic, and say that
Justin was come to the highest Perfection of the Heathen, and particularly of
the Christian Philosophy; that he had a very great knowledge in all Learning,
especially in History. Whereas we are assured on the contrary, that he was no
good Historian, as appears by many gross Faults that he has committed. 1. In
his Exhortation to the People, he makes Herod contemporary with Ptolomy
Philadelphia, in speaking of the Seventy two Interpreters which he had seen in
some of the Monks Apartments at Alexandria. 2. He Cites Hystaspes and the
Oracles of the Sybils against the Heathens, which made them ridicule him, as
Blondal shows in his first Book of the Sybils, c. 2. where he has Collected
diverse Contempts of this Holy Man. 3. Such another he made at Rome, taking an
Inscription writ in honor to an old Deity of the Sabins, called Semo Sangus,
to have been done in favor of Simon the Magician. The Inscription is now at
Rome, being dug up the beginning of this last Age in the very same place that
Justin said it was, Nella isola del Terere. It Is true, St. Irenaeus and
Tertullian have committed the same mistake; as many Learned Men have observed,
and amongst the rest Didier Herault, in his Commentary on the Apologetic of
Tertullian. But it is never the more excusable for that, as the Author proves
which we have just cited, and who P. 77.
judiciously observes, that the Christians in those Times, drew all Advantages
possible, from the Actions, Words and Writings of the Heathens, which they
often in favor of themselves interpreted contrary to the Opinion of the
Author: Omnia Gentium facta, dicta, scripta ita interpretabantur tunc temporis
Christiani, ut ea omnia proposito suo accommodarent, aliquando contra Gentium
mentem.

But to return to our Author, although he has very much praised Justin Martyr,
he Remarks some Doctrins that he found in his Writings, which are not
Conformable to those commonly received, and especially at this time.

1. He believed that Socrates, Heraclitus, and other Virtuous Heathens may have
been Saved, and to maintain this Opinion, says they were in some manner
Christians, because they have in part known the Reason (...), and have exhorted
Men to live conformably to this Reason. Which Sentiment was founded upon one of
the Platonics, that says the Supreme God had before the Creation produced a
Being, they called (...), who stood between God and the Creatures, by whom he
Created the World, and all rational Beings, which are such no farther than they
participate of this Reason. Some of the first Fathers who were Platonics, as
Justin, Origin, and many others, have believed the (...) of which Plato speaks,
was nothing else but the Reason or the Word. (for it signifies both,) that is
mentioned in the first Chapter of St. John; so that Justin had reason to say
the Ancients who spoke of the (...) knew Jesus Christ in part, and by
Consequence might be Saved. St. Origin in a place that Dr. Cave has cited,
speaks after this manner: P. 46 and 47. Ed. Huet. com. in Joan. T. 1.
As he that is God over all things is called The God, ((...)) and not simply
God; So even the Source of Reason that resides in each rational Being is called
The Reason ((...)) whereas that cannot properly be called so, tha^ is in every
rational Being, this Name belonging only to the first Reason. There is the same
Relation between Reason which is in each rational Being, and the Reason that
was in the beginning from the Supreme God, as there is between the Reason and
the Supreme God. For the same Agreement that is between God the Father, God
himself, the true God, ((...)) and between his Image and the Images of this
Image, between the Reason it self, and that which is in every one of us: Both
is as the Sourse, the Father of the Divinity, the Son of the Reason: Hence it is
not said that Man is the Image of God, but that he is made after his Image.

If these words were taken to the utmost Rigor, it would be very difficult to
distinguish this Opinion of St. Origin, and that of many other Ancients, from
the Arians, whom they have been accused of favoring. For it may plainly be
proved, that the Logos of the Platonics according to these Philosophers is of a
different kind from that of the Supreme God.

2. The second Error in his Writings, is the Reign of a thousand Years. He
believed that after the Resurrection, Jesus Christ should come again in a
visible manner, with the Patriarchs and Prophets into Jerusalem, which should
be then rebuilt much more magnificent than before. Many of the Primitive
Fathers were of this Opinion also, as Papias, Bishop of Hierapolis, St.
Iraeneus, Bishop of Lions, Nepos, Apollinarus, Tertullian, Victorinus,
Lactantius, and many others.

3. He believed the Souls of the Fathers of the Old Testament were before the
coming of Jesus Christ in some manner under the Power of the Devil, and In
Dial. cum Tryph.
that since Jesus Christ the Souls of the Righteous ascended not to Heaven
immediately after their Death, nor were received there till the Resurrection.
Nevertheless they continued (...), in an agreeable Place; even so the Souls of
the Wicked are, where they are as much displeased with their Habitation, still
expecting the day of Jugdment. Ibid. P. 307.
Justin repeats the same to confute some Heretics, who denied the
Resurrection, in supposing the Soul was received into Heaven immediately after
Death. It Is not his Opinion alone, almost all the Ancient Fathers have said as
much, among which St. Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origin, St. Hilary, Prudence, St.
Ambrose, and St. Augustine, etc. They have very agreeably described this Place
which received the Souls of Good Men, under the Names of Paradise, and the
Bosom of Abraham, which some of them have supposed in the midst of the Earth.

St. Justin had not a less number of Fathers on his side, in another point as
visibly absurd. That the Angels, to whom, before the Deluge, God had given
dominion over the Earth, becoming enamoul'd with the Daughters of Men, married
with them, and so fell from the Excellency of their Nature.

4. I could also, says Dr. Cave, insist upon what some have so often repeated
in our Martyr; which is, that he has very much exalted the Free Will of Man,
an Opinion that was generally received by the Fathers of the first Ages, before
the Pelagian Controversies entered into the World; though the necessity of Grace
has been acknowledged by many, as our Author proves from diverse passages of St.
Justin, St. Irenaeus, Clement of Alexandria, Tertullian, and even of Origin
himself. Dr. Cave ends this Life, with an Observation, that he passes by many
other speculative Notions in our Martyr, which are not Conformable to the
Truth; and the occasion of them seems to be the great esteem he had for the
Platonic Philosophy, endeavoring as much as possibly he could to make it agree
with the Christian Religion.

By this it is plainly seen that Speculative Errors are not wholly inconsistent
with true Piety, and that the most solid Virtue is not able to render a Man
infallible, nor give him a Right to decide Controversies. These Remarks
sufficiently testify one cannot take those Praises, that are sometimes given
to the Ancients a little too profusely, as an absolute sign all their Opinions
are approved on; since Dr. Cave, after he had very much praised the holy
Martyr, relates diverse Errors he was guilty of. It Is apparent by this how we
must also understand the praises Mr. Du Pin has given him in his
Ecclesiastical Bibliothique, p. 160. where he says, He to Admiration understood
the Holy Scripture, and Prophecies therein contained, had a perfect knowledge
of our Religion; So that there was hardly one of the Ancients spoke more
exactly of all our Mysteries than he has done.

There is not the least Reason to think Dr. Cave or Mr. Du Pin, approved this
Thought of St. Justin, which nevertheless they have neither of them placed
amongst the Errors of this Father. That although we should acknowledge Jesus
Christ to be simply but a Man, born after the same manner as others are might
nevertheless be proved that he is the Messiah: P. 50. Ect. Rob. Steph.
It follows not, says he, in his Dialogue with Trypho, that Jesus is not the
Christ of God, though I could not demonstrate his Existence before the
beginning of the World, as Son of the Creator of all things, and as God, and
that he is born Man of a Virgin, etc. It may only be said that I am mistaken,
but it must not be denied that he was the Christ, although he was believed to
be Man, born of Men, and that he is become the Christ by the Choice that God
has made of him: For there are some of our Religion, that in making a
Profession, do believe that he is the Christ, maintain that he is Man, born of
Men: However I am not of their Opinion, no more than the most part of the
Christians, etc.

5. Origin was born at Alexandria, about the One hundred eighty sixth Year of
our Lord. His Father, whose name was Leonidas, suffered Martyrdom in the Two
hundred and second Year, after he had taken much care in the Education of his
Son, whom he himself instructed in Learning and Religion. Origin from his
Childhood was excessively Curious, and often tired his Father, in proposing too
many Questions to him upon the Sacred Writ. As soon as he was advanced a little
in Years, he studied under Clement Catechist of Alexandria, and afterward
under Ammonius, who had set up a new School of Philosophy, where he taught the
Opinions of Plato, and those of Aristotle, as he believed reconcilable
together. They called him Ammonius Saccas, because that before he applied
himself to Philosophy, he had been a Porter, and gained his Livelihood by
carrying Sacks of Corn. Porphyry faith he renounced Christianity, to embrace
the Pagan Religion; but Dr. Cave makes it appear he was deceived in that, as
well as when he said Origin was born a Heathen. Ammonius was so much esteemed
amongst the Pagans themselves, that Hierocles calls him Lib. de Provid. and Fat.
(...) taught of God, and that Plotin, who could find no Satisfaction in other
Schools, engaged himself with much Application to that of Ammonius. Origin
learned the Platonic Philosophy under him, at the same time with Plotin.

Our Author observes here, that we must take care not to confound a Heathen
Philosopher called Origin, with him whereof we are a speaking. Porphyry,
Hierocles, Proclus and Eunapius have made mention of the first with much Honor;
and Eunapius ^aith, he was a Condisciple of Porphyry, not at Alexandria under
Ammonius, but at Rome in the School of Plotin. Porphyry had often seen our
Origin at Tire, but he was not his Fellow-Pupil, being much younger than he.
Lucas Holstenius De vit. and script. Porphyr.
wonders at the reason, that he did not say, Porphyry studied with Origin Son
of Leonidas; but he should have concluded according to Dr. Cave, that it was
not that Origin he meant, but another.

The tenth Year of the Reign of Severus, Leonidas Father to Origin suffered
Martyrdom at Alexandria, where he took all possible care to hinder his Son from
following him to the Stake. His Mother, to no purpose, employed her Authority,
and Tears, to dissuade him from it; she could not hinder him from hiding his
Garments so Artificially, that he continued in the Lodging with them by force.

Leonidas's Goods being confiscated, Origin had in an instant been reduced to
great Misery, without the Charity of a Lady of Quality at Alexandria, who
entertained him with many others, amongst whom was Paul of Samosatenus
afterward Famous for his Heresy. But Origin lived not long at the Expense of
this Illustrious Lady. He opened a School where he taught Literature, which
gave him an Opportunity to become much more Learned himself, in instructing
others. By which he acquired so great a Reputation, that at eighteen Years of
Age, he was chose a Colleague or Successor to Clement, under whom he had
studied: That he drew so great a Number of Auditors, he was soon obliged to
leave off teaching his School, and apply himself entirely to the Instruction of
the Catechumens, to whom he taught the Principles of Christianity. He was so
happy in this Employ, that many of those he had instructed gained the Crown of
Martyrdom; among which was Plutarch, Serenus, Heraclidus, Heron and Herais,
who, in spite of the Weakness of her Sex, died as constantly as any of the
four Men I have named. During the Fury of these Persecutions, Origin, not
content only to teach the Catechumens, visited those also that were put in
Prison, accompanying them to the place of Execution, endangering his Life a
thousand times, during the Government of Letus and Aquila, who were one after
the other Govornors of Egypt.

'Twas about that time Epiph. Haenes. ^xiv. p. 228.
Origin did an Action, for which he was as much esteemed by some, as blamed by
others. Being unwilling to encumber himself with Matrimony, and finding he was
of an unfit Temperament to preserve himself Chaste in a single Life, or it may
be to shun the Suspicion of the Heathens, he resolved to take an effectual way
to suppress all Youthful Desires. Some say he made use of the Application of
some Remedies, and Hieron. ad Pammach. de erroribus Origin.
others of a Knife. He thought himself Authorized in it, from these words of
Jesus Christ, That some make themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven;
which he believed ought to be understood in the Letter of the word. He was not
the first that had designed the same, though perhaps he was that executed it.
Apol. 11. P. 71.
Justin Martyr tells us of a young Man of Alexandria, that being brought before
Felix Governor of that City, desired of him the Permission of a Surgeon, that
he might put himself out of the State of ever being suspected of any Impurity.
Felix refused, because the Roman Laws forbid it, as the Canons of the Church
have done since. Justin related this, to show those that accused the Christians
of committing horrible Uncleanness in their Assemblies, were only Calumniators.
Demetrius Bishop of Alexandria, highly admired this Action of Origin, when
first done, but afterward becoming an Enemy to this great Man, it passed with
him for an enormous Crime. Origin was so ill treated for it, that it is
difficult to determine, whether this unkind Usage was not the cause, when he
was advanced a little in Years, that he interpreted the words of Jesus Christ
in a figurative manner, and condemned those who had any way mutilated
themselves.

The Emperor Severus, Persecutor of the Christians, dying the 211 th Year of
our Lord, Origin made a Voyage to Rome, a place he had always desired to see,
but continued not there long, Demetrius recalling him, and obliging him to take
again his Employ of Catechist. This Charge being too great for one, he joined
with himself one Heraclas who had been his Disciple, and bestowed his leisure
Hours in Learning the Hebrew Tongue; for which he was so much the more to be
praised, as he was the first amongst the Greeks that had dared to engage in so
difficult a Work, and for which there was then so little help. It is supposed
that his Master was one Huillus a Jew, Patriarch of those of his own Nation.

Origin had always a great Number of Disciples, that he instructed in Humane
Sciences, and in Religion; among which, one of the most Illustrious was a Man
of Quality named Ambrose, with whom he studied the Scripture with an
extraordinary Application during many Years: Whilst he was in this Occupation,
Demetrius received Letters from the Governor of Arabia, desiring him
immediately to send Origin to instruct him in the Faith of the Christians. He
went thither, but soon returned to Alexandria, from whence he was obliged as
soon to depart, to escape the Fury of Caracalla, who had entered into Egypt with
an Army, designing severely to punish the City of Alexandria that had offended
him. Origin retired to Cesarea in the Palestine, where whilst he was yet but a
Laick, the Bishop desired him publicly to expound the Holy Scripture to the
People. But Demetrius caused him soon to return to Alexandria, after having
complained to Theoctist Bishop of Cesarea, and to Alexander Bishop of
Jerusalem, that they had conferred on him an Employ that was never before given
to a Laick, although these two Bishops produced to him many undoubted Examples
thereof. They assure us, that Mammea, Mother to the Emperor Alexander Severus,
being at Antioch, and having heard of Origin, sent often for him, and had many
Conferences with him concerning Religion.

Being returned to Alexandria, he applied himself, at the Persuasion of his
dear Ambrose, to compose Commentaries on the Scripture; in the Prosecution of
which, he generally maintained seven Copyists, that in Latin are called
Notarii, from Nota, to Mark, because they wrote in Ciphers as fast as Persons
spoke. Who invented this manner of Writing is not certainly known; some
attribute it to Cunius, others to Tyro the Freed Man of Cicero, and some again
to one Aquila, a Freed Man of Mecoenas. These Notaries were made use of in the
Primitive Church, to write the Discourses of the Martyrs, both in Prison and
upon the Scaffold, as appears by what De coron. c. 13.
Tertullian and St. Cyprian Ep. 37. ad cler. Carth.
says, on the Fasts of the Church, and by Pontius the Deacon in the Life of
St. Cyprian, where he assures us that it was the Custom to Register all the
Acts of the Martyrs: By which may be seen, how the Interrogations and Answers
of the Martyrs were preserved, the Debates held in Councils, and the Homilies
spoken Extempore, whereof we have so great a Number, and all complete. The
Commentaries of Origin were so much esteemed, although they had much defamed him
for his pretended Errors, that St. Ierom once a great Persecutor of his
Followers, after becoming openly of their Number, said this in his Defense,
That he would willingly draw on himself the same Hatred as Origin had done, to
understand the Scriptures as well as he did; and that he laughed at those
Shadows of Errors that he was accused of, which were fit only to fright
Children, whose Imaginations are weak enough to receive Impressions merely from
Appearances. Praef. quaest. in Genesis
Hoc unum dico, quod vellem cum invidia nominis ejus, habere etiam scientiam
Scripturarum, flocci pendens imagines umbrasque larvarum, quarum natura esse
dicitur, terrere parvulos and in angulis garrire tenebrosis.

Origin was interrupted in this Work, by a Voyage he made into Greece, which
was at that time troubled by some Heresies. He passed through Palestine, making
a short stay at Cesarea, where Theoctist and Alexander ordained him Presbyter,
without his seeking the least after it, and with no other design, than to make
his Ministry more effectual. Demetrius had no sooner heard this News, but he
thought he had found a fair occasion to discover a Hatred he had long
concealed, for a Person whose Learning and Virtue had rendered him much more
Illustrious than himself, thinking to cover his Malice under the handsome
Pretense of defending Ecclesiastical Discipline. Then 'twas he reproached him
with that Weakness committed in his Youth, viz. The cutting off that part of
his Body which seemed troublesome to him. He caused him to be condemned by two
Synods, wherein they declared his Ordination void, and expelled him Alexandria.
But these Proceedings did no Injury to Origin, he was very well received
wheresoever he went, and continued to execute his Office of Priest, without any
regard at all to the Anathema's of the Synods of Egypt:

Nevertheless the Insults of his Enemies obliged him to think of quitting
Alexandria for ever, and entirely to give up his Charge of Catechist to
Heraclas, whom he had converted to the Christian Religion, a Man of a profound
Learning and great Virtue. One thing which prevailed with Origin to take his
Mind more easily off Egypt, and to depart from thence with less Regret, was as
Haeres. 64.
Epiphanius tells us, his falling into the Hands of some Heathens that were his
sworn Enemies, who threatened to kill him unless he would resolve to satisfy
the Brutality of an Ethiopian Woman, or Sacrifice to the Pagan Gods, and that
in so strange a Choice, he rather preferred casting a few Grains of Incense to
a false Deity. He adds, That Origin, after this, durst no longer continue at
Alexandria. But Authors that lived in the same time with him, make no mention
at all of it; nor was this Crime ever objected against him during his Life, as
has been sufficiently proved by the Apologies writ in his Defense. Epiphanius
was the first that ever spoke of it. So that it is not altogether without
reason, Baronius Ad Ann. 253. n 123.
has conjectured that this Passage may have been added to St. Epiphanius. Dr.
Cave believes likewise, that Epiphanius has said enough on this occasion, to
make an Intelligent Reader apprehend, that he ought not to give too easy a
Faith to all that he has related. He says he has spoken many strange things
of Origin, which he himself did not believe to be true, and that he thought
good nevertheless to insert them among his Writings. Besides those who have
read but little of what he has done, says our Author, know how much his Faith
was upheld by popular Reports, and having testified so much Zeal and Anger
against Origin, he took care to omit nothing that might sully or lessen his
Fame. In fine, the Relation we have had of Origen's Mutilation, and the Noise
that it made in the World, would not permit his Enemies to offer him that
Choice before mentioned.

'Twas in the 233 d Year of our Lord, that Origin quitted Alexandria, and
retired into Palestine. St. Epiphanius, to confirm his Accusation, says, That
Origin being at Jerusalem, and desired to preach, he stood up and read these
words of Psalm 50.16. And God said unto the Sinner, why speak thou of my
Righteousness, and take my Covenant into thy Mouth: That with great Sorrow he
spoke these words, and then shut up the Book, and sat down covered with Shame,
and fell into a violent Passion of Tears. That there might be nothing wanting
to complete his History, he has made a Recantation under Origen's Name, where
he confesses his Sin, and testifies a lively Repentance for it; but the
Misfortune is, that the Style of this piece does not agree with that of the
Author, whose name is affixed to it.

Origin having set up a School at Cesarea, drew many Men thither to him, and
among others Gregory Thaumaturgus and Athenodorus his Brother, who were
afterward. Bishops in that See. Firmilian Bishop of Cesarea in Cappadocia, a
Person celebrated for his Virtue and Learning, was also one of Origen's
Admirers.

The 235 th Year Maximinus of Thrace succeeded Alexander Severus, and with the
utmost Severity treated the Christians, who had some Rest in the time of his
Predecessor. This occasioned Origin to write his Book entitled, An Exhortation
to a Martyr, which he dedicated to Ambrose, and to the chief Presbyter of
Cesarea, who had then signalized themselves by a Courageous Confession of the
Christian Faith. Origin at this time resided with a Lady of Quality called
Iuliana, who furnished him with Books, and particularly with the Version of
Symmachus, and his other Works in favor of the Ebionites.

'Twas then that Origin took pains to collect the different Translations of the
Old Testament, which were published before his time: Whereof he made some
Famous Editions entitled, Tetraples, Hectaples and Octaples, which Dr. Cave
explains in order, as is his general Custom, according to the Idea's of St.
Epiphanius. One may see in the second Tome of the Universal Bibliotheque, Page
407. the Disposition of this Work, according to the thought of Mr. de Valois,
and Mr. Vossius, to the end that we may compare what these Gentlemen say
thereof, with the common Sentiment that Dr. Cave has followed after Father
Petau: Here is in short the common Order and Method of Origen's Works. The
Tetraples were four Columns, which contained the Versions of Aquilas,
Symmachus, the Septuagint and of Theodotion; in the Hexaples there were more
than two Colums, where the Hebrew Text was in Judaick Characters, and the same
Text collateral to it in Greek Characters. In the Octoples might also be seen,
after the six Colums (whereof we are a coming to speak) the fifth and sixth
Edition which were found not long since, one at Jericho, the other at Nicopolis
near to Actium. It is evident, says Dr. Cave, by what St. Jerome tells us
thereof, these two last Versions were not complete, but contained only some
Books of the Old Testament, and particularly the Prophets; though we cannot
determine whether it may be concluded from thence, that the Hexaples and
Octaples were only one Work under different Titles, according to those parts to
which the fifth and sixth Edition were added. Besides this, there was a seventh
Edition, but it contained only the Book of the Psalms, and by consequence made
no change in the name of the Work. The Reader will more easily comprehend the
Method of this Collection, by a Copy which is here added to it, and drawn from
an Ancient Manuscript of the lesser Prophets out of the Bibliotheque of the
Barbarines. It Is the first Verse of the eleventh Chapter of Hosea, When Israel
was a Child I loved him, and called my Son out of Egypt.

To render this Work Fruitful, Origin Remarks on the Version of the Septuagint,
that it contained either more or less than the Hebrew Text; when there was
something more he noted it thus () and when there was any thing Deficient, he
thus distinguished it (*) and if confirmed by many Versions, he added a Note
which he called Lemniscus; and when two only agreed, he affixed a
Hypolemniscus. This Work which was a Labor almost impossible to accomplish,
was begun at Cesarea and perfected at Tire.

Nevertheless it seems that Origin made a second Voyage to Athens, where he
writ his Commentaries on Ezekiel, and the Song of Songs. He passed through
Nicomedia, where he met with his Friend Ambrose, who was retired thither with
his Family. He there composed his Answer to Julius Africanus, touching the
History of Susanna, who had Fruitlesly endeavored to maintain it as a Truth:
Returning into the last, he recovered Beryl Bishop of Botsra in Arabia (as
Eusebius calls him) from a new Opinion apparently destructive to the True
Faith, which he soon renounced that he might be better instructed, and thanked
Origin for having disabused him. Beryl believed that Jesus Christ before his
Incarnation did not so exist, that he had a distinct Essence, which was only
proper to him; and that he had not a Divinity peculiarly his own, but only that
of his Father dwelling in him. Origin did not apprehend this Opinion at first,
but after diverse Conferences with Beryl, and indeed it is difficult to
understand what he meant, according to the words of Eusebius, when he comes to
cite and translate him word for word from the Greek. Dr. Cave thus expresses
it in English, P. ^^9.
That our Lord, before his Incarnation, had no proper Substance nor personal
Deity, but only a derivative Divinity from his Father. Mr. de Valois has
translated this Passage of Eusebius into Latin after this manner: Servatorem
antequam inter homines: versaretur non substitisse in propriae personae
differentia ((...)) nec propriam sed paternam duntaxat divinitatem in se
residentem habere. In his Remarks he says that the word (...) Essence, is
plainly to be understood in this place for that of Person; but that Beryl was
mistaken, when he said that Jesus Christ had no Personality before his
Incarnation, yet he might reasonably maintain that he had the same Divinity
with his Father, since if any other had been proper to him alone, there would
have been more Gods than one: By this may be seen, that it is not always very
easy to apprehend the Opinion of the Ancients upon difficult things; and above
all, when they are related by their Adversaries. What Dr. Cave observes a
little further, is more pertinent to Origen's case.

Origin was Sixty Years old, and ceased not nevertheless to take pains; at that
time it was that he composed this Book against Celsus: He writ also about the
same time Letters to the Emperor Philip, and to his Empress, which gave
occasion to some to believe* though without any reason, that he was a Christian:
He also applied himself to confute certain Heretics, who maintained that the
Soul died with the Body, to rise again with it; and the Helcesaites, who were a
kind of Gnostics, and whose Errors were stifled in the very beginning.

Decius succeeded Philip, who violently persecuted the Christians, and in whose
Reign Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem, as Dr. Cave relates in his History, died
in Prison. Origin was also imprisoned with him, and suffered much thereby, but
escaped his own Death by that of Decius: He at last died at Tire, being Sixty
nine Years of Age, in the Year of our Lord 254. in the first of Valerius, as
our Author has made appear, against some Ancients who were deceived therein: He
was buried in a Church at Tire, among the Ruins of which, his Sepulcher is yet
to be seen, according to the Relation of some Travelers. Dr. Cave afterward
makes an Eloge of the good Works and Learning of Origin: He was of an
Extraordinary Sobriety, and so little desirous of Riches, that he many times
refused Presents that Rich Persons offered him. He even at the end of his Life,
sold his Library to maintain him; and sold it upon this Condition, that the
Purchaser should give him four Oboles, that is to say, five Pence a day during
his Life: The extraordinary Pains which he took for many Years, procured him
the Names of Adamantinus and Chalkenterus, that is, of Steel and Brass: He
assures us that he wrote Six thousand Volumes, which appears impossible, except
we make a Volume of each of his Homilies and Letters; if so, we may reconcile
St. Ierom and Ruffinus, who have contented very hotly about it. To add the
Judgment of the Heathens to that of the Christians about Origin, I shall relate
here at length a Passage of Porphyry, of which Dr. Cave has given us the Sense.
It is to be found in the sixth Book of Eusebius, Cap. 19. what this Great
Philosopher says of Origin, in a Work of his against the Holy Scripture. Some
have chose rather to seek Solutions of the difficult Writings of the Jews, than
to abandon them; and have been obliged to put such Interpretations as have
contradicted themselves, and even agree not with their very Writings; which
includes not so much the Defense of these strange Writers, as Advantageous
Thoughts of their own Opinions; for after having spoken those things in Pompous
Terms, which Moses gives the clearest Relation of in the World, they esteemed
them as Enigma's, and Enthusiastically maintain, that they ought to be received
as full of hidden Mysteries; and they propose not their Explications till after
they have confounded their Auditors with their Lofty Language. And in a few
words, a Man that I have known, being also very Young, may serve me for an
Example: It Is Origin, who was then in great Esteem, and is so-still, because of
the Works that he has left behind him, etc. As to what regards his Life, he
was a Christian, and lived and obeyed the Laws of the Empire: But as for his
Opinions and Sentiments touching Divinity he reasoned in the Greek, and
maintained strange Fables by Principles of the Greek Philosophers. He
afterward incessantly read the Writings of Plato, Numerius, Cronius,
Apollophanus, Longinus, Moderatus, and of many more famous Pythagoreans; he
also studied the Lives of Cherimon a Stoic Pholosopher, and of Cornutus, of
whom having learnt the Allegorical manner of explaining the Mysteris of the
Greeks, he made use of it to his own purpose in interpreting the Writings of
the Jews. --

Dr. Cave thinks that Porphyry was not wholly mistaken in accusing Origin for
having learned of the Heathens the Method of turning all into Allegory, which
without doubt did prejudice more, as to Religion, than he could Convert. But
one may also suppose that Origin was persuaded to the Allegorical Method of
Interpreting the Scripture, as much by the Example of Philo and the ancient
Jews, as by that of the Heathen Philosophers: See the Fourth Tome of the French
Bibl. p. 528.

Our Author afterward shows Censur. de op. Origin.
Erasmus's Judgment upon Origin, which is extremely advantageous to him; he
has not, according to Erasmus, a bombast Style like to St. Hillary, nor Silla,
with too far-fetched Ornaments, as is St. Jerome; nor overcharged with
Rhetoric and Points like to St. Ambrose; nor sharp Picquant and full of old
Words like to Tertullian: Neither too exact nor too periodical as is St.
Gregory Nazianzen; nor too full of digressions and abrupt Periods like St.
Austin, but always lively and natural. Dr. Cave finds nothing to contradict the
Judgment of Erasmus, except where he says he believes Erasmus is deceived when
he takes Origin to be concise and short, since he has been reproached with
quite contrary defects.

As for the Errors of Origin he directs his Reader to the Originiana of Mr.
Huet the present Bishop of S^issons, and to an English Discourse Printed at
London 1661. in quarto, where we make use (says he) of all the Advantages that
can be drawn from Wit, Reason, and Eloquence to justify Origin. It is
entitled, a Letter of Resolution concerning Origin, and the Choice of his
Opinions. To which may be added, the Origenes defensus of the Jesuit Holloix.

Many great Men have formerly made Apologies for Origin, and among others,
Pamphilus Martyr and Eusebius, but they are all lost. Nevertheless we may draw
from the Ancients some general Remarks, which may render him more excusable* 1.
He had written many things not dogmatically, and to Remark that he had
thereupon determined his own Sentiments, but only for Exercise, as he Witnesses
of himself in diverse Places of his Book of Principles, which is the most
critical of all his Pieces. 2. In the heat of dispute sometimes he would to the
utmost extremity* oppose the Opinions of his Adversary which he disputed with,
although in effect he approved not of this immoderate way of Proceeding. And
this is what happened to Origin, as some say, in his Disputation against
Sabellicus, where sometimes he spoke as if he thought there were three Gods;
also as Dr. Cave remarks, St. Athanasius is far from attributing any Error to
him in this Case, and cites him among the Fathers who have been Orthodox
touching the Trinity, and calls him an admirable Man and one of great Studies.
3. Many of his Opinions are rather Sentiments of Philosophy and Speculation
than of Religion; also we see not that the Councils have denied any thing about
him, nor that the Divines raise any Disputes concerning him amongst themselves.
4. He has written many things for his own particular Use, and which were
published against his will, as Pamphilus has formerly complained, casting the
fault upon his Friend Ambrose, to whom he had communicated them. 5. The
Heretics have corrupted and added many things to the Works of Origin, as
Ruffinus has showed more at large, and Origin himself complained on even in
his Life time.

Ruffinus also makes it appear that the same Fate happened to the Writings of
St. Clement Romanus, Clement and Dionisius of Alexandria, and to Dionisius of
Corinth.

But Dr. Cave believes that it was not amiss that Marcellus and Ancyrus had
reasonably said that Origin had mingled too much Platonism with the Christian
Religion, and that he began to Teach in a time in which he had much more
studied Plato, than the holy Scripture. Thus Dr. Cave, etc.

Gregory Nazianzen his Works and Life, with many of his Epistles, etc. at
Cologne, in Folio, 1690.
GRegory was born Vid. p. crit. Baron. ad an. 354. and 388.
according to the most exact Chronology in the Year Three Hundred, in a Village
of the second Cappadocia, named Arianze, near the City Nazianze, whence the
Surname is taken, which is commonly given to Gregory. His Father and Mother
Greg. Presb. in ejus vita.
were Persons of Quality, and whose Virtue was esteemed of those that knew
them, if we may believe their Son, who always speaks of them with much praise.
He is free to tell us that his Father, who likewise was named Gregory, was born
of Parents who had I know not what Religion, divided betwixt the Or. 19. P* 289.
Pagans and Jews. They had neither Idols nor Sacrifices, but they adored the
Fire and Torches. They observed the Sabbath, abstained from Eating of certain
Beasts, and yet despised Circumcision. They took the name of (...).
Hypsistaires, because they boasted they did adore but the Supreme God, (...).
These People seemed to have borrowed the worshipping of Fire from the Magi of
Cappadocia which were called Strabo l. 15.
Pyrathes, because of the respect they had for the Fire, which they looked upon
as the Symbol of the Supreme Divinity. But they were not like them in other
things. It is a Wonder that Gregory, who, as we see, denies that they adored
Idols, and says that his Father was born in these Sentiments, Casun. 1. de
rebus suis v. 135.
should elsewhere positively say that he worshipped the Images of Animals. It
seems that his Memory was a little short in this place, or his great Zeal made
him fall into this Contrariety; unless we excuse him, by taking what he says
of the Idols of Animals, which his Father adored, for an Exaggeration of
Rhetoric, a figure common enough in the Style of Gregory. As for his Mother
Nonna, she was born of Christian Parents, who had carefully educated her, and
who had found in her a Disposition extremely inclined to Piety. Her Son also
praises infinitely her Wit, and her Conduct.

A Woman thus qualified, must be much afflicted for her Husband's Inclination
to such Errors as those of the Hypsistaires; yet he was of a very mild Temper,
and extreme orderly; so that although his Sentiments were erroneous, nothing
could be found of ill in his Manners. Nonna would continually press him to get
himself instructed in the Christian Religion; and as he could not be prevailed
with, it happened that he had a Dream which made him resolve to do it: He
dreamed that he Sung these words of the Psalm cxxii: I have rejoiced in that I
was told, we shall go into the House of the Lord. This manner of Singing,
though new, gave him delight; and his Wife failed not to make use of this
occasion, to induce him to embrace Christianity.

It happened when Leontius Bishop of Cesarea in Cappadocia, passed by that
place with some other Prelates to go to Nice, where Constantius called the
Council; Gregory went to see him, and told to him the desire he had to become a
Christian. Leontius got him instructed, and whilst they were instructing him,
for a Catechumen, he kneeled without any bodies advice, whereas Catechumens
were commonly standing, whilst they were instructed. Those that were there,
observed this Posture, because it was that of Priests, whilst they were
Consecrated. Or. 19. P. 294.
His Son testifies that every body guessed from thence, that he would be one
day honored with the Order of Priesthood. After that, as the Bishop of
Nazianze baptized him, those that were present saw him go out of the Water, all
environed with light; and the Bishop could not withold saying that Gregory
would certainly succeed him in the Episcopacy, as it really fell out, after
that the Sea of Nazianze had been sometime vacant. His Son in relating these
two Circumstances, treats on them both as Miracles; and as then, so at this
day; all the World believed not all that Ecclesiastics said, he declares he
proposes these Marvels but to the Faithful only: Because there is none of these
fine things, which appear credible to profane Minds. Without being Profane,
we cannot but suspect, not of Falsehood, but of a little Credulity and
Exaggeration, these Rhetorical Souls, which draw an Advantage from every thing,
in relating matters of this Nature: When we think to declare what we have seen,
we often say what we judge of a thing which surprises us, and instead of
affirming what we see with our Eyes, we draw some doubtful Consequences from a
prejudiced Mind; so we believe, without enquiry, all that is advantageous to
that which we have embraced, and all that is contrary thereunto is false, or at
least suspicious. If we do not make these Reflections in reading Gregory of
Nazianze, we shall run the hazard either' to take him for a Man of little
Truth, or to believe his Miracles suspicious.

Nonna had at the beginning of her Marriage but one Daughter, Gorgonia; (of
whom Gregory her Brother speaks in diverse places; who was the first of Nonnas
Children) Greg. de vita sua P. 2.
her Mother wished very much for a Son, and vowed to Consecrate him to God if
she had one; whereupon she had presently after a Dream that she saw the Face of
the Son which she was to have, and what should be his Name: Instead of one Son
she had two, of whom she took great Care, as to their Education, because she
found them of a Nature worthy of Instruction.

As soon as Gregory was a little grown, he was sent to Cesarea, Greg. Presb. in
vit. Gr. p. 4. and seq.
the Metropolis of Cappadocia, where the best Masters had the Instruction of
him; to wit, to understand the Greek Poets and Orators, and to learn perfectly
that Tongue. This was the only Tongue then in Reputation in all Asia, and the
reading of Pagan Authors that had writ well in it was all their study there. It
is believed that Gregory came then first acquainted with Basil, whom since he
loved so dearly. From Cesarea of Cappadocia, he went Or. X. P. 163.
to Cesarea of Palestine, where Eusebius was Bishop, he learned there to
declame Hieron. de Script. Eccles. in Eusebius.
as it was taught by a famous Rhetorician named Thespesius: After he had staid
a little at Cesarea, he went to Alexandria, which was a Place very famous, in
that Learned Men resorted thither. The stay he made there was not unprofitable
to him, yet he did not think himself capable of the Title of a Learned Man
until he had been at Athens, the Mother of Sciences.

He went on Board for this purpose, a Vessel of the Isle of Egine, not far
distant from Athens, being in the middle of De vita sua p. 3, 4. Or. 19. p.
306, and 307.
November, his Passage was not very comfortable; coming by the Isle of Cyprus
the Ship was tossed with a violent Storm for several days, and Victuals growing
short, Hunger was one of their many Inconveniences; insomuch that the Seamen
were not in a Condition to do their Business, had it not been for a Phoenician
Vessel brought by the Wind, which supplied them with Victuals. Gregory
testified, that all which troubled him at that time, was his not being
Baptized: That Thought troubled him so much that the Seamen took notice of it,
although they were concerned at the danger they were in themselves. He made a
Vow to get himself Baptized, and to Consecrate himself to God: Then the Storm
immediately ceased. One might by this conclude that he feared Damnation if he
died without Baptism; and since it was the Opinion of those Times, it is a
wonder that his Father and Mother, whose Piety he so much extols, had not got
him Baptized in his Infancy. True it is, Baptism might be deferred for fear of
losing the Grace which God gives to them that receive it, or of being
Excommunicated, if they lived unworthily after being Baptized. But these Fears
take not away the difficulty, seeing one is as much exposed to be damned in
living ill, without having received Baptism, as in dishonouring it after it is
received. Howbeit Gregory says his Parents had notice of the danger he was in,
by a Dream which caused them to pray for him. One in the same Ship saw also
Nonna, Gregory's Mother walking upon the Sea, and drawing the Vessel toward
the Shore, after which the Storm ceased. They Sailed by the Coast of Greece,
and passing by Rhodes, they came at length to the Isle of Egene, whence Gregory
went to Athens.

He was but a short time there when Basil came; Or. 20. p. 326. vid. and
O^ympiad: apud Photium cod. 80.
there it was that the Friendship they had contracted at Cesarea increased very
much. As they applied themselves both to the same Studies, and had the same
Inclinations, so their Friendships increased so much that Gregory said they
were but one Soul in two Bodies. We shall in the Sequel see what was the
breaking of their Friendship. The Sophists or Masters of Rhetoric at Athens
had each their Factions, and endeavored all they could to get Disciples; and
for that purpose they had Men posted at all the Avenues of the Town of Athens;
and as soon as any Youth that came to study appeared, they that were the
strongest seized on him, and carried him to lodge with their Friends. They that
could bring many Scholars to their Masters, paid nothing; and this made poor
Scholars very vigilant to take notice when any Strangers came to Athens. A
young Man being thus in their Hands, some one of the Scholars took delight to
contradict him, that they might try if he was Witty or Ingenious. After that
they carried him in Triumph through public Baignio's, and they who had taken
him went two and two before him: Coming at the Door they made as if they
refused to let him in, and endeavored by a great Noise to terrify him;
notwithstanding they would soon let him in, and being washed, put a
Philosophical Cloak on his Shoulders, which he was not permitted to wear
before. Basil was freed from this Ceremony, because he was more advanced in
Studies than those which used to come to Athens; but we do not see that
Gregory, who rehearses this, had found the same Privilege. This Custom was
observed, though of little value in it self; but it shows the Passion they
had for Sophistry and Rhetoric, and how greedy Masters were for Disciples. We
may see by this that the Academies of their Times were not better ordered than
these of our Times, and that according to all appearance, one came not out
thence better instructed than from our Academies at this time.

The two most famous Sophists at Athens, were Hincerius and Proeresius, both
much esteemed by the Emperor Julian. The second being an Armenian Eunap. Sard.
in vita Prooeres.
had on that account all the Youths of Pontus, Cappadocia, Bithinia, and other
Neighboring Provinces in his School. Which makes us believe that it was under
him that Gregory studied at Athens. This same Sophist had got himself such an
Esteem, that the Emperor Constantine took him to his own Table, and sent him in
a Magnificent Equipage to Rome, where he erected a Statue of Princes Metal,
with this Inscription at the bottom, Rome the Queen of Cities to the King of
Eloquence.

Basil having received an Honor at Athens, Nazianze, Or. 20. p. 328.
which seldom was bestowed upon any that went thither, had several that envied
him. Some Youths of Armenia, who had took the Philosophical Cloak, and were
entered into the Schools, where they learned only to prattle before him, thought
it their duty to humble this new Comer. They understood it in a Dispute, but
finding him stronger than they, saw themselves reduced to abandon the Field,
had it not been for Gregory, who thought the Honor of Athens was at a Stake,
came to their Assistance, and made the Combat equal on both sides.
Notwithstanding he perceived that the Armenians did it only out of Spite,
which made him take Basil's part, who then put his Adversaries to rout. From
that time their Amity increased, and they lived very lovingly together. Without
the happy meeting of such a Friend as Gregory, Basil would have been very weary
of Athens, where he found not the Learning he expected. But Gregory advised
him, and made him understand that he must employ some time to know well all the
Learned Men of a City, and to judge of them without Temerity. They both applied
themselves to the wisest and most rational Persons that studied at Athens, and
not to them that made the greatest show, and disputed the best. Basil left the
Town first, and after some Travels, retired into Cesarea. Gregory also some
time after went into Cappadocia, to ease and comfort the old Age of his Father
and Mother; he gives a Description in several places De vita sua p. 4. and
alibi.
after a very tender manner of his Separation which cost him many Tears, by
which we may understand that Gregory was of a tender Disposition for his
Friends.

Gregory had spent Thirty Years in learning or teaching Rhetoric, as he
witnesses himself; to wit, that he quitted Athens about the Year Three hundred
fifty four, or Three hundred fifty five. It is hard to believe, that having a
very ancient Father and Mother, he did not think of going to them sooner, and
did not undertake to do the Christian Church some other Service, than to study
or teach Rhetoric; vid. Pagi. Crit. Baron. ad an. 354, and 388.
If all the rest of his Life did not show it as may be easily perceived by
reading the remainder of this History. Julian, who was afterward made Emperor,
resided also there, rather, as Gregory says, to consult the Soothsayers
concerning his Fortune, than to study Philosophy. From that time Gregory began
to hope for no good from him, as may be seen in the Speeches which he made
against him. When Basil was gone, he particularly applied himself to Eloquence,
and declaimed with such Applauses, that every one esteemed him the greatest
Orator of those times. His Inclination, as he witnesses him self, was not for
that kind of Life; and he left Athens soon after without taking leave of any:
Ibid. p. 5, and 6. and Or. oc. p. 165.
He had a natural love for Retirement, and this hindered him from any way of
Living where there was much business. Those that live thus, and acquit
themselves well of their Employments, appeared to him to be profitable only to
others; and those that live quite retired seem to him profitable only to
themselves. He wished he could keep in the middle of these two Extremes, and to
lead a kind of a Monastical Life in the midst of Men; without taking any
Occupation upon him, but such as he would willingly choose, and without being
Subject to troublesome Regularities, which give a distaste to the finest
Employments.

He left Athens with these Thoughts, and took the way of Constantinople by
Land; he found their his Brother Cesaire, who was arrived by Sea from
Alexandria, where he had studied Physic. Or. 10. p. 164.
He had acquired so much Reputation during his stay at Constantinople, that the
Emperor would have kept him for his Physician, made him Burgess of
Constantinople, and give him the Dignity of Senator, and a considerable
Interest. What Inclination soever Cesaire had to yield to his Solicitations,
the desire of his Parents and Exhortations of his Brother made him omit all
this, and take his Journey with him to Nazianze; but having lived there some
time, he returned to Constantinople, in which it was far more pleasing to live,
than in a desert City of Cappadocia. As for Gregory he got himself Baptized at
Nazianze, and his Father soon after engaged him to give himself up to a
studious Life, and to take the Orders of Priesthood. Gregory a long while after
could not De vita sua p. 6.
but call Ep. 11.
this Action of his Father Tyranny. But the Respect he had for him, and the
Encumbrance wherein honest Men labored about the Controversies of Arianism,
where even his Father was entangled, obliged him patiently to bear the Yoke
that was put upon him.

Basil had got a Promise Ep. 5. Greg.
of him, that when he should quit Athens, he would come to live with him; but
Gregory could not be as good as his Word, being obliged to live with his
Parents. He invited Basil to come to see him sometimes, but we find not that
they ever were a long while together. Several were desirous that he would get
himself ordained Priest, and then frequented no more the Church of Orat. 11.
Nazianze for that reason, as he upbraids them in one of his Speeches, in which
notwithstanding he praises the Concord and Orthodoxy of this Church. He gives
them also a remarkable Praise, viz. That they made Piety consist, not in
speaking much of God, but in keeping silence and obeying him. If the ancient or
modern Divines had endeavored to deserve this Praise, Christianity would not
have been torn by so many Disputes, nor be as it now is.

Constans to appease (if it were possible) the Contentions of Arianism called
an Ecumenick Council in CCCLIX, which was divided into two Assemblies. The
Eastern Bishops were to hold theirs in Selucia in Isauria, and those of the
Western at Rimini a City of Romain. The Arians which were at Selucia Socr. l.
2. c. 40.
made a Confession of Faith, in which supposing they should make use of no
term, which was not in Holy Writ, and that consequently that of Consubstantial
was not to be used, they contented themselves to say, That the Son was like to
the Father, according to the Apostle, who says that the Son is the Image of
the Invisible God. There they also condemned those who did say, That the Son
was not like the Father. It was Acacius Bishop of Cesarea in Palestine, who had
composed this Confession of Faith. The same Acacius, and those of his Party
approved of the Confession of Rimini, which was conceived in such like terms.
They added only, that mention should not be Socr. l. 11. c. 41. etc. Sozom.
1.4. cap. 29.
made in this occasion, neither of Substance nor Hypostasis, because these
terms which had caused so many Disputes, were not found in Holy Writ.
Notwithstanding the Arians being pressed by the Orthodox to give their Opinion
in what consisted this resemblance of the Son with the Father, made it consist
in Will only; whereas the others maintained that the Substance of the Son, though
distinct, was altogether like the Substance of the Father. But upon each side
they used equivocal terms, so that unhappy. Inferences were made by those which
were not well acquainted with these kinds of Subtleties, in equivocating and
confounding their different Sentiments. The Father of Gregory was one of those
which fell into this Ambuscade; Or. 19. p. 297. and vit. Greg. p. 11.
he subscribed the Confessions of Faith of Seleucia and Rimini. The marvelous
light which appeared at his Baptism, nor the Studies he since made, had not
cleared his mind, so as to give him a true Intelligence of the Arian
Controversies. This Action of the Bishop of Nazianze alarmed the Monks of
Cappadocia, who full of Zeal for Consubstantiality, refused to communicate with
this good Man, and drew a part of the People after them. It seems that Gregory
the Son was not then at Nazianze, seeing he would have hindered his Father from
committing a Fault, which he afterward obliged him to repair, by a public
Retraction.

Having thus appeased the Monks, Gregory the Son ascended into the Pulpit, and
made a Discourse concerning Peace, which is the Twelfth of his Speeches, in
presence of his Father, who was not to be compared to him in Eloquence and
Ability. 1. He says, That the Joy he had to see Peace return into the Church
of Nazianze, had induced him to make this Discourse, whilst nothing before had
obliged him to speak. 2. That he was extremely concerned at the Separation
which was made before, chiefly when he considered the Austere and Holy Life of
the Monks, which he describes by the bye with much Rhetoric. 3. That Divisions
are the cause of all sorts of Evils, and that they had reason to praise God,
because that which arose in the Church of Nazianze, was appeased. 4. That the
Church of Nazianze, which before this last Division did not know what Schism
was, ought, for the future, to endeavor a perpetual Peace. 5. That in the last
Discord, they were so strongly persuaded that the Bishop of Nazianze acted
Sincerely, and retained the Truth of Faith, that he was reproached with nothing
else, but suffered himself to be surprised by equivocating words. 6. That every
thing obliges us to Peace, God, Angels, and all Creatures, which Concord holds
together. 7. That the Jews were happy whilst they were at Peace, and unhappy as
soon as they were divided. 8. That notwithstanding Men ought not to seek after
all sorts of Peace, but to keep a Medium, and that they were obliged,
vigorously to oppose Heresy, when any one was seen to profess it publicly;
but that for mere Suspicions there should be no Schism P. 203
. When that which afflicts us, says he, is but a Suspicion, and what is
grounded upon nothing, Patience is better than Precipitation, and Condescension
better than Furiousness. It is much better to correct each other reciprocally
like Members of one Body, than to condemn our selves by a Separation, before
they mutually understand one another; or to lose the Opinion the one had of the
other by a Schism, and then to undertake to correct others, not like Brethren,
but Tyrants, by Edicts and Laws. Finally, Gregory exhorts the Church of
Nazianze to preserve the good Doctrine concerning the Holy Trinity, which he
expresses in these words. P. 204.
We adore one Father, one Son, and one Holy Ghost; in the Son we acknowledge
the Father, and in the Holy Ghost the Son. Before we join them we distinguish
them, and before we distinguish them we join them. We do not look upon these
three things as one (God) for they are not things which are destitute of a
distinct Existence, or which have but one Existence; just so our Riches are but
in names of things, and not in things themselves, the other three things really
are but one. It is a thing not in Existence but in Divinity: We adore one Unity
in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity. It has all but one Throne and one Glory: It
is above all the World, beyond Time, uncreated, etc.

This Speech of Gregory, as almost all his others, is first without any great
Order: His thoughts are heaped upon one another just as they came into the
Author's Head, a Fault which is common to most of the Ancient Orators, which
makes him fall into unnecessary Repetitions. Secondly, His Arguments seem
sometimes to be too far fetched and of little Consequence, as when he says the
Universe subsists by Peace. This Expression is too far sought for, one might
say quite contrary, as some Philosophers, That the Contrariety, in which are
all the parts of the Universe, keeps the State they are in, hindering one
another to be otherwise. In the third place, his Style is very full of Figures,
uncorrect, and sometimes hard, and all this often causes Obscurity.
Notwithstanding we must allow that he is full of fine Similitudes, of strong
and happy Expressions, as are those whereof he makes use in that part where he
condemns Schism, which we before mentioned. He is full of Ornaments drawn out
of History or Pagan Fables; and he speaks of the last in some places, as the
Philosophers do, without openly rejecting it. So Or. 3 p. 86
in speaking of the Flames of Aetna, he makes use of this Expression, Whether
it be something else, or the Breathing of a punished Giant. In another place,
after he had spoken of the Torments of Tantalus Ixion and Tityus, he adds,
Whether it be Truth or a Fable under a Fiction, teaches us a Truth. We cannot
yet doubt but Gregory did observe all these things as pure Fables; but the
Greek Philosophers, which he had carefully read, said the same. One would
think, that the Custom of speaking like others, had made Gregory say several
things which he had in Pagan Books without Examination. But he is far from the
Clearness, Exactness and Eloquence of Isocrates, whom many say he took for a
Model. I thought it my Duty briefly to take notice here, of what you may judge,
what was the Style of Gregory, that I may not repeat it hereafter in speaking
of his other Speeches: I shall only take notice of some Examples of what I have
said, when occasion shall offer.

We must also observe here, once for all, that Gregory, as to what concerns
Philosophy, followed that of the Platonicks, of whom he borrows diverse Terms,
which we cannot understand without knowing it. So P. 198.
he says, That God* is the most Excellent and the most elevate of all Beings,
we cannot but raise him above all Essence, and place him above all Beings,
seeing he has given Beings to other things. For to understand the meaning of
these Terms, being above Essence, we must know that the Platonicks did
establish a Choice of Beings, as they spoke, to wit, Series of Beings placed
upon one another; so that as they mounted this Chain, they came to more
excellent Beings, and at last to Sovereign Trinity, which is above all the
Essences of these Beings; that is to say, which cannot have relation to any
particular Species, but which includes in it all their Essences, and can
produce them upon that reason. Vid. Proclum Theol. Platon. l. 111 c. 20. and
alibi.
This is what makes these Philosophers say, That the Gods have Superessential
Qualities. Without knowing this Platonic Tenet, we cannot comprehend what
Gregory means, in the words which we have cited.

In the same Page he says, That the Angels draw their Principles from Light;
that they are enlightened by true Reason, and that they are Rays of this
perfect Light. These terms are drawn from the bottom of Platonism, as it might
be easily shown in Expounding them, but that we should make too great a
Digression. It shall suffice to mark what the Philosophy of our Author was.

To return to the History, the Arians being informed of the Division which had
been at Nazianze, drew some Advantage from it, and laughed at the Orthodox.
This gave occasion to Gregory to make the Homily, which is the Thirteenth of
his Speeches, where he shows the Arians, that the Division of Nazianze being
sprung but from a Misunderstanding, and having lasted but a short time, they
unjustly insulted over this Church. Moreover he shows the Advantage of the
Orthodox, above the Arians and Sabellians, in comparing the Sentiments of these
three Societies one with another. Though the Passage is somewhat long, it shall
be put here, because those who have not sufficiently studied these Matters,
shall better understand what was then the Sentiment of the Orthodox, than they
could by the Passage of the Twelfth Speech which has been related.

Why love P. 208.
ye Vanity, says he unto them, and seek for Lies, in giving (he speaks to the
Arians) to the Divinity a Nature, which is neither one, ^or ^^^ple, but three
Natures disunited and separate, and even contrary by the Proprieties which the
one has too much, and which the others lack; or in establishing well one only
Nature (he directs his Discourse to the Sabellians) but narrow and straightened,
and which has not the Propriety of being the Principle of great things, as not
being capable thereof, or not having a will for it? It must needs be either by
Envy, or by Fear, that you do not establish any thing which should equal it, or
that should oppose it. But in as much as God is more excellent than Creatures,
so much is he most worthy of the first cause of being the Principle of a
Divinity, than of Creatures, and of not descending to these latter but by a
Divinity which is betwixt two: As if the Divinity existed (according to the
Arians) because of Creatures, as it seems to those who are so very subtle. If
in confessing the Dignity of the Son and Holy Ghost, we made them without a
Principle, or if we related them to a Principle of another Nature, then we
should dishonor Divinity, or introduce Gods opposed one to another. A little
lower Gregory says, That the Unity moved it self by reason of its Bounty, and
that the number of two has been surpassed, because Divinity is beyond Matter
and Form, which are the two Principles whereof Bodies are composed; that
Trinity is limited by reason of its Perfection, and surpasses the Conjunction
of two, so that Divinity is neither too strait, nor does extend it self to
Infinity. The first, adds he, has something in it very derogatory, and the
second would cause Confusion. The first is altogether Jewish, and the second
Heathenish. The word to move it self, in this occasion, is a Platonic term,
Vid. Plotin. Ennead. v. l. 1. c. 6. and 7.
which these Philosophers use when they speak of the Productions of Divinity;
and Gregory means that Divine Nature has been multiplied to three Hypostases
or three Individuals; which is opposed to Judaism, which holds but one Supreme
Nature; and to Paganism, which establishes too great a number of Gods. The
Platonicks disputed amongst one another upon this; the one maintained that
Supreme Divinity has not been multiplied but to their Gods, and that all which
is above that is not of a like nature; and the others understood it in a
greater number of Divinities. vid. Cyrill. and cont. Julian. and Plotin. Enn.
5. l. 8. c. 12.
Plato and Porphyrius were of the first Sentiment, and Plotinus of the second.

Julian having ascended the Throne in the Year CCLXI. sought all manner of ways
to ruin the Christians; and perceiving they made great use of Pagan Authors,
whether to form themselves to Eloquence, or to draw from thence Reasons fit for
maintaining the Christian Religion, and to attack Paganism, he undertook to
hinder the Christians from applying themselves to the Study of Literature: Some
Ancients say, that he prohibited them, Vid. P. 1. ad an. 262.
not only to keep Schools themselves, but also to frequent the Schools of
Grammarians and Orators amongst the Pagans; others seem only to say, that
Christians were prohibited to keep Schools. Julian himself says formally ( Ep.
xli.
in one of his Letters) That the Children of Christians should not be hindered
to go to the Schools of Pagans, because those who offend not, but for want of
Wit, ought to be taught and not punished. Gregory of Nazianzen speaks of this
Prohibition of Julian in his third Speech, but according to the Judicious
Observation of a Page 1. ad ann. 362. n. 130.
Modern, speaking more like an Orator than an Historian, it is hard to
penetrate into his thoughts. It Is a bad effect of the continual Rhetoric of
the Ancients: They are so Eloquent, that they are not understood. It Is likely
that Julian prohibited not the Children of Christians to go to the Schools of
Pagan Doctors, either because he says it, or because it was a good means to
seduce them. Hence some Learned Men amongst Christians, as the two Apollinaries
and Gregory, put Scripture and Religion in Greek Verses, or in fine Prose.
These Writings would supply the Reading of those of Ancient Pagans, and Youth
had no need of Grammarians for to understand them. Parents could easily serve
their Children in room of a Tutor, to expound unto them these Christian Verses
after having read Scripture. Yet this Prohibition extremely vexed the
Christians, which would not suffer their Grammarians, their Rhetoricians and
their Philosophers in the Churches of the Galileans (these are the terms of
Julian) to expound their Matthew and Luke. If he never had done any other
thing, they would not have introduced so many new words, nor so much subtiliz'd
upon the Tenets then in Dispute; and the Platonic Philosophy had not had so
much share in their Decisions.

It was about this time that Caesar, Brother to Gregory, who returned (as we
have said) to Constantinople, was, because of his Knowledge, received first
Physician to Julian, and placed amongst the number of the Friends of this
Emperor, who loved learned Men. Gregory writ him thereupon a Letter Ep. 17.
extremely sharp, wherein he told him, that he had covered his Family with
Confusion through his Conduct; that every one thought it strange that the Son
of a Bishop should follow the Court, and should seek for Honors, and get Riches
amongst Pagans; that he made his Fathers Life bitter, who could not reprehend
others of what his Son did commit; that they were forced to hide this Conduct
from his Mother, fearing it should make her dye for very Grief; that he had
Means enough to live Honestly, without exposing himself to so great a Danger;
that in fine, if he continued in this manner of Life, he must be ranked amongst
such Christians as are least worthy of bearing this name. If this Letter
obliged not Caesar to return to his Parents, there is a likelihood it
strengthened him against the Endeavors of Julian, of making him abandon
Christianism, whereof his Brother speaks Or. p. 167 and 168.
in one of his Speeches. He says, That Caesar having answered to all his
Reasons, protested to him he was a Christian, and would be so all his Life, and
that Julian cried out before several Persons of the Court, when he thought on
the Bishop of Nazianze and his two Sons, O Happy Father! O Happy Children!
Caesar either wearied by the Solicitations of Julian, or touched with the
Advertisements of his Brother, returned to Nazianze in the time that Julian
departed to go against the Persians.

It appears to be about the same time that Julian sent a Captain with Archers
to Or. 19. p. 308.
Nazianze, to seize on the Church of the Christians; but far from being able to
do what he desired, for if he had not escaped immediately, by advice of the
Bishop, or of some other Person, he would have returned with his Legs broken,
so great was the Anger and Zeal of the Priest (of Gregory the Father) for this
Temple: These are the own words of his Son, which shows that these good Folks
did not always Preach Passive Obedience.

In the Year CCCLXIII. Julian was killed in his retreat from before the Army of
the Persians; Ibid.
the effect (if we believe herein the Charitable Gregory) of the Prayers of the
same Bishop and the same People, who were for breaking the Legs of the Captain
of the Archers, of whom we have spoke.

Then it was that Gregory composed his two Invectives against Julian, where he
omits nothing to render him Odious to all Posterity. These two Speeches are
assuredly full of all the Eagerness and Passion that can be imagined, against a
Man, who setting aside his Paganism, had been one of the greatest Emperors
which has been in the Roman Empire. A Learned Man has unreasonably thought
that these two Speeches were published during the Life of Julian; Gregory
speaks of his Death in both of them. The same Author remarketh P. Cunaeus
Praef. in Caesares Iuliani.
reasonably enough, That the Authority of some that have been in times past
Illustrious in the Church, does mightily deceive us, when we judge after them
of some Princes of their time. Prejudices are so strong (says he) that they
seldom come into Examination, but suffer themselves to be entertained under the
Authority of the Holiness of these Illustrious Men. The Vulgar imagines it a
great Sin, to disbelieve that the Piety of these Men has not always been
accompanied with a great deal of Candor. As for my part, as I am persuaded that
they were Virtuous, so I know that they have committed Faults through Passion.
To say nothing of others, those that had some Reputation in Greece, have been
subject to the evil Custom of their Nation, to fall into Extremities, etc. They
have cast headlong into Hell those they were angry with, though their Virtue
had raised them up to Heaven: And on the contrary, they have so highly raised
those they have undertaken to Praise, that Posterity this day admires their
Virtue, which scarcely was indifferent: It is necessary to remember this Genius
of the Grecians, if we have a mind sincerely to judge of the Panegyricks and
Invectives of Christian Antiquity.

1. Gregory begins his first Invective Or. 3. p. 49
with Furious Railings against Julian, which he invites Heaven and Earth to
hear. He particularly makes his Address to the Soul of Constantius, who had
set up Julian to be Caesar. In speaking to him he adds these words, P. 46.
If the Dead perceive any thing: By which it appears, he doubted if the Dead
know any thing of what passes here on Earth. Notwithstanding he says
elsewhere, Page 63.
That he reprehends him as if Constantius was present and did hear him, though
he was with God and enjoyed his Glory. This shows that this is but an
Apostrophe of Rhetoric, whence nothing can be concluded.

2. He mightily wonders that Constantius had raised Julian to the Dignity of
Caesar, knowing what he was; and sets forth at the same time the Praise of the
first, whose Piety he boasts of every where; Page 65.
he defends him against those who accused him of Imprudency for having raised
up Julian, after having put to Death his Brother Gallus; and says, That he
thought to mitigate the mind of Julian by Kindnesses, and that full of
Confidence in his own Strength, he feared him not, as it might be seen, if
Constance had not been Dead. In the following Speech against Julian, speaking
of the same Emperor, he excuses him for the Protection he had given the Arians.
He says, Or. 5. p. 119.
That he suffered himself to be put upon by Simplicity and want of Firmness,
and that the appearance of Zeal that he saw in the Arian Officers at Court, had
seduced him. It would be hard to grant this with the Principles of Gregory, who
looked on the Questions of Arianism as Capitals; if it were not known that the
Expressions of Orators are not to be pressed, as those of a Geometrician. But
there would be much ado to reconcile him with St. Hilary of Poictiers, who has
treated Constantius a great deal worse than Gregory treats Julian. These
great Men acted as others, according to the Passion that animated them at the
present, without too much weighing the Figures and Expressions which they made
use of.

3. Gregory Page 51.
Laughs at Julian, who hindered the Christians to teach Profane Letters,
because the Reasons of Christians would not be the less Strong, tho they were
not proposed with so much Purity: But he makes as if he despised Eloquence and
Politeness, which in truth he did not despise, and which he shows as much as
he can in all his Writings, which would be even very often more clear, if there
was not so much Rhetoric in them. He also Reproacheth Julian, who trusted much
on his Eloquence, the desire he testified to take from the Christians the means
to acquire it: Which is, says he, the same thing as if a Wrestler played the
Bravade after having prohibited all the Vigorous Wrestlers to Contend with him.

4. He assures us Page 55.
That Constantius had carefully Educated Gallus and Julian, Sons to one of his
Uncles, and who also was named Constantius, to show that he had no share in the
Murder of the latter, which had been Commissioner when Constantius, Son to
Constantine, ascended the Throne. He was willing even to communicate the Empire
to his two Sons, who were of a very different Disposition, if we believe
Gregory. Tho they had been instructed after the same manner, and were both of
them willing to be Anagnostes, or to read the Holy Scriptures at Church; it
appeared afterward that one of them was not a Christian: It was said, and
Gregory believed it to be true, that Gallus and Julian building a Temple at
equal Expenses, in Honor of some Martyrs, what Gallus Builded did sensibly
Augment; but that the Ground Trembled in the Place where Julian built, and that
all which was done did Fall. There happened besides many other Miracles far
different from those of the Gospel, which were not so much in favor of the
Incredulous, as of those whose Disposition did not render them quite unworthy.
True it is, that Gregory P. 70.
says, that Falsehood was mixed with Truth, and relates but doubtfully what was
said, that Julian in Sacrificing, had seen a Crowned Cross in the Entrails of a
Victim. But he relates for truth things far more incredible in the following
Speech, P. 71.
and in this, he says, That Julian having called out the Devils by certain
Sacrifices, could not forbear trembling so soon as he heard the noise, and saw
certain Fires which usually precede their Apparition; and that as he had been
Educated in Christianity, he made the sign of the Cross, which immediately
banished all these Specter. The Priest that acted the Ceremonies, and
perceived the disturbance of Julian, told him that the Gods abhorred him for
that reason, and not that they were in any wise fearful of the sign of the
Cross, which he had made. So he begun the Sacrifice again, and Julian looked
upon the Devils.

5. Gregory P. 72.
laugheth at the Artifices which Julian made use of to Persecute the
Christians, without procuring them the Honor of Martyrdom, and without seeming
to entreat them evilly; because whatever Pretense he made use of, it was easily
seen that Christianity was their greatest Crime. Persecution for the cause of
Religion, is so Odious in it self, in those who have retained any spark of
Humanity, that the very People who make use of it, are ashamed thereof, when
Superstition and Cruelty leave them any interval, to think, with a little more
calmness on what they do. This is so true, that most of those, which have
abondoned themselves to the blind Zeal of Superstition, have made use of the
same artifices. Our Age has seen an illustrious Example of it, and if we
compare what Gregory says hereof, and the evil Crafts of Julian, with what
has been done not long since in a great Kingdom, there will be a great
Similitude found betwixt them. We shall pass it by here, fearing lest it should
be thought that we have a mind to stop at a Parallel so Odious as this.

6. Amongst the Reasons whereof Gregory makes use to show that Julian could not
succeed in his Design, he thus describes the power of the Saints which
Christians honored: Page 76. and 77.
Have you not feared those to whom so great Honor is done, and for whom solemn
Feasts have been established; by which Devils have been driven away and
Diseases cured; whose Apparitions and Predictions are known; whose very Bodies
have as much Virtue as their holy Souls, whether they are touched or honored,
of whom some drops of Blood only have the same Virtue as their Body. We see by
these Words, and diverse places of Gregory, and other Fathers of his time, that
there was then a great deal of Respect had to the Relics of Saints, and that a
great many Miracles were said to be done at their Graves. It is astonishing
that Gregory, who loved enlarging, has not said even that the Bodies of Saints
had more Virtue after their Death than during their Life; for there is no
comparison between the multitude of Miracles, which were said to be done at the
Graves of Martyrs, and those which they did whilst alive. Many People believe
that the Falsehood of some Christians, and the Credulity of some others
contributed much to hold up Paganism.

7. Our Author P. 77.
makes a Panegyric upon the Monks in the sequel, after having despised
Socrates and Plato, and all the Pagan Philosophers. Gregory reproacheth Julian,
that he did not love Virtue in his Enemies; but certainly Zeal made him commit
here some such thing; and it is very certain that he had infinitely learned
more out of Plato, and the Discourses of Socrates, than in the Conversation of
all the Monks that he had seen. As to their Lives, the endless Seditions of
those Pious Hermits, and their implacable Humor, show sufficiently that they
were infinitely beneath these great Models of Pagan Antiquity.

8. He remarketh P. 80.
very well, that to be desirous to ruin the Christian Religion, in a time
wherein the Roman Empire was full of Christians, was to undertake to ruin the
very Empire. When they were in a small number, they could not be ill treated
without Prejudice to the State; but when they were numerous they could not be
engaged without causing great Convulsions, and too much disorder. It were to be
desired that the Imitators of Julian had well weighed this Advertisement of
Gregory; who despises most justly all the good that could accrue from the
Government of Julian, in comparison with the evil that so detestable a Design
would have caused, if he had been able to put it in Execution. It were yet to
be wished, that our Age had P. 83, and 84.
been well instructed in the Horror which the Snares that Julian by his
Officers and Soldiers, laid for Christians. Gregory says that some Christian
Soldiers having one day, when Julian gave some Liberality to his Army, cast
Incense in his Presence into the fire, according to an ancient Custom, usually
interpreted, as if they had burned Incense to the Idols. Nevertheless many
others had done it, without any Reflection; and being admonished of their
Fault, as they invocated Jesus Christ making the sign of the Cross after their
Meal, by some one that told them they had renounced him, they went immediately
crying out in the Marketplace, and in the Ears of the Emperor, that they had
been surprised, and that they were Christians. Julian provoked at the mistake,
banished them.

9. Gregory describes P. 87. and 88.
some horrid Cruelties against the Christians which Julian had authorized in
Egypt and Syria. He says that the Inhabitants of Arethusa a City of Syria,
after having made Young-Women consecrated to God suffer a thousand Indignities,
killed them, eat their Livers all raw, and gave their Flesh to Swine to feed
on, covering it with Barley. These People treated with an abominable Barbarity,
the Bishop of this City, who notwithstanding appeared almost insensible in his
Torments; and Gregory P. 88.
marks that this Bishop, in the time of Constantius, exercised, having liberty
from the Emperor, an Habitation of Devils, to wit, a Pagan Church. This Action
of Mark of Arethusa had drawn upon him the Hatred of the People, as a Pagan
would have been detested by the Christians, if he had destroyed one of their
Churches. Notwithstanding Gregory Page 97.
a little lower says, not only that the Christians did not Treat the Pagans as
they had been Treated by them: But he asks of them, What Liberty Christians
had taken from them? As if it were nothing to pull down their Temples, as was
done Sozom. l. 2. c. 5.
since the Reign of Constantine! They continued with the same Rigor under the
following Emperors; and that they might be Reproacht with nothing of Paganism,
it was Prohibited on pain of Death to Sacrifice to Idols, with the Applause of
all the Christians, if St. Ep. xlviii. ad Vincunct^^m.
Augustine can be believed. We must not forget to Remark here another effect of
the Rhetoric of Gregory. It is, that in speaking of the Christian Young Women
of Aret^usa, who had been so Abused; he Accuses not only the Pagans, but also
makes an Apostrophe to our Lord thus: O Jesus Christ, how shall I suffer the
pain which you had then!

10. Julian added Insults also to his ill Treatments, and in taking away the
Christians Goods, he said, he only assisted them to observe the Gospel, which
commanded 'em to despise the things of this Life. This Railery is in the forty
third Letter of Julian, where he says, that the Church of the Arians at Edessa
having done some Violence to the Valentinians, he had Confiscated all their
Money to distribute it to the Soldiers, and kept their Goods to himself; fearing
lest the Arians being too Rich, could not get into the Kingdom of Heaven.
Gregory Answers to this, amongst other things, that Julian acting thus, made as
if he imagined that the Gods of the Heathens thought it necessary, that People
should be deprived of their Goods, without deserving it, and that they approved
of Injustice. He might have been satisfied with this Answer; but he adds, that
there are things which Jesus Christ has commanded as necessary, and others
which he has simply proposed for those that would observe them, without
indispensibly obliging any one to do it. Such is according to Gregory, the
Commandment of abandoning the Wealth of this World.

11. One thing for which they abused the Christians of that time, and upon
which they did not always defend themselves so well as they might have done,
was the Pagans Reproaching them for upholding Ignorance, Page 97.
Seeing they Preached nothing else but Faith. You do not Reason, said Julian
unto them, at all; you are Rusticks, and all your Wisdom consists in saying
Believe. Gregory answers to that, that if Julian jeered the Christians, by
reason of this Method, he ought also to Laugh at Pythagoras, whose Disciples
were accustomed to say, when they were asked the reason of any thing, that
Pythagoras had said it; which comes to the same sense. He adds, that Christians
meant nothing else thereby, but that we must not refuse a belief to what has
been said by Men Inspired from God; and that if they are worthy of Faith, what
they say is more Demonstrable than all the Faculties of Reasoning and
Contradicting. Celsus raised the same Difficulty, and Laughed at those that
said, Examine not, but Believe. Origin had answered, that 'twas in effect
impossible for the Multitude thoroughly to Examine things; and that there was
nothing more convenient for the People, than to Believe, without knowing the
reason why. Answers of this nature would not render Christianism very
Recommendable; nor to put Christians in a State of Triumphing over Pagans, who
might have shut their Mouths by such Answers. For in fine, if we must Believe
without knowing why, we may equally believe all that we hear say, be it never
so absurd.

12. Julian having remarked that Ecclesiastical Discipline and Order, which was
amongst Christians, helped infinitely to Unite them one to another, and to
augment their number, had resolved to introduce them into Paganism. He would P.
102.
Establish Schools in every City wherein the Pagan Religion was taught, and
also good Manners; public Prayers; Censures against those that would commit
any Fault; Monasteries; Hospitals, where care was to be taken of the Poor and
Sick. The Christians were Maintained and increased in the midst of Persecutions
by these ways, which were much more convenient to gain the People, than
Reasoning. Those who have treated of the manner whereby Christianity increased,
have notwithstanding, I know not why, for the most part forgotten the good
Order, and this regulated Charity, which was Established amongst them.

13. To make an end of the extract of this Speech, I shall only say, that
afterward Gregory P. 103. and seqq.
Attacks the Divinity of the Pagans. He is much Stronger on this occasion, than
when he defends himself; and it seems he knew a great deal better the weakness
of Pagan Religion, than the strength of his own.

I shall besides give an Extract of the principal Places of his second Speech
against Julian, and after that, I shall only in general speak of the Subject of
the other Writings of Gregory; whereas what we have seen, is enough to judge
what his Genius was. This Speech contains in general the evil Designs of Julian
against the Christians, with some of his Actions and his Death.

1. He was pleased to favor Or. p. 3.
the Jews, to opopse them to the Christians, and to Rebuild their Temple of
Jerusalem. The Jews beginning this Work, there happened as there did when
Julian himself built with his Brother Gallus, so great an Earthquake, that they
all Fled. And upon entering into a neighboring Temple to shelter themselves,
the Doors Shut of themselves, as some did relate. But all the World, if we may
believe Gregory, did affirm, that as they endeavored by force to get into this
Temple, there issued forth Flames of Fire, which Consumed one part of them, and
Disabled the rest. If there happened any Miraculous thing on this occasion, it
must be granted that there has been no great care taken to write it faithfully,
since History does vary extremely upon this Subject; as may be seen by
comparing only Socrates and Sozomen with Gregory. Yet the latter speaks of this
Fire which came forth, either from the Foundation, or from the Temple, as a
certain Truth; and to prevail with the Incredulous, he adds, That no body
refuses to believe these Miracles, if he does not likewise reject the other
Miracles of God. What there is most Admirable and Bright in it is, that in the
Firmament was seen a Light which represented the Cross, etc. The Miracle
stopped not there: Let those who have seen this Miracle, continues Gregory,
show their Clothes marked with the Cross. As soon as any one, whether of our
Party, or of Strangers, related it, or heard any body relating it, he did
perceive this Wonder, in himself, or in those who were near him. He saw it
shine on his Clothes, or on those of others, after a more Artificial manner
than the finest Weaving, or the most exact Painting could represent it. This
Miracle added to the forementioned, did Convert an infinite number of People,
if we may believe Gregory.

2. He after this describes the March and Conduct of Julian against the
Persians, and his Death, on which the Relation was different, some relating it
after a certain manner, and others after another; a Variety which was found not
only amongst those which were not in the Combat where he was Slain, but among
those which were at it. Gregory tells what he knew on it by Hearsay; but he
has not as yet writ all that was said of it, as it may be seen by what Sozomen
reports, l. 4. c. 1 and 2. There is no danger of his saying chiefly that the
Sophist Libanius. Accused the Christians of having Killed this Emperor. We may
thereby learn, that when Men Reason upon Fact, they ought not too much to rely
upon Circumstances. Our Author, who draws advantage from every thing, Prefers
Constantius to Julian, P. 118.
because the Funerals of Constantius were better in Order than those of his
Cousin; and that he was Praised after his Death, whilst Christians detested the
Memory of Julian. Amongst the Ceremonies wherewith those of Constantius were
Honored, Gregory puts Ibid.
the Nocturn Hymns and Torches; as if Constantius had been the Happier for it
after his Death.

3. After having reproached Julian with his Inconstance and Avarice, his
Disposition to Wrath, and several other Vices, P. 121. and seq.
he says, That that which others had acknowledged by Experience in this
Emperor, he had foreseen it a long while before, when he was at Athens. For he
thought that no good could be expected from a Man who continually moved his
Head, stirred and lifted his Shoulders, had his Eyes Wandering and his Looks
Furious, stumbling Feet, the Air of his Face full of Insolence, and in which
might be seen some, I know not what, ridiculous, excessive Laughters, his words
Stuttering; of a Man in fine who put Impertinent Questions, and gave Answers
which were no better. Seeing this, Gregory said, in presence of several People,
That he wished he was a bad Prophet, but he feared That the Roman Empire
nourished a great Evil. A Learned Man P. Can^^^ Praef. in Caesares.
whom we have already cited, could not endure that Gregory should lay so much
to the Charge of Julian of certain things, which have no relation of themselves
with Virtue.

4. Gregory P. 124. Verse. and p. 127.
who had begged of God the Punishment of Julian; as soon as he saw him Dead,
looked on the Pagans with Pity, and exhorted the Christians to treat them with
Mildness; though he was overjoyed that the Christian Churches should be no more
polluted, that the Altars would be no more Profaned, that things consecrated to
God should be no more carried away from his Temples, that Ecclesiastics should
no more be abused, that the Relics of Martyrs would be no more burned, etc.
After that he Insults over the False Divinities, and admonishes Christians not
to abuse their Prosperity, and to take heed they did not do what they
reproached the Pagans with. In beginning this P. 128.
Exhortation, he speaks of himself in these terms, to draw unto him the Readers
attention: Hearken to the Discourse of a Man who has not acquired an
indifferent Knowledge of these things, either by the Experience of what
happens every day, or the reading of ancient Books, or ancient Histories.

5. The greatest P. 131.
Satisfaction, notwithstanding which the Christians had after the Death of
Julian, according to Gregory, was, that those who had persecuted the Christians
were laughed at on the Theater in public places, and in the Assemblies. That
which is most surprising, adds he, is that those who persecuted us with the
rest, threw down with great Shouts the Statues of the Gods, by which they had
been so long misled. Those which adored them yesterday, draggeth them to day
along with Indignity. But those who remained in Paganism were without doubt
extremely affronted at the manner, wherewith the Statues of their Gods were
treated, and could not look on Christians as moderate Men. For in fine these
Statues were as dear to them, as what the Christians regard as most Sacred.
Moreover those that changed their Religion, as their Emperor did, and became so
suddenly Enemies to God, which they had adored all their Life, ought to have
been very much suspected.

6. Finally, Gregory having laughed at the Speeches and Writings of Julian P.
133.
which are not so contemptible, tells him, That he Boasts in vain of never
having contracted any Crudity, for having eaten too much; since the Hurt he had
done to the Christians was infinitely greater than the good that would accrue
to the State from Sobriety. When a Man, says he, is troubled with an
Indigestion, and that he feels the Inconvenience thereof, what harm does it to
the Commonwealth? But in raising so violent a Persecution, and causing so great
Troubles, it is impossible but the whole Empire should suffer. In effect to
want Royal Virtues is a Defect greater in a Prince, than to be destitute of
those that a private Man is obliged to have.

To pursue the Thread of our Discourse, Gregory having been against his Will
ordained Priest, as we have already observed, took the Resolution of retiring
into the So^^udes of Pontus, without the Permission o^ ^is Father. His Brother
Cesairio being then come from Court to live with his Parents, gave him an
occasion. Notwithstanding his Father being very Old, and not being able alone
to bear the Burden of the Episcopacy, engaged him to come back to help him.
Basil himself used his Endeavors to make him give this Satisfaction to his
Father. He was consecrated Bishop to be his Coadjutor, and performed the
Functions of Episcopacy, which his Father was not able to do. In that time it
was that he made the Speech, which is the Fifth in order, wherein he directs
his Discourse to his Father, and to Basil, P. 136.
and tells them, he took at their Solicitation, The long Gown and the Miter. It
is hard to know if he spoke this in Complement, or only was satisfied with the
writing it; but he rehearsed before the People the Forty first of his Speeches,
which is upon the same Subject. A little time after he made the long Apology
for his Flight, which is at the Head of his Works. He proposes more at large
the Difficulties which are found in the Exercise of Episcopacy, and says, That
notwithstanding he was resolved to come, to satisfy both the Church of
Nazianze and his Parents, who equally wished for his Return.

Amongst the Reasons which had given him a Distaste of the Episcopacy and
Priesthood, he puts the Shameful manner whereby many strove to attain them, how
unworthy soever they were of his Employment and the Multitude of Competitors.
Or. L. p. 5.
They look, says he, upon this Dignity, not as a Post where they ought to be a
Model of Virtue, but as a means to maintain themselves; not as a Ministry,
whereof they must give an account, but as a Magistracy, which is subject to no
Examination. They are almost in a greater number than those which they govern,
etc. And I believe, says he, the Evil will so increase with time, we shall
have no body to govern, but that all will be Doctors, and that even Saul will
be seen amongst the Prophets. He says that Page 21.
into the Sees were introduced Ignorant People and Children; Page 36.
that the Ecclesiastics were not better than the Scribes and Pharisees; Page
33.
that they had no Charity, but Eagerness and Passion only; that their Piety
consisted in condemning the Impiety of others, whose Conduct they observed, not
to bring them back to the Truth, but to Defame them; that they blamed or
praised Persons, not for their good or bad Life, but according to the Parties
they had embraced; that they admired amongst themselves, what they reprehended
in another Party with Eagerness; that amongst them were seen Disputes like to
the Nocturnal Combats, wherein neither Friends nor Foes are discerned; that
they were Litigious upon Trifles, under the fine Pretense of Defending Faith;
that finally they were a Horror to the Pagans, and the Contempt of Honest Men
amongst the Christians. This is a true Picture of the Manners of the
Ecclesiastics of his Age, as it is but too apparent by the History of those
times. By ill Fortune those of our time do so much resemble them, that if it
had not been said whence these Complaints were drawn, it would seem to be a
Picture of our Modern Divines.

Another Difficulty which was found in the Exercise of Episcopacy, is that of
speaking well of the Mysteries of Christianity, and principally of the Blessed
Trinity; Page 16.
where, according to Gregory, we must hold a Medium between the Jews, who
acknowledge but one God, and Pagans, who adore several; a Medium the Sabellians
could not hold in making the same God, considered in diverse respects, Father,
Son and Holy Ghost; nor Arius in maintaining that they have diverse Natures. As
for himself he believed, as we have already observed, and he himself says,
again here in many other places, he held this desired Medium, in establishing
three Principles equal in Perfection, although the Father is the Origin of the
Son and the Holy Ghost.

It was not a very long time, that Gregory was Coadjutor to his Father, before
his Brother Cesairia died. This was a little after the Earthquake, which
happened in Bithynia in the Month October, the Year CCCLXVIII. He was then Or.
10. p. 169.
at Nice, where he exercised the Employment of Treasurer to the Emperor. This
City was almost totally ruined, and he was the only Officer of Valens that
escaped this Danger. Gregory made a Funeral Oration in his Honor, which is the
Tenth of those which are in being. He makes there an Abridgment of his Life,
whose principal Circumstances have been related, and describes the Vanity of
all we enjoy here below, and makes diverse Reflections upon Death, and of the
manner of comforting ones self for that of Relations. He wishes that his
Brother may be P. 168.
in the Bosom of Abraham, wherever it may be; and toward the P. 173.
end, describing the Happiness of good Men after Death, he says, that
according to wise Men, their Souls are full of Joy, in the Contemplation of the
Happiness that attends them, till after their Resurrection they are received
into Celestial Glory. Cesairia dying, left his Goods to the Poor, and yet there
was much Difficulty in getting them; those that were at his Death having seized
on the greatest part, as Gregory complains in his eighteenth Letter, where he
prays Sophronius Governor of Bithynia to order that Business.

Basil, Friend to Gregory, being made Bishop of Cesarea, Vid. p. 1. Crit. ad
hunc ann.
in the Year CCCLXX. had some Disputes with Valens, of which we shall not speak
here, because it signifies nothing to the Life of his Friend. It was perhaps
for that reason, that this Emperor divided Cappadocia into two Provinces, and
made Tyanus Metropolis in the second Cappadocia. As the Jurisdiction of
Metropolitans was regulated upon the Extent of the Province, diverse Bishops who
were before Suffragans of Cesarea became so to Tyanus, so that Basil found
himself the Head of a fewer Number of Bishops than before. Or. 20. p. 456.
The new Metropolitan drew to him the Provincial Assemblies, seized of the
Revenues of his Diocese, and omitted nothing to diminish the Authority and
Revenues of Basil. Anthimus (for that was the Name of the Bishop of Tyane) who
was an Arian, concealed it under the pretense of Piety, and said, he would not
abandon the Flocks to the Instruction of Basil, whose Sentiments concerning the
Son of God were not upright, nor suffer that any Tribute should be paid to
Heretics. Gregory assures us, that he would send Soldiers to stop the Mules of
Basil, to hinder him from getting his Rents. Basil found no other Remedy to
that, than the creating new Bishops, which would have more care of the Flocks
than he could have, and by means of whom each City should bring him in what was
his due. Sasime being one of these Cities, in which he had resolved to send
Bishops, he cast his Eyes upon his Friend Gregory to send him there 3 without
considering that this place was altogether unworthy of a Man of his desert.
Greg. de vita sua. p. 7.
It was a Village without Water and Greens, and full of Dust; a passage for
Soldiers, and inhabited only by a few Ignorant People: The Revenues that could
be drawn from this Bishopric were very small, and besides all that, he must be
resolved to defend them by force against Anthime, or to be subject to this new
Metropolitan. Gregory refused this Employ, but at length the Importunities and
Addresses of Basil, which gained Gregory the Father, obliged him to accept
thereof.

It seems he composed at that time his seventh Speech, wherein he speaks to
his Father and Basil, and desire their help and Instructions for the Conduct of
his new Church of Sasime. He says notwithstanding to Basil that the Episcopal
Throne had extremely changed him, and that he had much more mildness whilst he
was amongst the Sheep, than since he was become Pastor. The next day he made
another Speech upon the arrival of Gregory of Nysse, Brother to Basil, to whom
he complains of the Violence that had been done him by his Brother; Or. 6.
and as it was the Feast of some Martyr, he adds diverse things on that
occasion, upon the manner of celebrating Feasts, not by profane Rejoycings, but
by exercises of Piety. He says amongst other things, That then was the time to
raise one's self and to become God, ((...)) if it be admitted to speak thus,
and that in that Martyrs do the Office of Mediators (...). This Expression to
become God, that is to say, to become a good Man and to despise earthly things,
is frequent enough in the Writings of Gregory. He says elsewhere that Or. 1.
p. 31. vid. and Or. 23. p. 410.
Priests are Gods and deifie others; Or. 2. p. 46.
that Solitude deifieth. Introducing Or. 20. p. 349.
Basil, who refused to embrace Arianism, he makes him say, that he could not
adore a Creature, he who also was a Creature of God, and had received
Commandment to be God. We must remark, that this Expression was used amongst
the Pythagorists, as may be seen by the last of the golden Verses of
Pythagoras, upon which we may consult Hyerocles.

When Gregory was at Sasime, he thought he perceived by the misery of this
Place, that Basil did despise him, and abused his Friendship. Though he kept
the Government thereof for a little while, he made no other Episcopal in it; he
prayed not there in public with the People, not imposed his hands on any. As
he went to it against his will, and without obliging himself to tarry there, he
thought he might leave this Church, and return into the Solitude from whence
they had drawn him, when he returned to Nazianze. He complained very Ep. 31,
and 32. and de vita sua p. 7. and alibi.
much of the Pride of Basil, whom the Episcopal Throne of Cesarea had so
blinded, that he had no longer any Consideration for his Friends. These
Complaints as Just as they were, yet passed for Attempts in the Mind of the
Metropolitan; who seemed to have forgotten the Esteem he had for Gregory and
the Services which the latter had rendered him, in his Promotion to the Sea of
Cesarea. Yet Gregory discovered not the unworthy manner wherewith his Friend
had treated him, neither then nor since.

Gregory having abandoned Sasime, Greg. Presb. in ejus vita p. 14.
retired into a Hospital of the Sick, whom he took care to comfort; and in vain
his Father entreated him to return to Sasime; he would never be resolved to do
it, nor digest the hard usage of Basil, who of fifty Bishoprics, which were in
his Diocese, had given him the least. All that Gregery the Father could obtain
of his Son, was, that he would take the Care of the Bishopric of Nazianze
during his Life, without engaging himself to succeed him.

In that time it seems, that a Commissary of the Emperor's, to Tax the
Inhabitants of Nazianze, and who had been a particular Friend to Gregory, gave
some suspicion to his Flock, that he would not Tax them very lightly; they
thereupon forced Gregory to make that Discourse, which is the Ninth of his
Speeches, where he exhorts all Conditions to Piety, and speaks to Julian, who
was the Commissioner of the Emperor, to induce him to settle this Tax like an
Honest Man. Notwithstanding there happened some Disturbances at Nazianze which
irritated the Imperial Commissary; and gave occasion to Gregory to rehearse the
Seventeenth of his Speeches, which is upon the same subject, and wherein he
exhorts the People to Patience, and the Commissary to Moderation.

It Is also believed, that it was about the same time that his Sister Gorgonia,
who had been Married to a Person of Quality, named Vitalian, died. Gregory made
her Funeral Oration, which is the Eleventh in order. We shall not stay to
relate the Praises he gives her for her Piety and Wise Conduct; but only Remark
two things.

1. That Or. 11. P. 188.
Gorgonia had not been Baptized with her Husband, but a little before her
Death, according to the Custom of that time; her Brother had such an Esteem of
her Pi^ty, that he dares say there is scarcely any one but herself, to whom
Baptism has been rather a Seal than a Grace, that is to say, rather a
Confirmation of the Virtue she before had, than the Infusion of a new Sanctity.
2. At the end of his Speech, after having said in addressing himself to her, by
a Figure of Rhetoric common in our Author, that she enjoys the Contemplation
of Celestial Glory, he continues thus: If you have any regard to us, and if God
has given this Privilege to Holy Souls, to perceive things of this nature,
receive our Speech, rather than Funeral Gifts. By this we see be doubted
whether the Souls of the Dead knew what was done here on Earth. We may besides
Remark the Word has been translated Privilege, Hes. Opera and dies. verse. 125.
which is the same that Hesiod makes use of, when he says that Jupiter has
given this advantage to Kings, to be after their Death the Guardians of Men.

In the Year CCCLXXI. Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria being dead, Gregory Orat.
21.
composed his Funeral Speech, some Years after V. p. 376.
being at Constantinople, whereof we shall say something when we shall come to
the part of the Life of Gregory.

Gregory made in the Year CCCLXXIV. another Funeral Oration in the Honor of
his Father, which is the Nineteenth in order. He testifies that he died almost
at a hundred Years of Age, after being Bishop forty five Years. His Son makes
at length his Panegyric, in giving an Abridgment of his Life; and endeavors
to comfort his Mother Nonna, whom he also praises much, for the Loss she had
sustained. He directs himself to his Father, Or. 13. P. 314.
whom he prays to let him know what Glory he was in, and to conduct both the
Flock and Pastors, of whom he had had the name of Father, and principally his
Son. He puts not a Word, which may excuse so violent a Figure as this
Prosopaeia; and if elsewhere he had not used some mollifying Expression on such
occasions, we should with much ado have distinguished this Apostrophe from a
true Invocation.

His Mother Nonna, who was almost of the P. 315.
Age of her Husband died soon after, and it was not requisite that Gregory
should make any Discourse in her Praise, because he had already made her
Panegyric, in the Funeral Discourse of his Father. After the Death of the
latter some would have had him to have taken upon him the Bishopric of
Nazianze, and it was pretended he had engaged to stay in it, when he begun to
take care of it. But Ep. xlii.
he excused himself on the account of his Age; the Bishops of the Province
named Eulalius, to succeed his Father; on which the report rising, that this
Election was done in spite of Gregory, he writ to Gregory of Nyssa, to show
him that nothing was done herein but at his request.

As the Business did not immediately come to that push, and that Gregory had
Carmen. de vit. p. 9.
feared he should be forced to stay at Nazianze, he retired to Seleucia into a
Monastery, where he remained a sufficient time, staying to see the Church of
Nazianze provided. Yet he returned into this City, before the Election was
ended, and was urged anew to take his ancient Post, but he never would. The
Author of his Life assures us it was at this time that Basil built an Hospital
for the Leprous, and that on this occasion Gregory made his Discourse of
Charity toward the Poor, and particularly toward those that were sick of a
Leprosy. In this Speech are diverse Reflections upon Piety in general, and
touching the Use of good and bad Fortune in this Life. It is very seldom that
Gregory applies himself to one matter only, and to an Order that is clear and
void of Digressions.

During the Empire of Valens, who favored the Arians, this Sect and that which
sprung from it, had gained a great many People on their side. Carmen de vita
sua P. 10.
Constantinople was chiefly full of Arians and Apollinarists, who believed that
the Divinity of Jesus Christ served for a Soul to his Body. That occasioned
several Bishops and many of the People, which followed the Council of Nice, to
desire Gregory to go to Constantinople, to strengthen the Orthodox, and to
oppose the Heretics. He declares he undertook this Voyage purely against his
will; particularly because the Report run that a Synod of Apollinarists was
going to be held there, to establish their Opinions.

Being arrived at Constantinople, Or. 28. P. 484.
toward the end of the Year CCCLXVIII. he lodged at one of his Kinsmens, whom
some Authors conjecture to be Nicobulus, who had espoused Alypiana, Daughter to
Gorgonia, Sister to Gregory. Valens had given the Arians all the Churches of
Constantinople, so that Gregory was forced to preach in the House of his
Kinsman. There was in a short time such a great Crowd of People, that this
House having no Chamber which could contain them, he to whom it belonged pulled
it down to make it a Church. Or. 22. p. 527.
It was called the Anastasia, to wit, the Church of Resurrection, because the
Belief of the Orthodox was as if it had been risen again in that place. The
Arians then raised almost all the City against him, accusing him of believing
several Gods. He attributes the Zeal of the People against him, to their
Ignorance of the manner, whereby the Trinity ought to be reconciled with the
Unity of God. It was not altogether the Fault of the People, because Gregory
himself speaks thereof in such a manner, as seemed as if he introduced that in
common Discourse, which would be called Three Gods; although, according to the
manner he defines Unity, it must be confessed he believed but one. He complains
that Carmen de vita. p. 10. and 11.
Stones were cast at him upon that account, and that he was cited before the
Judge as a Seditious Man.

All this made him but the more Famous, and augmented the number of his
Auditors. Then it was that St. Ierom heard him, as he witnesses in diverse
places. Ep. ad Nepot. Catal. scrit. Eccl. in Gregor. contra Iovinian, l. 1.
We have elsewhere T. 12. p. 145.
a passage of this Father, where he speaks but very indifferently of the
Eloquence of Gregory, whom he describes as a Declaimer, that the People
applauded without understanding what he said.

The number of the Orthodox increasing every day, they desired to have a Bishop
of their own Judgment, and generally cast their Eyes upon Gregory. The Orthodox
Bishops of the East, and principally Melece of Antioch, Basil of Cesarea, and
Peter of Alexandria favored him openly; yet their design succeeded not.

There was Carm. de vita sua, p. 12.
in Alexandria one Maximus by Profession a Cynick, yet a Christian. He
pretended to be descended of a Noble Family, and in which there had even been
some Martyrs. After the Death of Athanasius, the Orthodox being persecuted in
Egypt, he had removed into a Village of the Deserts of Thebaides, named Oasis.
He went clothed like the Philosophers, to wit, covered with a poor Cloak; he
would have neither his Hair nor Beard shaved, and carried a Stick as Diogenes
did: Living thus after a manner most Austere, he would take the liberty of
censuring the Vices of all People, without having any regard to their Quality,
as the Ancient Cynicks used to do. Notwithstanding under this severe
Outwardness was hidden a Soul Fraudulent, Ambitious, Malicious, Covetous, and
full of the most Shameful Lusts. But as that did not appear to the Eyes of Men,
he acquired a great Reputation, not only amongst the People, but also amongst
the most Learned Men. He held Correspondency with the Bishops of Cesarea in
Cappadocia, Friend to Gregory, Basil. Ep. 41 and 42.
as it appears by two Letters of Basil, which are directed to him.

Gregory received him so well, at his arrival at Constantinople, that he made a
Speech in Honor of him, Orat. 23.
where he omits nothing that could make this Impostor pass for a great and good
Man. But having since known his Fraud, Hieron. in Cat. in Greg.
instead of the Name of Maximus which was at the Head of this Speech, he put
that of Hieron, and entitled it thus: A Speech to the Praise of Hieron a
Philosopher of Alexandria, sent into Exile for his Faith, and returned three
Years after. Gregory shows in this Discourse, what use could be made of the
Cynick Philosophy in Christianity; and speaks of the Persecutions which the
Princes who had favored Arianism, had raised against the Orthodox,
particularly in Egypt, and to Maximus the Philosopher. He ends in expounding
the Mystery of the Trinity, and in exhorting his Philosopher to keep himself
constantly applied to the wholesome Doctrine, which held a Medium between Judaism
P. 425. and seq.
and Arianism. He often makes this Remark, when he speaks of the Holy Trinity;
and in general we perceive, in reading his Works, that the same thoughts return
frequently enough. In admonishing his Philosopher to despise the Objections
that are made against this Tenet, he bids him not to be ashamed at the
Accusation of Tritheism, whilst others are in danger of establishing two Gods
(the Arians and Macedonians) for you shall either resolve the Difficulty, adds
he, as they do; or you shall remain entangled like unto them, etc.

Gregory having thus made the Panegyric of Maximus, received him in his House,
instructed him in the Religion, Baptized him, conferred the Orders upon him,
and communicated to him his most secret thoughts. Carmen. de vit. p. 12. and
seq.
But so soon as Maximus thought himself capable enough, he saw with Sorrow that
they thought upon making Gregory Bishop of Constantinople. He judged himself
more worthy of this place than his Master and Benefactor, and perceiving that
one of the principal Priests of this Church envied Gregory this Dignity also,
he joined with him to supplant him. To which intent Maximus gained Peter of
Alexandria, who before favored Gregory. Some time after the Fleet of Corn,
which came every Year from Alexandria to Constantinople, arrived there; and the
Masters of the Ships Hammon, Aphammon, Harpocras, Steppas, Rhodon, Anubis and
Hermanubis, immediately joined themselves to the Assembly of Gregory, though
they had orders to assist the Designs of Maximus, whom two or three Egyptian
Bishops after that upheld strongly. Yet this arrival of the Egyptians, and the
Cares they took to join themselves to Gregory, gave him so much satisfaction,
that he made Or. 24.
a Speech thereupon; where he infinitely praises the Piety and Constancy of
those of Alexandria, and expounds to them his Sentiments touching the Equality
of the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost. He extends particularly to the Proof
of the Divinity of the Holy Ghost, and makes use, amongst other Reasons, of
this, the terms of which would seem strange, if already we had not observed
such heretofore. P. 429.
If the Holy Ghost is not God, let him be made God before, and after that let
him make me a God equal to him in Honor. This bold Expression seems to
signify nothing else, but that if the Holy Ghost be not God, he cannot
Sanctify Men, which Gregory calls in another place, to render Men Gods.

Some Learned Men think, That it was about the same time that Gregory made the
Panegyric of St. Athanasius, which is the Twenty first of his Speeches. He
reckons therein not only the Virtues of the Bishop of Alexandria, but also
gives more at large the History of the Persecutions he suffered, and the
Turmoils that happened during his Life. He praises him above all for his
Orthodoxy, and for his Constancy in Defense of the Truth. All those, says he,
P. 394.
that made Profession of our Doctrine, were divided into three Parties: The one
had no good Sentiments for the Son, and yet less for the Holy Ghost; there were
very few whose Doctrine was sound in these two respects. He was the first and
the only Person who durst publicly declare the Truth, or at least he was
upheld by very few. Gregory gives besides to St. Athanasius P. 395.
the Glory of having reconciled the Eastern with the Western People, who
Disputing only about words, believed each other reciprocally to be Heretics:
We say conformably to the Doctrine of Piety, that there is one Essence, and
three Existences (Hypostases) the first relating to the Nature of Divinity, and
the second to the Propriety of the three. The Bishops of Italy conceived the
same thing, but by reason of the Poverty of their Tongue, they could not
distinguish the Hypostases from the Essence (because that Latius would
translate Hieron. in Ep. ad Damas. T. 2. p. 13. Ed. Tryph.
the word Hypostasis by that of Substance) and they introduced that of Persons,
fearing it should seem that they acknowledged three Essences. What came on it?
Something Ridiculous, or rather worthy of Pity. A pure Dispute in words
appeared a Dispute touching Faith. Those (in the East) were suspected of
Sabellianism, which said that there were Three Persons; and (in the West) of
Arianism, those that spoke of Three Hypostases. This it was the Disputes
produced. etc. St. Athanasius remedied this, in intervening with Mildness
between each Party, and in examining carefully the Sense of the words whereof
they made use; and as soon as they found that the Bishops of the East were of
the same Sentiment as to the thing, and differed but in Expressions, he
permitted the use of different Terms, and reunited them in the bottom as Tenets.

To return to Carm. de vit. p. 14. and seq.
Maximus the Arrival of his Countrymen in CCCLXXIX fortified his Party; and
the more to engage the Bishops of that Country to serve him, he made them
considerable Gifts. For this purpose he borrowed Money of a Priest, who was
lately come from an Isle of the Archipelago, named Thassus, with order to buy
at Constantinople Marble and other Materials for a Church, which they designed
to build in this Isle. A little time after, Gregory who was indisposed, went
out of Constantinople, to take the Air, and thus gave the Egyptian Bishops an
opportunity to enter betimes in the Morning into his Church, and there to place
Maximus in the Episcopal See. They could not end the Ceremony of the Ordination
of this Cynick, before the report of it went through the City. Thereupon the
Magistrates of Constantinople, the Clergy, and People, without excepting the
very Arians, went in a Crowd to the Anastasia, and drove these Bishops out of
the Church. They retired into a Playhouse which was hard by, where they cut
his Hair and consecrated him. That still irritated the People the more, who
heaped all manner of Injuries upon Maximus, and blamed even Gregory, for having
received an evil Man with too much Bounty, into his House. Gregory being
advertised of what passed, returned speedily to Constantinople, and made the
Speech which is the Twenty eighth in order, wherein he declares he went out of
the City with much Difficulty, and that the short time he had been absent, did
but augment the Love he had for his Flock. He besides represents the
Perfidiousness of Maximus, and of those of his Party, to which he joins the
Description of a Christian Philosopher. He excuses himself for being put upon
by Maximus, in that good Men not being to be suspected, he could not imagine
that this Philosopher had an Intention to deceive him. He says at the end,
That he is ready to quit the Episcopal See, and that he never wished for it. He
mingles a great many general Reflections in this Discourse, and appears to
prepare himself for Patience, in consideration of the Miseries of this Life. We
see that he was Old, because he says, That perhaps Maximus would upbraid him
P. 483.
with his Old Age and Infirmity; which is contrary to the Opinion of those, who
believe that Gregory was born toward the time of the Council of Nice.

The Returning of Gregory engaged the People much in his Interest, and obliged
Maximus to quit the City; but not to renounce his Design. It seems that he
writ to the Ep. Ambros. and Ep. Ital. ad Theod. imp. Conc. T. 2. Col. 1007.
Bishops of the Italick Diocese, assembled in a Synod at Aquilea, whom he made
acquainted with his Election; which had been approved by Communicatory Letters
from Peter of Alexandria, which he sent then to be read in their Council. He
allowed that he had been ordained in a private House, but he said it was
because the Arians were in Possession of all the Churches, and that he was
obliged to yield to their Violence. The Council not knowing the Circumstances,
approved of his Ordination, supposing that the Promotion of Gregory was not
done according to the Canons, because it was not lawful for a Bishop to abandon
a Church, to go to establish himself in another. The Approbation which they had
given to the Ordination of Maximus, made them also afterward refuse to
communicate with Nectaire his Successor, and that they writ to the Emperor, to
entreat him to overlook it, and to re-establish Maximus; or to call a General
Council at Rome, to examine into this Matter. Damasus Bishop of Rome also
disapproved the Election of Gregory, who according to the Canons, ought to have
staid at Sasine, seeing it was not permitted to a Bishop, In Collect. Romans
Holsten. p. 37.
to abandon the People which had been committed to him, to go to another
through Ambition, which often causes Quarrels and Schisms. Thus he speaks
on it, in a Letter written to some Bishops of Egypt, wherein he also reprehends
the Election of Maximus, as contrary to the Canons. He writ Ib. p. 43.
besides to Acholius Bishop of Thessalonica against the same, and exhorted him
to endeavor to establish a Catholic Bishop in Constantinople. It is thereby
seen, that the Action of Gregory in abandoning Sasine, had scandalized many
People; and for a Man so disinterested in the World, as he testified himself to
be, was perhaps a thing that was a little too delicate. Moreover, to resolve to
go to Constantinople, after having despised Sasine, was a thing that might
produce bad Suspicions in ill-minded People. It cannot be doubted but Maximus
maliciously made use of all this, to ruin the Reputation of Gregory; and it was
perhaps that which gave him the Boldness of going to Thessalonica, to solicit
Theodosius to establish him by an Edict. But far from obtaining what he
demanded, the Emperor commanded him with Menaces to desist. Desperate for
missing his aim, he went to Alexandria, where having drawn some People unto his
Party, he threatened Peter Bishop of that City, to take away his place, if he
did not help him to become Master of the Church of Constantinople. The
Governor of Alexandria being advertised of this Insolence, and fearing the
Cynick should cause some Troubles, banished him from the City, and History
tells us not what became of him afterward.

Gregory being thus rid of Maximus, had the Arian Party upon his Hands, which
endeavored to defame him, in jearing his Country and Parents: Besides, he was
accused of an ill Humor, of Negligence and other Defects of this kind; but as
these Reproaches were either ill grounded, or inconsiderable, he easily
justified himself, as may be easily seen in his Twenty fifth Speech. That which
did him the most Damage, was, that in effect, though he was a great Orator at
that time, and considering his Age, he was not very fit to take other Cares
upon him, which he ought to have done to have maintained himself against the
Arians. He should have managed the Court, and endeavored to win the Favor of
the Chief, to advance the Interests of his Church; and this is what he was not
able to do, having passed the greatest part of his Life in Study and Rest.
Which caused the Priest who favored Maximus (as we have said) to gain diverse
Catholics, who began to say, that Gregory was not capable of fulfilling the
Duties of Episcopacy, where there needed no less Experience, and Ability in
Matters of Life, than Eloquence and Knowledge, The Complaints and Repulses of
these People, gave Gregory so much distaste, that one day De vita sua. p. 17.
and 18.
he undertook to take leave of his People. But he had no sooner said that he
would go away, but all the Assembly desired him so earnestly not to Abandon
them, and expose the Orthodox Doctrine to fall under the efforts of the Arians,
by his Departure, that at length he gave his consent to stay until the Bishops
of the East, who were to Assemble speedily, as they said, had Elected to fill
the Episcopal Sea of Constantinople.

Matters remained in this State, until Theodosius Arrived in this Cirty the 22
of Vid. p. 1. ad hunc ann. in 7.
November, CCCLXXX. This Emperor who had been Baptized of late at Thessalonica,
by Acholius, an Orthodox Bishop, that had Inspired him with resolutions to
Re-establish the Faith of Nice, had already ordered, being at Thessalonica, c.
Th. l. 16. T. 1. c. 2.
by an Edict of the 27 th. of February, that all his Subjects should Embrace,
concerning the Holy Trinity, the Opinion that was espoused at Rome and
Alexandria; that those who should profess it, should be named Catholics, and
the rest Heretics; that the names of Churches should not be given to the
latter, and that they should be obnoxious to Civil Punishments as well as to
Divine Vengeance. Being at Constantinople, and having observed the great
Multitude of Heterodox, whereof this City was full, he Published an Edict more
Severe, Ibid. T. V. l. 6.
the Tenth of January, in the Year CCCLXXXI, by which he Recalls all those that
might have given any Liberty to Heretics, and takes from them all the Churches
they had in the Cities, commanding them to deliver them to those who followed
the Faith of Nice. He sent word after that Socr l. 5. c. 7. Sosom. l. 17. c. 5.
to Demophilus an Arian Bishop, to Subscribe to this Council, or resolve to
quit the Churches of Constantinople. Demophilus without Ballanceing, took the
latter Party, and advertised the People, that the next day they should Assemble
without the City. And the Arians were thus Dispossessed of the Public
Churches, which they had during Forty Years. De Vita sua p. 20. and seq.
After this, Theodosius was Accused of wanting Zeal; and some would have had
him employed Violence, to have reduced the Arians, as Gregory reports; tho he
disapproves of the Heat of those who found fault with the Conduct of
Theodosius, because of that, and declares against those that pretend to force
Consciences. The Emperor having sent for Gregory, received him with much
Affection, and told him he was going to put him in Possession of
Constantinople. For fear the People, the greatest part whereof followed the
Sentiments of Arius, should rise, Theodosius sent Soldiers to Seize the Church
of St. Sophia, and made Gregory to be Conducted by others through the midst of
the People, which Cried on every side and was in as much Concern and Despair,
as if Constantinople had been Taken; which could not be an acceptable Spectacle
to a Wise and Moderate Bishop. Tho the Sun was Risen, it was so full of Clouds,
that it might have been said, it was Night; But the Sun immediately appeared
when Gregory went into the Churh. This Circumstance deserved not to be taken
notice of, if our Bishop had not related it as some extraordinary thing, after
having said, Carm. de Vita sua. p. 22.
That although he is one of those who regards not such sort of Thoughts, he
believes notwithstanding it is better to add Faith to all, than equally to
refuse to believe what is said. So soon as they were in the Church, Gregory was
demanded for Bishop, by the Cry of all the People which was there, which he
made to cease, in telling them by a Priest, that they should give God Thanks,
and not to Cry. He was threatened with no Danger, except thaat one Man drew his
Sword, and immediately put it into the Scabbard. But although the Arians had
given up their Churches, they never the less Murmured amongst themselves, and
were enraged for their being driven away. Gregory believed with a great deal of
reason, that the Heterodox might be drawn by Mildness; and used it more
willingly, than the Authority of the Emperor. "He complains of a parcel of
unhappy young People; who called Mildness, Cowardice; gave Fury, the name of
Courage; and would have the Arians to be irritated and inflamed with Anger. The
Moderation of Gregory did not displease Theodosius, who some times Carm. 10. T.
7. p. 80.
would send for him and make him eat at his Table. Notwithstanding our Bishop
would very seldom be at Court, Carm. de Vita sua. p. 23.
though others were continually there, to gain the Favor of the Emperor, or of
his Officers and made use of the pretense of Piety to advance themselves, and
ruin their Enemies. As he was Old and of a weak Constitution, he was often
Indisposed, which his Enemies attributed to too great Tenderness. Being one day
in Bed, a Man was sent to Assassinate him, who touched with Repentance,
confessed to him at his Beds Feet, that he was set on work to have committed
this Crime, and obtained Forgiveness. As to the Revenues of the Church, Gregory
says, that finding no Account out, neither in the Papers of those who had been
before him Bishops of Constantinople, nor amongst those who had the care of
gathering them, he would not meddle with them, and took nothing on it, that he
should not render an Account for the same.

Theodosius at that time called a Council at Constantinople, either to Condemn
diverse Heresies, or to Establish Gregory according to the Canons in the
Episcopal See of that City. But before we relate what passed therein, as to
what concerns Gregory, it is necessary to say somewhat of the Speeches he
made, whilst he was at Constantinople, and which remain yet amongst us.

Basil Bishop of Caesarea Vid. p. 1. ad ann. 378. n. 1.
Dyed the First day of the Year CCCLXXX. Or. 20.
Gregory made a Speech in Honor of him some time after; not being able to
render his Friend this last Duty as soon as he would. He praises the Ancestors
of Basil, who were Persons of Quality, and moreover Christians, from a long
time. He says, that P. 319.
during the Persecution of Maximinus, some of the Ancestors of Basil being
retired into a Forest of Pontus, without any Provision, and Arms, to go to
Hunt, they prayed God to send them some Game, or Venison, which they saw in
this Wood; and that in the very Moment, God sent them a great number of Deers,
and such as were of the Fattest, who showed they were troubled not to be called
for sooner. Gregory is Merry enough on this Subject, according to the Custom of
Pagan Orators, who do the like in respect to the Pagan Fables. That which there
is of worst consequence in it is, That this renders Suspicious the other
Narrations of Gregory.

2. Afterward he makes an Abridgment of the Life of Basil, and insists on each
Place, according to his Custom, with much Exaggeration, Figures and Moralities.
Speaking of the manner he himself had passed his Life, he says, that he wishes
P. 335.
His Affairs may prosper better for the future, by the Intercessions of Basil.

3. The ways whereby in his time Ibid.
Men advanced in Ecclesiastical Charges, were no more Canonical than the ways
which are employed this day upon that account, if Gregory may be Believed.
After having said, that in other Professions Men were advanced by degrees, and
according to the Capacity they had, he assures us, that the chief Places were
attained as much through Crimes as Virtue; and that the Episcopal Sees were not
for those who were the most Worthy thereof, but for the most Potent, etc. No
body takes the name of Physician, nor of Painter, who has not studied the
nature of Maladies, that has not well mixed Colors, and Painted many things;
but a Bishop is easily found, not after his being formed with care, but out of
hand, as the Fable has feigned, that the Giants were no sooner Sown, than they
were Born. We make in one day, and we bid those to be wise who have not learned
to be so, and who bring nothing to acquit them of Episcopacy, but the desire of
being Bishops.

4. Gregory attributes to Basil P. 340. and 358.
Monastical Laws and written Prayers. We have still the first, without great
Changes, but the Liturgy which bears his Name, has been extremely altered
since.

5. He praiesth not only his Friend, but also makes his Apology against those
who accused him of Pride, (of which notwithstanding he has done it himself in
diverse Places) P. 364.
and that suspected him of not ackowledging the Divinity of the Holy Ghost,
because he had not called him God in his Book. Gregory says, that Basil did
thus, that he might not enrage Heretics, who could not suffer that this Title
should be given to the Holy Ghost, because the Holy Scripture does not
attribute it to him, but that he had said the equivalent, which was the same,
seeing it is not Words, but things That do Save us.

6. In fine, after having described the Funerals of Basil, he continues in
these terms, P. 372.
He is now in Heaven, where he presents, as I believe, Sacrifices for us, and
where he Prays for the People; for in leaving us, he has not quite Abandoned
us, etc. He advertises me still, and reprehends me in Visions at Night, when I
swerve in any thing from my Duty. At the end of his Speech he asks his Succor,
in terms as earnest as if he heard him; tho he seemed to doubt if he was in
Heaven, to wit, in the Habitation of Supreme Beatitude; where Antiquity
believed, that excepting Martyrs, none entered till after the Resurrection, as
we have already seen by another Place of Gregory.

It Is probable, that 'twas at Constantinople he Composed the greatest part of
his Speeches, which we have not as yet spoken of, especially those that he made
against the Arians, wherein it was judged that he had defended the Council of
Nice, as well as in his other Writings; that for that reason he had the Title
of Divine. Thereupon may particularly be read his twenty third Speech, and the
four following. To give some Idea of these five Speeches of Gregory, it must be
observed* that the design of the First, is to show, that it belongs not to
all Men to Dispute of Religion, and that it ought not to be done before all the
World, nor at all times; nor with too much Heat. He Censures the Heretics, as
if they had no regard to all this, and names Common Places which every Party
have always made use of. Or. 33. p. 535.
He complains, that they no sooner thought a Man Holy, but they Sainted him;
that Divines were Chosen, as if by their Choice, Wisdom and Learning were
Inspired into them; and that many Assemblies of Ignorants and Pratlers were
Convocated. As he knew that there was People that could not abstain from
Disputing, to satisfy their desire, he tells them he will open them a vast
Career, in which they may Exercise themselves without Danger: As, to Ibid. p.
536.
Philosophy about the World, or Worlds; upon the Soul; rational Beings more or
less Excellent; upon the Resurrection; upon Judgment; upon Reward; upon the
Sufferings of Jesus Christ: In these matters it is not unprofitable to succeed,
and there is no great danger in being deceived therein. Men have much changed
their Opinions since, and it is certain, that we may fall into dangerous
Errors, and that some have effectively been deceived in these Articles.

In the second Or. 34.
he comes to the Point, and sets himself principally to prove against the
Enomians the Incomprehensibility of God, which he often repeats. He likewise
observes that there are many things in nature that we cannot comprehend; with a
design to conclude, that it is an ill Argument, to deny that something is in
God, simply, because we comprehend it not.

After having thus prepared the Mind of his Reader, or Auditor, he declares his
Sentiment upon the Divinity of the Son, Or. 35. p. 562.
and upon the Holy Trinity in general, which he does in such terms as are
worthy of remark. What we Honor is a Monarchy: I do not call that Monarchy
that is possessed by one only Person (for it may be that a Person not agreeing
with himself may do the same as if there were many) but what is founded upon
the equality of Nature, the consent of the will, the same Motion, and upon the
same Design, in regard to what is produced by this Monarchy (which is not
possible in created Natures) so that though those who compose this Monarchy
differ in number, their Power is not different. If Gregory had believed the
numerick Unity of the Divine Essence, he had spoken very weakly and obscurely,
since that instead of Equality of Nature, he should have said identity, and not
to speak of Consent of Will, but of one Will in number. In this same Speech,
Gregory answers Difficulties, that the Arians made against the Eternal
Generation of the Son, which often are very weak; whether it be that they are
not well proposed, or that the Arians argued no better. Howbeit, as the
Personage of an Arian may be better represented, the Opinions perhaps also of
Nice can be defended with more Advantage.

Amongst the Objections of the Arians, which Gregory starteth to himself, this
is one, which is the Eighth. P. 569.
That if the Son is, in respect of his Essence, the same with the Father, it
will follow, that the Son was not begotten, because the Father was not. Gregory
answers not to this, with the Scholasticks, that the Son is not begotten, in
respect of his Essence, who is the same in number with the Father, as he ought
to be according to the Principles of Modern Schools; but that not to be
begotten, is not essential to Divinity, to which he adds, P. 570.
Are you Father to your Father, that you may not be inferior to him in any
thing, because you are the same thing, in regard to Essence? If it was yet
doubted, if that Unity, whereof our Orator speaks, is a Specific or Numerick
Unity, we only need read these words, which are at the bottom of the following
Page: Or. 36.
This is our Doctrine, as it is likewise judged of things which are under the
same kind, as of a Horse, an Ox, a Man, and that each thing is properly called
by the Name which agrees to the nature whereof it participates, whilst that
which participates not, has not this name, or bears it but improperly: So
there is but one Essence, and one Nature in God, which is called alike,
although the Persons and Names are distinguished by our thoughts.

In the fourth Speech Gregory after his way resolves the Objections of the
Arians, by which they pretended to show the inequality of the Father and the
Son.

In the Fifth Or. 37.
he disputes of the Consubstantiality of the Holy Ghost against the Macedonians.

Some of those who received the Divinity of the Son, denied that of the Holy
Ghost, and had even the Boldness to call the Holy Ghost a strange God; under
pretense that he is named God in no place of Holy Writ. It is against those
that Gregory made his fifth and last Theological Speech.

In this Discourse, speaking of the diverse Sentiments which were had thereupon,
he says amongst other things, Or. 37. p. 595.
That the greatest Divines of the Heathens, and those that came nearest to us,
have had an Idea thereof; though they have given it another name, having called
it the Soul of the Universe, and the Soul that comes from without, and other
such names. As for the wise Men of our time, says he, some have believed that
the Holy Ghost is a Faculty, others a Creature; some a God, others know not
where to place him, because of the respect they had for Scripture, which is not
clear upon this Subject. Gregory maintains he is a Consubstantial Person to the
two others; and when he answers his Adversaries, who asked him in what
Generation and Procession differed, he fortifies himself in the
Incomprehensibility.

But one of the principal Objections, which was made against the Orthodox, P.
600.
is that they acknowledged three Gods. If there be, said they, one God, and one
God, and one God, how is there not three Gods? etc. That is, replieth Gregory,
what those say whose Impiety is arrived to the height; and those who are even
in the second Rank, have good Sentiments toward the Son. I have a common
answer to give both, and another which regards the second only: I therefore ask
these latter, why they call us Tritheists, who honor the Son; and if they
abandon the Holy Ghost, they are not Ditheists? How do you expound, continues
he, your Ditheism, when this Objection is made to you? Give us the means of
answering, for the answer wherewith you will repel Ditheism, will also serve us
to defend our selves from Tritheism, etc. Thus we shall overcome, and our
Accusers will serve us for Defenders, etc. But we have a Contestation with
these two sorts of Adversaries, and a common answer to both of them. We have
but one only God, because there is but one only Divinity, and that those who
proceed thence, relate to one thing only, though we believe three. The one is
not more a God than the other, the one is not anterior and the other posterior.
They are not divided in Will, nor separate in Power, and nothing is remarked in
them that is found in divided things; but to say all in one word, Divinity
without Division is found in three divided Persons; as in three Suns turned one
to another, there would be but one mixture of Light. When we consider Divinity,
and the first cause of Monarchy, we conceive but one only thing; but when we
consider those in whom is the Divinity, and those that proceeded from the first
cause before the beginning of time, and who enjoy the same Glory, we adore
three.

But they will say, is there not one only Divinity amongst Heathens, as their
most able Philosophers have professed? All Mankind has but one Humanity, and
yet there are several Gods amongst Heathens, and not one, as there are several
Men. I answer, That in these things Unity is but in the Thought; each Man is
divided from the rest, by Time, by Passions, by Power, which is not in God,
etc. This is it in which consists the Unity of God, as much as I can conceive
it. If this reason is good, we must give God Thanks, if not, we must seek for a
better.

After that Gregory proposes to himself an Objection of the Arians, which
shows still clearer, that the Orthodox made not the Unity of God to consist in
the Numerical Unity of Divine Essence, but in a Specific Unity of distinct
Essences, equal, and in a perfect consent of Wills. P. 902.
The things that are of the same Essence, say you, are reckoned as in the same
order of things -- and those that are not consubstantial, are not reckoned
after this manner; whence it follows, you cannot but grant that there are
three Gods, according to your opinion; for as for us, we are not in the same
danger, because we do not say that the Persons are Consubstantial. The Arians
would have it understood, that they admitted but one Supreme God, who created
all others; that they would say in this regard, that there is but one God;
because God could not be put in the same order, and under the same name as his
Creatures; but that the Orthodox acknowledging three Beings of a Nature
perfectly alike* they could not deny but that they acknowledged three Gods
speaking properly. Gregory answers nothing else, but that Men often place in
the same Rank ((...)) things that are not of the same Species, whereof he
brings diverse Examples drawn from Holy Writ. That shows that the Arians might
be accused, as well as the Orthodox, of admitting a plurality of Gods; but in
no wise that the Orthodox did not acknowledge three eternal Spirits, although
perfectly equal, and the same Will.

A little further in this same Speech P. 611.
Gregory says, That having sought uncreated things, something like to the
Trinity, he could find no comparison that could satisfy him. He had well
considered an Eye, a Fountain, and a River; but he did not find these things
proper enough to express his thoughts by. I was at first afraid (says he) lest
it should seem that I was willing to introduce a certain Flux of Divinity,
which would have no consistence. Secondly, Of establishing a Numerical Unity by
these Comparisons: For an Eye, a Fountain, and a Sun, are one in number,
although diversely modified. I reflected in the Sun, on the Beams and the Light;
but there was yet somewhat to fear on this occasion, lest that we should
suppose there was a Composition in a nature where there is none, such as is the
Composition of the Sun, and of what is in the Sun; and that we should give an
Essence to the Father, but that we should attribute no distinct Existence to
the other Persons, from thence making them Faculties which exist in God, and
which have no distinct Essence. The Sunbeams and Light are not other Suns (as
the Son and the Holy Ghost are other Spirits distinct from the Father) but
certain Emanations and Proprieties essential to the Sun. Finally P. 612.
Gregory found nothing better than to abandon these Images and Shadows, as
Deceitful and very far from the Originals.

But P. 608.
Gregory believed the Trinity was revealed by degrees, as that Revelation first
discovered God the Father, without speaking of God the Son but with much
Obscurity; after that the Son, without imposing on Men the Belief of the Holy
Ghost, fearing they should not be in a State of admitting thereof; and finally
the Holy Ghost, after the Ascension of the Son.

We may judge by these places, of the Doctrine of Gregory, and of the Orthodox
of his time, with whom the Orthodox of ours agree as well for the Terms, as
they are distant in the Sense. We may further see, in the Expressions of our
Bishop, a remarkable Effect of the Dispute. It is when we fear that our
Adversaries should draw some Advantage from certain ways of speaking, we avoid
with care the use thereof, lest we should give them some Prize; although these
Expressions are otherwise most proper, to express the Doctrine we maintain. It
is visible, that to make himself be understood, Gregory ought to have answered
to the Arians: Yet it is true we adore three Gods, seeing we acknowledge three
Eternal Spirits, whose Essences are distinct; but these Gods are perfectly
equal, and as perfectly united as distinct Beings can be, having the same
Thoughts and the same Will; which makes us say commonly, That we acknowledge
but one God. But if he had spoken thus, the Arians who boasted to study and
follow Scripture, would have replied, That all the Scripture represents the
Unity of the Supreme God, as a Numerical Unity, and not as an Unity of Species
and Consent. They would have said, as they did before, but with much more
appearance of Truth, That the Homoousians introduced a new Paganism, in
establishing three Collateral Gods. Thus they were obliged, that they might
keep themselves from these Reproaches, to maintain strongly that there is but
one God, according to the Sentiment of Nice. The Platonicks, who had a like
Thought, but were not restrained in their Expressions, fortified themselves
thereupon, and said, That the Principle of all things were three Gods. I cannot
but relate on this Subject these remarkable words of St. Augustine, which
admirably confirms what I have said: De civit. Dei, l. 10. c. 23.
Liberis verbis loquuntur Philosophi, nec in rebus ad intelligendum
difficilimis, offensionem Religiosarum aurium pertimescunt: Nobis autem ad
certam regulam loqui fas est, ne verborum licentia, Etiam in rebus quae in his
Significantur, impiam gignat opinionem. Nos autem non dicimus duo, vel tria
principia, cum de Deo loquimur; sicuti nec duos Deos, vel tres nobis licitum
est dicere, quamvis de unoquoque loquentes, vel de Filio, vel de Spiritu
Sancto, etiam singulum quemque Deum esse fateamur. Philosophers freely use what
words soever they will, and fear not to offend Pious Ears, in Subjects most
hard to be understood. For our part it is not lawful for us to speak, but
according to a certain Rule; lest words employed with too much Liberty, should
beget an Impious Opinion, to understand them, according to what they signify.
When we speak of God, we do not say two, nor three Principles, as it is not
permitted us, no more than that there are two or three Gods, though in speaking
of each one, or of the Son, or of the Holy Ghost, we grant that each of them is
God.

This Custom has made Men insensibly swerve from the Ancient Idea's, because
the word Unity was taken in the ordinary Sense that it used to be taken in;
without supposing that the Ancients understood it in a particular Sense. This
is what happened in diverse other Doctrins, as it has been observed in the
History of Iansenism.

It Is now time to return to the History of our Bishop, after having brought so
many proofs of his Sentiments upon those Tenets that then divided Christians.
The Council, whereof we have already spoken, Socr. l. 5. c. 8. and Soz. l. 7.
c. 7.
assembled at Constantinople in May CCCLXXXI. There were at it an Hundred and
fifty Orthodox Bishops and Thirty six Macedonians, who it was hoped would be
brought to the Orthodox Faith. Besides some Canons that were made there
concerning Discipline (whereof we shall not speak) the Affair of Gregory and
Maximus was treated on, they also made a Symbol. The Ordination of Conc. C.P.
c. 4.
Maximus, and all those that he could ever have, were judged void; after which
Carm. de vita, p. 14.
Gregory was declared Bishop of Constantinople, though he endeavored to
discharge himself from it. They obtained of him that he would stay there,
because he was persuaded that he could the more easily in this ^ost, reconcile
the different Parties which then rent Christianity. It was brought against the
Promotion of Gregory, that being Bishop of Sasime and Nazianze, he could not be
transferred to Constantinople, without violating the Canon of the Council of
Nice, which is express thereupon. But Melece Theod. l. 5. c. 9.
Bishop of Antioch replied to that, that the design of this Canon was to bridle
Pride and Ambition, which had no share in this business. Moreover, it seems
that this Canon was not observed in the East, since Gregory Carm. de vita sua,
p. 29.
says, That they opposed to him, Laws that were repealed long before; besides,
that he had performed no part of the Episcopal Function at Sasime; and as for
Nazianzen, he was but Coadjutor to his Father.

This Affair being cleared, they entered on the principal Subject for which they
were assembled, which was the Sentiment of Macedonius, who had been Bishop of
Constantinople, and believed that the Holy Ghost was but a Creature; though all
the Disciples of this Bishop were not of the same mind, upon the nature of this
Divine Person, as appears by a passage of Gregory which has been related.
Immediately, in the Council, was confirmed the Nicene Creed, and they thought
it convenient Vid. Conc. Chalced. act. 2.
to augment it, particularly with what respected the Holy Ghost. This addition
is in these terms, We believe in the Holy Ghost, the Lord of Life and he that
gives it, who proceeds from the Father, who with the Father and the Son is
glorified, and who spoke by the Prophets.

The Council also anathematized the Sentiments of Sabellius, Marcellus,
Ph^tinus, Eunomius, Apollinarius and Macedonius; but we shall not stand to
relate these Errors, because they have no Connection with the Life of Gregory,
the same reason makes us omit what concerns Discipline.

All passed with Tranquillity enough, in regard to Gregory, until a Tempest
arose, that made him lose the Episcopal See of Constantinople, when he least
expected it. It was the Spirit of Revenge in a Party which he opposed, that
caused this Difference; from which Gregory, who was not so Courageous as to
maintain the Brunt against his Adversaries, could not free himself but by
flying.

There was some time after a sad Schism in the Church of Antioch, where two
Orthodox Bishops were at the same time. Melece being dead at Constantinople,
before the Council was separated, they spoke of giving him a Successor. Gregory
thereupon proposed an Expedient to end this Schism; which was, that Paulinus
who was the other Orthodox Bishop, Carm. de vita, p. 25.
and who had been ordained by Lucifer de Cagliari, alone governed the Church of
Antioch during the rest of his Life; and that after those of the Party of
Melece, being reunited with those of Paulinus's, would choose a Bishop by
common Votes: For fear it should be thought that he had some Interest to favor
Paulinus, and that he would form a Party; he offered the Council to quit the
Episcopal Throne of Constantinople, in which he had been established. But the
Ambitious and Incendiaries, as Gregory calls them, who had begun to give a
Successor to Melece, would not hearken to this Proposition. Ib. p. 27.
A Crowd of young Persons begun to cry out like Magpies, and made so much
noise, that they even forced the old Bishops, who should have resisted them,
and brought in question again the Affair of Gregory, which had been decided.
Gregory perfectly describes their Ambition, Ignorance and Defects, in the Poem
he has made of his Life: It is better to read it in the very Author than here.
Yet the People, hearing that the Council gave Gregory a Distaste, and that the
latter spoke of retiring, cried out, That they should not take away their
Pastor, and entreated him not to abandon his Flock.

About that time Timothy Bishop of Alexandria, who succeeded Peter, and who was
of a Violent and Contentious Spirit, arrived there with diverse Egyptian
Bishops. The old Malice they had against Gregory, upon the account of Maximus
the Cynick, had so much inflamed them against our Bishop, that they began by
complaining that the Canons had been violated, in transporting Gregory from one
Bishopric to another. This excited a great Noise in the Council, and it was
upon this occasion that Gregory made his Speech of Peace, which is the
Fourteenth, wherein he at length presents the Advantages of Agreement, and the
evil Consequences of Divisions. He highly Censures therein the lightness of the
Bishops, who had without reason, changed their Opinion in his behalf, and
suffered themselves to be deceived by the Calmness of his Enemies. He says,
That Back-bitings ought to be slighted, which are commonly spread of Moderate
Persons; and in fine, we may easily see by what he has said, that it is not in
our Age alone, that Men do cover their Passions most unworthily under the fair
name of Zeal for the Purity of Faith. Gregory testifies also, Ib. p. 29.
that he told them, For what concerned himself they should not put themselves
to so much trouble, but that they should endeavor to be reunited; That it was
time to make People cease laughing at them as wild Men, who had learned nothing
else but to fight; That provided they would agree, he consented to be Jonas,
who should make the Tempest cease; That he had taken against his Will the
Episcopal See^ and that he quitted it freely, and that his Body being weakened
with old Age, obliged him thereunto.

Notwithstanding all this, they accused him of Ambition; he therefore made a
Speech, which is the Twenty seventh, wherein he protests he had accepted of the
Bishopric of Constantinople, but by force; and brings the People to witness
it. He says, Or. 27. p. 465.
That he cannot tell whether he ought to call the Seat of Constantinople, The
Throne of a Tyrant, or the Sea of a Bishop; he complains of the Distractions of
his Enemies, and the Envy they bore him P. 466.
because of his Eloquence, and his Learning in the Sciences of the Heathens. It
may be that made some People envy him, but the Post which he was in made a
great many more envy him. He would have suffered him to have made use of his
Rhetoric at Sasine without giving him the least trouble for it.

After having declared in full Council, that he desired to quit the place which
was envied him; he went to the Emperor's Palace, to entreat him to suffer him
to withdraw. He obtained it with some difficulty, and afterward he only
thought upon taking leave publicly, which he did in the Cathedral in the
presence of one hundred and fifty Bishops, and all the People: We have the
Discourse he then made, and it is the Two and Thirtieth in order; he there
represents the Ill Condition wherein he found the Orthodox Church of
Constantinople, and the Change he had accomplished; he makes a Confession of
his Faith, touching the Blessed Trinity, and shows he had done nothing which
was worthy of Censure; he exhorts the Fathers of the Council to choose a Person
worthy of the Sea of Constantinople to succeed him, and afterward took his
leave of all that heard him. In this Speech he complains of his Old Age, P. 528.
and in the Poem of his Life, P. 30.
he says he was then but a dead Man animated; which he could not say, if he
was, according to the common Supposition, but Fifty six Years Old.

As soon as he took his Leave, the People, and in general all those who had
heard him at Constantinople, testified a great deal of Grief. The Conduct of
the Council appears very unequal and Violent, since after they Confirmed
Gregory in the Sea of Constantinople, they obliged him to quit it, at the Age
of about 80 Years. This manner of acting so Unwise and Un-christian like, gave
pleasure enough to the Enemies of the Council, and much diminished the
Authority of their Decisions. For in fine, how can we think that Bishops so
Factious, so Unjust, and so Ignorant, as Gregory describes them in diverse
places, were nor capable of Examining maturely the Doctrins in question? If
their Authority did not make them incline to the Orthodox ^ide, it must needs
be Chance only that led them into the right way. The love of Truth is seldom
found with so much Vanity and Ignorance.

Thus Gregory Abandoned the Bishopric of Constantinople, some few Weeks after
he had been established by that Council that Banished him. He withdrew into
Cappadocia, according to Gregory the Priest, Author of his Life; and went to
live at Arianze, where he was Born. Amongst those that were presented to the
Emperor, Sozom. l. 7. o. 8.
some Bishops put up Nectairus, Senator of Constantinople, a Man of regulate
Manners, and comely Countenance, but who was not as yet Baptized, and who had
scarcely any Learning. It is not known whether Gregory parted for Cappadocia
before this Election was made, or staid at Constantinople until he had a
Successor named to him. Howbeit, Or. xlvi.
Gregory writ an Instruction to Nectairus; where he begins thus, That it seemed
as if the Providence of God, who before kept the Churches, had altogether
abandoned the Affairs of this Life. That which made him speak thus, he says,
was not his particular Evils, tho so great, that they would have seemed
insupportable to any body else. He assures us, that the State of the Church
only, forced those words from his Mouth. He afterward describes to Nectaire
the boldness of the Arians and Macedonians, who were in as great a number at
least as the Orthodox, and who durst Assemble and form Churches, (a horrid
Attempt) after the Decisions of a Council so well Regulated as that which had
been newly held! Gregory comprehended not how his Holiness and his Gravity (it
was thus that Bishops were styled) permitted the Apollinists to Assemble. He
advertised him that Apollinarus said, that the Body of the Son of God, Existed
before the World; that the Divinity served him as a Soul; and that his Body
descended from Heaven, and was essential to the Son; yet nevertheless Died.
Gregory thought, tho I know not why, that to permit these Men to Assemble, was
to grant, that their Doctrine was truer than that of the Canonical, since there
could not be two Truths; as if to suffer any one, was a sign that they believed
his Opinions to be true! In fine, he advises Nectairus to tell the Emperor,
that what he had done in favor of the Church, would be of no use, if Heretics
were admitted to Assemble. It was thus that good Gregory who would not whilst
the Arians were the strongest Party, the Emperor being on their side, have any
thing undertaken which was blamed in them; Exhorted his Successor to forget
this good Lesson; so difficult it is not to contradict our selves, when we take
not great care to free our selves from Passion.

The following Year, CCCLXXVIII. Theod. lib. 5. c. 8.
there was an Assembly of Bishops held at Constantinople, where Gregory was
called; but he would not go to it; and thus he Answered those which Invited
him. Ep. lv*
If I must write the truth to you, I am disposed always to shun every Assembly
of Bishops, because I never saw a Synod which had good Success, or which did
not rather augment the Evil than diminish it. The Spirit of dispute and
Ambition, (without exaggerating upon it) is so great there that it cannot be
expressed. It must not be thought that our Bishop said this, without thinking
well on it, in a time wherein he might have any regret. He repeats it again in
his Letters LXV.LXXI, LXXII. and LXXIV. and also diverted himself by putting
this thought in Verse, Carm. 10. p. 40.
I will never be present, says he, at any Synod, because none but Geese and
Cranes herd there, which fight without understanding one another: There are
Divisions among them, Quarrels, and shameful things, which before were hidden,
and which are Re-assembled in one Place, with Cruel Men. Being returned to
Nazianze, he found that Church Greg. Presb. p. 52.
Vacant a second time, and by that reason Infected with the Opinions of
Apollinarius. He was immediately desired to take the Place of his Father, but
he never would do it, and that gave occasion to Ep. 222. Et Carm. de rebus suis.
his Enemies to accuse him of Pride, as if he had scorned to take care of a
small Church, after having possessed the Patriarchal See of Constantinople.
Gregory protests in one of his Letters, that he had refused it only because he
was too Old, and too much Indisposed; yet seems nevertheless to promise to lend
his Body to the Church, as he himself said; which makes us believe he really
took care of the Church of Nazianze, at least until they had provided a Bishop
for it.

We shall not speak of what happened after the retreat of Gregory, because he was
not concerned in it; only he writ to several of his Friends, to endeavor that
the Bishops might live in Peace, tho they were to be severely Censured for it.
At his leisure hours he composed some of the Poetry which we have, and
particularly that which concerns his Life. We may say of his Poetry, that the
Style is as Prosaick as that of his Speeches is Elevated: As there is often top
much Ornament in his Speeches, so there is too little in his Verse, the turn of
which besides is harsh enough. But he is not alone among excellent Orators, who
have been indifferent Poets. The rest of his Poetry that is extant not being
placed according to the order of Time, we cannot well distinguish those that he
made at the end of his Life, from those writ under the Empire of Julian, as has
been already observed, unless there be in the very Poetry some matter of Fact,
which may distinguish the time.

Gregory died very Old, according to the Relation of Greg. Presb. p. 33.
the Priest who writ his Life: And Suidas tells us that he Lived above XC
Years, and died in the Year CCCXCI, the third Year of the Reign of the Emperor
Theodosius. We have still a Testament which he made, being at Constantinople,
and which is at the beginning of his Works; some suspect it to be
Supposititious; but as it contains nothing Singular, and no more than Gregory
has said before, there is no convincing reason that can make us reject it.

It is not requisite that I should make here an Encomium upon Gregory of
Nazianze: It might be seen by his Conduct and those Places we have related of
his Writings; what judgment may be made of him in general; and it is not sure
to trust to any whatever, when we are to judge with exactness of an Author. In
his writings is a very faithful description of the Manners of that Age; as
wherein the Penitency Vid. Or. 12. p. 191. or 19. p. 308. and alibi Passim.
of those that lay on the hard Ground, and such as rose at Midnight to sing
Hymns, and to weep, hindered not the Ecclesiastics from being generally very
Corrupt. Religion began from Carmine de vita p. 28. vocantur Episcopi
mercatores Christi.
that time to serve as a pretense to get Money; and as it is more easy to keep
an outward guard upon our selves, than to correct our inward Defects, so cannot
be thought strange, that many Persons whose Conversation seemed unblameable,
were nevertheless after some time found out to be very ill Men. The Elections
of Bishops were then for the most part made in Churches by the People; Or. 19.
p. 308.
amongst whom there was strange Caballing to be advanced. Gregory Ibid. p. 310.
and Ep. lxxi..
wished that this Election depended on the Priests, who were more capable of
judging of the Capacity of Persons, than those that considered nothing but
their Riches, or Authority; where People acted impetuously without Reason, and
were very easily Bribed. Nevertheless, his own experience taught him, as is
evident, that the very Bishops did not act on these occasions, with more Widom
than the Vulgar. We only need to read his description of the Council of
Constantinople to be convinced herein. Their judgments were so much the more to
be feared, because they determined very speedily, without being exactly
informed of the matter in question, but agreed with very great difficulty, as
in the business of Maximus and Gregory. They scarcely thought on any thing but
to enrich themselves and to augment their Authority, under pretense of Piety,
as Gregory reproacheth them in diverse Places.

This inclination commonly possessing the Ecclesiastics of that time, made
them gather the People into the Churches, and begin to publish both Miracles
and Legends, much more frequently than before, and to Preach up a blind
Credulity instead of exhorting Christians to examine their Faith, and to
maintain it by good Reasons: An Example whereof may be seen in the Eightenth
Speech of Gregory, which is in the Honor of St. Cyprian. He Accuses the Bishop
of Carthage, who bore this name, of being a Magician, and of having endeavored
to seduce a Christian Virgin, named Iustina, by the means of a Demon; who not
being able to accomplish his aim, entered into the very Body of Cyprian, and was
driven away by this Magician, by calling upon the God of Iustina. Those who
have read St. Cyprian, know that this Bishop never had such an accident, and
the refutation of the Fable may be seen in the Oxford Edition of St. Cyprian's
Works, before a supposititious piece, that is Entitled, Confessio S. Cypriani
Martyris and Pontificis. After having thus harangued upon the credit of a
Legend, Gregory says, that the Ashes of Cyprian, had Or. 18. p. 394.
the Virtue of driving away Devils, curing the Sick, and foretelling
Futurities. Persons are as little inclined to believe these Miracles, as the
other part of this Fable. A piece of St. Cyprian is likewise at the end of this
Speech, where Gregory asks him his Advice P. 286.
for the better governing of his Flock. This Prayer has no resemblance of
Rhetoric in it. There is likewise another place in this Speech, which may
persuade us that the Invocation of Saints began to be in use at that time.
Iustina represented P. 279.
Praying to the Virgin Mary, to help a Virgin in danger. In effect the opinion
of Miracles which were said to be done at the Graves of Martyrs, has a very
great connection with the Worship that is rendered to them several Ages since
amongst Christians. As if we believed that the Ashes of Martyrs cured the Sick
who drew nigh them, and did many other Miracles, there appeared no danger of
making Addresses to them, to ask some Favor of them; since God did so many
Miracles in favor of those that called upon them near their Graves. There is
great probability that the belief of Miracles, which Saints did after their
Death, is not much older than their Invocations. Dr. Cave in his English Life
of our Bishop, says not without Reason, that Gregory sometimes speaks to the
Dead, by a Figure of Rhetoric, which has been observed P. 35.65, 66.
more than once; but there is no Figure in the Action of Iustina, which Gregory
undoubtedly did approve of; as appears by the manner he relates it; I shall not
undertake to speak of all the Speeches of Gregory, it suffices to have given
an Extract of his Principal ones. We have Two hundred and forty one Letters of
his, the greatest part of which regard some particular Affairs, which are not
well known to us, or contain Complements, or Morals, or even some Jokes. There
are few considerable Facts, excepting those, wherein he complains of the Ill
Manners of the Bishops of his time, and of their Disputes. These Letters are
not of a Periodick Style, like to his Speeches, yet they were written with
Care, and generally very Elegant.

Amongst the Works which bear the Name of Gregory, it is doubted if two are his.
1. The Forty fifth Speech which treats of Divinity, and directed to the Monk
Evagrius. The Author makes it his business to Expound how Three Persons can be
in God; though we cannot say that there are Three Gods. He Establishes, like
to Gregory, the Unity of God in the strict Union of the Three Persons, and in
the specific Identity of their Essence. 2. A Discourse upon the beginning of
Ezekiel.

It is believed, that the Paraphrase of Ecclesiastes which is amongst the
Speeches of our Gregory, is supposed his, who is called Thaumaturge; and that
the Tragedy which is at the end of his Poetry, Entitled Christ's Sufferings,
is Apollinarius's of Laodicea.

But we may reckon amongst the Works of Gregory of Nazianze, at least, in
regard to the Form, a Collection of Divinity, which he had made with his Friend
Basil, in reading the Works of Origin, as may be seen by his Letter the LXXXVII
to Theodoret Bishop of Tyane. Gregory believing this Collection useful, the
Doctrine it contains may be looked upon as that of Gregory and Basil. We have
already said, that the German Edition of the Works of Gregory, which lately
appeared, contains nothing but what is in the Edition of Paris. We shall only
add here that two things might have been done in favor of Gregory, which would
have rendered this Edition a great deal better. First; His Speeches should have
been disposed according to the order of Times, as much as could possibly be
found out by the very Speeches, which was easy, in regard to a great many of
'em, as appears in the Life of Gregory. The same should have been done in
respect to the Epistles, which the Abbot de Billis, (tho otherwise a Learned
Man) has not placed in any good Method. Secondly, It would be a thing to be
desired, that some able Man should make a new Translation in Prose of all the
pieces of Gregory's Poetry. That which is in Verse is very bad, not only in
regard to the Poetry, but also in respect to the Sense. He that did it being a
very ill Poet, took excessive Liberties to fill the measure of his miserable
Verse. These sorts of Translations are not regarded by the Learned, for they
value them not, nor by those which cannot read the Original, without the help
of a Translation, because it is too far above their Sphere, and they may be
deceived. The Interpreter of Gregory has for Example, made Baronius, Page. ad
ann. 389. N. 5.
or some of his Copiers fall into an Error, since they believed that where
Gregory a little after the death of his Brother Cesario, and his Sister
Gorgonia, said that he was Old, that was to be understood of a prematured old
Age, because the Interpreter made use of this term, in Translating the 363 d.
Verse of the Poem Entitled, Carmen 1. de rebus suis; tho there is no such
thing in the Original. As for the version of his Works in Prose, it is
incomparably better; and we may say that the Abbot was as capable of writing
Prose as he was unfit for Verse. It is wonderful that a Man of his Learning,
should take so much pains to Translate into pitiful Verse, what he could have
put much better into Prose. One thing notwithstanding may be observed in the
Translation of the Speeches and Letters of Gregory, which will convince us we
ought always to have recourse to the Original. And that is the Pointing of the
Version, which is often very different from that in the Greek, that makes it
appear more clear, and less encumbered: Tho that may in part fall out through
the fault of those who have placed the Greek in the side of the Translation,
(for he had Published it alone) who have taken not care enough of the
Correction, and partly by the liberty of the Translator, who has Abbreviated
many Periods, and Lengthned those which appeared to him too short. However we
may say in general, that it is one of the best Versions which has been made of
the Greek Fathers, and at the same time one of the most difficult, by reason of
the too figurate Style of Gregory, and which is even Harsh and Obscure in
diverse Places where he treats of controverted Tenets.

We should here have ended the Life of Gregory, because we have nothing more to
say of him as a certainty, but that we perceived, a little too late, that what
was said of the delaying of Baptism (Page 9.) may be cleared by Gregory
himself. He disputes in his XL Speech, where he treats of Baptism against those
which deferred it, under such pretenses as we have before related. It appears
by this Speech, that Gregory believed, 1. That by Baptism all past Sins were
Pardoned and blotted out. 2. That it is difficult for a Man to reestablish
himself in the State of Salvation, if he falls into a Mortal sin after Baptism.
3. That those who neglect Baptism, and die without being Baptized, are Damned.
4. That those who died without it, but who have not neglected nor retarded
their Baptism, by their fault, are neither Glorified nor Punished, whether they
die in their Infancy, or in a more advanced Age, they desired to be Baptized.
We may see by this Doctrine, and by several others, that the Christian Societies
of this Age, without excepting one, cannot boast of following in all things the
Doctrine of the Fathers. Divinity has its Revolutions as well as Empires.

Dissertationes in Irenaeum Auctore Henrico Dodwello, A. M. Historices in
Academia Oxoniensi Prelectore Camdeniano. Accedit fragmentum Philippi Sidetae,
hactenus ineditum de Catichistarum Alexandrinarum Successione cum notis.
1. TThe third Dissertation which is the first we shall speak of, is taken up
in Examining the time of the Birth and Death of St. Iranaeus; as these two
Epochs were never took notice of by any Author, it must be traced out by the
help of Conjecture: And thus Mr. Dodwell endeavors it.

P. 230.
Profane History furnishes us with no Instances which can help us to discover
the Birth of St. Iranaeus; because since Tacitus who lived in the Reign of
Trajan to the end of the Empire of Commodus, we have no exact History; and that
the Latin Authors of the History of Augustus began after Adrian: It is true we
have many Monuments and Inscriptions of Trajans, whence Constantine the Great
compared them to the Herb which we call Pellitory of the Wall. But when we are
not assisted by History, all these Antiquities can no more maintain the weight
of Consequences, than Types and Figures in Divinity.

. 2
We have no clearer Demonstrations from the History of the Church, since the
Chronicle of Eusebius is now so corrupt, and that the Copiers have occasioned
so much Disorder, that one can scarcely find any thing fixed or certain
therein: We are therefore now to except the great Insight from the Writings of
St. Irenaeus himself, which may serve to guide us in these almost unconquerable
Darknesses; this is the Method our Author follows.

. 3.
St. Irenaeus speaks thus of the Apocalypse, Lev. 5. c. 30.
It is not long since it appeared it was almost in our time, at the end of the
Reign of Domitian. The Latin Interpreter makes use of these words nostro
seculo, to denote what we have translated in our time; and Eusebius, who speaks
of the same passage, says, (...). It remains therefore to know what the word
(...) signifies; it is certain that the Ancients distinguished Times by
Generations, some giving Twenty five Years to each Generation, and some Thirty;
and others allowing three Generations to each Age. But all did not assign the
same beginning to each Generation. According to some, the time of Infancy was
reckoned for nothing, and often said that a thing was done in the time of their
Fathers, though it happened after their own Birth, because they had share in it,
and by reason of their under Age, and that they could not remember it. They
accounted their Generation to begin no sooner than they succeeded their Fathers
in the managing of Affairs. There were others, which begun to reckon their
Generation from the very Moment of their Birth, and so Eusebius used to do, as
appears by a place cited by the Author.

Supposing therefore that Irenaeus begins to reckon his Generation from the
very time of his Birth,. 4.
it follows, that since he places it almost toward the end of the Empire
Domitian, he must be born under one of the Successors of this Emperor. Nerva
reigned but a short time, the Empire of Trajan was much longer; so though the
Reign of the first should be reckoned for nothing, it must be notwithstanding
concluded that St. Irenaeus was born at the beginning of the Reign of Trajan,
or else under the Empire of Nerva.

S. Irenaeus says also in a Letter which he writ to Florinus, See Eusebius. H.E.
lib. 5. cap. 19.
that he had seen him in Asia whilst he was but young [(...)] with St.
Polycarp. 5 and seq.
Mr. Dodwell endeavors to prove, that this Father gave the name of (...) to
Persons of Twenty five and Thirty Years, of Age; whence he concludes that he
was more than Twenty five, but he was not Thirty Year old, when he was in Asia
with Polycarp.

We likewise read these words of this Father in the same Letter to Florinus: I
saw you whilst I was but a Child, in the lower Asia with Polycarp, when you
made a great Figure at the Royal Court, and endeavored to insinuate your self
into the mind of this Holy Man: He shows that by this Royal Court, that of the
Emperor Adrian must be understood, who could not make so quiet a Voyage into
Asia, as to give occasion to Florinus to pursue a Friendship with Polycarp
before the Year CXXII. of the Common Era of Jesus Christ.

In fine, St. Irenaeus tells us in the same Letter, That he often heard
Polycarp say, upon the Subject of the first Founders of Heresy, who openly
divided the Church in his time, O God to what time am I reserved! We need then
only know precisely the time in which the Heretics Marcion, Basilides,
Valentinus, Saturninus, Cerdon and others took off their Masks. Mr. Dodwell
endeavors to show, that it was in the same Year of the Voyage of Adrian CXXII.
so that St. Irenaeus being then Twenty five Years, it follows that he was born
toward the XCVII Year of Jesus Christ, far from the common opinion; which says,
he was not born till the CXL Year of our Lord.

Mr. Dodwell has made appear in his first Dissertation,. 12. and seq.
that the Heretics came from amongst the Jews, and separated by a public
Schism from the Christians but under the Empire of Trajan. These are some of
the Reasons he has made use of; Hegesippus tells us, in a passage which
Eusebius preserved for us, that the Church remained a Virgin during the Life of
the Apostles and the first Disciples of our Lord; and that it was after their
Death, that Men publicly preached against the Truth. This same Author says
also, That the first that separated himself from the Church, was one Thebutis,
because he was not raised to the Episcopacy of Jerusalem, which happened, as
Hegesippus says, after the Death of Simeon Son of Cleophas, and under the
Empire of Trajan. Whence it follows that this Thebutis separated himself from
the Church not till the Year CXVI* of our Lord, and the last but one of this
Prince, seeing that since the Death of Simeon the Sea of Jerusalem was vacant
but that Year. The Author confirms all this by Passages of St. Paul, St. John,
St. Peter and St. Jude, who observe, as he pretends, that there were many False
Doctors arisen when they writ their Epistles, but that they only taught
privately, being not as yet separated from the Church. He enquires into the
time that all these Epistles had been written, and shows, according to his
account, that this agrees very well with the Epoche which he has observed of
the first Schism that happened in the Church.

Celsus, a great Enemy to Christianity, confesses in Origin, that the first
Disciples of our Lord were all of the same Opinion, and that they were not
separated from one another until their number increased. He reproaches them
with these Divisions, and had not omitted it, if there had been any in the time
of the first Disciples, to have made a Demonstration of them in like manner.

The same Truth also appears by a place of Clemens of Alexandria: This Author
pretends to prove that the Heretical Churches were of a later date than the
True. To this purpose he divides the time which passed since the Birth of Jesus
Christ, into three Periods; the first comprehends the time of our Savior's
Life, from Augustus to the fifteenth Year of Tiberius, according to the
Calculation of Clement; the second from the Death of Jesus Christ to the
Martyrdom of St. Paul under Nero's Empire; and the third from Nero to Adrian.
Clement shows that all Heresy began after these three Periods, thus agreeing
with Mr. Dodwell, that they appeared not until Adrian, so that some were in
being until the Emperor Antoninus's time, which is true of the Heretic
Marcion, and very likely of Valentinus.

Mr. Dodwell having proved in his first Dissertation, that the Heretics did
not begin to disturb the Church until under the Emperor Trajan, pursues this
Subject in the Dissertation whereof we give the Extract, and proves in
particular, that Marcion, Basilides, Valentinus, and some other Heretics, made
Polycarp say so often, O God to what times am I reserved? That all these
Heretics, I say, did not discover themselves until under the Empire of Adrian;
the reason hereof may be seen in the Author; we will be satisfied to remark,
that he reprehends Tertullian by the bye, of some very gross Faults, as that he
made but one Emperor of Tiberius and Claudius under the name of Tiberius
Claudius; but this of Tertullian will not seem so strange, as in H.E. lib. 2
Eusebius one Emperor divided into three, Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, and that
the Historian says they were Brothers.

. 21. and seq.
After having spoke of the time of St. Irenaeus's Birth, Mr. Dodwell searched
after that of his Death; he rejects the pretended History of his Martyrdom by
the Persecution of the Emperor Severus, because it does not appear in any
Author of the four first Ages, that this Father was Martyred, there being none
that gives him this name. To comprehend the strength of the Argument (which is
a Demonstration on this Subject) you must know that the Honor of Martyrdom was
so Glorious, that this Praise was never forgot; so that St. Irenaeus not having
it from any Ancient Author, though they gave him many Glorious Titles, we ought
to conclude that it was not due to him.

It Is true, some of the following. Ages honored him with the Title of Martyr;
the first that gave it him was the Author of the Questions to the Orthodox,
which Mr. Dodwell supposes to be one Iustina Sicilian, that is supposed to be
writ about the end of the fifth Age; at least he is sure he did not live until
after the Emperors embraced Christianity, and consequently his Testimony alone
ought not to be taken for things that passed a long time before.

The second who calls S. Irenaeus Martyr is In Esa. 64.
St. Ierom, but because this Doctor has not given him this name in the places
wherein he ought to have given it him, if he had thought it his due, Mr.
Dodwell judges it is some Remark that might have passed out of the Margin into
the Text, so that nothing can be concluded in favor of St. Irenaeus's
pretended Martyrdom, neither from the Author of the Questions to the Orthodox,
nor from the Testimony of St. Ierom; and Gregory of Tours may be looked upon as
the first that spoke of it affirmatively, but it is with so little Exactness,
and upon so false Supposition, that one ought not to take notice of what he
says: He will have him dye in the same Persecution that crowned Photion Bishop
of Lions, whom nevertheless St. Irenaeus succeeded* Besides it is certain that
he lived when Victor was Pope, as appears by the famous Dispute that happened
about Easter, which was undoubtedly in that Pope's time. And it seems under the
Empire of Commodus. Eusebius and the Chronicle of Alexandria make mention of
this Father in the third Year of this Emperor. Mr. Dodwell believes that it was
upon the occasion of his Works against the Schism of Blastus and Florinus, that
he put out under Commodus rather than Severus, by reason of the Troubles of the
Reign of this last, during which it seems this Dispute was quieted.

The last Actions of St. Irenaeus which we have any knowledge of, end in the
Year CLXXXIX of our Savior, and the Tenth of the Emperor Commodus, so that it
may be concluded this Father died about Ninety, but not full a Hundred Years of
Age.

This Author attributes this long Life to Providence, that Tradition might be
more complete: The same also was said of the Patriarchs before Moses, because
the Revelations were not writ; but the Writings of the New Testament being
received and known, the like Necessity does not appear. Nevertheless Mr.
Dodwell carries this thought further, and says, That it was more difficult,
that the Churches planted by the Apostles should consent to an Error, than to
convey Books under the borrowed names of Apostles; there would be nothing
wanting to fall into this Unhappiness, but the Perfidiousness of an Ill, or the
too great Credulity of a Good Man. It Is to befriend Tradition extremely, to
bring it from the Inconveniences to which it seems a thousand times more
subject than Scripture: For after all, how would it be possible to distinguish
from the true Apostolic Tradition, what might be added under pretext of
Explication, for some other end.

After having spoke of the Person of St. Irenaeus, Mr. Dodwell passes to his
Writings in the following Dissertations: The design of his Work against
Heresies, and the time wherein it was written, wholly takes up the fourth
Dissertation: If this Father excuses the Rudeness of his Style, it is not that
he was an Enemy to Eloquence, or that he despised it, but because his long
abode in Gaul made him lose the Habit of speaking the Greek Tongue, and because
he was not accustomed to write; whence it is concluded that his Work against
Heresies was the first of his Writings; nor did he write it until he was far in
Years, because he talks of having seen Polycarp in his Youth, as a particular
Advantage; which seems to intimate that there were but few then in the World
that could say the same thing. He says also, that diverse Bishops succeeded
Polycarp in the Government of the Church of Smyrna, which shows it was a long
time after the Death of that Holy Man; Irenaeus might be then about eighty
Years of Age.

This Work against Heresies, was not all writ at the same time, nor was it
built upon the same Foundation; on the contrary it appears by diverse places,
that the two first Books entirely took up the Design of the Author. It was
after these were ended, that he thought of making a third, which soon followed
the other two: After that he made a fourth and fifth Book, wherein he speaks of
the Doctrine of our Lord. But though he writ these things at several different
times, all the work was ended in a short time.. 7.
As Irenaeus himself says, in a Letter to a Friend that had desired to write
upon this Subject. Mr. Dodwell acknowledges that he does not know who this
Friend was, and makes no Scruple to refute those that thought it Turibius a
Priest of Toledo, whom the Author of this Fable Confounds, with one Turibius of
Asturia who lived not till the fifth Age; whether there were two of this name,
or that they made two of one, which was often done, it was so that Anaclet was
made two Popes, in taking away from him the two first Syllables of his name.

However this Friend must be a Grecian, because St. Irenaeus writes to him in
Greek, and makes an Apology for the Roughness of his Style: It may be he lived
in Cephalonia, or in some place of the Continent that is near this Island,
according to the Author's Conjectures, who pretends that the Heretic Ptolomy
was of this Country. He desired him to explain the Doctrins of the
Valentinians, and because they embraced almost all the Opinions of the other
Heretics, it makes Irenaeus speak of them all in his Work; going back as far
as Simon the Magician, pretending that they derived their Birth from him, as
the Orthodox did theirs from Jesus Christ and his Apostles: It is true, the
Valentinians, and other Heretics of St. Irenaeus's time, did not acknowledge
this, for they maintained on the contrary, that they received their Doctrine
from Theodad Disciple of St. Paul, as Basilides said* he received his from
Glaucias Interpreter to St. Peter: But this Father proves that they descended
by an uninterrupted Succession from the Heretic Menander Disciple to Simon the
Magician.

The better to apprehend all this, the Author observes that the new Heretics
used always to join themselves to the Ancient ones, and to enter into a Society
with them, adding also some new Error to their Heresy, whereby to distinguish
themselves. And as among Philosophers there was one Potamon that picked and
chose what he liked in all the rest, to form his own Principles by: So it is
very likely that the Valentinians formed their Heresy from what they found in
the other Heresies that suited with their Design. This is the reason that
Irenaeus calls it a Recapitulation of all Heresies*

. 16. and seqq.
Ptolomeus was one of the chief Disciples of the Valentinian Heresy, who
according to the Maxim we just before spoke of, added new Errors to those of
his Masters. It Is of him that this Father speaks of in the beginning of his
Work. Marcus was Disciple to Ptolomeus, erected a new School, and is more
spoken of in what follows than his Master. His Errors spread as far as Gaul,
and all along the Rhine. But Mr. Dodwell proves that the Valentinian Heretic,
Colorbasus, was more ancient than either Marcus or Ptolomeus, because he was
contemporary to Valentine, of whom he learned his Doctrine, after which he
formed a new School: All which is contrary to what Epiphanius writ. These
Heretics, like the Pythagorians, did not explain their Opinions, nor
communicate their Books to any but them who were initiated into their
Mysteries; which was the reason that very few were well acquainted with them,
this caused St. Irenaeus's Friend to desire him to inform therein; therefore
this Father designed, as he himself declares, to discover the Practices of the
Valentinians, and exclaim against their Manners: Mr. Dodwell Remarks upon this,
that the Fathers used to represent the Ill Lives of Heretics, thence to draw
Consequences against their Doctrins; according to the Maxim of Jesus Christ,
You shall know them by their works, Matthew. 7.16. Though this Consequence is not
always lawful, for the Manners of one that is Orthodox in his Judgment, and may
be corrupt; and on the contrary a Heretic may lead a pure and holy Life: But
it was just against the ancient Heretics, whereof the most part approved by
their criminal Opinions, their lewd Practices. They affirmed that one might
deny our Savior by word of Mouth, if Persecuted. That Magic was lawful, and
that simple Fornication was not a Crime, and.c.

The Author employs the rest of this Fourth Dissertation to find out the time
wherein St. Irenaeus writ this piece against the Heretics; to which purpose he
runs over all the Valentinian Heretics, of whom we before have spoken, and by
the great many helps of Conjectures and Inquiries, discovers the Times wherein
they lived and Taught; and concludes at last that Irenaeus writ this Work after
the Death of Photinus his Predecessor, about the Year CLXVII. of the common
Era, and the ninth or tenth of his Episcopacy; and because this Father speaks
of the Version of Theodotian, which is thought to have been later, he
endeavors to show that it is a Mistake, and that there is nothing in the whole
but what agrees with his Calculation* The Reasons may be seen in the Author,
because they cannot be alleged here without being Tedious.

The Fifth Dissertation treats of the Interpreter of St. Irenaeus, and a
Passage of St. Ierom, which joins St. Irenaeus with the Greek Authors, that
cleared Erasmus from his doubt whether he writ in Greek or Latin. Mr. Dodwell
adds another, that neither Erasmus nor Father Feuardant who published an
Edition of St. Irenaeus took notice of, which is, that St. Ierom says that
he will mention none of the Greeks but Irenaeus Bishop of Lions.

He adds Arguments to these Testimonies. This Author excuses the Roughness of
his Style, because he lived along time among the Celtes, and was obliged to
make use of their barbarous Language; but had he writ in Latin this excuse
would not have taken, for there was not only a Roman Colony at Lions, but also
every fifth Year they celebrated the terrible Combat of Orators in Honor to
Augustus, of which Iuvenal speaks in these Verses: Aut Lugdunensem Rhetor
dicturus ad Aram.

St. Ierom says also that St. Irenaeus writ learnedly and eloquently, and
without dispute this Father was too good a Judge to give this Praise to so rude
Latin as that of St. Irenaeus was, if it were that which is now extant; it is
not difficult to observe, that the Author of this Version understood Greek very
well, but could not speak Latin; so that if St. Irenaeus had writ in Latin, we
might justly apply to him the words of Cato Utican, on the Subject of
Posthumous Albinus, who being a Roman, would nevertheless write in Greek, and
yet excused the badness of his Style, saying, He did not well understand the
Greek Tongue. He had rather, says this grave Senator, beg Pardon for his Fault
than not to commit it. He has also Expressions so proper to the Greek Tongue,
that they could not have slipped from an Author that had writ in Latin, had he
been never so little versed in the Tongue; for Example this Author translates
(...), Qui sunt ciro^ Ptolomaeum, instead of saying barely Ptolomaeus, or
Ptolomaei Discipuli; he also makes an Adjective of the proper Name (...), which
he translates Clarus.

Mr. Dodwell goes much further, and maintains that this Latin Version is so far
from being the Original, or made by St. Irenaeus as some have believed, that it
appeared not until a long time after the Death of this Father; since Tertullian
quotes this Work always in other terms, though he writ thirty Years after. The
first that produced formal Testimonies was St. Augustine in his Books against
Julian. What is most strange is that it seems this Father did not know that St.
Irenaeus writ in Greek, this Version then must be made in the time that passed
between St. Augustine and Tertullian; and whereas St. Ierom makes no mention of
it in his Catalogue composed the Year of our Savior CCCLXXX. and the
Fourteenth of Theodosius; it must needs be made between the Year CCCLXXXV. and
the time which St. Augustine speaks of. Our Author thinks it is the Work of some
French or Spaniard that was very ignorant in the Latin, who undertook this
Version upon the account of the Priscillianists, who renewed the Errors of the
Gnostics, which St. Irenaeus had disputed against. This Version was the
occasion of a very singular Action; which was, that after the Heresies were
smothered, this Version was so rough and full of strange Matter, that it was
quite despised; so that Gregory the Great could not find one simple Copy of it,
after an exact Search which he caused to be made, and that none of the ancient
Schoolmen speak of it: But on the contrary the Greek Authors had several Copies
of the Greek Original, and there are Fragments of it in all Places. And
nevertheless now this excellent Greek is lost and the World is full of the bad
Latin Translation; the Fate of Books very often is like that of Fountains;
there are little Rivers that carry their Name into the very Sea, and very
considerable ones that lose themselves without any Name.

St. Irenaeus writ his Books, both without Distinction or Arguments, and his
Translator or some other Authors have added what we see at this day.

IV. Our Author in his last Dissertation of the other Works of St. Irenaeus,
begins his Letter writ to Blastus, and by the first to Florinus, the first
treated of Schism, and the second of Monarchy. Baronius thought that Florin's
Errors obliged St. Irenaeus to write the Books against Heresies; but Mr.
Dodwell is not of his mind. It is manifest that it is against the Valentinians,
that this Father intended these Works, and Florinus taught a quite contrary
Doctrine to that of these Heretics; for whereas these Heretics established two
Principles, the one good, the other bad, them Florinus made conformable to the
Doctrine of the Church, but he made that the Author of Good and Evil. As for
Blastus he is acquitted of the Crime of Heresy, whereof many Ancient and
Modern accused him, and its believed he was but a Schismatic, having done the
Office of a Priest after he was deposed by his Bishop. These two Letters were
writ at the same time after his Work against the Heretics, according to our
Author in the Year CLXXXII, and the Third of Comodus, and the Eighty fifth of
Irenaeus.

Florinus did not stop at these Errors, he soon fell into the Dreams of the
Valentinians, which obliged St. Irenaeus to write him a second Letter, which he
entitled, (...), of the Eighth, because it was writ against the Eighth, des
Eons de Valentinians. Our Author believes that Irenaeus was above Eighty five
years old when he writ it, which was about the CLXXXII. Year of Jesus Christ.

Irenaeus writ also an Harangue against the Gentiles, the Subject whereof was
(...) of the Science. It is known that Isocrates not having the necessary
Talents for speaking publicly, contented himself in writing several Orations,
with important Advise to them that ruled the People; he was imitated by a great
many others, and the Christians themselves were assisted by this Custom to
teach the Pagans the Truths of the Christian Religion, and did not neglect to
embellish their Orations with the vain Ornaments of the Sophists, to move the
Curiosity of the Readers, whose Gust lay that way: Such was then St. Irenaeus's
Discourse of Science, that it was addressed to the Greeks, that is to say, to
all them that were not Christians; for as the Christian Church succeeded that
of the Jews, and the Jews called all them Greeks that were not of their
Religion; so the Christians gave the same Name to all those that did not
embrace their Opinions. Mr. Dodwell believes, that this Work was employed to
refute the Opinion of some Philosophers, who thought that by Study and
Meditation one might raise himself beyond all that is sensible or material, and
to the perfect knowledge of God, and of all Spiritual Beings* and this by
themselves; that St. Irenaeus proved that Knowledge was reserved for the other
Life, and that we do not know in this but only by Faith.

St. Irenaeus writ another Work, which he named the Demonstration of Preaching,
or of the Apostles Doctrine, and dedicated it to one Mavejon, to contradict
several Writings that were fathered on the first Disciples of our Savior, and
particularly the Sermons falsely attributed to St. Peter. Mr. Dodwell says, that
the design of this Work was the same of that of the Prescriptions of
Tertullian. The Ancients speak yet of another Work of St. Irenaeus, entitled
(...), that is, according to St. Ierom's and Mr. Dodwell's Interpretations, a
Book containing diverse Treatises; our Author imploys a long Discourse to show
that St. Irenaeus had erected a School in his latter days, and that he taught
his Scholars what he himself had learned of the Apostles Disciples, that is to
say, Apostolical Traditions; and that this Work we speak of, was a Collection
of the Lessons that he made in that School. It is pleasant to see the trouble
Mr. Dodwell gives himself to establish this his Opinion, and it is like he took
it with pleasure, because it tends to the general end he proposed to himself of
reconciling the Traditions of the two first Ages of the Church with the
Scripture.

What is very advantageous, is, that all these Enquiries include many curious
Remarks, which may be read in our Author.

Besides these Letters of Irenaeus, whereof we have spoken, this Father writ
another to Victor Bishop of Rome, upon a Dispute that happened about Easter:
This gives the Author occasion to inquire why the Asiaticks, who had the
Apostolical Tradition on their side, generally embraced the contrary Opinion,
which was that of Victor: This question did not perplex a Roman Catholic, who
drew hence an Argument for the Supremacy of the Pope, through this deference
which the Christians had for Victor's Opinion. But Mr. Dodwell, who is a good
Protestant, alleges other Reasons for it. The First, that the Emperor Adrian
sent to diverse Roman Colonies in Asia, who carried their Customs along with
them; and the Christians who were in these Colonies, the way of keeping Easter
conformably to the Church of Rome. The Second is, that the Christians removed
as far as they could from the Jewish Customs, through the aversion they had for
the Jews; that made them not scruple reveiving Victor's opinion concerning the
day that Easter should be kept on, because it was quite contrary from that of
this Nation, to which the Asiaticks that opposed Victor, joined themselves.

Mr. Dodwell believes with Mr. Valois, that the Letter to the Church of Lions,
whereof a great part is seen in Eusebius, belongs to S. Irenaeus. Scaliger
said, there was nothing in all the Ecclesiastic History that moved him more
than that Letter did; and that he was as it were beyond himself when he read it.

Of all these Works, there remains only the Latin Version of the first, and
some Fragments of the others quoted by the Ancients. Irenaeus promised to write
in particular against Marcion; but there is none of the Ancien^s that speaks of
having seen this Work; so that it is likely he did not compose it.

The Author added to the end of these Dissertations, a piece of Philippe de
Side, upon the Catechists of Alexandria, with Notes of his own. The reason that
made him Print these Fragments, was because it contains a proof of what he said
in his Dissertations concerning the time that Celsus lived in, against whom
Origin writ.

Dissertations on St. Cyprian: By Henry Dowdell Master of Arts in Dublin.
Printed at Oxford, 1655. in Folio and Octavo.
IT appeared as if nothing could be wished for in the Edition that was given us
at Oxford, of this Father, in 1682. wherein the great Learning of Mr. Fell,
Bishop of Oxford, and Mr. Pearson, Bishop of Chester, appeared in all its
Luster: Nevertheless these Dissertations of Mr. Dowdell show that this Edition
wanted a very considerable Ornament: They are thirteen in number, and upon
important Subjects, selected out of the Epistles of St. Cyprian.

In the First is examined, whether what Mr. Rigaut pretends, be true, that in
the first Ages the name of Clergy was given to all Christian People, but that
the Ecclesiastics appropriated it to themselves by little and litte, to raise
'em proudly above the People. The Author as jealous as can be of the Honor of
the Episcopal Party, refutes this pretension by very good Remarks, wherein he
inquires after the first occasion of applying to the Christians the word (...)
Clergy, and shows, that tho the whole Christian Church was called so, yet this
Title belonged by a proper Dignity and special Favor to Ecclesiastics. He
touches many very Curious Things, which he has proved at large in an English
Book upon Schism; and this makes the first Dissertation short enough: The
Second is yet shorter, wherein he Treats of the signs of Distinction, by which
one may know whether a Letter be Supposititious or no.

The Third Dissertation treats of a pleasant Custom in St. Cyprian's time;
there were some Nuns that lay with Boys without being less bold in maintaining
their Virginity: They Swore it, and offered to suffer the examination of
Midwives. Mr. Dowdel says, that notwithstanding St. Cyprian's Zeal against,
this Abuse, there were some Examples of it in the following Age: But to say the
truth, they were less frequent, and in this that Father has not lost very many
of his Censures, tho he hardly prevailed at all upon another Art, the which
was, that these Persons of different Sexes, should not live at all together.
This Custom has outlived this Father, because in the following Times the
Fathers we fain to make Decrees against this, as it is proved here; and this
the Author brings as to what concerns the (...) which were Persons of different
Sexes yoked together by a great commerce of Friendship, and a continual
communication of Life in all things, except Bedding. It is reported, that Paul
of Samosatenus was the first that brought this Custom into the Church of
Antioch; to which perhaps the knowledge contributed that he had, that this
practice under the name of (...) was not now among the Pagans of that famous
City. However it was, he took share of that Liberty which he permitted to
others, for he always had with him wherever he went, a young and handsome
Virgin; and it appears by a circular Letter writ by the Council of Antioch,
where he was Condemned, that he protested that there passed nothing Dishonest
between him and them. The Council of Nice, expressly forbid this to all Bishops,
Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, and generally to all in Orders. 'Twas enough to
forbid it to such Persons, for 'twas only they that entered into those
Conversations. It might be proved that these Commerces went sometimes as far as
the community of the Bed; for St. Athanasius tells us, that when Leontius was
forbid to continue the inclination he had for the Young Eustolia, by castration
he put himself in a condition of Lying with this fair Friend, without being
suspected of Unchastity. The Author seeking the first Spring of these Fancies,
goes back to the ancient Pagans, amongst whom were Women that were equal to Men
in Philosophy and Wit, and upon that account joined themselves in a very near
Familiarity with them. The Mind had the greatest share in this Friendship,
although the Body was not excluded; and upon this there are some of the
Opinions of Plato's Philosophy explained, concerning Love, wherein is shown how
these Opinions might contribute to the establishing of several Customs.

The following Dissertation relates to a Subject more worthy of consideration,
viz. of Prophetic Visions. The Author proves that they lasted almost to St
Cyprian's time, without interruption, and blames them who attribute almost all
to the Sect of Montanus. But because the chief difficulty in this matter is to
distinguish false Visions from the true, he endeavors to show us how they
secured themselves from Error. What he says here upon this Subject, declares
him to be a Man not only of great Wit and Learning, but also one that is very
zealous to silence the Profane.

The Fifth Dissertation evidences a great knowledge of Antiquity, in relation
to the Dypticks, wherein were written the Names of such as were Commemorated in
Divine Service; the Changes which this Custom underwent, and the Source which
the Author thinks it proceeded from, furnish him with a fair Subject. The
degrees of several Priests and their Ecclesiastic Deputations furnish him with
a no less pleasant entertainment in the Sixth Dissertation. The Seventh runs
upon a very obscure Point, because it relates to the Principle of the Unity of
the Church, and the different Arguments which St. Cyprian drew from thence, for
the several Disputes which he maintained. The Subject of the Eighth is not less
difficult, because to clear it well, we must go back to the Roman Laws, to
examine the grounds of such who being received in Peace, by the Martyrs after
their Fall from the Faith, thought that to be reconciled with the Church, there
was no need of the Authority of their Bishops. We shall mention this but in
general, no more than the distinction of Priests and Bishops, which is spoke of
in the two following Dissertations; we are brief in them, that we may have more
room to speak fully on the last Dissertations, wherein ancient Martyrs are
treated upon, which is a curious Subject for all sorts of People.

You must know then, that the Author had the same Fate as Astrologers when they
endeavored to number the Stars exactly; they believed without doubt, what the
Commonalty does to this very day, that the Stars which are seen in a clear
Night, are Innumerable, yet they hardly find 1022 in the Firmament, after they
have contemplated the two Hemispheres. Thus it happened to Mr. Dowdell, as to the
number of ancient Martyrs; I do not doubt but that before he Studied the Matter
whilst he believed common Tradition, he thought that the Pagan Emperors put to
Death a prodigious number of the Faithful; for so all the World represent to
themselves the ancient Persecutions: We imagine Martyrs in Heaps and Piles, like
to the Miracles in the History of Francis Xavier, who tells us that such a day
was Consecrated to the Memory of 1100 Martyrs and Virgins. It is certain that
there are great abatements to be made in Peoples Imaginations upon this matter;
and if we were exact in our account, it will be found that the Popes and Roman
Catholic Princes, have made more suffer for the sake of Religion, than the
Heathen Emperors ever did; but Prejudices are strange things, they lessen or
augment the same Actions, as they proceed from such or such Persons. Let us be
so just to the Christian Authors that wrote the first after the Heathen
Persecutions, to think that they have not changed things much: 'Twas they who
were remote from matter of Fact that gave us such false accounts; and it is the
ordinary Fate of Human effects, as has been observed on the occasion of St.
Ignatius's Miracles.

There is nothing can be so strong a proof that few Martyrs suffered in the
first Ages, as a passage of Origen's, where he plainly says, that few died for
the Faith of Jesus Christ. Would he have said so who writ against a Heathen
Philosopher? He that had so great a knowledge of things, if accounts were true
in the Martyrologies which the following Ages compiled? Nor is Eusebius's
Authority less, in reducing the Martyrs to a small number, for there are not
many spoke of in the two Collections which he made, whereof tho one was lost,
there were Fragments enough of it preserved in his Ecclesiastic History, to
let us understand what it contained. Here also are Proofs alleged which are
strengthened before hand against that plausible Objection, that during the great
Tempests which tossed the Church, it was not easy to collect Memoires; for it is
clearly justified by the practice of the first Christians, that they were
extreme exact and devout in celebrating the Memory of their Martyrs, and that
it was easy for them to learn their Names and the circumstances of their
Punishment, for we cannot imagine but than they had some good Intervals; and
this is a point whereby the common Opinion is retrieved, in showing that the
Heathen Emperors were not always such Devils as they are though^ to be; for of
'em some have been Friends and Patrons to Christians; and others have valued
themselves so much upon Clemency, that they made the chiefest good of their
Reign consist in that they could boast they did not cause the effusion of
Blood. Nor must we believe that the Intendants of Provinces have put many to
Death under these Emperors; for however brutal an Intendant might be, he would
not think of making himself, a fierce and bigoted Converter, when he knew the
Court would disprove it; and they seldom satisfied their barbarous or
superstitious Tempers, until they had brought the Prince on their side. St.
Ambrose tells us, that the greatest part of Pagan Governors of Provinces
gloried in leaving them without putting any one to Death. But whereas these
general Reasons would not with all Readers be of sufficient force against the
vast Collections of Martyrologies, which have been a long time made, and are
become the Subject of Meditation, not only to devout Souls, but also to sevoral
Rhetoricians, the Author takes a particular review of each Persecution of the
ancient Church.

He begins with that of Nero, and presently meets with a Passage of Tacitus,
which does not seem to favor him, because this Author says that they put a
great number of Christians to Death. The Author seeks for no frivolous subtilty
to elude this Autorhity, but on the contrary he strengthens the Objection with
a false Remark, in applying to that Time these words of Tacitus, Repressar in
praesens exitiabilis Superstitio, which manifestly relates to the Suffering of
Jesus Christ. He acknowledges then the great Multitude, but pretends that this
Storm fell only upon the Christians at Rome, and so diminishes much the Idea's
that People framed to themselves of this first Persecution. He also believes
that the Names of these Martyrs were not put in the Archives, whether it was
that it was thought they ought not to be put in the number of Martyrs, who were
not put to death under pretext of Religion, but because they were suspected to
have set Rome on Fire, or whether it was that the Custom of Anniversaries was
not then established among the Christians; upon this he gives us several
critical Remarks, and passes to the Persecution of Domitian, and shows clearly
that it was but little or nothing. Since that time to the time of Decius, the
Church enjoyed great rest, if we believe Lactantius: It is already a great
Prejudice to suppose that it was miserably torn in this Interval, for whence
should Lactantius's ignorance of all this proceed? But not to ground all this
Affair on his Omission; all that concerns the Persecution of Trajan, Adrian,
Anthoninus, Marcus Aurelius, Severus, and Maximinus is carefully examined, and
the Advocates of Martyrologies are shown, that their account is to be much
lessened: This place teaches us a thousand curious things concerning the
History of those Times, and the Pretexts that animated the Gentiles against the
Christians: These Pretexts were of that nature sometimes, that they showed more
Negligence than Malice. As for Decius it is confessed, that though he had very
good Qualities, and was very Mild, nevertheless he suffered himself to be
possessed with much Hatred against the Church, but not to that degree as to
have caused so great a Slaughter as is attributed to him. Mr. Dodwell adhering
to St. Cyprian the most he can, Remarks, that when he perceived that the People
of Carthage sought to expose him to the Lions, he retired in hopes that his
absence would appease the Tumult: A great Arguments against some
Brain-sick-fellow, that would have People dare the Orders of a Prince as soon
as he meddles with the Privileges of Religion, and think it was never lawful
for a Pastor to yield to the Storm 'St Cyprian's Flight was followed with two
kinds of Persecutions; for until the Proconsul came the Magistrates of Towns
having no Power to condemn to Death, contented themselves with Banishing and
Imprisoning, and nevertheless forced a great many to abjure their Religion.
When the Proconsul came, he tried to reduce the Faithful without making use of
the most rigorous Punishments, but seeing them firm, he exercised the utmost
Cruelties. There were then many martyred, until other Cares, or seeing the
little benefit of such Cruelties, he grew less violent; although Mr. Dowdell
does not think their number very great that Sealed the Truth of their Religion
with their Blood; nor does he much value the Life of St. Gregory Thaumaturgus,
because it was writ more than a hundred Years after his Death upon hearsay,
the most Fertile Subject of Fables and Hyperboles in the World. After this, he
runs over the time that past between the Persecution of Decius and that of
Licinius, (for as for Julian the Apostate it is well known that he was not
Cruel) and he finds great abatements to be made in every Place in the
Computations of Martyrologies. He here gives a great insight into many things,
especially concerning the Emperor Dioclesian and his Colleagues. He does not
forget to note one thing that favors him much, which is, that in the greatest
heat of the Persecution there were no Martyrs; for Orders were given to Torment
the Christians after such a manner that none might dye, that they might brag of
their Clemency, and take from the Christians the Crown of Martyrdom, as
Lactantius elegantly expresses it. The Author observes that the Persecutors
Stroke came after a thousand Artifices used before; which is but little
credited by those Pagan Emperors; for their Violences are represented to have
been so brutish, that they had not the honesty to cover them with any Pretext.
This Dissertation ends with a Remark that will perhaps displease a great many;
which is, that Anniversaries and Honors done to the Memory of Martyrs, were
borrowed from the Apotheoses of Paganism.

The Twelfth Dissertation treats of the Courage of Martyrs, which was so
admirable, whether the nature of the Torments they endured were considered, or
the Age and Sex of a part of them that suffered, that People may desire to know
whence that Constancy proceeded. It is well known that the Spirit of God was
the chief Cause of it, but some may wish to be informed if there were no
Motives whereby the natural Strength managed by a Divine Providence might
contribute to it. Therefore Mr. Dowdell curiously examines it, and proposes a
great number of Motives, the chief whereof follow here.

He says, that the Primitive Christians led so austere a Life, and that they so
much accustomed their Bodies to hard Exercises, that they could easily resolve
to undergo Punishments, the Thoughts whereof would make a Man tremble that had
been brought up tenderly in Pleasures; and upon this he alleges the
Undauntedness and Patience of the Lacedaemonians, which without doubt proceeded
from the Austerity of their Discipline. He might have added what was said by a
Voluptuous Man, who was witness of their mean Fare, that he would wonder no
more why they so boldly dared Dangers; as if he would say, that their Condition
was so hard that it would not seem strange that they should prefer a glorious
Death to it. The Author says, that though Christians were too well instructed
to be governed by the desire of Glory; yet it was strange if the Honor that
was shown to the Memories of Martyrs, and also to them that were but
Confessors, did not make some Impression on their Souls. It is true, that the
Fathers did not disapprove of their having a sense of the Honor that redounded
to the whole Body, when any part thereof suffered for a good Cause. Moreover he
says, that the Testimony of a good Conscience, and the certainty they were in
of an Eternal Felicity, gave them great boldness against Torments, and even
against Death it self. But as it is certain that the Christians chiefly
contemned that Death that was joined to a Crown of Martyrdom; for sometimes a
common Death would not be so pleasing to them; so we must of necessity examine
the Reasons for this particular kind of Death; the Author concludes them to
consist much in the Opinions which the first Ages had, that Martyrs would go
directly to the Abode of the Blessed, without stopping at the Receptacle of
Common Souls, there to expect the end of the World, without needing the Fire
that is to consume the World, to complete the Purification of their Souls; and
because this Fire was believed more insupportable than the most cruel Pains of
Martyrdom; this Opinion much supported them. It was thought likewise, that the
Privilege granted to all Saints, of obtaining by their Prayers a shortning of
the time destined for the Sufferings of the Church, belonged after a more
eminent manner to the Martyrs; so that they were looked on to be the chief
Cause of the Anticipation of the Chastisement of the Wicked, and of
Recompencing the Good by the Reign of a thousand Years: And they believed that
the first Resurrection would happen in that Reign, that it would be only for
the Just, and that the Martyrs would be very advantageously distinguished; for
they looked upon it to be so far off, as we do the Glory of Paradise; they were
persuaded that the Reign of a thousand Years at hand; so that all these Hopes
prevailed much with them toward a desire or Martyrdom. I do not speak of the
degrees of Glory that was assigned the Martyrs to all Eternity, and which much
surpassed the Glory of other Just Men. In fine, they were of opinion that all
Faults were obliterated by Martyrdom, and that it was a Propitiatory Sacrifice,
not only for the Martyr, but also for all such as had fallen, and were recieved
into Peace by him before his Death: The Author explains how that does not
derogate from the infinite Value of the Death of Jesus Christ; and lest he
should be accused for not making the extraordinary Assistance of the Holy Ghost
intervene oftener in Martyrdom, he shows at length that the hopes of this inward
Grace that so often miraculously assisted the Martyrs, gave Courage to the
Faithful.

His last Dissertation fully shows, that the ancient Church looked upon
Martyrdom, as upon a Second Baptism: We might draw several Remarks from it, if
this Article were drawn at length; and for this Reason we will say nothing of
the Appendix of this Work, where are the Fasts of the Greeks and Latins, Pieces
for the most part that were never Printed, and that have a long Discourse
before them, full of Historick and Chronologick Learning,

The Author has published a Discourse lately upon a dark Passage of the
Exhortation to Chastity, where Tertullian seems to affirm, that all Christians
are Priests, and may in case of necessity Consecrate. Mr. Rigaut understanding
the Passage in this same sense, was refuted by Mr. de Aubespine, and found it
very convenient not to fall out with Bishops. But the Learned Grotius, that had
not the same Reasons to dissemble, did not acknowledge this Prelates Reasons to
be valid. He shows a Dissertation Published in 1638, that Tertullian had done
very ill, if he had not believed Laics had power to administer the Eucharist,
and endeavoring to establish this Opinion upon Tradition, he allarmed all the
Traditioners; therefore it was thought that nothing ought to be neglected that
might prevent the Consequences of this dangerous Sentiment: Father Petau, for
this end spared neither Study nor Meditation to answer Grotius; but Mr. Dowdell
fearing that the Jesuit did not sufficiently show the essential distinction of
Priests, and lest the Divinity of Episcopacy should be exposed to any
Intrenchments, has taken the Field with all his Learning to encounter with Mr.
Grotius. He tells us many fine things upon the Antiquities of the Church; it is
with Reason that the English are cajoled by him upon this Science, for in such
Points as they have the same Advantages with Rome, they furnish her with great
Assistance, but they pay themselves well on other accounts. The Title of this
new Book is, De jure Laicorum Sacerdotali ex Sententia Tertulliani aliorumque
veterum Dissertatio adversus Anonymum dissertatorem de Coenae administratione,
ubi Pastores non sunt: ab Henrico Dodwello, A. M. Dubliniens. Londini, Impensis
Benj. Took, 1685. in Octavo. There is added Grotius's Discourse, that of Father
Petau, and the answer which Clopemburg made to the first upon the Question, If
it be always necessary to Communicate with some one of the Christian Societies.

The Works of Clemens Alexandrinus in Greek and Latin, according to the
accurate Corrections of Dr. Hensii, with brief Additions, etc. at the end of
Dr. Heinsius; To which is added, the Ancient and Modern Annotations, Collected
by the Industry of Frid. Sylburgius. The Ninth Edition at Paris, 1641. Cologne,
1688. In Fol.
THough there are but few, who can read the Fathers in the original Languages;
there is a very great number of Persons, whom it concerns to have some Idea of
their Lives and Writings, because of the use made thereof now in Controversies,
which divide Christians. The Roman Catholic Doctors forget nothing to persuade
the People, that the Fathers have been of their Sentiments, thinking that it
was insufferable to reject a Doctrine upheld by the Suffrage of the most part of
the Fathers. When they cite a Passage, which they think conformable to their
Thoughts, they miss not to urge it, as a holy Father has very well said; else
if we oppose, any other words to them, from which they cannot well get free,
they answer that it was but his particular Opinion, and reject it as an Error.
The most part of Protestants establish the Consent of the Fathers, not as a
Principle of their Faith, though some of them make not much another use
thereof, in citing, than the Roman Catholics do: Hence it comes that in the
Ecclesiastical Histories of both Parties, the Places of the Fathers are
carefully remarked, which appear proper for the Opinions and Practices which
are this day received amongst us; and only mention by the by what we think
defective in their Conduct and Doctrine. As we are persuaded that the Fathers,
particularly those of the first Ages, received all those Opinions, which now we
look upon as Essential, so we think we ought to praise them, and to excuse as
much as possible the defects which are in their Writings, or in their Lives, so
that their Panegyric or Apology is insensibly made, with much more Passion
than their History: Hence those who read Works of this nature are persuaded
that the Ancients were Men of consummate Knowledge, and of an extraordinary
Purity of Manners: Hence it is concluded that if any were abused, there must
needs be great reason for it, and that there was no danger either of their
Relations, or the Confutations of the Opinions of Heretics. It is thought they
ought to be imitated, in their way of Reasoning and Acting, without taking much
heed whether they are conformable to the Precepts of the Gospel. Thus it
happens that there is no History of the first Ages sufficiently faithful, and
that these Histories are not used as they should be.

They are far from flattering themselves of being able to remedy an Evil, which
is so naturalized as this, and this Work is not composed upon that design; but
at least we think our selves obliged to keep off as much as possible from the
ways of those who give passionate Panegyricks of them to the Public, which
expects uninterested Histories. This Method was attempted in the History of
Pelagianism; and we shall endeavor to do it yet in the Life of Clement, which
we now come to relate in a few words.

Titus Flavius Clemens, famous for his Knowledge toward the end of the Second
Age, was born at Athens, according to some Authors, who believe they can
reconcile this Opinion with that of those, who make him to be of Alexandria; in
saying that Athens was the place of his Birth, but that the long Abode he made
at Alexandria, gave him the name of Alexandrinus: His Style nevertheless,
though pretty full of Figures, is often obscure and entangled, and has not much
of the Neatness and Elegancy of the Athenian Accademies. Howbeit, it is certain
he began his Studies in Greece, he continued them in Asia, and ended his days
in Egypt. It appears he was not satisfied to be instructed by one Master, but
traveled much to hear several; and thus to form to himself a more exact and
universal Idea of the Christian Religion, as well as to acquire more knowledge
in Human Sciences. His Masters had been themselves Disciples of the Apostles,
or had conversed with the Disciples of these Holy Men, as appears by what he
speaks thereof himself, though he expresses not himself altogether distinctly.
He says that his ruder Writings are an Image and Representation of the lively
and animated Discourses of happy and truly worthy Men, whom he had the honor
to hear. The one, continues he, which I saw in Greece was of the Ionick Sect.
I have seen two in Calabria, the one of Syria, and the other of Egypt. I have
met two others in the East, whereof the one was of Assyria, and the other, with
whom I have conversed in Palestine, was of Jewish Extraction. This last was the
most deserving. I stopped in Egypt, where he was concealed, to seek for him. He
was, as the Proverb says, a true Be of Sicily. He gathered the scattered
Flowers, as it were, in the Meadows of the Writings of the Prophets and
Apostles, by the means of which he could fill with a pure Knowledge the Souls
of those who heard him. These Men having conserved the true Tradition of the
Blessed Doctrine, immediately after the holy Apostles St. Peter, St. James, St.
John, and St. Paul, as a Child who retains what he has learned of his Father,
(though there are few who resemble them) have lived till our times, by the Will
of God, to pour into our Hearts the Seed they had received from the Apostles
their Predecessors. It is of a great Importance to know what Master an Author
has had, for to understand well his Opinions; for then, as at this day,
Disciples applied themselves chiefly to the Methods of their Masters, and
expounded Religion, as near as they could to the Principles of Philosophy,
which they learned. Thus Divine School men, who were Paripateticks, have since
Expounded Divinity by the Principles of Aristotle; and thus in the places,
where the Philosophy of Descartes is received, Divinity is treated on after the
Cartesian way. Therefore the Learned of our Age have endeavored to Divine, who
those were which Clement spoke of. It appears, by the Version which has been
given of the words of this Father, that he had five Masters, but Mr. de Valois
gives him but four, because he follows the manner of the Reading of Eusebius.
It cannot positively be asserted which is the Letter; but it may be said, that
the Interpreters who have taken the word (...), for a proper Name, have done it
without reason. There is no likelihood that Clement, who mentions not the Names
of others whom he acknowledges for his Masters, should name this; there was
none in Antiquity who was named Ionick, and this name may mark the Sect of
Philosophy, to which this first Master of Clement was chiefly applied. Thales
and Anaximander, Philosophers of Milet, a City of Ionia, had been the Chief
thereof. Clement of Alexandria speaks honorably of both those Philosophers in
his Writings: Thales, says he, in a Place, was of Phoenicia, according to the
Relation of Leander and Herodotus. He is the only Person who seems to have had
Corrispondence with the Prophets of Egypt, and we read not that any was his
Master, etc. Anaximander, a Milesian, and Son to Praxidamus, succeeded Thales,
and had for Successor Anaximenes, Son to Euristratus, likewise a Milesian.
Anaxagoras of Clazomenes, Son to Hegesibule, came after him; he transported his
Auditory from Ionia to Athens, and was succeeded by Archelaus, Master to
Socrates. Elsewhere, he says, that Thales being interrogated, what Divinity
is, he answered, That which has neither Beginning nor Ending: And that another
having asked him If Men can hide from God their Actions? How shall that be
possible, answered he, seeing they cannot hide even their Thoughts from him? In
speaking of Anaximander, of Archelaus and Anaxagoras, Philosophers of the same
Sect, he says, that the first has established for the first Being the
Infinite, and that the two others have said, that the Mind governed the
Infinite. The Principles of these Philosophers may be seen more at large in
Diogenes Laertius; and we may easily perceive, that there are some who agree
well enough with those of the Jews and Christians, as that all that is upon
Earth is come from Water, that the Night was before the Day, that the most part
of Men are bad, that for to live justly we must not do that which we reprehend
in others, that Heaven is our true Country, etc. It is not therefore
incredible, that a Philosopher of this Sect had embraced Christianity, and was
the first Master of Clement of Alexandria.

All that can be said against this Thought, is, that the Succession of
Philosophers of the Ionick Sect, ended in Archelaus, Master to Socrates. But
though there had been no Masters of this Philosophy, who had immediately
succeeded one another, that hindered not, but that those might have been
Philosophers in diverse Places, who followed the Opinions of Thales, and of his
first Disciples. Thus Diogenes Laertius says in his Preface, that the Italick
Sect, whereof Pythagoras was chief, ends at Epicurus, though there were
Pythagoreans several Ages after Epicurus. It is no wonder that a Christian
followed a certain Sect of Philosophy, because it is not to be understood, but
as much as he judged it conformable to Christianity. Thus Justin Martyr was a
Platonic, and Pantenes, Master to Clement, was a Stoic.

The Name of the Second, whom he had seen in Great Greece, or in Calabria, is
entirely unknown. Some Authors believe that that of Assyria was Tatian, a
Philosopher and Disciple to Justin Martyr; and others, Bardesanes of Syria, who
had been a Valentinian, who never left entirely the Sentiments of this Sect, As
for him, who had been originally a Jew, some believe he might be Theophilus
Bishop of Caesarea, though History does not observe, that he was descended of
the Jews. Likewise others do conjecture that he was named Theodotus, whose
Doctrine Clemens Alexandrinus had exposed in his Books of Hypotyposes, or
Justifications of Christian Religion; whence it comes that the Abridgment of
this Work, which is seen at the end of Clement, is entitled, An Extract of the
Eastern Doctrine of Theodotus. But some do attribute these Extracts to Theodotus
of Byzantium, a Courier by Trade, but a Learned Man, who was Excommunicated by
Pope Victor in CXCIV, for having Taught that Jesus Christ was but a mere Man.

In fine, the least of the Masters of Clement, whom he prefers to all the rest,
and with whom he sojourned, was named Pantenus; Eusebius believes it is of him
that Clement speaks in the last words of the Passage which has been cited of
him; and indeed Pantenus* Taught in Egypt, when Clement sojourned there, and
Clement called him his Master in his Books of the Hypotyposes. The Country and
Parents of Pantenus are unknown; but we know he applied himself much to the
study of Philosophy, particularly to that of the Stoics, won perhaps by the
Manners and severe Maxims of these Philosophers, which agreed not ill with
those of the Ancient Christians. There had been a public School at Alexandria,
for a long time, and if some Authors may be believed, ever since Mark the
Evangelist, where the Cathecumenes were Taught, an employ which was given only
to Learned Persons, and of a good Life. Pantenus was provided therewith, and
Taught a long while in this City, by Words and Writing. He had made
Commentaries upon Scripture, whereof we have only remaining a few words, which
are found in the Extracts of the Oriental Doctrine of Theodotus, where Clement
of Alexandria speaks thus; Our Pantenus says, that the Prophets express
themselves ordinarily by the Aoristus, and make use of the time present for the
Future and Past.

There is a likelihood that Pantenus officiated as a Cathechist, when Clement
arrived in Egypt, and that he studied some time under, him, before he succeeded
him. He applied himself there, as elsewhere, to the study of Philosophy, though
he was far from taking all those who bore the name of Philosopher, for such. We
do not simply receive, says he, every sort of Philosophy, but that only
whereof Socrates speaks in Plato: Socrates observed, That there are a great
many called, but few chosen. For he adds in the Sequel, that the latter,
according to his Opinion, are those who have applied themselves, as a thing
very requisite, to Philosophy. That People should not be taken for
Philosophers, who perhaps had but a show. Clement would not apply himself to
any Sect absolutely, but followed this manner of Philosophising, which was then
Eclectick, to wit, that of those, who chose out of all Tenets what appeared
most reasonable unto them, and formed a System thereof for their particular
Use. Potamon of Alexandria, who lived in the time of Augustus, was the first,
who had put in Use this manner of Philosophising. Clement could not choose a
more commodious Method for a Christian Philosopher, because there is no
Philosopher, whose Tenets are all conformable to those of the Gospel, though
there may be made a System drawing very near that of the Christian Doctrine, in
gathering in all the Philosophers what they have said conformably to the Light
of Nature, or to some ancient Traditions spread almost over the whole Universe.
It is Clement himself who speaks it, and who assures us that he applied himself
to the Eclectick Philosophy, for the Reason we have alleged. After having said
that God sent Philosophers to Men, he adds, That he understands not, neither
that of the Stoics, nor that of the Platonicks, nor that of the Aristoteleans:
But I give this Name, continues he, to the Truths which these Sects have held,
and which may incline Men to Justice and Piety. I in no wise call Divine, the
false Thoughts of Men. He says elsewhere, that the barbarous Philosophy, and
that of the Greeks, has included some Fragments of Eternal Truths in them, not
from Mythology of Bacchus; but of Reason, which has always existed. He that
should rejoin, continues he, that which has been divided, and which would
compose a perfect System, could assure himself of acknowledging the Truth.

A like Thought is in Lactantius, which affirms, that it is easy to show that
Truth altogether has been divided amongst the different Sects of the
Philosophers; and that if there was any who would gather the Truths scattered
amongst all Sects, and make but one Body of Doctrine, certainly it would not be
far from the Sentiments of Christians. Quodsi extitisset aliquis, qui veritatem
sparsam per singulos, per Sectasque diffusam colligeret in unum, ac redigeret
in corpus, is profecto non dissentiret a nobis. He says afterward, that none
could do it but by Divine Revelation; but that if it happened, as by hazard,
that some body should do it without this Succor, there would be nothing more
assured than this Philosophy; and that though he could not defend himself by
the authority of Revelation, Truth would be maintained of it self, by its own
Light. He afterward blames those who apply themselves to a Sect, so that they
would embrace all its Sentiments, and condemn all others ready to dispute
against all the Doctrins which they have not learned of their Masters. This
design of gathering all which Philosophers have said conformable to the Gospel,
is undoubtedly very fine, and can much conduce to convine the Truth of
Christian Religion. But for to succeed therein, the Christian Philosophy and
Religion should be equally understood, to comprehend the clear and undoubted
Articles, which regard Practice and Speculation. The Heterodox of those Times,
for want of taking heed, had introduced into Christian Religion an infinity of
Philosophical Tenets, which have no Relation with those of the Gospel.

Thus the Carpocratians believed according to the Relation of Clement, that it
was permitted to meddle confusedly with any Woman whatever, and did it actually
after having Supped in a great Company, and extinguished the Candles; they
entertained this Thought, because Plato would have Women to be common in his
Republic, and that they had wrested diverse Passages of Scripture, to
accommodate them to this Sentiment. Clement believes, that they ill
understood, not only Scripture, but also Plato, who, according to him, meaned
nothing else, but that there should be no Girl in the Commonwealth, to which
all the Citizens indifferently might not pretend; though after she being
Married to one Man, others could no more hope to Espouse her. It might be well
shown, that Clement expounded not well the Thought of Plato, if this was a
Place for it.

The Marcionites, who said that the Matter and Nature are bad, and who
condemned Weddings, fell into this Opinion, so opposite to that of Carpocrates,
because they expounded some Passages of Scripture, by the Principles of the
Platonicks: Because the Scripture often describes the Miseries of this Life,
and praises Continence; they imagined that the Sacred Authors had had the same
Ideas of this Life and Generation, or Birth, that Heraclitus and Plato had.
These Philosophers believed, as it has been remarked, that Souls existed
before the Body, where they are only sent to be punished for the Sins, which
they had committed in another Life; and that thus, to speak correctly, Birth
should be called a Death rather than a beginning of Life; and Death a Life,
because when we are born, our Souls are cast into the Prison of the Body, from
whence they are delivered when we dye; that is the reason that these
Philosophers, and several Poets after them, said it was better not to be born,
than to come into the World, and to dye in Childhood, than to live several
Years, which is the Cause also that they speak sometimes in very harsh Terms
against Matrimony, because it served, according to them, only to build a Prison
to some unhappy Soul, which was precipitated into the Body that they produced.

The Valentinians had also taken what they said of the Generation of their
Eones, from Hesiod, as will appear by comparing the beginning of his Theognia,
with the Doctrine of the Valentinians, related by St. Irenaeus and St.
Epiphanius, who fail not to reproach them, that they had their Doctrine from
this Poet. There is some appearance that they confounded the Doctrine of Hesiod,
with that of the Scripture, because of some light resemblance which is found
betwixt them. It would be easy to show that Hesiod by the Marriages which he
establishes betwixt the Chaos, Darkness, Light, Heaven, Earth, Air, etc.
intimate nothing else but that there was a Relation or Connection between the
things which he united, and that it was that gave him occasion to marry them
together. But it is only requisite here to show, by the Example of these ancient
Heretics, that the Primitive Christians made a great use of the Pagan
Philosophy, and that several have abused it, as Clement has observed in diverse
Places.

As for himself, though he made a Profession of following the Method of the
Eclecticks, and to take of all the Sects what he thought fit, he had
notwithstanding more Inclination to the Stoic Philosophy; because Pantenus his
last Master, and whom he esteemed most (as it appeared) preferred this Sect
above all the rest. Therefore it is observed, that Clement had a close and rough
Style, that he affected to speak Paradoxes, and to make use of new words; a
Character by which the Stoics are known, and those who had studied in their
School. Stoicorum, says Cicero, adstrictior est oration, aliquantoque
contractior quam aures populi requirunt. Nova verba fingunt, deserunt usitata:
at quanta conantur? Mundum hunc omnem Oppidum esse unum, etc. pungunt quasi
aculeis, interrogatiunculis angustis. Those who understand Greek, and read
something of Clement, might easily have remarked all this in his Style. There
are several Paradoxes in his Schoolmaster; for Example, he maintains in Chap.
6. Verse. 3. That their is none but the Christian only who is rich. A Paradox
very like to that of the Stoics, who said the same thing of their Wise Men;
these Philosophers expressed themselves thus: (...), That the Wise are only
rich; and Clement has changed nothing in it but the word (...), Wise, into
that of (...), Christian: The Reasons whereof he makes use to prove his Thesis,
are not very different from those of the Stoics, as it may be seen by
comparing what he says with the Explication, which Cicero gives of this
Stoical Maxim, in his Paradoxes.

Clement, in studying the Pagan Authors, was inspired with a more gentle
opinion toward them, than Persons have been since. He Remarks in several
Places, that all which they say is not false, and cites to prove it the
Discourse which St. Paul made to the Athenians, and which is related in the
Seventeenth of the Acts, where this Apostle tells them, that he Preaches unto
them the same God, to whom they had erected an Altar, with this Inscription, To
the unknown God; the same God of whom Aratus said, That we are of his Race.
Clement believes, that St. Paul approved what was good in the Inscription of
this Altar, and in these words of Aratus, and that he only gave them a more
perfect knowledge of the true God, whom they already had some faint Idea of,
without knowing him well. He elsewhere cites a Book which was attributed to St.
Peter, and which was Entitled, (...); The Sermon of St. Peter. It appears that
Clement doubted not but this Book was really St. Peter's, whence we may
conjecture there was nothing in it disagreeable to the Orthodox Doctrins of
that time, and that one might look upon it, if it were to be had, as the Work
of a good Christian. The Place which Clement cites is too remarkable to omit it
here, since it serves to show the Opinions several Ancients, (who were not
accused of Heterodoxy) had of the Pagans. Know that there is one God, said St.
Peter, ( in this Book) who has given Beginning to all things, and can bring
them to an End; who is invisible and sees all things, confined to no Limits,
and who comprehends all things, who needs nothing, and of whose Assistance all
Creatures stand in want, since they exist through him; who is Incomprehensible,
Eternal, and Incorruptible, who was not made, but he himself has made all
things by his powerful Word, to wit, by his Son, according to the Spiritual
Interpretation which is given to the Scripture. He adds afterward, continues
Clement, Serve this God, but not as the Greeks do; because some good Men
amongst the Grecians adored the same God with us, but without perfectly knowing
him, of those who have received the Doctrine of his Son. He says not, do not
Serve the God which the Greeks Serve; but, Serve him not as they do, only
changing the manner of Worship, but not Preaching unto them another God. He
himself explains what he meant when he adds: For being pushed on by their
Ignorance, and not knowing God so perfectly as we do, they employ such things
as God has given them for their Use, as Wood, Stone, Brass, Iron, Gold and
Silver, to make Statues; and instead of making Use of these things themselves,
they Worship them. They also adore Animals, which God has given them for their
Nourishment, the Fowl of the Firmament, the Fish of the Sea, the creeping
things of the Earth, and Savage Beasts, as well as Weesels, Rats, Dogs and
Monkeys: They Sacrifice unto Men what they should Eat, and offering dead
things, to the dead, as to Gods, they testify Ingratitude to the true God, and
deny thus his Existence. And that it may appear, that we and the Greeks know
the same God, though differently, he continues thus: Serve not God neither as
the Jews, for imagining they only know God, they perceive not that they adore
Angels and Archangels, Months and Moons; for if the Moon appear not, they
celebrate not the Sabbath, which they call the first, nor the New Mood, nor the
days of unleavened Bread, nor any Feast. In fine, he concludes in saying: As
for you, learn the just and holy Doctrine, which we teach you, observe it, and
adore God after a new manner by Jesus Christ. For we find in Scripture that God
says: Ill make with you a new Covenant, different from that which I made with
your Fathers, upon the Mount Horeb. He has given us a new Covenant, for those
of the Jews and Greeks are ancient; and we who serve him after a third manner,
which is new, are Christians. He shows clearly, says Clement, That one and the
same God has been known by the Greeks after a heathenish way, by the Jews after
a Iudaical one, and by us, after a new and Spiritual manner. He shows besides,
that the same God who has given the Two Covenants, is he who gave Philosophy
to the Greeks, by which the Almighty is glorified amongst them, etc. As God
intended the Salvation of the Jews, in giving them Prophets: So he has raised
amongst the Greeks the best Men, whom he has distinguished from the Vulgar,
according as they were capable of receiving his Gifts, to serve as Prophets
amongst them, in their proper Tongue. It is not only the Sermon of St. Peter,
which teaches this to us, it is St. Paul also, when he says; Take Greek
Books, and acknowledge that the Sybills Prophesied of one God only, and things
which were to fall out. Read Hydaspes, and you shall find that he has much
more clearly written of the Son of God, and has said, that several Kings
should arm themselves against Jesus Christ, that they should hate him, for
those who bear his Name, etc. As the Preaching of the Gospel came in his time,
so in their time the Law and the Prophets were given to Barbarians, and
Philosophy to the Grecians, which accustomed their Ears to the Preaching of the
Gospel. Clement speaks after the same manner in diverse other Places, and
declares evidently enough, that he believed Philosophy was amongst the Greeks,
what Prophecy was amongst the Hebrews, and that God always gave equally to all
Men the means of being Saved, which was also the Opinion of diverse other Greek
Fathers.

Clement believed also, that the Greeks had nothing good, but what they had
taken from the Barbarous People, chiefly from the Jews, and from the Books,
which he endeavors to prove in a thousand places; and we know that this was
the common Opinion of the Fathers, who undertook to Censure the Philosophy of
the Grecians. The Jews said also the same thing, as is plain by a Passage of
Aristobulus a Peripatetick, who is said to have been Tutor to Ptolomy and
Philometor, and who speaks thus: Plato has followed our Laws, and shown that
he studied them well. And before the time of Demetrius, before even the Empire
of Alexander, and that of the Persians, they were Translated by another,
(besides the Seventy) as well as the History of what happened to the Hebrews
(our Fellow-Citizens) at their coming out of Egypt, of what Remarkable things
they did and saw, and of the manner wherewith by force they possessed
themselves of the Country of Canaan, and how the whole Law was given, so that
it is visible the Philosopher, whom we have mentioned, learned several things
thereof; for he had much Learning as well as Pythagoras, who added to his
Doctrine several of our Opinions. But many things render this Author suspicious,
and as he is the only Man who has spoke of a Version made before the Empire of
the Persians; there is reason to doubt this is a Jewish Fable. Howbeit, it
appears, that in the time of this Author, true or suppsititious, the Jews
accused the Pagans of having stolen from the Holy Books what good Opinions
soever they had.

It is very probable, that the Greeks learned several things of the Eastern
People, as of the Egyptians and Babilonians, for they confess it themselves;
but if the thing was thoroughly examined, it would perhaps be found, that in
Greece they spoke very clearly of several things, before the Jews spoke thereof
after the same manner, and that these latter began to express themselves as the
Greeks did, only since they have had Commerce with them. Proofs of this
Conjecture might be brought, (at least as strong as all those which the Fathers
urge, to prove the contrary) but as that would make us abandon too far our
principal Subject, whereof we treat here, we shall not undertake to enter upon
this matter.

It is more proper here to observe, that though Clement often accuses the
Grecian Philosophers of Stealth and Robbery: Yet he believed God had given them
some of their Knowledge, by the Ministry of Inferior Angels, whereas he
instructed Christians by that of his Son. The Lord of all Men, says he, of the
Grecians as well as Barbarians, persuades those who will believe in him; for he
forces not him to receive Salvation, who can choose, and do what depends upon
time, to embrace the Hope which God offers unto him. It Is he who gives
Philosophy to the Grecians, by the Ministry of Inferior Angels. ((...); for it
is a long time since, that by the Commandment of God, Angels were dispersed
amongst the Nations; but the Opinion of such as believe, is the Portion of the
Lord. He after that proves at large, in the same place, that God is the Savior
of the Pagans, as well as of the Jews. In respect to the Ministry of Angels, to
reveal Philosophy to the Greeks. Clement and those who were of this Opinion,
fell into it partly by reason of what Socrates said of his Demon, who
advertised him of several things, and whereof Clement seems to speak in terms
which may make us believe that he was persuaded Socrates spoke truth. And this
also does not ill agree with the thoughts of the same Father and several
others, who believed according to many Pagan Philosophers, that each Person had
his Guardian Angel, who would sometimes give him Advices.

It will be no wonder after that if Clement attributes a kind of Prophecy to
Plato, chiefly if we consider that the words of this Philosopher agree so well
to Jesus Christ, that scarcely at this day can the State better be described in
which our Savior was, when he was Crucified upon the Cross. He describes an
exact Virtue, and says, Thus may be named the Virtue of a Just Man, who
notwithstanding should go for a wicked Man, although he courageously followed
Justice, and who in spite of this evil Judgment, which all the World should
have of him, should to his latest Breath walk in the ways of Virtue; Yea,
though he was scourged, though he should suffer diverse Torments, though he was
kept in Irons, though his Eyes were burned with a hot Iron, though all manner
of evil should be inflicted on him, and lastly, though he should be Crucified.

As to the rest, it was not that Clement equaliz'd in any respect the Heathen
Philosophy to that of the Doctrine of Jesus Christ. He acknowledged that before
his coming it was but like a Degree, or Preparation to Christianity, and that
Philosophers could pass but for Children, if they were compared to Christians.
He looked upon Faith as necessary, since the Gospel was Published throughout
all the World. Our Savior having given, says he, his Commandments to the
Barbarians, and Philosophy to the Greeks, has shut up Incredulity until his
Coming, at which time, whosoever believes not in him, is unexcusable.

All the Books of Clement are full of these Opinions, which he defends every
where with much clearness, and enlarges on them, so that we may see in those
Times these Opinions were not looked upon, (at least commonly,) as dangerous;
for there is no likelihood that he should have the Charge of Cathechist, after
his Master Pantenus, nor that he should have so many Praises bestowed on him,
as afterward appears, if he had been considered, as a Man infected with
dangerous Sentiments. St. Chrysostom has maintained the same thing, concerning
the Salvation of Pagans, in his Thirty eighth Homily upon St. Matthew.

It was necessary to observe in a few words these Opinions of Clement, because
otherwise diverse places of his Writings could not be understood; and that it
was upon these Grounds he retained all he thought rational in the Notions of
the Pagans, rejecting only what appeared false unto him, or incompatible with
the Tenets of the Gospel, or what had been reprehended by Jesus Christ and his
Apostles. Thus all the Greek Philosophers, until those who maintained Fatality,
believed that Men were Free by Nature, and might abstain from doing evil; as
likewise that they could apply themselves to Virtue, without having any
knowledge of the way by which Jesus Christ and his Apostles undertook to
rectify their Opinions, by any express Discourse. Clement openly maintains,
that Man has the liberty of doing Evil, or abstaining from it: Neither
Praises, (says he) nor Censures, nor Recompenses, nor Punishments, are Just,
if the Soul has not power to be vicious, or to refrain from Vice, and if Vice
is involuntary. It was not known amongst the Heathens what is since called
Original Sin; and Clement not observing that the Sacred Writers Reproach the
Pagans with this Ignorance, (and teach them, that even Children, newly born,
deserve the Flames of Hell) denies that Children are corrupted in any manner
whatsoever. The Heretics, whom we have spoken of, that condemned Marriage,
amongst others, gave this Reason against it, that thereby nothing has been
acted, but the bringing polluted Children into the World, seeing David said
himself, That he was conceived in Sin, and brought forth in Iniquity, Psalm. 51.
and that Job maintains, That there is no body free from Pollution, though he
had lived but one day, chapter 14.4, 5. Clement opposes them, and says, Let them
tell us how a Child newly born has Sinned, or how he who has yet done nothing
as fallen under the Curse of Adam. Afterward he Expounds the passage of David,
as if the Prophet meant only, that he was descended from Eve, who was a Sinner.

It must also be observed, that a Man whose Judgment was thus disposed, wanted
but little of believing that the Philosophers were of the same Sentiments with
the Apostles, as soon as he could find any relation in their terms. So Plato
having spoken of three Supreme Divinities whom he acknowledged, (as appears
elsewhere) in terms like to those which the Primitive Christians made use of,
in speaking of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Clement believed, that of this
Philosopher's was the same as that of the Christians. I conceive, says he,
that Plato understood nothing thereby but the blessed Trinity, and that the
third Being, whereof he speaks, is the Holy Ghost, as the second is the Son, by
whom all things were made, according to the Will of the Father. And speaking of
the Divinity of Jesus Christ, he described it no otherwise than the Platonicks
did Reason. The Nature of the Son, says he, is the most Perfect and Holy, that
which has the greatest share in Empire and Government, and the most like unto
him who only is Almighty: It is this excellent Nature which presides over all
things, according to the Will of the Father, who best governs the Universe; who
by an unexhaustible Power, and without Wariness, effects all that he makes use
of to act in Nature; and who sees the most Secret Thoughts. The Son of God
never leaves the Place whence he sees all; he is neither Divided nor Shared,
nor does he Transport himself from one Place to another, but is every where,
and is Incircumscriptible. All Paternal Light, a^ Eye, he sees all things, he
hears every thing, he knows every thing, and penetrates by his might into all
Powers. To this natural Reason which has received this holy Administration is
subjected the whole Army of Angels, and of Gods, because of him who has
subjected them to it.

Clement had another Opinion concerning the Human Nature of Jesus Christ, into
which perhaps he fell for fear of rendering the Body of Jesus Christ inferior to
that of the Gods of Homer. The Gods of this Poet eat no Bread, nor drank Wine:
And our Savior according to Clement, needed no Milk in coming into the World,
and was not nourished by the Meats which he took, only through condescension,
and which passed not into his Body by the same Organs as they pass into our
Bodies. It is also what made Origin his Disciple to believe that Jesus Christ
had no Blood, But a Liquor like that which Homer attributed to his Gods, which
he calls (...).

Plato said in diverse Places, that God In^licts Pains upon Men only for their
good: And Clement observes it after such a manner, to make us believe that he
approves on it. Plato also said, that Souls are Purged in the other World by
Fire, and that after their Purgation, they return to their first State. Clement
believed that the Apostles thought the same thing, when they spoke to us of a
Fire which is to Consume the World; and his Disciple Origin, has concluded
from these Principles, that the Devils and the Damned will be one day delivered
from their Sufferings.

The Apostles describe the Place where the Wicked shall he Tormented, under the
Idea of a Lake of burning Brimstone: They made use of the same word that the
Heathens did to denote the State of Souls after Death, to wit, (...): They say
that Men descend thereinto, and that Jesus Christ descended there also. This
was sufficient to draw this Exclamation from Clement. What, did not Plato know
the floods of Fire, and the profundity of the Earth, which the Barbarians
called Gehenna, and which he Prophetically named ((...)) Tartarus? He has made
mention of Cocytus of Acheron, of Pyriphlegeton, and such like Places, where
the Wicked are punished for their amendment. Clement also believed with most of
the Ancients, that Jesus Christ really descended into Hell, and Preached there
to the Damned Souls, of which he saved those who were willing to believe in him.

We might also bring many other Examples, by which it would be, plain that
Clement expounded the Doctrins of the Christians, by opinion the most
resembling 'em which he found amongst Philosophers. But the Examples we have
showed, may suffice for those who have neither time nor opportunity to read
this Author, as well as for those who will consult the Original, because they
will find enough of themselves. One thing may be apprehended by it, which most
of those who apply themselves to the reading of the Fathers, do not much
observe; and without which it is almost impossible to understand them well in
abundance of Places: Which is, that before we begin this Study seriously, we
must read with care the Heathen Philosophers, and particularly Plato; without
which we could not well apprehend upon what grounds they reason, or examine with
success the force of their Arguments, nor devise how they fell into so many
Opinions, so distant from those which are this day received in our Schools.

But now, to return to the Life of St. Clement, the Ancients with a general
consent say he was Successor to Pantenus, in the Office of Catechist. He
acquitted himself of this Employment with Success, and several great Men came
out of his School, as Origin, and Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem. His method of
instructing the Chatechumenes consisted in showing them what there was that was
good in the Heathen Philosophy, and so insensibly conducted them to
Christianity, which they were in a much better way of embracing, after having
received several of his Maxims drawn from Natural Light, and distributed
through the Writings of Philosophers, for whom they saw all the World had a
respect: If they were immediately told that they must renounce all their
Opinions, and look upon all the rest of Mankind not only as Men who were in an
Error, but such a had said nothing that was true. As Laborers cast Seed into
the Earth, but not 'till after they have watered it: So says Clement, We take
from the writings of the Greeks that which is necessary to water what we final
Earthy, in those we Instruct, that they may afterward receive the Spiritual
Seed, and that they may be in a m^re likely way to make it spring up more
easily. In effect, the light of the Gospel supposes that of Nature, and
destroys it not. We do not see that Jesus Christ and his Apostles have
undertaken to give us a complete System of all the Doctrins that* have any
reference to Religion; they supposed that we were already prevented with diverse
thoughts established amongst all Nations, upon which they Reasoned; otherwise
it would have been requisite, for example, that they should have exactly
defined all the Virtues, which they have not done, because in respect to this,
they found Idea's in the minds of Men, which tho imperfect, were yet very true;
so they were satisfied to add what was l^cking, or to cut off what evil Customs
might have injuriously established therein.

Besides the Office of Catechist, Clement was raised to the Priesthood, at the
beginning, as it is believed, of the Empire of Severus, because Eusebius in his
History of the Events of CXCV, gives to Clement the title of Priest. It was
about that time, that he undertook to defend the Christian Religion against
Heathens and Heretics, by a Work which he Entitled, Stromates, which we shall
afterward speak something of, because in this Work, in making a Chronological
Computation, he descends not lower than the Death of Commodus, whence Eusebius
concludes that he composed it under the Empire of Severus, who succeeded this
Emperor.

Severus enraged against the Christians, because perhaps of a Rebellion of the
Jews, with whom the Heathens confounded those that professed Christianity,
began to Persecute them violently. This Persecution arising at Antioch, reached
unto Egypt, and obliged several Christians to withdraw from their Habitations,
where they were too well known, to escape the Violence of the Persecution. This
seems to have given occasion to Clement of proving it was lawful to fly in time
of Persecution. After having said that Martyrdom purified them from all Sins,
and exhorting them to suffer, if they were called to it, he says, that Persons
ought to testify that they are persuaded of the Truth of the Christian
Religion, as much by their Manners, as Words. After that he Expounds this
Passage of the Gospel, When you are Persecuted in one City, flee into another.
The Lord, says he, commands us not to flee, as if it were an Evil to be
Persecuted, and bids us not to shun Death by flight, as if we should fear it.
He will have us neither engage in or assist any one to do Evil, etc. Those who
obey not, are Rash, and throw themselves without reason into manifest Dangers.
If he, who kills a Man of God, Sins, he also is guilty of his own Death; he
who presents himself to the Tribunal of the Jugde, etc. he assists as much as
is capable, the Wickedness of him by whom he is Persecuted. If he exasperates
him, he is effectually the cause of his own Death, as much as if he endeavored
to vex a wild Beast, who afterward devoured him. A little while after the
Apostles, Persons were observed to covet Martyrdom; but some after desiring the
Executioners, scandalously falling from Christianity, at the sight of the
Torments; this Conduct was thought dangerous, and those were condemned for it,
who offered themselves freely to be Martyred, as appears by diverse Passages of
the Ancients, and by that of Clement, which we have related. As Men ought not
to shun Martyrdom, when it cannot be avoided, except by renouncing
Christianity, or a good Conscience; so they ought to preserve their Lives as
much as they can, whilst there is any likelihood of serving the Christians,
rather to prolong it by flight, than lose it by staying in Places where the
Persecution is so violent, and whence they may get away without ceasing to make
Profession of Truth. Those who blame, or make some difficulty of absolving some
Protestant Pastors, because they came from a Kingdom, where they could not
tarry without an eminent Danger, should first prove that another Conduct would
have been more advantageous to Christianity, than their Retreat has been. Here
depends the Solution of this Question, which has been disputed of late; If
they have done well in withdrawing?

Clement seems then to have quitted Alexandria, seeing we find that he made
some Abode at Jerusalem with Alexander, who was soon after Bishop of this City,
and to whom he dedicated his Book, Entitled, The Ecclesiastical Rules against
those who follow the Opinions of the Jews. During his Abode there, he was very
useful to this Church, as appears by a Letter to Alexander, to the Church of
Antioch, whereof Clement was bearer, where this Bishop says, that he was a Man
of great Virtue, as the Church of Anitoch knew, and would still acknowledge him
so; and that he being at Jerusalem, by an effect of Divine Providence, had
confirmed and increased the Church of the Lord. From Antioch Clement returned
to Alexandria, where it is not known how long he lived. All that can be said,
is, that he survived at least some Years after Pantenus, and that he was not
old, when he composed his Stromates, seeing he says himself, that he did them
to serve him for a Collection in his old Age, when his Memory should fail him.
History teaches us nothing concerning his Death, but it may be believed his
Memory was blessed at Alexandria, if these words of the Bishop of Jerusalem be
considered, which we have spoken of; who in another Letter to Origin, says,
That they both acknowledged for Fathers, these blessed Men, who had quitted
this Life before them, and with whom they would soon be, to wit, blessed
Pantenus and pious Clement, from whom they had drawn great Succors.

Amongst several Works which Clement composed, we have but Three remaining,
which are considerable. The First is, An Exhortation to Pagans, where he
refutes their Religion, and endeavors to induce them to embrace Christianity.
The Second is Entitled, The Paedagogue, where he forms the Manners of Youth,
and gives them Rules to behave themselves Christianly; where he mixeth Maxims
very severe, and far from the Customs of this day. The Third are the Stromates,
that is to say, Tapistries, which he has Entitled thus, because of the
variety of the Matters, which he treats of therein. He shows there the
Conformity amongst diverse Opinions of Pagan Philosophers, and those of the Jews
and Christians; he censureth the Errors of Pagan Philosophy, he Maintains and
Expounds Christianity; he refutes Heretics, and manages every thing with much
Learning. But he scarcely observes any Order, as he confesses himself at the
end of the Seventh Book: He goes from one thing to another, without forming
any draught of what he is to say, and without having any other design, but to
gather all that he had learned by Study and Meditation, upon the Subjects which
came into his Head. His Style in this last Work is harder than that of the two
preceding, where notwithstanding there is more Affectation than Elegance and
Neatness. He pretends that he had a Reason for so doing: But there are two
great Inconveniences in this Method; the first is, that the want of Order
causes, that Men are not only ignorant of the force of the most solid Proofs,
but also makes the Author too guilty of great Tautology, and heap up an
infinity of Arguments, which conclude nothing: The Second is, that the
negligence of the Style often renders ones meaning unintelligible; for it is
not Elegance only, which is a want, but Perspicuity it self cannot be found in
it. And any affected Obscurity, in hard Matters, such as Clement treats of,
is by so much the more to be blamed, as it is not very intelligible in matters
which are more clear in their own Nature, though we neatly express them. As we
ought to speak only to be understood, there is nothing that can excuse an
Author for not speaking clearly, but an absolute weakness of better expressing
himself; and in effect we find our selves naturally inclined to believe, that
those whose Style is obscure, have not a clear Mind, and that they speak thus,
only because they do not more clearly conceive the things they treat of. It is
true, we may censure the affected Ornaments of a sought Eloquence; but
Clearness cannot be reckoned amongst these Ornaments. We must confess that
there are very few Fathers, in whose Writings the same thing may not be
observed, which is in Clement. The greatest part in excusing their not being
Eloquent, strive as much as they can to appear so, after their manner, as may
be seen by a thousand Tracts, and Metaphorical Expressions, which are not very
natural, wherewith their Writings are full; there being but a few who have
thought that the greatest Care which a Writer ought to take, is to produce in
the Mind of his Reader clear Ideas of what he says, making use of proper
terms, and such as cannot be equivocal.

There is besides, an Homily of Clement, Entitled, Who is the Rich that is
Saved. It was Printed in Greek and Latin by Combefis, at Paris, 1672. and at
Oxford in 1683. with diverse other Greek and Latin Fragments. Those who had the
Care of the German Edition, whereof we have read the Title, were to blame for
not joining it to the other Works of St. Clement, which would have rendered
their Edition Commendable, which without that is scarcely so, as those who make
use of it will find. We have been contented to follow the Edition of Paris of
1641, without adding any thing whatever to it, excepting new Faults.

At the end of the Volume, is found an Abridgment of the Doctrine of Theodotus,
and of the Doctrine which was called Easter in the time of Valentinus. They are
nothing scarcely but Interpretations upon Holy Writ, which it is thought have
been drawn from the eight Books of the Hypotyposes of Clement of Alexandria, as
we have already remarked. Eusebius teaches us that he had interpreted
Scripture in an Abridgment of this Work, without admitting, says he, the
contested Writings, as the Epistle of St. Jude, and other Catholics, the
Epistle of St. Barnaby, the Apocalypse of St. Peter, and the Epistle to the
Hebrews, which he assures to be St. Paul 's, etc. Photius, who had seen this
Work, witnesses, that the design also was to Expound Scripture; but he
accuses the Author of upholding that Matter is Eternal; That the different
Forms which it receives are sent to it, by virtue of I know not what Decrees;
that the Son is of the number of created things; that there were several Worlds
before Adam; that Eve was formed out of him, after an other manner than
Scripture says; that Angels having had concern with Women, had Children by
them; that Reason was not made Flesh, though it seemed so to Men; that there
are two Reasons of the Father, the least of which has appeared to Men, and was
made Flesh. If we had these Books, we might perhaps know more clearly, that
these are but some Platonic Tenets, some of which Photius has ill understood,
because of the Equivocation of the Terms; and others did not pass in Clement's
time for Impieties, as they have since Systems of Divinity were formed amongst
Christians. In the first Ages, where none were followed in Schools, and nothing
was Expounded to young People, as at this time, every one played the Philosoper
as well as he could upon the matters of Speculation, and expounded the
Speculative Tenets, according to the Philosophy he had learned: Excepting some
Sentiments, which for the noise they had made, or for some other Reasons, had
been condemned by the Bishops, their Opinions were so extremely free. If any
doubt of it, he might be convinced thereof by the strange Opinions which some
amongst the Fathers had, who are put in the number of the Orthodox, and who
have not been reprehended in their time. We may find diverse Examples hereof in
the 4 th Chap. in the Book of Dailleus, of the Use of the Fathers, which in
spite of the Panegyrists of Antiquity, will be always looked upon, by those
who know it, as a good Book. Such is, for Example, the Opinion of St. Hilary,
who believed that Jesus Christ felt no grief whilst his Body was torn.

But Photius suspects that Heretics have corrupted the Works of Clement; and
Ruffinus had the same thought, as appears by his Apology for Origin, which is
in the Fourth Tome of the Works of St. Ierom. Yet if there was only what
Photius cites, there would be no reason to believe that there was a great
Corruption, though it cannot absolutely be denied. The Reason of this, whatever
this Learned Patriarch says of it, is, that these same Sentiments, well
understood, are found in the other Works of Clement, and are conformable to the
Principles which he follows every where. 1. He approves very clearly of the
Opinion of Heraclitus, who believed that the Matter of the World is Eternal,
and even shows that he had an Esteem for him, because he distinguished the
Matter of the World from its Form; the first whereof is unmovable, and the
second subject to change. As to the Reasons for which the Matter receives
certain Forms, Photius knew no more of them than Clement. 2. If Clement had
said that Sovereign Reason had been Created, ((...)) we ought to observe, that
to create, to produce, to beget, signify the same thing in Plato, and that it
follows not that he believed that Reason was begotten, or produced from
nothing. 3. It is one of the Opinions of Plato, that in a certain number of
Years the Form of the World would entirely change, and that several of these
changes have happened before the Revolution begun, which now comprehends us. One
may see in his Politics, that he maintains, the Revolution of all the Stars
will cause an universal Change in the World. Thus, in his Opinion, what was
said of Men's deriving their Original from the Earth, happened in the beginning
of a Revolution. That is it, adds he, which our Predecessors have said, who
have lived at the latter end of the first Revolution, and who drew near the
second, as well as those who were born at the beginning of this. It is they who
have assured us thereof, and several are to blame, for not believing it now.
The Stoics also believed the same thing, according to the Relation of Clement,
who seems not to disprove their thought, and who fails not to confirm it by
the Authority of Plato. This Philosopher believed that the first Men were
Androgynes, and that they had four Feet, two Heads, and so of the other
Members; but that God afterward divided them into two, as may be seen in his
Banquet. Some Rabbis have advanced some such thing, and grounded their
Sentiment upon this, that it is said, God created Man Male and Female. This
seems to be but a Diversion of the Mind, and not an Opinion, which these
Authors seriously embraced. Parhaps Clement sported himself to make some
Reflections on the thought of Plato, with so much the more liberty, that
perhaps he believed, as his Disciple Origin, that there were many Allegories in
the beginning of Genesis. 4. As to what concerns Angels falling in love with
Women, Clement testifies in more than one place, that he has been of this
thought; and most of the ancient Greek and Latin Fathers have thus expounded
the beginning of the 6 th Chap. of Genesis. Photius cannot reprehend this
Opinion, without censuring at the same time all Antiquity; but it is his Custom
to abuse the most ancient Authors, when he finds Sentiments in them which were
not received in his time, or ways of speaking, which are not strong enough, to
express those Thoughts which he believed Antiquity should have had, because it
would have been a Heresy in his Age, not to have them. 5. Incarnation being a
Mystery; which we comprehend not, and Clement's Style being not commonly very
clear, it might happen that he expresses himself after a manner which Photius
did not well understand; and this is the more probable, because this Patriarch
ordinarily Expounds the Thoughts of the Ancients, in reference to the Opinions
and Manners of speaking of his time. The Writings of the Ancients are full of
Equivocate Terms, which they use in such Senses as the following Ages were
ignorant of. Terms which express Spiritual obscure things, and the most
composed Ideas, are necessarily hard to be understood, because they took no
care of defining them, or making an exact Enumeration of the Ideas which they
applied thereto. Perhaps it came not once into their Mind, that this would have
been very necessary to be well understood. At least we see, that when they
strive to Expound themselves upon these obscure Subjects, they use as obscure
Terms. 6. An Example may be remarked thereon, in regard to two Reasons, whereof
Photius speaks. Those who shall carefully Read the Second Tome of Origin upon
St. John, may observe that he establishes a first, or supreme Reason, which is
the Divinity of Jesus Christ, and several inferior Reasons, which are made
after the Image of the precedent. It might be said in this sense, that there
are only Second Reasons, which are become Flesh, because there are only they
which animate Human Bodies; for though the first was united to the Humanity of
Jesus Christ, it was not in stead of a Soul to him. Thus though Clement had
said what Photius makes him say, he could not be accused of Heresy for that;
but he did not say so, as it appears by the Passage which Photius himself
cites. The Son is called Reason, as well as the Paternal Reason, but it was not
that which was made Flesh; and yet it is not Paternal Reason neither, but
Divine Power, (which is as an Emanation of this same Reason) which is become
Spirit, ((...)) and which is come into the Hearts of Men. By these Terms the
Son, we must not understand the only Son of God, but Man, as is clearly seen by
the Sequel. Perhaps Clement had called it (...) simply, because he might have
sufficiently intimated before, whom he understood by this word. Photius, who
has not well apprehended the end of this Passage, might easily have equivocated
concerning the Sequel of the Discourse; as the Jesuit Schotus, otherwise a
Learned Man, was altogether mistaken in the Latin Version of these words, as we
shall soon observe by comparing it with that which we have already made thereof.

But we have another Latin Work, which is attributed to Clement, and which is
Entitled, Commentariolam primam Canonicam S. Patri, in Epistolam Iudae and
tres Epistolas S. Ioannis Apostoli. There are indeed diverse things in these
Notes, which are not far from the Doctrine of Clement; but it cannot be known
whether it be a whole Version of a part of the Hypotyposes, or only Extracts,
corrected according to the Pleasure of the Interpreter. It is known, that when
the Latins translated something of the Greeks, they were very subject to make
Changes therein as they thought fit, as has been objected to Ruffinus. It is
even needless to seek so far for Examples of this Ill Custom, seeing we have
one concerning a part of the Hypotyposes of Clement, whereof Cassiodorus speaks
thus; Clement of Alexandria, has expounded in Greek the Canonick Epistles,
that is to say, the First Epistle of St. Peter, the First and Second of St.
John, and that of St. James, where there are not only many subtle things; but
also some things which he has advanced, without well taking heed of them. We
have translated him into Latin, so that having taken away what would
Scandalize, his Doctrine thus purified, may with more safety be Read. Ubi multa
quidem subtiliter sed aliqua incaute loquutus est, quae nos ita transferri
fecimus in Latinam, ut exclusis quibusdam offendiculis; purificata Doctrina
ejus, securior posset hauriri.

Besides this, Clement composed five Treatises, which are lost. 1. The Rule, or
the Canon of the Church, against the Iudaizers. 2. Of the Passover. 3. Of
Backbiting. 4. Disputes concerning Fasting. 5. An Exhortation to Patience,
directed to the Neophytes.

After the particular Remarks which are made upon each of his Works, and what
been said in general upon this occasion, there remains now only three things,
which are much worth our notice.

He often cites supposititious Writings, as if they had been acknowledged by
all the World, as may be observed by the Passage of St. Peter's Sermon, which
has been a little before related, and by another of St. Paul's, which seems to
be taken from the Book of his Voyages, upon which, see Eusebius and St. Ierom.
This may make People believe that the great Reading of this Learned Man, had
not refined his Judgment; for in fine, there is no need of being a great
Scholar, to perceive what he cites, resembles not the Style of the Apostles,
neither is it conformable to their Principles. It cannot be doubted, but that
they believed the God whom the Jews adored, was the true God, Creator of Heaven
and Earth, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who testifies it himself.
Neither can the Jews be accused of having worshipped Angels, Months and Moons,
with any manner of Probability; and the reason which the Author of St. Peter's
Sermon brings for it, is so ridiculous, that it can impose upon no body, who is
not very willing to be deceived. It is true, that some Learned Men have
otherwise expounded this Accusation, which this Author makes against the Jews,
but it is plain by the Sequel, that he understood it more simply than they do.
Howbeit, this Book being visibly supposititious, Origin acted much more
prudently than his Master; seeing he had Heracleon a Valentinian to refute, who
drew Consequences against the Old Testament, from these pretended words of St.
Peter, he begins thus, It would be very proper to examine whether this Book was
really St. Peter's, or if it were not wholly supposititious, and if not, if any
thing was not added to it; after which, he shows, that the Jews adored the
Creator of the World. But it was the Custom of several of the Ancients to make
use of all sorts of Reasons and Books, to persuade what they had a mind to. If
it was so in our time, Men would be accused immediately of Simplicity, or of
Falsehood; but each Age has its Customs. However its certain, that Rules of
sound Sense have always been the same; and its not less true, that great
Learning does not render the Mind more just, according to the famous Maxim of
Heraclitus, which Clement relates amongst his Writings: (...)

Clement also used to interpret Scripture allegorically, without rendering his
Allegories probable, as the Ancients commonly did: We may see what Mr. Huet
says of the Origin of Allegories in his Origeniana, l. 2. c. 2. Qu. 14. But if
what Clement says be read carefully in the fifth Book of his Stromates, where
he treats of it more at large, one may easily perceive, that what induced him
chiefly to believe the Scripture was full thereof, was, that the Egyptians and
Greeks had accustomed themselves to hide the Secrets of their Philosophy, under
Emblems and Fables. It is true, that the Jews were fallen into this Opinion
before the coming of Jesus Christ. It is true also that in the most distant
times, this Nation expressed it self not only by dark words, but symbolick
Actions, as appears by diverse places of the Old Testament. Notwithstanding
there is no Example by which it is apparent that the Sacred Authors were willing
to hide the Tenets of the Jewish Religion, but on the contrary they exposed
them very clearly and simply. There are but few places of the History of the
beginning of the World, which may be turned into an Allegory with any
probability, and those which may only regard some Circumstances, which signify
nothing in respect to the Foundation of the History, and belong in no wise to
the Worship of God, or good Manners, or Tenets, without which they could not
serve God, nor be honest Men, according to the Law. In the rest of all the
History of the Hebrews, nothing appears which in the least resembles an
Allegory, all is simple and easy to be apprehended; which makes us believe,
that those who writ it, were in no wise Allegorists, and that if there was any
thing in the most ancient Events of the History of Mankind, which may be
understood that way; the Hebrews have followed this turn, only because the
Tradition, or the Memorials, which they copied after, were thus expressed. We
do not see that they amused themselves with Philosophy, or gave any opinions of
Physics, either clearly or obscurely; and the places where Philo strives to
find Philosophical Tenets, are wrested after so violent a manner, that there is
no Person who perceives not that the Sacred Authors never thought upon what he
makes them to say: Also if we reflect upon the origin of Allegories, amongst
the Pagans, it will appear that they are but of a late date; and when
Philosophers would give a Reason for Fables, or the ancient Histories of the
Gods; that is to say, to save the Honor of their most ancient Historians, who
were accused of having absurd Ideas of Nature, as Excellent as that of the
Gods, according to their Idea of it. Therefore it was necessary to make those
believe, whom these scandalous Histories offended, that the Poets thought quite
another thing than what they said, and thence comes, ((...)) which signifies
quite another thing than what is meant, and is what is properly called
Allegory. It may be found out by reading of three Works lately Printed at
Amsterdam, and where mention is made in the 7th Tome of the Universal
Bibleothick, p. 109. Thus Histories amongst the Grecians were turned into
Allegories, fearing it should be thought that the Gods of Greece were only
corrupted Men. The Jews, who never applied themselves to the study of Critics
and Philosophy, were no sooner amongst the Grecians, but they found this Method
of Expounding Religion, and used it to explain the Sacred Books, after a manner
more conformable to the Opinion of the Pagans, as is plain by the Example of
Philo, who Expounds all the Old Testament like a Platonic. They even so much
altered the Text, that they expounded allegorically, not only the places which
might have any difficulty, but also the most clear and simple, without
excepting even those that concern Manners, which being literally understood,
include excellent Directions for the conduct of Life; nor the most simple
Histories, whence most useful Instructions may be drawn, without searching any
other sense, but that which offers it self to the mind. Philo is full of such
Examples. The Christians afterward imitated the Jews, and were not satisfied
to interpret allegorically the Old Testament, but did the like concerning the
New, although neither Jesus Christ, nor the Apostles, proposed no Doctrine after
an emblematick Manner, which they expounded not clearly enough themselves, to
take away the trouble of seeking for the Sense, in having recourse to
Allegories, which have nothing plain in them. For in fine, it must be granted,
that according to this Method, though the Sacred Authors had said something
different, or even quite contrary to what they did, if we would we might find a
Sense equally fine, as those who examine will immediately be sensible of it.
Also the Heathens themselves, who were the Inventers of this strange manner of
Interpreting ancient Books, could not suffer that Christians should use it, as
the Christians likewise in their turn laughed at the forced Interpretations of
Pagans: Some Heathens also more ingenious than the rest, thought them
ridiculous. The Christians and Jews had done much better certainly to apply
themselves to the Letter, than to make use of so unstable a Method, to defend
the Scripture against the Heathens.

3. Though with reason we may treat as erroneous diverse Opinions of Clement of
Alexandria; yet if we observe each particular one which we had, and that none
this day holds, he shall Remark, that there are some which are looked upon as
Erroneous, only because the opposite Sentiments are established. I know not
how, in most Schools, though there have been no new discoveries made thereon,
so soon as any famous Person maintained a Tenet, without being contradicted by
People of an equal Reputation, or Authority, or even without any one's opposing
it; this Tenet established it self so well in the minds of Persons, that Men
insensibly accustomed themselves to look upon the contrary Opinion as on Error,
without knowing for what. Opinions are often introduced like Customs, that owe
their beginning to some few Persons, which others imitate. They in time so well
possess the minds of Men, that all others, except those which agree to it, seem
ridiculous. A Garment which is seen but seldom, looks strangely, though it were
in use in times past; it is even so with an Opinion which grows old, it
displeases because none still receives it. For Example, Clement believed that
the Angels had a Body, and that also was the Opinion of Origin, and of most of
the Fathers. Yet it is now treated as an Error, without any reason; for though
Scripture teaches us, that Spirits have neither flesh nor bone, and that
Angels are Intelligences; it says no where that they are not clothed with any
body. There has been since no Revelation upon this matter, nor no convincing
Reason discovered, which can persuade us of the contrary. Yet it is commonly
said, that it is an Error, because Scholastic Doctors maintain it to be so. I
confess, that the Fathers, who gave bodies to Angels, have not brought any
evident Reason to prove their thought. But all that could be thence concluded,
is, that they had affirmed a thing which they know no more of than we do; so
that it was better to continue in suspense, and assert nothing of a Subject,
which was equally unknown to us. This Suspension was not ('it is true)
accommodated to Dogmaticks, who are not very easy to grant, that they are
ignorant of any thing, and who believe they are wise enough to determine
speedily upon all sorts of Questions. Indeed without that we cannot form a
System so complete as we ought, to pass for Learned Men; and it would be a
shameful thing to grant that upon each Article a thousand things may be asked,
upon which nothing could be answered, if we should say only what we know. There
may be an Application made of this same Principle, on diverse other Tenets of
Clement, upon which it would be better to confess simply one's Ignorance, than
to condemn Sentiments, concerning which, we have no good Information.

Neither have these Opinions hindered some Ancients from rendering him many
Praises. Eusebius says, His Books are full of useful Learning. St. Ierom says,
That he composed very fine Works, full of Learning and Eloquence, and taken
both from holy Scripture and profane Authors, and elsewhere. Clement, says he,
Presbyter of the Church of Alexandria, the most Learned of our Authors, in my
Judgment, has made eight Books of Stromates, as many Hypotyposes; a Book
against Pagans, and three Volumes, Entitled, The Paedagogue. What is there in
his Books that is not full of knowledge, and drawn from the depths of
Philosophy? Cyril of Alexandria assures us, in his 6th and 7th Books against
Julian, That he was a Man of admirable knowledge, who had thoroughly searched
the Grecian Learning, with such an Exactness, that few before him arrived at.
Theodoret says, That this holy Man surpassed, all others in the extent of his
knowledge.

It is easy to form an Idea of the Doctrine of Clement, upon what has been
already said. It is necessary only to add a word of this Edition; two Defects
may be observed in it, one of which is common to it, with several other
Editions of the Books of the Ancients, and the other is particular to it.

Concerning the first, one may easily remark that the Editions, where there are
no Distinctions nor Lines, as the way of speaking is, are destitute of one
thing which appears not of Consequence in it self, but is very useful for the
Understanding of what is read. This beginning of a new Line serves for an
Admonition to the Reader, who in casting simply his Eyes on a Page, sees how
many Arguments, or Subjects it is filled with, otherwise this want of
Distinction in some degree confounds the Mind, and makes more attention
requisite to understand what we readhaond that we do not search for Connections
where there are none, or not to confound two Arguments in one. But one ought to
endeavor to diminish as much as possible, the trouble of the Reader, who has
too much already to understand the very things. The Lines in some respects
perform the same effect, as the Distinction of Chapters, which cannot be
neglected, without Confusion. It is true, that the Ancients neglected often to
divide their Books or Discourses into certain parts; but if we take notice, we
shall find this negligence was because there was not sufficient Order in
several of their writings. It was easier to pass from one Subject to another,
by reason of some slight reference which was among them, or to throw confusedly
a heap of Thoughts upon Paper, than to pass them into a certain Order: As it
would be easier, to lay in one mass the Materials of an House, than to dispose
them each in their proper Place. If any one has a mind to have examples of
Books without Order, he may only cast his Eye upon Seneca or Tertullian, who
both said very enthusiastically, whatsoever came into their Minds, without
almost any idea of Order which they had a design to follow. If these Authors
were Printed dividing their Arguments by a Line, their meaning could be much
better understood.

The other fault, which those who have the care of the Editions of ancient
Authors commit very often, is, that they do not distinguish with diverse
Characters the Citations from the words of the Author; so that if great
attention is not given to what is read, that which is attributed to one Author,
may belong to another. This is what happned to Dr. Cave in his English Life of
Clement Alexandrinus, which has been very useful to us in the making this.
Clement in the Passage which has been related concerning the Philosophy he
approved, if as Socrates, who in his Phoedon, applies to Philosophers this
Proverb, which they made use of in their Mysteries, There are many who bear the
Thyrse, but few who are truly filled with the Spirit of Bacchus. Socrates adds
immediately after, These are I believe, only those who applied themselves as
they ought to Philosophy, of the number of whom I have endeavored to be as
much as I could, etc. As the whole Passage is in Roman Character, Dr. Cave
thought that these words Of the number of whom, etc. were Clement's, whereas
they are Socrates, as appears in Plato, and even at the bottom of the Page,
where Clement Cites them. If all this Passage had been in Italick, Dr. Cave
would not have been deceived in it; which ought in no wise to appear strange to
those who know that to write the Life of an Author, collected out of diverse
places, Attention must be given to so many things all at a time, that it is
very difficult to avoid confounding ones self.

Besides, in distinguishing the Subjects by a Line, and the Citations by
different Characters, more Facility is given to those who have read an Author
in finding such places again, as they may have occasion for, which is not of
little use.

As to this Edition, there are three Indexes, one of the Passages cited by St.
Clement, the second of the Subjects, and the third of the Words and Greek
Phrases, either worthy of Remark, or such as this Author applies to a
particular Sense. If these Indexes were complete and correct, they would be
without doubt very useful; but they are neither. There is an infinite sig^t of
Faults in the Numbers, and often contrary to what is in Clement. The Passage of
Job, There is no one that is clean, is related in Chap. 25. of his Books,
whereas it is in the 14 th. There is in the Index: Peccato originali infectae
omnium and animae and corpora, 488. d. On contrary Clement refutes this Opinion
in this place; but Sylburge, or some other who has made this Index, had
apparently in his mind what Clement ought to have said according to him, rather
than what he effectually did say. There is besides, a fourth Index at the
beginning of the Work, which contains a List of the Authors cited by Clement,
but the Pages where he cites them being not marked, it is altogether useless.
It were a thing to be desired for the Republic of Letters, not only that Kings
were Philosophers, or that Philosophers were Kings, but also that Booksellers
were learned, or that the Learned Men were Booksellers, and that they brought
back the Age of the Manuces and Stephens, for to give us good Editions of the
Writings of the Ancients, and to level the way for a Study, which of it self is
hard enough, without making difficulties by our own Negligence.

Chap. 1. Our Author begins the Defininition of the word Church, as used in the
Primitive Times, which since it agrees so much with the present general
Definition, we shall pass it over to remark what is more uncommon. Afterward
he comes to treat of its Members, which he distinguishes into the Clergy and
Laity, in which he considers these three Particulars, 1. Peculiar Acts of the
Clergy. 2. Peculiar Acts of the Laity. 3. Joint Acts of both.


The Clergy he considers in these three Offices, Bishops, Priests and Deacons.
He begins at Jerusalem, where the Holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles and
Disciples, induing them with the Gift of Tongues, working Miracles, and fitting
them to Preach the Gospel to all the World. He assigns St. Andrew to Scythia,
St. Bartholomew to India, St. Matthew to Parthia, St. John to Asia the less,
telling us also that the rest of the Apostles had every one their Commission
and Allotment, according to Clemens Romanus. (...), etc. Epist. ad. Cor. p. 54.
The Apostles went forth Preaching both in City and Country, appointing the
first Fruits of their Ministry for Bishops and Deacons; which they left behind
them whilst they planted the other Churches; Thus Smirnaeorum Eccles. etc. de
praescript. advers. Haret. p. 80.
Clemens was ordained Bishop of Rome by St. Peter, and Polycarp Bishop of
Smyrna by St. John, as says Tertullian.

Our Author reconciles what the Scripture and St. Clemens Romanus says, A very
good reason for one Bishop, being Governor or Minister, but of one Church,
because in the beginning of Christianity one Church was large enough to
entertain all the Christians for twenty, thirty, or forty Miles distance. So
that the Bishops Power extended as far as those now a days.
( Ep. ad Cor. p. 2.) about the Plurality of Bishops in one Church, with the
Negation of Ignatius, Tertullian, and St. Cyprian, who affirm that there ought
to be but one Bishop in a Church. He says the word (...), was the Bishop by way
of Eminency and Propriety, though there might be others such as Ep. 69. 5. p. 208.
St. Cyprian reckons Bishop, Pastor, President, Governor, Superintendent and
Priest.

2. Our Author shows in the Second Chap. that these Bishops Jurisdiction or
Ancient Diocesses appeared to him to be but one Congregation, The People chose
the Bishop, because at first the Priests were so few, and at such a distance,
that they could not Assemble together without leaving their own Churches
unofficiated at the same time; but when the Gospel increased, and the number of
Bishops was consequently augmented, they removed this Inconvenience, though
they were long before convinced of it; for certainly Persons of an equal
Learning and Piety are much fitter to constitute and make a Choice of Bishops
than the multitude, which was more subject to breed Confusion, as Gregory
Nazianzen, and many others complain of; besides, the Peoples Voice alone was
not sufficient, for he was first to have the approbation of the neighboring
Bishops, according to our Authors own Citations.
for which he brings the Authority of several of the Fathers. He also shows
that the word Parish is as old as Irenaeus, who in his Synodical Epistle to
Pope Victor, calls the Bishoprics of Asia Parishes ((...), apud Eusebius. l. 5.
c. 24. p. 193.) He brings eight more Instances of the word, and gives us some
Examples of matter of Fact parallel hereunto, which could not be otherwise, as
to meeting all together, receiving the Eucharist from the Bishop alone, were
Baptized only by the Bishop, who was the Common Almoner; all the People met at
a Church Censure; and when the Bishop was dead, all met to choose another;
public Letters were read before the whole Diocese or Parish; all the Diocese
met to manage Affairs, etc. Our Author all along cites his Authorities very
plentifully in the Margent to maintain his Assertion.

3. In the Third Chap. he considers the Bishops Office, which he says was
Preaching the Word, Praying with his People, Administering the two Sacraments of
Baptism and the Lords Supper, taking care of the Poor, Ordaining of Ministry,
Governing his Flock, Excommunicating Offenders, and Absolving Penitents, for
every one of these Offices, our Author Cites a Father. He proceeds a little
after to show the manner of his Electing Bishops, which he shows was by the
Choice of all the People, who knew his Life and Conversation beforehand; but
the Voice of the People was not sufficient by it self; for after they had
Elected one, they presented him to the neighboring Bishops for their
Approbation, for without that the Election was not valid. (...), etc. Eusebius.
Lib. Cap. 11. Page 212. After a Bishop's Election, he was installed by
Imposition of Hands by other Bishops; he cites all along his Authorities.

4. He treats of Presbyters, and gives this Definition, That a Presbyter is a
Person in holy Orders, having thereby an inherent Right to perform the whole
Office of a Bishop; but being possessed of no Place or Parish, nor actually
discharging it without the Permission and Consent of the Bishop of a Place or
Parish; which he says, was much like the Instance of our present Ministers and
their Curates.

He considers this Subject under Two Heads, viz. 1. That Presbyters were the
Bishops Curates and Assistants, and so inferior to them in the actual Exercise
of their Ecclesiastical Commission. 2. That yet notwithstanding they had the
same inherent Right with the Bishops, and so were not of a distinct Specific
Order from them.


Which is as much as to say, they were not Bishops in Gradu, but in Ordine --
To confirm this, he shows out of the Fathers, too long to mention in an
Abstract, that a Presbyter could not Baptize, not Administer the Eucharist, not
choose his own Subject to Preach upon, not Absolve Offenders, etc. without the
Bishops consent first obtained; in short, he shows that they had a Right to do
every thing that the Bishops had, when leave was given them.

5. In the Fifth Chap. he treats of Subordinate Offices, first of Deacons,
which because he says there is so little contest about in our Disputes, he is
the more brief on it. In short he gives us to understand, that they were
inferior to Presbyters, and stood and waited on the latter, who sat down on
their (...) or Seats in the form of a Semicircle, being the same mentioned Acts
6.2. To serve Tables. Ignatius, (...), etc. Deacons of Meats and Cups: They
Baptized in the absence of Presbyters and Bishops, in a word, they were called
the Churches Servants, (...). Ignat. Epist. ad Tralles. p. 48.

Then he comes to treat of Subdeacons, whose number was enlarged according to
the greatness of the Church, and who were subservient to Deacons, as Deacons
were to Presbyters and Bishops.

Besides these, he proves, that there were yet a meaner sort of Ecclesiastics,
such as Acolyths, Exorcists, and Lictors, which were only Candidates for the
Ministry.

Here he turns to the Subject of the Presbyters, showing how they were
O^dained, which being so like that of the Bishops, I shall pass it over, only I
shall Rema^k, that amongst other Qualifications, Learning was looked upon as
very necessary; I shall mention one Passage that he brings from the Fathers
about it, viz. Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom. Lib. 1 Page 207. (...), etc. That
it is profitable to Christianity for the clear and distinct Demonstration of its
Doctrine, in that it helps us to the more evident understanding of the Truth. A
little farther the same Father speaking of Logic p 233. calls it, A Hedge to
defend the Truth from being trod down by Sophists, that it gives us great light
duly to understand the Holy Scriptures, that it keeps the way of Life that we
be not deceived nor circumvented by those that endeavor to draw us into the
way of Sin; he also shows us that the same Father, Page 472. Lib. 6. Strom.
complains that there were some in his days, that shunned Philosophy lest it
should deceive them, as much as Children did Hobgoblins: Because they saw that
many Learned Men's Brains were intoxicated by Philosophical Notions, and thereby
became Authors of most damnable He^esies, not observing the Apostles
Exhortation; but the same Father Answers this Objection; That that proceeded
not from Philosophy, but from the Wickedness of Men's Nature; for whosoever has
Wisdom enough to use it, he is able thereby to make a larger and more
demonstrative Defense of the Faith than others, Strom. Lib. Page 204. And in
another place the same Father adds, It was most unreasonable, that Philosophy
only should be condemned upon this Account, and yet the meanest Arts, even
those of a Smith and Shipwright, which are as much Human, should be commended
and approved; that they did not rest here and go no farther, but having got
what was most useful and profitable for it, they ascended higher unto the true
Philosophy, making this Humane Philosophy guide unto a Preparatory for the true
Philosophy, Ibid. Lib. 1. Page 207. I have been fuller upon these Citations,
because that many seem to be dissatisfied now a days with Human Learning in the
Ministry.

6. In the Sixth Chap. he treats of the Acts of the Laity, and shows that
Baptism was the Initiating Sacrament into Church Membership. Here the Author
gives us an Account how Heathens were admitted; They were put into the Rank of
the Catechumens or Chatechis'd ones, which were Candidates of Christianity;
they were permitted to come into the Church, where they stood in a place by
themselves, and were present at the Sermons, which were adapted to their
Capacities, being Discourses of the ordinary and less Misterious Truths of the
Gospel. Origin, Contra Cells. Lib. 3. Page 142. etc. If they behaved themselves
well in this Rank, They were advanced to the Superior Rank of Perfecti, as
Tertullian, calls them, De prescrip. Haer. Page 89. who staid not only at
Sermons, but Prayers too; afterward they were Baptized, and rec^ived the
Eucharist. Page 141.

Our Author brings us Examples where the People, as they had power to Elect
Bishops, so they had also power to depose them; he gives two Instances of
Martialis and Basilides, who for their Apostasy were deposed, and Felix and
Sabinus chosen in their place.

7. Chap. Seventh, Our Author treats of Church-Censure and says, That Schism,
Heresy, Covetousness, Gluttony, Fornication, Adultery etc. were the Subjects
of Church-Censure, in their Ecclesiastic Cou^ts; but that Apostasy and
Idolatry were Prosecuted with the extremest Rigor; he gives us Examples in
Ninus Clementianus, and Florus, who underwent three Years Penance before they
were received again into the Church; the Judges were both Clergy and Laity, and
some times the Bishops of neighboring Parishes came over to assist, that the
Censure might be free from any Imputation of Partiality or Injustice: The
manner Tertullian decribes thus, After other parts of the Divine Service were
over, then followed Exhortations, Reproofs, and a Divine Censure; for the
Judgment is given with great weight, as amongst those that are sure. God
beholds what they do, and this is one of the highest Preludiums and Forerunners
of the Judgment to come, when the Delinquent is banished from the Communion of
Prayer, Assemblies and holy Commerce: Approved Elders preside there who obtain
that Honor by Testimony, not by Price; Tertull. Apol. Cap. 39 P. 709. Those
who who were Excommunicate, were to be looked upon as Heathens if they retu^ned
again: What was requisite for them to do, is elegantly described in a Letter
sent from the C^ergy of the Church of Rome to St. Cyprian, Let them knock at
the Church Doors, but not break them; let them come to the Threshold of the
Church, but not pass over it; let them watch at the Gates of the Celestial
Tents, but armed with Modesty, by which they may remember that they were
Deserters; let them resume the Trumpet of their Prayers, but not to sound an
Alarm to Battle; let them arm themselves with the Darts of Modesty, and retake
that Shield, which by their Apostasy they lost, that so they may be armed, not
against the Church, which grieves at their Misery, but against their Adversary
the Devil; a modest Petition, a bashful Supplication, a necessary Humility, and
an Industrious Patience will be advantageous to them; let them express their
Grief by their Tears, and their Sorrow and Shame for their Crimes by their
Groans, Ep. 31. ap. Cypr. Tertullian in a like manner describes one in this
State, by lying in Sackcloth and Ashes, by having a squalid Body, and a
dejected Soul; by Fasting, Praying, Weeping, Groaning, and roaring night and
day; by throwing himself at the Clergies feet, and kneeling before the
Faithful, begging and desiring their Prayers and Pardon. -- If the Criminals
Repentance was thought real, he was admitted to part of the Service, but not to
all, for a long time, some two, three, five, ten Years, and some even to their
Lives end; On the day appointed for Absolution ^he came covered with Sackcloth
and Ashes, throwing himself at the Feet of the Clergy and Laity, and with Tears
in his Eyes begging their Pardon, and Forgiveness, confessed his Fault, and
received Absolution by the Bishops putting his hand upon his Head and blessing
him; and then he was looked upon as a true Churchmember again.

8. In the Eighth Chap. he comes to show the Independency that Churches had one
of another, as to Superiority or Pre-eminence, which concludes very strongly
against the Usurpations of the Sea of Rome; he Cites the Decree of the African
Synod, Apud Cyp. Ep. 55. 16. Page 142. That every ones Cause should be heard
where the Crime was committed, because that to every Pastor was committed a
particular Portion of Christ's Flock, which he was particularly to rule and
govern, and to render an Account thereof unto the Lord. Yet he shows there was
such a Dependence and Correspondence betwixt one another, Cypr. Ep. 67. 6. Page
199. Although they were many Pastors, yet they were but one Flock, and they
ought to congregate and cherish all the Sheep, which Christ redeemed by his own
Blood and Passion. And a little after: We ought all of us to take care of the
Body of the whole Church, whose Members are distended through various
Provinces, Apud Cypr. Ep. 30. 4. Page 67.

Our Au^hor treats next of Provincial Synods, which he proves were a
Convocation of Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons and deputed Laimen, who often met
to advise about Ecc^esiastical Affairs, and regu^ate what should appear amiss:
He shows that this Convocation was usually every Year, Per singulos annos in
unum Conveniamus, Apud Cyprian. Ep. 75. 3. Page 23^. In these Assemblies they
chose out of the gravest and most renowned Bishops, two to be Arbitrators and
Moderators, Apud Eusebius. Lib 5. Cap. 23. Page ^90. The Decrees that they made
were binding, and who ever broke them, came under the Ecclesiastic Censure.

9. In the Ninth Chap. our Author treats of the Unity of the Church. Here he
shows, that the Unity of the Church consisted not in an Uniformity of Rites and
Usages, but every Church was at its own liberty to follow its own particular
Customs, Iren. apud Eusebius. Lib. 5. Cap. 24. P. 193. In some Churches they
fasted one day, in others two, in some more, and in others forty hours; but yet
they still retained Peace and Concord, the diversity of their commending the
Unity of their Faith. And a little after, the same Father: They retained Peace
and Love, and for the diversity of such Customs, none were ever cast out of the
Communion of the Church. Also Firmilius, apud Cyprian. Ep. 75. 5. Page 237.
That in most Provinces their Rites were varied according to the Diversities of
Names and Places, and that for this no one ever departed from the Peace and
Unity of the Catholic Church. 'Twould be well if this Primitive Union was well
considered on, by such as keep up the Dissentions amongst us at this day; they
will certainly have a severe Account to make one day to the Prince of Peace;
nor will their Ignorance excuse them, in not making a due distinction betwixt
the Fundamentals of Religion and mere Circumstances.

Our Author proceeds to show what condescentions there were amongst them from
Justin Martyr, who speaking of those Jewish Converts, who adhered to the
Mosaical Rites, says, That if they did this only through their Weakness and
Imbecility, and did not persuade other Christians to the observance of the
same Iudaical Customs, that he would receive them into Church Fellowship and
Communion, Dialog. cum Tryphon. Page 266.

After this, our Author shows how the whole Churches censured such as were
Authors of Divisions, about the different Observation of Easter, Baptizing
Heretics, etc. and afterward he brings in Irenaeus, saying, That at the last
day Christ shall judge those, who cause Schisms, who are inhuman, not having
the fear of God, but preferring their own advantage before the Unity of the
Church, who for trivial and slight Causes rend and divide the great and
glorious Body of Christ, and as much as in them lies, destroy it; who speak
Peace, but make War, truly straining at a Gnat, but swallowing a Camel. Lib. 4.
Cap. 62. Page 292.

Here our Authors defines Schism according to the Primitive Fathers, to be an
unnecessary causeless Separation from their lawful Pastor or Parish Church: So
that who ever separates upon such a Ground is a Schismatic; then he comes to
lay down such measures as the Primitive Christians did make use of for
Separation from their Bishop; (1) Apostasy from the Faith, (2) Or when a Bishop
renounced the Christian Faith, and through fear of Persecution embraced the
Heathenish Idolatries, as was done in the Case of Martialis and Basilides, two
Spanish Bishops; 3 ly. When the Bishops Life was scandalous and wicked; he
gives Instances of all of them, yet he brings in Origin against this last
Opinion, his words are these, Origin Hom. 7. in Ezekiel. He that has a care of
his Soul, will not be scandalized at my Faults, who am his Bishop, but
considering my Doctrine, and finding it agreeable to the Churches Faith; from me
indeed he will be averse, but he will receive my Doctrine, according to the
Precept of the Lord, which says, The Scribes and Pharisees sit on Moses his
Chair; whatever therefore they say unto you, hear, and do, but according to
their Work do not, for they say and do not: The Scripture is of me, who teach
what is good, and do the contrary, and sit upon the Chair of Moses as a Scribe
or Pharisee; the Precept is to thee, O People, if thou can not accuse me of
false Doctrine, or Heretical Opinions, but only beholdest my wicked and sinful
Life; but do those things which I speak. After having mentioned this Father's
Opinion, he adds, that whether Irenaeus, or an African Synod, or Origin
deserves most Credit, he leaves it to the Learned to judge; but however our
Author, gives his own Opinion, that they might both have condescended a little
nearer. Afterward we have an Account of several Schisms, and the manner of
their Growth, all along very curious in his Remarks, and very plentiful in the
Citation of his Authorities in the Margent, to which, for greater Satisfaction,
we refer the more inquisitive Reader.

The Second Part of the Enquiry into the Constitution, Discipline, Unity and
Worship of the Primitive Church, that Flourished within the first Three Hundred
Years after Christ.
1. IN the First Chap. of this Second Part, he begins with the manner of their
Public Worship in the Primitive Church; when the Congregation was assembled,
the first Act of Divine Service was reading the Holy Scriptures, and sometimes
the Epistles and Tracts of Eminent and Pious Men; he that read the Scriptures
was particularly destined for that Office, being the Lector, which as we said,
above, was preparative for an higher Office; how long they read, our Author
could not determine, but he says it was a considerable part of the Divine
Service.

Then followed singing Psalms; the Matter he says was not always the same; some
times, as he Cites out of Tertullian, they Sung an Hymn out of the Bible, or
one of their own composing; one of their Hymns, as he tells us, being made on
the Praise of our Savior, began thus (...), etc. Hail Light, they sung with
their Voices altogether, some times alternately, Origin. de Orat. 6. Page 7.
Ep. ad Trajan. 'Twas in Rhyme, Meter, and Consort. He mentions particularly the
133. Psalm, Oh how good and pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together in
Unity, etc. After singing of Psalms, Preaching succeeded. Scripturae leguntur
Psalmi Canuntur, ad Locutiones proferuntur, Tertull. de Anima, c. 3. p. 530.
Scriptures are read, Psalms sung, and Sermons pronounced.

The Subject of the Sermon was usually a Commentary or Explanation of the
Lessons, which were just before read, according to Justin Martyr, Ap. 2. p. 98.
The Bishop made a Sermon by way of Instruction and Exhortation, to the
Imitation of those excellent things which had been read; They usually preached
about an Hour, Origin Hom. de Engast. p. 29. The manner of their Sermons was
thus; they began with a short Exordium, and then explained Verse after Verse,
or Sentence after Sentence, showing the natural and literal Signification of
the Words, and then the Spiritualized or Mystical meaning of them, and
concluded with a suitable Application of all, regarding the Quality of their
Hearers, and suiting themselves to their Capacity; he gives some Instances of
the Laity, who by the Permission of their Bishops, were suffered to Preach some
times, but never but upon sufferance; and they were only such as were (...),
fit to profit the Brethren.

II. He continues his Inquisition in the Primitive Worship, and informs that as
soon as Sermon was ended, they all rose up and offered their Prayers unto God,
Justin Martyr Apol. 2. p. 98.

The manner of their Praying was with their Faces toward the East, for these
Reasons, which by the way, might give light why we make the Communion Table at
the East End of our Churches. 1. Because the Title of East is given to our
Savior in the Old Testament, the Word is (...), which signifies an arising or
sprouting out, in the Greek it is rendered (...), which signifies arising out,
and by a Metonymy is appropriated to the East. 2. Because it symbolized a
Spiritual arising out of the Darkness of Sin and Corruption; Here our Author
mentions Alexandrinus, Stromat. Lib. 7. p. 520. Let Prayers be made toward the
East, because the East is the Representation of our Spiritual Nativity: As from
thence Light first arose, shining out of Darkness; so according to that Rising
of the Sun, the day of true Knowledge arose on those, who lay buried in
Ignorance; whence the ancient Temples looked toward the West, that so they who
stood against the Images therein, might be forced to look toward the East. 3.
The next Reason our Author gives, is out of Origin, viz. to denote our
Diligence in the Service of God, in being more forward to arise and set about
it, than the Sun is to run his daily course. 4. Another Reason was the Opinion
of the Excellency of this Quarter above others. -- The Posture of Prayer, Clem.
Alex. Strom. Lib. 7. p. 519. was thus, We lift up our Head, and stretch out our
Hands toward Heaven: There was a little Preface to their Prayer, as Let us
pray, or Lift up your Hearts, and the People answered, We lift them up unto the
Lord. Some times our Author says they used the Lord's Prayer, and some times
not; St. Cyprian used it commonly: I cannot pass over notwithstanding the
smalness I designed in this Abstract, what this holy Father has said upon the
Lord's Prayer. De Orat. Dom. 1, 2. Page 309. Christ has given us a Form of
Prayer, he has admonished and instructed us what we should pray for: He that
made us live, has taught us to pray, that whilst we offer unto the Father the
Prayer which the Son taught, we may be the more easily heard: -- For what
Prayer can be more Spiritual, than that which was given us by Christ, who gave
us also the Holy Spirit? And what Prayer can be more prevalent with God, than
that of his Son, who is the Truth proceeding out of his Mouth? so that to pray
otherwise than he has taught, is both Ignorance and Impiety. Let us pray
therefore, dearly beloved Brethren, as God our Master has taught us: It is a
friendly and familiar Prayer to ask God with his own, and to present the Prayer
of Christ to his Ears; the Father will acknowledge his Sons Words. When we
pray, let him that dwells in the Heart, be in the Voice; and since we have him
an Advocate with the Father for our Sins, when we beg Pardon for our Sins, let
us use the Words of our Advocate; and since he says, that whatsoever we shall
ask of the Father in his Name, he will give it us; how much more efficaciously
shall we prevail for what we beg in Christ's Name, if we ask it in his Prayer?
For the manner of Prayer, our Author says, he finds not such a thing as set
Forms, or Liturgies, that were imposed upon the People, nor (to use his own
words) that having no imposed Form, they unpremeditately, immethodically, or
confusedly vented their Petitions or Requests.

III. Chap. Third, our Author treats of Baptism, which was done by the Bishop,
or whom he should order in cases of necessity even to Laymen, but never to
Women: The Subjects of Baptism were of two sorts, either Infants or Adult
Persons; to show Infants were Baptized, he also proves that the Communion was
never given till after Baptism; and then he brings Instances of Children that
received the Communion. Justin Martyr, p. 97. To which he adds the Testimonies
of Irenaeus, lib. 2. cap. 39. p. 137. and of St. Cyprian de Lapsis, 7. p. 279.
which he waves, because he would be fuller in Translating an African Synod held
Anno 254, which consisted of Sixty six Bishops; the occasion of which
Determination was this: A certain Bishop called Fidus, had some Scruples,
concerning the time of Baptizing of Infants, upon which the aforesaid Bishops
determined the Case in the following Decree, Apud Cyprian. Epist. 59. 2, 3, 4.
p. 164, 165. As for the matter of Infants, whom you said, were not to be
Baptized within the Second or Third Day after their Nativity, or according to
the Law of Circumcision within the eighth Day thereof; it has appeared to us
in our Council quite contrary; no one maintained your Opinion, but we all
judged, that the Mercy and Grace of God was to be denied to no Man; for since
the Lord said in the Gospel, The Son of Man came not to destroy, but to save
the Souls of Men; therefore as much as lies in our Power, no Soul is to be
lost; for what is there defective in him, who has been once formed in the Womb
by the hands of God? To us indeed it seems, that Children increase, as they
advance in years; but yet whatever things are made by God, are perfected by the
Work and Majesty of God their Maker. Besides, the Holy Scriptures declare, that
both Infants and Adult Persons have the same Equality in the Divine
Workmanship: When Elisha prayed over the Dead Child of the Sunamitisn Widow, he
lay upon the Child, and put his Head upon his Head, and his Face upon his Face,
and his Body upon his Body, and his Feet upon his Feet. This may be thought
improbable, how the small Members of an Infant should equal the big ones of a
grown Man; but herein is expressed the Divine and Spiritual Equality, that al^
Men are equal, and alike, when they are made by God; that though the increase
of our Bodies may cause an inequality with respect to Men, yet not with respect
to God; unless that that Grace, which is given to baptized Persons, be more or
less according to the Age of the Receivers; but the Holy Ghost is given equally
to all, not according to measure, but according to God's Mercy and Indulgence;
for as God is no respecter of Persons, so neither of years; he equally offers
to all the obtaining of his heavenly Grace.

And whereas you say, that an Infant for the first Days after his Birth is
unclean, so that every one is afraid to kiss him, this can be no Impediment to
his Obtainment of heavenly Grace; for it is written, to the Pure all things are
pure; and none of us should dread that which God has made; for although an
Infant be newly born, yet he is not so, as that we should dread to kiss him;
since in the kissing of an Infant, we ought to think upon the fresh Works of
God, which in a manner we This they speak with reference to their Custom of
Saluting one another at the Conclusion of their public Assemblies.
kiss in an Infant newly formed and born, when we embrace that which God has
made. And whereas the carnal Jewish Circumcision was performed on the Eighth
Day, that was a Type and Shadow of some future good thing, which Christ the
Truth being now come, is done away; because the Eighth Day, or the First day
after the Sabbath* was to be the Day on which our Lord should rise and quicken
us, and give us the Spiritual Circumcision: therefore was the Carnal
Circumcision on the Eighth Day, which Type is now abolished, Christ the Truth
being come, and having given us the Spiritual Circumcision. Wherefore it is our
Judgment, that no one ought to be debarred from God's Grace by that Law, or
that the Spiritual Circumcision should be hindered by the Carnal one: but all
Men ought to be admitted to the Grace of Christ, as Peter says in the Acts of
the Apostles, that the Lord said unto him that he should call no Man common or
unclean.

But if any thing can hinder Men from Baptism, it will be heinous Sins that
will debar the Adult and Mature there from; and if those who have sinned
extremely against God, yet if afterward they believe, are Baptized, and no Man
is prohibited from this Grace, how much more ought not an Infant to be
prohibited, who being but just born, is guilty of no Sin, but of Original which
he contracted from Adam? Who ought the more readily to be received to the
Remission of Sins, because not his own, but other Sin^ are remitted to him.
Wherefore dearly beloved, it is our Opinion* that from Baptism, and the Grace
of God, who is merciful, kind and benign to all, none ought to be prohibited by
us, which as it is to be observed and followed with respect to all, so
especially with respect to Infants, and those that are but just born, who
deserve our help, and the Divine Mercy, because at the first instant of their
Nativity, they beg it by their Cries and Tears.

This is as formal a Synodical Decree for the Baptism of Infants as can be
expected, which being the Judgment of a Synod is more Authentic than the
Opinion of a private Father; the Question put was not Whether an Infant should
be Baptized, but When; which plainly supposes Infant Baptism in general Use,
seeing so great a number of Bishops were concerned to decide the time of
Baptizing them.

He passes on to the Baptism of Adult Persons, such as came over from the
Heathens; they were instructed or Catechis'd, and from thence called
Catechumens, of which we have spoken above; the manner of their Baptizing was
this, there were certain Questions proposed to them, which consisted of
Abjuration of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and an Assent to all the
Articles of the Christian Faith,

Here our Author takes occasion to treat of the Creed called the Apostles,
which he says was not made by the Apostles, nor was it made all at once, for
some Articles were made and added in Opposition to the Heresies which sprung in
the Church: Thus, I believe in God, says the Greek, I believe in one God, in
Opposition to the Polytheism of the Heathens; nay, for above Four Hundred Years
after our Savior, it was not all made up, for then there were two Articles
wanting, viz. He descended into Hell, and the Communion of Saints. The
Collection our Author has made of the Primitive Creeds is too curious to be
past over without a general Transcription, as he had them from their Original
Language, they are as follow.

. 6. (...). Ignat. Epist. ad Tralle^. p. 52.

(...) (...). Irenaeus, lib. 1. c. 2. p. 35, 36.

Credo in unum Deum fabricatorem Coeli ac Terrae, and omnium quae in eis sunt,
per Christum Jesum Dei Filium, qui propter eminentissimam erga Figmentum suum
dilectionem, eam quae esset ex Virgin, generationem sustinuit, ipse per se
hominem adunans Deo, and passus sub Pontio Pilato, and resurgens, and in
claritate receptus, in gloria venturus Salvator eorum qui salvantur, and Judex
eorum qui judicantur, and mittens in ignem aeternum transfiguratores veritatis,
and contemptores Patris sui and adventus ejus. Irenaeus Lib. 3. Cap. 4. Page
172.

Regula est autem Fidei, ut jam hinc quid credamus, profiteatur, illa scilicet,
qua creditur unum omnino Deum esse, nec alium praeter mundi creatorem, qui
universa de nihilo produxerit per verbum suum, primo omnium amissum: id verbum
Filium ejus appellatum in nomine Dei, vary visum Patriarchis, in Prophetis
semper auditum, postremo delatum ex spiritu patris Dei and virtute in Virginem
Mariam, carnem factum in utero ejus, and ex ea natum, egisse Jesum Christum,
exinde praedicasse novam legem and novam promissionem Regni Coelorum, virtutes
fecisse, fixum cruci tertia die resurrexisse, in Coelos eruptum, sedere ad
dexteram Patris, misisse vicariam vim spiritus sancti, qui credentes agant,
venturum cum claritate ad fumendos sanctos in vitae eternae, and promissorum
coelestium fructum, and ad Prophanos judicandos igni perpetuo, facta utriusque
partis resuscitatione cum carnis restitutione. Haec regula a Christo --
instituta nullas habet apud nos quaestiones, nisi quas haereses inferunt, and
quae haereticos faciunt. Tertull. de Praescript. advers. Haeret. Page 73.

Unicum quidem Deum credimus; sub hac tamen dispensatione quam (...) dicimus,
ut unici Dei sit and Filius Sermo ipsius, qui ex ipso processerit, per quem
omnia facta sunt, and sine quo factum est nihil; hunc missum a patre in
Virginem, and ex ea natum hominem and Deum, Filium hominis and filium Dei, and
cognominatum Jesum Christum, hunc passum, hunc mortuum and sepultum secundum
Scripturas, and resuscitatum a Patre, and in Coelo resumptum, sedere ad
dexteram patris, venturum judicare vivos and mortuos, qui exinde miserat
secundum promissionem suam a Patre spiritum sanctum Paracletum, sanctificatorem
fidei eorum qui credunt in patrem, and filium, and spiritum sanctum. Hanc
regulam ab initio Evangelii decucurrisse, etc. Tertull. advers. Praxean. Page
316.

Regula Fidei una omnino est, sola immobilis and irreformabilis credendi
scilicet in unicum Deum omnipotentem, mundi conditorem, and filium ejus Jesum
Christum, natum ex Virgin Maria, crucifixum sub Pontio Pilato, tertio die
resuscitatum a mortuis, receptum in Coelis, sedentem nunc ad dexteram patris,
venturum judicare vivos and mortuos, per carnis etiam resurrectionem.
Tertullian de Virginib. veland. Page 385.

(...). Origin. Comment. in Johan. Tom 32. Page 397. Vol. 2.

Unus Deus est, qui omnia creavit, atque composuit, quique ex nullis fecit esse
universa, Deus a Prima creatura and condition mundi omnium justorum, Adam,
Abel, Seth, Enos, etc. and quod hic Deus in novissimis diebus, sicut per
Prophetas suos ante promiserat, misit Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum, primo
quidem vocaturum Israel, secundo vero etiam gentes post perfidiam populi
Israel. Hic Deus justus and bonus pater domini nostri Jesu Christi, Legem and
Prophetas and Evangelia ipse dedit, qui and Apostolorum Deus est, and veteris
and Novi Testamenti: Tum deinde quia Jesus Christus ipse qui venit, ante omnem
creaturam natus ex patre est: Qui cum in omnium condition patri ministrasset
(per ipsum enim omnia facta sunt) novissimis temporibus seipsum exinaniens homo
factus est, incarnatus est cum Deus esset, and homo mansit quod Deus erat.
Corpus assumpsit corpori nostro simile, eo solo differens, quod natum ex
Virgin and spiritu sancto est, and quoniam hic Jesus Christus natus and passus
est in veritate, and non per imaginem communem hanc mortem vere mortuus est:
vere enim a morte resurrexit, and post resurrectionem conversatus cum
Discipulis suis assumptus est.

Tum deinde honor ac dignitate Patri ac Filio sociatum tradiderunt Spiritum
sanctum, in hoc non jam manifest discernitur, utrum natus aut innatus. Sed
inquirenda jam ista pro viribus sunt de Sacra Scriptura, and sagaci
perquisitione investiganda, sane quod iste Spiritus sanctus unumquemque
sanctorum vel Prophetarum, vel Apostolorum inspiravit, and non alius Spiritus
in veteribus, alius vero in his, qui in adventu Christi inspirati sunt,
manifestissime in Ecclesiis praedicatur. Post haec jam, quod anima substantiam,
vitamque habens propriam, cum ex hoc mundo discesserit, and pro suis meritis
dispensabit, sive vitae aeternae ac beatitudinis haereditate potitura, si hoc
ei sua gesta praestiterint; sive igne aeterno ac suppliciis mancipanda, si in
hoc eam scelerem culpa detorserit. Sed and quia erit tempus resurrectionis
mortuorum, cum corpus hoc quod in corruptione seminatur surget in
incorruptione, and quod seminatur in ignominia, surget in gloria. Origin in
Proaem. Lib. (...).

Credis in Deum Patrem, Filium Christum, Spiritum Sanctum, remissionem
peccatorum, and Vitam Aeternam per Sanctam Ecclesiam? Cyprian. Epist. 76. 6.
Page 248.

(...). Gregor. Neocaesar.

IV. In the Fourth Chap. he continues the Subject of Baptism, and says he
cannot determine whether Sponsers or Godfathers were in use from the Apostles
days; -- but he not considered that this Practice, was amongst the Jews, both
in and before the Apostles days: But before Baptism was Exorcization, which was
thus, The Minister put his Hands on the Persons Head that was to be Baptized,
and breathed in his Face, implying thereby the Exorcization or expelling of the
Devil or evil Spirit from him, and a preparing of him for Baptism and
Confirmation, when and where the good and holy Spirit was conferred and given,
Theodot. Epitom. Page 573. Apud Cyprian. Page 445. But our Author shows, that
the Continuation of this Custom was grounded upon a Mistake of our Savior's
valedictory Speech, Mark 16.17. for it was only to the first Preachers that the
extraordinary gift of working Miracles, etc. was limited: When Exorcization was
finished, Water was consecrated, and the Person dipped over Head and Ears, and
sometimes sprinkled or washed, as in the Case of Clinicks, or those that were
sick in Bed, Ep. Corn. ad Fabium Antioch. apud Eusebius. Lib. 6. Cap. 43. Page
244. Ibid. Lib. 6. Cap. 43. Page 245. Cyprian. Ep. 76. 9. Page 249, 250. which
last Quotation we shall transcribe against the Practice of such as absolutely
condemn Sprinkling.

That as far as he could conceive, he apprehended that the Divine Benefits
could in no wise be mutilated, or weakened, nor that less thereof could be
bestowed, where the Divine Gifts are received with a sound and full Faith, both
of Giver and Receiver: For in Baptism the Spots of Sin are otherwise washed
away, than the filth of the Body in a Secular and Carnal Bath is, in which
there is need of a Seat to sit upon, of a Vat to wash in, of Soap, and other
such like Implements, that so the Body may be washed and cleansed; but in
another manner is the Heart of a Believer washed, otherwise is the Mind of a
Man purified by the Merits of Christ. In the Sacraments of Salvation through
the Indulgence of God in Cases of Necessity, the Divine Abridgments convey the
whole to those that believe; Nor let any one think it strange, that the Sick,
when they are Baptized, are only perfused or sprinkled, since the Scripture
says, by the Prophet Ezechiel, Chap. 36. v. 25, 26. I will sprinkle clean Water
upon you, and ye shall be clean from all your Filthinesses, and from all your
Idols will I cleanse you; a new Heart also will I give you, and a new Spirit
will I put within you. Also it is said in Numbers, chap. 19.19, 20. And the Man
which shall be unclean to the Evening, he shall be purified the third day, and
the seventh day, and he shall be clean; but if he shall not be purified the
third day, and the seventh day, he shall not be clean, and that Soul shall be
cut off from Israel, because the Water of Aspersion has not been sprinkled on
him. And again the Lord spoke unto Moses, Numb. 8. v. 6.7. Take the Levites
from among the Children of Israel, and cleanse them; and thus shall thou do
unto them to cleanse them, sprinkle Water of Purifying upon them. And again,
the Water of Aspersion is Purification: From whence it appears, that sprinkling
is sufficient instead of Immersion; and whenever it is done, if there be a
sound Faith of Giver and Receiver it is perfect and complete.

V. The Fifth Chap. treats of Unction, Signation, and Confirmation; he brings
his Authorities from them, who mention them as succeeding Baptism, but the
manner how is not expressed; only about the last he gives us an uncommon Remark,
to wit, that Absolution and Confirmation were the same; and that when they
absolved Penitents, the Bishop put his Hands upon their Heads, and that this
Confirmation was frequently repeated.

VI. In the Sixth Chap. our Author treats of the Lord's Supper, in which he
considers three things; 1. The Time; 2. The Person; 3. The manner thereof: 1.
For the time he proves it to be commonly at Supper, some times Morning and
Evening; and in times of Persecution, according as they had Opportunity. 2. The
Persons that communicated were such as were initiated into the Church by
Baptism; but Penitents, that were yet under Penance, and the Chatechumens, were
not admitted. 3. The manner of Celebrating the Eucharist. -- In some places the
Communicants made their Offerings first, as in Africa and France, presenting
according to their Ability, Bread, Wine, the first Fruits of their Increase,
etc. which were employed to the use of the Poor. -- Justin Martyr Apol. 2. Page
97. says, Bread and Wine are offered to the Minister, who receiving them, gives
Praise and Glory to the Lord of all through the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and in
a large-manner renders particular Thanks for he present Mercies, who when he
has ended his Prayers and Praise, all the People say Amen. And when the
Minister has thus given Thanks, and the People said Amen, the Deacons
distributed the Elements.


Our Author tells us, that the Prayer consisted of two Parts, viz. (...), and
(...), Petition and Thanksgiving; in the former they prayed for the Peace of
the Church, the Quiet of the World, the Health of their Emperors, and in a
word, for all Men. In the latter they gave God Thanks for sending Christ, and
for the Institution of that comfortable Sacrament, desiring his Blessing on,
and the Consecration of the Elements then before them: After some Prayer, the
Minister consecrated both the Elements together, blessed and distributed them
amongst the rest to Children, as above. The posture of Receiving at Alexandria
was Standing, in other Places Kneeling, especially at Whitsontide: After
Distribution was over, they Sung an Hymn or a Psalm to the Praise and Glory of
God, and then they concluded with a Prayer of Thanksgiving; and made a
Collection for the Poor.

VII. He treats of the Circumstances of public Worship, as, Time, Place, etc.
He says the Primitive Christians had their Churches and appointed Places,
except in times of Persecution when they took the best Opportunities they
could: Their Churches were erected high, and in open Places, made very light
and shining, in Imitation of the Holy Ghost's descending in Fire; they built
them toward the East, as we said above. -- They imagined no Sanctity or
Holiness tied to them, or that Divine Service was more acceptable there than
elsewhere, but for Convenience, Clem. Alex. Strom. Lib. 7. Page 520. -- The
times of meeting together were constantly every first day of the Week or
Sunday, by them commonly styled The Lord's Day; and the Western Churches met on
Saturday and Sunday both, the former to gratify the Jewish Converts, who were
numerous in those parts.

VIII. The Eighth Chap. treats of the Primitive Fasts, which were of two sorts,
occasional and fixed, the first not determined by any constant fixed Period of
time, but observed on extraordinary and unusual Seasons, according as the
variety and necessity of their Circumstances did require, as as in case of
eminent Dangers in Church or State, particularly against Persecutions; thus
Cornelius Bishop of Rome, Ep. 57. 3. Page 159. was writ to by St. Cyprian, That
since God was pleased in his Providence to warn them of an approaching Fight
and Trial, they ought with their whole Flocks diligently to fast and watch, and
pray, to give themselves to continual Groans and frequent Prayers; for those
are our Spiritual Arms, that make us firmly to stand and persevere. The fixed
Fasts our Author tells us, were Fridays and Wednesdays, some times till Three
of the Clock, sometimes till Night. Besides these, they had an Annual fixed
Fast, viz. Lent, the reason of it (says our Author) was from these words,
Matthew. 9.15. The days will come when the Bridegroom shall be taken from them,
and then shall they Fast. They imagined this to be an Injunction of Christ to
all his Followers, as appeared by some places he quoted out of the Fathers.

IX. In the Ninth Chap. we have an Account of Primitive Feasts, the first we
meet with is Easter, mentioned by Tertullian; upon which we find there were
some differences in the Churches, as to the precise time of keeping it: The
next was Whitsuntide or Pentecost, spoke of by Tertullian and Origin. The next
was Christmas, mentioned by Clemens Alexandrinus; here the Author takes notice
that the Ancients disagree'd about the time of our Savior's Birthday; some
were for the Twenty fifth of December, some the Twenty sixth of December, some
the Twentieth of April, some the Seventeenth of April, and some the Sixteenth
of May. -- There was yet another Feast amongst them, called by us, Epiphany,
mentioned by Clemens Alexandrinus; The Author observes they kept no other
Saints days, nor did they call (...) Apostles Saints, but plain Matthew, (...)
etc. only they celebrated the Anniversa^^ of their own Martyrs, praising their
Actions, and exhorting one another to Imitation; the Place of their Meeting was
at their Graves and Tombs. Lastly, our Author observes, that their Festivals
were not times of Revelling, Drunkenness, Gluttony, etc. but in Acts of Piety,
Charity, and Religious Employments.

X. In the Tenth and last Chapter, our Author comes to consider the Ceremonies
of the Primitive Church; for instance, when they Baptized in some Churches, the
new Member had Milk and Honey given to him; and in some Places, before they
prayed, they washed their Hands, they had Exorcism before Baptism, and Unction
after, and innumerable more such Ceremonies, which crept in partly by a
Misunderstanding some Texts, and partly by being amongst the Superstitious
Heathens: Yet the Churches retained their own Liberty and Customs, without
imposing or being imposed upon, by one another. I shall give only one of those
many Instances that our Author has brought for his Purpose; it is out of a
Fragment of an Epistle written by Irenaeus, and other Bishops of France,
wherein they affirm, that Victor was in the right with respect to the time of
Easter, that it ought to be celebrated, as he said, on the Lords Day, but that
yet he had done very ill to cut off from the Unity of the Church those that
observed it otherwise; that it had never been known, that any Churches were
Excommunicated for a disagreement in Rites, an Instance of which there was not
only in the time of Easter its self, but in the Fast that preceded it: Some
fasted one day, others more; some forty hours, which variety of Observations
began not first in our Age, but long before us in the times of our Ancestors,
who yet preserved Peace and Unity amongst themselves, as we now do; for the
Diversity of Fasts commended the Unity of Faith: And as for this Controversy
concerning the time of Easter, the Bishops which governed the Church of Rome
before Soter, viz. Anicetus, Pius, Higynus, Telesphorus, and Xystus, they never
celebrated it the same time with the Asiaticks, neither would they permit any
of their People so to do; but yet they were kind and peaceable to those who
came to them from those Parishes, where they did otherwise observe it, and
never any for this Cause were thrown out of the Church; even their
Predecessors, though they did not keep it, yet they sent the Eucharist to those
that did keep it; and when in the times of Anicetus, blessed Polycarp came to
Rome, and there were some Controversies between them, they did not separate
from one another, but still maintained Peace and Love: And though Anicetus
could never persuade Polycarp, nor Polycarp Anicetus to be of each others mind,
yet they Communicated one with another; and Anicetus in Honor to Polycarpus,
permitted him to Consecrate the Sacrament in his Church, and so they departed
in mutual Love and Kindness; and all the Churches, whether observing, or not
observing (...) same Day, retained Peace and Unity amongst themselves, Apud
Eusebius. Lib. 5. Cap. 24. Page 192, 193.

After all, our Author concludes with a most passionate Exhortation to Love and
Peace amongst our selves, protesting, that in this Treatise he has not been
biased by any Party or Faction whatever, but has endeavored a plain, full,
and impartial discovery of Truth, leaving every one to their Liberty, as to the
Judgment they shall make of it: He says he has left out many Ancient things,
and handled mostly those Points that are now in dispute amongst us. He has
taken a great deal of pains in citing his Authorities all along; In short, he
has outdone all that ever have Wrote in this kind before him, and yet with a
Spirit of so much Modesty and Humility, that every Party may see their Errors,
without having any cause to be angry with their Exposer. He has given a Table
of the Fathers Names, which he has made use of, as also their Ages and
Countries, that we may thereby be able to ghess at the Original of some Customs
amongst them, and the Places where they were chiefly practiced.

St. Clementis Epistolae duae ad Corinth^os, Interpretibus Patricio Iunio,
Gottifredo Vendelino, and Johan. Bapt. Cotelerio. Recensuit, and Notarum
Spicilegium adjecit Paulus Colemesius Bibliothecae Lambethanae Curator. Accedit
Thomae Brunonis Canonici Windesoriensis Dissertatio de Therapeutis Philonis.
His subnexae sunt Epistolae aliquot singulares vel nunc primum Editae, vel non
ita facile obviae. London. Impensis Jacobi Adamson 1687. in 120. Page 377.
1. THese Epistles of St. Clement, which were known only by some Citations of
the Ancients, were published the first time, more than forty Years ago, by
Patricius Iunius, who found them joined to the end of the New Testament, in the
famous MS. of Alexandria. This Learned Man added to them a Latin Version and
Notes. William Burton Translated them into English in 1677, and added likewise
Remarks of his own much larger than those of Iunius. The Edition of the latter
being soon become scarce, it was imitated at Helmstadt in 1654, and Iochim John
Maderus added to it a new Preface; since that time the Edition has appeared in
Twelves, by Dr* Fell Bishop of Oxford, and that of Mr. Cotelier in Folio: Here
is a fifth, which we owe to the Care of Mr. Colomies, who has compared the
precedent Editions with the MS. whence they have taken them, and has showed,
that the Learned Iunius was some times mistaken, and had in the Reading this
MS. put a wrong Sense upon many things; we shall give an Example hereof after
we have made some little mention of a small Dissertation, which Mr. Colomies
placed before St. Clement, Entitled, De Clementis and ejus Epistolarum
tempore, Vandelini Divinatio. This Vandelin was Tutor to the famous Gassendus,
and died Chanon of Ghent. He believes that St. Clement was near the Age of St.
John the Evangelist, and lived as long as he, dying the third Year of the Reign
of Trajan, at Chersone in Pontus, whither he was banished. The Ancients all
agree that St. Clement was Bishop of Rome, but they do not agree upon the time
he was so, nor upon the Order which ought to be given him in the List of the
first Bishops of this City: Baronius himself confessed, that he was not well
assured of the order of the Succession of these Bishops, until the Year CLXXIX,
Vandelin undertakes in this Dissertation to resolve the Difficulties, by the
means of the old Breviaries and Martyrologies; after which, he speaks of the
time in which the Epistles of St. Clement were written. As his Dissertation is
extremely short, the Reader is desired to consult it. We shall only Remark,
that according to this Author, St. Peter being upon the point of parting from
Rome, for England, in the Year of our Lord LV, he established Linus to govern
the Church of Rome in his absence, whither being returned in LXVI, he found it
without a Pastor, Linus being dead during his absence. A little time after,
being cast into Prison, he established Clement in the place of Linus, toward
the time of the Passover, in LXVII, a few Months before his Death. St. Clement
held the Sea nine Years and eleven or twelve Days, after which, great
Contestations arose in the Church of Rome, which obliged St. Clement to quit
the Episcopacy. It would not be permitted, if we believe Vandelin, that St.
Clement should succeed in the Sea of Rome, by virtue of St. Peter's Testament,
fearing lest this Example might render the Episcopacy Hereditary; and St.
Clement having declared, That if it was upon his account that these
Contestations happened, he was ready to retire in what place of the World they
would have him; he was taken at his word, and Cletus was chosen in his place,
to whom Anacletus, Evaristus, Alexander, Telesphorus, etc. succeeded in the
order we have named them.

Vendelin believes, that the first Epistle of St. Clement, as it is commonly
called, was written by this Holy Man, not in his own particular name, but in
that of the Clergy of Rome in XCV, after the death of Anacletus, and during the
Vacancy of the Sea; though according to him, Evaristus had been nominated to
succeed Anacletus; so that this Letter was written during the most violent
Persecutions of Domitian: But Vendelin pretends, that which is called the
Second, was written in a time wherein the Christian Church enjoyed an entire
Peace, in LXXV; after which account the second would have been written twenty
Years before the first: He grounds what he says chiefly upon a Letter of Denis
Bishop of Corinth to Pope Soterus, written about the Year CLXVII, where Denis
speaks thus to the Church of Rome: Eusebius. l. 4. c. 29.
We have celebrated Sunday this day, in which we have read your Letter, which
we always read for our Instruction, as well as the former, that Clement writ to
us. He believes the latter to be that which is called the second of St.
Clements, and that the other is the first, which Clement of Alexandria calls
according to the Remark of Mr. Colomies, the Epistle of the Romans to the
Corinthians.

After the Dissertation of Vendelin, are the two Epistles of St. Clement in
Greek and Latin; the first of the Version of Iunius, and the second translated
by Vendelin. Mr. Colomies has joined to it little Notes, where 1. he corrects
some places of the Text, which Iunius had ill transcribed from the Original.
For Example, from the first Page there is according to the Edition of Iunius;
That Grace and Peace which come from God-Allmighty, through Jesus Christ, be
abundantly poured upon you ((...), etc. upon every particular Person amongst
you, and upon one toward another. We have thought, most dear Brethren, a
little later then we should have done upon what you have demanded of us, by
reason of the evils and accidents which happened to us, etc. but according to
the MS. of Alexandria, the Phrase is much more clear, since there it is, That
Grace and Peace, etc. be given to you abundantly, by reason of the unforeseen
Evils and Accidents, which have happened to us one after another, we have
thought, etc. (...). Mr. Colomies Remarks also in a place or two, wherein the
Original was not observed; but these Passages are not of the same Importance
with that which we have cited. 2. Some Conjectures are in these Notes, and
varieties of Reading, taken from Clement of Alexandria, who has several times
cited St. Clement of Rome, which places are all marked here, as well as the
rest of the Ancients, who have cited the latter Clement. 3. Mr. Colomies in
some places corrects the Latin Version. 4. He Expounds diverse words of the
Original. 5. Upon the occasion of St. Clement, he makes some critical
Observations about Ecclesiastical History: Thus also upon what St. Clement
says 21. of the death of St. Peter and St. Paul, he affirms that the time of
their death is not certain. A Council held at Rome under Pope Galasius, says,
that the Heretics pretend that St. Peter and Paul received the Crown of
Martyrdom, in diverse times; nevertheless it was the Opinion of Justin Martyr
and St. Irenaeus, who said St. Paul died five Years after St. Peter.
Philastrius also reckoned amongst Heretics those who give the names of the
Seven Planets to the days of the Week, though St. Ignatius and Justin Martyr
followed the received Custom therein.

St. Clement, in Chapter 28th. cites a Passage of the Psalms under the name of
(...), the Writing, upon which it is remarked, that Mr. Vossius was mistaken,
when he says that this word was found out by Aquila, and that seems to teach
us that the word Chetoubim (...) Writings to mark the Psalms, Proverbs, Job,
and the other Books which the Jews comprise this day under this name, is not
new.

2. There have been in England several Learned Men who having consumed all
their Life in the study of Antiquity, seem to have studied only for their
particular Satisfaction, without caring to impart to the public their
admirable knowledge therein; Such was Richard Thomson, Gerard Langbaine, and
Matthew Bustus, whose few Writings which remain amongst us serve for almost
nothing but to discover to us what these great Men might have done had they
been willing. Mr. Colomies adds Thomas Bruno, Chanon of Windsor, who left
several Collections with his Friend Mr. Vossius, but of which there is scarcely
any thing that is fit for the Press. The Dissertation which we have of it here,
De Therapeutis Philonis adversus Henr. Valesium, was by good Luck ended; and it
is to Mr. Vossius, who communicated it to Mr. Colomies, that the Public is
indebted. Amongst the Works of Philo, is found a Treatise of a Contemplative
Life, where he describes the Esseans manner of living, who dwelt near
Alexandria, and solely applied themselves to Contemplation. There were Esseans
spread through all Egypt, who sent the most virtuous amongst them to inhabit a
Hill which is near the Lake of Maria, in a Place agreeable enough, and which is
not far from Alexandria. They lived there after a Devout manner and very
austere; and l. 2. c. 17.
Eusebius thought that when St. Mark went to Preach the Gospel into Egypt, he
converted them to the Christian Faith: Joseph Scaliger has very bitterly
reprehended De Emond. Tanp. l. 6.
Eusebius for saying so; and many times that these Therapeutes, as Philo calls
them, never were Christians, but only Essean Jews. Mr. Valais in his
Annotations upon Eusebius, holds with Scaliger, that the Therapeutes did not
embrace Christianity, and also brings some new Reasons to prove it; but he
denies that they were Esseans. He will have them to be a sort of Jewish
Philosophers, who all applied themselves to Contemplation, Reading of the Law
and the Prophets, and to Prayer. He brings several Reasons thereof, which may
be seen in the Original. Mr. Bruno undertakes in this Dissertation to refute
Scaliger and Mr. Valois. He maintains that the Contemplative Esseans, who were
near Alexandria were converted by St. Mark, contrary to these two Learned Men,
and endeavors to show that Mr. de Valois in particular was mistaken when he
said that the Contemplatives were no^ Esseans.

As to this last Opinion we shall make no stay at it, because it is particular
to Mr. Valois, and the Refutation can be read in Mr. Bruno, in half a quarter
of an hour. He is of the Opinion, that the Therapeutes of Philo were converted
to Christianity. 1. Because we find in the Lausiack History of Palladius, a
Description of a Place, wherein the ancient Christian Monks of Alexandria kept
themselves, exactly like that which Philo gives of the Habitation of the
Therapeutes, and that there is no appearance, that 200 Years after the time of
Philo the Christian Monks could have driven the Jews from this Place, seeing in
that time the Jews were more powerful than they were in Egypt. There is much
more likelihood that St. Anthony, and some other Solitaries of Thebes joined
themselves to the Christians, who before lived very austerely, and introduced
thereby the Rules for a Monastical Life, a little time before Palladius lived.
2. It being very certain, that in the time of Josephus there were three Sects
amongst the Jews, Pharisees, Sadducees, and Esseans, and that these Sects were
not immediately lost; it is very strange that from that time there should be no
mention of the Esseans. But the Wonder will cease, according to Mr. Bruno, if
it be acknowledged that these Esseans embraced Christianity. Scaliger following
the Opinion of this Author, proved that the Esseans, remaining Esseans, viz.
Jews, could not be Christians; but has not proved that they were not become so
by abandoning Judaism. He speaks more largely in the Refutation of Mr. de
Valois.

This Learned Man said particularly, that Philo observed, that the Therapeutes
had Writings from some ancient Authors of their Sect, who interpreted the Law
after an Allegorical manner, which did not agree with Christians, who then had
no Ancient Author of their Sect. Mr. Bruno answers to that, that they might
have been some old Jewish Authors, who since the time of the Ptolomy had
expounded the Law allegorically, and had thus rendered the Jews more proper to
receive the Gospel, than if they were kept only to the Letter of the Law. Such
were Eleazar and Aristobulus, whereof Eusebius speaks in his Evangelical
Preparation, Book 8. c. 9. It may be that St. Mark sent the Essean Converts to
these Books, to convince themselves of the Truth of the Gospel, by seeing the
Law was expounded therein after a manner conformable to what he told them. Mr.
Bruno believes even that it was these Books that Jesus Christ had respect two,
when he said to the Jews, Search the Scriptures, they are they which speak of
me: Iean. V. 39.
Because to take Prophecies according to to the Letter of the Word, it would
not be easy to form a clear Idea of the Messia. It was necessary that the
Christians should be satisfied at that time, with the Books of the ancient
Jews, seeing that under the Emperor Claudius, the Books of the New Testament
were not as yet published. We shall say no more concerning the Dissertation of
Mr. Bruno; it is so short, that those who have a mind to examine his Opinion,
may read it in less than an hour.

3. Mr. Colomie added to the end of this Volume a Collection of Fifty five
Letters of diverse Learned Men, both of the past and present Age; there are
several which never were Printed, and it is certain, that those which have
already appeared, either are more correct in this Edition, or such as were
become so scarce, that it was not easy to meet with them. There is no Question
treated on in these Letters; but some Events of the Times are spoken of in
which they were written, or some Circumstance about the Life of these great
Men, or other Places, which will divert those who love to be instructed in the
least things, which concern Manners, or the Genius of those whom their
Knowledge, or their Employments have rendered Illustrious. There is, for
Example, a small Address of Father du Moulin in the Fifteenth Letter to
Lancelot Andrews, Bishop of Winton. Father du Moulin writing to this Bishop,
calls Episcopacy a thing received since the Age which followed that of the
Apostles, Rem. a saeculo Apostolis proximo receptam; but as the Bishop
reproached him with it, he immediately writ, a saeculo Apostolorum, from the
Age of the Apostles. After that he blotted out the word Apostolorum, and
substituted those of Apostolis proximo; yet so, that what he writ at first
might be read. The Bishop suspects him to have made this Correction in favor
of those who inclined to the Opinion of the Presbyterians; and of having but
half blotted the word, which he at first writ, to make People suspect that he
was not a zealous Presbyterian, seeing this word slipped from him before he was
aware: For the Letter otherwise is so short, that it was easy to transcribe
it, which he undoubtedly had done to a Person of the quality of Bishop Andrews,
if he had not the design we observed.

All these Letters are short, and there are a great number which were written
by English men: Amongst others, the XLII Letter which is directed to Mr.
Anthony de Dominis. It Is Joseph Hall who writes to him, and testifies that he
is very much scandalized through the Reports which ran then concerning this
Archbishop, and which were found to be true afterward. It is that he would
not quit England, but to return into the Bosom of the Roman Church. This Letter
is very fine, and worthy to be read, although it had then no effect. Some
others will be found, which are not less curious, as the LI, tho it treats ill
enough of St. Augustine, under the name of Traducianus.

A New Bibliothique of Ecclesiastical Authors, Containing the History of their
Lives, the Catalogue, Crisis, and Chronology of their Works, the sum of what
they contain; a Judgment upon their Style and Doctrine, with an Enumeration of
the different Editions of their Works: By Mr. Ellis Du Pin, Doctor of the
Faculty at Paris, and Royal Professor in Philophy. Tome Second, of the Authors
of the Fourth Age of the Church. Octavo, at Paris 1687. Page 1060.
THE Design and Method of Mr. du Pin, in this new Bibliotheque of Ecclesiastic
Authors, is very largely treated on in his first Tome, an Abstract of which is
to be found toward the latter end of this As is directed in the Table.
Book; (which is transferred by reason of Inconvenience of so many Printers
that were forced to be employed upon it) the only difference in these two Tomes,
is, that the Extracts of the Fathers of the Fourth Age, which are in the second
Volume, are longer, and consequently more exact than those in the first.

He begins with Eusebius of Caesarea, whom his Ecclesiastic History has
rendered so celebrated, of whom he gives a very dissinterested Judgment, Page
19. Although he found no difficulty in the Council of Nice, to acknowledge the
Son of God was from all Eternity, and that he absolutely rejected the Impiety
of Arius, who said that he was Created out of nothing, and that there was a
time when he was not; yet he always found it hard to believe the Term
Consubstantial, that is, to confess that the Son is of the same Substance with
the Father; and after he had received it, he gave such a Sense of it, as
established not the Equality of the Son with the Father, since he speaks thus
in a Letter that he writ to his Church, to give it an account of his Conduct:
When we say that the Son is Consubstantial with the Father, we Mean only that
the Son has no resemblance with the Creatures, which were made by him, and
that he is perfectly one with the Father by whom he was begotten, not of
another Hypostasis or Substance. -- When we would justify Eusebius in respect
to the Divinity of the Son; it is more difficult to defend what he says of the
Holy Ghost; For he affirms not only in his Books of the Preparation and
Evangelick Demonstration, but also in his third Book of Ecclesiastic Divinity,
that he is not the true God: The holy Spirit is not God, nor the Son of God,
because he has not taken his Original from the Father as the Son has, being in
the number of such things, as are made by the Son. This shows, says Mr. du Pin,
that Socrates, Sozomenes, and and some Modern Authors, have been mistaken in
excusing him entirely; whereas on the other side it is a very great Injustice to
call him an Arian, and even the head of them, as St. Ierom does. His Judgment
upon other points of Religion appears very Orthodox to the Author; and in
respect to his Person, he says he was very much dissinterested, very sincere,
loved Peace, Truth and Religion; He authorized no new Form of Faith, he no way
endeavored to injure Athanasius, nor to ruin those of his Party. He wished only
to be able to accommodate and unite both Parties. -- I doubt not, adds Mr. du
Pin, that so many good Qualities was the Cause of placing him in the number of
the Saints, in the Martyrologies of Usard of Adon, and in some ancient Offices
of the French Churches. It is true, he continued not long in the peaceable
Possession of this quality of Saint: But it would be, in my opinion, a very
great boldness, to judge him absolutely unworthy of it.

The second Author in this second Volume, is the Emperor Constantine, whose
pretended Donation he rejects 59. and seq.
as well as the false Acts attribubuted to P. 46. and seq.
Pope Sylvester, because nothing to him seems more fabulous. If Constantine was
the first Christian Emperor, he was also the first that made Edicts against the
Heretics. But he did well in not pushing things to that Extremity as his
Predecessors have carried them to. It is true, that he sent Arius into Exile,
and the two Bishops that had taken his part in the Council of Nice; and that he
caused all these Heretics Books to be burnt: But he afterward recalled him,
and banished St. Athanasius to Treves. He 55. and seq.
made also an Edict in the Year CCCXX against the Donatists, by which he
commanded those Churches they possessed to be taken from them; but the Year
following he moderated the Rigor of it, permitting those who were exiled to
return to their Country, their to live in rest, and reserved to God the
Vengeance of their Crimes. This alteration of his Conduct, sufficiently shows,
that this Prince on these occasions acted not according to his own Reason, but
according to the different Motions that inspired the Court Bishops, who made
him the Instrument to execute their Passions. He was not of himself inclined to
persecute Men for Opinions in Religion; for the 27th of September, the CCCXXX
Year, he granted the Patriarchs of the Jews an Exemption from public Charges.

In the Month of May, Anno Dom. CCCXXVI, he made an Edict to forbid the
admitting into the Clergy Rich Persons, or such as were Children to the
Ministers of State. The occasion of this Edict was, because many Persons entered
themselves amongst the Clergy to be exempt from public Charge; which was a
great Oppression to the Poor. And Constantine thought it very reasonable that
the Rich should support the burthensom Charges of the Age, and that the Poor
should be supported by the Riches of the Church.

Grotius, M. Ludolf, and others, have observed the Disputes of the Eutychians
and Nestorians, were not really such as they were imagined, for many Ages, Mr.
du Pin is not very far from this Opinion, since he says, ( p. 80.) that the
Eastern People always applied themselves more particularly to observe the
distinction between the two Natures of Jesus Christ, than their intimate Union;
whereas the Egyptians speak more of their Union than Distinction: Which has
been since the Cause of great Contestations, that they have had amongst
themselves upon the Mystery of the Incarnation.

As the Life of St. Athanasius is one of the most remarkable of the Fourth Age,
for the variety both of his good and bad Fortune; so Mr. du Pin relates it more
at large. It Is plain, that from the time of this Father, Persons were very much
inclined to the Exterior parts of Religion, since two of the greatest Crimes
which the Arians accused St. Athanasius of, were breaking of a Chalice, and
Celebrating the Mysteries in a Church that was not Consecrated. Page 129. and
seq. 131, 148, 157.
We may also observe after these Authors, that the Communion was then given to
the Laics under both kinds; that there were Women which vowed Virginity, which
were not Cloistered up; that there were Priests and Bishops married; that the
Monks might quit their State and take a Wife: That it was not permitted to make
new Articles of Faith; and that even the Ecumenick Councils were only Witnesses
of the Faith of their Age, whereas they authoritatively judged of such things
as regarded Discipline: Thus the Bishops of Nice said well in appointing a Day
for the Celebration of Easter: It pleases us, we will have it so: But they
expressed themselves quite otherwise in respect to the Consubstantiality of the
Word, since after having given their Opinions upon it, they content themselves
with adding, Such is the Faith of the Catholic Church. P. 137.
As for the rest although St. Athanasius was an Ardent Defender of this
Council, P. 139.
he was not for having those treated as Heretics, which could not without
difficulty make use of the Term Consubstantial, when as they freely
acknowledged the Divinity of the Son of God. He approved not of the Disputes at
that time upon the Subject of the Hypostasis, because he looked upon those that
received Three into the Trinity, and those that admitted but of one, to be of
the same Opinion, and only to differ in the manner of Expressing.

St. Basil was not so moderate, for accoding to his Opinion, those were
Sabellians that said the Father and Son were two in Thought, and one in
Substance. The Demi-Arians or Homoiousians, that was, those that would not
acknowledge that the Son was Consubstantial with the Father, and that said
nevertheless that he was like him in all things, etc. the same in Substance,
were no more Heretics than those that maintan'd the Three Hypostases, in the
Judgment of St. Basil, St. Hilary of Poictiers, of Philaster, and even of Saint
Athanasius, who confesses in his Book of the Synods, that Basil of Ancyra, and
those of his Party, differed from those who made a Profession of
Consubstantiality as to the name only. Some of these Demi- Arians are placed in
the number of Saints in diverse Martyrologies, as Eusebius. of Caesarea, and Eusebius.
of Emissa; and P. 214.
Pope Liberius also being a Catholic, received them into his Communion. P.
225, 226.


St. Hilary of Poictiers, although a great Defender of the Nicene Faith, was
not free from Error; P. 250, 251.
for to Answer to the Objections that the Arians drew from such passages of
Scripture, as proved that Jesus Christ was subject to fear, sorrow, and grief;
he fell into such an Opinion as made the Humanity of our Savior a Fantom; he
maintained that Jesus Christ sustained not really either Fear or Grief, but
that these Passions were only represented in him. To explain what the Son of
God says of himself, That he was ignorant of the day of Judgment, Mark 13. He
says it ought not to be understood in the Letter, as if Jesus Christ had been
effectively ignorant of this Day; but in this Sense, that he knew it not to
discover it to Man. P. 268.
He had an other very very particular Error, that he advanced in the Twentieth
Canon upon St. Matthew, that Moses and Elias should come with Jesus Christ near
the time of Judgment, and that they should be put to death by Antichrist,
contrary to the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, for he says that Jesus
Christ being raised from death, shall dye no more. Pa. 277.
He was of the Opinion also, that Predestination was subsequent to Merit, and
that the Divinity of Jesus Christ was separated from his Humanity in the time
of his death. P. 283.
As to the rest, the Roman Catholics, which complain, that some Protestant
Refugees have spoken too freely of those that have deprived them of their
Goods, and reduced them to the utmost Misery, may read what St. Hilary Lib. 1.
adv. Constable.
says of Constantius, That neither he, nor the Bishops of his time received the
thousandth part of the evil Treatments that the Reformed have suffered.

P. 336.
Mr. du Pin thinks the Errors of Optatus of Milan, small and pardonable,
although he believed that Heretics ought to be Rebaptized; and seems to give
Free Will the Power, not only of willing and beginning a good Action, but also
of advancing in the way of Salvation, without the Assistance of the Grace of
Jesus Christ. He approves not however of the Allegorical manner, whereby this
Bishop explains many Passages of Scripture, giving them a very distant sense
from what they naturally have, and applying them to such things as they have no
Relation to: This defect, says our Author, that might be suffered in a Sermon,
appears intolerable in a Treatise of Controversy, where all the Proofs ought
to be strong and convincing. But Optatus had to do with Enemies that did the
same, and who abused Passages of Scripture to injure the Church, and give
Praises to their own Sect.

P. 374.376.
After having complained of the loss of Apollinarius's Works, the most Learned
of all the Christians Authors in Humanity, this Loss is attributed to his
Errors, or rather the Zeal of the Catholics, which have had such an Horror to
the Books of Heretics, that they have not even preserved those that regarded
not their Heresy, and that might have been useful to the Church. Wherefore
(continues du Pin) we have almost no Books of the Ancient Heretics remaining.

Many Men believe, that the Disputes with the Heterodox have been the Cause of
the Catholics inventing Solutions, which have afterward passed into Opinions;
such is the Doctrine of the Infallibility of the Church, which was not regarded
till toward Luther's time. Some in this Rank place Original Sin, which begun
in the Seventh Age to be more acknowledged than before, P. 940.
according to Mr. du Pin. They speak also more of Grace than they did in the
preceding Ages, and notwithstanding much was always attributed to Free Will. P.
381.
It Is surprising, that Titus of Bostres, whose Arguments are solid and subtle,
had not recourse in his Treatise against the Manicheans to Original Sin, which
he might have made use of as a general Solution to almost all their
Difficulties. For we may easily apprehend why Man is inclined to evil, why he
suffers, why he is subject to hunger, to grief, sickness, miseries, and to
death it self, where once we have admitted Original Sin. Neither does this
Author speak of the Grace of Jesus Christ, and he seems to have supposed, that
Man can of himself as well do good as evil. The Disciples of St. Augustine will*
not find Dydimuss of Alexandria much more Orthodox, since he maintains, P.
389.390.
that Predestination is nothing else but the Choice, which God has made of
those, that he foresaw would believe in Jesus Christ; and would Act according
to it. He likewise believed with his Master Origin, that the Incarnation of the
Son of God was beneficial to Angels, as well as to Men, and that it took away
the Guilt of their Transgressions. As to the Sentiment of the Eternity of
Spirits, he speaks on it without condemning or approving it. In Truth it would
be absurd and impious to fix Eternity to any other Being than God, if by this
word was understood an Absolute Eternity or Existence by it self; but if we
suppose that the Souls of Men were Spirits created a long time since, which
have offended God, and which he sends into mortal Bodies, there to do Penance
for their Faults, this Hypothesis perhaps would be instrumental to discover
many Difficulties in Divinity, which have hitherto appeared Unexplicable.

All the World has heard of the Catechumens of the Ancient Church, that few
well know what they were. 1. P. 395.399.
When an Infidel presented himself to be admitted into the number of
Christians, they begun to instruct him in private, but he was not suffered to
enter into the Church, nor to assist at public Exhortations. 2. Afterward when
he was believed to be well undeceived of his old Errors, he was permitted to go
to the Church, but only to hear Sermons, and not to assist at any Prayer.
Therefore this second kind of Catechumens were called Hearers. 3. But those to
whom leave was given to assist at public Prayers, until the Consecration of
the Eucharist, and to Kneel to receive the Benediction of the Bishop, bear the
name of Prostrates* 4. When they were found sufficiently instructed to receive
Baptism, they were permitted to demand it, and to give their names, to be
admitted thereto, and they were then called Competents; or if their demand was
accepted of, Chosen and Enlightened. These are all the Degrees that can be
distinguished amongst the Catechumens: But commonly the Fathers, without
stopping at these Distinctions, called them the Hearers, and the Prostrated,
when as they give the name of Competents, and Enlightened to those that were in
a Condito receive Baptism. Which relate well enough to the Mystes and Epoptes
of the Mysteries of Ceres.

As Tradition was not so clear against the Arians as against the Heretics of
the first Ages, the Fathers who lived after the Council of Nice, studied
Scripture more than before, because the strength of the the Dispute run upon
the Sense of diverse Passages, for the Exposition of which, they had recourse to
the Greek of the New Testament, P. 245.
as to the Original. The holy Books were then the only Rule of Faith, and the
Writings of Doctors that were dead before the Contestations of Arianism were
considered only as Human Testimonies, where the Doctrine of their time might be
learned. The least thing ought not to be taught, says Cyril, of Jerusalem,
according to the Relation of Mr. du Pin, touching Divine Mysteries, that cannot
be established by Testimonies of Scripture. P. 405.
Even believe not what I say to you, if I do not prove it by Holy Scripture.

The Letters of St. Basil, which may be of very great help to those that would
know thoroughly the Ecclesiastical History of that time, are placed without any
order, as well as the Epistles of Cicero, and the most part of the ancient
Works of this Nature. The Author promises us a Translation thereof in French
and Latin with Notes; in the mean time he gives here diverse Extracts of these
Letters, disposed according to the order of times. There are several of them
that bear evident Characters of being Supposititious, as the 203, with this
Title to Julian the Apostate. P. 468.
Would St. Basil, says Mr. du Pin, have directed him a Letter with this
Epithet? This Letter besides is not like the Style of this Father, it is only a
Profession of Faith, to which is added, the Invocation of Saints, and the
Worship of Images; whoever heard that this was put in the Professions of the
first Ages? The Author of this Letter says, that he Honors and Adores the
Images of Saints, because it is an Apostolical Tradition. Did St. Basil speak
thus? and is it not visible, that this Letter is the Work of some Greek, who
lived since the seventh Council? For the same reason he rejects a Work which is
attributed to St. Athanasius, and Entitled, The Narration of the Passion of
the Image of Jesus Christ in the City of Berytus. In the CCCXCI Letter,
answering to diverse Questions, that Amphilocus Bishop of Iconium, had put to
him, he Expounds this Passage, That no Body knows the Day of Judgment, but the
Father, after this manner; that the Father knows it by himself, because he is
the Source and Principle of this Knowledge, whereas the Son receives it from
the Father; as it is said in the same Sense, That there is only God who is
Good, (p. 517.) In the CCCCX Letter, he says, that we ought to be contented
with the Faith we have made Profession of in our Baptism, to keep to the Terms
of the Holy Scripture, and shun all new Expressions; because our Faith depends
not upon these Terms, but the Orthodox Doctrine.

Of all the Fathers of the Fourth Age, there was none more moderate, nor
perhaps, a Man of more Worth than Gregory of Nazianze. P. 603, 604.
In the Apology he made, for his Retreat into Pontus, when he was going to be
made Bishop, he pathetically describes the Disorders of his time, Where the
Priests were like the People: After that he deplores the Unhappiness of the
Catholics, who were divided upon unprofitable Questions, or such as were of
small Consequence. He says, that in the same time when Faith is in dispute, we
are obliged to separate our selves from those that teach Impiety, and to suffer
any thing rather than approve on it; but that it is a Folly to break Union, and
excite troubles, for Questions that are not of Faith.

In his Oration against the Emperor Julian, P. 608.
this same Father makes a Digression upon the Mildness that the Christians have
kept, when they were Potent; and opposes it to the Cruelties the Pagans have
exercised. There was a time, say he to the Heathens, that we have had the
Authority as well as you; but what have we done to those of your Religion, that
comes near what you have made the Christians suffer? Have we taken away your
Liberty? Have we persuaded Governors to condemn you to Torments? Have we
attempted the Life of any? Have we even put any from the Magistracy and
Employments? In a word, have we done against you any thing, that has given you
Cause to make us suffer? I do not conceive, says Mr. du Pin, hereupon, how St.
Gregory of Nazianze can reconcile all these Maxims with what he has just now
said; that Constantius had done very ill to leave the Empire to Julian, because
he was an Enemy to the Christian Religion, and that he would persecute it,
maintaining that, in that Constantius had made a very ill use of his Mildness
and Bounty. As to the purpose of Constantius, whilst Hilary of Poictiers calls
him Antichrist, and speaks a thousand other injuries against him. Gregory of
Nazianzen P. 612.
excuses this Emperor upon the Subject of Arianism: He casts the whole Fault
upon the Great Men of the Court, and even pretends, that after his death
Angelical Voices were heard, that celebrated his Praises.

In the Funeral Speech of his Brother Cesarius, P. 616.
he says, That he was informed by the Discourses of Learned Men, that Souls
that are Holy and acceptable to God, being delivered from the Bonds of the
Body, feel an ineffable Joy and Pleasure, in considering the Beatitude they are
one day to receive; that they go strait to God, and that they already know as
'twere in a Representation and Image the Beatitude they will receive after the
Resurrection of the Body.

In his fifty third Poem P. 648.
he numbers holy Books exactly as the Protestants do, only he does not put the
Apocalypse in the Canon of the New Testament; otherwise this Bishop had a very
ill Opinion of the Councils, for in his LV Letter, he declares that he fears
all the Ecclesiastical Assemblies, P. 632.
because he never saw the End of any Council, which had been happy, and which
had not rather increased their Misfortunes, than diminished them.

Gregory of Nyssa, P. 672.
in his Discourses against those that defer Baptism, distinguishes three sorts
of Persons, with Relation to the other Life. The first Order is, that of the
Saints and Righteous, which will be happy; the second, those that shall be
neither happy nor unhappy; and the third, those that shall be punished for
their Sins. He puts in the second Rank those that cause themselves to be
Baptized at the point of Death. There is a Letter of this Father P. 681.
concerning Voyages made to Jerusalem, where he diverts the Faithful from
undergoing slightly these sort of Pilgrimages, by reason of the Abuses that
proceed from thence. Some Catholics have been willing to make it pass as
Supposititious, but Mr. du Pin believes it to be true.

Here Priscillian and his Disciples are placed in the Rank of Ecclesiastical
Authors, P 714.
after St. Ierom, who speaks thus of them: Priscillian Bishop of Avila was put
to death in the City of Treves, Hieron. Casal. Scrip. Eccles.
by the Command of the Tyrant Maximus, having been oppressed by the Faction of
Itharius. He has written several Works, whereof some are come to us. Some
accuse him this day of the Heresy of the Gnostics of Basilide and Marcion:
But others defend him, and maintain, that he was not Guilty of the Errors that
are imputed to him. It Is true, pursues Mr. du Pin, that the same St. Ierom in
his Letter to Ctesiphon, speaks of Priscillian, as of a notable Heretic, which
has made Mr. du Quesnel believe, that this place of the Ecclesiastical Writers
was corrupted. This Conjecture which is grounded upon the Authority of a
Manuscript, would be of Consequence if we knew not, that St. Ierom has often
spoke differently of the same Man; besides, it is apparently the manner that St.
Ierom speaks in his Catalogue, which placed Priscillian and Matronian his
Disciple, in some Martyrologies amongst the Holy Martyrs.

The second Letter of Pope Syricius, furnishes P. 734.
us with a fine Example, Says Mr. du Pin, of the Ancient manner of the Holy
Patriarchs Judging. He writes in it to the Church of Milan, that having
Assembled all his Clergy, he had condemned Jovinian and all his Sectators, by
the advice of the Priests, Deacons, and the whole Clergy.

Baronius, Bellarmin, and some others, pretend that part of the second Letter
of St. Epiphanius is Supposititious; because he there relates a History, which
is not favorable to the Worship of their Church. P. 745, 747.
Being entered, says this Bishop* into a Church of a Village in Palestine,
called Anablatha, and having found a Vail that hung at the Door which was
Painted, where there was an Image of Jesus Christ, or some Saint, for I do not
remember whose it was; but since, against the Authority of Holy Scripture,
there was in the Church of Jesus Christ the Image of a Man: I rent it, and gave
order to those that had the Care of this Church, to bury a dead Body with this
Vail. Mr. du Pin, after having proved, that all this Letter is St.
Epiphanius's, adds, That though it be true, that there were placed in some
Churches Pictures, that represented the Histories of the Scriptures, and the
Actions of the Saints and Martyrs, it cannot be said that this use was general;
and that it must be granted that St. Epiphanius has disapproved it, although
without reason, (according to him,) for I believe, continues he, that it would
be contrary to the Candor and Sincerity that Religion demands of us, to give
another Sense to these words.

After the Extracts of the Writings of the Fathers, are found those of the
Councils held in the Fourth Age. P. 770. and seque
The Canons of that which is called the Council of Elvira, are an old Code, or
an ancient Collection of the Councils of Spain; and it cannot be doubted, but
these Canons are of great Antiquity, and very Authentic. The XXXIV Canon and
the XXXVI, have given much Exercise to the Roman Catholic Divines. The one
forbiding to light Wax-Candles in the Churchyard, because the Spirits of
Saints must not be troubled; and the other Paintings in Churches, lest the
Object of our Adorations should be painted on the Walls. They have endeavored
to give several Expositions on these Passages; but it seems to me, says Mr. du
Pin, that it is better to understand them simply, and to allow that the Fathers
of this Council have not approved the use of Images no more than of Wax-Candles
lighted in open day. But, continues he, these things are of Discipline, and
may or may not be in use, and do no Prejudice to the Faith of the Church. The
XXXV Canon prohibits Women to pass in the Night in Churchyards, because often
under pretense of Praying, they in secret committed great Crimes. The LX
deprives such of the quality of Martyrs, as are killed in pulling down Idols
publicly, because the Gospel commands it not, nor is it read that it was
practiced by the Christians in the time of the Apostles.

The same Spirit of Parties, which wrested the Canons of the Council of Elvira,
has caused Men to doubt of the History of Paphnusius, related by Socrates,
lib. 1. c. 9. This Egyptian Bishop opposed the new Law that was going to be
made in the Council of Nice to oblige Bishops, Priests and Deacons to keep
unmarried, and abstain from Women, that they had espoused before their
Ordination. Although he himself had never been married, he maintained that this
Yoke was not to be imposed upon the Clergy, and that it was to bring the
Chastity of Women in danger. I believe, says Mr. du Pin, upon this speaking of
the Roman Catholic Doctors, that this doubt proceeds rather from the fear they
are in, that this act should do some hurt to the present Discipline, than of any
solid proof. But these Persons should consider, that this Regulation is purely
a Discipline, which the Discipline of the Church may change according to the
times, and that to maintain it, it is not necessary to prove it has always
been uniform in all places.

The Author shows, that it was Osius Bishop of Cordova, who presided in the
Council of Nice, and not the Legates of the Pope. He only acknowledges for
Authentic Monuments, of this Council the Form of Faith; the Letter to the
Egyptians, the Decree touching Easter, and the two first Canons. He
consequently rejects as Supposititious pieces, the Latin Letter of this Council
to St. Sylvester, the Answer of this Bishop, and the Canons of a pretended
Synod held at Rome, for the Confirmation of that of Nice.

The Christians of that time, who were not perfectly instructed by the holy
Scripture in what they ought to believe touching the Mystery of the blessed
Trinity, were in great uncertainty; for neither the Tradition nor Authority of
the Church were then infallible marks of the Truth of a Tenet, since the
Ecclesiastical Assemblies that the most reasonable Catholics make the
Depositaries of these Traditions and Authority, some time declare for the
Arians, some time for the Orthodox, and another for a third Party, which is
that of the Semi- Arians or Homoiousians. The Reader will not be displeased to
find here a List of these Councils, which is made upon the Remarks of Mr. du
Pin.

Councils against Arius.
1. At Alexandria composed of near a hundred Bishops, in the Year 322. 2. At
Nice in 325, composed of 318, or 270, or 250 Bishops. 3. The Third Council of
Alexandria, where St. Athanasius was absolved, in 340. 4. At Rome, by the
Bishops of Italy in 341, where Marcellus of Ancyra and St. Athanasius were
justified. 5. At Milan, where Ursacius and Valens were received into Communion,
for condemning Arius, in the Year 346. 6. At Sardica, in 347, composed of an
hundred of the Western Bishops, who sent back St. Athanasius and Marcellus of
Ancyra, Absolved. 7. At Alexandria, in 362, with St. Athanasius, where it was
declared, that the difference upon the three Hypostases were only Disputes of
words. It was composed of the Bishops of ^gypt. 8. At Paris, where the Bishops
of the Gauls retracted what they had done at Rimini, in 362. 9. The Bishops of
Italy did as much, in another Synod the same Year. 10. At Antioch, in 363,
where the Bishops of Egypt approved the Form of Nice. 11. In 370, at Rome,
under Damasus. 12. At Aquilea, in 381. 13. At Constantinople, in 383.
Councils for Arius.
1. In Bithynia, in the Year 323, Sozom. Lib. 1. Cap. 15. 2. At Antioch, where
Eustathius Bishop of this City was deposed, in 330. 3. At Caesarea in
Palestine, where St. Athanasius was cited, but appeared not, in 334. 4. At
Tire, where St. Athanasius appeared, as accused in 335. It was composed of a
hundred Bishops. 5. At Jerusalem, where Arius and his Party were received to
the Communion of the Church, in the same Year. 6. At Constantinople, against
Marcellus of Ancyra, which communicated with St. Athanasius, and who was
deposed as convicted for renewing the Errors Paul of Samosetus and of
Sabellius, in 336. 7. The Third Council of Constantinople, where Paul Bishop of
that City, Defender of St. Athanasius, was deposed, in 338. 8. At Beziers,
where the Followers of Arius were reconciled to the Church, in spite of Hilary
of Poictiers, and some other Bishops, which were banished in 356. 9. The Third
Council of Sirmium, where the Father was declared greater than the Son, in 357.
10. Another at Melitin the same Year. 11. At Antioch, in 358, where they
condemned these Terms, The same in Substance. 12. At Constantinople, where the
Anomeans cunningly condemned Aetius their Head, and deposed many Semi- Arian
Bishops, in 360. 13. At Antioch, where Melece Bishop of Antioch was deposed,
and where the Son was declared Created out of nothing, in 367. 14. At Singedun
in Mesia against Germinius a Semi- Arian 366. 15. In Caria, where they rejected
the Term of Consubstantial, in 368.
Councils for the Semi- Arians.
1. The Second Council of Alexandria, in 324, where nothing was determined
against Arius, and they treated only of the Terms Substance and Hypostasis,
against Sabellius, where Osius presided. 2, 3. Two Councils at Antioch, in 341,
and 342, where they declared they received Arius, because they believed him
Orthodox; where they composed three Forms of Faith, in the which they
Anathematize those who said there was a time when the Word was not, and made a
Profession of believing him, like to the Father in all things. This Council
made XXV Canons, which are inserted in the Code of the Universal Church. 4.
Another Council at Antioch by the Eusebians, where the word Consubstantial is
not found, though it be Catholic, as to the rest. It was held in 345. 5. At
Philippolis, in 347. 6. The Second Council of Sirmium, the Form whereof was
approved by Hilary of Poictiers, although the word Consubstantial be not in it.
In the Year 351. 7. At Arles, where St. Athanasius was condemned, in 353. 8. At
Milan, in 355, where St. Athanasius was also condemned by Violence. 9. At
Ancyra, where those were Anathematized, which held the Son Consubstantial with
the Father; and those who denied he was the same in Substance, in 358. 10. The
Fourth Council of Sirmium, where they approved of the Forms of the Councils of
Antioch, and of the second Council of Sirmium. 11. The fifth Council of
Sirmium, in 359. 12. At Rimini, composed of 400 Bishops where they rejected
Terms of Substance and Hypostasis, as was done in the fifth Council of Sirmium.
Notwithstanding they held the Son to be equal to the Father in all things. It
was also in the Year 359. 13. At Selucia the same Year, where forty Anomean
Bishops, or pure Arians, were condemned by 105 Semi- Arians. 14. At Antioch, in
363, where the Term Consubstantial was received in different senses. 15. At
Lampsaca, in 365, where the Anomeans were condemned, and where the Bishops were
reestablished, which they had deposed. 16. Diverse Synods in Pamphilia,
Isauria, Lycia, and Sicily, in 365, and 366. 17. At Tyanes, in 368, where the
Anomeans were reunited with the Semi- Arians.
In 370, P. 873.
a Synod was held at Gangres, the Canons whereof are inserted in the Code of
the universal Church, and the fourth of which condemns those that say the
Communion ought not to be received from the hands of a married Priest.

The 59th and 60th, and last P. 882.
Canon of the Council of Laodicea, which Mr. du Pin believes to have been held
between the Year 360, and 370, prohibits the Reading at Church any other than
Canonical Books, and those that were acknowledged for such, and those the
Protestants receive, excepting the Apocalypse.

The 8th Canon P. 900.
of the Council of Saragossa, defends the Vailing of Virgins, that have
consecrated themselves to Jesus Christ, before the Age of forty Years.

The Bishops of Macedonia willing to confirm a Judgment they had given against
a Bishop, named Bonosus, by the advice of Pope Syricius, he answered them, P.
903.
That the Council of Capua having sent this Cause to them, it belonged not to
him to judge on it, and that 'twas their business to determine it.

The P. 909.
most ancient Monument, according to Mr. du Pin, where the name of Mass is
found to signify public Prayers, that the Roman Church makes in offering the
Eucharist, is the third Canon of the second Council of Carthage, held in 390.

At the end of this Volume P. 947.
the Author makes an Abridgment of the Doctrine of the 4th Age, as he did in his
precedent Book, in respect to the three first, and he confesses, that though
nothing was taught in the 4th Age, which was not believed in the three first,
nevertheless the principal Mysteries were much more cleared and expounded in
the fourth.

The Travels of Mars, Or, The Art of War, divided into three parts, etc. With
an Ample Relation of the Soldiery of the Turks, both for Assaulting and
Defending. A Work enriched with more than 400 Cuts engraven in Copper Plates,
by Alla^n Manesson Mallet, Master of the Mathematics to the Pages of his
Majesty's lesser Stable, heretofore Ingenier and Serjeant-Major of Artillery in
Portugal. Paris, Sold by Denis Thierri in St. James Street, and are to had at
Amsterdam at Henry Desborde's, 3 Vol. in 80. 1685.
THis Author, who published a Description of the Universe, in five Volumes in
Octavo, in 1683, with a curious Collection of a thousand things concerning
Geography and History; had also published these Travels of Mars some Years
since. The Work was esteemed by the most Learned in that Science. It was
immediately Reprinted at Amsterdam, and was soon translated into several
different Languages. It is a right Judgment upon this Second Edition, that it
has been enriched with many new Treatises, several Maxims and particular
Remarks, which the Author has endeavored to conform to the excellent Maxims
of famous Mr. Vauban, one of the chiefest Men in the World in these sorts of
matters.

He gives us in the first part of this Work the Explication of the Elements of
Geometry, which are necessary to Fortification. After that, he Expounds not
only the Construction of regular places, whether on Paper or on the Earth, and
the method of raising and leveling the Ground, but also the manner of
Fortifying all sorts of irregular Places in what Situation soever.

He gives and examines in the second place, the diverse methods of Fortifying
Places, which have been invented by the most able Authors or Ingeniers, as
Errard, Marolois, Tritach, Stevin, Dogen, Marchi, Sardi, de Ville, le Comte de
Pagan, and others. He compares their methods with his own, and adds to all
this, several fair and ample Dissertations for and against the use of
Cazemates, second Flanks, etc. to which he adds, the different manners of
laying Foundations, transporting the Earth, etc. This Work will hold its place
above all others, seeing we may find there faithfully exposed the
Constructions, that the greatest Masters approve of, and that which the Author
judges the best.

The third part is very fine and proper for all manner of Persons, because
there they may learn an infinite deal of things, which they would be glad to be
instructed in, though they have no design of going to War. There may be found
the Names, the Charges and Duties of the Officers of Infantry, Cavalry and
Artillery. There are seen all that regard Military Exercises, the March of
Troops, the use and difference of Arms, the Service of Cannons, artificial
Fires, the Instruments used for Assault or Defense of Places, the Sieges of
Cities, the duty of the Besieged, and the War of the Turks. This latter Article
is replete with a great deal of Curiosity, by reason of the War they have with
the Emperor, which will make the Book of Debricius to become dear, although it
has been laid by, since the Rout of the Turks. The meaning of it is, that we
must neither assure our selves of, nor be frightened at any thing.

Nemo confidat nimium secundis
Nemo desperet meliora lapsis: Seneca.
Miscet haec illis prohibetque
Clotho Thyest.
Stare Forturiam, etc.
We shall be able one day to come to speak more distinctly, and in particulars
of this Book of Monsieur Mallet. In the interim what we have said thereof will
serve to show the Profit and Importance of it.

The Education of Daughters, by Mr. Feuelon Abbot, according to the Copy
Printed at Paris, Sold by Peter Abouin, 1687, in Twelves.
THis is a matter of one of the most grave and important Concerns of Life. Mr.
Abbot Feuelon, concerned at the negligence wherewith Virgins are Educated,
thought he could not better Consecrate his Cares, than to the Instruction of
this Fair Sex. Fathers in reference to public Good, or by a blind Inclination
to Young Men, abandon their Daughters almost without giving 'em any Education.
Notwithstanding, says he, they are destined to fulfill the Duties which are the
Foundations of human Life, and which decide that which most nearly concerns
Mankind. There is then nothing more important than the Precepts that are given
us here. And indeed the Source of Men cannot be too pure. But the difficulty of
Succeeding is greater than is imagined. For if to give a good Education to
Young-women be to be removed entirely from the World to apply them to what
concerning Housewifery and House-Government; it is to be feared, that their
Restlessness and natural Curiosity, will push them upon other impertinent
Accomplishments. That whereof Moliere gives a Model of natural Simplicity, and
which seriously asked,

If Children that are begotten, were made by the Ear, being cleared of its
doubts, made him repent himself for being jealous of the Ignorance he had taken
care to Educate his Daughter in. Some pretend also, that it is not less
dangerous to let Maids take pleasure in Reading and frequent Conversation,
fearing they should fall into the Extremities of the Learned and knowing Women,
who never come down from Heroism and Refined Wit.

Let us then see what way Mr. Abbot Feuelon traceth out for Mothers to prevent
these two Defects. He begins with the tenderest Infancy, and even regulates the
Diet to give a more sweet Blood, and strengthen the Organs. He pretends, that
the Pleasure which is taken about lusty Children, spoils them, because they
begin too early to be applauded, and to hazard all that comes into their mind,
and that thus there remains with them all their Life time a Custom of
precipitate Judging. It is better to moderate these first Heats, to render them
more quiet and patient, and to approve them rather when they doubt, than when
they decide well, because thus Modesty insensibly enters into their Mind. As
Curiosity is an Inclination of Nature, which prevents Instruction, he takes
occasion whereby to instruct them in every thing, and hastens to settle in
their Brains the most perfect Images, because Traces are more easily imprinted
in this Age, and hardening, become indelible. And that there may be no delay in
the least Circumstance, Mr. Abbot Feuelon enters into the most particular
Condescensions, and prescribes amongst others, that in passing by Shops, they
should be instructed in the just price of all things; which is the Foundation
of Economy, the Portion of Young-women. He adds as a thing that ought not to
be omitted, viz. That the best Education befalls Children that feel nothing.
This Towardness renders Care useless. For if such as are naturally sensible
have great Errors, they likewise have great Helps.

After that coming to a more advanced Age, he says, that nothing backwards
Young-women so much, as the bad Humors of those Mothers, who make perpetual
Lessons, and render Virtue odious by too much Preaching on it: Wisdom ought not
to be shown to this Age, but under a Smiling Countenance, and under a pleasant
Image. The most serious Occupations ought to be seasoned with some honest
Pastimes; and a familiar and open Conduct makes more progress than a more
severe Education, and a dry and absolute Authority. Notwithstanding it is the
common Injustice of Mothers, who taking always an Austere and Imperious
Countenance, judge not of Pleasures but by the Sorrow and Care of their Age;
instead of Judging thereof, by the Joy and Sportings they had in Times past. It
falls out often, that they cry out against Pleasures because they themselves
cannot taste of them. Howbeit we cannot be Old as soon as we come into the
World; and Mr. Abbot Feuelon condemns these constraining Formalities, and
these dimm Ideas of Virtue, which render it Sad and Tedious to Young-women.
Notwithstanding, continues the Author, as they are destined to moderate
Exercises, it is good to give them a slight Employ; for Idleness is an
unfathomable Source of Troublesomness; and besides, the wandering Imagination of
a Young-woman turns it self easily toward dangerous Objects. Therefore also he
will not have them to accustom themselves so much to sleep, because that
mollifies the Body, and exposes the Mind to the Rebellion of the Senses.

Mr. Abbot Feuelon condemns utterly Romances, because according to him,
Young-women fall into Passions for Chimerical Intrigues and Adventures. Being
charmed with what they find tender and mavelous in them; what a Distaste is
it to them to abase themselves unto the lowest part of Housewifery, and to this
ordinary Life we lead? He is not yet altogether against their Learning some
Languages; but he Rejects the Italian, because it is only proper to Read
dangerous Books; and he prefers the Latin Tongue by reason of the Divine
Office. But without mentioning other Inconveniences, he forgot that Ovid and
Martial are Poysoners, far more pernicious than Amyntas and Pastor fido; for
besides the Obscenity of Martial, there is in Ovid all that Love can inspire,
most Tender, most Ingenious, and most Delicate. In Truth, it were a thing to be
wished for, that the Modesty of a Young-woman should make her Ignorant of all
things that concern Love; but it is convenient enough to know it in order to
prevent it as much as possible. At least it was the Advice of Madam de
Chartres, a Grave Authoress upon this Matter, and which well may be opposed to
Mr. Abbot Feuelon. The greatest part of Mothers imagine, (says the Author of
the Princess of Cleves) that it is not sufficient to speak of Gallantry before
Young Persons to make them keep from it. On the contrary, Madam de Chratres
often depainted Love to her Daughter. She would tell her what there was
pleasing in it, the more easily to persuade her of the Misfortunes whereinto
Engagements lead us.

This Conduct has something in it very Acute. For nothing is more dangerous
than to expose a Young-Woman to know Love by an interested Persons Mouth, who
far from making her observe the Troubles that follow this Passion, has no
greater Care than to hide them from her. So that it is very hard, that a Young
Person should resist Love, whilst never hearing mention made of it, she begins
to know it by that which is taking in it; and how shall she defend her self
from a Passion, which only Promises Sweetnesses, and which offers such
pleasing Baits! But the Question is too important to be decided so; we shall
pass to the Chapter which speaks of the Faults of Young-women.

Mr. Abbot Feuelon says, That they must be Corrected for those Tears they shed
so Cheap. They have been always Reproached with a mavelous Talent of
Speaking, and it is even presumed, that there is a little Lewdness intermixed:
For according to Mr. Fontaine, a Handsome Woman when she is in Tears, is by the
half more Handsome. It is without doubt a great Art to know how to shed some
Tears to the purpose. Notwithstanding the Author condemns these over-frequent
Tears, as marks of Weakness and Artifice. It Is also sometimes the Effect of a
sensible and compassionate Nature. It Is needless to say, that they should be
told of Expressing themselves in a few words, and not to be transported with a
Faculty of Speaking, and Vivacity of Imagination, which are natural to them.
Mr. Abbot Feuelon spares not these Affectations of Grief; these perpetual
Complaints, these little Indispositions, which always show a negligent
Countenance; and these precipitate Decisions of the curious Ladies which so
much displease Men of good Judgment. A Poor Man of a Province, says he, will
be the Ridicule of five or six A-la-mode Ladies, because his Peruque is not of
the best make, or because he wants a good Grace, though he has an upright
Heart, and a Mind Just and Solid: When a Courtier is preferred, whose whole
deserts consist in Fashions and Cooks, and who hides a low Heart and False
Mind, under an Exterior Politeness.

Finally, he enveighs mightily against the Vanity of Women, their violent
Desire of Pleasing, and the Passion of Dressing themselves, which they make
their most important Business. He pretends that this Haughtiness draws after it
the Ruin of Families, and the Corruption of Manners; and he neatly decides,
That Beauty is noisome, if it does not advantageously serve to Marry a
Young-woman. This Sentence is a little Rigorous. It Is true, that the Virtue of
an Ugly one seems to be more secure, because she is sheltered from the Attacks
to which a Fair one is continually exposed: But on the other side the Virtue of
a Handsome Woman shines more by the Conquests she goes through; and we may doubt
of her that never was Attacked. The one is inured by the Assaults which she
repelleth; and the other that is not accustomed to defend her self may be more
easily surprised. On the other hand, seeing the ways that Conduct Men to
Authority and Glory, are denied to Women, and that they have for their Lot only
the Charms and Graces of Nature; what a Spite then is it for 'em to deny 'em
their utmost they are capable of doing, to raise and preserve the Luster
thereof? What! Because Men are too sensible of it, must they be deprived of all
their Pleasingness, and cloister up all their Charms to expect patiently an
advantageous Match, that is to say, to become the Prey of some happy Fop, or
Capricious Fellow? In Truth, it is a crying Injustice, and I should as soon
have the Stars condemned to give light no more, because Men being surprised by
their Luster, adored them. Beauty makes the Glory of Women, as Valor that of
Heroes. Therefore one of the most polite and refined Authors of this Age
opposes a Fair Virgin to Alexander the Great, and maintains, that she had more
Right to make Conquests than him; because Beauty has a natural Right to
Command over Men, and that Valor has a Right only acquired by Force.
Notwithstanding Conquerors are permitted to set fire upon whole Cities and
Kingdoms; And must not Fair Women be able to fire Hearts, or make Conquests in
their Territories, without being exposed to Censure? We shall then conclude
this Article by a Passage of the same Author, That the chief Merit of a Woman
is to be Handsome, and that there is no Prettier Condition than that of a Pretty
Woman.

Curious Miscellanies: or, the Journal of Physics? by the Curious in Nature of
Germany. Noremberg, at the Expenses of Wolfandus Mecuritius Endterus. 1686, in
4to.
WE have spoke in the Novels of October 1685, of the Institution of this
Accademy of the Curious in Nature; and we have mentioned several of their
Observations in their Journal of the year 84: Now we hope that their Journal of
85, is furnished with no less rare Curiosities. Nature does not grow old, what
ever People say: She is always fertile in all Productions; and we may observe
her Effects, to see that She Signalizes her self every year in some Country or
other, and sometimes in all Countries, by Distempers, singular Cures, Monsters
and other rare Phenomena. I may be suffered without doubt, to place among the
Works of Nature, that do not happen often, the heat that is conserved in a dead
Body for 3 or 4 days; which is the Subject of the 18th. Observation of this
Book; wherein is seen that a Man of 72 years of Age, but Strong and a great
Drinker, dying of a Burning Fever on Christmas Day, 84, was found Hot by his
Domestics at night; who were curious to feel him for a certain Superstition
which reigns in several places of Germany, whereby they believe that if the
Deceased do not grow Stiff, it is a Sign that many of his Friends will dye soon
after: This Man's Servants having found him hot the 1st. day, tried next day,
whether he continued so, tho the Weather was very cold; and they found him as
hot as the day before, both at his Back and Region of the Abdomen; and they
found him Lukewarm the 3d. day and 4th. and it was but the 5th. day that he
became entirely cold. A Gangreen that had possessed his Bowels, did without
doubt much contribute to this Heat: For th^s poor Man having lost the parts of
Generation before his Death, by a Descent of his Guts into his Scrotum, which
occasioned a Castration, and made the rest disappear after such a manner, that
if it did not concenter inwardly, it mixed after an insensible manner, among the
other Excrements which were taken from the Sick Man's Body. M. de le Boe, had
already observed that the Bodies of Hydropicks, remain hot some time after
Death, for 2 or 3 days: Nor is it after all, so surprising, seeing that Plants
parted from what nourished them, ferment after a mavelous manner.

Let us pass to the 32d. Observation, where the Opinion of Scaliger is refuted
about the Cry of Crikets. It is a Noise that agrees with the Africans very
well, and serves as delicious Music to lull them asleep: This makes them
nourish Crikets in Iron Cages, and purchase them at considerable Rates: And
they receive them as acceptably at Fez it self, the most learned place of all
Africa. We find the noise of these little Animals, sometimes troublesome; but
because it is thought an Ill Omen if they quit the House, we do not wish to be
rid of them. M. Konig having searched the Organ of the Cry of Crikets, found
that it was not the Passage or Fistule of the Belly, as Scaliger believed, but
that it is a very dry Membran that foulds it self as a Fan, and which is
fastened under the Wings to a Tendon that is pretty long, and which when the
Muscle shortens, forms them, folds upon the Membran, and thence comes the
sound, which can be renewed in some manner in a dead Criket; so that the Tendon
be dexterously drawn: And it is remarked that a Criket cut in two, sings and
lives a long time.

The same Mr. Konig furnishes us in the Four and Thirtieth Observation, with
the Anatomy of an Owl: He found that the Eyes of this Bird are shut up in his
Scull, that they, are immovable, and that they neither have an Elliptique
Figure as Men's Eyes have, nor a round one as other Birds; they are like a
Globe, in the midst of which, a Turner would make a Hole on both sides, and
there are seen the Parts of the Bones all in a row. There has been mention made
the 10th. year of this Journal, of some Flies, that did great Damage in Poland;
their Figures are seen here in different Fashions, as they appeared in a
Magnifying Glass to M. Pelisius, who tells us a very strange thing in his 43d.
Observation; which is, That a Rosemary-Branch which was according to Custom put
in a dead man's Hand, grew so strangely, that it spread it self and covered with
its Greenness, the whole Face of the dead Person; as it has been found to the
great Admiration of many, some years past, on uncovering the Coffin.

The 106th. Observation contains one of those happy Temerities, that are seen
some times as well in Physic as Politics. A Peasant of the Duchy of
Meklenburg, seeing his Wife almost dead in Childbirth, pressed the Midwife so
much, to draw the Child from her with a great Scale-hook, that the Midwife was
at last obliged to make Trial, and hit so well the Nape of the Child's Neck,
without knowing what she did, that she brought the Child into the World in a
very good Condition, and with little hurt, and is living yet. In the following
Observation, we are entertained with a Child already Rotten and Corrupted, that
was delivered from a dead Woman, which confirms the 42d. Observation, that
says, some 7 days after the Death of a poor Woman that dyed a Month before the
time she should be brought to Bed at, was put in a Byer; the Child was observed
to have rouled to the dead Woman's Feet; and it is more credible that a Child
should come into the World of it self from a dead Mother, than that pieces of
Gold, Brass and Iron, fall with the Thunder in the Indies. However that is, M.
Rumphius, the Historiographer of the Dutch Company in that Country, has sents
to M. Menzeliur, a Physician of S. A. E. of Brandenburgh, among other Rarities,
whose Catalogue is here to be seen, a piece of Brass weighing about 12 Ounces,
which he says fell from the Skies in a great Tempest. The Indians make great
Account of these Metals, which they pretend do fall with the Thunderbolt, and
make Rings of them, believing them Powerful to preserve their Healths, and to
render them Victories over their Enemies. Few Physicians will meet with as much
Satisfaction in these things, as in the Remarks of M. Harderius, Professor of
Philosophy in Basil, upon the Venom of Vipers; he gives M. Redi an account of
the different Effects of this Poison upon several Beasts, and admires the
difference in the Experiences of M. Redi, and M. Charas, about the Yellow Juice
which is in the Vipers Gut, which M. Charas says is very innocent; but in the
Opinion of M. Redi, it is their very Poison: He seems to be inclined to this
last Opinion.

Let us now speak of the Appendix, which is worth as much, if not more than the
whole Work. We first meet with the Mystical Key to the Doctrine of the Chinois,
about Pulses; composed in 1658, by the Polish Jesuit Boymus, Missionary of
China. The Title of this Book insinuates that Mr. Cleyerius, first Physician to
the Dutch Company in the Indies, had gathered some Fragments, and committed
them into Europe, and that now at last he has sent 'em all well corrected,
having received them from China by the hands and care of Father Couplet, a
Flemish Jesuit, that was lately sent to Rome in Embassy about the concerns of
that Country: I find something dark in the Title, for I do not see why that
Jesuit returning to Rome, could not bring that Manuscript along with him, but
must leave the Glory to a Dutch Physician, of sending the Work of an other
Jesuit into Europe: However it be, the Treatise of Father Boymus is very
curious, and shows he had a great deal of leisure, which he well employed in
learning the Foundation of the Chinois Physic; he explains the System very
neatly, and it is easy to see, by what he says, that the Chinois are very able
men. It Is true, their Principles are not the clearest in the World; but if we
had them in the time of Aristotle's Philosophy, they would be much admired, and
there would be found in them as much Reason and Evidence at least as in our
own. But they were unluckily brought into Europe, when the Mechanic Principles
invented and received by our Modern Naturalists, had given our Physician such
an Aversion (...) the Faculties natural Heat and radical Moisture. The great
Bases of the Philosophy of (...) Chinois, agree well with the (...): We should
do ill to say that (...) Chinois had their Physic from Europe, (...) the first
Physician of that Nation, was their Emperor Hoamti, who lived 400 years after
the Deluge, and 2697 years before the Birth of our Savior. We took notice last
year p. 97, that the chief Ability of the Chinois Physicians, consists in the
Knowledge of the Pulse, wherein they are very expert. This is the reason why
this Jesuit thinks to learn the Subtilty of their Precepts, if he can explain
unto us their Speculation and Practice upon the Pulse; to render which, he says
more likely, he observes that that several Chinois Physicians apply themselves
solely to certain Distempers and particular Persons; some undertake only
Hectic Fevers, some Children, others Women, and these last have most Trouble,
because they are not permitted to see Women of Quality; they must divine by
their Pulse, which they will without the help of the other external Signs,
which they consult with Success in the Distempers of Men; a strange Madness of
these People that will not suffer that their Wives be seen, even when they
prove rather Objects of Pity than an incentive to Lust. The Eastern Christians
are yet more foolish about their Wives; for there is a certain Tavernier, live.
4. chap. 8.
Armenian that has never yet seen his Wife, whom he married Ten years ago; nor
ever heard her speak.

When she lies with her Husband, she takes not off her Veil until the Light be
first put out: And in whatever Season it is, she gets up before day, and never
eats with her Husband. The Chinois want one thing very necessary to the
Perfection of Physic, which is, the Anatomy of Human Bodies; whoever would
undertake to direct any Person upon what account soever, must expect a public
Execration. The Author conjectures that they have not always been of this
Humor, because they have very exact Draughts of our internal Parts; and it
were hard to imagine that the Emperor Hoamti, had formed the Theorie of the
Pulse, without the help of Dispection: His Precepts upon this are very
different from those of Galen; for as this latter will have the Pulse to be
felt but in one place of the left Arm, the Chinois have ordered it should be
felt in Three different places of both Arms, and by Three different Degrees of
Pressure: First to the Flesh, then to the Nerves, and at last to the Bones.
Galen confesses that he knew not the number of the Beatings of the Arteries,
for any considerable time; but Hoamti has given a very particular Table of
them, taking his Rules from the Intervals of Respiration.

It will do well to acquaint the World with the Abilities of the Chinois, that
their Observations may be compared with those of our Moderns, who are certainly
more acquainted with the Qualities of the Pulse, and have a far more perfect
knowledge therein than Galen himself: This appears by the Treatise de
variatione Pulsus; Printed at London in 8 vo. and Writ by Mr. Abercromblus
Physician, that made himself known before by his Method of curing veneral
Distempers, without the help of Mercury, and without any mercurial Salivation.

The other pieces of the Appendix, are 1. a Letter of M. Sturmius, wherein he
gives M. Volkamer an account of the Experiences which he has spoken of in the
other 2 Letters, and that serves to show the Truth of the Principles by which
the subtle Borellius has explained the force of the Office of the Muscles. 2.
A Letter of M. Lauranti, Physician at Boloyn, to Father Ferroni, a Jesuit and
Professor of the Mathematics in the same place; upon the erecting of Figures
in an Optic Chamber, for so is that Chamber called that is close on every
side, one place only excepted, that gives passage to the Light to show plainly
upside down upon a piece of clean Paper, all the Objects abroad, that are
opposite to this Hole, wherein a unequal Glass is put: It would be much more
pleasing to the Eye, if Objects could be so represented as to give their true
Situation; and for this purpose, Expedients have been thought to redress the
Figures, before they came too near the Glass, or to the utmost end of the
Radius, which is before they came to the Paper. The Author mentions 10 of these
Expedients, and in every one, are some inconveniences; at last he finds one
that is without any, and which by the means of a Prisme through which the sight
is* and by which the Images are seen in Paper, in their natural order, that so
it increases the vivacity of their Colors: We are obliged to Chance only for
the Discovery of this Phenomeny. The 3d. piece of the Appendix, is a plain
Table, invented by Lothaire Zumback, and much better, as is reported, than all
the Endeavors that diverse Astrologers have made in instruments of this kind.

There are in the 4th. place two Manuscripts, composed by two Friars of Corbie
in Germany; one of these Friars is called Isibord D' Amelaxer, and the other,
Alexander of the Island, both very good Gentlemen, of an extraordinary
Application to Learning, which was more commendable, because they lived in
those ill times wherein the Friars of Corbie, as well as of other places, were
too much addicted to Vice and Idleness. These two Religions made a Collection
of memorable Adventures, which had remained a long time unknown, and all
covered with Dust; but at last M. Paullini published them with Notes of his own
making* upon the places that have any particular Relation to natural History;
there are many things very remarkable, as that the Cook of Corbie getting up at
Midnight, the Eve of St. Vitus, the year 86, and opening the Larder Door, it
appeared to him all of a light fire. Cocta autem comestaque in festo pa^roni
carne, quam ubi suspenderat Oeconomus splendour iste evanuit. I Relate these
words in Latin, because I fear I could not Translate them well, for I find no
Syntax in them. Upon this M. Paullini says, That Bartholin and Aquapendente
have made the same experience.

The Journal of the Learned informs us, That on the 14th. of June 83. at
Orleans, Meat has been seen at the Shambles to shine like phosphore. The
Conjecture of Bartholin is not altogether improbable, that somewhat of the
Glo-worms sticks to this Flesh and communicates this shining. There is affirmed
in one of the French Novels of the foregoing Month, That M. Lanzwerdo does not
much credit such Generations as are called Equivocal; that is to say, where the
Mother is of a different kind from that which engenders, or is produced;
nevertheless one of these Friars assures us, that in the year 874. a Woman
brought forth a Black Cat, and that a Mare brought forth a Calf. He adds, That
this Black Cat was burned, because the Father of it was supposed to be of
Devils. M. Paullini makes mention of several such Generations; and it may be
concluded in general, that the Text and Commentary thereon, make a very curious
Treatise. There is likewise the History of a Dog that lived in the year 897. at
Corbie, which was of an Exemplary Devotion, hearing the Mass very modestly, and
observed all the requisite Postures at the reading the Evangelists, or when the
Priest raised up the Host: Besides this, he kept Fasting Days with so much
exactness, that all imaginable Civility could not engage him to taste Flesh. If
he had seen any Dogs piss against the Walls of the Church, he went presently to
bite them with great Zeal, and if there were any that barked in the Yard during
the Mass, he would not fail to quit the place without disturbance to quiet
them; he never suffered any Dog to enter into the Church. Father John Eusebe of
Nieremberg, brings yet a more admirable Example of a Dog; if the Crow of the
Abbey of Conrad were as wise as that Dog, he had not felt an Excommunication
that took away his Appetite, and ordinary briskness, the cause whereof was
thus: Conrad having a mind to wash his Hands, took the Ring off his Finger, and
could not find it when he wanted it again; he caused it to be sought for in
every place, without hearing of it, so that he had issued out an
Excommunication against whoever had stole his Ring; the Crow that took it,
presently felt this stroke, and confined himself within his Nest, with a heavy
heart; this raised the Abbot's suspicion, that it was he that had stole his
Ring, and in effect so it proved, for it was at length found in his Nest, upon
which the Crow came to his first Condition, as may be seen more at large in the
Holy Recreations of Father Angelin Gazee. A Work full of Pious Jests and
Diversions for Devout Souls; as the Sieur Rems remarks, who has Translated them
into French: It may be truly said, that there are more pleasing Accounts in
this Book than in that of Bocace. I do not know what to say to that which Friar
Isibord relates concerning a Cat of their House, which hatched Ducks Eggs, and
took all possible care of the young ones, to whom she communicated her Nature
of warring against Rats. But for what concerns the inability of the Ears of a
certain young Girl, the Abbot of Marolles has left no room to doubt of it,
being so confirmed by the Philosopher Cressot, in the 32 page of his Memoirs,
She much resembled (says he) the Figures or Pictures of the Cynick Philosophers
that are in the Closet of the Curious, being as dirty as they, with a long
Beard and Hair uncombed; she had a very particular thing which I never took
notice of in any but in her, which was to raise her Ears and to fould them at
pleasure without touching them. Father Messie in his 24th. Chapter of his first
Part makes mention of a Man which St. Augustine has seen not only to move his
Ears at pleasure, but also his Hair, without any motion of Hand or Head. This
little Girl then is not so great a rarity as the Relation of a Woman who had 4
Breasts, corresponding to each other before and behind, equally full of Milk;
she lived in the Year 1164, and had thrice Twins who sucked her on both sides.
Nevertheless what we hinted at the Friars of Corbie, does not hinder, but there
have been very famous Men amongst 'em, which may be seen in the Account that M.
Paullini published at Ione, entitled Theatrum illustrium virorum Corbeae
Saxonicae.

Fasciculus Rerum Expetendarum: Or, a Collection of Things to be sought after,
and Things to be avoided; Published at Cologne, in the Year 1535. by Orthuinus
Gratius Presbyter in Daventry, for the Use and Instruction of an Assembly then
Convened, freed from Innumerable Faults, according to the best and choice
Editions of those may Tractates which are contained therein; by the Labor and
Study of Edward Brown Minister. Tom. 19th. Sold at Amsterdam.
WHen Orthuinus Gratius (alias Graes) Published this Work, there was a Council
called, for a Reformation of the Church, and the Catholic Princes did
extremely desire it from the Court of Rome; yet it was doubted very much
whether they should obtain it. Nevertheless the Collector of these Pieces
believed he ought to publish 'em, that in case the Assembly met, they might
draw thence some very necessary Instructions to satisfy such as were for a
regulution of Abuses: Wherefore he added it to his Title, which was since a
little changed in this new Edition. Quod si futurum Concilium celebrari
contigerit, summopere, tanquam cognitu necessaria, ab optimis quibusque
expostulabuntur. All these Advertisements being unprofitable, this Collection
is become very scarce: Whether it was endeavored to be suppressed, because it
has been condemned by the Index's of many Books; or that length of time only
had produced this effect, is uncertain: However 'twas, this persuaded Mr. Brown
to publish this Book anew; though the Roman Church having not received those
Truths it contained, it is not likely they should be more welcome now than
formerly; also the World has not seen this Collection, because of the fewness
of the Copies. I will in brief give an account here of what it means: It Is
composed of 66 different pieces, all which relate to some Abuses of the Roman
Church, either in the Doctrine, or in the manner of the Clergy, or some
Scandalous Histories which this Church has produced since the Popes have had a
desire to usurp a Despotick Power over the Revenues, and even the Consciences
of the Christians, or of pretended Privileges of the Church, which is there
refuted, and of which he shows the evil Consequences; or, in fine, of Heresies
condemned some time since. One may gather from all this, that there were great
Abuses in the Church of Rome, for which there was no remedy in the times of
Orthuinus Gratius, nor is there any to this day.

There are four Pieces which give an account of the History of the Council of
Basil, who have declared the Authority of the Councils Superior to that of
Popes.

The First is an Account of this Council by Aeneas Silvius Picolomini, since
Pope, under the Name of Pius the Second -- This History is so ingenuous and
plain, that in the reading it seems as if one were present at the Council, and
even heard the Fathers speak which composed it. There is no doubt but it has
been faithfully done, since he that wrote it was Secretary of the Council, and
whose interest it was as much to speak ill as well of its Authority: Since
according to the Remarks of John Mason, the Popes gave Benefices, whereas the
Council gave nothing. Thus, although the Author had retracted it, 'twas not of
less consequence, because he was Interess'd so to do, when he became Pope;
whereas when he wrote it, he was engaged of neither side. The reasons of the
retraction, which was found in a Bull at the head of his Works Printed at
Basil, are very weak; as Edmund Richer proves in the fourth Book of his History
of the General Councils.

The Second Piece concerning the Council of Basil, is a Letter of the same
Aeneas Silvius to a Spanish Divine, where he relates after what manner Amideus
Duke of Savoy was Elected Pope, under the Name of Felix, to oppose Eugenius IV.
who had refused to submit to the Council. This Letter was dated at Basil,
August 12. 1440.

The Third Piece consists in two Letters from Julian Cardinal of St. Angel.
Julian the IV. Predecessor of this Pope, had called together the Council of
Basil, and Named this Cardinal as President, who had taken much care to
Assemble it; but Eugene fearing that this Council might be some prejudice to
the Council of Rome, resolved to Dissolve it, and enable the Cardinal of St.
Angel with a sufficient power to do it. Nevertheless this Cardinal, who foresaw
the scandal it would cause, could not persuade himself to obey it; but writ to
Eugenius all the Arguments he had against it; although those Reasons are in bad
Latin, they were nevertheless Vindicated very strongly: He says also first in
other things, Page 57.
Quid dicet universus orbis, cum haec sentiat? nonne judicabit clerum esse
incorrigibilem, and velle semper in suis deformitatibus sordescere? celebrata
tot sunt in diebus nostris concilia, ex quibus nulla secuta est reformatio.
Expectabunt gentes ut ex hoc sequ^retur aliquis fructus; sed si hoc
dissolvatur, dicetur quod nos Irridemus Deum and homin^s. What will all the
World say when they shall see it? will they not judge the Clergy is
Incorrigible, and that they are willing to run into greater disorders? since
which, there have been so many celebrated Councils in our days, of which there
has been no Reformation that people expect some fruit from this. But if it is
dissolved what will be said, but that we m^ck both God and Man. There is also
in these Letters very lively painted the Terrors of the Court of Rome, when a
Reformation was feared, and the ways that they took to hinder the Blow -- We
may consult upon these 2 Letters, Edmund Richer in the third Book of his
History of the Councils. Richer has also in his fourth Piece, which is much
more Correct than this last, an Appeal from the University of Paris in 1517. to
the following Council again Leo X. where appears a List of the chief Abuses,
that reigned then in the Eastern Churches, and which made the Convening of a
Council necessary; with the proofs which the University shows contrary to Leo,
that the Council of Basil was Canonically Assembled, and could not be rejected.
The University protests also against the Treaty that Francis I* has made with
Leo, as pernicious to all the Kingdom in general, and particularly in respect
to Dauphine. At this time was made the Elegy upon the Pragmatick Sanction
(after which succeeded this Treaty) and is expressed throughout the whole with
more Life and Courage than they dare do at this Day. For although France has
much Learning, yet it has as little Valor.

If Orthuinus Gratius had had any regard to order in his Collection, 'twou'd
have been seen here in the extract which is at the 123. Page of the Works of
Nicholas de Clemengis, where this Author reports, That Eugenius spoke freely
against the Council of Basil. There would also have been the Letter of
Frederick of Brunswick (a little while after chosen Emperor) to Charles VIII.
King of France, where he desires him to send Deputies to Mentz, to try if they
could remedy the Schism that was then in the Eastern Churches. It Is Dated 21st.
of May 1400. and it might contribute much to the knowledge of what was treated
of in the Council of Basil, concerning the Peace of the Church.

Script. 5.
There may be added to these pieces concerning the Council of Basil, those that
one Brown speaks of in his Preface, which he had drawn from a Manuscript shown
him by the Archbishop of Canterbury. These are the Credential Letters and
Instructions, that King Henry the 6th. gave his Ambassadors, which were to go
to the Council of Basil; and the Dispatches that he had made to the Court of
Rome, under Martin the 5th. to hasten the Assembling of that Council. Secondly,
The pieces which relate to the Council of Basil, are followed with an Harangue
that the Legates of Leo the 10th. made 1519, before the Emperor Maximilian, and
the Assembly of the Princes of Germany, to persuade them to consent to the
levying in all their States, the 10th. part of the Ecclesiastics, the 20th. of
the yearly Revenues of the rich Laics, the 5th. part only of all others; and
every House taxed to the maintaining of a Soldier under the Pretense of making
War with the Turks. This Design was only to get the Germans Money, to enrich
the House of Medicis, which sufficiently appeared by the Affair of Indulgence:
But the Princes of Germany would not hearken to it at all, as may be seen in
the Refutation of this Harangue, by Ulricus Hutterius, who has unmasked these
Legates of Leo.

If I should keep the order of the old Edition of the Collection, I should put
before it this Harangue and its Refutation, a piece that Mr. Brown, has
inserted in its Preface; which is the Account of an Answer given to Cardinal
Cajetan, Legate of the same Pontiff, in 1518, in the name of the Princes of
Ausburge; by Richard Bartholini de Barouse, Chaplain to Cardinal de Gurk. There
are in this History, all the Dificulties that were found in this Demand of the
Court of Rome, and particularly the just cause they had to distrust him for his
Covetousness, after having been deceived so often under the same pretext.

Script. 6. et Seq. ad 11.
3. After that, there is the Life of Gregory the 7th. by Cardinal Bennon; the
reasons, for which Henry IV. Emperor, chose Guibert instead of Gregory, are
drawn from d' Othon de Frisinge; the manner how Silvester the Second, was
accused of giving himself to the Devil, with an Account of his Death, taken out
of John Stella, a Venetian; the Judgment that Peter Crinitus made of Boniface
the 8th. the Life of the Emperor Henry the 4th. Written by Otbert Bishop of
Liege, in the year 1106, with some Letters of the same Emperor to the Pope, and
to diverse Princes; the cruel manner wherewith Henry was treated by Gregory, is
sufficiently known, and may be seen in their Lives, what Princes ought to
expect from the Pope, if they are so vain to promise an Establishment of those
Opinions in their States, which the Court of Rome has endeavored to spread
every where about her Sovereign Authority, in all matters, Spiritual and
Temporal.

4. How Popes have to the utmost endeavored to render the Election of the
Emperor, dependent upon the Court of Rome. The Princes of Germany have not
failed to oppose it, and one of the principal Ramparts against the Enterprises
of Italy, is the Golden Bull, given Script. 12.
by Charles the 4th. in the year 1365 and the 10th. of January: 'Twas this that
obliged Orthuinus Gratius, to publish this Bull, in a Collection, wherein he
designed to advertise the Princes of dangerous Abuses that ought to be
corrected, which was daily put in practice by the Court of Rome.

5. One of the Fictions, which has been the worse founded, and which was
forged to establish the temporal Greatness of the Pope, is the pretended gift
of Constantine, where he says, that he gave all the West to Pope Silvester and
his Successors. Now there is none who has Learning or Sincerity amongst the
Roman Catholics, that will not acknowledge this to be merely Supposititious;
and that this is not the same that was 200 years since: And he is wanting in
the serious Refutation of a piece which he dares not now make mention of;
wherefore we ought not to regard, as foreign to our purpose, the Refutation of
Script. 13. et Seq. ad 18
Laurentius Valla, here brought against this Gift of Constantine, which is
thoroughly examined by the Collection of diverse Learned men, who either doubt it
to be Authentic, or wholly reject it. If all these pieces were lost, we should
not want to object to those Men who look upon this Gift as ridiculous, the
novelty of their Opinion which opposes the consent of many Ages. Thus we must
abolish all Writings which prove it, with those that condemn it: Or in keeping
the first we must preserve the second.

6. The Vaudois are in the number of those who have complained of the Abuses of
the Roman Church, and who have Script. 19. and 20.
endeavored to Correct them, as may be seen in the Confession of Faith which
some of 'em sent formerly to Uladislaus King of Hungary, with their Answer to
one Augustine Dr. of Divinity, addressd to the same Prince -- This Answer is
Dated 6 days after Epiphany. The Confession and Answer are much better
Translated than most of the Pieces in the Ages past, and contain Opinions very
conformable to those of the Reformed, on the Sacraments, Invocation of Saints,
Purgatory, Holy Scripture, and some other Articles; those who desire to know in
what those who have written these Epistles, differed from the Reformed at this
day, may have recourse to the Original, tho it is not to be found only in this
Book, but also in the Collections of the Historians of Bohemia by Freber.

7. After this of the Vaudois are some Pieces concerning the Doctrine of
Wickliff, and the manner how they were condemned, viz. in a Book of one William
Woodward, who lived at the end of the 14th. Age, against the Opinions of
Wickliff, in 18 Articles which are at the beginning of this Treatise; and with
a much greater number of Articles which were attributed to Wickliff, whether
true or false, and condemned in the Council of Constance, with the Censure and
Refutation of 44 in particular: Without doubt several of these Treatises are
attributed to Wickliff, as some Learned Protestants have made appear. Some seem
to be ill understood, as the last. Omnes Religiones indifferenter introductae
sunt a Diabolo: If Wickliff had said, he understood by Religions the Order of
the Monks, against whom he was much Incensed, as it appears by the Articles of
Page 277. against the Religions; Nevertheless the censure of this Proposition
supposes that we must take the word Religions in the most common sense of the
different manners of serving God, as are the Iudaick and Christian Religions.
But when they will condemn any one, or take all that he says in the worst
sense, it ought to render their Explications extremely suspected, who has given
us his Opinion of the Ancient Heretics, as well as the Orthodox Fathers,
hurried away by their Zeal, ordinarily rendered 'em as worthy to be condemned
as possible. There are Remarks also upon this ill Custom, and the manner
whereby Page 296. and Seq.
Aeneas Silvius exposes the Opinions of Wickliff, which he says passed from
England to Bohemia, and in the Sentence of the Council of Constance against
him, who declared him to be a Heretic, after his Death commanded to take up
his Bones, if it was possible, to distinguish 'em from those of the Faithful
who were buried near him, and cast them out of the Churchyard.

8. Scr. 24.
Aeneas Silvius says in his History of the Bohemians, That the Opinions of
Wickliff were transferred from England into Bohemia, by a Bohemian Gentleman
who Studied at Oxford, and returning into his own Country, carried some of
Wickliff's Books with him. However the Council of Constance, after they had
condemned him, also condemned John Hus and Ierom of Prague, and their
Disciples, Scr. 26. ad 31.
as may be seen at large by diverse Pieces which are here inserted touching the
affairs of the Bohemians. It is shown there also what passed in the Council of
Basil, the Demands that were made to 'em, and their Answers thereon.

Orthuinus Gratius has not forgot on this occasion the celebrated Letter of
Poggius to Leonard Arretin, upon the Death of Ierom of Prague; but he
endeavors to be beforehand with the Reader against Poggius, that he may not
believe all he says to the honor of Ierom of Prague. This is apparent, that
this History has too much effect upon the mind of the Reader, and makes him
suspect Ierom of Prague of Hypocrisy; and the same Author has put after the
Letter of Poggius, a Discourse of Leonard Arretin against Hypocrites, where
Gratius having easily applied the Truths that Leonard Arretin advances, to the
Fathers of the Council, which is not to be believed, although the Application was
but too just.

9. This Piece that follows contains the Canons of a Council, Script. 34. It Is
spoken of in the 32 th. and 33 th. Piece upon the first Article.
held by an ArchBishop of Mentz, named Arribon, the year 1023. concerning some
abuses of that time, as against Priests, who imagined themselves to be able to
extinguish a fire, by casting into it a consecrated Host.

10. There are afterward two Writings which contain the Examination of John de
Wesel, Doctor of Divinity, accused of Heresy; he was brought before two
Dominicans, Gerard Elten, and James Springer; the first being an Inquisitor of
Faith, in 1479. Some Thomists had remarked in his Sermons, Propositions they
judge Heretical. There are some Opinions supposed to be faithfully reported,
which agree to those of the Protestants, touching the Scripture, the Authority
of the Ecclesiastics, and fasting. He says (for example) that the holy
Scripture must be expounded by its self, and that we are not obliged to comply
with Expositions, or other Writings of Doctors. There are also some particular
Propositions very remarkable, as this, Raro reperio vel duas unanimes
literatos, etiam in fide. Nullus tenet mecum, dempto Evangelio, ubi omnes sumus
concordes. I rarely find two Learned Persons of the same Opinion, even in
matters of Faith; but no Body is of my Opinion, except in regard to the
Evangelists, in which we all agree. He also says, Quod Papa and Episcopi and
Sacerdotes nihil sint ad salutem; sed sola concordia sufficit and pacificee vi
vere; that the Pope, Bishops and Priests, are nothing to our Salvation; but
Unity alone suffices to live happily. He believed also that one ought rather to
give Faith to St. John, who says, that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father;
than to that Article of Athanasius's Creed, that these Doctors cite under the
name of the Council of Nice; which Article says, the Holy Ghost proceeded from
the Father and the Son. In the Assembly, where the Inquisitor Elten was
President, he demands of the accused Doctor, if those Propositions of which we
spoke, were his? The Doctor would have explained himself more at length, and
said, that he did not know that he had writ any thing against the decisions of
the Church; but if it was so, he was there to retract it. Magister noster
Gerardus immediately interrupted him, and told him, after having heard that he
was ready to retract the Errors that he had committed: Petis nunc gratiam? Do
you beg pardon? The Divine answered him, that he could not for errors unknown
to him: And upon that, the Inquisitor said that he should be put in mind of 'em
by examining 'em. He came to this Examen, which they read in the Original,
where they might mark the Spirit of the Inquisition, or those who imitated it.
Magister noster Gerardus did all he could to manage this poor Doctor, so that
he might not justify himself, or draw him from his pretended Errors without a
noise, by good reasons: But to render him infamous and guilty, in malignantly
explaining all his words; 'twas this made him say with sufficient reason to
this misfortune: After the manner you have used me, if Jesus Christ were here,
you might condemn him as a Heretic; to whom it was answered laughing, That if
he were, he would overcome him by subtilty. In fine, Whether convinced or no of
his errors, Mr. Wesel was obliged to make a public Retraction, and so submit
to what penance they pleased to impose on him.

He that writ the relation of this Examination, ends with considerable Remarks
upon the understanding of the Divines of that time, except, says he, the
Article of the Procession of the Holy Ghost, which imports very little; it
seems not to have deserved so deep a censure as the others. If they had given
him time and liberty to consult persons about 'em, he might have cleared
himself, if the most part of the Judges had not been Realists; or if the
Religious had not had a mind to insult over a secular Priest, who had no esteem
for St. Thomas, he might have been proceeded against with more humanity. I can
take God to witness, that their manner of dealing with him until he had
retracted and burned his Books, has extremely displeased Mr. Engelin de
Brunswick, and Mr. John Keisersberg, who were Men of Learning and Integrity.
Mr. Engelin in particular, thought they acted with too much Precipitation
against so great a Man as John de VVesel; he confesses freely, that the most
part of his Articles may be maintained. He dissembled not the hatred that the
Thomists had against the Moderns (he observes some amongst the Divines of that
age, who did not believe St. Thomas to be infallible) and the satisfaction
the-Monks took in triumphing over Seculars: This can be nothing but the Devil,
who sowed this Division amongst the Divines, which causes so much Inveteracy
amongst 'em, and diversity of Opinions, as those who follow Thomas Ascot; and
if any should deny the Universals to be Realists, they judge him guilty of the
sin against the Holy Ghost, which they think to be a most culpable sin against
God, the Christian Religion, Justice, and all Policy; from whence comes this
but from the Devil, who deludes our Imaginations, and draws us to the search of
useless things, and cold Speculations, which make us neither devout nor
charitable, lest we should oblige our selves to what is more honest, and learn
how to regulate our Manners, and to procure Salvation to our Souls? This is the
reason that none is edified, and that the Zeal of Christians diminishes daily.

11. The greatest part of the rest of the Writings which compose this Volume,
are Complaints that the Germans and French made some Ages past against many
Abuses, whereof they demanded a Reformation at the Court of Rome, who troubled
themselves not much with it. Most of these Pieces are very well known;
therefore we shall mention 'em in a few words: There are diverse Grievances,
that the Dyets of the Empire made known to the Pope's Legate, which was sent to
'em, and the Answers of these Legates, to evade the Complaints; Nicholas de
Clemengi's Writings upon a General Council, and Abuses that ought to be
reformed. The Harangues of John Francis, and of Anthony Cornelius Linnecau,
upon the Depravation of Manners and Discipline, with the Book of Erasmus of the
manner whereby their Controversies, which divided the Western Churches, are
sufficient to put a Period to all these Animosities.

12. In fine, there is some Discourse upon the Original, and Power of the Turks
with the manner of its Abatement, and Reasons that introduce Christian Princes
not to despair of their overthrow. Orthuinus Gratius, who has often placed
unuseful Prefaces and Advertisements both at the beginning and ending of his
Works, of which I have treated, ends his Collection with a Discourse, where he
protests the Innocence of his design in publishing so many Heresies and
Complaints against the Roman Church; he makes it appear by his Declamations
against the Heretics, which were spread through the whole Work and
Advertisements, that he was zealous for the Roman Religion, although he wished
they had Corrected some Abuses which insensibly slipped into their Manners. He
made the Elegy upon the Council of Basil, and University of Paris, and defends
others who have opposed themselves to the utmost Authority of the Popes. It Is
apparent, that all his Zeal against the Heretics could not hinder him from
ranking this Work at Rome amongst Prohibited Books. There is more profit in
reading the great Preface of Mr. Brown, where he not only makes useful Remarks
upon this Collection, and upon those of its Supplement; but also relates some
curious Pieces, that had not been seen until then, which has been already
spoken of: There are some nevertheless since this Collection is not for the
People; he that published it might very well have sorborn many Invectives in
his Preface and Notes against the Roman Church; and there are a thousand Pieces
more proper to declaim against, than a Work of this nature; this is a fault for
which Orthuinus Gratius has been oftentimes reprehended.

The Christian Wife of John Mayerus, Professor of Divinity; or three
Dissertations about Wedlock, Incest, and Divorces. Amsterdam at Jansonius
Waesburgs, 1688 in Quarto, page 438.
SInce Laws punish Poligamy with so much severity, it seems there was no need
of the assistance of Divines to stop the disorders which might have given life
to a Book, called, Poligamus Triumphans, written by one Mrs. Lyserus; yet this
Opinion would nevertheless be as dangerous to the Heart, as to the Mind. For if
it was true, that there was a Legitimate privilege, of which the Laws have
deprived Man, so as he could act no farther, except he violate them without
their taking notice that he was not exempt from their Penalties: Yet
Industrious Love would not want means to laugh at their unjustice, and enjoy a
liberty which should set no limits to his desires. Thus Mr. Mayerus, who is a
learned Professor at Harderwick, finding the Question important, and worthy of
his utmost endeavors, undertaketh here to overthrow the imaginary Triumph of
Poligamy. His Work is divided into three dissertations. The first regards
Polygamy, the second treats of Incest, and the last of Divorce. He observes,
that the first care of Legislators ought to make Laws for Marriage, which is
the Basis and Foundation of Commonwealths. Therefore, after God had imprinted
in Man the Inclination which induces him to Wedlock, he ordered him besides to
increase and multiply. The Author grants, that these words include a Command,
which concerns not only Men, but Women also; so that no body ought to bury
their Talents. Yet he adds, that the Obligation was much more indispensable
immediately after the Creation and deluge, because the World was then a vast
Desert. But the rule ought no more to be taken in the Rigor: Yet he maintains
with the Fathers of the Church; that Adam looked not on Eve as his Wife, nor
had for her the tenderness of a Husband, until after his crime. This is it
which has given place to the pleasant Imaginations of the Rabins upon the
Apple gathered on the Tree of Life, which the Serpent tempted the Woman to
taste, who having found it delicious, corrupted the Innocence of the first Man,
and made him become the Father of Mankind. Does it not seem that Mr. Sarazin
has sweetened this Thought to make his Sonnet so much the more famous against
Women?

Mr. Mugerius afterward maintains, that the Polygamists can draw no advantage
from the Command of God, Increase and Multiply, because it bears an unlimited
License to mix himself indifferently: For this is understood only in relation
to a just Marriage, such as God has instituted from the beginning of the
World, to wit, between two persons. The proof drawn from the example of Beasts
cannot be applied to Man who governs himself according to the Laws of reason,
which abhors this confused mixture. If he was governed by a blind instinct
merely, it might be maintained, that there is nothing criminal in the most
unlawful Copulations. After all, Is not the Turtle-Dove with its tender
Cooings, and Sighs, the Symbol of Conjugal Fidelity? Its true, that Men
sometimes resemble wild Beasts which tear one another, the most powerful
destroy the weakest. His Passions, which tyrannise over him, and keep him as a
Slave in Chains, often overwhelm Reason which distinguishes him from them.
Nevertheless they enjoy, say they, much more than he does this precious
liberty, which he prostitutes to whosoever will buy it; and according to
Montaigne, We are but the Tenants of our life. But these disorders suffice not
to take from Man all his Prerogatives. The Arts and Sciences which enlighten
his reason, and enrich his mind, give him a Pre-eminence which suffers not
these odious Comparisons. It is not to lose his liberty when it is limited only
by reason, and the Laws of Society: It is on the contrary a more noble liberty
which cannot be put in competition with this natural brutality which makes the
liberty of Animals. It follows then, that he ought not, as they say, to
trample under foot Modesty and Chastity, and being endowed with an
understanding, he ought to distinguish himself from Beasts in the very things
which he resembles them most in, to show that he does not behave himself like
unto them, by a brutish impetuosity, and that he can bridle his desires.

Having answered the vain Declamations of the Polygamists, the Author strives
to show that Polygamy is repugnant to the Law of Nature; and he calls the Law
of Nature the Will of God, who has fixed Laws of Nature in the Creation of one
only Man, and one only Woman, which he has formed upon that account. He
pretends also that it overturneth natural Equity; because it is not just that a
Wife should be constrained under the Yoke of an exact Fidelity, whilst the
Husband is prodigal of his Conjugal Love elsewhere: Both of 'em, according to
him, are strictly tied by this Precept of Law, To give to every one what
belongs unto him. Men, if we believe St. Gregory of Nazianzen, do abstain only
because they have made Laws which take away a tyrannical authority over a Sex,
which has no other power to defend its Rights, but that of Charms and Natural
Graces. The Wanderings of a Husband then are Frauds and Stealths, and directly
contrary to the Fundamental Contracts of Marriage, by which he obliges himself
solemnly to his Wife. Mr. Myerius adds, That Poligamy is opposite to the tender
Union which ought to be between Married Persons. Diversity of Women divorces
and weakeneth the Desires and Transports of the Heart. It is with them as with
Brooks, which being divided into several Branches, leave dry those Meadows from
whence they arose in abundance. It was for this reason that the Hebrews called
him who kept himself single a sad half of Man; whence it is easy to conclude,
that he has need but of another half. The Jealousy which would infallibly
kindle amongst the Women, seems yet another important reason to the Author,
against the Opinion of Polygamists. For it would be a Civil-war as dangerous in
the small Domestic State, as in a Commonwealth wherein every one would be
Master. Those which unhappily find, that Repenting Marriage claims the Rights
Of Palling Ioys, and Tedious Nights.
Will not perhaps think these Arguments convincing. As Marriages are commonly
the Works of Love or Fortune, how can we still apply our selves to the same
person, when the Heart has not chosen her; or to make our tenderness live
longer than the Charms which gave it birth? Second Marriages would remedy all,
and would be a kind of Infidelity, and Inconstancy without a crime, Besides,
the Jealousy of several Women animated with a design to please and to be
preferred, is not without Charms. Is it not said, That the Patriarch Jacob was
rejoiced by the Emulation of Lea, which had given Mandrakes to obtain what was
due to the Beauty of Rachel? Whilst a Woman which has no Rival, keeps the
heart of her Husband without any fear of losing it. But this is to be
understood something more seriously, and it is maintained, that the reasons
which favor Poligamy are suggested by the Intemperance and corruption of the
Heart. And indeed Honesty (which is an inviolable Law in good Manners) does not
suffer these Extravagant Conjunctions, and Immoderate Transports. Love, who
only looks on the heart of the person beloved, cannot consent to those new
Engagements which divide his Cares and Wishes. But Debauchery may be extended
to a thousand, because it has but unsettled Sentiments. After that the Author
enters into a Calculation of numbers, to persuade Men what a rashness it is to
have several Women at once. Iuvenal says, who reckoned it amongst the Troubles
of Marriage, that if a poor Husband has slept quietly all Night, nothing is in
order the next day, and the Wife expresses nothing but Discontent, after a
most Terrible manner.

-- Si nocte maritus
Aversus jacuit tota, periit domus.
All the Infirmities which spring from Debauchery, are here marked out as so
many Reasons to overthrow Poligamy, and we must not forget to take notice of
the Pains of the Gout, which make Old Men remember the sins of their Youth. In
fine, because Error seems to have its spring as much from the Temperament, as
from the Heart, Mr. Mayerus prescribes ways how to overcome it. He compares
the Flesh to a mad Horse, which ought to be tamed by Temperance and Work.

In the 4th. Chapter he answers the great Argument of the Polygamists, which is
drawn from almost all people who have ever made use of it. To end the Dispute
of this History, the Author observes, that the Author of Poligamy was Lamech,
and his example, though a great Libertine, was almost generally followed: So
that the Rabbis maintain, that before the Flood, they were wiser than we in
following Ages, because they took two Wives, one for Pleasure and Delight, and
the other only to get Children. The Emperors Theodosius Arcadias, and Honorius
in 393. forbid Poligamy by an express Law. It is certain that until then it was
very common throughout the whole Empire, and with the Nations of the East. The
Romans, which were a little more severe in their Manners, did not put it in
practice. Mark Anthony, being seduced by the Charms of Cleopatra, was the first
who took the liberty of marrying two Wives; although some pretend, that Caesar
had introduced the liberty by a Law which was since renewed by the Emperor
Valentinian the I. Whence Polygamists may conclude, that it is a natural Law,
because Grotius confounds the Law of Nations, with that of Nature. And Mr.
Mayerus is of Opinion, that the Corruption and Errors of Nations constitute not
the Laws of Nations, since we have seen some so barbarous as to feed on human
Flesh: So we must consult the Laws of Nations the most polite, and see if they
have been enlightened by the Gospel, and conducted by Reason in the
Establishment of their Laws. As for Caesar, it is not true, that he published
such a Law; but as he was the most voluptuous of all Men, it was said of him,
that he was the Husband of all Women, and the Wife of all Husbands. Suetonius
says, that he intended thereby to authorize his Baseness under the vail of a
Lawful Polygamy. They say, the same thing of Valentinian, who renewed not the
Edict of Caesar, as Socrates has reported it, or who did it through the same
motive; to wit, that he abused the Supreme Authority to color his double
Marriage, contrary to the Purity of Christianity. The Examples of Abraham and
the Patriarchs, seem to be more pressing, and better to fortify the cause of
Polygamists; but Mr. Mayerus shows, that the Patriarchs having no Revelation,
followed the custom which was in that time: Yet their ignorance can be no proof
for it, and we must not imitate them, seeing we have Revelation for a Guide. As
to Moses, it is not agreed on, that besides Zipperah, he married the Daughter
of the King of Ethiopia, as Joseph testifies. After that, the Author taking all
the Passages of Scripture, which command Man to be satisfied with one Wife
only; he clears this matter with a great deal of Learning, and attacks the
Chimerical Opinion of the Polygamists by most positive Authorities, drawn from
the New Testament (amongst others, by the 12 th. Chapter of St. Matthew) which
wholly blots out the strong impression that Examples could make, which God had
tolerated under the Old.

The second Dissertation is employed to speak of unlawful Degrees of Kindred,
and in which it is not permitted to contract Marriage. If we considered nothing
but the Law of Nations, every one would have a full liberty in his choice. The
Persons that are the nearest related, would not be excluded thence, that they
might join to that of Blood, a more tender Union, and tie the Knot still closer.

-- Gentes tamen esse feruntur
In quibus and nato genitrix, and nata parenti
Iungitur, ut piet as geminato crescat amore.
Ovid. But God having prohibited us to marry in certain degrees of Proximity,
no body ought to oppose it. To that end, Mr. Meyerus gives us a Theological
Explication of all the Precepts of Leviticus upon this matter. He speaks
accidentally of several Questions which spring from those Laws, where all the
Cases are not expressed. The Decision of it might be expected from Lawyers; but
so many curious things would not be found in them, and chiefly concerning the
Jews and Karaites, whose Opinions are here expounded, and which may be read
with a great deal of profit: Yet we shall stop but at one general difficulty,
which is to know if the Levitical-Law is a moral and natural Law, or simply a
Ceremonial one, which the Church may pass by: Those who extol the power of the
Pope, stick not at flattering him with this Power, excepting in a direct line.
Some Protestants have embraced the same Party, and maintained, that these
Politic Laws had respect only to the Republic of the Jews. The Author is of
the contrary Sentiment, and pretends that as there is Incest betwixt the Father
and Granddaughter, there is no difference for the other prohibited degrees.
According to him, the Commands in Leviticus are not pure Ceremonies, and Rules
of Policy; they are the Determinations of Reason and Sense, and the Decrees of
Nature, which God has engraven in our Hearts. In effect, natural Modesty
resists these Marriages betwixt Persons so near, in whose Veins the same Blood
seems still to run. As Decency and Honesty ought always to preside, it is
better to be too scrupulous, for fear of wounding good Manners, than to expose
our selves to give a scandal to the public. Consequently, the Pope cannot
dispense with the Precepts of Leviticus, which are of a positive right. It was
the Opinion of Thomas Aquinas, that these Laws are Obligatory, and of a
perpetual Observation, with which the Pope cannot dispense, because his
Authority is Inferior to him that made them. The greatest part of the Doctors
which were consulted upon the famous question of the Divorcement of Henry the
VIII. which made so much noise in the last Age, upheld the same Sentiment. To
this we shall add but one thing; That there ought to be some difference put
betwixt the Degrees of Consanguinity and Affinity. The latter do not produce so
straight a connection, and often are but fictious, which Men have invented for
Decency, whilst the first are formed by Blood, and Nature it self.

In the third Dissertation, which treats of Divorces, Mr. Mayerus maintains
that under the ancient Law, Women taken in Adultery were punished with the
utmost Punishments. But since that time, Men have been mighty slack in this:
For now the whole affront is on the Husbands side; and it has been very
prettily said, that if a young Woman commits Uncleanness, it is for her self;
and that if a Wife does as much, it is imputed to her Husband. Neither is it
remarked, that this extreme rigidness was practiced amongst the Jews. On the
contrary, here its related, that there was amongst them two Opinions, which
divided them: The one maintained, that the Bill of Divorce could be given for
Adultery only; the other, that it could be done on other occasions, provided
they were of consequence; Deformity for example, old Age, or ill humor, or for
boiling the Meat too much. Howbeit, Mr. Mayerus proves, that Adultery is the
only cause for which Marriage may be dissolved; and shows it plainly by the
words of Jesus Christ in the Gospel. This truth cannot be withstood; but the
use on it would be dangerous in so corrupt an Age as ours, and where the
disloyalty of Women is only a pleasant entertainment. The best on it is, that
each quietly dissembles his Disgraces and Sorrows, without rushing into sad
demonstrations of it: And Men laugh as well at the Accuser as the accused. It
is then better prudently, not to clear our selves herein, and to believe our
suspicions and restlesness ill grounded. When all is done, there are such
Husbands, as it is difficult to be faithful to them, and whose Person is a kind
of excuse for the Weaknesses and Errors of a young Heart. For in fine, we do
not love by Reason and Duty, and nothing is truer than, Who gives his Child, a
Man she hates,
Must answer all the faults such Tie creates.
Moliere.

Discourses `upon the Sciences, in which, besides the Method of studying, it is
taught how we ought to make use of Sciences, to enrich our Minds with Justice,
and our Hearts with Piety, for the Good of the Church: With Advice to such as
live Retire in Holy Orders at Bruxels. Sold by Eug. Henry Frick, 1614. in 12s.
and at Rotterdam, by Reiniers Leers.
THere is all the likelihood in the World, that these Dicourses were made by
the same Father of the Oratory, who is the Author of the Art of speaking, and
of the new reflection upon the Art of Poetry. He is a Man that understands the
Mathematics, examins things with much application, expresses himself clearly,
and who wanted no fine Thoughts. As he has studied much, it was impossible for
him not to observe the usual defects, as to the Methods which are followed in
studying: He gives us his Reflections thereupon. They are sometimes superficial
enough, but it is a mark of his Judgment; for a Book that is for the use of all
those that study, must not be filled with Depths and Abstractions, which is to
refer all to God. All the World needs to be advertised thereof, and the Men of
Letters more than others.

The first of the seven Discourses wherewith this Work is composed, shows the
Profit of Learning: But after that we are shown that it is prejudicial to
certain Men, because it swells and spoils their Mind, and that it procures them
nothing which does free them from this loss. A man, says this Author, whom too
violent an Application to his studies has made sick, and reduced into Poverty
through his neglecting his Affairs, amongst Persons which neglect or despise
him, which is the common lot of Learned Men: This man, I say, is esteemed by
perhaps a dozen Scholars, English, German, Italian, etc. whereof one speaks of
him advantageously in strange Countries, another cites his Works with
Encomiums; but these praises which scarcely do reach him, do not deliver him
from his Sickness, do not feed him, nor secure him against the Judgments of
God. We are moreover advertised, that over-curiosity is no less prejudicial to
Men of study, than Pride; it is necessary notwithstanding, very necessary to
study. Let the Debauched boast as much as they will of their Genius and Wit,
the Author cannot believe their Ability, even in sensual Pleasures. To advance
in Letters, says he, we must love Solitude; deprive our selves of pastimes,
resist the lightness of our Mind, which requires change; we must oblige our
selves to a certain rule for rising, for going to Bed, for taking our Meals,
and our Recreations, that we may fix the hours of our Study, and find time,
which we should employ thereat. These are Labors essentially necessary to
become Learned. After that, we must no more admire that amongst so many that
are destined for Studies, there are so few that succeed. True it is, that we
see People who pleased themselves in naming certain Learned Persons, which have
been very disorderly in their Youth. The name of these Learned Men is cited in
all places; but it is an ill excuse for the Slothful and Voluptuous to make use
of where they see that they are upbraided with the Abuse which they make of
their time; and that they are foretold of the sorrowful Consequences thereof.
It is an unhappy Illusion: It is impossible, that those who constantly study
may not become very Learned; but it is almost impossible, that a Man who does
not extremely study, should acquire much Learning; and if the few Examples
which are alleged were examined well, it would be found, that they are neither
extraordinary Wits, nor have they much Learning, but only a little Address to
hide their Ignorance. Scarcely do we know any thing, when we study Night and
Day. How should we be learned without studying much? The Author gives some
Advice to them that would instruct others, and maintains with a great deal of
reason, that it is by good Logic that we ought to begin to study.

After having given us some general Counsels, he descends to particular ones in
the third Discourse, as to that which we call the Study of human Letters. He
says, that as in a Commonwealth there must be People who inhabit Mountains
and Barren places; it is also in Letters advantageous, and even of the order of
Providence, that there should be Persons that are willing to cultivate the most
unfertile Grounds. A Man which looks upon it as a great thing, (adds he) to
know what was the order of the Months of the Macedonians is despicable; but he
that collects this order (if there was occasion for it) the clearing thereof
deserves so much the more praise as his work is the more painful. Its
unnecessary, that all the World should study Arabic; but it is necessary some
Body should be found, whom one should have recourse unto, when this Language is
of any necessity. This is for the instruction of those who absolutely condemn
all the Studies which have not a continual use in the course of civil Life, and
which do not bring as great Riches into the Country, as the Occupation of
Merchants: Several other good Reflections may be seen in this third Treatise.

The fourth begins with very pious Discourses, which are followed with several
Considerations upon Poetry and Grammar. The Author describes the advantages and
necessity of Eloquence, and advises to the reading of Cicero. There is no
Author amongst the ancient Heathens, says he, whose Study is more useful for
the solidity of Thoughts, for the admirable Maxims, for the Idiom of the Latin
Tongue, and for the fine way of discovering Truth, and making it known with so
much variety and fruit, that the Minds of the most distracted are necessitated
to perceive it.

The fifth Discourse contains a Description of the Life, which the Congregation
of the Fathers of the Oratory had. The Author speaks very finely thereof; for
example, that although they do not make the three Vows of Poverty, Chastity and
Obedience, they are notwithstanding observed. There is no Indulgence, says he,
for the opposite Vice to Chastity. Those that cannot be profitable to Persons
of a different Sex, never to speak to them, though they are consecrated to God.
Those which are confessed, are seldom seen out of the Tribunal of Penitents.
What Conversations they have with them are short, never by nights, nor in
remote places, but as public as can be, and in presence of Witnesses. By this
means Scandal is avoided, and suspicions, being vigorously punished, the Crime
is not committed. He adds, that they undertake nothing which engages them to
great Expenses, as Magnificent Buildings, Guildings, rich Paintings; and that
also they have no necessity of making recourse to rich Persons, not in danger
of betraying their Ministry by baseness and flatteriee: It is a Crime with us,
pursues he, to intrude into Families, to meddle with Marriages, or Law Suits.
He speaks much of their manner of studying, and instructing young Persons. He
says, that when they find any penetrating and great Wit, which has a good
Genius for their Sciences, he is disburthen'd of all other Affairs; and they
believe, that he cannot render better Services to the Church than by studying.
He says also, that they use great Precaution to those who desire to enter into
their Society; for if they have any Inclination to Vice, and feel themselves
weak, they are advised to uphold themselves by Religious Vows, and to shut
themselves up in Cloisters. If they have fallen into great Crimes, they are
persuaded to fix on Monasteries, and to pass their whole life in Repentance
therein, without ever making themselves Priests. But if they give marks of a
holy Calling, without perceiving themselves called to an Austere Religion, they
are received without speaking to them of receiving any Order; but after being
purified by a long Penitence, in which, a regulate Life, and remote from all
Commerce with the World, makes the Principal part. He relates several other
things infinitely glorious to this illustrious Congregation, but he advertises
us in two or three places, that he makes not an Encomium, but gives an Image of
an Holy Community; wherein may be seen what Men ought to be. He adds to his
fifth Discourse, what has been said of the Cycopedie of Xenophon, that it was
not an History, but the Idea of a wise Government, non ad Historiae fidem, sed
ad effigiem very Imperii Scriptum esse. It is the means of appeasing a little
the other Orders of the Church, which might perhaps believe that they had a
design to oppress them.

The two following Discourses are placed in a Library which is valued at more
than 20000 Crowns. There are considered the Books that are most necessary for
each Science, and the most proper Method to make a good use thereof. He speaks
very contemptuously of the Scholasticks, and maintains it is sufficient to read
one or two of them, because commonly they do but copy one another. He has not
more consideration for the Casuists, but believes them dangerous for the most
part, because they seem to confirm Sinners against God, and teach them the
means to shuffle with him, in showing them how far they may offend him without
his having a right to punish them. M. Bornier in his excellent Abridgment of
the Tome 7. p. 529. 2 edit.
Philosophy of Gassandus relates a Spanish Proverb which he heard the late
chief President of Moignon say, That those who trouble themselves to seek for a
prop to their doubts amongst Casuists, seek silently to perplex the Law of God,
Quieren pleytear contra la ley de Dios. Afterward he speaks of Preachers, and
praises above all others Father le Ieune, and a Father of the Oratory, who
lately died with the Reputation of one of the first Preachers of his time,
though he only clothed Father le Jeune after such a manner as might be
acceptable to the World. They had this in common, that both Lived as they
Preached. The latter had no concern with the World, but by necessity, and he
was never seen at Feasts, where Preachers destroy all that they have
maintained, according to our Author.

At the end of this Book are two Letters of Morality: The first treats of the
beauty and necessity of Order: The second presents to an Ecclesiastic, who
would leave his Retreat to take a Benefice upon him, the danger he exposed
himself to by this change. He shows him how the Commerce of the World is
dangerous, and how it sometimes happens, that a Priest, who has resolution
enough to renounce lewd Pleasures, yields to the temptation of Good-fellowship.
At first the necessity of eating is pleasing to him, which afterward he
prevents, and eats between Meals, will have Sauces, and imploys in them the
Money he at first gave the Poor. He gets him Friends who are people of pleasure
and Goodfellowship. He thinks himself no longer rich enough, but seeks after
Benefices; he is distasted at a Regular Life, and in a little time becomes like
the Laics, Commixti sunt inter Gentes and didicerunt opera eorum: For in fine,
he keeps not Company with them in their Pleasures, to Preach Repentance. They
invite him, to divert themselves with him, and he strives to be neither
Incommodious, nor Displeasing. He, like to them, esteems Goodfellowship, they
Sing, they provoke one another to Drink. It is indeed a most dangerous
Temptation for Ecclesiastical Persons: They are too much afraid, lest they
should pass for Formal Men, and interrupt the Pleasures of a good Meal. They
are too solicitous, lest People should complain, that they are not contended
only to be tedious in their Sermons.

A Recital of the Conference that Luther had with the Devil, given by Luther
himself in his Book of the Private Mass about the Unction of Priests; with
Remarks upon his Conference at Paris, by John Baptista Coignerd, 1684.
THis is the third Edition of this Work of Monsieur Cordemoi. He relates the
Dispute, that Luther confesses himself he had one Night with the Devil,
touching private Masses, and draws from them most grievous and odious
Consequences against the Protestants. The Lutherans who have made so great a
number of Books, ought to oppose him. It looks as if he was not willing to
destroy the disadvantageous Idea that it represented to the mind when in a
Dream, or any other manner, an Instruction is received from the Devil; for as
he is called in the Evangelist the Father of Lies, so there is no great
Persuasion necessary to make one believe he never spoke truth: But we ought to
conclude otherwise when a Spirit is so wicked as himself, which delights in the
disorder of the World, and in committing many Crimes, so that nothing is more
hateful to him that the Truth, that he should be capable to Induce Men to speak
the Truth: It Is not wonderful that the Providence of Almighty God, who often to
his end makes use of second Causes, and sometimes employs the Malice of the
Devil to the advancement of good. Now in part omitting here the Question,
Whether Luther Preaches the Truth, or not? It is easily apprehended, that it is
possible that an Evil Spirit might at that time believe a Lie would be less
proper than the Truth, to excite cruel Passions in their minds. It is not very
likely that any thing was more pleasing to the Devil, than the Discord that was
caused about the Contest of Truth. As for Example, The Ten Persecutions of the
Ancient Church sufficiently show.

The Grand Seignior's Spy, and his Secret Relations sent to the Divan of
Constantinople, discovered at Paris in the Reign of Lewis the Great, in
Twelves, at Amsterdam, by Westhein.
THis Work was Counterfeited at Amsterdam, with the consent of the Bookseller
of Paris who first Printed it; its composed of many little Volumes, which
contain the most considerable Events of Christendom in general, and of France
particularly, from the Year 1637. to 1682. An Italian, Native of Genoa, Marana
by Name, gives these Relations as Letters Written to the Ministers of the
Ports, by a Turkish Spy, who concealed himself at Paris. He pretends he
Translated it from Arabic into Italian, and relates at length how he found
them. It Is probably supposed it is the product of an Italian Spirit, and an
Ingenious Fiction like to that which Virgil made use of to praise Augustus.
This Poet very often introduces Anchises, sometimes Vulcan, who to praise this
Emperor more artificially, begins by little and little, and falls by degrees
into the Panegyric, which was the Poets main design; this is much handsomer
than to praise a Prince purely with a prospect of Interest. Its thought, that
the Sieur Marana had no other design, than to make an Elogy upon His Most
Christian Majesty; the better to conceal his Game, and to render him something
mavelous, he puts into the mouth of a Turk, that which himself had studied
upon the Glorious Actions of this Puissant Monarch; but before he has done,
makes his Spy say many other things; it is no matter whether it be a Turk, or
Genoese that speaks to us, provided he gives us a good Book. The first Book is
very agreeable, it contains the History of the last Month, from the Year 1637.
and of the most part of the Year 1638.

An Anatomical Bibliotheque: Or, a New and Copious Treasury of Anatomical
Discoveries; in which there is a full and exact Description of the whole Human
Body, which is accurately treated of, from the Collections of the Tractates of
the most Famous Anatomists, Published and Vnpublish'd: To which is added, an
Anatomical Administration of all its parts, with diverse Curious Preparations: A
Work very profitable and necessary for Anatomists, Physicians, Surgeons,
Philosophers, and all Learned Men whatever, performed by Daniel le Clerk, and
Johannes Jacobus Mangetus, M. M. D. D. who have supplied the Tractates,
Arguments, Notes, and Anatomico-practical Observations, with necessary Indexes,
and a great number of Copper Cuts. Geneva, at the expense of Johannes
Antonius-Chouet, in Folio 2 Vol. 1684.
A Title so well Circumstantiated as this, seems to leave nothing for the
Journalists, or the Novelists of the Learned to add. It carries the
Recommendation, and Praise of the Work with it self. Nevertheless if we had
seen it, we would observe many things of this Anatomical Bibliotheque; but how
can we see it, not being yet published, but hope it may be soon ready for the
Press. 'Twill be a most useful Work, because it unites in one Body many Books
of Anatomy that were dispersed, and being joined together from a Complete
Anatomy, there are diverse pieces of Mr. Malpighi, and some Celebrated Authors,
which never appeared in the World. Those who have endeavored to gather so many
separated Pieces together, and give an account of them as soon as they came
out, are Mr. Clerk, and Mr. Manget Physicians of Geneva, which will be very
serviceable to the Republic of Letters. There was Printed also in Geneva, the
Research of Truth, translated into Latin, with a handsome Preface, which the
Translator had joined thereto, to show the usefulness of those Principles; the
Author has offered to give some Advice to them who would read the Work with
advantage: And in fine, it is to show that it is impossible to have an exact
knowledge of these things, if we are not skilled in the Abstracts of
Metaphysics: If any will buy the whole Edition, Sieur John Picteat, Bookseller
at Geneva, will sell it at a reasonable Price. It Is in Quarto.

A Treatise of the Excellency of Marriage; of its necessity, and of the means
of Living Happy therein: Where is an Apology made for Women, against the
Calumnies of Men: By James Chausse, Master of the Court-Rolls. Printed at
Paris, sold by Samuel Parrier in the Palace, 1685. in Twelves, and at
Amsterdam, by Peter Morteri.
I Have in the first Article of the last Month said, that 100 Officious Writers
might please themselves infinitely in employing their Pens to the Glory of the
Fair Sex: He needs be no great Divine that says so; and he must have but a
little Memory, and a very mean Knowledge of Books* who without this Treatise, is
afraid of being deceived in judging as we do, since so many have Written in
favor of Women in all Countries, and all Ages of the World. We shall always
find some who exercise themselves with pleasure upon this repeated Subject. How
many Books have we seen in favor of Women? Those Written by Monks, would stock
a Library; even the Chief Magicians, (according to the Common Opinion) have
Written upon this Inviting Subject, as appears by the Discourse of Agrippa, De
nobilitate and praecellentia foeminei Sexus. I know some have Writ against
them, but their number is inferior to those who spoke in their Praise. There
are too many, as well on the one side as the other; but those who know how to
Write, being sensible of the trouble there is to keep the Mean, more easily
pardon the Extremes these Authors fall into. It Is very difficult to maintain
Marriage without decrying Celebacy, and speak for a single Life, without
bringing Marriage into Disgrace. Therefore we ought to excuse those who cannot
shun this Rock. St. Ierom had so little power in this Affair, that his Friends
were forced to suppress some of his Books, where under pretext of establishing
Continency, he entirely ruined the Doctrine of the Church concerning Marriage.
Some say, that Mr. Chausse runs upon the different Rock, when he says, That
Marriage is the only way to Paradise, and it is to rob himself of the greatest
happiness, and the most solid Blessings of this Life, to forbear entering into
the Matrimonial State. But certainly when they only imputed these thoughts to
him, they forgot the Declaration which he made in these decisive Terms, Nothing
is better, nor more excellent than Marriage, except an absolute Continency.
There are some who indifferently regard the Disputes of these Authors* and only
divert themselves, as if they saw different Persons acting a Comedy. Yet there
cannot be seen, without some agreeable Sentiments, two Books published at
Paris, both at the same time, each well armed with Approbation and Privilege,
which maintains absolute Contraries upon the great Theme of Matrimony. One of
these Books is an Answer of Mr. Ferrand to his Apology for the Reformation; the
other is that of which we are going to speak. Marriage is in it every where,
almost elevated to the highest point of perfection, where Fidelity continues
during this Life; but in the other Book it is to Virginity, that this advantage
is attributed, and that in so violent a manner, that if we followed the Maxims
of the Author, cited step by step, we should look upon Married Persons but as
Vultures and Swine* We ought certainly to remit something of each side, and
say, that Celebacy and Marriage are, speaking Morally, in themselves neither
good nor bad. Those who remit nothing on the part of Marriage* will immediately
show us how to prove the Excellency thereof, by these three Reasons.

First, Because it was God that Instituted Marriage in the Earthly Paradise,
during the State of Innocence.

Secondly, There is nothing agrees better with Man than Marriage, nor is more
adapted to his Necessities.

Thirdly, That Marriage is the most necessary thing in the World to maintain
Society, Wisdom, and Chastity.

These three Proofs are clearly amplified, these two Considerations annexed.

First, That Marriage is the most perfect Bond, the sweetest and most
beneficial of all humane Unions.

The Second, That it is the most legitimate and agreeable exercise, and of the
most absolute Authority in the World.

This he proves by most lively Descriptions, and observes, that this Union
includes both Body and Souls, that it represents the greatest Mysteries of
Religion, that it is a Source of sweetness, and infinite Consolations, and which
furnishes us with excellent Virtues, as Patience, Charity, and a desire to
improve our selves amongst the number of the Elect, and Fellow-Citizens: He
adds, that the Father of a Family is Master of a little State, where he
exercises the Function of a King, Priest, and Prophet. It allows him a very
lawful and priviledg'd satisfaction of that desire which rules in a Man: He
ends with this Consideration, That in one sense nothing can be more excellent
than Marriage, since it is an Universal Custom, and the most general of all.
Societies in all times, all places, and all sorts of persons, how different
soever. This seems to me a just Abridgment of the first part of the Work.

In the second is represented the Infamy of Incontinency, considering three
sorts of people that plunge themselves therein, one by Inclination, another by
Habit, and the last by both, but with this difference, that the first look upon
Lasciviousness as their Sovereign good, whereas the second continues there in
spite of themselves, being subjected to the force of Custom and Temper; but
the last look upon these Irregularities as an Innocent Gallantry.

The Author considers besides that, four sorts of Importunities; that of the
Heart, of the Eyes, of the Mouth, and that of the Hand; he shows wherein they
consist; he proves 'em Criminal, and gives the Reason why God has so severely
prohibited such things to Man, as he was Naturally inclined to, and why he
tolerated Poligamy in the Ancient Patriarchs.

The Third Part contains the full End and chief Design of the Author; for he
writ this Book only to persuade the necessity of Marriage to a considerable
Person whom he extremely Honored, for his Merit and Family, where in this
place he displays all his force to represent to the life, those Motives that
ought to persuade People to Marry, he immediately proposes this Principle,
there is nothing but Marriage that can naturally preserve Man from the guilt of
unchastity, and by consequence that it is necessary for Salvation. After that
other Reasons seem Superfluouse: Nevertheless, the Author sticks not to this
great Principle which he ought to make appear, since he believes it is true,
but he brings many other Advantages with abundance of Truth; he urges the
unusefulness of Continency, he says, that the most Favorable Judgments of the
Wisest about a single life is, that it is a virtue neither good nor bad and that
being without Action it is a kind of Vice. He maintains that God made Two Sexes
in Nature, to show they cannot subsist without being joined together; he sends
us to learn of the Animals amongst which the Mutual love of Males for Females,
and Females for Males is common to every Individual; after this he considers
Men, as Men in a State, in a Family, and in a Church, and he says, that in all
these regards they are obliged to Marry, because (adds he) it is necessary to
endeavor to preserve their own kind, as they are Citizens to the Republic,
Successors to their Families, and Servants to the Church; he speaks very large
upon these three Duties, and considering the Beauty and Perfections of Man, he
is wrapped up in admiration, and says, can there be any thing more Noble than
the Ambition of Producing Creatures so perfect? He asks if it is possible that
we should be so much moved with the Glory of making a fine Book, drawing a
Beautiful Picture, or a handsome Statue, and should not be sensible of the
Glory of making of Man. This appears so Noble and Admirable that all men that
we read of in Scriptures, have thought themselves very happy in it; as Ibstan
and Abdan, of which the first had 30 Sons and 30 Daughters, and as many Sons
and Daughters in Law; and the second had 40 Sons and 30 Grandsons, whom he saw
altogether on Horse back. O God, (cries he out) can any thing be added more to
the Happiness of a Father, can any thing be seen more memorable in the Life of
Man! In my Opinion it exceeds all the Acts of Caesar and Alexander. such an
Increase is more Noble than any Action that can be found in History. Hence he
supposes that Augustine had acquired more Glory, if instead of leaving so many
Volumes he had furnished he World with 30 Children, and he would persuade us
that the Invention of Archimedes and Des Chartes are Trifles in Comparison of
the Exploits of a simple Country Fellow, who helps to People the World by
lawful means; I say lawfully, For the Author thinks no Offspring good that is
not from Marriage. He fortifies his Proofs as much as possible, and goes back
to the Ancient Jews, observing that Marriage being one of these things which
generally happen, sooner or later, it is better to engage our selves in happy
time, than after a thousand declamations against it, whilst we are hurrying on
to old Age, when Marriage can produce nothing but vexatious consequences, Dom.
Anthonius de Guevare, Preacher to Charles the 5 th. represents it very
Ingeniously in one of his florid Epistles.

Yet what Reasons appear so fine and commodious to Monsieur Chauss, are subject
to a little Inconveniency, because they are the same which are brought for
Polygamy, and which indeed is the best Argument for it; and because they ruin a
Notion that was very common, even among those, who for Political Reasons
ascribed a kind of dishonor to a single Life. The Notion is, That a Widow
which Marries not, is more esteemed than she that a second time admits another
into her Embraces: We have not much Authority for this, only the words Virgil
makes Dido speak, teaches us that it was the opinion of the Ancients.

Ille meus primus qui me sibi junxit Amoris,
Abstulit, ille habeat secum servetque sepulcro.
The Ideas of Honesty are more Favorable to second Marriage, therefore we must
agree to 'em: But it is as certain that these Weddings were formerly, and still
are subject to many Canonick Penalties; and if you will believe the Learned
Counsel, who assisted in the Laws of the Queen, the Devolution that has been
in certain Countries was established there but to keep the widowers from
Incontinency, and prevent their second Marriages, to the great prejudice of the
first Wives Children; all this is silenced by the principles of our Author:
For* if we agree with him, we shall find that a Widow which Marries not at the
end of six Months at the least, is answerable to God, her Country, and Mankind,
to the State, her House, and to the Church, all the time she lives in
Widowhood, since she robs the Public of a great Advantage, and Generation, the
most memorable thing, that can be done of the handsomest Action of life, and of
atchieving a more Illustrious Glory, than Alexander and the Cesars: According
to these Principles, the man whereof St. Ierom speaks, that had been a Widower
21 times, and Married a Wife that buried as many Husbands, was an Incomparable
Hero, and that he and his Wife ought to be received into the Catalogue of
Saints: We may say also, according to the same Principles, that Incontinence is
a great Sign of Gods Favor, since it obliges Man to keep in the State of
Matrimony, and make himself as Famous as possible by the Increase of Children.
This may be said in the abuse of Monsiur Chause his Reasons; but no Equitable
Persons will put so far fetched an Inference upon the Intention of the Author.
Now let us review the 4 th Part.

It is designed as an answer to those which exclaim against Marriage: The
Author is considered as an opposite against all Mankind, and it ought not to be
taken for a Contradiction, although he acknowledges in another place that all the
World should Marry, for he had drawn from thence a proof of the Excellency of
Marriage. Nevertheless it is next a Contradiction what he says here, provided it
be true that those who are Married speak ill of the State. If men will
Criticize, it must not be upon what they ought to do, but rather upon the
extreme difficulties which the Author represents in the Combat he undertakes,
since it is certain all that is said against Marriage, has been only for a
little merriment, and is very little persuasive, since it makes but a slight
Impression upon the greatest number of Men; he refutes these Railery's who
speak contrary to their practice; for very often, if they lose their Wife, they
take another in three or four days after: But as the Author has writ his Book
in Favor of a Man of another Temper, that is to say, who would not so much as
hear of the Conjugal Bond, he endeavors to make all the Apologies he can for
Marriage, First, against those who raise Accusations against the Conduct of
Women. Secondly, Against those who found it upon the Nature of Marriage it
self. Thirdly, such as say, the consequences and obligations are an
unsupportable Yoke. These three chief Accusations furnish him with a large
Field, in which the Reader may trace him with pleasure.

The first Head is composed of diverse Branches, which the Author displays
without any dissimulation: Having collected faithfully the chief Invectives
against the Sex, he afterward answers them in order, using the same sincerity
in relation to the Reasons that respect the other two Heads; and says, amongst
other things, That the state of Angels and Saints, ought not to be alleged as
a prejudice against Marriage, since on that account their possession is equal
with the Devil and the damned.

The last part is very important, for it treats of the most likely means to
make our Marriage happy. The Author gives us thereupon many good Counsels;
first, that after having recommended our selves to God, who presides in a more
particular manner over that state, we make a Choice of such a Person as pleases
us, and who has an agreeable Temper. It would not be unpleasing to have her
handsome; but since it is not very common to find such a one, we ought to be
contented, if she please us, whether she does others or no; and that it is not
always advantageous for the Wife to please all the World: But it is not
sufficient to be pleased with her Beauty, except there be a Sympathy in
Humors. The Author advises us to study the Genius of those we design to marry,
that may the better succeed in spite of the Address that some make use of to
hide their weakness; he adds for the better security, that we may choose one
that is young, and resides near our own habitation. In the first place he
advises to a choice in a well ordered Family, and to observe the equality of
Condition and Fortune, and to take care that she has no such pre-engagements as
may make her marry him by constraint: To these things only, which regard the
Lover he adds two others for the choice of a Husband, which relate both to
Women and Children; he advises them upon the whole to a conjugal Amity, good
Example, Devotion and Moderation in the pleasures of the Bed, and gives good
reasons for what he says. There is upon this subject also one of the elegant
Epistles of Anthoninus de Guerre's Advice, touching the Education of Children.
In fine, we may say without flattering Mr. Chause, that there appears in the
whole Book the Character of an honest Man, and good Christian, without
prejudicing his Favor; we may see, besides good Wit, much reading of the
ancient Poets, many things that divert the Reader at the same time that they
instruct him. I believe that a good part of Mankind, would be glad that this
Work might have the same Success that the discourse of Socrates had at
Xenophon's Feast; this great Philosopher, so sensibly touched the Guests in
speaking to 'em of Love, that those amongst 'em who were yet Batchellors, made
Vows to marry, and those that had Wives, immediately took Horse, and ran full
speed home, that they might soon embrace their Wives.

It Is a good Observation, that the Author, who in his Book exhorted Men to
marry, says not a word to persuade Virgins to the same: He well foresaw, that
this Silence would surprise some of his Readers, therefore he has put 'em out
of pain in the Preface, by acquainting them that Virgins are sufficiently
convinced of the necessity of Marriage, therefore want no Exhortations thereto;
it is certain, (says he) that though a Virgin never proposes Marriage, because
of her modesty, there is nothing she so passionately wishes for; her Heart
often gives her Mouth the Lie; she often says I will not, when sometimes she
dies for desire. The rest of the Passage ought to be read.

The Lives of Saints and Saintesses, drawn from the Fathers of the Church, and
Ecclesiastical Authors. Tom. 11 4to. at Paris, 1687 with Approbation of the Of
the Roman Communion; nevertheless, the Ingenious will like the Be, find
something good in all Flowers.
Doctors.
WE have not seen the first Volume of this Work; but it is sufficient to give an
Idea to the Reader of it, and the other Ten that are to follow; because it is
apparent the Saints in January and other Months, have not been less fruitful in
Mi^acles than those of February, whose Lives are contained in this Second Tome:
But two of the Licensers assure us that the Author continues to give Marks
therein of his Exactness and great Judgment.

Though the Month of February has but 28 Days, yet there are more than 60 Lives
in this Volume, without reckoning that one Life sometimes includes the History
of several Saints. They are all Edifying, at least for those who suffer
themselves to be gained rather by Declamations than solid Reasons, who are only
touched with Noble Actions, rather than with what is related in a Sublime and
Periodick Style. In the Title the Authors which are made use of, are commonly
marked, and the place is sometimes marked in the Margen. Neither do the
Licensers fail to say, that though Men make a kind of Religion, of Piously
cheating others in the matter that the Author treats on, after having first
abused themselves: He on the contrary advances no fact, but for which he has
Witnesses, which cannot in Reason be denied, being persuaded that how bright
soever the Actions of Saints are, they always makes less Impression upon the
hearts of Men, as soon as there is any Ground to doubt of them.

It were a thing to be desired that not only the Lives of the Ancients that
have been Canonized, were given to the Public; but also a complete
Ecclesiastical History, written in a Style as pure as that of this Book. Such
another Work would be extremely profitable, providing the Author always kept
the Character of an Historian, and fell not into the ways of Preachers,
e^p^cially of the Catholics. It may be that Virtuous Actions that would be
read therein, would make more Impression upon the Mind, and would more
Efficaciously oblige the Readers to imitate them; such is that which the Author
relates of the Solitary Moses. P. 158.159. Socrat. I. 4. c. 36. Sosom. l. 6. c.
38.
which Maria Queen of the Sarazins asked of the Emperor Valens to be Bishop of
the Christians of her Nation. He was brought to Lucius Bishop of Alexandria,
who was an Arian, to be Consecrated; but Moses would not receive from him the
Imposition of Hands, because he had dipped them in Blood, and defiled them by
the Death of a great many Saints. Lucius, who imagined that the refusal of this
Hermit came from this, that he believed him an Heretic, answered him, That not
knowing which was the Faith, it was against Justice that he should thus treat
him, before he knew him. Your Faith, replied Moses, shows it self clearly by
your Actions. So many Servants of God banished, so many Priests and Deacons
Relegated into Countries, where Jesus Christ is not known, exposed as a Prey to
wild Beasts, or consumed by Fire, are convincing proofs of the Impiety of your
Belief: For we know that these Excesses are infinitely opposed to Jesus Christ,
and unworthy of all those who have the Sentiments which they ought to have.

Ethelbert was made a Saint, who was first King of Kent that embraced
Christianity; and he certainly deserves it, were it for nothing, but the
Sweetness with which he received the Preachers Pope Gregory I* sent him. The
Monk Augustine was P. 596.
the chief of them, and was accompanied with Forty others. Before they came
into England, he stopped in the Isle of Thanet, which is on the East of the
Province of Kent, whence he sent word to the King, that he came from Rome, to
bring excellent News to those that would believe him, and would follow the
Advices he would give them, seeing they would be certain to Reign everlastingly
with the True God, and of enjoying Heaven, and all manner of Happyness. Some
time after the King himself went to meet those Missioners, and speak to them in
these terms: These are fine words, and great hopes that you give us: But these
things are new and uncertain, and consequently I cannot embrace such a Religion
to the prejudice of that which we have professed for so long a time: Yet as you
are come so far off, and according as I can judge, only design to make us share
of what you look upon, as best and most advantageous, we will do you no
displeasure, but rather receive you favorably into our State, and procure you
an Establishment to live therein. We shall not hinder you to preach the Faith
of your Religion, and to Proselyte all that you can. He kept the same
Moderation after he had Embraced Christianity; and having learned, says the
Author, after venerable Beda Bed. Hist. Angl. l. 1. c. 26.
, from the Ministers of the Gospel, that Piety toward the true God is a thing
altogether voluntary, and that all the Authority of Men cannot inspire; he
would exercise no Empire upon the Minds, nor force any body to make Profession
of Christian Religion; contenting himself to Testify a greater Bounty to those
that were converted of themselves.

There is another Moses toward the Latter end of the 4th. Age, who was an
Ethiopian, and who from a Captain of Robbers became chief of the Hermits of
Thebaides. He betook himself afterward to the exercise of a Penitence more
mavelous than imitable: But instead of falling into Pride, that excessive
Austerities ordinarily inspire to those that practice them; he p. 318.
kept always much Humility, in calling to mind his past Crimes. One of the
Monks of Siete having committed a considerable Error, and all his Fraternity
being gathered to judge him, Moses was called thereto with the rest: He at
first refused it, and after not being able to put it off; whilst all excepted
him, he loaded himself with a Basket full of Sand; and went in this State to
the place of Assembly: They all were very much surprised, asked him what he
would do with the Basket. I carry, said he, my Sins behind me, which hinders me
from seeing them. Yet ye will establish me Judge of other Folks Sins, when I
cannot see my own.

A Collection of several Pieces of Eloquence and Poetry, presented to the
French Academy, for the Prize^ of 1687, upon St. Lewis day* with Orations the
same day, at the reception of Mr. Abbot de Choisy, in the place of Mr. Le Duc
de St. Aignan, At Paris, Sold by Peter le Petit, 1677 and at Amsterdam, by
Henry Desbord in 12s.
TO say that Mr. De Fontenelle, has aspired to the Prize of Eloquence, the
Distribution whereof is made every Two Years, by the Judgment of the French
Academy; and to say that he has carried this Prize, is the same thing. For if
he is so much distinguished by the Excellent Works that he has given the
Public, nothing can come from his Pen which is not immediately followed with a
general Approbation: The Academy alone gave him the Prize, which no body could
reasonably contest about. It Assembled according to Custom last St. Lewis's
day, which is the 25 th of August; and the Discourse of Mr. Fontenelle, Upon
Patience and its opposite Vice, was proposed by the Deceased Mr. De Balz^c, for
the Prize of Eloquence. To undertake to give here an Abridgment of this
Discourse, would be the same thing as to take away the greatest part of its
Grace. Those that will have the Curiosity of seeing it, as undoubtedly its very
well worth the while, will find it in this Collection. He will not have much
difficulty to find out the Character of the Illustrious Author of the Dialogues
of the Dead; of the Plurality of Worlds, etc. Every where he commands this
happy turn that he knows so well to give to things, the same Elevation of
Thoughts, the same Purity of Expressions. Can there be any thing more
Ingenious; but at the same time more True, than what he says to show how much
corrupt Reason, and divine Revelation are opposed? O blindness of Nature, O
Heavenly Lights of Religion how contrary you are! Nature by its inordinate
Motions augments our Grief; and Religion teaches us to profit by 'em, by the
Patience it inspires us with. If we believe the one, we add to necessary Evils
a voluntary Evil, and if we follow the Instructions of the other, we draw from
those necessary Evils, the greatest of all Goods.

All this Discourse should be copied, if we should remark all the fine places
of it. Nothing weak appears in it, nothing languisheth in it, and it is
difficult in reading it, not to conclude, that if the Academy has done Justice
to Mr. de Fontenelle on this occasion, it may also very soon acknowledge his
Merit after a more solemn manner; whilst receiving him into its Bosom, it will
give him the place, that great Men, whose Name he bears, have so worthily
enjoyed.

But what Honor soever the Prize does to Mr. Fontenelle, the Prize he has
already carried, to wit, the Ode of Mademoiselle de Houlieres was Crowned the
same day, is still more Glorious to him. What a wonder to see a person of her
Sex, in so tender an Age, to Triumph over so many Learned Rivals, who expected
nothing less than such a defeat! We should scarcely believe it, if these words
that are at the end of her Poem, Non degeneres progenerant Aquilae Columbam,
did not teach us that she being Daughter to the Illustrious Madam des Houlier^,
it could not be that so great a Desert as hers should not pass unto her. The
Subject given for the Prize of Poetry, was about the Education of Nobilitg in
the Schools of Gentlemen, and in the House of St. Cyr. They read in the Academy
two pieces of Prose and Verse which have carried the Prize; but they were not
satisfied to print them in this Collection; there have been joined two pieces
of each sort, which though they were not honored with a Prize, have nevertheless
their Beauty. A Discourse on the praise of the King sent by the Academy of
Soissons to that of Paris, an Epistle to the King of Mr. Perraust, and some
other pieces in Verse, are found at the end of this Collection. But at the
beginning were placed two Discourses delivered in the Academy, the same day
which was that of the Reception of Mr. Abbot de Choisy, in place of Mr. le Duc
de St. Aignan, and I believe it will not be amiss to give it here.

A Discourse in the French Academy by Mr. Abbot de Choisy.
SIRS,
IF the Laws of the Academy suffered me, I should this day keep a respectful
Silence* I should imitate the new Cardinals, who in taking of their place in
the Sacred College, forbear speaking for some time, and I should think on
nothing but holding my peace, until you should teach me to speak. But Custom
must be obeyed, my acknowledgment must appear; and what Expressions must I make
use of to show it to you altogether? How shall I Express the joy I feel, in
seeing my self Associated to all that is Great and Illustrious in this Kingdom?

Here it is that the first Men of State divest themselves of all the Pride and
Grandeur, and seek for no Distinction but by the greatness of their Knowledge
and Capacity. For Sirs, it is neither Birth, nor Dignities alone, which render
your Society so Famous. To have gone through, the greatest Employments would not
suffice, to come amongst you: Wit and Knowledge have opened to you the Doors of
the Academy. This is it which distinguishes you amongst the rest of Men, and
which makes you to be admired amongst Great Divines, profound Philosophers,
Poets and Orators of the first Order, and Historians that will Transmit it to
Posterity the Wonders of our Age.

When I see my self placed amongst these great Men, whom hence forward I shall
call my Brethren, I feel my self excited by a Noble Emulation to follow their
Examples which are now going to be Familiar to me. My Assiduity in your
Assemblies, will be to me instead of Desert, and perhaps will give me some: I
think I feel in my self the Spirit of the Academy, which raised me above my
self, and that I need to repair the loss which you have sustained by my
Admittance. It is He Great Sirs, whose place I fill that deserves your Regrets
and our Praises.

Scarcely was he out of his Infancy, but he runs into Combats; and Glories, in
the steps of his Ancestors. He was wounded at the Battle of Vaudrevange at the
Siege of Dola, and more Dangerously at that of Graveline: And if for the future
he seeks occasions every where, to make his Valor shine, the reason is, that
this Valor, this Ardour of Glory, which makes Herces, did fill his Soul so,
that it being too great and lively to be contained, did show it self outwardly.

Which of you, Sirs, has not known the Elevation and Vigor of his Mind? At
every moment he would give some strange Instances thereof. Governor of a
Province, Duke and Peer, first Gentleman of the Chamber, notwithstanding which
Charges, he yet found time for the Muses, and was honored with the Title of
Academist.

The Bounty of his heart engaged him to serve all the World: It was enough to
be a Man of Wit, or miserable to have his particular protection; but that which
alone would make his Elogy, he had always an Inviolable and Tender Deference
to the Kings Person; this great Prince did honor him with his Benevolence.

So many Advantages that distinguished him in the first Court of the World,
could not exempt him from the common Law; he is dead. But he has left in
France a Son, a worthy Heir of his great Soul and Virtues, who from his
tenderest Youth in the midst of Court and War, of Favor and Pleasures, has
Consecrated all his moral Virtues by a Christian, singular, universally
acknowledged and respected Piety.

To you it belongs, Sirs, to mark by immortal Tracts, the Actions of this Great
Man, whose loss will be for a long time sensible unto you. You will do it: His
Memory will for ever live in your Works: All that parts from your hands
partakes of the Genius of your Founder.

If it has been said in times past, that as Caesar by his Conquests had
augmented the Empire of Rome; Cicero by his Eloquence had extended the Wit of
the Romans: Can we not say, that Cardinal Richlieu only has done in France,
what Caesar and Cicero had done at Rome, and that if by the Spring of our
admirable Policy he has extended our Frontiers; he has Raised us, Polited,
and if I may say it, Amplified our Wit by the Establishment of the Academy.

But Sirs, if he has done so much for the State, in forming, your Society, he
has still done more for himself. In vain for his Glory had he found the means
to pull down the Haughtiness of this proud House, that dared to stand in
Comparison with that of France; in vain by the taking of Rochel had he given
the first blow to the Monster which even now has expired before our Eyes: His
name would still perish, and the most part of his Actions though marked with a
singular Character of Grandeur, would have been unknown to the following Ages,
if in founding the Academy, he had not founded at the same time the eternal
Remembrance of his Glory.

At his death the Academy being at a loss found an Assylum in an Illustrious
Chancellor whose Memory will be always dear unto you, and who in the space of
35 years, that he was the head of Justice always passed for the most Learned of
Majestrates.

But when you had lost him, being fallen into new Allarms, uncertain of your
Destinies, what a joy it is to you and what glory! A thing the greatest of
Kings declares himself your Protector; receives you into his Palace, and make
you equal to the first Company of his Kingdom. By this, Gentlemen, by this I
say, your Names becoming Immortal, will not be far behind his, and you may
answer unto your selves for the Immortality which you know how to give to
others. You surely know how to give it, and you will give it to Lewis: There is
a Commerce of Glory made betwixt you and this Prince; and if his Protection
does you so much honor, you may flatter your selves of not being unprofitable
in his Glory. Yes Gentlemen, this Prince so necessary to all men, chiefly to
his own Subjects, which he has already rendered the most formidable People of
the World, and which he is going to make the most happy to his Allies, to whom
he grants every where a Protection so powerful; to his very Enemies, whose
happiness he causes inspight of themselves, in forcing them to a peace; this
Prince, who alter the example of God, whose Living Image he is, seems to stand
in need of nothing but himself, stands in need of you for his Glory, and his
Name how great soever it is, would scarcely pass to the last Posterity without
your Works.

Gentlemen, You have already applied your selves to it, and shown him to the
Eyes of Men equally great in Peace and War. But what is the Valor of the
greatest Heroes being compared to the piety of true Christians? It reigns in
this Glorious King, and always mindful of the acknowledgment he owes to him
from whom he holds all, he continually thinks of making this God Reign in his
Heart and in his Kingdom, who for so many years has poured upon his Person
such a continuation of Prosperities. Has he not silenced those Wretches, who
notwithstanding the natural Lights of the Soul, affect an impiety at which they
cannot arrive? Has he not repressed this furious Blasphemy which is so
audacious as even to attack God in his very Throne? He does more, He burns with
Zeal for the House of God: He spares neither Cares nor Expenses to augment the
Kingdom of of Jesus Christ; his Zeal goes over the Seas, and to the Extremities
of the Earth he seeks out People buried in the darkness of Idolatry; the first
difficulties do not deterr him, he constantly follows a design that Heaven
has inspired him with, and if our Vows ase heard the Faith of the True God
will be quickly Triumph antunder his Endeavors in the Kingdoms of the East.

What shall I further say? This Christian Hero openly engages this formidable
party of Heresy, which had caused the Kings his Predecessors to tremble; he
compleats in less than a year what they durst not undertake for almost two
Ages; and the Infernal Monster at the last gasp, forever reenters into the
Pit, whence the malice of Novators and the corrupted Manners of our
Forefathers had caused it to come out* Happy France, thou shall no more see
thy Children rend thy Entrals! The same Religion will make them take the same
Interest; and it is to Lewis the Great, that thou owe so great a good: Let us
speak more just, it is to God; and the same God, for to assure our Happiness,
has now preserved this Prince unto us, and given him to the Ardent Prayers of
all Europe. For Gentlemen, The French are not the only People who do interest
themselves in so dear a Health; and if some Princes jealous of the Kings Glory,
have testified the same by vain projects of Leagues which they were willing to
believe might profit the State, their very Subjects and all the People of
Europe made sure Vows for him, knowing well that in his Person alone resides
universal Tranquillity.

But how far does my Zeal carry me? Being but just placed amongst you, I
undertake what would make the greatest Orators tremble, and without consulting
my Forces, I dare speak of a King, of whom to speak these only are permitted.
As you Gentlemen, and do it, after a manner worthy of him.

After that Mr. Abbot De Choisy had thus thanked the Academy, Mr. De Bergeret
Secretary of the Cabinet, and first Commissary to Mr. De Croissy Minister and
Secretary of State, finding himself then Director, began and Answered him in
these Terms.
SIR,
THE Eloquence, the Wit and the Politeness of the Thanks you give the Academy,
restores in you the loss of the Person of the Duke De St. Aignan: And I can
tell you also, Sir, That it could not give you a more honorable Mark of the
esteem it made of you, than in receiving you in the place of a Man of this
Merit, whose Memory should always be honored and cherished by it.

It Is very just that the Dukes Letters acknowledge the Love he had for them,
and that by Eternal Marks of their acknowledgment, they may show that there is
no Man, in any rank of Fortune whatever, to whom it is not an Honor to have
loved them.

Monsieur the Duke of St. Aignan loved them with the same passion with which he
loved Glory; and he had taken all necessary care to get what they adjudg'd to
be most profitable and most agreeable. He was very far from the vain Error of
those who imagine that all Desert consists in the chance of being born of an
Ancient House; and he considered the Advantage of having so many Illustrious
Grand^yres, but as an indispensible Obligation of augmenting the Luster of
their Name by a personal Merit.

As soon as he could read our History he saw there with a Noble Emulation his
Third Grandfather, the Count of St. Aignan Governor of Berry, and chief of
the Counsel of the Duke De Alenson. He presently resolved either to Dye in the
Careir of Honor as the Count De St. Aignan his Father, or to advance farther
in it than his third Grandfather, as he has done in deserving the Esteem and
Confidence of the King.

He judged that the best means of arriving at this height of Honor, was to
join Letters with Arms, by an Alliance which is no less Natural than that of
the Mind with the Heart; and seeing it self applied to the service of a Prince,
whose Heroic Virtues give more employment to Letters, than have done all the
Heroes of Antiquity, he still took more affection for them. He acquired to
himself the manner of speaking and writing what was Noble, Easy, Eloquent, and
made France, see, the Roman Urbanity, which was the Character of the Scipio's
and most Illustrious Romans.

'Twas after the example of these Conquerors of Nations, who returning from
their Campagnes laden with the Spoils of their Enemies, he came to study with
Terence, and know as well how to manage the Intreagues of a Scene, as the
Stratagems of War: It was, I say, after their examples, that Monsieur the Duke
De St. Aignan had so often manifested, that a Lieutenant General of Arms to the
King, might be a Poet, an Orator, and an Historian; that whilst he himself
undertook the Noblest Actions, he knew besides how to praise them in others;
and that with this same Heart which seeks but to sacrifice it self to the
service of the King, he every day produced Sentiments, expressed after the most
delicate and most eloquent manner.

By these Qualities truly Academical he obtained in this Society the place that
he has so worthily discharged, and he also deserved to be Named Protector of
an Illustrious Academy, which we have received into our Alliance; which is an
immortal Honor to him, and so much the greater in that the King is willing to
bear a like Title, and to add to those which his Virtues and Conquests have
acquired him.

But Monsieur the Duke of St. Aignan was not only Protector of a famous Academy
by a particular Title; but also it may be said, that he was so in general of
all Men of Letters, by a Generosity which excepted no bodies Desert, whatever
stranger he was, what part soever he came from, he was sure to find in him a
Prop and Protection. He received with marks of Friendship all those that had
some Talent of Mind, and he did let them feel his Rank and Dignity by the good
Offices that he took Delight in heaping upon them. He also loved all our
Exercises, and came to us much oftener than we dared to hope from a Person who
could not come to us without quitting all the pleasures of Court.

Methinks I yet see him in that fair Day, when assembled to testify our joy
for the Establishment of the King. Then was Read a Magnificent Ode which he had
made upon that Subject, where Wit and Zeal equally appeared, and shined
throughout with the Fire of the most lively Briskness, which he has always
preserved by a privilege which Nature only grants to extraordinary Genius's.

Finally, After a long and happy Life, he dyed in all the Sentiments of
Christian Piety, laden with Honors and Rewards, which his Courage, his Zeal
and Fidelity in the Kings Service had deserved; and he had in dying, the
Consolation of leaving behind him a Son which will still augment this
Succession of Glory and Virtue.

This Illustrious Son, in whom the Father lives, has always distinguished
himself with Honor, and without Affectation. A great deal of Courage has
always been seen in him, with a great deal of Sweetness and admirable Purity of
Manners, a perfect uniformity of Conduct, penetration of Judgment, Application,
Vigilance, constant Love for Truth and for Justice; chiefly a solid Piety,
which makes him act secretly in the eyes God alone, as if he were seen of all
Men.

So many Virtues have well deserved that in an Age so little advanced, he is
made Chief of the Counsel of Finances; and justifies each day so good a choice,
and shows that the King is a just Dispenser of his Favors, and has the Supreme
Gift of discerning Minds. Happy is he whose Memory we Honor, to have so worthy
an Heir of his Name and Virtues.

And we should not be less happy to give him a Successor among us; though having
chosen you Sir, to repair so great a loss we hope you will publicly a^low our
choice and perfectly answer our Expectation.

The Academy asks nothing of you for it self, that you are not obliged to do
for your self. You owe it to the Reputation you have acquired by your Works;
you owe it to the Blood you derive from the Grand-Chancellor of the Hospital,
your Third Grandfather; more Illustrious still by his Excellent Writings, than
the Eminence of the First Employment of the Kingdom; you owe it, in fine, to
your Illustrious Mother which may be compared to the Cornelia's, who speaks her
Tongue with so much Grace and Purity, and who having made you receive such
Eloquence from her Breast, has given us occasion to believe that you were born
for the Academy, and that you were Educated for it, in the Arms and Lap of the
Muses themselves.

But what Talent soever you may have for Eloquence, the New Obligation that you
have to Consecrate your Studies to the Glory of Lewis the Great, our August
Protector, will make you more and more feel how difficult it is to speak
worthily of a Prince, whose Life is a contiual Series of Prodigies.

Poets complain they have not Expressions enough to Represent the Marvelousness
of his Exploits, and Historians on the contrary that they have not Simplicity
enough to keep so many Marvels from being supposed so many Fictions. What Art,
what Application, what Conduct must not one have to present a probability of
the great things which he has done?

I speak not of his Astonishing Valor, who has taken as it were in running a
Race, the strongest Cities of the World, and from before which the most
numerous Armies have always fled for fear of a Fight. I think now only on this
Glorious Peace which we enjoy, and which was made in a time, when there were on
every side, nothing but Provocations by our Victories, nothing but the States
declaring themselves Enemies to our Interest, nothing but Princes jealous of
our Advantages, all with different and incompatible pretentions. How then
appeared on a sudden this happy Peace? It is a Miracle of the Wisdom of Lewis
the Great, that Policy cannot comprehend: And as he alone was able to give it
to all Europe, he alone also is able to keep it.

How much of Action, of Insights into matters of Provision is there in him to
cause that so many free States, and whose Interests are so contrary, should
submit to the terms that he has prescribed unto them? We must equally see what
is past and what is to come, as well as what is, to have a Genius of an
extraordinary force and extent which no Affair burdens, that no Object
deceives, which no Difficulty stops; such in fine, as is the Genius of
Lewis the Great, which is dispersed through all the parts of Europe, and which is
included therein, acting both without and within, with an unconceivable power.

It is as far as the utmost Bounds of the Earth, that you have heard of so many
holy Missions maintained by the continual Aid of his Power and Piety.

It is in Foreign Courts, where it conducts and enlightens their Ministers,
that we only need to Read and Hear, what his Prudence has Dictated.

It is in the Frontiers of the Kingdom where he Fortifies after such a manner,
unravels our Enemies Designs, and makes 'em all despair.

It is at the Ports, where he builds those Prodigious Vessels which carry
through all the World the Glory of the French Name.

It is in the Academy of War and Sea-Affairs, where Noble Education joined with
the Nobleness of Blood, produces Wit and Courage equally capable of Command and
Execution in the greatest Enterprises.

It is, in fine, every where, and causes that every thing is ruled as it
should be: The Garrisons always Crowded, the Magazins always full, the Arsenals
always guarded, the Troops always in breath, and after the Travels of War are
now busied in Magnificent Works which are the Fruits of Peace. Thus it is that
this great Prince acting at the same time on all sides, and doing things which
continually inspire Terror to his Enemies, Love to his Subjects, and Admiration
to all the World, can in spite of Hatred, Jealousies and Mistrusts, preserve
the Peace which he has made, because there is no State which sees not how
dangerous it would be to break it.

Some of the Princes of the Empire seemed to have some Thoughts, and begun to
form new Leagues: But the King always equally Just and Wife, not willing to
surprise nor be surprised, sent the Emperor word, that if in two days after
the date of his Declaration, he received not positive Assurances from him of
the Observation of the Truce, he would take the Measures which he thought
necessary for the good of his State. His Troops at the same time Fly on the
Borders of Germany, and the Emperor gives him all the Assurances which he
could desire. Thus Europe owes him a second time, the Rest and Tranquillity
which it enjoys.

Spain on the other hand had done an Injustice to our Merchants, and
constrained them to pay a violent Tax under pretense they Negotiated in the
Indies against the Ordinances. The King suddenly to stop these beginnings of
Division, thought fit to send before Cadiz a Fleet Capable of Subduing all the
Indies. Immediately Spain Allarmed, promised to restore what it had taken away,
and the King who was contented therewith, has appeared still more great by his
Moderation than his Power: For it is true, that there is nothing upon Earth is
so taking as to see a Prince, who being able to do all that he pleases, will do
nothing but what is Just.

But it is the Natural Character of Lewis the Great, It is the bottom of this
Heroic Soul; where all Virtues are pure, sincere solid, true, and make up one,
an admimirable Union, which declares that he is not only the greatest of all
Kings, but also the most Accomplished of all Men.

Those that shall Read these two Speeches may easily observe in them, all the
pleasingness that Politeness and a great Study could give. Some after having
compared them, have made a Judgment equal to that which Belzac did in Times
past of the Famous Sonnet of Urania. He blamed not the Eight first Verses
thereof, but he found that all the Nobility and the Grandeur was behind them;
and he added, that they made him laugh in calling into his Memory the Pageants
of Italy, where Servants Precede their Masters. We should value the Speech of
Mr. Abbot de Choisy at too low a rate, if we judged with so little favor on it.
It not only has the Precedence by Right of Age, but also may dispute a
Pre-eminence amongst his other celebrated Works. What Mr. Bergeret has said of
the King, that so many holy Mission's are maintained by the continual Succors
of his Power and Piety: It Is doubted whether the Consequence drawn from thence
can be admitted; it is certain (say they) that there is a great difference
betwixt the ancient and new Christianity. The ancient one maintained it self by
it self, and the sole force of Truth served for a Prop and Recommendation to
the first Christians: But at this day things have changed Face, and Catholic
Truths are not so easy to be persuaded as when a great Monarch makes use of
his whole Authority, without which, this great number of Missions, made within
and without the Kingdom, would have little or no effect.

An Extract of a Letter, written from Versailles to the Author of the Republic
of Letters, concerning some Manuscripts of China.
IT IS about 18 Months ago (the Ambassadors of China being then here) that the
Duke of M^ntz took an occasion to tell the King that those People had the
Chronicles of their Country from about 3000 Years past, that they were the
first who had Arts and Sciences, and that as yet there has been no particular
Account given of it; and that it belonged to none but such a Prince as the King
to send for some of their Books from China, and to provide People that might
translate them. His Majesty presently gave his order for this Project: I am
assured that some days past there were brought to Paris 300 Volumns of these
Books of China; some being of the Civil, and some the Natural History of that
Country, others of Mathematics, and diverse curious Treatises: That besides
there are two Translators come, one a Jesuit, who has been 30 Years in China;
the other a Chinois, who belonged to the last Embassage, and understands
French, Latin, Italian, and Portuguese, etc. That these will translate these
Books out of hand, beginning with the most curious, and will publish them as
soon as they are fit for the Press. Since it is known that the King of China
takes delight in the Jesuits, there are Eight young Jesuits sent thither, who
receive a Pension from their King, and are to learn that Country Language, and
to instruct the Chinois in the French and Latin, that they may be brought into
France, to go on with the Translation. We shall have others also come to teach
us their Mechanic Arts.

Another Letter gives us an Account that Father Couplet is returned from Rome,
where he has made his young Chinois a Jesuit like himself, and it is hoped,
they will Translate all Confutius's works.

A Clergy Man's Letter to the Nuns, who have the care of the Education of young
Women, exhorting them to second the Popes Intentions about Nakedness.
I Received a Memoire not long since, from an unknown hand, containing that the
Censurer of the Books of the Archbishop of Malines being of Liege, and a
Ians^nist had approved a Letter directed to the Nuns, wherein the Heresy of M.
Arnaud concerning the Two heads of the Church, and the Pelagian Errors,
comdemning all kind of Ornaments, are renewed. As I do not love to speak of a
Book before I see it, especially if any ones Reputation is concerned, so I have
deferred speaking of this Letter before I had seen it. I do not repent this
delay, for having at last examined this little Writing, I have seen nothing in
it of Mr. Arnaud's pretended Heresy, nor any thing but what agreed with the
Doctrine of St. Peter and Paul, concerning Women's Dresses; so that if it be an
Opinion of Pelagius's, I see no harm that would come of setting it on foot
again; it surprises me more, that any should send such false Advices.

I shall say somewhat of this little Book; and first observe that the Pope not
being able by all the means he used to oblige the Women to cover their Breasts
and Arms; and understanding that the fear that all Italy was in when the Turks
besieged Vienna, did not hinder this disorder, he had recourse to his last
shift, his Excommunication, which he published by a Decree the 30 th. of
November, 83. commanding all Women and Girls to cover their Shoulders and
Breasts to the Neck, and their Arms to their Hands, and this with no
Transparent, but thick Cloth, under pain, if they did not exactly obey it
within six days, to be excommunicated Ipso facto, that in no other case but at
the Point of Death, none but the Pope himself should absolve them: For it was
declared, That the Confessors that durst presume to absolve from this
Excommunication, should incur it themselves, and should become subject to what
Temporal and Spiritual punishments the Pope would be pleased to lay on them, to
which Temporal punishments, also the Fathers, Husbands, Masters, or other heads
of Families should be subject, that continued at, or permitted their Wives,
Daughters or Maids, to disobey this Ordinance. This is all there at length,
with two Letters which relate to it; one was writ through the Pope's Order, by
the Procurer general of the Capuchins, to all the Provincials of his Order, to
oblige their Preachers and Confessors, to endeavor more than ordinarily
against the corrupruption of Manners, and chiefly in relation to Women, to
strive to bring them off their Dresses that are too Luxurious, and immodest.
The other Letter is that of Mr. Stravius, Administrator of the Nunciature of
the Low Countries, which he writ to the Bishops the 31 th. of March, 35. by
order from Urban the VIII. to put them in mind of proceeding against worldly
Women, who uncovered their Breasts and Shoulders, and covered their Faces with
Patches; And to proceed against them to the very shutting them out of the
Church, if it could be done. This shows that for a long time they have taken
pains to remedy these Nakednesses, and that they are obstinately resisted
therein. This in all likelihood will be an employment that will never be
wanting to the Preachers of Reformation. All these pieces which I have quoted,
come after the Letter to the Nuns; the Clergyman that writes it to them,
directs it only to the Reverend Mothers. He represents to them to the Life, the
extent of that disorder, which Innocent the XI. punished with so much severity.
He adds, that its their business chiefly to endeavor this Reformation, as well
because the Public trusts them with the Education of their young Daughters, as
that it is easy for them to instruct 'em in all that is modest in such a
tender age, wherein they have all the Bashfulness and Tractableness of their
Sex. He tells them, that in the best governed Monasteries, It happens but too
often that for want of applying themselves sufficiently to express the first
motions of Youthful Vanities, and forward of giving them an aversion to ill
Books, and immodest sights, for too tender friendships, and the too great love
of their Bodies, and for the Inclination of showing such parts as Modesty and
Decency require to be covered with the greatest care and exactness: These young
Scholars have their Hearts full of the World and its desires, and with a great
impatience of having the full satisfaction of all the pleasures and liberties
that they think their Cloisters kept them from, or the vigilance of their
Mistresses. Experience is a very strong Proof of this, and all the World
acknowledge it; whether it really proceeds from what he pretends here, that the
first Progress of corruption is not repressed with viligance and care enough,
or whether it be that Nature is more prevailing than all the dexterous
endeavors of Art. Nature is an inward Master, whose Precepts lead a young
Disciple very far, without the assistance of any one, though his Precepts be
exposed by contrary ones; Then what cannot this Nature do, when it is assisted
by the Dictates of an outward Master, who passionately Caresses, and cajoles a
young Pensioner but lately come from a Convent? It Is said, he does more in an
hour, than the Reverend Mothers in a 1000; and in 2 or 3 times head to head; he
blots out all their Repetitions. Here is what one may do that works upon Matter
naturally well prepared. This does not hinder Peoples getting their Children
brought up at Convents, for it is thought the evil would be the more universal,
if they were not armed with this defense before they embarked in the World. And
moreover, it is thought Family Examples should not be suffered to their
knowledge.

This Author shows a great Zeal for the Education of Young Women; he would have
them to be made to comprehend well, that it is but in vain, that they flatter
themselves with having a Chaste Heart, or a love for Purity, either in the
Cloister, or in the World, if they do not love these things in others, as well
as in themselves; and to convince themselves of this Love they ought to keep
from all that may lessen it in their own Hearts, or in their Neighbors, and
always forbid themselves the use of these ill Fashions, which by Violence, and
open force made passage for desires, and designs opposite to Chastity into the
best disposed Hearts. He proceeds, and says, that it is not sufficient to cover
what might give scandal to our Neighbor, and hurt Chastity, but they are to
cover it modestly, and they must be learned; that very often these worldly
Ornaments, and these cheating Vails that cover without hiding, serve only to
irritate and multiply in a Thousand different ways, the desires and motions of
a corrupted Heart; and it is for this, that the Pope's Edict has in express
terms enjoined them, They shall cover themselves with a thick, and not with a
transparent Cloth: This takes away all Equivocation which might be made use of
to cheat the Governors Vigilance. For though according to remark of a certain
Sen. de Ben. l. 7. c. 9. and ep. 90.
Ancient, A Man cannot well take an Oath, if he is not quite naked; for when
Men are clad with any prejudices, etc. there are abundance that would not stick
to swear any thing: So the Pope did very well, to mark expressly Cloth not
transparent. Afterward the Author shows, that the Scripture condemns all
Equipage, and vanity in Clothing, and that for greater reason it condemns
these Nakednesses, which show so much self love, and inclination to be the
occasion of sin to our Neighbor. He does not quote the Fathers, which he might
many on the same occasions: He supposes, that those he speaks to, have no need
of proofs for what he says. It must be allowed, that the principles of this
Morality are agreeable to Christianity; nevertheless, there are many Casuists
who have pardoned Nakedness on many accounts, which the famous Voetius
reproaches them with in the 4th. Volume of his Disputes, p. 461. where he takes
notice, that he knew but one Divine of this Communion, which was Alstedius, who
has said, that a Woman might go naked, or covered with slight Gause, in the
Countries where it is the custom to go so. This Clause serves to excusest the
Casuists, because it is certain that Nakedness loses the greatest part of its
Allurement by custom. Schookius the constant defender of dissolute Morality
against Preciseness; for it is so he called the Scrupulous and Austere Morals
of Voetius, cites upon this Subject Ex eritat sac p. m. 439.
among other things which the Minister John Leri remarks upon the occasion of
the Women's going quite naked in Brasil, which is, that Dressing works a greater
effect than the most natural simplicity.

As for the rest, This Stranger that gave me the account of the publishing this
Book for the Nuns, was the occasion that I made an Article of it in my Novels,
he also was the cause of my speaking of the Factum of the Iansenists: For it
was through him that I understood it was published. Both these advices came to me
at the same time, from the same place, and with Glosses that have not been
found true; perhaps People may be willing enough that I should add at the end
of this Article, the present condition of the Iansenists Process.

I say then, that they published a Second Factum, wherein they declared, that
having the advice of some godly Persons they were willing to end the debate
some milder way than by a rigorous Judgment; that for this end they Declared to
Mr. Internance, presenting him a Form of Retractation to be sent to Father
Hazart, That they were ready to desist from all Pursuits. If that Father and
Mr. Hoesslaegh Signed this Model and Published it afterward, its at length
here accompanied with the 19 th. Decree of the 12 General Congregation of
Jesuits, because it might engage Father Hazards Superiors to bring him more
Efficaciously, to which he could not refuse without renouncing his hopes of
safety. This Decree speaks in most express Terms how the Superiors of the
Jesuits are obliged to impose rigourous Penance on those of their Society who
offend their Neighbor, through the indiscretion of their Pen, and must make
them presently lawful satisfaction; Mr. Internance has promised to send the
Model to Father Hazard, and has Named Judges, which makes some believe that
there is nothing to be hoped for from the expedient, that the Plantiffs have
offered. This is the more manifest by two Letters, that this Jesuit has writ to
a person of Quality, that he is not inclined to do what is proposed to him.

The first of these Letters contains a very sharp Invective against the
Iansenists, and a promise to answer in writing the complaints of the Plantiffs.

The Second shows, that Father Hazard will make no answer at all, both because
the Judgment of many Lawyers and Divines determined it beneath him, and because
he sees his Adversaries abhorred by the Catholics, and even refuted by the
Heretics; to prove which he alleges what we said of the First Factum, and
makes Observations thereon, which are not so just as those that are made here
of his two Letters; the two Articles of our Nouvelles, which concern the First
Factum, are inserted in these Factums, and may be well enough understood by the
Reader, without our Commentary.

If Father Hazard imitated M. Arnaud, he would fairly have shown the model of
Retractation, which was proposed to him; for Mr. Arnaud, understanding that Mr.
Southwell, an English Protestant, had complained how unjustly he had been dealt
with in the Apology of the Catholics, upon the account of Coleman's Trial,
presently offered him any fitting satisfaction; and as soon as he had seen the
proofs of Mr. Southwell's Innocence, he writ to him in the most honest and
obliging way in the World, for the reparation of his Honor; and that the
matter might become public, he desired one of his Friends to print all that
passed in clearing this matter. It was done according to his Wishes; since a
second addition has been Printed, for the first part of the Apology of the
Catholics, in which addition are the Letters about M. Arnaud writ upon this
Subject, those which M. Southwell has answered, and what justifies the
innocence of this last. This will not be the least glorious action in the Life
of M. Arnaud, when the History is finished.

The Life of Gaius Clinius Mecenas, Written by the Illustrious James Maria
Ceuni. At Rome, Printed by Francis de Lazari, 1684.
THose that honor Men of Letters with their Protection, and marks of their
Liberality, receive thereby so many praises, that it makes many Authors to be
suspected of Partiality; for People imagine that it is not so much the
acknowledgment which makes them to be Panegyrists, as the design of obtaining
the sweet Dew of Gifts, and to induce others to the same liberality by the
hopes of a fine Elogium. Howbeit Meibomius was very reasonable to wonder, that
before him none had taken pains about the Life of Mecenas. Every one knows,
that this Favorite of Augustus protected fine Wits after an honorable manner,
that his Name is become that of all the Patrons of the Muses, and yet during
many Ages, his History has been forgotten. Meibomius had already put the last
hand to the Life of this Favorite, when they showed him that which Martin Rizo
had done in the Spanish Language, but this Reading would not let him believe
that he had not been preceded by any Author. Indeed the Spanish Work has more
the looks of a Romance, than of a true History, and it is but a weaving of
Anachronisms, and imaginary Suppositions, even to relate the passionate
Compliments which the Gallant of Terentia, Wife to Mecenas, used on the
Festival Day. The Book of Caesar Caperali, and that of the Doctor Ceuni, are
quite of another nature. The last is divided into two parts, whereof the one
reaches from the Life of Mecenas, until after the Battle of Actium, and the
other unto his Death. The Observations put in this Work render it curious and
diverting. Many things concerning Gardens, and the Houses of Mecenas are
^ention'd, fine Wits which he honored with his Friendship, and the reasons
which hindered Ovid to make mention of him in his Verses. There is also seen
the Answer to the Invectives of Seneca, the Catalogue of the Works of Mecenas,
the Fragments that remain with us, and some Notes that expound the most
difficult Places.

Tractatus duo singulares de Examine Sagarum, etc. Two Singular Treatises of
the Trial of Witches cast upon cold Water, in which, the Beginning of this
Trial, its nature and truth is curiously sought into, and diverse Questions out
of the Writings of Divines, Physicians, and Philosophers, are most Learnedly
and Pleasantly resolved. At Francfort and Lipsia, at the Costs of Henry
Greutzius, 1686, in 4to.
THE first of the two Treatises that is given us here, was made by one of the
Magistrates of Bonn in the Country of Cologne, to justify the Practice of some
Judges of Germany, who for a long time make use of the proof of Water, when
they have a mind to try if a Woman is a Witch. All her Clothes are taken off,
her right Hand is tied to her left Foot, and the left Hand with the right Foot;
then she is cast into Water, and if she does not sink under water she is
believed guilty, and is burned. Great Wits which examine but by halves what
they deny, are not encumbered with this Objection, they say, that they are all
Chimeras, and that there must be no belief given to such Stories: but those
that penetrate into things with an extreme exactness before they affirm or deny
them, are incomparably more irresolute upon a fact so strange as this; on the
one hand they have difficulty to comprehend why this proof avails 'not but in
certain places, and why if it be certain, all the Tribunals of the World do not
make use of it when they have occasion. Besides, their knowing that the proof
of a hot Iron, that of boiling Water, and some others made use of in times past
in diverse places to discover where the unjustice or justice of an accusation
subsists, and that they have been condemned by the Church, because without
doubt they perceived there was illusion in all this, and that Knaveries were
intermixed, which often times did oppress Innocence, and justified Criminals.
However it is, our Author pretends that this Trial of Witches is lawful. His
name is Rickius, and speaks very bad Latin. Perhaps he was a better Citizen
than a Wit.

He at first proposes to himself a great number of Objections which usually
are made against the practice he maintains, and which are for the most part
weakness it self. The best of all is, that God must not be tempted, and that
this is to tempt him, to commit the decision of a Process to a most Signal
Miracle of his Providence. But this Objection would not be considerable, if we
were assured that the proof whereof we speak has never failed; for we should
have reason to believe in that case, God has established the immersion of
People Confederate with the Devil, as an occasional cause of the discovery of
this Plot, in engaging himself to hinder the natural effect of heaviness. An
Experience constantly reiterated would be a revelation significative enough of
this Institution of God, so that without tempting him we might have recourse to
it when it would be necessary. There are an hundred examples in Scripture which
show that God has not disapproved that Signs should be required of him and
Prodigies, to be well assured of a matter, and we must hold as undoubtful, that
the Church would never have condemned the proofs of Hot iron, if they had not
strong Reasons of doubting that they were a good Warrant of Justice or
Unjustice. The Objection that is founded upon the Supposition that it is the
Devil who holds Witches Suspended upon the Surface of the Water, is miserable,
for it is against all the light of a good Reason, that the Devil should employ
his Forces to betray Creatures which are the most devoted unto him, and to make
Judges Triumph over his Subjects who have a Design to send them into the fire.
It is, say they, because God forces there Proud Spirits to Act against their
proper interest: But besides that, they say this without forming a distinct
Idea of the manner wherewith these Spirits may be forced to produce certain
Actions; Who sees but a constraint of this nature ought not to hinder
Magistrates to verify by the Experience of Water if a Woman be a Witch, seeing
that whether God Acts therein by his immediate Virtue, or forces the Devils
to work this Prodigy, it is still his wise and admirable Providence which
would make use of this means to teach Judges what they know not? These Two
Objections, which are the best of all, being ruined, it seems that the only
means to refute this practice is to make the foundation of these Proofs
suspicious of falsehood; but as the Author strives only against those that agree
with him in the fact, there is nothing to be feared on that side.

We must do him this justice that he is not of those who have precipitately
recourse to the Essay of Immersion; he will have men recourse to it but upon
very probable Indices of Sorcerie; and he gives thereupon very good Counsels to
the Judges, chiefly exhorting them to take heed that the Hangman acquit himself
faithfully of his duty, for without it there would happen great abuses in this
matter, because the persons which are cast into the water being sometimes very
innocent, do not swim, and then the Hangman ought to be active to draw them
out, for fear they should be drowned. But if he is too hasty he may save the
guilty, because there are Witches which being immediately descended a little
under water, would soon come up again of themselves, and would manifest thereby
their crime, whilst they pass for innocent if the Hangman does not give them
time to come up again. It may also be that a Woman which weighs not much, may
have motions which swell up some Muscels to form a perfect Equilibrium betwixt
her weight and that of the water. The Emotion and Tonick movement of the
Muscels would perhaps soon cease, and then this Woman would sink and would
justify herself. But if she be judged according to the effect of the
Equilibrium where she is in at the first Moment, she is lost with all her
Innocence. There are then many things to be observed, and apparently it is one
of the best difficulties that may be made against this proof. The Author has
heard say, that there are certain Countries where the Women who are suspected
of Witchcraft, are weighed in a Balance, and says, they have experienced that
Witches of the greatest and thickest Stature weigh no more than about 15 pounds.

He brings several proofs of his sentiment which are good enough, considering
the quality of the matter. This is not the less convincing that the Judges must
not be refused this Essay of the Immersion, seeing it is so difficult to assure
themselves of the truth by the Testimony of the Accomplices; for says he, a
Witch that accuses another, Grounds very often but upon that She imagines to
have seen her at the Caterwauling or meeting of Witches. And what assurance can
one take upon such imagination which might have been deluded by the evil
Spirit, as the Author shows in the fourth Chapter? Besides, it being known by
the Deposition of several of these Wretches, that Witches of quality walk nor
dance at that Assignation but in a mask, whence it follows, that they are
known but by their Mien, and Stature; and other signs very suspicious. A
strange thing is that in the Books of Pagans where so much is spoken of
Witchcrafts, no Women are found which are thought to go to the Assignation. Is
not it because the Devil changes customs and manners according to the diversity
of times and places? The Author answers very largely to the objections of his
Adversaries; but sometimes he says things which have not the least solidity,
as when he supposes that the Water of all the Elements is subject to the Devils
power, and where uncertain facts may be best discovered, because of the
Exorcisms and Consecrations whereof Water is commonly the Subject in the
Administration of Baptism. He finisheth his Book with a very devout Oration
which he believes the Judges ought to make to God before they make use of the
Proof.

The Author of the Treatises is called Herman Neuwalds; he refutes a Letter
which is seen here, and which was written at Langow in the County of Lippa the
4 th. October 1583, by Adolphus Scribanius, who assures, that a few days before
he had seen Women accused of Witchcraft cast three times into the Water in
presence of a multitude of People, which sunk no more than a bit of Wood. He
cites diverse Authors which have spoken of this proof, and after having
expounded this Phenomen, in supposing that as soon as a person makes agreement
with the Devil, he is so possessed with him, that he contracts a great
lightness by the habitation of a Being so light and volatile, as he concludes he
is, that the use of this proof is very lawful.

The Treatise which refutes this Letter is curious enough: many things are
related there touching the Origin, Practice and Abrogation of the proofs by a
hot Iron, by cold Water, hot Water, etc. In it also are related several
Traditions of the Common People which regard the mark of Wizards, the Feast of
Where Witches are turned into Wolves.
Loup-Garous of Livonia, and diverse superstitious means or Magic to discover
Wizards, and to Divine; The pretended lightness communicated to Witches by the
Volatility of the Spirit which possesses their body: And though it is maintained
against the Physician Wier, that these Women are worthy the utmost punishment,
yet the Trial of Immersion is not approved of any other besides him.

It were to be desired that now there are great Philosophers in the World, some
one would give a good Treatise upon Witchcrafts. It Is supposed as a constant
Principle that as soon as Wizards and Magicians have been seized by the
Authority of Justice, the Devil cannot do the least thing for their
deliverance, and yet in other occasions he makes a hundred Actions more
difficult than the breaking open a door. They are constrained to admit of a
hundred other silly qualities. Men should profoundly reason upon all this: And
seeing this Age is the true time of Systems, something should be found out
touching the Commerce which may be betwixt the Devil and Man. There is no
Philosophy more proper for that than that of Mr. Descartes, chiefly because men
have so well disputed on the occasional causes. It seems that hitherto the
question of Witchcrafts has only been treated by Judgments either too
incredulous or too credulous. Both of 'em are very unfit to succeed in this,
since they are commonly guilty of the same defect, which is, to determine or
deny, or to believe without searching into things. There never were People more
bold to deny Extraordinary Facts than the wretched Spinozists. Yet they are
very ill grounded, seeing there is scarcely any thing whereof their Hypotheses
do not engage them to hold the Possibility. I do nevertheless grant that the
Discovery which is made from time to time of several sorts of Knaveries, is for
them as well as for others a Reason of uncertainty. There has of late happened
an Accident at Campen, in the Over-Issels, which will not be unacceptable to
give an Account of here.

It is that in the Month of December 1685, a Boy of 13 Years showed by great
contorsions of Body and Sinews that he was furiously Tormented. They even would
say, that he emitted Nails, Needles and Pins by Urine, and all that was shown
in a Glass wherein he had Pissed in presence of those which kept him. He
accused a Woman which had given him a Root to have bewitched him: Several
believed it, and being moved for him, with a great Compassion Recommended him
to God by Ardent Prayers. Others not believing that in this there was reason
enough to accuse the Woman of Witchcraft, imagined notwithstanding that the
Devil did put these strange Bodies into the Glass where the Boy pissed.
Notwithstanding the People were so moved that if the prudence of the
Magistrates had not intervened this Woman had been in great danger. In fine,
they ceased to say that this Boy emitted Pins, at any other time but only
toward the end of the Month of January; he bethought himself of another thing,
which was to cast Stools and vomit Hairs, bits of Scales, and other things of
this kind. The Wisest, who were far from thinking that there was any Magic in
it, concluded it to be a pure Artifice, and the Magistrate applied himself so
well to find it out, sometimes in Threatening this Boy, sometimes in making him
promises; at last he declared that his Father and Mother-in-Law had made him
learn all this Play of a Vagabond Woman who asked but 100 pence for such a
secret: He gave the Magistrates the Spectacle of his Vomits, of his
Convulsions, and of the Activity with which he would make Pins, etc. fall in
the Glass which he was to piss in. His Father and Mother in Law, which had a
Reputation of Piety, were brought before the Judges; but because there was not
found where withal to convince 'em that they were Partners in the fraud, and
that the Boy had declared he had unjustly accused them, they were absolved, and
the Son was condemned to be whipped by his Father.

This Accident puts me in mind of one which is related in the Iournal of the
Learned; of the 11 th. September 1682. They were some young Women that were of
the Neighborhood of Thoulouse which vomited Pins and Ribbands, and that
suffered other Accidents so singular that they were taken to be possessed, and
they were endeavored to be cured by Exorcisms: But the able Physicians which
the Parliament enjoined to observe well the matter, declared these Phenomens
might be expounded by Principles purely Natural; and they were not a little
confirmed in this opinion, when they observed that feigned Exorcisms produced
upon these Persons the effects as the true ones. The difference that is betwixt
them and the little Boy at Campen, is, that the latter did through Malice what
the first did by a Hypocondriack Malady.

He that Informed us of the Affair of the little Boy is an Advocate of Zceol,
Named Mr. Nuis, who has published in Dutch a very considerable Treatise of
Geometry. He Entituleth it, Gebruyk Uan Het Rectangulum Catholicum
Geometrico-Astronomicum, etc. Te Zwolle, by Gerard Tideman 1686, in 4^o. in
Amsterdam at Waesbergs. He has divided it into Three Parts: He shows in the
First the Geometrical use of this new Instrument, and briefly touches what has
been said by others on the use of the Compass, and of the Rule of proportion.
He also speaks of Trigonometry of Draughts, and of the use of this Instrument
to measure the Visual Angles, Height, Draughts and Distances. In the Second he
Treats of Solar Dyals, and gives a new general Method to Trace the Horary
Circles, the Azimuths, the Almucantaraths, the Signs of the Zodiac, upon all
sorts of Surfaces, and that in Three manners, one by Rule and Compass, and the
Two others by this new Instrument. Besides its probableness, here is shown how
to find the Declination, Inclination and the Reclination of Draughts. All this
is maintained by Mathematical Demonstrations. The Third speaks of Spherick
Trigonometry, and of the Astronomical Problems which are thereby resolved, and
of the Construction of an Universal Clock comprehended in this Instrument, and
fit to find the Hours and Azymuths by the Sun and Principal Stars in all places
of the World where the Elevation of the Pole passes not the 65 Degree. The
Appendix contains the Resolving several Problems of Astronomy by Rule and
Compass on the Principles of Dyalling. The same Author has pubished a small
Work in 4 to where he Geometrically shows why the Current of Water makes the
Beds of Rivers, or where they run sometimes higher and sometimes lower; and why
the means employed hitherto for the Rhine on Issel have not been successful. He
Composed this Book upon occasion of the Works, that were prepared for the use
the Fort of Scenck, and Entitled it, Redenen Middelen Uan Uerdieping en
Uerzanding de Rivieren en Havens op even Meethundinge Maniere betoogt en aan
gewesen.

A Treatise of Law by Anthony Matthews in the Famous University of Leyden,
wherein he Treats of Nobility of Princes, Dukes, Counts, Knights, Esquire^; in
a word, it is a Treatise of all the kinds of Gentry. Amsterdam, Sold by Janss.
Waesberge and Felix Lope, 1686.
THis Work in 4 to is very useful to those that would thoroughly know the
History of the Middle Times in Regard to those Countries, which are generally
neglected, and Men apply themselves to the Study of the First and Last Ages,
and despise the Middle, by Reason of the horrible Barbarity which is in all
their Writings, which must be cons^lted. Mr. Matthews was not discouraged at
these displeasing Obstacles, he has turned over with a deal of Patience, the
old Pancreas and Archives, and has drawn from thence a great many Memoirs and
curious Pieces, which have not been as yet Published, and which serve as a
light to several dark Places of History. He endeavors most to clear what
concerns the Town of Utrecht, his own Country. He Explains the Form of its
Government, its Rights, the Authority of it is Bishops, and Vicissitudes of all
that past in them. He likewise applies himself very particularly to the History
of the Province of Holland, and shows the Epoch of these Courts which is
generally given. He clears by the by several things concerning the History of
other Nations, that of the Low Countries, and in particular that of the
Franches, and makes many learned Observations upon all the Dignities mentioned
in his Title, so that its a very useful Work. The Church was always so embodyed
in the World, the Disorders of which he shows, that the Author cannot get
forward without falling foul on all sides, so that the Reader may expect in
this great Volume a long account of what concerns the Clergy. He finds there
Friars and Canons of all Sects and Kinds, Convents where the Religious and
Religiouses lived together; I do not say in the same Cell, but under the same
Roof and in the same Apartment. The World Naturally detracting the Chastity of
Cloisters, has given occasion to think very oddly thereon, and it was to take
away that Scandal that the Civil and Canon Laws have forbidden both Sexes to
live in the same Convent. Nevertheless Mr. Matthews Reports that St. Briget
founded several of this Nature, and that Gilbert of Semplingham founded a great
many by Advice of St. Bernard. Amongst other Authors he quotes the Chronicle of
Montserain, which says, that in the Year 1223, because they would send abroad
many of the Convent Sisters, many glossed thereupon, that the time of their
Lying In drew near. Consueto Laicis more loquentes dicebant Moniales illas a
Monachis stupratas esse quibus jam pariendi tempus instaret. He quotes a Poet
named Nigellus, who said that the Mother Abbess very well deserved that name by
her Marvelous Fertility.

Quae pastoralis baculi dotatur honor
Illa quidem melius fertilius que parit.
As he is a Satirical Poet it would be very ill done to believe this upon his
bare saying. It is generally believed that St. Willibrord was the first
Preacher of the Gospel amongst the Frizons. But Mr. Matthews shows that St.
Eloy Bishop of Nayon had Instructed these Barbarians. It is true, that the
greatest part of these Conversions was reserved for those that came after them;
for St. Wilfride, St. Willibrord, St. Vulfran, etc. had a great hand in them
and so had Pepins Troops, and them of Charles Marlet his Son: For Mr. Cordunoy
acknowledges in his History of France, that though the Frizons suffered Wilbrord
to speak to them of the Christian Religion, Pepin could not trust to that,
because most of them left off the worship of their Gods only by force. A little
after he says, they Revolted, and Charles Martel having Vanquished them, beat
down their Idols and Temples, and cut down the Forests which they thought
Sacred, and caused all them to be killed which would not submit. It was a good
time in those Countries for those which converted. Mr. Matthews quotes William
Malmesbury, who says, that the Saxons and the Frizons were Converted by the
pressing care of Martel, who threatened one, and promised a recompense to the
other. If it were Charles Magne, St. Willibrord would not have received any
profit, for he did not live so long; but under Charles Martel St. Willibrord
and St. Boniface might have passed for Famous Converters, at the Expense of the
manner of doing, and of their Masters Purse.

The Art of Preaching the Word of God, containing the Rules of Christian
Eloquence. 12s. At Paris, 1687. page 524.
THe Judgment of men is so different, and the circumstances, which produce
persuasion, are sometimes so contrary to one another, that it is hard to
prescribe unto Orators such Rules as are a little particular and of some use:
Yet as there are defects which all Men blame, and such methods as please almost
all People in the same Age, Masters of Arts have thought it requisite to remark
them. Indeed these general reflections are not unprofitable, provided we do not
exceed those bounds. For as soon as we come to particulars, we may chance to
give for Maxims, contested things, and so force, or spoil the Genius of a young
Man, instead of perfecting him. This is what those who shall read the Books,
which we are going to speak of, may easily observe, and which we shall
endeavor to make here as plain as we can.

The Author of the work, whose Title we have set down, is a Roman Catholic
Preacher, who has thought convenient to remain Nameless, apparently for the
same Reason, which has hindered him a long while from Publishing these
Reflections upon the Art of Preaching; the reason was because he saw every day
so much Jealousy amongst Persons of the same employ: P. 2, 3.
Every Orator has particular turns and methods, which seem good to him only.
That leaves always some suspicion, that he blames unjustly in others what
agrees not with his particular Genius. He has divided his work into Four
Books, which are as so many Conversations, wherein he Treats after a particular
manner, (and which have no Taste of the Style of Schools) of the principal
qualities necessary for a Preacher.

The first Book concerns the Studies which a Christian Orator ought to
prosecute. Herein is maintained, that he ought to read the Precepts of the
Heathens, and that they are necessary to attain Christian Eloquence.

2. That Logic is not less necessary, provided thereby is understood the Art
of Reasoning well, to discern what is true from what is false, the certain from
the doubtful, and that which is evident from what is probable; because this P.
1.29.
necessary use of true Logic cannot be sufficiently learned, by the reading of
Aristotle's Rhetoric, nor even by the frequent Commerce, which we ought to have
with good Authors, as F. Rapin pretends, who is cited here without being named.

3. In regard to Physic, he thinks that that Part only which regards Man, is
absolutely necessary to be known, because he ought to be acquainted with all
the natural Dispositions of the Mind, and all the general and particular
Truths, which make him more able and ready to say, this is* true.

4. Touching Scholastic Divinity, P. 36.84.
he introduces an Abbot who testifies a high contempt for those who maintain
that the Scholastic Doctors teach often nothing less than the Doctrine of the
Church; and that when even they do teach it, they cannot dispose their minds to
Preach it well. But he answers him, that true Scholastic Divinity is nothing
else than the Doctrine of the Church, Examined and Established according to the
solid Rules of true Logic, which teach how to define, divide, and reason
exactly. The Abbot having replied, that if so, Men have no other obligation to
the Master of Sentences, nor to his Commentators, than for having made the
Science of the Church Scholastic; or filling it with an infinite deal of
unprofitable and Chemical Questions, and of having given it a very Barbarous
Style: the Author replies, That we must distinguish what this method has in it
Essential in it self, from the defect which the misfortune of Times, and
imprudence of several Professors have suffered to slip into it. 2. That the
only Design of these Authors was to include, in one body of Doctrine, all the
vast Science of the Church, which was confusedly disposed in Scripture and in
the Ancient Fathers, without any natural Order, and to Reduce all the Truths,
which God has Revealed to us, to certain principal Heads, which comprise them
all, and give them an Order, founded upon the nature of things, or upon the
Subject. 3. That before this Reduction, this Study did extremely displease the
Mind, not only by its length, but also by the confusion of matters. That
according to the opinion of the Roman Church, Men put themselves into great
danger of ^alling into Error, and of casting others therein, when they
immediately apply themselves to the Study of Holy Writ, and Ancient Fathers;
without having before studied in Methodical Divinity, necessary Precautions. 4.
That the Roman Church approves not that Men should indifferently read
Scripture. 5. That there are a great many Errors in the Works of the Ancient
Fathers, which they advanced with a good intention; but that they have been
since condemned. That they have made very Orthodox Propositions upon the
Mysteries of their time, and in the sense they gave them, which ought no more
to be mentioned, without some Mollifying. That they have made use of several
Hyperbolical Expressions, which seem contrary to the Sentiments of other
Fathers, and what they themselves have elsewhere spoke with less heat* 6.
Scholastic Divinity Teaches, according to the Author, how to distinguish
always what is of Faith with that which is not. This exact distinction,
pursues he, is very important in our Sermons, though never so much neglected by
a thousand People, P. 32.
who apply themselves much more to the opinions of Doctors, than to the true
Faith, and who affirm doubtful opinions, with the same firmn^ss as undoubted
Truths.

Notwithstanding he dissembles not the Defects of the Catholics; but their
obscure and barbarous Style he attributes to the Ignorance and ill Judgment of
the Ages wherein they lived. The evil is, that when Men begun again to know and
taste the Clearness and Elegance of the Style, there has been found too great a
number of Professors, who would maintain the Barbarity, as Essential to their
Method. Nevertheless, by little and little this unsupportable Iargon is le^t
off; but there is another defect, which is not easily forsaken, and that is an
hundred unprofitable Questions, wherewith the Imprudence of Ancient Professors
have filled the Divinity of the Schools, and that the weakness, or negligence
of their Successors still obstinately maintain: They stop so long at these
Questions which only perplex, and that disputations have rendered Famous, that
they are forced entirely to omit the greatest part of such truths as are
necessary for our Faith, for Christian Morality, which should make the
principal Subject of each Treatise. So that Scholars found themselves at the
end of their Study, altogether ignorant of true Divinity. The reason of this
conduct, and that which has never yet been observed, is, of that to settle to
the Study Divinity only, Men must Read, Think, Digest P. 74.
and Range an infinite number of positive things which they have never heard
of: In fine, these Famous Questions are more proper to cause a glittering show
and make the Subtility of the Wit be admired, whereas if they were slightly
passed over, they think it might be Attributed to some defect of Reason, or
Apprehension. It must be confessed also that the Air of Schools is contrary to
Eloquence.

This Book ends with the Examination of this Question, P. 85.122.
Whether a Minister ought always to Preach us the most severe Morality? The
Author, who is not of this Sentiment, alleges, in favor of the Casuists, a
great number of Doctors, which are for them, and the esteem that the Roman
Church makes thereof; upon which the Abbot answers him, P. 101.
That a man alone who sounds his Decision upon the Gospel, or upon a Writing
that cites the Canon Law, or some holy Father, ought always to be believed,
even against the common opinion of Recent Doctors, what number soever they may
be, because their opinion is founded but upon human Reasons* The strongest
Reply to this is, That their Maxim is dangerous, and makes room for the
Calvinists. Its in fine concluded, P. 18.
that a Minister ought never to take part in the particular opinions of
Divines, and that he ought never to Preach them, being sent to Teach the pure
Word of God, which contains only the truths of Faith, and moral Reflections,
which are clear consequences of 'em.

II. The Second Book treats on the manner how to gain the attention and good
will of the Auditors to a Christian Orator; and it is affirmed that the
principal means is to give them an advantageous Idea of his good manners and
probity, not in praising, or abasing himself by a Foolish and Proud Humility,
or in making Compliments to them; but in ^aking of every thing, the Sentiments,
Expressions and Manners, which ought to be expected from a grave Man, full of
Honor and Integrity: Every thing which may Augment or Diminish this Idea is
carefully remarked. Amongst what serves to increase the first, place an
inviolable Application to the most exact Truths, which banish all those
extravagant thoughts, that are called Concetti; and even to shun excessive
Hyperboles. 2. An extreme horror to Vice, and a sincere desire of inspiring it
into his Auditors: Which engage him to be very grave in all his discourse; to
avoid all sort of Railleries, even the most honest ones; never to paint Vice so
as to may make the Hearers laugh, and not to speak Comedies, or Satyrs, instead
of Sermons; to avoid all Tones of the voice and all such Gestures, which render
a man contemptible or ridiculous. 3. He must appear extremely Modest, and be so
far from all manner of boastings, as to be satisfied to make others sensible of
the beauty, solidity, and force of his thoughts, without seeming to take notice
thereof himself, and without making use of his Wit, Knowl^dg, Memory, or any
other Artifice in Discourse to gain applause; he ought to show a Moderation
void of all regret, and every interessed passion, never to speak of any thing,
which the People know, they have any Personal Interest in. All that may be said
or done, against a Minister, he cannot mention in his Sermons, without its
producing a very ill effect. The best Apology is to appear as if one did not so
much as think one had been affronted. 5. To give to these Expressions a Noble
and Affectionate turn. 6. To make a frequent and judicious use of Sentences, or
often to make use of general Expressions conceived in few words, which express
that which is done, or is not done; what we ought, and what we ought not to do,
in relation to the general conduct of Men. 7. To advance nothing but what is
certaian and undoubted: Which obliges never to relate P. 205.209.
in the Pulpit such facts, as are known only to particular Relations, or common
Report, which may be false; nor even such things as we know to be certain, when
the certainty does not appear so clearly to all men, that many cannot doubt
thereof. We often see Persons cried down in many things, wherein they are
really very innocent. If it be said in a Pulpit, that such or such a thing is
done in the City, immediately People cast their Eyes upon the Persons, which
are the most suspected thereof; and there is no more doubt but Suspicions are
true, since they are spoken of in a place where only Truth is expected. This
Rule requires no examples to be cited, which are not in Scripture, or that can
be called in Question. The more these examples do appear extraordinary, or
miraculous, the more they annoy the Authority of the Preacher, by reason of the
great inclination, which the generality of the People have to doubt of all
things appear prodigious, 8. It is pretended upon the same Principle that we
ought never to take a party in Questions, wherein the Catholic Doctors are
lawfully divided; but to be satisfied simply to relate their Opinions, when
that is requisite; because absolutely to assert a thing, is to give an Opinion
which may be false, for the Word of God. 9. Finally, its maintained and proved
much at large P. 316, 228.
against the multitude of Preachers of the Roman Church, that passages in Latin
ought not to be cited, neither of Scripture nor the Fathers; because these
Citations discourage their Auditors, by giving them so many Reproaches of their
ignorance, and causing unavoidable distractions. The answer to the Objection,
which is drawn from Custom, is, that if it was as inviolable as its pretended,
the whole Sermon should be made in Latin, as was done some few Ages ago in
France; or to preach as much or more Latin and Greek than French, as was also
done at the beginning of this Age. We judge now, pursues the Author, that our
Fathers have done very wisely to change these Customs that the People might the
better understand the Word of God. Those who shall come after us, will give us
thanks, if we perfectly banish from our Christian Discourses all the Languages,
which the greatest part of Christians understand not. Afterward we are taught
how to make use of the passages of Scripture and the Fathers, after a manner
which is not tedious.

III. All the Studies of a Preacher, and the care he ought to take to acquire
himself Authority over those who hear him, tends only to persuade them, and to
create a value upon the strength of the proofs which he brings. This then is
the prinpal, and it is that for which particular precepts are given in the
Third Book. It is nevertheless, what is most neglected; because good and solid
proofs are always truths which appear common, and that we apply our selves much
more to what may render the Orator Admirable, than what may efficaciously
persuade the Auditors. We do not perceive that this desire of appearing Famous
hinders us from saying almost any thing Essential to the purpose, and makes us
fall into a thousand extravagancies. If we should retrench, says the Author,
from a hundred Sermons that are heard every day, all that we should dare to
say, to any honest man, for fear of making our selves ridiculous in his
opinion, what would remain would be a very small matter, and often nothing at
at all.

To remedy this abuse it is proposed as an uncontestable Maxim, that an Orator
ought to prove every thing, and to advance nothing, which has not some reason
in it, or which may not serve to establish it, or to give it more force or
clearness. The very Exordiums, which serve not for this, are not only
unprofitable, but also contrary to the end of Eloquence; and so much the more
contrary, as they appear adorned and polished with more Artifice. Similitudes,
which prove nothing and which are of pure Ornament, may in some manner be
suffered, provided they are not frequent, and that they are expressed in so few
words, that they give not leisure to the Auditors to take notice that they are
Similitudes: but not in vile false Lustres, against which the Author declaims
in many places; and with much reason.

He Treats afterward of the choice of the Matter, and asserts that Experience
has made Roman Catholic Preachers a long time since to judge that it is more
useful to choose one important Subject only, which should be treated thoroughly
on in a Sermon, than only to make Paraphrases upon the Gospels, or on any other
Book of the Scripture. But in making this choice, we too often fall into a
considerable defect, which consists in fixing on such Texts as we may say are
extraordinary and curious things. P. 261.
I see no other reason but this, pursues the Author, which has obliged one of
our most excellent Preachers of this Age to make a Sermon upon the Kingdom of
Devils: Such a subject is very fit to make one say many particular things,
known but of few. Though it never appeared proper to me to produce any other
effect than what it one day did which was to oblige a Prince of the Blood, at
the end of so extraordinary Sermon, to go and tell the Preacher that he had
Preached in a Devil and a half. Apparently our Author would not approve what is
related of a Famous Protestant Preacher, who having taken his Text upon Matt.
10. If thou art the Son of God, bid these stones to become bread, begun his
Sermon much after this manner. My Brethren, it has been usual to Preach to you
in this Pulpit the Word of God: but I go about to Preach to you this day the
word of the Devil.

The principal subject of a Sermon ought commonly to be somewhat general,
according to the Author, the Auditory being composed of all sorts of Persons.
But he judges it not convenient it should be drawn from the Existence of God,
from the immortality of the Soul, or from Predestination P. 264. and Seq.
. He maintains there is almost always more harm than good done, by undertaking
thoroughly to expound these great Truths, to uphold them with all their proofs,
and to answer all their Objections. As to Predestination, how able, says he,
and prudent soever a Preacher is, he cannot treat of all that is Essential to
it, without producing in the minds of the Hearers such perplexity as he cannot
so well dissipate, but that there will always some doubts remain. As to the Two
others, the People is never capable of those reasons which establish them, and
each man is always more persuaded of himself, than he can be by all the reasons
which may be alleged. Understanding Persons have these truths so well
Established in their Minds, that they doubt when they think on them without a
design of examining them, or proving them. Ill proofs, which are sometimes
given thereof, are fitter to mak^ them suspected than any thing else. As to the
Impious, it is certain they never are more obstinate against Divine Truths, than
when they are threatened to have them demonstrated, making them then to deny
several Propositions, which at another time they would have granted. These
Truths being the foundation of all Morality, we ought never to speak of them
but as undoubted Principles. If we have any sensible and popular Reasons, it
may be added in a few words, without making a show of proving them; these sorts
of Proofs convincing better than long Arguments. The same Precepts are given,
in respect to the other Mysteries of the Christian Religion, as the Trinity and
Incarnation; and its affirmed that there is no better manner of Preaching them,
than in making People observe what glory they owe to God and Jesus Christ, and
to enlarge yet more upon the good and useful Sentiments which these Mysteries
ought to inspire into us. This method is very profitable, chiefly for Roman
Catholic Preachers, whose Religion is not very demonstrable, and who are to
deal with a People who have accustomed themselves to believe rather by
Prejudice, than be persuaded by Reason.

After that he speaks of Division, and as its to be taken for granted that
Christian Orators are always Masters of their Subject, and of the Propositions,
which they would form thereon: So they will do wisely to propose to themselves
only two or three Truths to establish in so many different parts. Several
Reasons, and diverse Important Precepts are given on this matter: As that all
Propositions must be Moral and Practicable; except those which are formed upon
matters of Faith, which import the necessity of Sanctification, and that they
given an occasion to come to some particulars of the ordinary actions of life.
After that he marks the qualities that the proofs ought to consist on, by which
these Propositions are maintained. 1. Their Sense must be different from that
of the Proposition: 2. The truth must appear more plain in 'em. 3. They must be
conclusive. To make sure of the force of an Argument we need only, according to
the Author, to consult our selves, before we make use thereof, and to examine
if this reason would content our mind, when another should coldly propose it.
P. 323.
As to Novelty he proves here that it consists not in making digressions, and
in seeking for subtle reasons; but in expounding things after so natural a
turn, that no other form but that of truth is given them: In following this
method it may happen, by the ill Judgment of the generality of Preachers, who
reject every thing which does not appear extraordinary, that the most common
things will seem the newest to the People, being such Truths which never were
Preached unto them.

We should be too long if we related all the fine things the Author speaks upon
the Method of understanding a solid Argument, without coming into teedious
Repetitions, by applying it to the pretense of Preachers, and particular cases.

IV. The Fourth Book treats of what may preserve in the Auditors a favorable
disposition to the Speakers, and its believed that the whole Artifices is to
render them attentive, by proposing things to them after an easy and
acceptable manner: For Attention cannot be easy; 1. Without clearness in the
expressions and in the Matter it self; which obliges us to banish all words
that are too old, or too new, as well as the Terms of Art, and of the Schools,
and all Methaphysicual Speculations. 2. Briefness in Periods, without which the
Discourse becomes Unintelligible, and in the Sermon it self, which ought never
to last longer than an hour. The attention is rendered agreeable by variety in
Subjects and Phrases, by diversity of the Style, by Figures and Ornaments,
which however spoil all when they are excessive, or far sought: And in short,
by sweet and affectionate Motives through the whole Sermon. Upon all this, are
remarked the Defects, which we ought to take heed of* and we are taught how to
avoid, being lifeless and insipid. He finishes the whole work by giving rules
for Panegyricks.

Historia Animalium, etc. Or a short and Accurate History of Animals, mentioned
in Holy Writ, in which the Names of every one are drawn from their Originals;
and their Nature, Profits and Uses are Explained. A work in which many Writers
both Sacred and Profane are Illustrated, and chiefly Great Bochart in all the
Chapters is Augmented and Amended, by the Labor and Study of Henry May.
Francfort and Spire, 1686. in Octavo, at Amsterdam: Sold by Waesberge and Boom
THE Work is in Two Parts, Writ by Mr. May, Professor of the Eastern Tongues at
Durlac, upon Animals, and chiefly upon those which the Scripture speaks of. He
undertakes to make the History of Four footed Beasts, Fowls, Creeping things,
and of Aquatick, or Amphibious Animals. He designs Four things in this piece.
1. To Search after the Etymology of their Names, chiefly in Hebrew, because
this Disquisition may serve for the understanding of several Passages of Sacred
and Profane Writters. 2. To make an exact Description of Exterior forms of
Animals, of their Nature, and of their Qualities. 3. To remark the usefulness
which may be drawn from them in the various occasions of life. 4. To speak of
the Superstitious use that Pagans have made of them, in the Sacrifices and
Ceremonies of their Religion. Amongst the Authors that have written upon this
Subject there are few who perfectly knew the Eastern Tongues. Bochart is
perhaps the only Man who was so well read in this point as to undertake without
Temerity to write upon so difficult a Subject. But Bochart himself confesses,
that he has yet left a great many things to be discovered. Besides that, his
Book is very large of the Animals spoken of in Scripture, and of full
Citations, which few are capable of understanding, Therefore Mr. May thought it
would not be unprofitable to examine this matter, according to the Ideas of
this great Man, whose faults he endeavors to make known and augment his
Discoveries. The First Book treats of the Four kinds of Animals, and the Second
of diverse Four Footed Beasts in particular. This Second Book is divided into
Two Sections, the one for Domestic and the other for wild Animals. This is
sufficient for the method of your Author; we shall make no longer stop before
we enter upon the Principal Matters which he treats on; only observe what is
most singular, and in what he differs from Bochart.

In the 11. Chapter of the first Book, he remarks after Bochart, Ludolf and Goli^s,
that the Name (...) Behema which the Hebrews give four foo^ed Beasts, comes
from the Ethiopick, Bahama which signifies, to be dumb, or to form only
inarticulate sounds. In the same Chapter, he searches for the Origin or
Division of Animals into clean and unclean, which is so Ancient that it was in
use, even before the Flood. G. 7.2. He has an inclination for the opinions of
Heideggerus, who believes the Sacred Author calls such Animals clean as nature
has no aversion to, and those unclean which are only fed upon through necessity,
such as are Crocodiles, Serpents, Crows and the like. But he decides nothing in
this place. He afterward examins this famous Question, Whether it was
permitted to eat of the flesh of Beasts before the Flood; He maintains the
affirmative and endeavors to prove it, in translating the 30 verse. of the
first Chapter of Genesis, quite contrary to the common way of Interpreters. He
pretends that (...) Lamed of the Hebrews is not always the sign of the Dative,
that it often signifies, also, with, together, and that in repeating the Verb
and case of the preceding Verse, the Translation may be made thus, I have given
you also every beast of the Field, and every fowl of the Firmament, every
creeping thing, in which there is a living Soul, and every herb of the Field to
feed upon. To this question Mr. Majus adds another, which is not less curious,
viz. if the prohibiting of eating Blood yet subsists. He is for the negative,
and strives to show the abolishment of it in spite of powerful Adversaries,
whom he opposes, as Grotius, Salmatius, De Courcelles, Gerard Vossius, Blondel,
etc. In the 6. Chapter of the same Book is the discussion of some Questions of this
Nature, concerning the Animals which God brought before Adam, and the names he
gave them. It is asked, if there were of all sorts there, and how much time was
requisite for Elephants and all the Animals formed in another Continent, to come
from the remotest parts of America or Indies, to do homage to our first Father?
It is answered that though an Author expresses himself after a very general
manner, it is still a natural equity not to press his expressions beyond the
limits in which the circumstances of the Discourse restrains them: That the
terms cannot be understood of all the Animals of the Earth, and all the Fowls
of the Firmament, but of those of Mesopotamia, which were about the places
where Adam had been Created: That there is no contradiction; that God, who
produced Frogs and Lice of Egypt, made Bears come forth against the Children
who jeered the Prophet, and sent Lions against the Samaritans, should bring so
many Animals to Adam. The Knowledge and Judgment of the first Man is much
insisted upon, and its pretended that he gave all Animals Names which express
very well their Natures, because this supposition is the Foundation of all the
Etymologies which are sought for in the rest.

The First Book begins with Elephants, and the word (...) Schenhabbim, 1 King.
10.22. gives an occasion to our Author to enter into the matter. This word is
commonly translated by those of Ivory or Elephants Teeth. Indeed the term of
Schen signifies Teeth. Bochart pretends that the Ancient Hebrews called
Elephanes (...) Kahabim, because they are of a brown color, and that
Schenhabim was made by a Syncope of Schenkahabim. Mr. Majus says to this. 1.
That this retrenchment seems very hard. 2. That there are Elephants quit black
and even white. 3. That there is a Daguesch in (...) which Shows that b must
be redoubled and that we must say Schenhabbim and not Schenhabim. Therefore he
proposes another Etymology, which seems more likely to be true; he believes
that it was spoken in the Singular (...) Hab an Elephant taken from (...)
Hababb to make a noise with teeth, to gnash them, which is yet used amongst the
Arabians. Even as the Latins have called this Animal Barr^s from Barrire.

p. 146
We know that it is the Indians, who first undertook to Tame Elephants, and
Pliny gives us the manner: But our Modern Travelers relate it a little
different. Elephants newly taken must have Four Months Apprenticeship, before
they will know how to bend their Knees, and before they are in a way of serving
in Military expeditions; they are lead to drink twice a day, two tamed
Elephants are the Conductors of the Flock; they do before those which are not
tamed, all the actions which their Masters have taught them; and when the wild
ones will not obey, the Tamed ones punish them for it with great blows of Teeth.

2. c.
As Oxen are of the most robust Animals that are, the Hebrews call them (...)
Abbirim from (...) Abhir, or Abbir, Strong and Powerful. This Name is likewise
given to GOD and the Celestial Spirits; and therefore it is commonly Translated
Ps. 78.25 (...) Lechem Abhirim. The Bread of Angels. But as Abhirim is also
said of Persons who surpass in Force and Power, the Author believes that it may
well be Translated the Bread of the Powerful, or great Lords, as it should be
said in High Dutch Herren Brod, white and delicate Bread, upon which Persons of
Quality commonly do Feed. The labor of Oxen is one of the Principal Causes of
the Fertility of the Land, that is, according to Mr. Majus, which has given
place to the Fable of the Horn of Abundance of Amalthea, which he derives from
the Hebrew (...) Amal, to work; where as Bochart brings Amalthea from the
Phenician Amalthea, a Nurse. If what is related on the credit P. 239.
of John Albert of Mandeslo is true, we must confess that the Climat may cause
great changes in the Constitution of Animals, This Traveller affirms that the
Oxen of the Indies are as light as ours are heavy, that being coupled to a
Chariot, they are lead where one will, in putting a Rope betwixt their
Nostrils, and that they draw it with so much force that he himself made Six
Leagues in Germany, with such carriage in four hours. Besides, P. 282.
Oxen are not every where so miserable as in Europe. There are Countries, as
the Kingdom of Bengal, in the State of the Great Mogul, where Divine Honors
are rendered unto them, where it is prohibited to kill them, and where they are
Enterred with more Pomp and Magnificence than Men. At Calicut P. 283.
there is a Holy Water made of the Ashes of a burned Cow: The Women sprinkle it
upon their Movables and Houses, and the King and Priests do wash therein their
whole Bodies, before they enter into the Temple, and take their Meals. The
Sacrifice of the Heifers is well expounded in this Chapter, and Burnt Offerings
of Beeves, of the Proverbs and Laws of the Scripture which have been made upon
the occasion of these Animals.

P. 2.
Bochart brings the Name of Camel, Camelus, from the Hebrew (...) Gamel, which
signifies to wean and to render, because, says he, this Animal remembers a
long time the evil which has been done him, and saileth not to render it. The
Author is of the same opinion with Bochart, in regard of the Origin of the
Word, but he cannot approve the reason which this Learned Man gives.

P. 309.
What likelihood is there that Adam should omit all the fine Qualities of the
Camel, and should impose thereupon a name, which gives an Idea but of a Vice,
he who knew the bottom, the nature of all Animals? He therefore believes that
it is better to remark that the Gamel of the Hebrews has a signification as
extensive as the Mereri of Latins, which is taken in good and bad sense, and
that it signifies to do good and evil* it has been applied to the Camel in the
first sense, because of the Profit which Men receive from them. Here is
expounded the passage of Matt. 19.24. It is easier for a Camel to pass through
the Eye of a Needle, etc. It is pretended that the Term of the Original (...)
always signifies a Camel, and cannot be taken in this place for a Cable. The
explication of the Proverb of Mat. 23.24. is found here.

P. 361.
Those who only look upon Beasts but as Automatas and Machins, without
Knowledge, shall find in Chap. 4. some little Ancient and Modern Histories,
which they may expound at their leisure, if they do not love Contradiction.
Hist. Anim. l. 9. c. 48.
Aristole assures that a King of the Scythians had a Mare which brought the
finest Foles in the World, that they would have her Leapt by one of her own
Colts; that for to surmount the Horror this Animal had for Incest, they were
obliged to disguise his Dam; but after Copulation, having found the Fraud
imposed upon him, full of sadness and despair, he went and precipitated himself
from the hight of a Rock. If we believe Iustus Lypsus in his time, another like
thing happened in Spain to a Horse, which was cheated in the same Act; he no
sooner found it out, than he tore the Instrument of his Crime with his Teeth.
In giving the Description of Horses, the following passages are expounded at
large, Zach. 1.8.6. 2. Job 39.23, 28. He corrects the Latin of the New
Ethiopick Testament of Nisselius and Petraeus, upon Ia. 4.7. p. 382, according
to Bochart. There the Superstitions of Pagans in regard to Horses and Chariot
of the Sun, which St. Chrysostom believes to be taken from the Chariot of Elia,
by reason of the Proximity of the Name of the Prophet Helias, and of Helios,
which is that of the Sun in Greek. There is the Fable of Vistnon which some
Indians adore, as the Director of the World: And which they say has been
changed into a white and winged Horse, which is in Heaven, standing upon three
Feet, holding the right Foot up, because that as soon as he shall lay it down,
this Universe will come to an end, and will make place for a new World. To see
more of this, examine Philip Baldaeus upon the Idolatry of the Indians, Chap.
10.

c. 5.
The name of Ass was for a very long time an affront; but it has not always
been so generally odious. Thus sometimes Robust Persons were called, who were
very laborious, as Ieffrey, who was surnamed Asinus, propter Vires, non propter
Pigritiam, according to the Relation of Aumonius in the III Book of the
Miracles of St. Benedict. Therefore the Religious of the Holy Trinity, or St.
Mathurinus, are not affronted that their Order should be named Ordo Asinorum.
Chamor one of the Hebrew names of an Ass, was that of the Father of Sichem,
even as amongst the Latins, there were some called Asella, and Asinus. As to
the Origin of Chamor, our Author is not of the opinion of Bochart, which brings
it from one of the significations of (...) Chamer, used amongst the Arabians,
viz. to be r^d, whereas Mr. Majus derives Cham^r from Chamar, to be hard, heavy
and d^fficult, a sense frequent amongst the Chaldeans and the Thalmudists, and
which agrees very well with this Animal destined to carry great loads. Amongst
the good qualities of an Ass, one of the principal is, as it is said, that it is
Hearing is very acute, to which the length of his Ears contributes not a
little. Thence People will have the Fable of Midas to come, to whom Poets have
given Asses Ears, because nothing passed in his Kingdom but what he knew. The
passage of St. Mat. 21.5. is Expounded P. 425.

P. 510.
Bochart has uncontestably proved that they were not Mules which Ana found in
the Desert, in feeding the Asses of his Father Genesis 36.24. But our Author does
not also believe so, that it must not be Emean, Giants who are understood by
(...) Iemim in this passage: He has more inclination for the opinion of
Wagenseilius and Ab^n Ezra, who will have Iemim to be the Name of an Herb,
which is now no more known; but which was very much known in the time of Moses.
The Author Expounds the Hebraick Phrase by this. It was Nicot who found out
Tobacco, which is very like that of Genesis 30.14. Ruben found the Dudaim,
which Ludolf believes to be the Fig^ree of the Indies. To all this Mr. Majus
adds that (...) Ieman is the name of an Herb in Arabic which Go'ius Interprets
Blitum, Blite, which is an insipid Plant and without salt, whereof much grows
in the Deserts, and which Asses do feed upon.

c. 7.
The Author agrees neither with Bochar^ upon the extent of (...) Aschtaroth one
of the names of the Sheep; for whereas Bochart will have it to pass for great
and small Cattle, Mr. Majus pretends that it only belongs to Lambs, or Flocks
of Sheep. Here the Ancient Sacrifices are very amply spoken of, the
unprofitableness of them, and the necessity of that of the Messia are shown;
and to convince the Jews, a passage is produced out of a Book Entitled Zohar,
Fol. 59. col. 3. ed. Cremon.
very Ancient, and much respected by the Jews. It is R. Iochai who speaks. If
the Messia had not engaged himself to suffer all the pains which the Isralites
had deserved in sining against the Law, no body would be able to sustain them.
Therefore Isaiah says, Truly he has born our Griefs, etc. For the troubles
that come unto the world, since the Law was published, and to which man is
subject, are infinite. Its true, whilst the Israelites were yet in the holy
Land, the Ceremonies and Sacrifices which they offered might take away sickness
and pains in this world. But now the Messia takes them from men, until he quits
this World, in loading himself with the pains which they were to suffer, P. 510.

In Chap. 8. Mr. Majus still engages the Sentiment of Bochart upon the
Etymology of (...) Chasiph, and of (...) Ez, which both signify Goat: But in
recompense he maintains the opinion of this Author concerning the Buck Azazel,
against him who has given us in Latin the Moses and Adron of Goodwin, with
Notes of his own. In speaking of the Worship which Pagans paid to these
Animals, he refutes what P. 569.
St. Jerome advances in in the life of St. Paul the Hermit concerning the Fauns
and Satyrs, which this Father says kept with St. Anthony, and prayed him to
obtain Mercy from God for them, whom they knew to be come for the Salvation of
the World.

The Hebrews call a Dog (...) * c. 10. Ch^lebb. And because St. Jerome
expounded the Word (...) Chelubb, Amos 8.1, 2. by that of Uncimus, Bochart
thought that a Dog was called Chelebb; because it is Teeth are like so many
Hooks, which do not let go their hold. Mr. Majus says to that, that there are
other Animals who have as good Teeth as Dogs, and that (...) Chelubb also
signifies a Cage or a Basket wherein Birds or Fruit are kept, and Chelebb and
Chelubb may both come very well from one Root, which is lost, viz (...)
Chelebb, which should signify to keep, if one had not rather derive it from
Chelabb, as he adds, and which comes from the Arabic Chalaba, to be mad, or
rage. Being to treat of wild beasts in the Second Section of this Book, he
begins with Lions. He refutes, after Bochart, the Opinion of them who pretend
that the six or seven Hebrew names of Lion, do mark as many different Ages of
this Animal: but they do not yield to this Learned Man that (...) Ari, or (...)
Arieth, comes from (...) Raab to See. It Is believed that the common Opinion
which derives Ari^th from Arab (...) is the best, because its pretended that
this word does not simply signify to gather Fruits, but also to cut or break
with violence, or to tear off; and they endeavor to prove it by Ps. 80.13. and
the Explication of R. D. Kimchi upon Ps. 22. 17. which is refuted in the
Chapter of the Panther in Explaining a passage of Hosea 13.7. and there is
mention made of the opinion of Mr. Meiboom upon the word (...), which he
Interprets Erectus, as the Panther which stands Erect in the way to throw
himself upon Passengers. And his Wit is much commended, his Judgment, and 3
Essays of the New Explication of the Old Testament which he has published;
though some are not of his opinion in Relation to Transposition, which he finds
in the Book of Job* Chapter 31. Our Author pretends that the Leopard is a different
Beast from the Panther, which owes his birth to the She Lion and Male Panther;
and that though the name of Leopard was not invented till three Ages after
Christ, them that have lived before have notwithstanding spoken of such
Animals, under the name of Parde, as Pliny and Philostratus. Claudian describes
'em so in these Verses under the same Name.

Obvia fulminci propcrant ad vulnera Pardi Semine permixto geniti, cum forte
Leana. Nobiliorem uterum viridis corrupit Adulter, Hi maculis patrem referunt
and robore matrem.

The 4 th. Chapter treats of the Came-Leopard or Giraffe, the 5 th. of the
Tiger, the 6 th. of the Lynse. These are Beasts which are not mentioned in Holy
Writ, but are mentioned by Translators who understood it not well. Here is a
mention of the Shape and Qualities of these Animals: And several Histories and
Stories are drawn from Baldaeus, Belon, Kirchar, Bonzius, from Iohnston, and
chiefly from Dapper. As the description of Africa will soon appear in France by
the Flemish Geographer, and as we have hopes of having all the other Volumes of
this Author, we will pass over several Histories which Mr. Majus does mention.
Here is one taken out of Iohnston, which is like those which are alleged in
the Second Extract of Grotius P. 152, 153. An Ethiopian dreaming at Sea, that a
Tiger was ready to devour him, went next night to hide himself in the Prow, but
this Precaution did not avail him; for the Vessel being then at Anchor not far
from the Coast, a Tiger entered and chose out this unfortunate Negro, and tore
him in pieces, not touching any of the Europeans. The Wolf, the Hyena and the
Ihoes, take up the three following Chapters. Bochart deriveth the Hebrew word
(...) Zeebb, from (...) Zaab, of Gold; but Mr. Majus derives it from the
Arabic word Zaaba or Daaba, to frighten, whence is formed the word (...) Dib a
Wolf, and perhaps the German Dieb, a Thief. The Hyena has not Legs so long as
those of a Wolf, but its Body is as big and its Hair rougher and the Body
spotted with diverse colors. It Is said that there are a kind of Beasts in
Spain, which are called Ginetts, which resemble the Hyena. Thaes is a Greek
word, which is the name of several little Beasts less than Wolves, of a yellow
color, the Hebrew call them (...) Tsiim: See Bochart. They go in great Troops
and do no harm to Men, only they enter Houses at night, and eat all they like.
They are thought to be very cunning Beasts; but it seems this craft is merely
Machinal, since it fails 'em when they have most need of it; for being at night
in a House, if any of the Company be left at the Door, which begins to howl,
all the rest do the same, and so they awake the Master and Family, which treat
them like night Thieves.

Most of the Eastern Languages call a Bear (...) Dobb or Dubb. Bochart derives
this word from the Arabic Dabiba, to be furred, and our Author likewise
believes that it may be taken from another signification of the same word,
which is to walk slowly.

Bochart has shown that in Isaiah 34.14. (...) Tsijm, Signifies Wild Cats, Mr.
Majus confirms that Explication, and adds to the remarks of this Learned Man,
some Modern Histories; but he is not of this opinion touching (...) Zemar,
Deuteronomy. 14.5. Luther and Munster have explained it of the Elau. Gesner of the
Giraffe, Bochart of the Camel, upon which our Author decides nothing: He says,
that the word (...) Acco, which is in the same passage would belong better to
the Elan. Upon the word (...) Opher, a Fawn, in Arabic Algophro or Algaphro,
from Gaphoran, the first hair of the Face, etc. The Wool of Cotton Cloth
according to Bochart. Mr. Majus says, that though this Conjecture is very witty,
nevertheless he had rather derive (...) Opher from (...) Apher, Dust, because
of the lightness of Deers, which run almost as quick as the Dust which the Wind
carries.

That we may more commodiously use this work, there are three Indexes joined to
it, one of the passages of Scripture, another of the Author quoted in this
Book, and the third of the Subjects treated of. Bib. um. Tom. 16. P. 138.

A Discourse Concerning Liturgies by Mr. David Clerkson, at London, in Octavo
P. 198. To which is Annexed an Answer to it by Dr. Comber.
THE Authors design is to Examine the Antiquity of the Liturgies, P. 2.
or of Forms of Prayer which we are obliged to make use of at Church, without
making any change therein. He denies not but that in the Primitive Church,
there might have been private Persons who had composed certain Prayers that
were commonly made use of in public; even that there have been some men, who
have made use of Prayers made by others. There is mention made of this last
kind in the 23 d. Canon of the 3 d. Council of Carthage, held toward the end
of the Fourth Age. This is the most ancient Liturgy, which the Author found,
unless this name be given to the Lords Prayer. Mr. David Clarkson P. 3.
maintains it was repeated only in blessing the Signs of the Eucharist, and
cites diverse passages of the Ancients and Moderns, by which it appears that
several Great Men looked upon the Lords Prayer, rather as a Model, than as a
Form whose terms must necessarily be kept. Which his Antagonist has
sufficiently confuted.

II. The Author confesses that diverse P 4. and Seq.
Churches had such an Order, for Public Worship and for the Celebration of the
Sacraments; but he believes that the resemblance consisted not in the same
words, but in asking of God the same thing on such occasions. As to Regular
Forms, which are only read, he pretends that during some Ages, the Custom was
not in Practice. He brings diverse general and particular Reasons thereof, which
shall be here related in few words. The proofs he gives, to she^ that there was
no Form for the Celebration of the Sacraments in general* are these.

1 st. We do not find in the Authors of the First Ages, when they speak of what
happned in their Assemblies, any of these manners of speaking (...), Preces
legere, to read Prayers, de scripto recitare, though they often speak of
Lectures, of reading of Psalms, Martyrologies, and of Epistles, etc.

2 d. To Read and Pray, are things represented as very different by Justin
Martyr, St. Athanasius, Socrates, Theodoret, and Sozomen.

3 d. He that Prayed could not Read, if he had his Eyes raised toward Heaven.
And this the Author endeavors to prove by Tertullian, Clement Alexandrin, St.
Cyprian, Arnobius, Lactantius, Denis of Alexandria, and Eusebius, etc. Saint
Chrysostom says, that in Praying, as it was usual to do, to bless the
Eucharist, there was more assurance required, for liberty of Expression ((...))
than Moses and Elias had; which is not necessary simply to Read a Liturgy. The
passages which the Author cites here, seem to have a respect to Prayers in
general. To which we answer him, That what is said of Prayers, which we make
our selves, This was not in the Extract,
ought not to extend all manner of Prayers; and that now Liturgies are to be
excepted which are read. As for the word (...), as it often simply signifies
Assurance; So we may say, that those who read the Liturgy ought to do it with
confidence, that the Prayer which they make shall be accomplished: We observe
this in short, that it may be perceived, that the Citations of Authors will not
go for concluding Arguments in the minds of many Readers. As these Citations
cannot be related, this remark was necessary.

4. The Ancients never make mention of any Book of Prayers, in such places
where they would have spoken of them, if they had any such Books. We have
Catalogues of Vessels, Utensils and Books of Churches, as Bibles, Gospels, etc.
The Fathers speak of the good and bad use that has been made of them; but
there is no mention made of a Book of Public Prayers. One of the First Books
of this kind is the Libellus Officialis, which is spoken of in the 25 Canon of
the IV Council of Toledo, held in DCXXXIII. But it was only a short instruction
of the manner whereby Prayers ought to be formed. If there had been then any
Liturgy, the 2, 5, 6, and 8, Canons, even to the 17, would be useless.
Traditors of Liturgies have never been heard of, viz. People that in time of
Persecution, gave up these Books to Heathens. And this would have appeared,
because it was not so much the opinions of the Christians, that they were
persecuted for by the Pagans, as their Worship, which consisted, as it is
believed, in the Reading of Liturgies The Romans were much more against new.
Liturgies, than new Gods; as appears by a passage of Titus Livius L. 25. C. 1.
who relates that the Senate Prohibited a new manner of Worship, which was
introduced into Rome, and caused the Books to be Seized, which those who were
of this new Profession made use of. Edixit ut quicunque libros latinos,
precationesve, aut artem saorificandi conscriptam haberet, eos libros omnes
literasque ad se, ante Calendas Aprilis, deferret.

5. We do not see that in the First Ages Liturgies were cited, to refute Errors
or decide Controversies; as they would have been, if they would had any, and
particularly in the Arian and Pelagian Controversies.

6. How came it to pass that nothing was said of the Changes, that probably
might have been made in them, or of the occasions which might have rendered
these alterations necessary? Paul of Samosatenus prohibited the use of Hymns,
which were Sung in Honor of Jesus Christ; the Arians often enough changed the
Doxology, the words prescribed by Jesus Christ in the Administration of
Baptism, and the Confessions of Faith; yet we do not find that they have done
so, in regard to Liturgies, wherein they would doubtless have had much stronger
reasons for it. The addition of the Terms, who was Crucified for us, in the
Trisagion, caused great troubles, but we see none that happened on the account
of Liturgies.

7. The Ancient Christians, chiefly in the Fourth and Fifth Age, were
extraordinary careful in keeping secret from the Catechumens and Heathens, the
Symbols, Ceremonies and Prayers, which were used in the Celebration of the
Eucharist. St. Basil says, that even the words, which were used before, after
and in the Consecration, were not written. It Is in his Treatise of the Holy
Ghost, C. 27 Innocent the First Bishop of Rome, in his Answer to Decentius of
Gubio, sends him to no written Form; he will not even add in this Work the
words which were used in giving the Chrison, for fear of publishing the Secrets
of the Church. He testifies an equal reservedness in regard of the Eucharist,
which shows they had no public Form thereof.

II After having P. 44.
made these general Remarks, the Author comes to consider the Eucharist in
particular.

He cites the 23 Canon of the Third Council of Carthage; Ut nemo in precibus,
vel Patrem pro filio, vel filium pro Patre nominet, and cum ad Altar
assistitur, semper ad Patrem dirigatur oration, etc. Et quascunq^e sibi preces
aliquis describit, non eis utatur, nisi prius eas cum instructioribus fratribus
contulerit. That no man in his Prayers name the Father for the Son, nor the Son
for the Father; and let him that is at the Altar always direct his Prayers to
the Father. What Prayers soever any man makes for himself, let him not make use
of them, before he has communicated them to one of the better Instructed
Brethren. The Author from thence draws diverse Consequences, to prove that there
was then no Liturgy. He chiefly founds his Argument upon this, that this Canon
permitted those that Officiated, to make use of what Prayers they pleased,
provided that they first communicated them to some wise Persons. Mr. Clarkson
explains these words* by those of St. Augustine against the Donatists L. 6. c.
25. Multi irruunt in preces non solum ab imperitis loquacibus, sed etiam ab
Haereticis compositas and per ignorantiae simplicitatem, non eas valentes
discernere, utuntur iis, arbitrantes quod bonae sint. Many, says he, throw
themselves upon Prayers composed not only by ignorant Men and great Speakers,
but also by Heretics. Being too illiterate and too simple, to make a just
distinction they make use of such as they think good.

2. The Author after that considers the 70. Canon of the Collection of the
Council of Africa, which in effect is the same as the 12. of the Council of
Milan, the Terms of which are these: Placuit etiam hoc, ut preces, quae
probatae fuerint abomnibus celebrentur, nec aliae omnino contra Fidem
proferan^tur, sed quaecunque cum prudentioribus fuerint collatae dicantur. The
Author observes from this, that the necessity of using certain Prayers was
imposed upon those that could not distinguish the good from the bad; and
besides, all they had to do was but to communicate them to some Person who was
more capable of judging thereof than themselves. As for those who had more
knowledge, they were permitted to make use of such Prayers, as they thought
fit. Besides, here is only condemned the Prayers which are against Faith. And
it was allowed that those might be made use of, which were approved by a Synod,
or by able Men; whence the Author concludes, there was no common Form, or at
least that there was none, which Persons were necessarily obliged to follow.
After that he answers to some Objections, which are made against the Exposition
he gives upon this Canon.

3. In the 12. Canon of the Second Council of Milan, instead of cum
prudentioribus collatae, there is a prudentioribus tractatae, If they were
Examined, to see if they might be approved of. This sense of the word tractatae
agrees, according to the Author, with the other Constitutions of of the Church
of Africa, and with their practice; such as St. Augustine represents it, in the
passage which was cited. The Author also makes some reflections upon these
words; which I shall omit to relate for fear of being too tedious.

4. As to the general Prayer, for all the Bishops, which was used in
Celebrating the Eucharist, the Author endeavors to prove that it was not
always conceived in the same terms by the Epistle of St. Epiphanius to John
Bishop of Jerusalem. This Bishop had heard that St. Epiphanius was accustomed
to insert these terms in his Prayers. Domine praesta Ioanni ut been credat,
Lord grant John may entertain a true Faith. The Bishop of Jerusalem complained
of this addition, which rendered his Belief suspicious: But such terms could not
be added, if it had been prohibited to change any thing whatever, in the Prayer
which was then used, and John would not have had the occasion of complaining as
he did. St. Epiphanius in answering to that, exclaimeth not as against a
Calumny, which the practice of the Church should destroy, but says only, noli
nos in tantum putare rusticos, ut hoc tam aperte dicere potuerimus: He adds Pro
te quoque dicimus: Custodi illum qui praedicat veritatem. Vel certe, ita: Tu,
praesta Domine, and custodi, ut ille verbum praedicet veritatis sicut occasio
sermonis se tulerit, and habuerit oration consequentiam: We also say for thee:
Keep him who preaches the Truth, or at least thus, do thou O Lord, keep him,
and make him to preach the Truth, according as the occasion of the Discourse
shall, and as the Sequel of the Prayer shall require. We see by these latter
Words, that St. Epiphanius did not always express himself after the same manner.

5. Mr. Clerkson believes not also that the Prayer of the Consecration was
conceived in such terms, as was constantly rehearsed. To prove it he cites
Justin Martyr Apol. 2. P. 129.
who says, that the President made Prayers and Thanksgivings as far as his
Capacity admitted thereof, (...), as those who maintain the Antiquity of
Liturgies have omitted nothing to give this passage, a sense conformable to
their opinions; So the Author does what he can to show that in the First Ages,
no regulate words were written, which ought to be made use of in this occasion.
He likewise endeavors to show that there was no conformity amongst the
Churches, in the expressions which were used on this occasion, or in giving the
Symbols to those who communicated; from whence it follows that there was no
Liturgy generally received as at this day.

III. Neither was there according to Mr. Clarkson, P. 93. and Seq.
an entire uniformity, in respect to Baptism; and that they kept not themselves
scrupulously to the Terms, which Jesus Christ made use of the Institution of
this Sacrament. Some thought they were not obliged to Baptize expressly in the
Name of the Father, of the Son, and the Holy Ghost; but were satisfied to do
it, in the Name of Jesus Christ. St. Irenaens, St. Basil and Theophilact
declare, that they did not disapprove of this Practice, and sufficiently showed
that they did not think Men ought to apply themselves too much to the words:
The Ancients were so far from constraining one another to it, that according to
the Author, there was not so much as uniformity in the Terms of their
Confessions of Faith. He Remarks by the by, that he who first Introduced the
Custom to Rehearse the Creed in Public Service, was Peter of Foulon; and shows
in what time the same Custom was Introduced, in the Churches of the West.

2. As to the manner how they Renounced the Devil and all his Pomps, the Author
Remarks in the Fathers Twenty Expressions upon this Subject, whereof there not
Two but their Terms are different: Though they are found in the Writings of the
same Country, and Church. This Renouncing is also seen diversely expressed in
the writings of the same Author. St. Basil in his Treatise of the Holy Ghost,
Chapter 27. affirms positively that the Prayers were no^ written, which were used
in Baptism. He who made the Constitutions, which were attributed to Clement,
puts indeed a L. 7. c. 45.
Form, which he pretends to be of the Apostles; notwithstanding he obliges none
to make use of these very Terms, he would only have Men to ask the same things
of God. St. Augustine in his Work of L. 6. c. 25.
Baptism against Donatists, speaking of the words which they made use of in
Baptizing, says, Si non santificatur aqua, cum aliqua erroris verba per
imperitiam Precator effundit, multi non solum mali, sed etiam boni fratres in
Ecclesia non sanctificant aquam. If the Water is not Sanctified whilst he that
Prays is mistaken through ignorance, in some expressions, there are not only
several evil Persons, but even good Christians, who cannot Sanctify the Water
in the Church.

IV. Mr. Clarkson after having brought diverse proofs, by which he pretends to
show that there was no Form, in the First Ages for the Administration of the
Sacraments, cites P. 155 and Seq.
diverse places of the Fathers, which seem against Forms in general. 1. For
example, he Expounds at length the passage of Justin Martyr, which is already
related: He adds thereunto what Tertullian says, ( Apol. chapter 30.) of the
manner how Christians Prayed: sine monitore, quia de pectore, precantes sumus,
etc. We pray without being advertised of the terms, which we ought to make use
of, because we pray from the bottom of our heart. In this place Tertullian
opposes the Christians to the Heathens who rehearse their Prayers after a
Person that Read them, Qui praeibat de scripto. Some thought that Tertullian
meant that the Christians rehearsed their Prayers by heart; but then instead of
saying de pectore, he should have said, de memoria; and it would be no small
labor to learn by heart all the Prayers, that the Christians then made. In
their meeting together, which lasted 9 hours, and sometimes 12. and which were
done twice or thrice a week, all the time was almost employed in Prayers; not
mentioning the quantity of others that were done on Vigils, Feasts, Sundays, in
the Administration of Baptism, in the Ordinations, in the Reconciliations of
Penitents, etc.

2. Besides that the Generality of the Christians being obliged to no Form in
respect to the Hymns they Sung, as appears by Apol. c. 39.
Tertullian; there is no likelihood that the Pastors were more confined in
their Prayers. Indeed in the time of Origin they Prayed according to their
Capacity, as is evident by some passages of this Father, which may be readin
the Author, who makes use of diverse other Reasons, which we cannot stay to
relate.

3. We find these Terms, in this Book of St. Augustine, de Catechiz. rudibus,
chapter 9. where after having said that those who had some Learning and entered into
the Church, must be taught, that God has much more respect to the Heart than
Words, he adds, Ita enim non irridebunt, si aliquos Antistites and Ministros
Ecclesiae forte animadverterint, vel cum Barbarismis and solecismis Deum
invocare: For thus, says he, When it shall happen that they will hear both
Bishops and Priests commit Solecisms, and Barbarisms in their Prayers to God,
they will not laugh thereat. L. 5. C. 21
Socrates who lived in the middle of the Fifth Age, says, that two Prayers
could not be found, which in every thing agreed with one another. The P. 134
Churches of Spain had no Liturgy in DCXXXIII, and in France it was but in
Charles Majus time that they were established there. In the Diocese of Cologne
there were diverse sorts of 'em, until the middle of the Tenth Age; and the same
was observed in Ireland, with which the English and Scotch agreed, until the
Twelfth Age.

V. The last thing that the Author does in this P. 135.
Work, is to Refute the Reasons, which are brought to prove the Antiquity of
Liturgies.

1. To that purpose is cited a passage Strom 7.
of Clement Alexandrius, who says, That the Assembly of those who Prayed had
but one Voice in common, and but one thought; And the Author replies that that
signifies nothing else, but that the Pastor speaks in the name of the whole
Assembly.

2. As for the passages of Tertullian, St. Cyprian, and St. Basil, where they
say, that the Christians asked certain things of God; Mr. Clarkson maintains
that hence can no other Consequence be drawn, but that the matter of their
Prayer was the same, though the Terms might be different.

3. Diverse places of Origin are cited, where he speaks of the Prayers of the
Christians, of which he relates some Words; but if we believe the Author,
Origin by the word (...) meant in some places, nothing else but the Psalms of
David, where these words are found; and it appears not by other passages of
this Father, that they were obliged constantly to make use of the same
expressions, but only that sometimes those which he relates were made use of.

4. Some Learned Men have believed that the words of Dominica Solennia in
Tertullian (c. 9. de Anima) signify the Liturgy, which was read on Sunday.
Mr. Clarkson believes on the contrary, that these Terms mark nothing else than
the reading of Scripture, the singing of Psalms, Prayers and Homilies, and that
this is visible by the Sequel of Tertullians discourse, which may be read in
the Original, or in the Author. Solennia is also taken for the same thing in
St. Cyprian; and in the time of Justin Martyr and Tertullian, the care of
remarking what was to be read was left to the Pastors. After the Examination
of these passages drawn from the Authors of the First Age, Mr. Clarkson comes
to later Testimonies; amongst which the Liturgy of St. James ought to be read,
which is manifestly Supposititious, and which according to the Author, was
unknown before the Seventh and Eighth Age.

5. The 18. Canon is cited of the Council of Laodicea, where it is said, That
the Liturgy ((...)) of Prayers ought every where to be the same at Evening and
Morning. To that the Author answers, amongst other things, that the word
Liturgy signifies Originally a public Function, and is taken in the most
ordinary signification, for the Exercise of this Change, and not for the manner
of doing on it. Thus in Theodoret Hist. L. 2. C. 24.
The Liturgy of Hymns not for a Form of Canticles, but for the very Action of
Singing them. In Justinian the Liturgy of the Scripture which was read, is the
very reading of Holy Writ, and not a Rubric, which notes in what place it
ought to be Read. The same Emperor condemns to death those who should
undertake to trouble the Divine Liturgies; to wit, the Public Service, and not
the Forms of Writings.

6. The Author after that treats, in a few words, of the Liturgies Attributed
to St. Basil and St. Chrysostom. He believes that these two Bishops have been
supposed as well as St. Ambrose, Authors of new Liturgies, because they
introduced a new manner of Singing, in their Churches. Flavianus and Diodorus
established at Hist. L. 2. C. 24.
Antioch, the Singing of the Antiphones, when the Arians had forced them to
meet together in a particular Assembly, after having taken from them the
Public Churches. They were followed in that by Saint Basil, whom Saint Ambrose
imitated, as he himself served in that as a Model to other Churches St.
Chrysostom was the first amongst the Orthodox, who put them in use at
Constantinople, fearing lest the Arians, who made use thereof, should draw the
People to them by this means. It ought to be observed that this manner of
Singing, is called Liturgy, by St. Chrysostom. Theodoret and Justinian, as this
Author says Afterward the same word being since taken to sinifie a Form; those
who read in the Writings of the Preceding Ages, that these Fathers had
introduced new Liturgies, thought without Reason that they had made new Forms.

This Conjecture is maintained by these Two Remarks; First, a Liturgy has
indeed been Attributed to St. James, Brother of our Lord, because Hegesippus,
in Eusebius, call him (...) Liturgus, or, Public Minister. Secondly, amongst
the Latins in the time wherein these Liturgies were supposed to be extant, the
most part of these Forms were called Cantus, Singing, without excepting even
the Prayers as the Author shows by several Examples. So those who had
introduced new ways of Singing, might pass for Authors of new Liturgies, when
Cantare and (...) came to signify the same thing. The Author believes it is a
like expression, which made some say that St. Jerome made a Liturgy, though he
did nothing else, but introduce a new manner of Singing, in the Church of Rome.

7. Mr. Clarkson examins after that the 15 Canon of Vannes, held toward the
end of the Fifth Age, where there is Sacrorum ordo, and psallendi una sit
consuetudo. The word ordo, according to the Author, signifies only the
disposition of the Respontes. Prayers, Hymns and Psalms, in the order they
ought to be, which he proves by the 21st. Canon of a Synod of Agatho, held some
years after, in the same Country. Besides this, if by ordo, a Liturgy is
understood, or a regulate Form, that which is in question must be Attributed to
Six Bishops only in a Province of France, and that upon the end of the Fifth
Age. These are, according to the Author, the principal citations of of the
first Five Ages, which are alleged in Favor of Liturgies. He speaks
afterward in few words, of the Benedicite the Te Deum, and Song of the Three
Children, which he maintains to be of the Sixth or Seventh Age.

8. In short, the Author examining the Reasons why Liturgies were introduced
into the Church, attributes this use to the Ignorance and Corruption of the
Times, which became excessive since the Fourth Age. Those who Governed the
Church did it with an unsupportable Tyranny, not only at Rome, but elsewhere;
they were Negligent, Lasie, and Ignorant after a scandalous manner, as appears
by the complaints which St. Ambrose, St. Gregory of Nazianze, St. Chrysostom
and St. Basil, etc. made of them in their time. Several Bishops knew not even
how to write their Names, so that they were forced in the Councils to make
others Subscribe for them; which by-like was very common, seeing they made no
difficulty to confess a thing, which should have covered them with shame. The
Author relates several Examples thereof drawn from the Councils of Calcedon and
Ephesus, where Subscriptions are found after this manner: I such a Man have
Subscribed by the hand of such a Man, because I cannot Write: Such a Bishop
knew not how to write, I underwritten have subscribed for him.

After that if these Assemblies judged well of Controversies, it must have been
a great Chance or Miracle. The Misfortune still is, that if we are now a little
more expert, there are yet so many who know not how to pray to God, that
Liturgies are little less necessary than at that time. But the Author advances
nothing that he endeavors not to prove by passages of the Ancients, which he
cites in the Original Languages. Those who would thoroughly Examine these
matters, will not do amiss to read this work, and compare them with the
Originals.

A Scholastical History of the Primitive and General Use of Liturgies in the
Christian Church, together with an Answer to Mr. David Clarksons Late Discourse
Concerning Liturgies. By Thom. Comber D. D. Precenter of York. London, Printed
for Robt. Clavel 1690.
DR. Comber in his Introduction shows that Mr. Clarkson was to blame in his
Work.

1. In repeating his Disc. Lit. p. 48. and 113. p. 5. and 142. p. 65. and 121 p
6.29.138.
Testimonies many times over to appear Numerous.

2. In Stuffing the Margin full Ib. p. 28, 29, 34, 35, 36, 42, 51.52
of what no Body Denies.

3. In placing the latter Fathers before the former and mixing the First, Last,
and Middle Ages together.

4. In false Ib. p. 44, 49, 76, 60.77, 98.
Translating, and false Citing several passages.

5. And lastly, In saying, he has Answered all the Places of the Ancients,
which either others had alleged, Ib. p. 179.
or he in his diligent search of Antiquity had met with, which seem to make for
Liturgies. When it will appear by some Hundreds of Proofs the Dr. produces,
that this is a prejudiced Error. For a fuller Citation and Evidencing these
Five Heads, those that have the Curiosity may Consult the Author.

Our Author begins with the Old Testament, as Forms of Prayer and Thanksgiving,
used by Moses and David, and shows from Dr. Hammond that the Jews View of
direct. p. 136. Oxf.
had Forms in the same Method with our Common Prayer and that they had
Lightfoot. Vol. 2. p. 1139.
stated Forms, and set down the Order, both of their Hymns and Supplications,
and Demonstrates that these continued so till our Saviors time Ib. Vol 1. p.
922.942. and 946.
and long after.

CHAP. 1. Our Author in Speaking of the Liturgies of the First Century proves
that
Philo and Josephus speaking of the Esseans whom Eusebius and the Learned of
these Ages, Anno 60. Philo Iudeus
believe to have been Christians, says, of 'em Philo de vit Contem plat. Jos.
Bell. Jud. lib. 2. ^ap. 7.
That their manner was to rise before the arising of the Sun and to Worship
God, with certain Prayers received from their Forefathers. Philo also relates,
that they had a Choir of two Sides Singing Alternately, so that when one had
begun to Sing, the rest answered him by repeating the ends of the Verses, in
imitation of those at the Red Sea.

Eusebius (...). Eusebius.
speaks of these Hymns Sung in this manner, calling them, the Hymns used among
us Christians.

Anno Dom. 1690
Clemens Romanus (...) etc.
in his Epistle to the Corinthians, intimates they had a Liturgy -- We ought to
do all those things in order which our Lord has commanded us to perform, viz.
to Celebrate our Oblations and Liturgies at certain days.

Pliny Junior says, Lib. 10. Ep. Carmenque Christo, etc.
the Christians used to meet and Sing an Hymn to Christ as God. Anno 93.
Carmen dicere, according to Vossius his Comment upon Pliny says, it signifies
to Repeat a Prayer in a set Form of words.

There Is only one other Testimony of Ignatius, in the First Century, who makes
mention of one Prayer and Supplication. Epist. ad Magnes. p. 34.

In the Second Century Testimonies are more Plentiful.
Anno 140^
Justin Martyr speaks of Common Prayer, Apol. 2. p. 97. (...). St. Nazianzen
(whom Mr. Clarkson had wrested) Exhorts Christians, as well as they were able
to sing that Triumphant Hyman (upon Iulians being cut off) which Israel Sang
when the Egyptians were drowned in the Red Sea, Naz. Orat. 3 p. 54. Iraeneus,
when some Heretics made an Argument, from the Conclusion of the Form of a
Doxology, says, they allege also that we in our thanksgiving do say, World
without End Iren. adv. Here Is. lib. 1 ^. 1. This Form is mentioned in
Tertullian, de Spect. p. 83. And the Gloria Patri was a Form both in the
Gallican and African Church. Tertul. speaking de Basil, c. 13. says, Christ had
not only imposed the Law of Baptism, but prescribed the Form of it. The same
Father, Apol. c. 39. says, after having washed their hands, and brought in
lights, they called for some to sing Psalms, or somewhat of their own Composing.

In the Third Century.
Anno 220.
Hyppolitus the Martyr de Consum. Mundi, Tom: 2. p. 357. speaking in his
discourse of the end of the World, and the coming of Christ, says expressly,
That Liturgies shall be extinguished, singing of Psalms shall cease, and
reading of Scripture shall not be heard. -- Origin in Anno 230. is so full in
his Homily on Jeremy, that the Centuriators were convinced, that Set Forms of
Prayer were used in his time. It is (say they) without Question that they had
some Set Forms of Prayer in that Age, etc. The same Father adds on this
Subject, ( in Cells. lib. p. 302.) They who serve God through Jesus in a Christian
way, and live according to the Gospel use frequently as becomes them, night and
day the Enjoyed Prayer; which is as full as can be to the purpose. St. Cyprian
de Orat. Sect. 5. p. 310. says, That Christians had a public and Common Prayer
wherein all agreed. Anno 253. Gregory Thaumaturgus Bishop of Neocesarea was
contemperary with St. Cyprian. St. Basil, an unquestionable Witness, says
concerning him, that he appointed a Form of Prayer for that Church of
Neocesarea, from which they would not vary in one Ceremony, or in a Word, nor
would they add any one Mystical Form in the Church to those which he had left
them, etc. Paulus Samosatenus was offended at some Hymns and Composed others.
Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 24.

In the Fourth Century.
Anno 303.
Arnobius lib. 2. p, 65. says, To venerate this Supreme King, is the end and
design of these Divine Offices. Constantin's Form of Prayer is well known.
Eusebius. vit. Constant. lib. 4. -- Athanasius in his Apol. ad Constant. p. 156,
157. says, The People Mourned and Groaned to God in the Church, all of 'em
crying to the Lord, and saying, Spare thy People good Lord, spare them, give
not their Heritage for a reproach to thine Enemies: Which is an Original piece
of Littany, and a known Form prescribed in Scripture. Athanasius de interp.
Psalm p. 303. Orders the People to sing the Psalms in the very words wherein
they were written. Flavianus was entreated to come back to the church, and
perform the same Liturgy there, Theodor. lib. 2. c. 24. -- St. Cyril says to
his Auditors in the Eucharistical Office, Lift up your hearts. Answer, We lift
'em up unto the Lord. P. Let us give thanks unto the Lord. A. As it is meet and
just Cyril. Catechis. Mystag. 5. -- Julian the Apostate devised to to make a
Form of Prayer in parts, for the Heathen Worship to be set up in Schools, etc.
which things says Nazianzen (in Iul. Orat. 3. p. 102) are clearly agreeable to
our Good Order. And Sozomen (Hist. lib. 5. cap. 15.) speaking of the same
thing, says, that Julian designed to adorn his Gentile Temples with the Order
of Christian Worship, appointing prescribed Prayers upon set days and hours.
The Ingenious Apostat in one of his Epistles, ( Julian Fragment. Epist. in
Oper. p. 552.) yet extant, advises his Pagan Priests, to pray thrice a day, if
possible, or however Morning and Evening, both in private and public, and to
learn the Hymns of the Gods, which were made in Old and Latter Times. Adding
that there was a Liturgy for these Priests and a Law directing 'em what to do
in their Temples, from which they might not vary.

Anno 363.
The Council of Laodicea, which is one of the Earliest Synods, and has been
always received by the Church, says, Canon 18. Bev. Tom. 1* p. 461. (...), etc.
That the very same Liturgy of Prayers which the Fathers had appointed for Three
in the Afternoon, etc. -- In the Council of Sardica, Anno 347. A Bishop coming
to a strange City, is Ordered to Assemble and Perform his Liturgy there. ( Can.
12.) There are other Testimonies in this Century of Gregory Nazianzen, St.
Basil, Dionysius Areopagita, St. Ambrose, St. Ierom, Chrysostom, the Third
Canon. Carth. the 70 African Canon. And here we come to the time that Mr.
Clarkson confesses the uses of the Liturgies. So that we need go no further: We
might run down the 5 th. 6 th. 7 th. 8 th etc. Centuries if there was occasion
for it; but what we have brought does sufficiently answer Dr. Combers end, viz.
To show the palpable Errors of Mr. Clarkson about the Innovation of Liturgies.
Dr. Comber has Written a Second Part, wherein he has followed his Antagonist
down through these latter Ages, and does not only show from the beginning of
Christianity till of late, that Liturgies and Set Forms of Prayer were used
publicly, but that Extemp^re public Prayer was never suffered in the
Christian Church, whatever it might be in Private Families. The use of the
whole Discourse cannot miss this Effect amongst all considering, and
unpre^udic'd Presbyterians; that it will either convince 'em, that our practice
is more agreeable to that of the Primitive Christians than theirs, or at least
that ours was used as well as theirs. Besides, it will take off the common
Objection against us, viz. That our Practices have taken their Original from
the Papists, since here a^e the most clear and convincing E^idences in the
World, that the Papal Authority was not settled, for many Hundreds of Years,
alter some very considerable Instances which are here brought against Liturgies
and Set Forms of Prayers, Hymns, etc. I had almost forgot to do the Author this
Justice, that he has not only brought his Authorities for the Practices of the
Church of England, but has also fully answered Mr. Clarksons Arguments against
it, with that Mildness, Perspicuity, Judgment, and Learning, as have not given
him a little Repute amongst the Learned. Such as would be better acquainted
with the Knowledge and Worth of the Author, or are any way dissatisfied with
this Subject, if they please to consult the Author himself, they cannot fail to
meet with an ample Satisfaction.

A New Bibliotheque of Ecclesiastic Authors, Containing the History of their
Lives, the Catalogue of their Writings, and the Chronology of their Works, the
Sum of what they Contain, a Judgment on their Style, and Doctr^n, with an
Enumeration of the Different Editions of their Works. Tom. the First, of the
Authors of the Three First Ages, with a Preliminary Discourse upon the Authors
of the Bible. At Paris 1686.
Although the Title of this Work is so well known, that the Design of it is
easily perceived, yet since the Matter is new, and the manner it is promised to
be treated on, is difficult, Mr. Du Pin thought it very necessary to Instruct
the Public more particularly in a Preface, of the assistance that he had, and
the Method he followed to accomplish this work: He divided it into Two Parts,
and begins the First with Justifying the Title of Bibliotheque, showing for
example, that it is a Name that ought to begin P. 1.
to the collection of many Authors, and to Books that treat of their Works. He
afterward shows that the Custom of writing Bibliotheques is very Ancient, and
that it was introduced amongst the Christians, in the First Ages of the Church;
P. 3 d.
The Stromates of Clement of Alexandria, being a kind of Bibliotheque* of the
Opinions and Thoughts of an Infinite Number of Writers; and the History of
Eusebius may be called a Bibliotheque of Ecclesiastical Authors, since he has
done almost nothing else in this Work, than Writ their Life, give a Catalogue
of their Writings, and relate many Passages out of them. After having spoken of
those who have taken like pains, and above all P. 4.
of Photius, Mr. Du Pin adds that Authors never took so much pains, especially
Ecclesiastics, as in the Last Ages, in which Learning was renewed, and
Critics carried to such a point as they never were before; Both Catholics and
Heretics, have endeavored to out-vy one another in making Bibliotheques.
Erasmus (pursues he) in Printing the Fathers, has put Prefaces and Notes
before their Works, which contain must Judicious Critics; and that although he
is sometimes too confident in rejecting some Pieces; It must be confessed
nevertheless that he has broke the Ice for those that have followed him. He
speaks with the same freedom of other Authors of the Roman Church, and in
respect to the Protestants, although he accuses them of Passion and of being very
Erroneous; P. 7.
he confesses nevertheless, as to what regards Critics, they were sometimes
sharper and more quicksighted than the Catholics, and that the Protestants
have discovered many things therein, that they were obliged to acknowledge and
aprove of. The Author afterward tells the Motives that engaged him to
undertake this Work, which were, that no body before him had done any thing
Complete upon it. He shows the design of his Book, by a Comparison between a
number of Books well ranged, which is properly called a Bibliotheque; and the
Order that he has observed in this Work, to which he gives the same name. There
is only this difference between these two Bibliotheques, it is that in the
first, if we content our selves only to read the Titles, no advantage to
Learning is to be received from it; and to run through all the Authors which
compose it, much time and pains is required: Whereas in this we may instruct
our selves in many important things with great Facility; since there is not
only the Titles of the Books, but also the Abridgment and Sum of what they
contain, with a Remark upon the particular Sentiments in them.

In the Second Part of the Preface, Mr. Du Pin shows the necessity there was to
make use of such a Method as followed; to write the Life of the Authors, to
make a Catalogue and Remark of the Chronology of their Works; the Circumstances
of the Time, Place, Age, and Condition of him that writ, and of the Persons he
was concerned with, changing the manner of his Discourse according to the
nature of the Subject. An Author that engages against a Heresy of his own time,
that is the Head of a Party, and who has Personal Contestations with those
that Attack him, expresses himself very differently from him that writes
against a Heresy that is extinguished, who takes no part in the Quarrel, and has
no other Motive in writing than defending the Truth. P. 18.
St. Cyprian speaks of the Reconciliation of Penitents, following the different
Circumstances of the Times; St. Augustine writing against the Pelagians, speaks
otherwise of Grace and Free Will, than he had done before: And from the time
that his head was possessed with these Heretics, and the Donatists, P. 18.
he speaks continually in all his writings (even in his Homilies) of the Church
and of Grace.

He afterward tells the Reason why many Works are attributed to some
Celebrated Authors which is none of theirs; viz. the Malice of Heretics, the
little Piety of some of the Orthodox, the Levity of some Men, Ignorance, or
Avarice of the Copyists, of the Printers, and the oversight of those that have
taken for Authors of certain Dialogues, such Persons as are made to speak in
those Dialogues. So it is that Vigilius of Tapse has made Five Books under the
name of Saint Athanasius; and it may be that also under the same name he made
the Creed that is attributed to this Father. In short the Ambiguity of Titles,
and the Resemblance of Names have often caused Pieces to be attributed to such
Persons as they belonged not to. After that he establishes Rules for true
Critics, remarking that the Proofs or Conjectures that we can make of any
Work, are Internal or External. Time is one of the most certain Internal Marks,
and nothing is more capable of convincing an Author of Imposture, than when the
date of his Work is false, or that he speaks of Persons that have lived a long
time after him, whose Name is affixed to the Work. 2 ly. The matter that is
contained in a Book discovers whether it be Supposititious or no. 1. When we
find Opinions in it, that were not maintained till a long time after that Age.
2. Expressions concerning those Opinions, Ceremonies and Customs that were not
then in use. 3. Errors that are of a latter date, or such matters as were not
treated on in that time that the Author lived, whose name is affixed to the
Work. 4. Opinions contrary to such as are seen in their writings. 5. Or
Histories manifestly Fabulous. 3 ly. The turn of the Discourse, the manner of
Writing, the Elocution, the Figures, and the Method being a thing most
difficult things to Counterfeit, are of very great use to discover whether a
Work be supposititious or not. Tho'we must not always reject a Book for a small
alteration in the Style without any other proof, because Persons may write
differently according to their Age, Places, and the Subject of the Discourse;
nor should we receive a piece as true only for the Resemblance of Style; for an
Ingenious Man often imitates the Phrases and Genius of an Author very well in a
Discourse that is not long.

The External proofs whether a Work is supposititious or no are taken. 1. From
Ancient Manuscripts, in which we find not the Name of the Author, or find that
of an others. 2. The Testimony of Ancient Authors that reject this work, or
that say nothing at all of it.

In his Preliminary dissertation.
Mr. Du pin begins to apply his Rules for Criticism, to the Books of the Bible,
and proves by them that Moses was really the Author of the Pentateuch, since
it is Established by Holy Scripture, by the Authority of Jesus Christ, by the
consent of all Nations, and by the Authentic Testimonies of the most Ancient
Authors. It is necessary to observe that this Dissertation upon the Bible, and
all the rest of the Book is disposed in such order; that each Article contains
a following Discourse, where he only proposes his opinion, and maintains it by
some Reasons which all the World agrees to. After that is the Notes that
include the Proofs and Authorities of what has been advanced in the precedent
Article: Following this Method, the Author to prove that Moses writ the Books
that bear his Name, Cites in the Notes many passages of the Old and New
Testament. He says, that the Samaritan Pentateuch being writ in ancient Hebrew
Characters, must necessarily be composed before the Captivity of Babylon, where
the use of these Characters were lost. He relates the Testimonies of Manethon,
Philocorus, Atheneus, and other ancient Authors, that Josephus and the
Primitive Christians have preserved some passages of; to which he adds other
Authors of a latter date, and whose Works still remain amongst us, as St.
Strabo, the Abridgment of Trogue-Pompeus, Iuvenal, Pliny, Tacitus, Longinus,
Porphirius, Julian, etc. And from this universal Consent, he draws an
invincible Argument to prove that Moses writ the Law, and that he was the
Lawgiver of the Jews.

27.32.
In the Notes he Answers, Eleven Objections, which seem to be drawn from the
Critical History, upon the Old Testament, and the Sentiments of some Dutch
Divines upon this Book, which contains the Reasons of those who pretend that
the Pentateuch is a Collection made upon the ancient Memoirs and Writings of
Moses; but compiled by some other. In short, he maintains that when they would
suppose that the reasons that are alleged against the Antiquity of the
Pentateuch, are all unanswerable, they should prove only that there is some
Names of Towns or Countries changed, some little words inserted to clear
Difficulties, and in fine, that the Narration of the Death of Moses, was
necessary to be added to finish the History of the Pentateuch. We have not the
same certainty, according to M. Du Pin, in respect to the rest of the
Historical Books, since we are absolutely ignorant of the Authors of 'em. P. 12.
The Judgment that he gives of the Book of Job is, that the Foundation of
Narration is true: But that the manner how this History is related, the Style
that it is writ in, the Discourses that were held between Job and his Friends,
and what is said of his mean condition, must be confessed to have been much
amplifyed and adorned with many feigned Circumstances, to render the Narration
more agreeable and useful. For the Book of Wisdom which is commonly attributed
to Solomon, he thinks it to be composed by a Grecian P. 74.
that was a Jew who to imitate the Books of Solomon, had taken many thoughts
from thence.

P. 51.
In respect to the Book of Ecclesiasticus, some have imagined that Josephus
acknowledged it to be Canonical, because he cites a passage out of it in his
Second Book against Appion. But according to the observation of Mr. Pithou,
this allegation which is not in the ancient Version of Ruffinus, was added to
the Text of Josephus.

* The Book of Esther, was according to some, in the Jews Canon, but others
deny its ever being there. Meliton rejects it, and the Six last Chapters of
this Book are not in the Hebrew. Origin believed they were formerly, and that
they have since been lost: But it is evident they are taken from many places,
says our Author, and that they contain such things as were apparently Collated
by some Greeks that were Jews. St. Ierom formally rejects the Book of Baruck
and denies its being Canonical, in his Preface upon Jeremiah: The Story of
Tobias also is not in any ancient Catalogue placed in the Rank of Canonical
Books, no more than that of Judith. P. 51.
In a word the ancient Christians followed the Canon of the Jews, for the Books
of the Old Testament; there is none else cited in the New, and a great part of
these are very often mentioned. The first Catalogues of Canonical Books, made
by the Greek and Latin Ecclesiastic Authors, comprehended none but these. P.
59.
In the Chronicle of Eusebius, the Books of the Maccabees are opposed to those
of Holy Writ, and placed with Josephus and Africanus. The Book of Wisdom and
Ecclesiasticus, are in the ancient Catalogues placed in the number of such
Books as are most useful, Except Canonical. Nothing can be concluded in favor
of their Divinity from any passages of the Fathers; since Origin, St. Ierom,
and St. Hillary, place them in the number of Apocryphal Books. P. 60.
Even from the time of St. Gregory the Great, these Books were not in the Canon
of the Holy Scripture, since this Pope speaks in those terms, Greg. l. 12. Moral
We do nothing unreasonable in bringing the Testimony of such Books as are not
Canonical, since they were published for the Edification of the Church Many
Ecclesiastical Authors both Greek. and Latin agree only upon 22 Canonical
Books, joining the History of Ruth to the Judges, and the Lamentation of
Jeremiah to his Prophesies, although they lived after the Third Council of
Carthage, and Innocent the First, who placed the Maccabees and other Apocryphal
Books, in the Canon of Holy Writ. Which shows, adds the Author, that these
Definitions were not approved by all Authors; nor followed by all Churches,
until it was entirely determined by the Council of Trent: This Ecclesiastical
Assembly has this common with others, That the last Decrees do still abolish
the preceding ones: Besides, it is just that the Church of Rome who has power
to make new Articles of Faith, should also have power to make those Books
Canonical, whence they take these new Articles.

III. In the Third Article of this Dissertation, where there is the History of
the Hebrew Text, the Version of the 70 and other Greek Translators; the History
of Aristeus is refuted almost by the reasons that are mentioned in the Extract
of Mr. Hodi. Nevertheless he believes not that it can be absolutely denied that
there had been a Greek Version of the Bible made in the times of Ptolomy
Philadelphus, because there is no likelihood that the Authors of Books
attributed to Aristeus and Aristobulus, have wholly invented this matter. But he
rejects as a conjecture without any Ground, the Opinion of Father Simon, viz.
That this Version was called the Version of the Seventy, because it was
approved by the Sanhedrin. He also maintains against the common received
opinion of the Learned, that the Caldaick Language was not the only Language
spoke by all the Jews at their return from the Babylonish Captivity, but that
many amongst them did then speak Hebrew, and all of 'em understood it, but that
the Syriack Tongue did insensibly mix with the Hebrew Dialect, and became
common to the Jews, and has since been called the Hebraick Language.

IV. He Examins in the Fourth Article, the Works of many Authors, who make
mention of the Old Testament, as those of Philon, Josephus, Iustus, etc. in
speaking of the Writers of the New Testament, he Remarks (after St. Ierom) that
the last Chapter of the Gospel of St. Mark is but in a very few Copies, and
that we may reject it almost with all the Greeks, because it seems to mention
several things contrary to those which are spoken of by the other Evangelists:
Besides, he assures us upon the Credit of this Father, that that which obliges
St. John to write his Gospel after all the rest, was that having read the rest,
he remarked that they had only confined themselves to write the History of one
Year of the Life of Jesus Christ, viz. from the Imprisonment of St. John the
Baptist, to the death of our Savior, and thereupon he resolved to give the
Church an account of what happned in the preceding Years. He does not
precisely find in the Acts of the Apostles, the time when St. Paul changed his
Name from Saul. Mr. Du Pin conjectures that it was after the Conve^tion of
Sergius Paulus, because (he says) it was the custom of the Romans, to give
their own Names in Testimony of Friendship. It might also be said, (as Budeus
proves in his Pandects) that it was to honor their Patrons and Benefactors;
for these they had obliged to take their Names.

VI.
He ends this Dissertation with the Books of the New Testament, which were at
first doubted, but that were soon after placed in the Canon of Holy Writ, by
the consent of all Churches; to wit, the Epistle to the Hebr^ws, the Epistle of
St. James, the Second Epistle of St. Peter, the Second and Third of Saint John,
that of Saint Jude, and the Apocalypse.

First Age
The Bibliotheque it self, he begins with Criticisms upon the Letters of Agbar
to Jesus Christ, and Jesus to Agbar, which he shows to be Supposititious, as
well as the Gospel according to the Egyptians. The Gospel according to the
Hebrews and many other pieces, that some would have to pass under the name of
the Apostles. There were Persons in St. Ierom's time that pretended the Gospel
according to the Hebrews was originally that of St. Matthews, because it was
written in Syraick and Chaldaick Characters. Mr. Du Pin proves here that they
were different, not only by the passages of this Gospel according to the
Hebrews, which has nothing in it like the History of the Adulterous Woman in
Saint Matthew: But also because Eus. l. 3.
Eusebius, and after him St. Ierom absolutely distinguishes them; that this
last had translated the Gospel according to the Hebrews, whereas the Author of
the Version of St. Matthew is wholly unknown; and that in the Gospel according
to the Hebrews, the Scripture is cited there after the Hebrew; and St. Matthew,
in his, followed the Translation of the Septuagint. Yet there is room to doubt
of this last Argument since the same St. Ierom which distinguishes these Two
Gospels here, confounds them in another place, according to the relation of our
Author, in the 39. page of his Dissertation. And it is not only Contradiction
of that Father, which he has observed. Always, says Mr. Du Pin, when St. Jerome
Treats expressly of Canonical Books, he rejects as Apocryphal all those that are
not in the Jews Canon; but when he speaks without making any reflection, he
often cites these same books as Holy Scripture, Ib. p. 72. speaking diversely by
Economie and according to the Persons with whom he had to do.

The Epistle of St. Barnabas, which we have also an entire Latin Translation
of, and great part of the Greek Original, is certainly his, since we see in it
the same passages, that St. Clement of Alexandria, Origin, Eusebius, and St.
Ierom, cite out of it. But says he, if this Letter was really St. Barnabas's,
it ought not to be added to the other Books of the New Testament. That follows
not (according to our Author) for if it is true that a Book is Canonical, when
we are certain 'twas writ by an Author who had the Authority of making it
Canonical: Who is it that has said St. Barnabas must be of this Number rather
than St. Clement or Hermas? It Is the business of the Church to declare it, and
it is sufficient that it has not done it; therefore his Letter is looked upon as
Apocryphal although 'twas certainly his own. He adds, that this Letter is
unbecoming this Saint, being full of all Stories and Allegories. P. 17.
But we must know a little the Genius of the Jews and the first Christians, who
were nourisht and brought up in the Synagogue, to believe that these kind of
Opinions could not come from 'em: On the contrary this was their Character,
they Learned from the Jews to turn all the Seripture into Allegories and to
make Remarks upon the Properties of Animals which the Law had forbidden 'em to
eat of: We must not be surprised then, if St. Barnabas who was Originally a
Jew, writing to the Jews, has Allegorically explained many passages, since
every body knows that the Books of the first Christians were full of these
sorts of Fables and Allegories.

He rejects the Liturgies attributed to the Apostles, Because he could not but
make a little Reflection upon what is read in the Celebration of the Eucharist,
in the First Epistle to the Corinthians, and upon what St. Justin and the first
Fathers of the Church have said to persuade us that the Apostles and those
which succeeded them, have celebrated the Sacrifice of the Mass, with great
simplicity. He only relates a small Number of Orisons, but by little and little
he adds some Prayers and a few External Ceremonies to Render the Sacrifice more
venerable to the People. In fine, the Churches have regulated all abuses in the
Sacrament and wrote down the way of celebrating it, as may be found in the
Liturgy.

P. 21.
The Apostles Creed, the Canons and Apostolic Constitutions are none of
theirs. Ruffinus was the first and only Author of the Fifth Age, who wrote that
the Apostles composed the Creed; and he only advanced it as a popular
Tradition. Mr. du Pin to confirm his Opinion and prove that the Creed was not
the Apostles, as to the Words and Form, gives us a Table of the Four ancient
Creeds, the Vulgar, the Aquilean, the Eastern, and Roman, where one might
compare them together and observe considerable Differences between them, for
Instance the Terms Catholic, Communion of Saints, and Life everlasting, which
are in the Vulgar or Common Creed, are wanting in the other Three.

As for P. 35.
the Canons which are attributed to the Apostles, he defends the opinion of
Aubespinus and Beoregius, who believed 'em very ancient, and who pretend that
they were properly a Collection of many Councels held before that of Nice; the
Author of the Apostolic Constitutions is the first who attributed them to the
Apostles, before which time they were only called Ancient Canons or
Ecclesiastic Canons. It Is he who has inserted many words there to persuade us
that the Apostles were the Authors of 'em, and in his Constitutions which he
would father upon Clement Romanus, he attributes many things to 'em, which
don't agree with the Apostles, such are those which concern Temples,
Catechumens, Energumens, Feast-Days, etc. There were even some things absurd
and wicked, such as that, which orders Women to be Shaved, and not Men, lib. 1.
and that other which permits Women^Slaves to suffer themselves to be corrupted
by their Masters, lib. 8. Constit. cap. 32.

P. 47.
Although Baronius, Bellarmin, and some other Catholic Critics, received the
Acts of the Passion of St. Andrew, Mr. du Pin rejects 'em with his ordinary
liberty, as a Book doubtful, and whereof we can make no use to prove an Article
of Faith and which was not cited as we have it now, till the Seventh or Eighth
Age.

In the speaking of the Sybils, the Author says, many things agreeable to what
Mr. Petit does, and shows in his Notes that there is nothing more uncertain
than the Name and Number of these Prophetesses. The most particular thought is
his refutation of Mr. Vossius, who maintained that in the Verses of the Sybils
(which Otacilius Crassus brought from Greece, after the Conflagration of the
Capital) was slipped in some Jewish Prophesies, that however past for the Sybils*
which are those that the Fathers have cited. To Answer to this M. Du Pin shows
that this System, although well enough invented, suffers many difficulties, and
that the Doctrine of the Sybils Books is rather that of a Christian, than that
of a Jew; Jesus Christ being therein more plainly foretold than in the
Prophets; and the Resurrection, Judgment, Reign of a Thousand Years, with
Antichrist, being there remarkt in formal Terms.

P. 71.
It Would be a groundless imagination, to say, with Ierom, that the Sybils had
received the gift of Prophesying in Recompense for their Virginity. Its very
well known they applied themselves entirely to things of greater Consequence,
and that it was often their Fate to be mistaken in profane Histories, and cite
Supposititious Books such as Hystaspus, and Mercurius Trismegistus, etc. It is
not easy to determine either when, or by whom these false Oracles of the
Sybils were made: But as they made no noise till since the time of Antoninus
the Pious, he Conjectures that these Verses were toward the beginning of the
Second Age P. 73 col. 1.
.

P. 67.
'Twas, says our Author, by a Pious Fraud much like this, by which a passage
concerning Jesus Christ, got into the Fourth Chapter of the 18 th. Book of the
Antiquities of the Jews: But the perplexed turn and sequel of the Discourse,
shows that it entered in by force. This he proves by Origin* Theodoret, and
Photius, to which Mr. Huet answers that these ancient Authors had Manuscripts
of Josephus, from whence the Jews had taken away this passage.

P. 74.
The Book that bears Hermas's Name, who was a Disciple to the Apostles is
certainly his. It was received as Canonical in many Churches, and St. Ireneus
and Origin cited it as such, although it is filled with a great Number of Visions,
Allegories and Similitudes, which make it very tedious.

Amongst the Works that are attributed to St. Clement, he admits as true, only
the two Epistles to the Corinthians. The first of which, according to our
Author, after Holy Scripture, is one of the finest Monuments of Antiquity: But
the Second is not so certainly his. The Apostolic Constitutions is a work of
the Third or Fourth Age, which from time to time was reformed, changed and
augmented, according to the different Customs of times and places.

P. 89.
False Dionysius the Areopagite was an Author of the Fifth or Sixth Age, whose
Books were first cited in 532 by the Heretics that were called Serezians. The
Author speaks there of the Trinity and Incarnation in such Terms as have been
used only since the Fourth Age of the Church. He proves in his Notes that the
true Dionysius the Areopagite never was in France, that Photinus Preached
Christianity the first in that Kingdom, and that from the time of Ireneus his
Successor, the Faith was only established in Two Provinces of the Gauls, since
there were Martyrs no where else in the Kingdom.

P. 102.103.
He rejects the Vulgar Edition of the Letters of St. Ignatius, but receives the
Seven that the Learned Isaac Vossius published from a Greek Manuscript of the
Florence Library, which is perfectly conformable to the Version that Usher has
published. He refutes two opposite Opinions, whereof one is that of Belarmin,
Baronius, and Possevinus* who received all that were in Greek, or who admitted
the Three Latin ones, as Father Haloix did, who although in a clearer time, were
not however the best Critics. The other is that of some Protestants, as
Salmasius, Blondel, Aubertinus, and Dailleus, who to the utmost of their power
endeavored to destroy the Credit of Usher and Voissius's Editions.

All the World now agrees that the Letter of Polycarp to the Philipians is
truly his, and that the other* Works that are attributed to him are
supposititious. The Martyrdom of this Saint is described after a very
Circumstantial manner in a Letter from the Church of Smyrna to the Churches of
Pontus; and our Author relates a passage from thence that Merits a particular
Notice. The Heathens having hindered the Christians from carrying away the Body
of Polycarp, which continued untouched in the middle of the Flames, said it was
for fear they should adore it instead of Jesus Christ* The Church of Smyrna
makes this reflection upon it.

P. 138.
Senseless as they were, to be ignorant that the Christians adored Jesus Christ
only, because he was the Son of God, and that they loved the Martyrs only who
are his Disciples and Imitators, because of the Love they Testified to have for
their King and Master. Afterward the Centurian having burnt the body of this
Martyr, the Christians carried away his bones, more precious than the rarest
Stones, and more pure than Gold, which they buried in a place where they
assembled together to celebrate with joy and cheerfulness the day of his
Martyrdom. Thus Honoring the Memory of those that Gloriously fought for
Religion, that they might Confirm and Instruct others by their Examples. This
is, adds Mr. du Pin, the Opinion of the ancient Church concerning the respect
due to Martyrs and their Relics, explained after a very curious way, equally
distant from the Contempt that the Heretics of our time have for 'em, and the
Superstition of some Catholics.

Speaking of Papias, who though a Disciple of St. John the Evangelist, passed
in the Judgment of Eusebius for a very Credulous Man, and of a most indifferent
Wit, who pleased himself with the hearing and relating Stories and Miracles; p.
145.
He says, That he made Errors and Falsities pass for the Opinions of the
Apostles, and makes this Reflection upon it, taken from St. Augustine. It is
evident, that nothing is of so dangerous a Consequence in Matters of Religion,
as slightly to give credit to every one, and eagerly to embrace whatsoever
bears the appearance of Piety, without considering whether it be really so or
no. Non sit Religio nostra in Phantasmatibus nostris: Melius est enim
qualecunque verum, quam omne quidquid pro arbitrio fingi potest; melior est
vera stipula, quam lux inani cogitatione pro suspicantis voluntate formata. De
ver. Rel. c. 55.

Second Age.
There remains nothing of Quadratus, Aristides, Agrippa, nor of Hegisippus, but
some Fragments that Eusebius, and St. Ierom relates. For it is a false
Hegisippus, an Author of the Fourth Age, that made the History of the Jewish
Wars, and of the taking of Jerusalem, divided into five Books, which has been
often published, and is no more than an Abridgment of Josephus.

p. 153.167.
He acknowledges for the Works of St. Justin only his two Apologies, and his
Dialogue with Tryphon. There are also two Discourses to the Gentiles, which are
at the beginning of his Works, and that may be attributed to him, without
injuring him, as well as the Epistle to Diognetus. p. 167. c. 2.
He observes also, the particular Opinions of this Father, and that of his not
despairing of the Salvation of the Gentiles: For in his 2d. Apology, p. 83. he
says, That those who lived conformably to Reason like to Socrates, Heraclitus,
etc. may be called Christians; and he seems to suppose they might be saved in
following the Law of Nature. Mr. Du Pin explains many Passages of Justin,
Tatian, and Theophilus of Antioch concerning the Generation of the Word, and
its visibility, which appears not agreeable to the Common Opinion. p. 179.
He remarks, that this Theophilus was the first that used the word Trinity, to
note the three Divine Persons, and that he calls the third the Wisdom: That
Athenagoras said, that the Devils lost themselves by the love they bare to
Women; that he admits Free Will in its utmost extent, praises Virginity, and
condemns second Weddings, calling them an honest Adultery. But Denis of
Corinth, in a Fragment that Eusebius has preserved of him, l. 4. c. 23.
advertises Pinytus Bishop of the Gnossians not to p. 184.
charge the Christians with the heavy burden of an Obligation to Virginity, but
to have respect to the weakness which the generality of Mankind lay under. p.
186.
This same Author complains, that they had falsified some of his Letters, and
says, That we need not wonder that some Men dare to corrupt the Sacred Books,
since they do it in Books of much less Authority.

p. 197.
St. Irenaeus as well as St. Justin, seems to have believed, that Souls are
immortal only by Grace, and that those of the wicked, shall cease to be after
having suffered torment for a long time. p. 198.
He has also some peculiar Opinions; for example, that Jesus Christ lived above
50 Years upon the Earth: That the Saints shall in the other Life learn by
degrees whatsoever they are ignorant of, etc. We must pardon the Ancients, adds
the Author, these sort of Opinions, it being not singular to any one, for many
had the like.

Eusebius has preserved us a Fragment of an Author named Rodon, p. 210.
who mentions, that in a dispute he had with one Apelles, a Heretic, who
having been convinced of many Frailties, said, That he was not to examine what
he believed, and that all those who hoped in Jesus Christ Crucified, should be
saved; That the Question about the Nature of God, was very obscure; that he
believed there was but one Principle, but he was not certain; and that the
Prophesies were contrary one to the other.

p. 169.
Mr. Du Pin wonders that the Books of the Pedagogue of Clement of Alexandria,
are not Translated into the Vulgar, Tongue. But (says he) if any one would
undertake this Translation, he must leave out some places which ought not to be
read by all the World, and others he must accommodate to the Customs and
Manners of our time. We doubt very much whether this way of acting will denote
a sufficient respect for Antiquity; and are apt to believe that our Author in
making his Extracts has not followed the Counsel he gives to others.

p. 220.
The same St. Clement has made other Celebrated Books under the Name of
Stromates, that he calls so, because they contain many thoughts collected from
different places, and crowded together, which makes a variety something
resembling what we see in Tapestries. Wherefore this Father himself compares
his Work to a Meadow, or a Garden, where we find all sorts of Herbs, Flowers,
and Fruits, and we may gather such as please our selves; but not to such
Gardens where the Trees, and Plants are placed in order on purpose to divert
the sight: But rather to a shady and thick Mountain, where the Cyprus,
Linden-tree, Laurel, Ivy, Apple Tree, Olive, Fig Tree, and other Fruitful Trees
are mingled with Barren ones. In the P. 223.
Third Book of the Stromates, Clement affirms that St. Peter and St. Philip
were Married, and that they had Children, that Saint Philip had Married his
Daughters, and that St. Paul had also a Wife; In which he is deceived, says the
Author. This Father has spoken something that seems to Favor Arianism, which
is, That the Nature of the Son is most Excellent and most Perfect, and that it
comes nearest to God Almighty. He excuses him, saying, that the Ancients had
not an exact distinction between the Terms, Nature, and Person, but often took
one for the other. P. 228.
Yet confesses that he speaks after such a manner to persuade us, that he
believed not, or at least made no reflections upon Original sin. How do we say,
(says he) that a Child prevaricates as soon as he is born, or how can it
(having done nothing) fall under Adams Curse?

P. 245.
There Is a Contestation amongst the Learned upon the Marriage of St.
Tertullian, whether he was Married before or after his Conversion, and when he
was a Priest; for in the Books which he Dedicated to his Wife, one may find
that he lived with her when he wrote them: The Author of the Life of
Tertullian, and of Origin, was obliged to say, that he also composed 'em after
his Conversion. But Mr. Du Pin affirms that it is more probable that he was
Married after his Baptism, and that he writ his Books to his Wife when he was
very Aged, and fell into the Error of the Montanists. P. 240.
He Examins the Reasons of his change, and believes with St. Ierom that the
Envy he bore to the Roman Clergy, and the outrageous manner wherewith they
treated him, enraged him against the Church, and made him separate from it.

P. 249.
He afterward gives a Catalogue of Tertullians Works, and with care
distinguishes those he made whilst a Catholic, from those that he composed
after he was engaged in the Heresy of Montanus, placing amongst these last his
Book of Prescriptions.

Amongst the Orthodox Treatises of Tertullian, he gives the chiefest place to
his Apologetick, his two Books to the Gentiles, and that which he Dedicated to
Scapula, to persuade the Governor of Africa from Persecuting the Christians.
He proves in this last that all Men ought to have the liberty to embrace what
Religion seems the truest to them:

That it is no part of Religion to constrain men to embrace a Religion, which
ought to be a voluntary choice. Non est Religionis cogere Religionem quae
sponte suscipi debet, non vi.

P. 276.
In the Sixth Book of Baptism, Tertullian disapproves of Baptizing Children
without Necessity. How is it necessary, says he, to expose Godfathers to the
danger of answering for such who may prevent and hinder the performance by
Death, or Apostatizing from the Christian Religion when they come of Age? Our
Author assures us that this Opinion of Tertullian is his own particular one;
and there is no other Father to be found who has said as much. But Tertullian
affirms other things as incredible; as for Instance, when he says, Christians
are absolutely forbidden to bear Arms; and he calls the Crowns that Soldiers
put upon their heads, the Pomps of the Devil. To r^ad his Book of Spectacles,
one would hardly believe that he was the Author of that of Prescriptions, but
only by his affected Style and Particular Transports, he endeavored to prove
in his Book of Spectacles, that Virgins ought to have their Faces covered in
the Church, contrary to the Custom of the Country, which only obliged Women to
be Veiled: He mightily exclaims against Custom and Tradition, and maintains
that nothing can be prescribed contrary to Truth. It Is true, (adds Mr. Du Pin,)
when not Dogmatically enjoined, but it is when it is done as a Discipline of
little Consequence.

P. 338.
In mentioning the History of Origin, and how he was persecuted by Demetrius
the Patriarch of Alexandria, he relates an Article of the Discipline of that
time, viz. when a Priest was once Excommunicated and deposed by a Bishop with
the consent of the Bishops of the Province, he could no more be received into
any Church; and it was never Examined after the Judgment was past, whether it
was just or unjust.

P. 330.
He places among the Errors of Origin, the Exposition which he gave upon the
words of Jesus Christ, Whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth, etc. because he seems
to retain the power of binding and loosing only to Bishops and Priests which
follow the virtue of St. Peter, and he says that all Spiritual Men are this
Stone upon which Jesus Christ has founded his Church.

P. 397.487.
St. Cyprian is one of the Fathers, whom Mr. Du Pin has been large upon, because
the Life and Letters of this Martyr make a considerable part of the
Ecclesiastic History of his Age. We may see there in the troubles that were
excited amongst the Christians, by the parties of Novatian and Felicissimus, on
the account of those that were fallen by Persecution: The Moderation that St.
Cyprian observed to avoid the Rigor of the first, and the extreme Remissness
of the second; and the Weakness of Cornelius Bishop of Rome, who suffering
himself to be seduced by Felicissimus, writ to St. Cyprian after a disobliging
manner. These Two Schisms were not extinguished before a third arose, upon the
Question, whether Heretics ought to be Rebaptized, proposed by Ianuarius and
the Bishops of Numidia, who upon that Account came to consult a Council where
St. Cyprian was. They that composed it, answered that this Question was already
decided by the Bishops that were their Predecessors, who had declared in the
Affirmative. The Year following another Synod was Assembled in Africa, which
having confirmed this Decision, sent to Stephen, who was then Bishop of Rome,
to persuade him to embrace this Discipline. But the Bishops was so far from
complying with the Reasons of the Africans, that he was Transported with anger
against St. Cyprian and his Colleagues, and treated their Deputies very ill,
calling them false Christians, false Apostles, and Seducers, even forbidding
all those of his Church to entertain them, and so depriving them not only of
Ecclesiastic Communion, but also refusing them the Laws of Hospitality; but
St. Cyprian testified great Moderation, being unwilling that any Person should
Separate himself from the Communion, upon this Dispute. Mr. Du Pin afterward
endeavors to prove in his Notes, that St. Cyprian did not change his Opinion,
and that the Churches of Greece were also a great while after his time divided
about this Question: He directs the Reader to a Letter of St. Basil to
Amphilocus, in which this Father relates the different Customs of the Church
upon this Point.

Almost all the Letters of St. Cyprian run upon those Subjects that we have
already spoken of, the extracts of 'em are given to our Author according to the
order of time. He relates many fine passages from thence upon the necessity of
examining the Disposition of such as are admitted to the Communion, the
Excellency of a Martyr, which principally consists in keeping in every respect
an Inviolable Holiness in his words, and not to destroy the precepts of Jesus
Christ at the same time that he is a Martyr for him. This holy Bishop made it a
Law to do nothing in the Affairs of his Church without the Council of his
Clergy, and consent of the People. Whefore in the Council of 37 Bishops, held
at Carthage in 256. upon the Reiteration of Baptism, this holy Man gave this
reason against Excommunicating those that were of a contrary opinion to him:
For P. 444.
no one amongst us, says he, ought to establish himself Bishop over the
Bishops, or pretend to constrain his Colleagues by a Tyrannical fear, because
each Bishop has the same liberty and power, and he can no more be judged be
another, than he can judge him; but we ought all to expect the Judgment of
Jesus Christ, who only has power to propound to his Church and Judge of our
actions. P. 442.
In this question the Two Parties pretended to have Tradition on their side:
And St. Cyprian opposed to the Tradition that Pope Stephen brought, the Truth
of the Gospel and the first Tradition of the Apostles.

Our Author says also, P. 474.
that St. Cyprian was the first that spoke clearly of Original Sin, and the
necessity of the Grace of Jesus Christ. The best Edition of this Fathers Works
is that which has been lately published by Two of our Bishops: But Persons have
not much esteem for the observations of Dametius, because he endeavors more to
confirm the Doctrine and Discipline of our time than to explain the difficulties
of his Author.

P. 490.
Mr. Du Pin rejects all the Letters that are attributed to Cornelius Bishop of
Rome, except those that are in the Works of Saint Cyprian, because the rest and
particularly the Epistle to Lupicinius Bishop of Vienna, and two other that are
in the Decretals under the name of this Pope are not like the Style of those
that are undoubtly his.

P. 513.
In the time of Dionysius of Alexandria, who lived about the middle of the
Third Age, one Nepos Bishop of Egypt writing of a Book to maintain the Reign of
a Thousand Years, where he proves his opinion by the Apocalypse, Dionysius
undertook to refute him. And to Answer to the Testimony of the Apocalypse, that
his Adversary quoted, he says, that some have slighted this Books, thinking it
the Heretic Cerinthus's, who admitted no other Beatitude than what consisted
in Corporeal Enjoyments: But as for himself, he says, he durst not entirely
reject it, because it was esteemed by many Christians; yet that he was
persuaded that it had a hidden sense which could not be comprehended by any
one: That it was the Book of some Author inspired by the Holy Ghost, though not
St. John the Evangelist, but another that bore his Name, as he endeavors to
prove by the difference of the Style and thoughts P. 514.
Denis without doubt went too far upon this matter, as well as in the Letter
that he writ to the Bishops of Pentapolis, when to refute the Error of
Sabellius, who confounded the Three Persons of the Holy Trinity, this slipped
from him, That the Son is the work of the Father, and that he was to the Father
as a Vineyard is to it is Vinekeeper, or a Ship to its Ship-wright, and that he
was not before he was made. That happened to Dionysius, adds our Author, that
does almost to all those that dispute against an Error, viz. to speak after
such a manner as favors the opposite Errors.

P. 516.
Baronius thinks that a Letter that Turrian published under the Name of
Dionysius; and which is inserted in the first Volume of the last Councils, P.
850. is certainly his. But Mr. Du Pin believes it a Supposititious Work,
because the Author of this Letter approves of the Word Consubstantial, and
says, that the Fathers have thus called the Son of God. Whereas it is certain
that Dionysius and the Synod of Antioch received not this term, and that in his
time they could not say, that the Fathers commonly made use of it. There
remains nothing else of this Bishops but a letter to Basilides printed in the
first Book of the Councils.

Besides many Fragments of Methodius Bishop of Olimpius, or Patarus in Lycia,
that Father Combefix has taken from the Ancients, or Collections of diverse
Manuscripts, we have now his Feast of the Virgins complete, which we ow to
Possinus the Jesuit. It Is a Dialogue of many Virgins, each of which make a
Discourse in praise of Virginity, nevertheless, without blaming Matrimony; a
Moderation very rare to the Ancients, says Mr. Du Pin: P. 339.
This Work is composed of Ten Discourses, full of Allegories, and places of
Scripture, and treats on diverse matters as occasion serves. In the Second, to
prove that God is not the Author of Aulteries although he Forms the Children that
are produced by so wicked an Act, he brings some natural instances.

In the Eighth Discourse this Father speaking against the Fatum of the Stoics,
proves that Men are free, and that they are not necessitated to do good or
evil, by the Influences of the Stars. At the end of this Dialogue the Author
speaks very Orthodoxly of the Holy Trinity, if we may believe Mr. Du Pin. We
have only some Scattered pieces of Methodius's, Treatise against Origin, taken
from Saint Epiphanius and Father Sirmond. Our Author doubts whether the passage
that John Damascenus relates in the Third Prayer to Images, are Methodius's or
no. He affirms there, that the Christians made Images of Gold, to represent the
Angels for the Glory of God. If this is our Bishops, says Mr. Du Pin, it must
be that he meant something else than what Damascenus did, and that by the Word
Angels, Principalities and Powers, he must understand the Kings of the Earth.

He adds to the Authors of the Three First Ages, Arnobius, Lactantius,
Commodianus, and Julius Firmicus Maternus, although they passed the greatest part
of their lives in the Fourth Age, because they imitated the First Fathers in
disputing more against the Heathans than Heretics. He praises Lactantius very
much, and confesses that in his Book of the Persecucutions, he seems to Note,
that St. Peter came not to Rome till the beginning of Nero's Empire.

Afterward he gives an account of the Councils held in the Three First Ages of
the Church, and affirms that there are none more ancient than those that were
held in Victors time about the end of the Second Age, upon the Celebration of
Easter; and that they held no Councils to condemn the First Heretics, the
Disciples of Simon, Carpocratus, the Basilidians, and Gnostics, because the
Christian^ abhorred all their Errors.

He rejects all the Decretals attributed to the First Popes: And believes 'twas
Riculphus, and Benet his Successor that counterfeited them in the Ninth Age. He
ends this Volume with an abridgment of the Doctrine, Discipline, and Morals of
the Church in the Three First Ages. He Makes no Notes upon this Abridgment,
because he takes it for granted, that he has proved all he says there, in the
Body of his Work. Nevertheless we have not observed (says the Abridger) upon
the reading of it, by what reasons Mr. Du Pin, in his Treatise maintains the
following Proposition, which he advances in his short account. 1. That although
all the Fathers agreed not that Children were born subject to sin and deserving
damnation; yet the Church was of the contrary opinion. 2. That they Celebrated
the Sacrifice of the Mass in memory of the Dead. 3. That they prayed to Saints
and Martyrs, and believed that they besought God for the Living. There are
others also better maintained, and of great consequence in relation to the
differences that now separate the Christians. 1. That the Ancients spoke of the
Virgin Mary with much respect; that they went not so far upon the subject as
they have done since; that for the Generality they did not believe she
continued a Virgin after our Blessed Savior was born; that they spoke not of
her Assumption, and that there is a passage of St. Ireneus which is not
favorable to her Immaculate Conception. 2. That the Scripture contains the
chief Articles of our Faith, and that all Christians may read it. 3. That the
Elements of the Eucharist were ordinary Bread and Wine mingled with Water. That
they divided the consecrated Bread, into little bits; that the Deacons
distributed it to those present, who received it in their hands, and that they
also gave them consecrated Wine. That in some Churches this Distribution was
reserved to the Priests, but in others each Person drew near to the Table and
took his Portion of the Eucharist. 4. That in these Three First Ages, the
Unction of the Sick, which St. James speaks of, was not mentioned. 5. That
Priests were forbid to intermix their Civil and Spiritual Affairs. 6. That the
Priests were permitted to retain their Wives that were Espoused before
Ordination, but not to Marry afterward; Though Deacons were not forbidden the
last. 7. That there were few Disputes in the Church concerning Morality.

There are many Tables at the end, some Chronological ones, observing the times
in which the Holy Writers, and Ecclesiastic Authors Flourished, with that of
their Birth and Death, others that serve to distinguish the true Works from the
Supposititious. There are also Alphabetical Indexes for Authors, and for the
Subjects they treat on.

De Antiqua Ecclesiae Disciplina dissertationes Historicae, Autore Ludovico
Ellies Du Pin Saerae Facultatis Theologiae Parisiensis Doctore. An Historical
Dissertation upon the Ancient Discipline of the Church, by Mr. Du Pin, Doctor
of Divinity. At Paris 1686 in 4to.
THE Author speaks very freely against the Ambition of the Court of Rome, and
for the Liberty of the French Church. He vigorously maintains the Independence
of Kings, Superiority of Councils, and other points which have a long time
caused many Disputes between France and Rome, which although it does not run into
an actual Schism, yet it does into a Virtual one; but it would be something
very humbling to the Roman Communion if its Divines had not wholly betaken
themselves to the Asylum of Providence. For in fine, never to agree upon the
Principle of infallibity, and to dispute eternally upon Pretensions of the
greatest importance, and by a fundamental Rule which the two Parties agree
upon, I mean Tradition, is not this Eagle against Eagle, and Rome against Rome?
It not this to discover its Nakedness to all Passengers? And what will become
of it, if this last Remedy is wanting, that God being willing to try our Faith
permits this great diversity of Opinions about the Authority of his Vicar?
Indeed we must confess this is a great Latitude for a man's Faith. But let us
see: Examine what Mr. Du Pin says in his 7 Dessertations, which are in very good
Latin.

He proposes in the I. to show the Ancient Form of Church Government, and to
this end he shows the division that was made of great Bodies into Metropolis's,
Jurisdictions, ArchBishopricks, Exarchats, and Patriachates. He tells us the
Names and Privileges of those that possessed these different dignities, and as
these things had not a beginning all at the same time, nor have continued in
their original terms, he forgets not to observe their rise and different
changes; the name of Metropolitan he believes was not used in the same sense we
take it now, before the Council of Nice, and he says, that that of ArchBishop
was not known before the Fourth Age, when they some times gave it the Pope, and
some other Prelates of the greatest Towns, but that afterward it was given to
all Metropolitans. There were also Bishops amongst the Greeks which took upon
'em the Quality of Archbishops. Not because they did not see very well that to
do things in order the^ ought to add a Title with the real thing signified; but
it depended not upon themselves to extend their Jurisdictions over other
Bishops; they must therefore accommodate themselves to an abuse that they
desired to cure by joining with the Word, the thing it signified. Simplicibus
Episcopis, says the Author, Speciosum Archopiscopi Nomen sibi vindicare haud
difficile fuit At subject as alijs Ecclesias sibi subere non i^ a facile. There
are also at this time in Italy Archbishops who have no Suffragans. What he says
upon the word Patriarch, is a very learned account of the Variations and
Fortune of this Word, and may be surprising to those that imagine Ecclesiastic
affairs have been always the same. Though they will be yet more astonished (says
the Abridger) when they shall know that Mr. Du Pin proves by very good reasons,
that the charge of Metropolitan, or Patriarch, was neither instituted by Jesus
Christ nor his Apostles, but that it proceeded from the rank that was held in
certain Cities, according to the division of the Provinces, by those who in the
Roman Empire had such a place in the Civil Government. Its very Natural to
suppose that those who were Pastors in Capital Towns had some Authority in the
Province, because its very necessary that the People showed have recourse to
them if any difference happened amongst 'em, wherein they needed advice or
determination. This introduced a Custom that displeased not these Pastors, and
from whence they were very willing to deducea Title and Right to Possesi^n;
Natural Order requires it, and when Nature wills a thing its very rare that she
does not accomplish it. Thus from the First Ages, the Archiepiscopal degree of
Hierarchy began to form it self; which afterward passed by little and little
into custom, and then the Canons confirmed it, and thus the Ecclesiastical
Government was divided according to the Form of Civil Government, so that when
some Cities were the chief of many Provinces, their Prelates had also some
Authority over the Metropolitans; for that Reason the Churches of Rome Antioch
and Alexandria became the Principal ones; the First in the West, the Second in
the East, and the Third in South. Constantinople was raised to the same degree
after it became the Seat of the Emperors. As for the Church of Jerusalem it
was the same, but not for the greatness of the place, but because of its
Primogeniture. Rome, Antioch, and Alexandria aquired Privileges beyond other
Seats, either by time, Learning, or the Liberality of their Synods: Thus we may
translate the words of Mr. Du Pin, Vel sibi vindicarunt, vel a Synod^s Concess
a receperunt.

He gives many proofs for what he advances concerning the rise of Metropolis's,
after which he gives a particular account of the distribution of the
Ecclesiastical Government, which was regulated after the form of the Civil
Government; and when he comes to the division of the Gauls, he forgets not the
difference between the Archbishops of Arles and Vienna, nor the Privilege of
Primate which some French Metropolitans enjoy. He is very large upon the
Authority of the Patriarchs, and maintains that Rome had always the First Rank,
but that it is Jurisdiction extended no further than the He speaks of their
extent. p. 87.
Suburbicary Provinces, since elsewhere he had no power to command the
Metropolitans, which is one of the particular Prerogatives belonging to the
Patriarchs. He confesses that the Popes have enlarged the limits of their
Patriarchate more than they ought; and that they have since ruined the
Priviledgs of all Metropolitans. He examins the Objections of the contrary
Party, and many difficulties which are represented about the Patriarchate of
Constantinople, the Sixth Canon of the Council of Nice, and some other
Passages. One of these Two things cannot be denied when so many Innovations are
Visible, either that for some time the Popes remitted a part of their Right, or
that they have Usurped over other Prelates. The First is much more unlikely
than the Second. But there is another Question which extremely perplexed those
that are not used to dispute, viz how so great a number of Learned Men can be
so confidently accused of Innovation upon this matter, for they cannot Testify
this great ^oldness without having some Matter of fact which favors them: From
thence we must Judge that Tradition is intricate and uncertain, and condemn no
body rashly. See what Father Lupus says, at the beginning of his Book of
Appellations; Adversus prophanas vocum novitates, adversus quosdam temporum
Novatores. Does he seem to level this against the Protestants? And who would
believe that he refutes Mr. De Marca, and Gerbais, and Father Quesnel and
Garnier? On the other side the Epithet Innovator is little less Prodigious.

Mr. Du Pin in the Second Part of this Treatise refu^es F. Lupus. He First
exmains the Question of Right, and then comes to that of Fact; I mean that
after having disputed to the utmost of his Power upon the sense of some Canons
that seem to give to the Pope the Right of the last Appeal, he explains the
method they observed in the Ecclesiastic Judgments, before and since the
Ancient Councils. It Is a very Copious Subject, and from whence a great number
of fine things may be collected: The misfortune is, that Objections often
prevail as much as Solutions to them who have already taken the Popes party.

The Third Part of this Work treats of Excommunication. He pretends here that
it is a dependence upon the Keys that Jesus Christ has given to his Church, and
that although all the Faithful was the Primitive Subject of the Power of the
Keys, it is only the Clergy that ought to deduce it to Act. He confesses however
that in the First Ages Excomunications were made with the advice of the People,
and that there are some Tracts of this Practice left in the Writings of St.
Cyprian. But by degrees the Laics were excluded from this Jurisdiction, but
not the Second Order of Ecclesiastics, for it was very rare formerly that the
Bishops made a Judgment in such Affairs without their Clergy. When a Man was
Excommunicated by one Bishop, others must not receive him into their Communion,
but they might call a Provincial Synod upon it, and if the case was an Article
of Faith, it was necessary to follow the resolution of this Synod.
Excommunication in that time more employed the Church than it does now; for
lest they should be mistaken, they received no strangers into their Communion,
except they carried a Letter of Recommendation which declared their Pastors
were well satisfied with them.

The Author clears all these things with good proofs, and observes, that to
shun all Surprise without much trouble, we must suppose that all the Western
Churches were in Communion with those of the East, when the Patriarch of
Antioch was united with the Pope; so also to shun the odious name of
Schismatic or Heretic, and to have a good opinion of all Christians it was
very necessary to agree with the Church of Rome, and the Church of Antioch, and
that it was without doubt the reason why the first of these two Churches, says
our Author, obtained the Elogy of the Center of Unity. Mr. Du Pin confesses
very freely that there may be some occasion in which a Person may separate from
the Communion of the Pope, and not lose the quality of a good Catholic; and
when he examins upon whom, and for what cause Excommunication is allowable, he
says, Kings come into the Number, but not after that manner that many Popes
have extended their power. viz. not any way that does any injury to a temporal
Right, or dispenses with their Subjects Breach of Fidelity contrary to their
Oath to the Prince. He maintains it more advantageous to Christianity to
abstain from these proceedings against Crowned heads, than to make use of 'em,
and that the Bishops of France are always against the Excomunication of their
King. However he himself shows the contrary in respect to Philip the 1 st. and
Philip the 2 d. He extremely blames the flinging about Prohibitions, upon
Towns, or Kingdoms, but thinks there is no harm in Anathematizing the Dead. In
respect to the effects of Excommunication he would not have it extend to the
despoiling of a Man of his Natural Right, and the Right which others can confer
upon him: Thus an Excommunicated Person should not be deprived of his Wife, his
Children, his Friends, and those Offices which these Relations engage him in;
but other men must not so much as eat with him without necessity, or keep him
company. We should never speak of it, if we read not the Order which is given
us of shutting our Door against an Heretic, and not to do so much as wish him
a good day. Mr. Du Pin Reasons Judiciously upon this, and thinks it no
difficulty to believe that Excommunication has any effect upon the Soul, and
that a man who is otherwise disengaged from the bonds of Sin, would remain
perfectly just under the Anathemas of the Church. The Journalists of Lipswick
have mentioned a Work which treats of Excommunications. It was Printed at Dijon
in the Year 1683 in Twelves, at the charge of Mrs. P.H.B. T.C. who composed it.
These Gentlemen give a very advantageous Idea of it in their Month of January
1684.

The Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Dissertations of Mr. Du Pin are destined to prove
that the Pope is the Primate of the Church, that his Judgment may be corrected,
and that the Council is above him. We shall speak but little upon his great
Controversy, it shall suffice to say, that he proves here the Primacy of Saint
Peter only by the passages of Scripture that speak of him the first in the list
of the Apostles. As for these Famous Words, Thou art Peter, and upon this
Stone. -- Feed my Sheep. -- I will give thee the Keys, -- he shows that the
Ancients have taken them in diverse ways which cannot be adjusted to the Notions
of the Court of Rome: He maintains that the power of the Apostles was equal,
which nevertheless injured not the Primacy of St. Peter, since this Apostle was
only in quality of the first. Do we not every day, says he, see Brethren which
have all precisely as much right to the Possession of their Father, but who are
all necessarily excluded except one, in the quality of the Eldest? (But this
Argument wont be conclusive till our Author shows how the rest of the Apostles
were excluded from either a Heavenly or an Earthly Patrimony, when St. Peter
was not; for so the Parallel of the Argument intimates.) He examins also what
some have said of the Primacy's being founded jointly upon St. Peter and St.
Paul; he shows wherein consists the Prerogatives of the Pope according to his
Flatterers, and what the French Divines say of it: He brings the the Examples
of those Popes that have committed Errors.

He answers in particular to Mr. Schelstrate concerning the Council of
Constance, but says nothing to the difficulties that were published against Mr.
Maimbourg's Book. He says, the Manuscripts upon which Mr. Schelstrate founds
his Argument, are not of certain Antiquity, and that they come from suspected
places, viz. the Roman Libraries, in quorum MSS. certum est pleraque eorum quae
Curiae Romanae placitis adversabantur esse erasa aut omissa. It is certain that
almost every thing which was contrary to the Maxims of the Roman Court, was
either taken away or omitted in the Manuscripts of their Libraries.

I shall speak more fully to the last Dissertation of Mr. Du Pin, where he
pretends to prove that neither Pope nor Church have any power either direct or
indirect over the Temporalties of Kings. 1. Because our Lord exercised no
Temporal Jurisdiction. 2. That all the power that he gave to his Apostles was
only to publish the Gospel'Baptize, to Bind and Unbind Sinners, to Celebrate
the Eucharist, to separate the Wicked from the Church, and Establish a
Discipline. 3. Because Christ and his Apostles forbid the Church to exercise
any Temporal Authority. 4. That according to the opinions of the Ancient Popes
and Holy Fathers, the power of the Church extended no farther than Spiritual
Affairs. 5. Because the Primitive Church exercised over its Members, only the
pain of Deposition and Excommunication; for when She desired to put an end to
her Rebellions by Penalties and Exiles, She had recourse to a Secular power.

Mr. Du Pin adds that if in the following Ages the Church had the power of
Condemning to Temporal punishments, it was by the Concession of Princes. To
prove this, first he shows that Jesus Christ suffered not his Apostles to make
use of the Sword, or to wish for fire from Heaven upon those that resisted
them. Secondly, he relates a hundred fine passages of the Fathers who say very
positively, that Religion ought to constrain no one. These are the same
passages that the Refugees allege to the French Converters, to show them the
great difference between the Maxims of the first Ages and these Dragooning
Missioners who compelled the Protestants to Sign another Confession of Faith.
But what use would Mr. Du Pin make of this? Does not he see that M. Schelstrate
will answer him, it is a mocking of the World to refer 'em to such Maxims as the
Fathers themselves laughed at, when instead of suffering Persecution they were
in a Condition of making others suffer? Does not he see that if these Maxims
were good, the Clergy of France could not justify the Approbation which he has
given of the Conduct he maintains? In a word, these Maxims are perfect Burlesk,
if the Church can have recourse to a Secular power forcibly to constrain
Heretics to enter into its Communion: Common sense plainly says, that if Jesus
Christ forbid his Church to use Violence, he has also forbidden their desiring
such Assistance from Kings; and if he had permitted them to compel Persons by
the Intervening of Kings, he has not command them in case of Necessity, to make
use of all the power they can furnish themselves with, I mean by the credit
they may have with the Multitude. But all this is inconclusive. Thus Mr.
Schelstrate ruins his Adversaries if we come to Arguments ad hominem. But its
true, the proofs of Mr. Du Pin considered abstractedly, are very solid; I mean
those which I have already spoken of, and those that he founds upon the Nature
of the Royal Power; for he plainly shows by Scripture and the Fathers, that it
depends upon God Almighty, that its only justifiable in him, and that the
Church is only obliged to suffer with patience, where Princes abuse their
Power. These Maxims were so evident to the Holy Fathers that St. Ambrose who
durst not abandon them in retaining a Church contrary to the Orders of the
Emperor; nevertheless he set a great value upon himself, because he practiced
no other Resistance than that of Sighs and Tears. See how Witty Men are
mistaken; if they are not Orthodox in their Actions, they are at least so in
their Words.

The Answering these Objections it seems Mr. Du Pin has found much difficulty
in; for although he proves very evidently the opinion that he would refute is
New, yet he cannot Demonstrate it to his Antagonists, because they may maintain
that they are Truths that have continued a long time undiscovered, and now are
made manifest to the Church. The Mystery of Transubstantiation is of this
Number, since M. Allix has shown us that before the Council of Trent it was
strongly rejected. This is therefore indeed what was never revealed as an
Article of Faith till the 16 th Age. Why may not they also say, that the Power
of the Church over the Temporalties of Kings, is another Truth* that lay
undiscovered till Gregory the Seventh? This is a little perplexing, but the
Council of Constance, the Terrible Shield of the French Church is yet more
difficult* I shall only speak a little to that of all the Learned Disputes of
the Author against Cardinal Bellarmin* who to prove that the Temporalties of
Moriarchs ought to submit to the Tribunals of the Church, has Collected in one
Piece all matter of Fact, that he has found in Ecclesiastic History, and the
Old Testament, with all the Reasons that his great Wit and Learning could
furnish him with: From whence it appears that we may learn a thousand curious
things in the answer of Mr. Du Pin to this Famous Cardinal.

We find many places in the Acts of the Council of Constance, where it
attributes to the Church, the Right of Deposing Princes; but we shall content
our selves with relating the words of the 14 th. Session, where it is Decreed
that all those who observe not its determinations shall be eternally Infamous,
and deprived of all Dignity, Estate, Honor, Charge, and Benefice
Ecclesiastical and Civil, although it should even be a King, an Emperor, a
Cardinal or a Pope. The Council of Basil Decreed the same thing. Mr. Du Pin
answers to that, 1. That it is a Menace without effect. 2. That we may
understand it should be done only with the consent of Princes, and by their
Voluntary Submission. 3. That as it was done in a time when the general Opinion
attributed to the Church any power over Kings, so these Decrees were rash. 4.
That these Councils determined it not in Form, since they did not examine it,
but spoke only according to the General Style of the Prelates of that time, so
that this cannot be a Decision made Conciliariter.

It would be needless to tell the Reader that these Answers neither taken
together nor separately, can any way injure this Decree, from whence it follows
either that the Church has a Right to depose Sovereigns, or that it has made a
very false Decision. I say, Decision, f^r it is as impossible to make a Decree
without defining the the Doctrine, which is the Insparable foundation of this
Decree, as it is to declare this particular Proposition for an Article of
Faith, We ought to believe St. Peter, because he was inspired of God, without
declaring this General Pro^osition as an Article of Faith we must believe all
those that speak by the inspiration of God.

A Treatise upon Nature and Grace against the Two Hypotheses of Mr, Pajon and
his Disciples, by Mr. Jurieu Doctor and Professor in Divinity. Rotterdam, Sold
by Abraham Acher, 1687 in Twelves. Page 419.
THIS Treatise upon Nature and Grace, was made in answer to Mr. Pajons
Sentiments, but supposing they might with their Author Mr. Iurieu, be thought
to have past it over in Silence, till he found that Mr. Pajon was not withou
Proselytes to his Opinions, and therefore thought fit to Root out such Doctrins
as he had planted, before they were fixed too deep, To the end (says he) that if
God raises our Churches from the dead, they may come out of their Tombs
purified from the Corruption which began to prey upon them: Indeed Mr. Papin is
disposing himself to defend the Quarrel of his Uncle; but if Mr. Iurieu should
turn his Arms toward him, he could expect no other fate, than that of
Patroclus, who having put on the Armor of Achilles, would therefore contend
with Hector, and was soon foiled by that Hero; Our Author thinks him not worthy
of a Refutation, and contents himself only to say in an Advertisement, That it
is a very rare thing to find one in an Age, that will go about to refute a Man
who has not Commenced for some Y^ars; and he was much deceived when he could
not prevail upon him to answer him, The public, says Mr. Iurieu, must pardon
me, it has more need of my leisure for something else. If he (meaning Mr.
Papin) had proposed his Qu^stions with Submission he might have had some
Lessons read to him; but since he Interrogates in quality of a Master, he is
far from acknowledging his own Weakness and Ignorance.

After this severe Reprimand, our Author passes on to the body of his Work,
which is divided into Two Parts: In the First he treats of the Superintendence
of Providence, and in the Second, of the Operations of Grace, for to comprehend
well the difficulty of the Superintendence of Providence, it is necessary to
explain the Followers of Mr. Pajon: They say, God before any thing had a being,
did through his vast Intelligence Conceive the System of the World, the
Concurrence of its diverse Springs, and the manner whereby it was to be linkt
together in all its parts: In fine, that he created the Universe upon the
project which he had formed in his Mind, that is to say, after having Chained
and Tied all parts of the World together, he put the whole Machine in motion,
after such a manner that the indissolvable Connection which is betwixt 'em,
produces all the Events we have known to happen, and which shall hereafter
happen to the end of Time* In a word, this Connection of Causes and Events, and
the force of this first Impression which every part of Nature has received,
suffices to give motion to all things without any new Action or Concurrence of
GOD. Thus we see the World is like a Machine whose Springs turn regularly* and
God after having created Second Causes, has left themselves to Act according
to their Nature and First Motion which he gave to the whole Universe; from
whence it follows according to these Divines, That the Concurrences of God is
nothing else but his Decrees, by which from all Eternity he wills that Second
Causes should Act after a certain manner, and they pretend that they never
interrupt the General Order which he has established. So that it is but a
necessary consequence to do which Men call a Miracle: In fine, he meddles not
with the Will in particular Events. This System has much relation to that of
Father Malebranch.

Mr. Iurieu maintains on the contrary, that God immediately concurs himself in
all our Actions; and besides this first Impression and General Motion which he
has given to Nature, he lends his immediate concurrence to all Events. Upon
this foundation he vigorously attacks the System which we have spoken of: He
pretends first, that without an immediate concurrence he destroys the Infinite
dependence of Creatures in relation to their Creator, in giving 'em, says he,
the power to Act for themselves without a new Action of God; this is to draw
'em after a certain manner out of their Nothingness, and to raise them up into
the Quality of little Divinities which can dispose of Events. One may even
assert, says he, that there is no Independence at all in the Creature, because
God is alwas the first Mover by virtue of his first Impression which he has
made upon every part of Matter; whereas that is always to weaken this Truth of
Nothingness which is of so great importance in Divinity, that without it, it is
impossible to get out of the incomprehensible Abysses which the mind of Man
finds in the Conduct of Providence. On the contrary this is to extol the
Majesty of God, when we ascribe all the Operations of the Creatures to a
perpetual dependence upon his immediate Concurrence, which seems (if we may so
say) to add something to the Sovereignty of God over the Creature. It Is
impossible without his immediate Operation (continues Mr. Iurieu) to explain
how objects strike the Organs of the Body, how they affect the Soul, and how
the Emotions of the Blood follows that of the Mind; for it is certain that the
Soul which is Spiritual, cannot be struck by sensible objects, nor excite the
motions of the Body. Indeed if on one side the Mind could be touched, it might
be extended; and if on the other, the Spirit has no material parts it cannot
move the Body. Now all the difficulty is easily resolved by a continual
Concurrence of Providence to maintain and form the Comerce which is betwixt the
Body and the Mind, because (according to our Author) at the presentation of
every object, God does by an immediate Operation, produce the Idea which Men
conceive in their mind about such Objects.

The finest Objection against this System, and which appears to be most to the
purpose, is, that in denying an immediate Concurrence, he ruins the use of
Prayer. You demand of God, perhaps, that he would bless such a Marriage with a
happy fruitfulness; but if God intermeddles with nothing, and if there be a
Chain of Causes whose effect is inevitable, then nothing is more useless than
this Prayer: for things would happen-necessarily, as they must happen* if it be
not so, then God intervenes and breaks this Chain to stay the course of the
first Impression; and to punish Crimes or reward Virtue he inverts the General
Order, and this is that which our Author calls doing a Miracle. Thus adds (Mr.
Iurieu) nothing can be more insipid than to tell a man that he must thank God,
because, by virtue and in consequence of the first chaining together of Second
Causes, there is a Temperament of Courage in himself, and that by the same means
his Enemies are disposed to fearfulness; whereas by means of an immediate
Operation, God, without inverting the Order of Nature gives Victory to his
People, and deprives their Enemies of Courage, and by consequence hears the
Prayers of the Faithful without doing Miracles, or Suspending the course of
those Laws which he has established: God governs these Laws with a profound
Wisdom: And as he keeps Second Causes in his hands that he may determine their
Motions, so he produces Scarcity or Abundance according as he thinks fit, for
the exercising of his Mercy and Justice.

In fine, the chief Difficulty which results from both Systems is, If Mr.
Iurieu reproaches the Pajonists, that they make God the Author of Sin, they may
return the same Objection against him with greater force. Thus the Reader
perceives his curiosity redoubled in this Work, whilst he sees an able Man a
little overcome, and Mr. Iureiu in a danger worthy of himself. He says, then,
that according to these Gentlemen, all the Events which happen in the world,
and by consequence Criminal Actions are the Effects of his first Impression.
Now God having created the World Innocent, found an Innocent Chain of Second
Causes, it must necessarily follow that he breaks this Innocent Chain of
Events. For a Man cannot break it without a Miracle which cannot be attributed to
him, and if God breaks it, he is evidently the Author of Sin. On the contrary
he maintains that by saying, God concurs with particular Events, he makes him
more evidently the Author of Sin, for in supposing an immediate Concurrence in
every Action, God who is the first Mover, is by Consequence Cause of the Crime,
and much more, if this Concurrence imposes a kind of necessity upon Man's Will
which being not able to act of it self, is compelled to follow the Motion which
is impressed upon it.

Mr. Iurieu Answers, that when God moves and makes a man to Act, who commits a
Sin, he determins him to the Action, but not to the wickedness of the Action.
The Motion is from God, but the disorder which is observed in it comes from
Man; for instance, when God determines my Arm to thrust a Sword in to a Man's
Breast, he is not a partaker of the Crime, because this Action of Moving my
Arm, and Stabbing with a Sword, is not morally an ill Action, for it is
innocent in a Battle, or in ones just Defense; but all the wickedness depends
upon the malice of the Heart, and the intention of him that Smites, of which
God is not the Author.

Nevertheless, say these Gentlemen, God who knows the malice of the heart, does
notwithstanding this knowledge lend his immediate Concurrence for the Execution
of this Malice. Now if God refused his Concurrence, the ill Intention of the
Man would not proceed to its Effect but it seems by his immediate Concurrence
he lends* (if we may so say) his Arm toward the Commission of a Crime. Thus,
is there not less danger to say, that God having once given Motion to the whole
Machine of the Universe, he leaves it to accomplish Second Causes according to
his Eternal Decrees, and the General Order he has Established? Else, add they,
God lends not his immediate Concurrence only for an Exterior Action, by which
a Man lifts his Arm, but also according to Mr. Jurieu, for the inward Action of
the Will: Now as a Crime resides in the Will, which could not be determined
without an immediate Operation of God, it follows that God is the Author of the
Criminal motion of the Will; for Example, To hate God, its difficult to
comprehend how God can Act as to the Substance of the Action, and lend his
immediate Concurrence for the Motion by which Man lifts himself up against God,
without partaking a great deal of the Evil which is inseparable from the Action.

To remove this difficulty, Mr. Iurieu says, that in the hatred of God there
are two things; one is the motion of the Hatred, the other is the determination
of this motion on Gods Side: Now the motion of Hatred is not ill in it self,
for one may very justly hate certain things and God may concur thereto very
justly. But the determination of this motion upon Gods part, is a Moral Evil,
and a Moral Evil is not an Entity, but a Privation of being, with which God
does not concur, because he does not concur to a Nonentity. God does well
determine the Will to a Real and Positive Action, that is to say, to Good; but
he determines it not to Nothingness, that is to say, Evil or Sin. It is true,
that God by General Laws is obliged to make use of Nature in things themselves,
which are contrary to his Will: Thus he moves a Person who is advanced in Sin
according to the desires of a corrupted Mind, and he makes him sensible of
debauched Pleasures in the abuse of Creatures, to follow the Laws of the Union
of the Soul and Body, which he himself has estalished, because the sensation
of Pleasure is a Physical Good, and not ill in it self; and for God to will and
do good as the occasional cause of this Pleasure would be a Criminal abuse of
the Creature; but God wills not that which is Criminal in it, and is not the
Cause of Moral Impurity. He Illustrates this by the example of a Stone, which
being thrown toward Heaven, instead of following the Impression of the Motion
which the Hand gave it, it stops its course and falls back again upon the
Earth; Because it is carried on by its natural Heaviness. Thus God lifts up the
Will, to make it produce an Act of Love. Doubtless if it followed the motion
which was impressed upon it, it would be carried toward its Good; but the Will
corruptly determining this Love which is Imprinted upon it by the first Cause,
causes it to fall upon a Criminal Object.

In the Second part Mr. Iurieu refutes the Opinion of Mr. Pajon, upon the
manner how Grace works upon the Will. Mr. Pajon, after having laid down as a
Principle, that God lends not his concurrence to particular Events, and that
the Will is subject to the first Impression, which we have spoken of, conceived
a certain meeting together, and a certain management of external Circumstances,
which joined with the Word, do according to him, make all the Efficacy of
Grace. These principal Circumstances, are the Disposition of the Organs, the
Temperament, Education, Age, which often repair what the Passions of Youth have
spoild; Poverty which makes People sooner hearken to the Exhortations of
Repentance; whereas Prosperity blinds 'em with Security and Pride, and
Deliverances which confirm the Faith, whereas Adversity weakens our Affiance in
God. Now Providence presides over all these Circumstances, so that being
assembled together, they necessarily produce their Effects, the Conversion of
Souls.

Mr. Iurieu reduces this Opinion to Ten Propositions, which he engages
Successively: We shall not undertake to follow him throughout, we shall content
our selves to examine three of 'em, which will suffice to give a through knowledge
of Mr. Pajons Sy^tem, and the manner how he is attackt in this Work: One is,
that ye will always follows the Understanding* wherefore to enlighten the
Understanding, its sufficient to incline the Passions and the Will. That is to
say; before all things we must persuade the Understanding, because a Man cannot
will or consent where he is not convinced; whence it follows, that the
Understanding inclines the Will; when it is persuaded, there must not be an
immediate Action of the Mind upon the Will, because there must be only a
Predication to enlighten and convince the Understanding by the Evidence of
Truth. Mr. Iurieu, who has studied much the heart of Man, and knew all its
foldings, tells us quite contrary, viz. That it is the Passions, and not the
Understanding which determins the Will. They prevent deliberation; the violent
Motions which they cause, leave not the Understanding time to judge.

-- Video Mcliora, Proboque.
Deteriora sequor --
This is the condition of all Men. They raise up an Eternal War in themselves,
and after much struggling they are carried away to sensible Objects and Charms,
in spite of the Light of the Understanding. Man believes a thousand things,
only because he would believe 'em, and his Passions plead for an Interest; even
the Air of a Man's Face changes according to the Nature of the Passions, so much
is Passion the Mistress of the Judgment. In fine, according to Mr. Iurieu the
Understanding is so little Master of the Will, that we ought to look upon it as
a Passive Faculty, which receives Ideas as they are impressed upon it; it is an
Ice which receives Images and reflects 'em more or less distinctly; now as it
acquiesces it determines not; the Will ceases not to revolt and follow the
Motions of the Passions. If the Understanding resists, it is only in those
things wherein it has not acquired a habitude of Sinning without remorse, and
which stay upon the brink of the Precipice, being at a loss how to free
themselves. The Understanding is almost always subject to the Will, which
disposes of all its Reasonings; whence we may conclude, that it is not necessary
to pass through the Understanding in order to penetrate the Will; and as it is
this which determines, so it is this by which the Holy Ghost also Acts
immediately upon the Mind: Thus the Joy that the Souls of the Faithful possess,
is not a Reasoned Motion, nor does it arise from reflection; it is inward Grace
which gives it birth: In fine, it must be an immediate Action of the Holy Ghost
upon the Will to overcome its inclination to Evil, and draw it back from
sensible things.

The other Proposition we have chosen, is this, That the Word of God contains
Moral Demonstrations, capable of themselves only to produce a full and entire
certainty of the truth of it. That is to say, the Scripture has such Evident
Characters of the Divinity of its Author, that they are sufficient to form this
certain persuasion, viz. The Scripture is Divine. I know not, (says Mr. Iurieu)
that ever man yet durst advance what these Gentlemen have done, without having
a design to lessen the Power and Light of these Holy Characters: I dare affirm
that there is not one which cannot be avoided by the profane, not one that will
amount to a proof, or to which nothing can be objected.

But (say these Gentlemen) It is true, there is nothing which the Mind of Man
cannot turn into Darkness; nevertheless; if these Characters of Scripture are
not sufficiently evident to produce this certainty, will it be a fault in the
Wisdom of God to make use of means which are incapable of producing the Effect
which he proposed? And will it be a lawful excuse for those who are chained in
the Darkness of Paganism? God will only reprove the mal^ce of their heart and
the source of their incredulity; since he has hid his Word under so great
obscurity that the Characters of Divinity which it bears along with it cannot
make one proof. They add, that if by the Assistance of the Holy Spirit, there
are not found in Scripture sufficient proofs to produce a certainty which
excludes the fear that the Contrary cannot be true, as Mr. Iurieu says himself,
then there will be an eternal restlesness: For a man cannot be fully assured
that the Scripture is Divine by the Scripture it self; doubtless Grace can form
a confidence which excludes all doubts that the Scripture is Divine: But as
Grace is not so prevalent that one cannot sometimes be persuaded by the
prejudices and darkness of Reason, instead of that of Grace: So that one shall
be at a loss to be so much assured of the Divinity of the Scripture, that there
will not rest some doubt, and some fear that the contrary will be true. In fine,
cannot the Scripture be said at least to produce a certain and humane Faith
without the Assistance of the Holy Spirit, and cannot we convince a Heathen that
it is Divine by the Light of Reason only?

Mr. Iurieu confesses that there is nothing appears more contrary to Reason
than that these Character of themselves should be able to produce an entire
certainty. For Man is full of Errors and prejudices, which blind his
Understanding, and hinder him from discovering the Truth. Besides, the subtilty
of Mysteries, and their disproportion with the powers of the Soul, distract the
Reason and cause Insurrections in it. Thus he pretends we can have only that
certainty of the Divinity of the Scripture that he calls Adhesion, which is
produced from the Importance and not Evidence of the thing. For Example, I
believe that such a one is my Father, I have no demonstration of it, says he,
but the importance of this Truth upon which the Obedience I owe him is founded,
and the right to his Succession makes my Will adhere thereto. Thus as Sensible
Advantages recur from this great Truth, the Scripture is Divine, so it is the
visible interest of man to believe whatsover that Commands, and that his Will
should be absolutely determined by it. In a Word, the Holy Spirit which acts in
us, produces with these Characters a greater certainty than naturally could be
produced, and creates an inward sense of the sweet Efficacy of the Word.
Without the Operation of Grace the Scripture would continue like an unfruitful
Seed upon the heart; for it is that which strengthens and encourages the Mind
against all its doubts and diffidence.

The last Proposition that we shall examine, is, that the Word of God Preached
under Proper External Circumstances, managed by Providence, may cause an
Irresistible Grace, and overcome all the wickedness of Man's Heart.

This is the Foundation of the Controversy in Question; Mr. Iurieu makes no
scruple of saying that this is a Pelagian Opinion, and that it would be to make
use of the Heretics Arms which have disturbed the Church. God, said Pelagiu^,
works in us the Will to do what is Holy and Good, by Inflaming us with the
Prospect and Recompense of future Glory to draw us back from Earthly
Concupisence in which we are overwhelmed. Now the Scripture is full of such
passages as intimate that God by an Almighty hand and by an invisible and
internal Efficaciousness, independent of External Circumstances, Acts in the
Depths of our Souls, and that Grace penerates even into the deepest and most
secret Faculties. It would follow from the System of these Gentlemen, that the
Progress of the Gospel and that of Philosophy is the same; Philosophy persuades
by a happy Concourse of Circumstances, that is to say, by its Eloquence, turn
of Wit, Art of well managing its Dispositions according to the inclination of
the Auditor, and its Address, which must give an Air of Evidence to all its
Reasons. These are not the methods of the Holy Ghost; its very true that
Circumstances are not without their use, but we ought not to give 'em any force
which Necessitates or attribute to 'em an Irresistible Grace. On the contrary,
a new Action of the Holy Ghost is displayed upon the Will and makes it feel a
certain secret Charm at the sight of an Evangelick Object, which begins to wean
it from sensible things, and disposes the Understanding to a favorable
Judgment of Truth and Virtue: In fine, it causes preventing and overruling
Grace upon the Will, and God Seconds our Endeavors and places us in necessary
Circumstances which also Act immediately upon the Heart.

We shall conclude with a proof which Mr. Iurieu here makes use of, and which
deserves our consideration. He maintains that if a Concourse and Order of
Circumstances, is the only Source of Sanctification, and if Grace depends upon
the first admittance of the knowledge of the Truth, then the greatest Wits
ought to be the greatest Saints, although, says he, Experience shows the
contrary: God has not made choice of the greatest Scholars to be partakers of
his greatest Graces; the Church was first taken out of the Bosom of the Vulgar,
and the great Wits which are distinguished in the World, have not embraced
Christianity. We may ordinarily observe that those whom God has endued with
the most Elevated Devotion and Fervent Zeal, are Common Persons. However we
find a few great Men who are as Examplary for their Piety as Merits. Mr. Iurieu
himself is an Example. Nevertheless it is true, this is a reproach which is
always cast upon great Wits, they often resemble Persons whose gust is too fine
to abide any thing but Meats well seasoned. Ignorance more surely finds
Devotees. Now if according to these Gentlemen, the Understanding is the great
Spring which Actuates all the Faculties of the Soul, one might conclude from
thence, that those who have the most Light should have more Zeal, and certainty
in Religion than meaner Spirits. Wherefore, adds Mr Iurieu, we can by no means
doubt that the Faith and Piety of these Devout Souls, these who are Poor in
Spirit, was not produced by an immediate Operation of the Holy Spirit, which
has imprinted the Efficacy of its Grace in their Souls.

A Relation of the Inquisition at Goa, At Leyden 1687. in 125.
ALL the World knows in General what the Inquisition is; some Books have given
such descriptions of it (and not exceeded the Truth) that one cannot read
without Horror and great Emotion: It Is even very surpizing to Reflect, that
Religion that ought to inspire its followers with Justice and Humanity, can
Authorize these Barbarous Formalities, and horrible punishments which make this
Tribunal so formidable. But few men know the particulars of what passes, for
the Mysteries thereof are almost impenetrable. This Author is one that informs
us by his own Experience; he is a Frenchman that relates this sorrowful
Adventure, who confesses it is not without some regret that he makes it public;
because the Inquisitor, according to their General Custom had forced an Oath
from him never to discover the Secret. Some Pious Persons, that were Timorous,
Strengthened his scruples; till others of a better Judgment convinced him that
the benefit of the public Dispensed him from an Oath that was extorted by his
Tormentors. His Relation ought to be so much the less suspected, as his delay
showed he was not in have to publish it, since 'twas above Eight Years after
his return; so that his resentment being lessened by time, it has little or no
part in his recital.

He tells us, that being a Catholic and well Instructed in Divinity, he had a
great mind to go into the Indies, which he prosecuted and Landed at Daman an
East India Town under the Dominion of the Portuguese, which are the most
Superstitious People living, and the French Catholics are Heretics when
compared to them. They use to carry into their Assemblies the Image of some
Saint, and if there is any one that will not give Alms he must at least kiss the
Image. Our Traveller not being able to contain himself at this sight from
Laughing at them, all the Devotees were Scandalized at him, his refusal
rendering his Faith suspicious; some time after being at a Portuguese Gentleman's
house, who always had an Image in his Bed which he kissed with much Ardour, our
Author instructed him upon it, and told him that the Heretics Interpreted the
worship of Images much to their disadvantage, and therefore it would be better
to Moderate it. It happened the same time that one of his Neighbors seeing a
Crucifix at the head of his Bed, piously advised him to cover this Image, lest
by chance he should have some Amorous adventure in his Bed. Upon which the
Author had the Imprudence to Laugh, (the Scruple appearing to him so very
pleasant) and to make some profane Raileries upon the Holy Custom of the Women
of that Country, which would not grant any Favors until they had Locked up
their Chaplets and covered all the Images in their Chambers.

This multitude of Crimes made him to be taken notice of in the S. Office:
Besides, he had another Misfortune, for he made frequent Visits to a Lady which
a Priest was in Love with, that was Secretary to the Inquisition: This Priest
was very much disgusted at it, and some appearances gave him great Disquiet;
this Jealousy animating his Zeal, he rid himself of his Rival by casting him
into the Inquisition. The description he gives of his horrible Prison is
capable to touch the hardest heart with Compassion. The Stench and Darkness of
it was so insupportable that Fifty Persons Strangled themselves with Despair.
He was afterward removed to Goa, where resides the greatest Tribunal of the
Portuguese Inquisition in the Indies; all the Favor that he found there, was
the choice of the lightest Chain of all the Criminals. He had there the
Mortification to see his Rival there, who came to feed his Eyes with his
unworthy Triumph.

As soon as ever he came he was despoiled of every thing that he had; they
shaved off all his Hair, as is the Custom, without Distinction of Sex, when
first they come into the Holy Prison of the S. Office. The Sacraments are never
Administered to any one there, nor do they ever hear Mass: There Reigns so
profound a Silence that they are not permitted to ease themselves by Complaints
and Tears. There are Two Inquisitors at Goa, he which is called the Grand
Inquisitor is always a Secular Priest; and the other is a Dominican Monk. The
Huissiars are Persons of the Chiefest Quality, who think it a Glory to be of
the Noble Function, and have no other Recompense than the Honor of serving so
holy a Tribunal. Afterward he Relates the particular Formalities he observed
there. He says, it is no wonder that such Men as only Examine the outside and
appearances of things should be deceived in Favor of the Integerity of this
Jurisdiction; For they make a great show of Justice and Humanity. There must be
Seven Witnesses to Convict the Accused, and if the Criminal Confesses he is
guilty, he is acquitted of his Fact for the Confession, and obtains the Favor
of being Suspended to the Secular Power. But in Reality they violate all the
Laws of Justice and Charity, never suffering him to see the Witnesses that
accuse him nor is he never permitted to reproach them with it.

They persist in the Desiring him to confess the Crime that he is supposed
guilty of, and almost force him by this detestable Maxim that is amongst 'em,
we will rather burn thee as guilty, than suffer it to be thought that we have
imprisoned thee unjustly. Thus the Inquisition is always in the Right, and
cannot Err, which infatuates the People, and makes them believe that the Holy
Spirit presides over all their Actions; for the Miserable Victims of the S.
Office Reciprocally accuse one another, to make others alike guilty of their
imaginary Crimes; so by Consequence a Man may be very innocent and have Forty
or Fifty Witnesses against him. In short, the Goods of those that are punished
with Death, and those that escape it by Confession are equally Confiscated,
since they are all reputed guilty* Nevertheless that which is very particular,
is, that these pretended Offenders from whom by Torture they very often force a
Confession, are also obliged to Declare publicly that they used much Clemency
toward 'em. If a Man pleases himself after being escaped from their hands,
with endeavoring to justify himself he shall never more have forgiveness; and
on the Contrary, he that will live securely is forced to tell the World his
Goods were most justly Confiscated. He is not therefore permitted to discover
the least thought of his Heart. This is certainly an imitating the Cruelty of
Caligula, who after he had caused the Sons of a Roman Knight to be Stab^'d,
command the Father to Sup with him, and to add to his Grief the punishment of
Imprisoning him. Perijsset (says Seneca) nisi carnisici Conviva placuisset.

Those that they treat most rigorously, are the Jews, which were chased by
Ferdinand and Isabella, and fled for refuge into Portugal. They force them to
turn Christians; and although they have been there near two Ages, they still call
'em New Christians by way of contempt. The scandal of Heresy or Judaism, is
never defaced; for Rome always preserves her Suspicions and Distrusts: It looks
very suspiciously, as if she was not well persuaded of the force and evidence
of the reasons she makes use of, since she distrusts the sincerity of those
Converts she has made. Be it how it will, yet these new Christians have not got
the good opinion of the Inquisitors; and Suspicions, in respect to them, are
more severely punished than a real Crime in another.

But to return to what personally regards our Author; he says, that after being
a long time shut up in the dark Lodgings of the Holy Inquisition, he was
permitted Audience. He prostrated himself at the feet of the Inquisitor, by
this humble posture and his tears to prevail upon him. But this obdurate Judge
having commanded him to rise up, conjured him coldly, by the Bowels of the
Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ to confess his crime: He with a good courage
recited all we have related, and alleged the Council of Trent to justify
himself about Images. He observed only, that the Inquisitor appeared surprised,
and that he was so ignorant, he never heard that Council mentioned before: But
they sent him back without making any explanation of the Crimes he was guilty
of. He was carried three or four times back to the same Audience, and the same
desires were reiterated to make him confess without further clearing of the
Matter, so that at last he abandoned himself to Despair through the slowness
and cruelty of these dumb Proceedings, and resolved to put a Period to his
Life. To effect which, he feigned himself sick, and said he wanted bleeding;
they let him Blood, and as soon as he was alone, he again opened his Vein, and
had bled to death, if the Keeper had not entered; who instead of having that
Compassion, which such a sight ought to have produced, chained up his Flands
and his Neck: What redoubled his discontents, was, those that served him with
what he had, never spoke to him, that by all manner of Circumstances they might
increase his Terror.

As to what they call the Acts of Faith, which are the days wherein they
condemn the Guilty, and absolve the Innocent, they come but once in two or
three years, so he expected that time with much impatience. He was however very
much surprised, when at Midnight a Keeper brought him a suit of black Cloth,
streaked with white, and roughly commanded him to put it on; he doubted not but
it was to be the preparation to his punishment: Thus after many efforts, being
filled with mortal Apprehensions, he took the Habit; two hours after he was
brought out, and conducted under a Gallery, where was a doleful sight, there he
saw 200 of his miserable Companions, set in order against a Wall, to whom they
did not so much as permit the use of their Eyes. They were not all clothed
after the same manner: For their Habits were different according to the nature
of their Crime and Condemnation; those that are destined to fire, have
Garments, whereon the Picture of the Sufferer is laid upon firebrarnds, with
flames and Devils all about him. As they were ignorant of the formalities of
the holy office, so there might be observed in their Faces the diverse motions
of fear, shame and grief, wherewith they were inspired. For it seems it is a
part of their Ingenuity to forget nothing that may add to their fear. As soon
as the day appeared, the miserable Wretches were conducted to the Church,
holding in their Hands a yellow Wax Candle for the Act of Faith, where every
one received his Judgment. After two years Imprisonment, our Author was
condemned to serve five years in the Galleys, with Confiscation of his Goods;
those who were to be burnt, were given up to the Secular power, by the holy
Inquisition, with instant prayer to use them with Clemency, or at least, if
they thought them worthy of Death, that it might be without effusion of Blood.
The secular Justice doubts not of the Infallibility of the holy Tribunal, but
burns 'em immediately without Examination, agreeing with much Humanity, that
that is no Effusion of Blood. They carry also with 'em some Boxes full of dead
Men's Bones, that have been accused many years before, and this makes up part
of the Process. But to return to our Author, after he was redeemed from the
Galleys, by the Credit of his Friends, he returned into France, being resolved
to pay no more Visits to the Inquisition, nor engage a Rival Inquisitor above
all Rivals.

The Works of P. Virgilius Maro, Illustrated with the Interpretation and Notes
of Charles Ruaeus, of the Society of Jesus, by the Command of the most
Christian King, for the use of the Dauphin, according to the Edition of Paris.
London 1679. in 8vo. p. 610.
THis Edition of Virgil is not less fine for its being one of the first Books,
which were Printed in England in the same form as the Authors printed it in
Holland, cum Notis Variorum. And it may be said, that no Authors have been
better printed in France, than this; and its hoped that diverse more will be
printed in the same manner. There is at the end an Idea of all the Words, which
may almost serve as well as that of Erythraens, provided it is correct, which
is pretty difficult in so great a number of errors. As for the Text, it lacks
much of being so correct, as it is well printed, which happens undoubtedly in
that the Booksellers have not made Proofs enough thereof to be revised, as it
also happens in Holland, but too often.

All the World knows what the method of those is, who have commented upon
Poets for the Dauphin. Father de la Rue complains justly, that the Learned, who
had labored until now upon the Ancients, applied themselves more to acquire
Reputation in making long unnecessary digressions on the Authors, which they
commented upon, than to make young folks comprehend well the sense thereof. He
might besides have said, that it is easier to play the Learned Man, in putting
off his collections upon the occasion of one word, which is not more clear
thereby, than to follow the Author step by step, and to leave no obscurity in
his Expressions and Thoughts, as those who have studied for the Dauphin, have
endeavored to do. This last Design is equally advantageous for those who begin
to read the Writings of the Ancients, or who hardly understand them; and
painful for those who undertake to remove all the difficulties which are found
therein. This is what ought to oblige the Public, or to excuse the faults
which may be remarked in Interpretations, otherwise so exact and agreeable to
the Author.

Notwithstanding a part of what we have proposed to our selves, in this Work,
consisting in making known the Opinions of the Public, or even of Particular
People, upon Books which are Published, as well as to tell what they contain, it
will not be amiss to remark here what the Public finds fault with, in some of
the Authors which are for the use of the Dauphin. The Reader may observe if he
pleases, that we only relate here what we often heard said of diverse able
Persons in such things, and not our particular Opinions. It cannot be denied
that it is not a thing which Essentially belongs to the History of Books, to
tell what the Learned have thought thereof, as soon as they were made Public.
And as an Historian ought not to have the boldness to relate any falsehood, so
there is no Truth but what he ought to speak of, he ought to flatter no Body,
nor testify hatred against any whosoever. Cicer. l. 1. de Orat.
Quis nescit primam esse Hitoriae legem, nequid falsi dicere audeat;
deinden^quid very non audeat; nequa suspicio gratiae sit in scribendo, nequa
simultatis. We were obliged to make this small Digression, fearing it should be
thought that we have forgotten our Promise, which we made three years ago, of
not judging of the Works whereof we should make mention.

Some Persons who have carefully applied themselves to the Study of Humanity,
find, two things to be reprehended in several Authors in Question. The First
is, that in the Paraphrase they have not only applied themselves to Paraphrase
the Original by an equal Number of Words, but also have for the most part
retained certain Metaphorical Terms, which helps on with the obscurity of the
Authors Style. They have even been contended to put the Terms of the Original,
according the Order of Construction without expounding them in the Notes, though
they were not clear. It would therefore be a thing desirable that they had so
scrupulously applied themselves to the number of Words. 1. Because it is
impossible to speak plainer than the Author, without adding some Terms. For
Example, Virgil says in his IV. Eclogue, Ultima Cumaei venit jam Carminis
aetas; word for word, The last Age of the Camae'an Verses is come. F. De la Rue
Traslates, Nunc attigimus extremum saeculum vaticinij Cumaea Sybillae. Those
who begin to read Virgil may believe that this Signifies, that we shall soon
cease to respect the Verses of the Sybil of Cumes, and that they are going to
be buried in Oblivion; or some such thing. He should have said, Attigimus
extremam aetatem Mundi a Sybilla Cumaea decantatam, we are come to the last Age
of the World, so called by the Sybill of Cumes. 2. What avails it to
Paraphrase Idle Epithets, chiefly when they are clear, as when they Paraphrase
Cast a Lucina, by pudica Diana? There has never been an impudica Diana, and
this Epithet does but render the Prose flat and affected; for it is known that
Poets have Privileges which Orators have not. 3. In keeping a Metaphor in the
Paraphrase, they speak as obscurely as the Author. Virgil had said, Si canimus
Sylvas, Sylvae sint Consule dignae; if we Sing, we Sing country Songs, let them
be so fine as that a Consul may not Scorn to hear them. F. de la Rue says, Si
cantamus Sylvas Sylvae deceant Consulem. It Is true, he expounds in his Note
Sylva by Country Song, but if he had put it in his Paraphrase, that would have
spared him a Note; and the Terms of deceant Consulem are at least as obscure as
those of the Original. Therefore it may be that it had been better to render
the Metaphors into simple words, that the Young Folks should Learn the Figured
Style, and that which is not so.

Besides this manner of Reckoning words has produced another obscurity, which
is not of a less consequence; which is, that when the Author has put no
Particle to remark the Connection of his Discourse, none has been put likewise
by the Commentator, which makes those who want Notes to understand it, not
understand the Sequel, and think they read a fiddle faddle. Virgil thus begins
to his IV. Eclogue.

Sicelides Musae paulo majora canamus,
Non omnes arbusta juvant humilesque myricae.
Si canimus Sylvas Sylvae sint Consule dignae.
We do not immediately see what Connection this Third Verse can have with the
Preceding, beause there is a Conjunction missing, which F. de la Rue has also
omitted in his Paraphrase. Therefore this Conjunction should have been joined
in this wise. O ye Muses of Sicilia (or Bucolicks) let us sing Subjects a
little more elevate, for every one is not taken with Verses, which treat of
Shrubs and Brambles (or such as speak of Country Subjects) Or if we Sing
Country Airs, let 'em be so fine, etc. the Particle Vel or Aut omitted at the
beginning of the Third Verse causes here an obscurity which has so much
troubled the greatest part of Interpreters.

These faults which are found every where in many Authors who have taken pains
for the Dauphin, without doubt lessens the great profit that Youth might draw
from thence. But he says, that besides these defects which regard the Method,
there is a great many places wherein these Gentlemen have not given the true
sense of the Original. There are some who believe that we should not speak
Latin if we said, Magnus Saeculorum ordo, Magni Menses, in the same sense as we
say, Alexander Magnus, Pompeius Magnus. However thus it is that Father la Rue
explains the Epithet Magnus, in the Verses of Virgil, from whence the words
that we have cited are taken. He says also, that the word adeo, in the 11 th.
Verses of the same Eclogue, does not signify porro, as F. la Rue believes, but
Yes: So that Virgil after having said that the Golden Age is about to come, and
after having used Seven Verses upon that, he would continue thus, Yes, Pollio
it shall be under your Consulship, that this Child, the Honor of our Age,
shall have its Birth, etc. F. de la Rue, by Decus hoc aevi understands the
Golden Age, since he understands it Gloria haec aetatum inchoabitur; whereas it
is generally believed aevi decus, can signify only the Honor of our Age.

However, whether it be so or no, there has been diversity of Opinions upon
these sorts of things; and a Person must be so very well Verst in ancient
Authors, to distinguish who is in the Right, that few Men are capable Judges in
this affair. But here is another thing which depends upon good sense, and not
barely upon the study of the Latin Tongue, which is to be observed, viz. to
mark frequently where the Ancients have varied from certain Rules* which being
founded upon Reason ought to be reviewed in all Ages. For, in fine, as it would
be foolish to despise these Admirable Models of Antiquity, so we ought on the
other hand to avoid falling into an over-respect to them, or approving of their
oversights: The finest Wits sometimes mistake and commit Errors, which Persons
inferior to them can observe: It Is not amiss to preserve this same natural
Liberty, which the Ancients themselves have used with so great a freedom, which
consists in blaming what is blameable, and praising what is paise worthy. On
the contrary, the greatest part of our Learned Men at this day, cannot forbear
boasting of Antiquity, nor suffer the least thing to be examined, as if a
Fault, and an Ancient Poet or Historian were incompatible. Nevertheless this is
to spoil the Judgment of Youth, and to accustom them to Admire every thing,
without judging any thing; and this General Observation is also more dangerous
than some Judgments that are a little freer; for Nature has given us a Right,
to determine after a solid examination. There Is also another Preamble which we
should be very willing to pass over, but that the Humor of our Critics has
made it necessary to be observed.

To give an Example of an Error, for we must call it by its right Name, Virgil
ought to be reprehended; we shall relate some Verses of a Discourse which
Jupiter is made to speak with Venus the Mother of Aeneas, in the First Book of
his Aeneids. Jupiter there informs his Daughter what was to be the Destiny of
Virgil and his Posterity. After having spoken of him he comes to his Ascanius,
and speaks thus to Venus, At puer Ascanius, cui nunc Cognomen Iulo.
Additur, Ilus erat, dum res stetit Ilia regno.
But this little Ascanius who is now Sirnam'd Iulus, and who was called Ilus,
whilst the Kingdom of Troy stood. This Reflection upon the Name of Ascanius, is
insupportable in the Mouth of Jupiter, speaking to the Grandmother of this
Child, and in a Discourse so serious as his; if the Poet would have made
Ascanius known, he ought to have inserted that in his Narration, and not to
have made Jupiter spoke of it, nor even to insert it by a Parenthesis in so
fine an Harangue. One might perhaps say, for the Excuse of Virgil, that the
NUNC shows that this was not the Poet that spoke. He seems to have imitated
Homer, who to instruct his Readers in the Customs of the Gods, introduced
Jupiter speaking to Thetis, as if she knew not more than Mortals, that what he
consents to by nodding with his Head, is irrevocable* Iliad. A. V. 525.

Varia Sacra, ceu Sylloge variorum Opusculorum Graecorum ad rem Ecclesiasticam
spectantium. Cura and studio Stephani Le Moyne Theologi Leydensis, qui
collegit, versiones partim addidit, and Notis and Observationibus uberioribus
illustravit. ^ugd. Batav. apud Danielem Gaesbeeck 1685, 2 Vol. in 4 to.
THIS Work is Composed of three parts, since it is a Collection of Greek Pieces,
before which are long Prefaces, and after them very fine Notes.

The Collection is not only made of rare pieces; for the Epistle of St.
Polycarp, and that of St. Barnabas, which are at the beginning, are common
enough, but there are others which are very curious, as, A Treatise of the
Occumenic Councils by Germain, Patriarch of Constantinople: The Preface of
Euthymius upon the Psalms: An Account of the five Patriarchates of the Church,
by Nilus Doxopatrius: A Conference between a Christian and a Sarazen, by
Bartholomew of Edessa: A Conference between a Grecian and a Roman. The Latin
Version is annexed to all these Pieces, and they have been taken either out of
the King's Library, or that of Oxford, or Leyden.

We may consider the Prefatory Discourses as divided into four parts, and for
the first take all that the Author says about his being engaged by chance to
Compose this Work, and how he has brought it to that perfection it now appears
to us in. He dissembles not the Grief and Vexation that he received from a new
Edition of Josephus, being begun at Oxford* For as he had made it the Care and
Study of his whole Life to Correct and Explain it; so he thought none else
should ever have had the Glory of giving it to the Public. Having been
prevented of his hopes, though not without great Mortification, he even resolved
to be content with that Printed at Oxford, and go upon this design, of
Collecting these Pieces together. The three other parts of these Prefatory
Discourses, are so many Dissertations, one upon St. Polycarp and his Writings;
the second upon St. Barnabas and his Epistle; the third upon Hipolitus, and the
greatest part of the Works that are Attributed to him.

Before he begins his first Dissertation, he tells us, That he had no design to
publish the Epistles of Polycarp and Barnabas, because they were already so
well known; but coming into Holland, he heard every where a great Rumor, that
was surprising enough; viz. That M. Rulleus, who was Chaplain to Mr. Paetus,
during his Embassy to Spain, and who afterward making a Voyage into Italy,
brought back from thence a Manuscript of the Epistle of St. Polycarp, above
twice as big as any that has yet appeared as his. Mr. Rulleus was very
Inquisitive after it, and himself intended to publish this rare Treasure; but
Death preventing him, his Brother made a Present of the Manuscript to Mr. Le
Moyne, who soon perceived, that they had taken the Epistle of St. Barnabas for
part of St. Polycarp, because they were both joined together, without any
distinction. The Jesuit Turrian, a very Learned Man, and very much accustomed
to Manuscripts, was also fallen into the like mistake. Which made me remember,
that formerly the piece of Minucius Felix's was taken for the eighth Book of
Arnobius, because it was affixed to his seven, and that it was imagined instead
of Octavius, which was its true Title, it ought to be read Octavus. It must be
very welcome to the World; that the Author, according to the last Will of Mr.
Rulleus, made an Impression of these two Epistles, for there are many fine
Observations added, which are altogether new.

In his first Dissertation he maintains, That St. Polycarp suffered Martyrdom
on one of the Days of the Great Sabbath, which was the beginning of the
Ecclesiastic Year, the first Day of the Month Nisan, according to the Hebrews.
He says, That the Jews gave the Name of the Great Sabbath to the two first Days
of the Civil and Ecclesiastic Years, the first of which began in the Month
Tisri, or September, and the last in the Month Nisan, or March. These two Days
were called by preference (...), but the first Day of Tisri was preferred to the
other, insomuch, that the first Day Nisan was only the second Great Sabbath,
whence it comes (adds Mr. Moyne,) that in the Gospel according to St. Luke
there is mention made of a second first Sabbath, (...), which perhaps is so
named, because they called the first Day of the Year (...) Sabbathum principii
Anni. Now because (...) signifies Annum and secundum, some Ancient Interpreters
would Translate (by sticking too much to the Letter) (...) Sabbathum principii
Anni, by these other words Sabbathum primo secundum, or secundo primum, which
the Greeks have rendered by (...).

This Observation will appear very probable to those that understand both
Languages The Author says, There is much reason to believe that Polycarp dyed
in the Year 167. under the Consulship of Quadratus, and he maintains this
Cronological Observation very learnedly against all those that affirm he
suffered Martyrdom in any other Year, and to remove all difficulty* he shows
that there were many Quadratus's. There was T. Numidius Quadratus, who was
Consul in the Year, 167. and L. ^tatius Quadratus, who was Pro-Consul in the
lesser Asia at the same time.

There is a happy Illustration of a very considerable matter of Fact; amongst
the Circumstances of the Death of this Martyr; some tell us, That a Dove which
came out of his side, fled into the Air, having lighted upon the Pile of Wood,
without being injured by the Flame, was killed by a Soldier. Neither Eusebius
nor the Ancients speak any thing of that Miracle, they only say, That St.
Polycarp was wounded in the side, and that a great quantity of Blood issued
from the wound. The Author believes, That there was formerly in the Epistle of
the Church of Smyrna, wherein the Martyrdom of this Holy Man was related, these
Greek words, (...), Ex sinistro Latere exivit Magna copia Sanguinis, and that
(...) was changed into (...), which signifies a Dove, after which they were
piously believed, and as confidently published, that a Dove went out from the
side of St. Polycarp. M. Le Moyne supposes also, that Lucian, who lived in the
same time with St. Polycarp, only composed his Peregrinus to insult over this
Martyr, and to turn Christianity into Ridicule. He believes, that the Novus
Empedocles, to whom Themistius compares the Emperor Iovinian, was Polycarp, and
proves it by Reasons that appear very solid, and in refuting the Opinion of M.
Petit, who maintains in his Miscellanea, Printed in the Year 1682, that this
Empedocles is infallibly the Peregrinus of Lucian.

The Discourse upon St. Bernard is also full of Curicus Remarks. The Author
observes, he was of the Isle of Cyprus, where there was so great a number of
Jews, and that once they put all the Idolaters in that place to Death. These
Jews lived in the principal Towns of the Isle, as Cyrene, and Labithus, and as
they went often to Jerusalem, both because the Passage was very easy, and to
assist at the Solemn Feasts, so they had Synagogues there; and these, he says,
are those that were called Cyrenians and Lybertines in the 6th chapter of the
Acts. St. Barnabas dying in Cyprus was Buried under a (...), a Carch-Tree, and
not under a (...), a Cherry-Tree, as a Learned Interpreter believed it to be.
We may see here very Learned Etymological Remarks, intermixed with a great deal
of Arabic. The consideration of St. Barnabas was, because the Metropolitan of
Cyprus pretended to the right of (...), and Independent of any Patriarchal
Jurisdiction. M. Le Moyne illustrates whatsoever he says with very fine
Notions; and after having observed, that upon the Breast of this Apostle, was
the Gospel of St. Matthew Writ in Hebrew by his own hand, he refutes the false
consequence that Mr. Mallet has inferred from thence, That the Apostles would
not permit the Laics to read the Holy Scripture. He praises Mr. Arna^d, and
the vigor with which he refutes this consequence of M. Mallet. But however, he
proves by very good Reasons, that the Epistle that is attributed to St.
Barnabas, is none of his: He supposes it to be St. Polycarp's, without
absolutely determining any thing upon it.

In the Dissertation upon St. Hypolitus, he maintains that he was not put to
death in the Year 230, but many Years after: He proves it by the Letter he writ
to Severa Wife to the Emperor Philip. She is called Severina in the Canon
Paschalis that was published by Scaliger; but as there never was any Empress
Named Severina, so the Author pretends it it must be read Sever. Aug. whereof
they made Severina. He bids us not confound this Severa with her that was the
Wife of Severus, who applied her self so much to Philosophy, that she was
called a Philosophress in this Passage of Philostratus. (...). That is,
Antoninus was Son to the Philosophress Iulia. These words have puzzled the great
Scaliger, that Man of the World, who confessed the least that he was ignorant of
any thing. Our Author shows, that we must Correct them after this manner,
(...), and understand by 'em Antonine Caracalla. Afterward he easily
overcomes all the Difficulties founded upon this, that Iulia Severa was not
the Wife of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, sirnam'd the Philosopher, nor by
consequence the Mother of Antoninus Commodus. This same Passage of Philostratus
is a very strong proof to M. Le Moyne, that this Iulia was own Mother to
Caracalla, and not Mother-in-Law, as is generally believed, and he confirms his
thoughts by a Passage of the Kynegetick of Oppian, Dedicated to the Emperor
Caracalla himself.

Hyppolitus never writ to this Iulia Severa, but to Severa Daughter of Mammeus,
and Wife to the Emperor Philip, to whom she communicated the good Sentiments
she had of Christianity, which she had received of her Mother. The Author
agrees not with the Testimony of Eusebius, that it is doubtful whether this
Emperor was a Christian or not; but he thinks not that we ought to prove this
Opinion by the Medal, which those of Apamea made under their Emperor; one may
see (...) on one side the Head of this Empero^ and on the other an Ark, 4
Person (...) 2 Pigeons, one of which hold (...) Branch of Olive in its Mouth*
Round (...) the Figures are these Characters, (...), and under them(...), all
which made the Celebrated Mr. Fa^conier judge that this Medal represented the
Leluge, as he endeavors to prove in a very Learned Dissertation. Our Author
shows here, that he is deceived, and explains the Medal after this manner.

The Ark signified the City of Apamea, which was called (...), because it was
the Storehouse of all the Country round about: The four Persons represent two
Inhabitants of Apamea, and two of Alexandria. The Doves and the Olive Branch,
was a Representation of the good Intelligence there was between these two
Cities. It Is very certain, that the Characters inscribed upon it contained
(...), Those of Alexandria. If we read the three last Letters Reverse, they
make (...), which Mr. Falconier believed were to be seen at the bottom of the
Medal. And although it were so, if we believe this Author, we must not establish
our Faith of the Emperor's Christianity upon this Medal; but found it upon
other Proofs that he alleges for it.

Thus having maintained that this Emperor was a Christian, and that it was to
the Empress his Wife, that Hyppolitus writ Letters, as well as Origin had done
to the same Lady, the Author shows, it was not this Hyppolytus that contributed
so considerably both by his Exhortations and Purse to the Works which Origin
composed upon the Scripture, as the Patriarch Photius has falsely affirmed. He
that was at these great Expenses for Origin was a very Rich Laick, Named
Ambrose* Hyppolitus being then only Bishop, was not at that time in a condition
of making such Contributions: It is not easy to decide what City he was Bishop
of, for he is sometimes called Bishop of Rome, sometimes Bishop of Arabia.

The ^^thor examins all these Difficulties after such a manner, as shows he has
a very penetrating Wit, and is a Man of great Reading. He proves by many
Examples, that there has been two Bishops in the same City; and he does not
only believe that Hyppolitus continued a long time in Arabia, but also that we
ought to attribute to him the Conversion of Thirty Thousand Saracens, which
Work others assign to Nonnus. He shows that he has been confounded with this
Nonnus, and others of his own Name; and that he never was a Monk, nor long
enough Deacon to bear that Title, from whence he takes occasion to censure a
Council held at Rome in the Year 324, which gave him the Name of Hyppolitus,
Deacon. He confirms the Observations of some Learned Men, that this Council was
never held under Sylvester.

He afterward makes many Remarks upon the Works of Hyppolitus, that are
engraved upon a Marble Chair at Rome, and which is one of the finest Monuments
of Antiquity. It was found in the Year 1551. in the Diocese of Tivoli; from
whence the Author infers, that Hyppolitus was not Bishop of Porto, at the Mouth
of the Tyber; for if it had been so, it is very probable this Monument would
have been found there, and not in the Diocese of Tivoli: It cannot be doubted,
but that the Marble Image of the Man that is sitting in this Chair, in
Hyppolitus, because, although his Name is not there, yet there appears all the
Titles of almost all his Works that the Ancients have attributed to him. M. Le
Moyne tells us, 'twas the Custom of placing these sort of Monuments in the
Temples, and that it was practiced both amongst the Heathens and Jews. They had
in the middle of their Temples upon Walls and Pillars, a great many
Inscriptions, and Historical Relations, that by the Holiness of the place, the
memory of past things might be the better preserved. 'Twas from such Monuments
that Sanchoniaten Contemporary with Gideon, took the greatest part of his
Memoirs, wherewith he composed his Book. He observes that he drew them (...),
from the Ammonean Letters that is from (...), from the Temples and Statues of
the Sun that the Hebrews called (...), upon which they writ the most remarkable
things that concerned the Eastern People.

The Third part of this Work, which is the Notes, is a distinct Volume, much
larger than all the Collections and Prefaces.

My Reader perhaps may wonder (says our Abridger) that I have so long neglected
to tell him. That the Famous Epistle of St. Chrysostom to Cesarius, is one of
the Pieces that M. Le Moyne has published. He so religiously observes to Print
it exactly according to the Manuscript, that he has given it without Points,
and without any Distinctions; but he designs in his Volume of Notes, which is
to follow to give it in a better form, and make it the most intelligible he
can. He proves it is a Work of St. Chrysostom's, and he says, he will discover
from whence, when, and by whom this Rare Piece is fallen into his hands. This
Work is considerable, because it appears contrary to the Opinion of
Transubstantiation, and I believe it would not have made so much noise as it
has done, if something that feel out at Paris some few Years ago had not given
the occasion of making Reflections upon it. The Affair happened when the
Learned M. Pigot Printed the Life of St. Chrysostom, writ by Paladius. He would
have added there amongst other little Pieces, this same Letter of his, written
to the Monk Cesarius; and some say, that it was ready for the Press, but he was
desired to Suppress it, and made to understand, unless he did so, he should
obtain no privilege for his Book, wherefore he did what they desired him. The
Protestants, who come to understand this Matter, have not failed to take notice
of it, as if the Publication of this Letter had been hindered only, because it
favored them. One of 'em has Printed a long Dissertation upon this Subject,
under this Title, St. Anastasii Sinaitae Anag^g^carum Contemplationum in
Hexaemeron liber 32 hactenus desideratus, cui praemissa est expostulatio de
Sancti Iohannis Chrysostomi Epistola ad Caesarium Monachum adversus Apollinarii
haeresin a Parisiensibus aliquot Theologis non ita pridem suppressa, Londini
1682, in 4 to. Now we shall speak to the Notes.

This Second Volume wholly filled with his Remarks, is as I have told you, very
large, yet its only upon the three first Pieces of the Collection, which are
the Epistle of St. Polycarp, that of St. Barnabas, and a Discourse on
Hyppolitus. There is above 15 or 16 to comment upon besides, little or great.
'Twould have been very pleasing if the Author had made Notes on them all; for
his Commentaries are filled with so much Learning and Judgment, that all
Ingenious Men that read 'em, receive advantage from them. It would be
impossible here to give a particular Accont of all the fine things in this
second Volume, wherefore we shall be content to give the World leave to judge
of the whole, by some of its parts.

The Title of St. Polycarp's Letter, by which it appears, that he and his
Priests, writ to the Philippians, gives M. Le Moyne a good opportunity to speak
of the difference between Ecclesiastics; for after having rejected the Opinion
of those that allege that as a Proof of the equality between Priests and
Bishops, he shows there was a difference in that time, but not so great as is
between the Ecclesiastics at this Day, since the Priests Consecrated Virgins,
even conferred Orders, performed the Chrism, gave their Opinions in Synods, and
had Seats like to the Bishops, which were called Thrones as well as theirs.
Here he takes occasion to reprehend Salmasius, who thought these words of
Eusebius, (...), signified Bishops that were Suffragans to a Metropolitan,
whereas he ought to be understood by it, (says our Author) Simple Priests, which
he proves also to have been called Antistites, which a Learned Man being
ignorant of fell into this oversight, and understood by it Antistitem secundae
sedis, the Patriarch of Constantinople. He proves by the Example of St.
Cyprian, that the Bishops writ conjoyntly with the Priests, to other Bishops
and Priests both together, and some time even with the Deacons. He Relates a
Letter of Constantine's the Emperor, wherein he speaks much upon it, because
it is directed to Miltiades Bishop of Rome, and to Mark; which is not
conformable to the Idea they have of the Pope's Preeminence; for its a little
too familiar, not only to write to him by himself, but also to associate him
with another that was only a simple Priest. The Author justifies its being read
Mark, contrary to the reading of a great many Learned Men; and he wonders, that
in the same Book where the great Salmasius, who has cited this Letter of
Constantine's against the Pretensions of the Court of Rome, should believe it
as false. This defect of Memory is more supportable than the Infidelity of this
Translator, who to disguise Constantine's directing to the Pope and to another
in the same Letter, has thus changed these words of the Original, (...). Nec
tuam Sedulitatem Latet.

The Author makes this Remark upon the word Sacerdos, a Sacrificing Priest;
that it was never given to the Ecclesiastics in the first or second Age, the
reason of which, he says, was because the Christians conforming themselves to
the practice of the Synagogues, and not that of the Temple of Jerusalem,
established Priests, Deacons, Bishops, etc. But not Sacrificers, or Sacrificing
Priests, by which he Convicts him of Imposture, who disguised himself under the
Name of Denis the Areopagite, and who affected to be called Sacerdos. He
concludes this Remark with Criticizing upon some Authorities that seem to be
contrary to this point.

Mr. Le Moyne as occasion offers it self, explains all obscure places, and
corrects the Errors; but he has a very handsome Quality, that is not very
common, for he treats those very civilly that are guilty of Mistakes, and very
often censures the faults, without naming the person. As he was very well
acquainted with Iudaick Antiquities, and the Eastern Tongues. So he has taken a
great many Etymologies from them, which has been unusefully sought for, both in
the Greek and Latin.

He is not satisfied only with clearing a great many Critical Points, but has
also engaged himself to defend our Mysteries, and the Divinity of the word
against a Heretic, which was so much the more dangerous, as beside his Heresy
he had Wit and Learning; he was not so uncivil and imprudent as some others who
have boldly published, it did not concern them, if what they affirmed was never
before known to the World. His Name was Sandius, he was wise enough to see
'twas the greatest Absurdity in the World to pretend that an Opinion was true,
that took birth only in these last Ages, or in case that it was true, it was
not worth the while to trouble the Church; for common sense evidently tells us,
that every Opinion that Christianity has past by for these Sixteen Ages is
unuseful for Salvation, and of none, or at most of very little importance. So
that when an Heretic is cunning, he puts off no opinion but under pretense of
its being founded upon some very ancient Doctrine; this was the craft of
Sandius, he applied himself very much to Ecclesiastical History, that he might
prove the Fathers of the three first Ages did not believe the Trinity, as it is
now taught, from whence he pretends to draw one of these Advantages, either
that Error prevailed in the Council of Nice, and that so things ought to be
reduced to their Primitive State, or that the Fathers of this Council made that
an Article of Faith, without which, their Predecessors burning with Zeal and
Holiness, had obtained the Glory of Paradise, and therefore by consequence
persons were not obliged to undergo the new Yoke that the Council of Nice would
have imposed upon the Conscience. Every one must be sensible that its the Duty
of the Orthodox to dissipate these Illusions, and the Author deserves praise
for undertaking the proof of the Divinity of the Son, by Passages of the
Ancients, whilst M. Wittichius, his Colleague, maintained the Divinity of the
Holy Ghost against the same Sandius.

I believe, that after having considered the proofs that M. Le Moyne brings,
there is few Men will be so Opinionative as to maintain, that the Fathers of the
three first Ages were of Acius's Opinion; for he relates many express and
formal Passages, wherein they maintained the Eternal Divinity of the Son of
God. He doubts not but what was said of Tiberius is true, viz. That he proposed
to the Senate the Apothesis of Jesus Christ, or taking him into the number of
the Gods. Tertullian, Eusebius, and St. Chrysostom relate it, but this last was
deceived when he said the Senate of Rome placed Alexander in the number of the
Gods; its very likely he took the Roman Senate for that of A^hens.

The Author Corrects a passage of Per^^ius's Translation of Justin Martyr, and
which Cardinal Bellarmin made use of to prove the worship of Angels. He shows
that such a worship was not meant in this passage, and that it must be pointed
according as Christopher Langus, and Sigismond Gelenus have pointed it: He
adds; that in the time of this Father the worship of Angels was not practiced
amongst the Christians. He very strictly examin's what was the true Opinion of
Paulus Samosatus, whereupon he takes occasion to explain the different Fortunes
of the Term Homousian.

I should be too tedious to give an account of the fine remarks he has made
upon the Measure of the Increase of Nile, that was kept as a relick in the
Temple of Serapis, and which the Emperor Constantine carried to the Church of
Alexandria. Mr. de Valois has happily corrected the Passage of Socrates where
this Translation is Copi'd* for whereas Christophorson and Musculus had
translated it thus, Constantine caused this measure to be removed to the Church
of Alexandria, his Translation says, that this Emperor Commanded Alexander who
was then Patriarch of Alexandria to place it in the Church. But in remarking so
exactly the Errors of others, he did not observe he committed on himself, when
he said, that Constantine at the same time, caused the Images of the False Gods
to be placed in the Church. Which is the sense he gives to the word (...),
which Sozomon makes use of. The Author shows how improbable it was that
Christians should put such abominable objects in so! Sacred a place, so that
the word (...) must signify, eithe the Standard or Ancient Titles of the Town.
The Idolaters murmuring against this Translation, Reported that Nile increased
more, but that they were deceived. For the People always imagined that upon the
change of Religion would follow strange marks of the wrath of Heaven; they
wished it out of spite, and yet were afraid of it, because of the unhappy
effects it might produce; and these two Passions made men very credulous; we
ought not however to think it strange that Providence very often makes use
thereof. The Christians had their part in the surprise if they believed that
Nile was sensible of it when Julian carried back to the Temple of Serapis, what
Constantine had taken from thence. The Conjectures of the Author are very fine
upon the Reason, which made Josephus cite a Second Book of Ezekiel, and upon
the sense of a difficult passage of the First Book of the Maccabee's Chap. 3.
verse. 48. where according to some Versions it is, That the Heathens sought
Copies of the Law to Paint their Idols by in. These conjectures are very
learned, as well as all that he says upon the Instruments of punishments, etc.
used amongst the Romans; from whence he takes occasion to explain many
obscurities of the Ancient Authors.

He says, that the Wild-Hony which St. John eat of in the Wilderness, was not a
kind of Manna, or Concrete Dew, but a true Honey made by Bees in the hollow
places of some Trees, as there are Ants in China and Tunquin which fly in great
Companies upon the Trees, and there make a kind of Wax or Gum, whereof the
Lacca, so well known to the Dyers, is made; it is also the chief Ingredient of
the Spanish Wax; he confirms his Opinion by the History of Jonathan, who found
Honey in a Wood, and refutes the Chemical Opinion of the Rabbi, who pretended
Jonathan only found Sugar there.

Upon which Mr. Le Moyne examines, whether Sugar was in use amongst the
Ancients, and says, That although they knew how to draw from certain Reeds a
Juice very agreeable to the Taste, yet they had not the Art of Taking,
Condensing, Whitening, and making it dry as we do now. Lucan speaks of this
Reed when he says, Quique bibunt tenera dulces ab arundine Succos.


Eratosthenes speaks thereof also in the 15th. Book of Strabo, and plainly
insinuates, that they sometimes baked this Juice, but 'twas a preparation very
different from ours. Those that allege this Verse of Stace, Et quas praecoquit
Ebufita Cannas, to prove that the Ancients made Sugar, did not observe that it
was corrupted, and that instead of Cannas, it must be read Caunus, which was a
kind of Figs that the Inhabitants of the Isle of Ebusus, made very excellent by
their manner of preparing them. As for the Sugar Mambu and Tabaxir, which the
Ancients had the knowledge of.

The Author shows 'twas a kind of Gum, which they made use of to sweeten their
Medicines, and that this Gum gathered together in the joints of certain Trees,
or else that 'twas the dew which Coagulated upon the boughs: He brings a
passage of Pliny which Favors this opinion, since in it one sees, that Sugar
is a Honey gathered upon Reeds white like Gum, which may be reduced to Powder by
the Teeth, larger than a Hazle-Nut, and which is used only in Medicines. Arrian,
Seneca, Galen, and Theophrastus have spoken of Sugar, either under its proper
name, or under that of the Honey of Canaan, but the Idea they give us of it only
resembles a thick juice either running from the Plant it self, or taken from
the Reed. We must therefore conclude with the Author that the Ancients knew not
the Sugar that we now have. He very Learnedly examins the Reasons how the Rabbi
come to commit that mistake; and mentions amongst other things the Scripture
observation, That as soon as Ioanathan had taken of this Honey his Eyes were
enlightened, which had probably Contributed thereto; for the Ancient Physicians
ascribed to their Sugar, a particular virtue of curing Eyes, as may be seen in
the second Book of Diosc^rdies, Chap. 104. He afterward speaks upon the Goat
Azazel, upon the dependences of this Mysterious Sacrifice, upon Hysop,
Circumsicion, etc. To extract from which subjects all that Merits observation,
would take up too great a part of this Volume; I shall therefore content my
self with relating these rich Treasures of Learning, and with the Thoughts of
St. Barnabas, That the number of the 318 Persons that Abraham Circumcised in
his House; was very Mysterious.

They were so accustomed in that time to expect the finding a Mystery in
Numbers, (according to the Platonists, Pythagorians, and Jews) that they were
persuaded from one to another that the Three Hundred and Eighteen Domestics of
Abraham were a Mystical Figure of the Crucifixion of the Son of God, because
that to make this Number they must use these three Letters of the Alphabet TIH.
The first whereof represents the Cross, and the other Two are the First
Syllable of Iesus's Name in the Greek Tongue. Our Age is so much reduced from
playing with words, and these Mystical Allusions, that they never use 'em; for
if we except a few contemplative Monks, there are none to be found who have
lost themselves in these sorts of Refinements. In the First Ages of the Church,
there was no such Custom, although there were few in this respect wiser than the
Jewish Doctors: It Is here that one may see the Mysteries of Numbers in their
greatest extent.

There were also some Fathers which pretended that the 318 Domestics of
Abraham with whom he overcame the Kings that had spoiled Sodom were a Figure of
the 318 Bishops of the Council of Nice. The Author shows in brief the Illusion
of the whole, and afterward tells us in what time they began to count by
Figures that are called Ciphers. He believes with the Generality of Learned Men
that we are obliged to the Sarazens for the Communication of these Notes* and
that they come originally from the Arabians, in which he dissents from the
Opinion of Mr. Vossius, and from his old Friend Mr. Huet, for whom with Reason
he Professes a very particular Friendship.

Scaliger was so persuaded of the Novelty of Ciphers, that he believed the
Celebrated Silver Medal of Marguard Speher was lately cast, as soon as he had
learnt there was seen on it these Numeral Figures 234, 235. There is four
different Explanations of this Medal in the 3d. Volume of Camerarius, Book 4.
It Is believed that Planudes who lived at the end of the 13th. Age, is the first
of the Christians that made use of Ciphers. The manner how Father Kircher
relates that they passed from the Indian Brachmans to the Arabians in the Ninth
and Tenth Age, and from the Arabians into Spain in the time of Alphonsus King
of Castile, who causing Astronomic Tables to be made, made use of those marked
with Ciphers; and in fine from Spain to Greece a little time after; this
manner, I say, is here abridg'd with some Critics of this Author. He concludes
that to be a pretty thought, but does not believe that the Arabians having
brought from the Indians this Invention, gave them the Glory of it, and amongst
other Reasons, founds his Opinion upon the great Conformity that he observed
between the Ciphers and Arabian Characters.

I shall omit what he says upon the Fast of the Sabbath, the shadow of Samuel,
upon the time that St. John had the Vision of the Apocalypse, and a great many
other Profane and Holy things, which would oblige me to give him great
Praises, did I not know him to be as Modest as Learned, which is to possess two
Qualities almost incompatible, and to which we may almost apply what a great
Wit once said concerning certain words ill, put together, viz. It Is I believe
very surprising to see others like them, for it is probable they were the first
and last of their kind. Nature seems not to have made these two things one for
the other, and those that can unite them make a more dangerous Rupture than
that of Nerva, who made the Romans sensible of a Republic Liberty under the
Government of an Emperor.

Nerva Caesar res olim dissociabiles miscuit
Principatum and Libertatem.
Tacit. in vit. Agrico. cap. 3. Illustrissimo Ecclesiae Principi, Armando
Ioanni de Rotondi de Biscaras, Episcopo and Domino Biterrensi, Abbati beatae
Mariae Cendracensis, Regi a Consiliis, etc. Historia Carmelitana Theologice
propugnata. Quaestio Theologica. Quis Prophetas facit Successores post se?
Ecclesiastici cap. 48.
I.
ELias Thesbites de habitatoribus Galaad, de linea Sacerdotali Aaren natus est
annis octo ante mortem Salomonis. Primo secundum aliquos Hebraeos, dictus est
Jaberschyth, verum ex acclamatione populi post interfectos Prophet as Baal
dicentis, Dominus ipse est Deus, vocatus est Elias. Isidorus vult statim a
nativitate sua Eliam dictum. Sobac aut Sabaccha fuit pater ejus, cui dum adhuc
Elias in utero matris gestaretur apparuerunt homines niveum habitum ferentes,
Ordinem Carmeliticum praesignantes, qui pusionem salutabant, deinde flammis
quasi pannis involvebant, a^ ipsum loco lactis igne pascebant. Arridet mihi
opinio valde probabilis, asserens Eliam in utero matris fuisse sanctificat^m,
decebat enim ultimi adventus praecursorem iisdem titulis ac honoribus insigniri
quibus praeeursor primi donatus est. De pueritia Eliae nihil habet Scriptura.
Asserunt tamen autores gravissimt, parentum and proprio sui ipsius voto
Nazarenum se exhibusse, and fuisse primum in veterilege qui deserta incoluit,
and monasticam in montibus vitam egit. Septem circiter annis commoratus est in
monte sancti Eliae juxta urbem Sydon, ubi anachoreticae vitae dedit initium:
deinde prope Jerusalem, post modum in Damasceno, deinceps iterum in Iudaea,
postremo in Carmelo, ubi Ordinis Carmelitarum fundamenta jecit. In rebus
divinis praeceptorem habuit Abiam Silonit^m in Collegio Galaad, ubi florebat
Samuelis institutum. Deinde ad compescendam imp. etatem Achab Regis Israel cui
Iesabel innupserat, evocatur a Deo, and frusira monitum Regem miraculis
coercet; and pro tuenda fide zelo accensus metuque mortis intrepidus, praelia
Domini contra Tyranni them praeliatur.

II.
Omnipotentiae Dei Vicarius in populos siccitatem and famem inducit. Dei jussu
ad torrentem Carith secedens corvo pascitur: eo loci ductis ab Angelis
Custodibus discipulis invisitur. Siccato torrente Sareptam contendit, viduae
filium suscitat, quem ex devotione matris sibi traditum erudit. Is fuit Jonas
qu^ deinceps in Prophetam evasit, primus Elianae Religionis alumnus, sed non
praecipuus, nam post interfectos Prophetas Baal; post miram immaculatae
conceptionis caeterorumque Beatae Virginis mysleriorum in nubecula parva
revelationem; post fugam; post subministratum ab Angelo cibum; post suavem Dei
visionem qua positus est in Monte Horeb; post stabilitam in Dei matrem
specialem devotionem, sancto dictante and mandante. Spiritu, Elisaeum filium
Saphat de Abelmeula xunit Prophetam pro se and designavit in generali
Praelatione totius Ordinis successorem. Multi erant jam conventus in Galgalis,
Bethel, Ierica, Carmelo, etc. in quibus Elias Discipulos suos ad omnem pietatem
instituerat, quos Elias visitavit, ut suos alumnos in vera fide and aspero
vitae eremitanae instituto confirmaret, ultimaque salutis and perfectionis
monita eis daret, and Elisaeum promulgaret successorem. Plurimi ex illis
spiritu prophetico noverant parentem suum in Paradisum subvehendum, unde
praeter Eliae voluntatem qui raptum suum humiliter celare volebat, ducti
desiderio videndi finem, longuiscule steterunt a Iordane, and duos sui Ordinis
Magistros abire passi sunt. Comque Elias and Elisaeus pergerent, and incedentes
sermocinarentur, ecce currus igneus, and equi ignei diviserunt utrumque, and
ascendit Elias per turbinem in coelum: Elisaeus autem, non vidit eum amplius,
scissisque vestibus orbitatem suam luxit, duplicis Fundatoris spiritus
successoret haeres.

III.
Merito damnatur a Patribus Origenes qui per terrestrem Paradisum, coelum vult
inteligi quo raptus est Paulus Apostolus, and quaecunque de consitis illic
arboribus, de fluviis rigantibus asserit Scriptura, totum id in allegoriam male
vertit: est enim sententia gravissimorum autorum accedens proxime ad fidem,
Enoch and Eliam nostrum translatos esse in Paradisum unde expulsus fuit Adam.
Refellendi sunt etiam qui asserunt post Adae peccatum Paradisum terrestrem
paulatim defecisse, and demum aquarum diluvii inundatione omnino submersum and
sublatum. Hujus opinionis Princeps inter Catholicos fuit, Augustinus Steuchus
Eugubinus qui vixit anno 1540. Verum stat traditio Ecclesiae, Enoch and Eliam
adhuc vivos ibi habitare, and usque ad tempora Antichristi reservari cum ad
confirmandam veritatem Evangelicam pro salute Electorum mitt^ntur. Interea
vitam agit Elias (...) Paradiso terrestri non qu^dem adeo felicem ac Sancti
quand^ peracto operis die, den (...) acceptu ^ sunt, vel adeo infelicem
qu^madmodum (...) qui nondum ex hac vita migrarunt, de qua tamen ille non
morte, sed trans^^tione migravit. Iam itaque aliquid meiius (...) quam in hac
vita posset, quamvis nonatum (...) quod ex hac vita recte gesta habiturus ^st.
Ita cum Divo Augustino communiter Theologi, quamvis Pr^copius Gazaeus,
Augustinus Engubinus, Catharinus, Salmer (...), and Barrados Eliam habituali.
and pe^enni visione Dei potiri asseverarint, quam ipsi per modum transeuntis
quandoque concedi censeo, sicut and dotes aliquas gloriosorum corporum dotibus
persimiles, licet non omnino easdem, immortalitas enim est essentialis corpori
glorioso, and certum est de fide Eliae corpus Antichristi crudelitate
adinventis atrocissimis suppliciis vexandum reservari.

IV.
Quamplurimi Doctores asserunt multoties Eliam cum Christo fuisse conversatum
non solum in monte Thabor dum transfiguraretur Dominus, sed etiam in Paradiso
terrestri: fluentibus enim 40 diebus post resurrectionem, illud tempori^ quod a
revisendis instruendis que Discipulis reliquum erat, impendit Christus Eliae
atque Enoch in Paradiso praesentia sua recreandis, instruendisque de omnibus
quae olim ipsis adversus Antichris^une usui esse pessunt. Et quia praeceptum
baptismi obligavit omnes homines qui eo tempore vivebant quo C^ristus legem
hanc tulit, quantumvis essent j^sti and sancti, sicut obligavit Apostolos and
^^atam Virginem, ita and obligavit Eliam and Enoch. undecertum mihi videtur
Patriarcham nostrum vel ab ipso Christo, vel ab Angelo, vel ab Enoch fuisse
baptizatum, cui etiam vicissim gratiam baptismatis rependit. Nec inde sequitur
caeteris omnibus Ecclesiae legibus illos fuisse obnoxios. Quod attinet ad
Sanctiss^num Eucharistiae Sacramentum, verisimile est non negari amico
salvatoris pro ipsius gloria fertiter quondam di^ micaturo, panem illum
coelestem qui plerunque indignis conceditur. Quin imo quidam opinati sunt Eliam
vel ab ipso Christo vel ab Angelis in Sacerdotem fuisse consecratum, nec res
est sine exemplo. Lubenter assentior opinioni illorum Theologorum qui asserunt
Eliam in statu in quo nunc est mereri, habet enim nunc omnes conditiones ad
merendum requisitas; atque hinc est quod infinitis propemodum meritis ad
excelsum evectus est fastigium Sanctitatis, unde merito tum in nova tum in
antigua lege a fidelibus, Sacellis and Ecclesits ipsi consecratis, orationibus
and Officiis ad ipsius honorem concinnatis ipsius patrocimum summopere fuit
concupitum. Nec defuit Propheta sanctus intercessionibus and praesentia
plerunque ad se confugientibus opitulari. Primus ipsum invocavit E^isaeus ut
pallio Eliae quod ceciderat ei, Iorda^^ (...) divideret.

V.
Deinde ex sacris antiqua legis Prophetis quamplurimi ipsum imitari in eodem
religioso and monastico vivendi instituto, ipsum colere, ipsum invocare
studuerunt. in^er quos numerare possumus Michaeam filium ^imsa; Abdiam qui fuit
ex tribus Och^siae quinquagenariis unus; Isaiam socerum Manasses Regis Judah;
Ieremiam de Tribu Levi Sacerdotem filium Helciae, Ezechielem (...) Buzi
Sacerdotem, quem quidam falso existimant eundem suisse (...) Pythagoram licet
vald^ sit probabile Pyth^goram Philo^phum etium fuisse Carmelitam, ^ra^ ^nim
natione Iudaeus, diu commoratus in monte Carmelo inter Religioses Carmelitas,
and ab illis edoctus est, sicque d^scipulos suos (...) ut victu, conversatione,
and vestitu Eliae discipulos omnino referrent. Cum iis censendus est etiam
Daniel Propheta de regio Iudaeorum sanguine, sicque novem saeculorum decursu
per Rechabitas, Essenos, Assidaeos, Nazarenos perpetuos Eliana religio transut
ad praecursorem Christi Domini Job. Baptistam. Florebant tunc temporis in
Gallia Religiosi nominatissimi Dru^^ae dicti quorum si vivendi genus, and
observantias regulares serio discusseris, reperies veros fuisse Carmelitas.
Praecipuam suam sedem habuere Carnuti. Interea vigebat in Baptistae discipulis
Spiritus Eliae, and primis Ecclesiae saeculis ante Sanctorum Antonii and
Basilii institutionem omnes Monachi Christiani non solum imitatione (hoc enim
diffitetur nemo) sed etiam haereditaria successione ab Essenis immediate at
direct, ipsisque mediantibus a filiis Prophetarum, and ab Elia ipsorum
Patriarcha processerunt, very alumni Religionis Carmelitanae tunc absque
interruptione ac divisione perseverantis in ejus domibus and bonis, Carmelitae
enim qui fuerant Apostolorum praedicatione ad Christi fidem conversi, partim
eorum Coadjutores effecti, ac per totum orbem cum eis dispersi, fideliter
Evangelium praedicaverunt, partim solitudini suae professionis assueti deserta
quaefiverunt. Primi simul cum fide Religionis institutum, and observantias
edocentes ubique terrarum vitae religiosae semina reliquerunt.

VI.
Alii vero in solitudinibus Palaestinae and Aegypti, praesertim in Thebaide
plurima prorsus innumerabilium Monachorum Collegia fundaverunt, in quibus
Carmelitana Religio perseveravit, and ad haec usque tempora pervenit, quamvis
post modum insignes viri surrexerunt qui servatis principalioribus observantiis
Carmelitanae Religionis, maxim tribus votis (cum quibus etiam in antiqua lege
sed non adeo perfect stetit illa nostra Religio) adjunctisque aliis, novas
Religiones tam in Orient, quam in O^cidente fundaverunt. Dicti sunt Patres
nostri in illa veluti secunda Religionis atate Therapeutae, Eremitae,
Anachoretae, Solitarii, Ascetae, Philosophi, ac Coenobitae. Et sicut in monte
Carmelo singulari Dei providentia etiam tempore Iudaicarum captivitatum, cum
totus pene populus in Assyrios fuit translatus, Carmelitae natali Religionis
solo potiti sunt, ita etiam in primis Ecclesiae saeculis usque ad annum 1290.
quo scilicet a Saracenis e Carmelo expulsi sunt, quem tandem nostri Discalceati
anno 1631. recuperarunt. Interdum floruerunt Carmelitae qu^mplurimi, ut Ioannes
Vigesimus quar^us Patriarcha Hierosolymitanus Praesul sanae and Orthodoxae
fidei, Author libri de Institutione Monacho^um qui habetur in Bibliotheca
Patrum tom. (...) quicquid in contrarium dicant antiquitatis nostrae aemuli,
qut etiam Monachis^um Cyrilli fabellam male arbitrantur, fuit enim vere
Carmelita, inde assumptus in Patriarcham Alexandrinum, and in Ephesiono
Concilio Caelestini primi legatus. S. Anastasius Martyr; Petrus Eremita; S.
Antonius Abbas; S. Hilarion; S. Basilius; S. Pachomius; S. Simplicianus
Magister S. Augustini; S. Romanus Monachus Director S. Benedicti; V. F.
Gerardus Institutor Hospitaliorum S. Iohannis Baptistae; S. Hieronymus
Ecclesiae Doctor; S. Honoratus Fund^^or Monasterii Lirinensis in
Gallo-Provincia; S. Cassianus Fundator Monasterii Massiliensis S. Victoris; S.
Palladius Scotor^^ Apostolus; Cyrillus Constantinopolitanus and alii pene
innumeri* Sed omit^ereno^ possum, Simonem Stochium cui Beata Virgo sacrum
Scapulare concessit* cujus dovotae g^^^atiani deinde privilegium Bu^lae
Sabbatinae voluit annexum, ut devotum sibi Ordinem se specialiter tueri
demonstraret, and per innumeros Carmelitanae, Propheticae, and Elianae vitae
Professores, ad finem usque mundi duratures os^enderet Patriarcham nostrum
Eliam esse, qui Prophetas facit successores (...) se.

Has Theses Deo dante and auspice Deipara Ordinis Patrona tu^bitur in Comitiis
Provincialibus Provinciae Tholosae Bitteris congregatis die -- Mensis Aprilis
anni 1682. hora secunda pomer^diana apud Carmelitas R. P. Philippus Teissier
Carmelita Sacrae Theologiae Doctor.

Sunt autem defensae hae Theses per triduum.

The Printed Copies of this Thesis are so very scarce (says our Abridger) I
could not get any of 'em, so that he was forced to make use of some Manuscript
Copies, two of which he confesses were very defective, and as ill Decyphered,
but happily one supplied what the other wanted, so that with the help of a Book
that he sometimes consulted, he says, he thinks he has avoided any considerable
faults that might have slipped into this Edition, either in respect to proper
Names, or any thing else. He says, that the Carmelite Fathers cannot complain
that he has falsified there Positions, for if it is not exactly conformable to
the Original, it is only in respect to a word or so, which signifies nothing to
the Affair it self. The Book that assisted him was Entitled Elias Thesbites,
sive de rebus Eliae Prophetae Commentarius, in Quarto, Printed at Paris 1631.
It is full of Learning, Reading and Curious Enquiries; but there are many
Fancies and Chimera's in it as well as in the Thesis of Beziers. They ought not
to permit that such things be publicly maintained as constant Truths, for the
least Advantage that the Protestants would draw from thence is, that it plainly
appears that under the Benefit of Tradition, they maintain and deny what they
please: The Incredulous take a great advantage from thence to insult over
Faith, and it is certainly Pernicious to Religion to introduce so many Fabulous
Stories. Permit me (says our Abridger) to cite here a Thought of Mr. Rohault's,
that Celebrated Philosopher, whose Posthumous Works were Printed by the care of
his Father in Law, who lived but a little after this Edition. He says, in the
Preface to his Treatise of Phisicks that nothing has prodoced more unhappy
Dispositions in Scholars, than to see Those who publicly maintain any Doctrine
whatsoever, always Triumphing over those that endeavor to prove the contrary,
so that upon their Accounts all things pass only for probabilities. They look
not on Study as a means to discover new Truths* but as a Sport for them to
Exercise their Wits upon, the end of all which is only so to confound Truth
with Falsehood by some subtility, that they may equally maintain both without
ever appearing to be convinced by any Argument, how unreasonable soever the
Opinion may be that they maintain. And it is in effect the general Success of
all Public Actions, where often in the same Pulpit, Opinions are Alternatively
delivered perfectly contrary, and equally triumphing, without any Tenet being
the better cleared, or Truth the more Established. I don't think (continues he)
that such Persons as would defend all the Propositions maintained by the
Carmelite Friars as true, are very proper to Convert Socinians.

Isaaci Vossii Variarum Observationum Liber, at London, 1685. in Quarto.
MR. Vossius begins this Book with a Discourse upon the greatness of the
Ancient Roman City, upon which he has several Thoughts which appear incredible
to many Men; for he says, That in the time of Augustus, the Walls were above
thirty thousand Paces round, although they enclosed not that part of the City
that was situated upon the Confines of Tyber, which contained twenty thousand
Paces. And if so, the Circumference of Rome would be above fifty thousand Paces
without the Suburbs. Our Author in taking them into the Computation, found that
the whole contained 72 thousand Paces, in so much that its Area or Content was
greater by 3/11 than that of Babylon, which was a square City of sixty thousand
Paces about. Rome appears to us already of an excessive greatness, but what
would it be if we added to it that part beyond the Tyber, which has not yet
been counted? Because they did not formerly look upon it as a part of the City.
The Palace of Nero encompassed Rome on that side; and it was of so prodigious
an extent, that Mr. Vossius did not believe that there was then any City in
Europe so large. He durst not say positively that the Quarter on that side the
River extended even to the Ocriculum for the space of 36 thousand Paces; but he
shows, that it took up much Land upon the Ianicule, the neighboring Mountains,
and along the way of Flaminius, which being that whereby Men entered in Triumph
into the City, 'twas necessarily full of Houses.

He proposes some considerable Difficulties, and answers them very learnedly.
He says, amongst other things, that the Walls of Rome must be distinguished
from the Pomaerium, which being at first without the City, was afterward one
part of it within the Walls, and the other without; because that those that
enlarged the Walls, was also obliged at the same time to enlarge the Pomaerium,
the Augures so managed the matter, that all which had this quality before
preserved it self. He also says, That when they made their City bigger, they
proportionably removed certain places, without taking from them their Ancient
Names. For Example, the Grove of the Muses, and the Cave of Egeria, or Numa,
was often removed, being once but a little distance from the Gate of Capena,
which in the time of this King was not very far from the middle of Rome. But
after a while this Grove and this Cave were found at Aricia, near the outmost
parts of the City, fifteen thousand Paces from the place where the Gate of
Capena anciently stood. This Observation may serve for an Answer to a Passage
in Pliny, where it is said, That Rome was limited at the East by the Caprice of
Tarquin the Proud; for if any would infer from thence, That the Limits of the
Town were only distant from the Center about two thousand Paces, he may be
answered, That this distance which was effectively so once, is so increased in
proportion to the enlargement of Rome; because the Monument which bears the
Name of Tarquin, was always extended to the utmost bounds of the City. Our
Author adds, That it is vainly alleged, that there is no Trace left at this Day
of the prodigious Bulk of Rome, for (says he) if one would find any Marks of
it, he must dig sixty foot deep, and to find any of the Ruins of Nineveh or
Babylon, which were built upon soft Foundations, he must dig two hundred foot
deep.

What he says afterward, is not less common, viz. He brings a long List of the
numberings of the Roman People from the time of Servius Tullius, to the Year of
Rome 667. The first Account gives 130000 Citizens, that of the Year 667 affords
above 46000. In respect of the Inhabitants, it is hard to give a positive
determination, because they were never reckoned; but our Author affirms they
were of a far greater number than Lipsus believed; for if the proportion
between the Slaves and Citizens, was the same as betwixt those of Rome, and
Athens, where for 20000 Burgesses there were 400000 Slaves, it would follow,
that Rome contained 8000000 of Slaves, a greater number than any Kingdom of
Europe whatsoever has in it. He assures us in another place, That before the
Tyranny of Sylla, the City of Rome by it self had as many Inhabitants in it, as
the Moiety of Europe has at this day.

But to the Computation he brings, he supposes, that the City of Paris, and
that of London, joined together would fill an Area of six thousand Paces
Square. And that the City of Rome, with its Suburbs, and that Quarter beyond
Tyber, would take up twenty times a greater Square than those six thousand
Paces. He supposes also, that Rome was at least as well Peopled as Paris and
London, and grounds his Opinion upon the Prodigious height of the Houses, as
appears by Augustus taxing them at 70 foot apiece; Now we may well suppose here
with those who are not carried away with the Multitude in their Computation,
that there are not more than six hundred thousand Inhabitants in each of those
Cities that I have named. In another place he is not so liberal, he allows only
that number to two Cities joined together, he concludes this following
Proposition, That there was in Rome fourteen Millions of Inhabitants, a Number
(says he) that the three most Populous Cities of Europe will not supply us with.

For after having related many fine things upon the manner how Rome fell to
decay, upon the greatness of Babylon, Nineveh, Thebes in Egypt, Alexandria,
Carthage, Cairo, and some Cities of China, thus he divides the different
Nations of Europe; he gives to Spain, two Millions of Inhabitants, to France
five Millions, to Italy, to the three Isles of Sicily, Corsica, and to Sardinia
two Millions, to Great Britain and Ireland two Millions, to the Low Countries
two Millions, to Germany, Bohemia, and Hungary five Millions; to the Estates of
the King of Denmark, excepting Norway, four hundred thousand, to the Estates of
Sweedland and Norway 600000, to the Estates of Poland, a Million and an half,
to Turkey, etc. five Millions and an half, adding as he goes along all Muscovia
to Europe, and supposing 3000000 of Inhabitants in Muscovia, from whence it
follows, That all Europe has not above thirty thousand persons Inhabitants.

He does not believe that if we should join the Inhabitants of Africa to
America, they would amount to an hundred Millions, but that Asia is more
populous; for although the War with the Tartars has destroyed at least an
hundred Millions of the Chinese, yet there remains above three hundred Millions
of Inhabitants, tho principal part whereof are in the Eastern Regions, and in
the Isles. He cannot determine of the Southern parts, but supposes that all the
persons in the World do not exceed 500000000. He adds that one might place 'em
all standing on a Superficies, which contained a German League in length, and
as much in breadth, giving to each person a Foot square, from whence he
concludes, that Lucan had great reason to say, that Rome would contain all
Mankind.

-- Urbem Populis victisque frequentem
Gentibus and generis, si coeat turba, capacem
Humani. --
For according to his Calculation, the Ground of this City contained at least
twenty German Leagues square, which divided between five hundred Millions of
Men, would allow to each person twenty Foot square. Mr. Vossius is of opinion,
that the World is much diminished, and has lost a great part of her
Inhabitants; he believes there were formerly more Men in Sicily, than there are
now in Sicily and Italy too; and that the number of Persons was greater in
Athens only, than now it is in all Greece, which is probable enough, and
therefore we cannot dispute it: But when he allows Paris but Three hundred
thousand persons, and to Holland but Five hundred and fifty thousand, Four
hundred and fifty to the Cities, and an Hundred thousand to the Country, he is
very far from multiplying upon the matter: And when he speaks of China, he
thinks he cannot number too many. He believes that in the last breaking in of
the Tartars there were in China an Hundred and seventy Millions of Inhabitants.
He supposes the Town of Hancheu (for so it ought to be called, and not Quinzai,
as in some corrupted Copies) was inhabited with near twenty Millions of people,
without reckoning the Suburbs; and with taking them in, with more than all
Europe besides, and that it was larger without the Suburbs, than Rome was with
them. When he speaks of that Country, the Men cost him nothing, but he is
afraid that all the Europeans will complain of his division, without excepting
even the Spaniards, although he has been pretty bountiful to them.

What he says of the Manners and Wit of the Chinese, is admirable; they keep no
Memoirs of their Warlike Princes, and reserve their Elogies for the Peace
Makers and Righteous. They never delighted in Conquests, unless the desire of
living under so wise a Government, invited by their Neighbors to submit; but
they constrained none, being only concerned, if men who wanted this happiness,
refused to participate with them.

They acknowledge none as Gentlemen, but Men of Learning; it is derogatory
amongst them, and reduces them into a Plebean state, to forsake this
profession. The Counselors and Favorites of the Prince, are all Philosophers,
and when he commits a fault, they reprehend him with so much Liberty and
Freedom, that the Prophets took not more in respect to the Kings of Judah. If
they don't make use of this Privilege, the People censure them, and look upon
'em as weak Men, and degenerate from the Courage of Confutius, and other
Philosophers, who have retired from the Court in a time of Tyranny. They
reproach them to their face with Cowardice, and say that they are neither
Philosophers, nor Men of honor, since for their own private Interests, they
abandon the good of the Public. As for their Wit, Mr. Vossius believes they
surpass all the World, and that after having learnt from 'em the Compass,
Printing, and many other admirable things, he doubts not but there remains much
finer Inventions amongst 'em, than we have borrowed of 'em: He tells us
wonderful things of their skill in Physic; and above all their Art, in knowing
the Diseases by the differences of the Pulse. They are so admirable in that
respect, that they look not upon a Man to be a good Physician, if after having
felt diverse places of the sick persons Arm, he does not without asking
Questions, discover from what part of the Body the Distemper proceeds, as well
as the nature of it. It Is very pleasant to read all the curious things that Mr.
Vossius has related upon this subject, and upon the Ability of this Nation in
all the noble Arts. He pretends that they made use of Powder and Cannons many
Ages before the Europeans were acquainted with them; and adds to it, the
Original and Progress of Powder amongst the people of Europe.

The other Pieces which compose Mr. Vossius's Works, are not less worthy of
particular observation; but having been long upon this, there is a necessity of
being brief upon what follows:

1. He treats upon the Constructions of Galleys very learnedly.

2. On the Reformation of Longitudes. The Author maintains that the
observations of Eclipses have more confounded this matter than any thing
whatsoever, because they have not sufficiently regarded either Refractions or
Shadows.

He corrects many errors that concern the extent of the Mediterranean Sea,
which has been rendered much less than really it is; he shows also, that the
like faults have been committed upon many Eastern parts of Asia, and says, that
the dispute betwixt the Portuguese and Spaniards, touching the Division of the
New World, has produced strange Alterations both in Longitudes and Geography.

3. He speaks of Navigation into the Indies and Iapan, by the North: this
Treatise contains many curious and useful observations.

4. He examines the cause of the Circles, which appear sometimes about the
Moon: Upon which he has some thoughts perfectly new; for he believes these
Circles proceed from the Mountains in the Moon, because they produce their
Images reverst in the Air, that is under them, which he maintains by some
experiments. Amongst others he relates this, that some English Merchants, being
on the Pick of Tenariff, observed, that as soon as the Sun arose, the shadow of
this high Mountain convered not only all the Isle of Teneriff, but also the
great Canarie, and all the Sea, even unto the Horizon, where the top of the
Pick seemed to appear reverst, which sent back its shadow into the Air. He
tells us a very surprising thing, viz. that the shadow of this Mountain
extended as far as the Levant, to the place even from whence the Light came,
since the great Canarie, which is at the East of this Pick, is covered with the
shadow. What he adds concerning the Sea between this Mountain, and the grand
Canaries, is very remarkable; for he says, it appears not larger than the
Thames, although there is fourteen Leagues between these two Isles.

5. He treats of the fall of heavy Bodies, and explains it according to the
Cartesians, by the Diurnal Motion of the Earth upon its Center; but establishes
a Principle unknown to Mr. Des Carts, viz. That a Body which is moved
Circularly, approaches nearer to the Center than is possible when its Axis is
perpendicular to the Horizon* But if its Axis is parallel to the Horizon, then
it is removed from the Center as far as it is possible. He relates an Experiment
that he says, was made some times ago, and which is quite contrary to Mr.
Hugens's, given us by Mr. Rohault; for whereas Mr. Hugens says, that the
Particles of Spanish Wax dipped in a Vessel full of Water which is turned upon
a Pirot, are removed farther from the Center and soon arrive to the extremities
of the Vessel, Mr. Vossius has found out that Balls of Leed and Iron thrown
into a Vessel of Water which is moved circularly, tend toward the Center of
the Vessel, whereas Bowls of Wood which float upon the Surface of the Water
make toward the sides of it.

The rest of the Book is a Treatise upon the Oracles of the Sybils, which Mr.
Vossius published in the Year 1672. There Is also the Answer that he made
sometime after to the Objections of Mr. Simon scattered throughout his Critical
History of the Old Testament, and a Reply to that part of the Discourse which
concerns him in Father Simons's Disquisitiones Criticae de var^s Bibliorum
Editionibus.

Historia Plantarum, etc. Or, Ray's History of Plants, Tom. 1st. London 1686.
SInce Baubin published his History of Plants, and Parkinson his Botanick
Theater, a great Number of Plants have been discoved, that appeared not in
their Collection. Several Authors have described many that were unknown to the
Botanists that lived before them: But no one yet has ever gathered them
together in one Piece like our present Author. who has also used much more
Method than has yet been observed on the same Subject.

He divides Plants into Genders and Kinds, and gives an account of those that
resemble them in their principal parts, as in their Flower, Seed, and Films,
which cover them.

He thinks this Method is the most Natural and easy to attain in a little time
to the knowledge of Botanicks; and doubts not but any one that will apply
himself to this study, may without the help of a Master by following these
Rules to accomplish it, and be well acquainted with Plants. If any Plant should
be found which comes not under these Rules which are ordinarily known, there is
no more to be done than to compare it with these General Distinctions which are
given to priecipal Genders, which it is necessary to learn by heart. He
immediately tells us to what Gender it belongs, and descending to the Species
not contained in this Gender, he examins to what other it does belong, by these
Essential marks whereby these Species are distinguished, and thus, in fine, the
Species of Plants which they contain may be discovered by this particular
description. But if it is plain that none of these descriptions agree, that then
this was left out of the Collections which former Botanists have hitherto made.

It Is not that our Author believes that he has found out a Method so very just
and exact that there ar^ not Plants which are not reducible to the Kinds and
Species observed in this Work; the prodigious variety of Nature and the
inexhaustible Riches which it prostrates to our Eyes, cannot be comprehended in
certain Limits. There are almost infinite Combinations betwixt the diverse
proprieties of Plants which necessarily constitute Anomolies and Exceptions
from those Rules which are given to distinguish the different sorts; the Form
of the Seed and the Film which covers it is not so certain an Index as is
believed, to distinguish Plants, since some which are centainly of the same
Species are different enough in that, as appears by many Examples which Mr. Ray
produces; there is a kind of Cummin whose Seed is hairy, although in other things
it is like other Cummin Seeds.

At the beginning of the Book there is a General Table, where our Author has
briefly observed the differences by which he has distinguished the Plants into
diverse kinds and Species, which its necessary to know, in order to discover the
Plants whose description one would learn. This Volume contains XVIII Books,
whereof the last treats de herbis flore papilionaceo, sive leg uminosis. In
comparing this Title with the Table which we have spoke of, we may conjecture
the first Tomb contains above half of the Work.

As to what regards the matter, one may Judge by the Title, which we have no
need to repeat here; we shall only remark that there are several very exact
Descriptions of Plants which are particular to the Britanick Islands which
foraign Botanists have not discovered: What is chiefly wanting, is the Figures
of Plants, which it is not always easy to remember by a bare description of
'em. Figures in Wood are commonly too gross, although there are some pretty good
in the Ancient Botanists, as Mathiolus of Venice; and these in Copper Cuts cost
too much; this is the cause that there were no Figures in this Edition. But the
Booksellers, who are at the Expenses of what is done, promise to add 'em very
quickly, and to publish every Classis of Plants in their Order, provided they
can do it by way of Subscription.

It Is not amiss to Advertise you, that the Method according to which Mr. Ray
has disposed Plants is in 80 Entitled Methodus Plantarum nova brevitatis and
perspicuitatis causa Synoptice in Tabulis exhibita, cum Notis Generum tum
Summorum tum Subalternorum Characteristicis Observationibus nonnullis de
seminibus Plantarum and Indice copioso. Authore I-Raio, etc. Amst. apud
Waesbergios, 1681.

There Is also a Second Edition of another Book of the same Author touching this
matter. The Title of it is, Catalogus Plantarum Angliae, and Insularum
adjacentium, tum indigenas tum in Agris passim cultas complectens. In quo
praeter Synonyma necessaria, facultates quoque summatim traduntur, una cum
observationibus and experimentis novis medicis and Physicis. Editio secunda,
Plantis circiter quadraginta sex and observationibus aliquam multis auctior,
Oper. J. Raij Londoni.

Besides that this Edition is more correct than the former, there are added
Three Hundred Plants and Sixteen sorts of Fungus which were omitted through
mistake or oversight. He has put the Remarks which were at the end, every one
in his own place, and has added something new in many places. Besides, there
are two Figures in this Edition where were not in the other, one is, Fungus
Phaloides, and the other Pentaphylloides Fructicosum. Such as would know what
Plants are added may find 'em in the Leaf following the Title Page, where also
is another Index at the end, of the Virtues of Plants, and of the Distempers
which they remedy.

FINIS.
AN Alphabetical Table, COMPREHENDING The Contents of The Five First Volumes of
the Athenian Gazette. The Contents of The Five Supplements to 'em. The Contents
of The Young Student's Library; and of The Contents of The History of the
Athenian Society (by a Gentleman who got Secret Intelligence of their whole
Proceedings.)
Which Several Volumes COMPLETE the Entire Set for the Year 1691.
Note, That at this Mark [*] begins the Contents of the Five First Volumes of
the Athenian Gazette: At this Mark [] the Contents of the Five Supplements to
'em: At this Mark [] The Contents of the Young Students Library: And at this
Mark [] The Contents of the History of the Athenian Society.
A.
[*]
AVthor in League with penny post, v. 1. n 2. q. 1. Alexander, or Julius
Caesar, which greatest? v. 1. n. 5. q. 2. An liceat mulieribus bellum gerere?
v. 1. n. 6. q. 4. Angels fall, the cause on it? v. 1. n. 9. q: 6. Abdication,
the meaning of the word, v. 1. n. 10. q. 1. Athenian Gazette, why changed into
the name of Mercury? v. 1. n. 12. q. 1. Astrology sinful, censured by
Scripture, etc. v. 1. n. 14. q 5. Apple, whether real, our Parents eat in
Paradise? v. 1. n. 15. q. 6. Astrologers acknowledge the Sun to be a Body of
Fire, v. 1. n. 16. q. 6. Animal, what nourishes it, v. 1. n. 20 q. 6. Antimony,
how does it emit a virtue, v. 1. n. 23. q. 12. Allegiance to the present
Government; v 1. n 23. q. 13. Age, why generally desired, v. 1. n. 24. q. 1.
Angels, when their first existence, v. 1. n. 28. q. 2. Adam, how could all sin
in him? v. 1. n. 30. q. 3. Adam, and Eve, whether they had Navels? v. 2. n. 1
q. 12. Adams fall, when? v. 2. n. 1. q. 18. Athenians, whether Batchelors? v.
2. n. 3. q. 1. Adultery, what satisfaction it requires? v. 2. n. 3. q 2.
Abortive, whether capable of a future state? v. 2. n. 4. q. 5. Adam and Eve,
where had they Needles, v. 2. n. 5. q. 9. Apprentice, whether forced to serve
the Widow, v. 2. n. 5. q. 11. Apprentice, whether loses his Gentility, v. 2. n.
9. q. 2. Ague, how cured, its return again, v. 2. n. 11. q. 1. Atheists, why
apt to swear by God, v. 1. n. 12. q. 2. Aposthume on the left Thigh, v. 2. n.
12. q. 6. Atheist in Bedford, v. 2. n. 12. q. 8. Auction of young Ladies, v. 2.
n. 13. q. 1. Angels, why painted in petticoats? v. 2. n. 14 q. 4. Aged man,
whether possible to recover his vigor, v. 2. n. 16 q 4. Athenians, will they
maintain what they assert, v. 2 n. 17. q. 12. Athenian Project, how long will
it continue? v. 2. n. 17. q. 13. Acquaint* with the Athen, how to, v. 2* n. 18.
q. 4. Accident following the finding of Money, v. 2. n. 20. q. 6. Acumen,
Ingenium and Sal, which signifies wit, v. 2. n. 14 q. 13. Animals, whether
their blood, etc. v. 2. n. 24. q. 19. Apostles, did they know Salv. v* 2 n. 26.
q. 10. Adam, had he stood, would, etc. v. 2. n. 26. q. 12. Abraham, the Hist.
of the Ang. v. 2. n. 27. q. 7. Adam, did he lose the Image of G. v. 2. n. 29.
q. 16. Adam, was he a Giant? v. 2. n. 30. q. 4. Aaron, did he make the Calf, v.
2. n. 30. q, 6. Amazon^s, whether there be any? v 3. n 2. q. 7. Astronomers,
can they know the bigness of the Sun, v. 3. n. 2. q. 8. Armies, when engaged,
does God fight for one. v. 3. n. 6. q. 1. Armies seen in the Air, v. 3. n. 6.
q. 6. Arts and Sciences, how many may be attained? v. 3. n. 9. q. 1. Atheism,
who its first founder, v. 3. n. 9. q 4. Ark, what became of it after the fl. v.
3. n. 9. q. 10. Adam, whether he would have multiplied Children, v. 3. n. 10 q.
4. Antipathies in nature, v. 3. n. 11. q. 2. Angel, whether one makes a
Species, v. 3. n. 11. q. 3. Alderm. in the City, 7 Quest. in one, v. 3. n. 12.
q. 1. Athenian, whether their credit. v. 3. n. 13. q. 4. Adul. whether the Laws
against it, v. 3. n. 13. q. 5. Adam and Eve, why they sewed Fig Leaves
together, v. 3. n. 17. q. 6. Atheist and Jew, how will you prove the Scripture
to 'em v. 3. n 18. q. 2. Angels, whether they move, v. 3. n. 20. q. 1. Ambergr.
and Musk how produced, v. 3. n. 21. q. 8. Animal, which is the happiest, v. 3.
n. 25. q. 1. Adam's Fall, was it on the day of his Creation? v. 3. n. 26. q 4.
Adam, did he sin more than once, v. 3. n. 30. q. 5. Adam, if he had not sinned,
had he been Immortal? v. 3 n. 30. q. 8. Angels, how many fell at first? v. 3.
n. 30. q. 9. Adam, was he a perfect Man, and Eve taken out of his side, v. 4.
n. 5. q. 5. Apparitions to warn a Man to repent of a crime, v. 4. n. 7 q. 1.
Apparition in Scotland, v. 4 n. 7. q. 7. Apparitions, 4 Rel. concerning 'em, v.
4. n. 10. q. 1. Apparitions instanced in several, throughout. v. 4. n. 10.
Adam, had he stood, would the World increase as now, v. 4. n. 15. q. 4.
Athenians, would they not oblige the World by Artificial Rarities, v. 4. n. 7.
q. 7. Abraham's Age, how reconciled? v. 4. n. 11. q. 9. Affronts offered me,
how shall I ^^venge 'em? v. 4. n 19. q. 6. Apparitions, a large relation, v. 4
n. 20. q. 1. Affidavits of several about Appar. v. 4. n. 20 q. 21. Apparition
to a Person of Quality, v. 4. n. 22. q. 2. Apparition of a Grandmother, by the
Church door, v. 4. n. 22. q. 3. Apoplexy, which caused Dumbness, v. 4. n. 22.
q. 4. Afflicted in Body, Medic. in vain, v. 4. n. 24. q. 3. Atheism exposed, v
4. n. 24. q. 7. Angels, how can they be said to eat, as in Lot's case, v. 4. n.
28 q. 4. Athenian, Society, have they ever a Poet among 'em, v. 5. n. 1. q. 1.
Anabaptist, a word to 'em, v. 5. n. 5. q. at the end. Apprentice at
Cripplegate, a strange Relation, v. 5. n. 6. q. 1. Apostles Creed, when
Compiled, v. 5. n. 7. q. 10. Athenian Mercury, whether Writ by one Man, v. 5.
n. 7. q. 12. Ancients, whether they knew the Mariners. Compass, v. 5. n. 7. q.
13. Angel that appeared to Balaam, v. 5. n. 10. q. 2. Anabaptist, why are they
vilified, v. 5. n. 26. q. 17. Angels, are there a perfect equality between 'em,
v. 5. n. 28. q. 2. Anabaptists last Book, remarks upon it, v. 5. n. 30. q. 1.
Anabaptists Postscript, remarks on it, v. 5. n. 30.
[]
ANimals, whether any have Reason, 1 Suppl. p. 26. Art, which is the most
necessary of 'em, 2 Suppl. p. 27. Art of Divining, 2 Suppl. p. 28. Abortion, to
procure it, is it Murder? 5 Suppl. p. 15. q. 12. Arminianism, or
Antinomianism, 5 Suppl. p. 24. q. 23. Athenian Project, a full account of it, 5
Suppl. p. 27.
[]
ANtiquity and Original of the Points, Vowels and Accents that are placed to
the Hebrew Bible, in 2 Parts, p. 241. Advice to Young Students in Divinity --
p. 241. Animadversions on the various Editions of the Bible, by the Athenian
Society, p. 291. An Abridgment of Universal History, p. 105. Altings Works, p.
145. Art of Navigation demonstrated by Principles, and confirmed by many
Observations, drawn from Experience, p. 233. Anatomical Bibliotheque, p. 414
Art of Preaching the Word of God, containing the Rules of Christian Eloquence,
p. 430
B.
[*]
BEardless Men, the cause on it, v. 1. n. 3 q 3. Beasts, how they came into the
Islands -- v. 1. n 4. q. 1. Babel, Tower, what was the height, etc. of it, v.
n. 14. q 4. Beauty, real, or imaginary, v. 1. n. 18. q* 1. Babels builders,
Languages confounded, v. 1. n. 19. q. 3. Beasts in the Ark, v. 1. n. 20. q. 11.
Bodies, what Matter shall they have in the other World, v. 1. n 23. q. 10.
Bottle let into the Sea, v. 1. n. 26. q. 7. Brothers, two born together, v. 1.
n. 29. q. 4. Burnet's Theory of the Earth: about Peter, v. 1. n. 29. q. 9.
Buggs, their Cause, and Cure, v. 2. n. 1. q. 2. Balaam's Ass, what Language it
spoke, v. 2. n. 1. q. 8. Bleeding, an Experiment about it, v. 2. n. 4. q. 2.
Bodies deformed, what remedy. v. 2. n. 5. q. 1. Baths, why is the Water more
Hot, v. 2. n. 5. q. 10. Breath, why does it blow cold, v. 2. n. 12. q 4.
Bullet-falling from the Ship, v. 2. n. 12. q. 11. Bees, a Swarm of them in
Cheapside, v. 2. n. 15. q. 4. Basilisk, is there any such Creat. v. 2. n. 15.
q. 10' Bashfulness, the cause of it, v. 2. n. 16. q. 3. Burning-glass, why it
contracts the Sunbeams, v. 2. n. 17. q. 5. Bodies, when taken out of their
graves, has the Soul, etc. v. 2. n. 23. q. 7. Barrenness, why counted a Curse,
v. 2. n. 27. q. 1. Being of God, v. 2. n. 27. q. 12. Born Poor, or Rich, which
best, v. 2. n. 28. q. 9. Blockhead, Why have one of ten, v. 2. n. 29. q. 6.
Birds, have they any government, v. 2. n. 29. q. 10. Bible, how an ordinary
capacity may know it, v. 2. n. 30. q. 9. Bully of the Town, drew in a young
Lady, v. 3. n. 10. q. 3. Brutus, and the rest, whether they did ill in killing
Caesar, v. 3. n. 12. q. 9. Banter, how far inconsistent with Wisdom? v. 3. n.
12. q. 9. Buggs, why bite one more than another? v. 5. n. 13. q. 6. Battles,
why so few killed in 'em? v. n. 1. q. 2. Brother, how far obliged to conceal
his brothers Money, v. 35. n. 16. q. 3. Body, what matter will it be made of, in
the other world? v. 3. n. 17. q. 3. Body, what physical alteration made in it
by the Fall. v. 3 n. 17. q. 5. Brown in his Religio Medici, v. 3. n. 20. q. 6.
Bezoar, what account can you give, v 3. n. 21. q. 7. Birds, Tom. Tit the least,
v. 3. n. 23. q. 10. Beard, why the hair grows gray v. 3. n. 24. q. 10. Born
with Cawls, what signifies it? v. 3 n. 25 q. 10. Bodies, what befell those that
perished in the Deluge? v. 3. n. 30. q. 10. Balaam's Ass, what sex was it? v.
3. n. 30. q. 12 Bees, how they make that hum. v. 4. n. 2. q. 12. Baptism of
Infants, a whole Mercury about it, v. 4. n. 14. Baptism, whether in the room of
Circumcision, v. 4. n. 14. q. 1. Baptism of Infants, what Practice and Grounds
for it v. 4. n. 14. q. 2. Baptism of infants, is it found in Scripture? v. 4.
n. 14. q. 3. Books ordered to be given at Fun. v. 4. n. 15. q. 1. Body drowned,
why not found in fourteen days after? v. 4. n. 15. q. 2. Baptism of Infants
further ass. v. 4. n. 18. through. Brothers born two in one, had they two
Souls? v. 4 n. 28. q. 2. Body while Tenantable, the Soul may separate without
Death, v. 4. n. 30. q. 6. Brimmer, is there any deceit in it? v. 5. n. 1. q 4.
Branches and Heads to instruct Children, v. 5. n. 3. q. 2. Balaam a Moabite,
how could he understand his Ass? v. 5. n. 5. q. 3. Blood, how circulates ^'th'
Body? v. 5. n. 7. q. 5. Bodies of living Creatures, why without putrefaction?
v. 5. n. 10. q. 4. Brother, may he marry his Sisters Daughter? v. 5. n. 13. q.
3. Bowing at the Name of Jesus, whether sinful? v. 5. n. 16. q. 4. Bowing
toward the Altar, its Original, v. 5. n. 16. q. 5. Baptism of Infants proved
in several Mercuries, v. 5. n. 19. Arg. 1. Baptism from the Greek Word Baptizo,
v. 5. n. 23. q. 27. Baptism of Infants proved in answer to twenty three
Questions, v. 5. n. 25. q. 1. Baptize thee in the Name, etc. v. 5. n. 26. q. 8.
Baptis. of Inf. no prom. nor threats, v. 5. n. 26. q. 9. Bap. of Inf. no where
in Scripture, v. 5. n. 26. q. 10. Baptism we ought to keep to the revealed Law,
v. 5. n. 26. q. 13. Bapt of Inf. if a dangerous Error, v. 5. n. 26. q. 14.
Baptism and the Lords Supper alike to be given, v. 5. n. 26. q. 15. Baptism or
Baptisma why not translated right? v. 5. n. 26 q 18. Baptisma what does the
word m. v. 5. n. 26. q. 19. Baptizing or Rantizing, v. 5. n. 26. q. 22.
Baptizing of Inf. why deserr'd? v. 5. n. 27. q. 1. Bap. was not the Fathers
mistaken, v. 5. n. 27. q. 2. Baptism of Infants, is it good Divinity? v. 5. n.
27. q. 4. Bap. of Infants Postcript to it, v. 5. n. 27. postc.
[]
BLount's Judgment of the most Celebrated Authors, 1. sup. p. 20. Beauty,
several questions about it, 1. sup. p. 25. Bynaeus of the Birth of Jesus, 3.
sup. p. 8, Beughem's Essay toward a litterary History. 3. sup. p. 24. Blount's
Essays on several Subjects, 3. sup. p. 34. Becker's Enchanted World or Treatise
of Spirits, 4. sup. p. 17. Body or matter at the Resurrection, 5. sup. p. 5. q.
5.
[]
BArrow's Works. p. 13. Body of the Canon Law, p. 79. Dr. Burnet's Letters, p.
117. Boil's disquisition into the received notions of Nature, p. 161. -- His
Discourse of specific Remedies and Dissertation about the usefulness of simple
Medicaments, p. 184. -- His disquisition of final Causes, p. 202. Bergerac's
Eloquent Speech, p. 121.
C.
[*]
CHeating ones self or another, v. 1. n. 2. q. 4. Confessor, whether he may
discover Secrets. v. 1. n. 4. q 13. Cambridge or Oxford, which the antientest
University, v. 1. n. 8. q. 6. Clouds, what they are, etc. v. 1. n. 8. q* 8.
Converse with Angels, Reasons for, and against it, v. 1. n. 10. q. 8. Child,
whether troubled for Damnation of Parents, v. 1. n. 10 q. 9. Circle, whether it
may be squared? that is, etc. v. 1. n. 15. q. 7. Churches of Asia, what is
become of them? v. 1. n. 15. q. 9. Chyrurgion being taken into your Society, I
desire, etc. v. 1. n. 16. q. 4. Consonant, double Chapter does not always, etc. v.
1. n. 16. q. 13. Children oftener like the Fath. v. 1. n. 18. q. 5. Clouds
composed of Rain, v. 1. n. 20. q. 1. Conflagration of the World, v. 1. n. 20.
q. 2. Copper, why dearer than Brass? v. 1. n. 20. q. 4. Cuckoldry, the word and
infamy, v. 1. n. 20. q. 8. Cain's Wife. v. 1. n. 20. q. 17. Castle, which best
fortif. in Europ. v. 1. n. 20. q. 18. Clergy suspended for refusing Oaths, etc.
v. 1. n. 22. q. 3. Children by a first wife, whether they ought, etc. v. 1. n.
23. q. 1. Coffee and Tobacco, whether prejud. v. 1. n. 23* q. 1. Chickens when
hatched in Ovens, v. 1. n. 23. q. 7. Covenant, how may a man know when in it, v.
1. n. 25. q. 2. Cain, what Mark set on him? v. 1. n. 26 q. 8. Cock crowing
thrice reconciled, v. 1. n. 29. q. 5. Christ's disputing in the Temple, v. 1.
n. 30. q. 4. Child fathered on a friend of mine, v. 1. n. 30. q. 10. Corpse, why
bleed when touched by its Murderers, v. 2. n. 1. q. 2. Corns and Warts, how to
be destr. v. 2. n. 1. q. 6. Cannibals, whether any such people? v. 2. n. 1. q.
10. Cain, what Weapon slew he his Brother with? v. 2. n. 1. q. 19. Calf with
Flesh like a Commode, v. 2. n. 2. q. 1. Caesar or Alex. which preferable, v. 2.
n. 2. q. 8. Coffee-houses, whether take the twelve numbers? v. 2. n. 4. q. 1.
Clouds, the difference of sight about 'em, v. 2. n. 4. q. 3. Chamelion, its
properties, and living on Air, whether true? v. 2. n. 14. q. 7. Cricket,
whether lucky? v. 2. n. 18 q. 8. Confident, why some more so than others? v. 2.
n. 18. q. 11. Circulation of the Blood, v. 2. n. 19. q. 2. Child growing out
betwixt a Man's Breasts, v. 2. n. 19. q. 4. Cain, who he feared should slay him
v. 2. n. 23 q. 8. Cains Wife, who was she? v. 2. n. 23. q. 9. Cain, whether any
helped him to build the City? v. 2. n. 23. q. 10. Cowleys negative defin. of
wit, v. 2. n. 24 q. 14. Child, whether possible to be born without a Navel? and
live, v. 2. n. 24 q. 18. Christianity, whether invented at the destruction of
Jerusalem, v. 2. n. 25. q 3. Cain, who did he fear would kill h. v. 2. n. 27 q
4. Christ, why he took our Nature to suffer Death? v. 2. n. 27. q. 11. Cat
hanged full of Kittens, v. 2. n. 29. q. 3. Cains Damn* why so avouch'd? v. 2.
n. 30. q 8. Comet, a Dream of it, v. 3. n. 2. q. 2. Crimes, whether to be pub.
conf. v. 3. n. 2 q. 4. Cowkeepers Daughter, v. 3. n. 4. q. 1. Cloud and a Fog
the difference, v. 3. n. 5. q. 4. Contract when Solemn, whether it can be
broke, v. 3. n. 6. q. 8. Child speaking when 10 w. old, v. 3. n. 10. q. 2.
Carcass, whether eat by Vermin or Lice? v. 3. n. 11. q. 1. Creatures, whether
all apprehend the same thing? v. 3. n. 11. q. 7. Criminal his own Executioner,
v. 3. n. 12. q. 2. Charms, Amulets, Love-powder, any force in 'em? v. 3. n. 13.
q. 8. Camel going through the Eye of a Needle, v. 3. n 17. q. 8. Cambridge
Schol. his Extravag. v. 3. n. 20. q. 5. Coral why soft under the water? v. 3.
n. 21. q. 9. Carps why they breed in Ponds? v. 3. n 24. q. 2. Contract, whether
one marrying the other may, v. 3. n. 24. q. 15. Compass their Variation. v. 3 n
25. q. 3. Cyrenius mentioned, Luke 2. Governor of Syria, v. 3. n. 26. q. 5.
Christ's Ascending up to Heaven, and no flesh seeing God, how agree? v. 3. n.
27. q. 2. Communion, which comes nighest to our Saviors Doctrine, v. 3. n. 28.
q. 4. Christ, why did he pray being God himself? v. 3. n. 30. q. 11. Court a
Mistress, how to accost her at first, v. 4. n. 3. q. 1. Carriage and Behavior
most winning to a Lady, v. 4. n. 3. q. 2. Created, does it signify matter, or
only Existence, etc. v. 4. n. 4. q. 2. Concept. of my wife, I am sick, v. 4. n.
7 q. 6. Creatures, which strongest considering the Bulks v. 4. n. 8. q. 10.
Chiromancy, what are we to believe of it? v. 4. n. 8. q. 11. Chequer, why the
Sign of an Alehouse? v. 4. n. 9. q. 10. Comprehension, whether necessary, v.
4. n. 11. q. 1. Christ, was he baptized before he was 30 years old? v. 4. n.
14. q. 4. Conyers Collection of Rarities, whether best to expose 'em, v. 4. n.
16. q. 4. Christians, which most in the right Q. Elizabeth's or King James's,
v. 4. n. 19. q. 9. Clergy man whether he may give Bonds to resign his Living,
v. 4. n. 23. q. 2. Conjurers, can they absolutely tell Events? v. 4. n. 23. q.
4. Child found in the fields, ran away unseen v. 4. n. 23. q. 10. Crickets
breeding in a house, v. 4. n. 24. q. 2. Clergyman broke his Contract with a
Lady, v. 4. n. 24. q. 4. 1 Cor. 11.14. about long Hair, your thoughts on it? v.
4. n. 24. q. 5. Creatures allowed for food, whether sinful to kill them
cruelly? v. 4. n. 24. q. 6. Coals, ten Bushels laid on a fire make but a few
Ashes, v. 4. n. 28. q. 1. Christians, which best, Precisians or Moralists, v.
4. n. 29. q. 4. Canons of the Church, v. 4. n. 30. q. 5. Constantine the Great,
the cause of his War with Licinius, v. 5. n. 1. q. 6. Candles, found a strange
story of 'em, v. 5. n. 6. q. 3. Crocidile sleeping, the Indian Rat shoots
himself into his belly, v. 5. n. 6. q. 9. Clergy's wives and Child. why unhap.
v. 5. n. 8. q. 2. Christ born, at what time of the year, is it possible to
know? v. 5. n. 16. q. 1. Covenant about Circumcision, v. 5. n. 25. q. 1.
Circumcision, whether all Believers had a right to it? v. 5. n. 25. q. 2.
Circum. whether a Seal of Faith? v. 5. n. 25. q. 3. Circumcision or Baptism,
does it Seal Children? v. 5. n. 25. q. 4. Circum. what are its Privilege. v. 5.
n. 25. q. 5. Children, what right to Covenant Transactions? v. 5. n. 26. q. 6.
Covenant, does it bind the consciences when at Age? v. 5 n. 27. q. 2. Covenant,
if not of God's Appointment? why, etc. v. 5. n. 27. q. 3.
[]
CRitical Remarks upon the prettiest Fancies to be found in the Works of
Ancient and Modern Authors, 1. sup. p. 8. Ciampini's Examination of the
pontifical Book, 1. sup. p. 13. Coast of France, 1. sup. p. 19. Content why no
body meets it, 1. sup. p. 24. Caves Literary History of Ecclesiastical Writers,
2. sup. p. 6. Consubstantiation of Transubstantiation, which most absurd, 5.
sup. p. 25. q. 25.
[]
CRitical Disquisitions upon the various Editions of the Bible, p. 289.
Chardin's Voyages into Persia and the East Indies, p. 90. Collection of some
curious Pieces, concerning the Philosophy of Mr. Des Carts, p. 182. Cicero's
Offices with Graevius Notes, p. 189. Curious Observations on Insects, p. 236.
Caves History of the Lives, Acts and Martyrdoms of those who were contemporary
with or immediately succeeded the Apostles, and of the chief Fathers of the
Church of the 3 first Ages, p. 321. Clemens Alexandrinus's Works 9th. Edition.
p. 365, Clements Epistles, p. 388. Curious Miscellanies, or the Iournal of
Physics by the curious in Nature of Ger. p. 401. Collection of several Pieces
of Eloquence, presented to the French Academy, p. 419. Clergymans Letter to the
Nuns* who have the Education of Young Women, Exhorting them to second the Popes
Intentions about Nakedness, p. 424 Clerkson's Discourse concerning Lyturgies,
p. 438 Comber's Answer to Mr. Clerkson of Lyturgies, with a Scholastical
History of the Primitive and General use of Lyturgies in the Christian Church,
p. 443 Cocquetin's Famous Speech, p. 111
D.
[*]
DEsign of the Athen Gazette, N. 1. Col. 1 V. 1 Dreams, their cause and
pleasure, v. 1. n 2. q. 6 Divorced persons, whether they may Marry, v. 1. n 4.
q. 2 Dying in Infancy -- v. 1. n. 10. q. 10 Dead to appear* and live again, v.
1. n. 17. q. 11 Departed, whether any knowledge of Earth, v. 1. n 20. q. 5
Defect, natural in the Parent, v. 1. n. 22 q 2 Distraction, whether ever
pleasant, v. 1. n. 22 q. 11 Dog, his overtaking the Hare, v. 1. n. 26. q 6
Dives and Lazarus, a Parable or History, v. 1. n. 28. q. 6 Dictates of God's
Spirit, etc. v. 1. n. 28. q. 9 Deceased, do they walk? v. 1. n. 29. q. 3 Death,
what is it? v. 2. n. 2. q. 3 Distraction, etc. why it takes away Reason, v. 2.
n. 2. q. 2 Drunken Man, how a fright recovers him? v. 2. n. 5 q. 2 Dreams, the
reason of it in a Gar. v. 2. n. 5. q. 3 Dolphin, why is follows a Ship, v. 2.
n. 5. q. 5 Death, whether an indisposition of the Organs, v. 2. n. 9. q 5 Dogs,
why linkt together, v. 2. n 9 q. 8. Dog, why he always turns round, v. 2 n. 9
q. 9. Devil, whether a Corporeal subst. v. 2. n. 14 q. 5 Devils, whether
drowned with the Sw. v. 2. n. 14. q. 6 Death watch, what is the cause of it? v.
2. n. 16 q. 2 Dying persons, why they fold the Sheets? v. 2. n. 16 q 8
Debauchery and ruin of youth, how prevented? v. 2. n. 16. q 19 Dream, why of
things we never thought of, v. 2. n. 17. q. 3 Delightful, what is most so to
any Man? v. 2. n. 17. q. 4. Debt, whether a Man may Marry then? v. 2. n. 20. q.
3. Deceive the Deceiver, is it a sin, v. 2. n. 20. q. 10 Die of Conceit,
whether possible? v. 2. n. 21. q. 1 Dancing Master, or Schoolmaster, which
preferable? v. 2. n. 24. q. 13. Divine Idea's, the Notion of Omniformity, etc.
v. 2. n. 26. q. 1 Devil of Mascon, v. 2. n. 26. q. 3 Deity acknowledged and
proved, v. 2. n. 26. q. 9 Devil, does he know our thoughts, v. 2. n. 26. q. 11
Democritus, or Heraclitus, which in the right? v. 2. n. 27. q. 13 Die, why must
in the Night, your reason, v. 2. n. 29. q. 1 Duelling, how far lawful? v. 3 n.
2. q. 1 Dream, whether obliging to Marry? v. 3. n. 4. q. 17 Drunken Man,
whether capable of Marriage? v. 3. n. 5. q. 2 Discourses, vain and absurd, v. 3
n. 12. q. 8 Drunken man, how far obnoxious to the Law? v. 3. n. 14. q. 2
Despair caused by unkindress of Relations, v. 3. n. 14. q. 9 Drunken man, how
brought to his Senses, v. 3. n. 15. q. 9 Divines, whether Preaching against all
vice. v. 3. n. 18 q. 3 Dew of Hermon, how it descends on Mount Sion, v. 3. n.
18. q. 6 Die than live, is it not better, v. 3. n. 19. q. 2 Dreams of commit. a
grievous sin, v. 3. n 20. q. 7 Dreams, do we think then? v. 3. n. 21. q. 3
Devotion, how hindered by Ignor. v. 3 n. 21. q 10 Drowned Bodies, why they
float, v. 3. n. 22. q. Devils, can they generate, v. 3. n. 24. q. 12
Defrauding, whether pardoned without restitution v 3. n. 24 q 14 Devotion, what
Book you advise me to, v. 3. n. 25 q 4 Dan. 5.23. Why Daniel leaves out a word,
v. 3. n. 25. q. 9 David's heart, why it smote him for Readiness garment? v. 3. n.
26. q. 1. David's Sin in numbering the People, where consists, v. 3. n. 27. q. 6
David's speaking in Scripture, is it the word of God? v. 3. n. 30. q. 4 Debtor
and Creditors, what a brother must do? v. 4. n. 1. q. 3 Dissenters, are they
Schismatics? v. 4. n. 2. q. 2 Discourse, to cry out O God, is it sins. v. 4.
n. 2. q. 9. Dragon, is there any such creature? v 4. n. 6. q. 5 Dissenters that
freely communicate with the Chapter of England, v. 4. n. 7. q 4 Delivery of a Gate
etc. Town of Lymerick etc. v. 4. n. 8. q. 1 Dizziness in the Head, v. 4. n. 8
q. 8 Dreaming of a Text Preached on, v. 4. n. 16. q 3. Dealing with a secret
reserve, whether sinful? v. 4. n. 16. q. 5 Divines, why they begin their
Prayers so low? v 4. n 19 q. 11 Death, if the cause be in the Body only? v. 4.
n. 25. q. 2 Death, is the cause of it in the Soul or in the Body? v. 4. n. 28.
q. 7 Dramatique Writers, who the best? v. 5. n 1 q. 3 Dramatique Professor, who
the best? v 5. n. 2 q. 1 Disciples, how come they to know Moses and Elias? v.
5. n 4. q. 3 Devils generating, a relation of one, v. 5. n. 9. q. 3. Defrauding
and overreaching our Brother, v. 5. n. 10 q. 1. Different Colors in Clouds,
the reason for it, v. 5. n. 11 q 5
[]
DIssertation on a State of Virginity, 1 Suppl. p. 18 Dispute about the
Grandeur of Great Britain, 1 Suppl. p. 21. Description of the City of Rome, 2
Suppl. p. 3 Dine, or to sup, whether better, 2 Suppl. p. 30
[]
DIssertations of Mr. Burman. p. 107 Darmonseus Philosophical Conferences, p.
179 Dodwell's Dissertations on St. Irenaeus, p. 356 Du Pin's new Bibliotheque
of Ecclesiastical Authors, containing the History of their Lives, the
Catalogue, Crisis and Chronology of their Works; the sum of what they contain,
a Judgment upon their Style and Doctrine, with an Enumeration of the different
Editions of their Works, Tom. 1. of the Authors of the 3 First Ages, p. 445.
Tom. 2. Of the Authors of the Fourth Age of the Church, p. 391. Dury's Treatise
of Church Discipline, p. 454 Discourses upon the Sciences, in which, beside the
Method of Studying, it is taught, how we ought to make use of Sciences for the
good of the Church, with Advice to such as live in Holy Orders, p. 411
Discourse of the French Academy, p. 420
E.
[*]
EArth, its Circumference and Thickness, v. 1. n. 2. q. 10 Earth, whether
destroyed or refined, v. 1. n. 3. q 4 Earthquakes, their causes, v. 1. n. 10.
q. 5 Experiment about perpetual motion, v. 1. n. 10. q. 7 Eels, how produced,
v. 1. n. 17. q. 9 England, be happy, v. 1. n. 22. q. 9 Essence, be really
distinguished from Existence, v. 1. n. 22. q. 13 Estates, whether an ensuring
office for 'em, v. 1. n. 26. q. 4 Exodus 7.33. comp. with Ver. 20, v. 1. n. 29.
q. 7 Egyptian Magicians Miracles, whether real, v. 2. n. 1. q. 16 Earth or Sun,
which moves, v. 2. n. 6. q. 9 Eyesight, how best preserved v. 2. n. 14. q. 1
Eunuchs, why never troubled with the Gout, v. 2. n. 20. q. 7. East India, and
African Company, one who has a stock, v. 2. n. 24. q. 3 Eve, did she lose her
Beauty by the Fall, v. 2. n. 26. q. 13 Eyes shut under water, v. 3. n. 9. q. 8
English Nation, why the Finest People, and yet Ill Singers, v. 3. n. 13. q. 12
Earth, are its Foundations to continue for ever? v. 3. n. 18. q. 5 Experiment
about finding out a Thief, whether lawful, v. 3. n. 22. q. 1 Errors, whether
they will be tolerated at Judgment? v. 3. n. 24. q. 13 England, the most
devout, why delight no more in singing Psalms, v. 3. n. 29 q. 5 English, what
Language is it, v. 3. n. 30 q 3 Empyreal Heaven, had it no Begin. v. 3. n. 30.
q. 11 Echo, its nature, v. 4. n. 17. q. 5 Experiment about artificial wind, v.
4. n. 22. q. 7 English Satyrist, who is the best, v. 5. n. 1. q. 2 Eve, what
she spun? v. 5. n. 5. q. 4 Egyptian Talisman, their Force and Virtue, v. 5. n.
7. q. 1 Epithalamium on a Wedding, v. 5. n. 11. q. 7 Eyes of Beans in the Kid,
why grow downward some years, v. 5. n. 14. q. 6 Ephesians. 6.12.5. Whether these
words are referred to all Christians? v. 5. n. 17. q. 1 Evil Spirits, in what
sense do we wrestle with 'em, v. 5. n. 17. q. 2. Evil Spirits, in what sense
the Rulers of darkness, v. 5. n. 17. q. 3 Evil Spirits, in what sense they are
in High Places, v. 5. n. 17. q. 4 Evil Spirits, how reconcile some Phrases
about 'em? v. 5. n. 17. q. 5
[]
ELliot of New England, his Life and Death 3 Suppl. p. 32 Europeans, from which
of Noah's Sons did they proceed, 5 Suppl. q. 1. p. 7
[]
ESsay upon Critics, wherein is shown in what the Poetry of the Hebrews
consists, p. 294 Examination of the Infallibility of the Roman Church, p. 99
Enquiry into the Constitution of the Primitive Church, p. 382 Education of
Daughters, by Mr. Treveton, p. 398 Extract of a Letter concerning some
Manuscripts of China, p. 424 Essay upon all sorts of Learning, by the Athenian
Society, contained in the four sheets that are prefixed to the Young Students
Library.
F.
[*]
FIshes, whether they breathe or no, v. 1. n. 2. q. 13 Fish in salt water, why
fresh? v. 1. n. 3. q. 7 Fire extinguished, where goes it? v. 1. n. 7. q. 3
Friendship, if there be any such thing, what is it? v. 1. n. 7. q. 4 Friendship
between persons of different Sexes, v. 1. n. 11. q. 1. Females, if went a
Courting, more Marriages than now? v. 1. n 13. q. 9 Friendship contracted
before Marriage -- v. 1. n. 15. q. 1 Friendship, its grounds being placed, etc.
v. 1 n. 15. q. 8 Friends engaging to meet after death, whether Lawful, v. 1. n.
16. q. 1 Fleas, whether they have Stings, v. 1. n. 17. q. 1 Feme Covert,
whether obliged to appear, v. 1. n. 18. q. 12 Fire emitted Tobacco-pipe and
Cane, v. 1. n. 20. q. 12 French King's Father, v. ^. n. 22. q. 6 Flowers, their
different colors, v. 1. n. 23. q. 11 Females, how Circumcised, v. 2. n. 1. q.
9 Fools, why ask they more questions, v. 2. n. 1. q. 20 Flashes of Fire, what
natural cause, v. 2. n. 5. q. 6 Fire, whether visible, v. 2. n. 5. q. 13 Fishes
living longer with, or without Scales, v. 2. n. 5. q. 15 France, a Descent on
it by Sea, or by Savoy, v. 2. n. 6. q. ^ Fishes, what instances may we expect,
v. 2. n. 6. q. 8 Figures, how to make 20 out, etc. v. 2. n. 9. q. 10 Frenchman,
why Incensed with the Lie, v. 2. n. 15. q. 8 France's King, what is he doing
now, v. 2. n. 17. q. 1 Friendship, when contracted, whether best to Marry, v.
2. n. 18. q. 1 Fly, or the Late King, which the greatest Heart? v. 2. n. 18.
q. 5. Faces, why not two alike? v. 2. n. 18. q. 10 Friendship contracted, the
one Rich, the other Poor, etc. v. 2. n. 19. q. 7 Friend, when in drink, v. 2.
n. 23. q. 14 France, whether Psalms were sung in the Air there? v. 2. n. 30. q.
10 Flood, what was the greatest sin before it? v. 2. n 30. q. 11 Fogs, why some
stink more than others? v. 3. n. 2. q. 6 Fornication, what sin? v. 3. n. 4. q
3. Fondness, or Coyness, which most desirable, v. 3. n. 4. q. 19 Fair, the
keeping it, 3 Questions Ans. in one, v. 3. n. 8. q. 7 Fly-blows, their cause,
v. 3 n. 8. q. 10 French, why love the English, etc. v. 3. n. 9. q. 2. Forms of
Prayer, whether Lawful, v. 3. n. 9. q. 3 Fairies and Goblins, their Circles and
Customs, v. 3. n. 10. q. 5 Figures, how pattern'd out by one act, v. 3. n. 12.
q. 6. Friends, falling in Love with the same Lady, v. 3. n. 13. q 3 Friendship,
or Love which the Strongest, v. 3. n. 13 q 7. Falsehood in Love, is it a Folly
or Knavery, v. 3. n 13. q. 10 Friends, how far obliged to one another, v. 3. n.
15. q. 4 Fornication, or to eat Puddings, which is the greatest Sin, v. 3. n.
22. q. 9 Fornication, whether it does not dissolve a Solemn Contract, v. 3. n.
24. q. 3 Fear, what is the best antidote against it, v. 3. n. 24. q. 7 Fondness
after Marriage, worse in Man or Woman. v. 3. n. 13. q. 6 Flux, and reflux of
the Sea, v 5. n 6. q. 2 French here exempted from all Taxes, Liberty to Trade,
v. 5. n. 10 q. 5 French, if Naturalized, would it not ease the Nation, v. 5. n.
10. q 6 Fingers cut off and healed, and now useful as before, v. 5. n. 16* q. 3
Fame, the meaning of the word, and what it is, v. 5. n. 18. q 2 Faith of the
Parent, will it serve the Child, v. 5. n. 27. q. 3
[]
Funeral Oration of the Dauphiness, 1 Suppl. p. 4 Fleetwood's Collection of
Ancient Inscriptions, 2 Suppl. p. 25
[]
FAsciculus Rerum Expetendarum, or a Collection of things to be sought after,
and things to be avoided. p 404
G.
[*]
GVardian Angel, v. 1. n. 1. q. 3 Government, what sort is best, v. 1. n. 4 q.
11 Glass broke flying into dust, v. 1. n 5. q* 8 Gog and Magog, whether yet
destroyed, v. 1. n. 8. q. 2 Goodness objective consists in the Agreement etc.
v. 1. n. 12. q. 7 Glass painting, is it different from what was, v 1. n. 14. q.
6 Gunpowder, or Printing, which done most mischief, v. 1. n. 14 q. 7 Gout, its
original cause, v. 1. n. 15. q. 5 Genus and Species, their difference, v. 1. n
16. q. 7 Game's, its production, v. 1. n. 17. q. 7 Globe of the Earth, a
Millstone fall, etc. v. 1. n. 17. q. 10 Gentlewoman left to her own
management, v. 1. n. 18. q. 3 God's Prescience, and Man's Agency, v. 1. n. 28.
q. 5 Glass, its different representations, v. 2. n. 1. q. 1 God, when he
reveals himself in a Dream, v. 2. n. 17. q. 10 Golden age, v. 2. n. 18. q. 12
God's Spirit, how moved on the waters, v. 3. n. 9. q 5 Good Conduct in a
General, v. 3. n. 15. q. 1 Girl of Seven years old, whether capable of love? v.
3. n. 15. q. 5 Genesis First, v. First, etc. Confutation of Atheists, v. 3. n. 26
q. 4 Gentleman Marrying a Lady, may they separate for a time, v. 4. n. 8. q. 3
God's Name not once mentioned in Esther, v. 4. n. 9. q. 13 Government, whether
we are obliged to serve it? v. 4. n. 19. q. 8 Gunpowder-Treason, how a Plot? v.
4. n. 25. q. 1 Grotius, Buchanan, or Barklay, the best Latin Poets, v. 5. n. 14
q. 5
[]
2. GEneral of an Army, whether he should fight as others, 1 Suppl. p. 28 3.
Gurtler's History of the Templars, 2 Sup. p. 9 1. Gallant Discourses,
containing Questions and Answers, Translated out of French, 1 Sup. p. 22
Gallant Discourse, being a Continuation of Questions and Answers, 2 Suppl. p.
27 Genealogical History of the Kings and Peers of Great Britain, 3 Suppl. p. 25
Generation in the Act is not Soul united to Matter, 5 Suppl. p. 15. q. 13
[]
GRotius Letters, the Subject Critics and Divinity, p. 48 -- His Letters, Part
2. Treating upon Law, History and Politics, p. 55 Gregory Nazianzen his Works
and Life, p. 331 Grand Seignior's Spy, and his Secret Relations sent to the
Divan, p. 414 Goa Inquisition, a Relation of it, p. 462 Gronovius's
Exercitations upon the Death of Judas the Traitor, p. 314
H.
[]
HIstory of the Athenian Society; Giving an Account of the Novelty, Advantage,
First Inventor, and Occasion of the Useful Undertaking; the Difficulties that
attend it; the Noble Daring of the First Author, with a particular account of
the rest; the Reasons why this Society assumed the Title of Athenian; The
Progress, Methods, and Performances of the Society when Established; A Prospect
of what the World is suddenly to expect from it; and likewise what it has
Reason to hope for hereafter; with a too-favourable Account of both the
Principles of its opposers, and the Injustice of their Endeavors; to all which
is prefixed an Ode, made by Mr. Swift; as also several Poems written by Mr.
Tate, Mr. Molleux, Mr. Richardson, and others. These heads are all largely
treated on in the forementioned History, which is prefixed to the First Volume
of the Athenian Gazette.
[*]
HAir and Nails of Dead People, v. 1. n. 4. q. 10. History, whether any true,
except the Bible, v. 1. n 9 q. 4 Heaven or Hell, whether local, v. 1. n. 9. q 5
Hope or Fruition, which most pleasant, v. n. 14 q. 2 Heathen, how to be
convinced that our God is the true God, v. n. 14. q. 9 Happiness, wise men or
fools, v. 1. n. 20. q. 9 Homer and Virgil, your sense of 'em desired, v. 1. n
21 q. 7 Horace, whether translated right, v. 1. n. 21. q. 9 Hairs, an equal
number on any 2 Men's head, v. 1. n. 21. q. 13 Horse, why it emits a square
Excrement, v. 1. n. 23. q. 5 Hell punishment, whether equal, v. 1. n 27. q. 3
Husband, where likeliest to get one, v. 2. n. 13. q 5 Husband, whether lawful
to pray for one, v. 2. n. 15. q. 1 Husb. a Lady would know when she shall get
one? v. 2. n. 15 q. 2 Hiccough, whether pronouncing the word one, v. 2. n. 17.
q. 14 Hearing or Sight, which best to lose, v. 2. n. 18. q. 9 History says,
that Aeneas lived in the days, etc. v. 2. n. 29. q 11 Habit, what it is,
whether to be overcome, v. 3. n. 1. q. 1 Handsome Wife, whether a happiness, v.
3. n. 4. q. 12 Highlanders of Scotland, Saucy Rebels, v. 3. n. 11. q. 9 Heaven,
will there be Sexes there? v. 3. n. 13. q. 2 Harangue, whether pleased with it,
v. 3 n. 14. q. 7 Hating Cheese, and other Antipathies, v. 3. n. 16. q. 6
Husband willing to part with his Wife to another Man* v. 3. n. 19. q. 1 Hue and
cry after lost piety, whether it is not time, v 3 n. 20 q. 4 Horse unfound, am I
obliged to tell the Buyer so? v. 3. n. 21 q 6 Horses and Men compared in their
breed, v. 3. n. 24. q. 11 Hair, why not grow on the Face of a Woman, v. 3. n.
29. q 4 Hebrew word, of the World being a Chaos, v. 3. n. 30. q. 2 Hanging in
Chains alive, v. 4 n. 2. q. 5 Husband and Wife, when they cannot agree, may
they part, v 4. n. 2. q 7 Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. how to be understood, v. 4. n. 2. q.
8 Horse Neighs, is it Rejoicing or Angry, v 4. n. 2 q. 13 Husband gone to
Virginia 8 years, may she Marry, v. 4. n. 7. q. 3 Homunculus, etc. v. 4 n. 7.
q. 4 Hag, is there any such thing as Witch-riding, v. 4. n. 8. q. 4 Horse,
whether cheered by Bells and Harness, v. 4 n. 9. q. 9 Horse, from whence
proceeds it being broken winded, v. 4 n. 17. q. 2 Hainousness of the Sin of
Astrologers, v. 4. n 23 q. 4 Hammers of four ounces, drive a double Ten into a
Plank, v. 5. n. 2. q. 2 Heads of thing's best to enter Children in, v 5 n. 3 q.
1 Heads of things how to refer to 'em, v. 5. n. 3. q 3 Hair turned Gray at 20
years of Age, v. 5. n 6. q. 7 Hobbs, or L'Estrange, the better Christian, v. 5.
n. 14. q. 1 Heaven, how far is it there, v. 5. n. 18 q. 4
[]
HOn Camps. Apology for the Sacred Scritures, 1 Suppl. p. 22 Heat or cold,
which is most supportable, 1 Suppl. p. 28 History of the Empires and Princes
during the First Six Ages of the Church, 2 Suppl. p 1 History of Monsieur
Constance, 2 Suppl. p. 8 Huygen's Treatise of Light, 2 Suppl. p. 14 Heat,
whether better to heat one by fire, or exercise, 2 Suppl. p. 30 Hebrew Points,
by whom, and where invented, 5 Suppl. q 2 p 9 Habits, have they Parts, etc. 5
Suppl. p. 15. q. 17
[]
HIstory of Great Britain, p. 95 History of a Christian Lady of China, p. 156
History of the East Indies, p. 159 Hook's Micrographia, or some Philosophical
Descriptions of Minute Bodies, made by Magnifying-Glasses, with Observations
and Enquiries thereupon, p. 221 History of Animals mentioned in Holy Writ, in
which the Names of every one are drawn from their Originals, and their Nature,
Profits and Uses are Explained, p. 434
I.
[*]
IDea of the Spiritual World, v. 1 n. 3. q. 1 Individuation of Separate Souls,
v. 1. n. 3. q. 2 Infant Soul, what conception of things, v. 1. n. 3 q. 3
Islands, how they came to be Inhabited, v. 1. n 4 q. 2 Ill desires g^cst at, by
undecent habit, v. 1. n. 5. q. 6 Judicial Astrology, whether lawful -- v. 1. n.
6. q. 3 Incest, whether it be Malum in se? v. 1. n. 12. q. 6 Jewish Custom of
Marrying at 25, etc. v. 1. n. 12 q. 7 Intellect. what there; was it first in
the Senses? v. 1. n. 21. q. 16 Jacob's Rod, how influenced it Laban's Cattle,
v. 1. n. 21. q. 17 Jephtha, whether he Sacrificed his Daughter? v. 1. n. 26. q.
3 Joy, its effects, v. 1. n. 29. q. 1 Ingratitude to former Benefactors, v. 2.
n. 1. q. 3 Idea of a thing, but when we speak of God, v. 2. n. 7. q 1
Individuation, what is it, v. 2. n. 8. q. 1 Infallibility, where lies it now
the Papal Chair, v. 2. n. 19. q. 6 Ingratitude, what Punishment fit for it? v.
2. n. 23 q. 13 Ink how to take it off from Paper, v. 2 n. 24. q. 21 Jews, why
they make their Idols like a Calf? v. 2. n. 30 q. 2 Jealousy, how to cure it?
v. 3. n. 4. q 20 Informer, whether not now a Rogue? v. 3. n. 7. q. 4 Justice of
Peace Tippling in Sermon time, v. 3. n. 7. q. 4 Iron laid on the Cask, why it
prevents Mischief by Thunder, v. 3. n. 9. q. 9 Irish Fugitives, that received
Alms, v. 3. n. 14. q. 3 Josephus, Dr. Burnet's opinion of it, v. 3. n. 14. q. 8
Judas, how hanged and yet burst asunder, v. 3. n. 18. q. 7. Injuries how to be
forgiven? v. 3. n. 22. q. 6. Jew, Mohammedan, Quaker, etc. may they expect
future happiness? v. 3. n. 23 q. 4 Infans, etc. thou they shall arise at the
last day? v. 3. n. 23. q. 5. Image of God, should we form in our minds? v. 3.
n. 25. q 5. Jacob, did he sin in putting the Rods to Laban's Cattle? v. 3. n.
26 q. 8. Josephus his Testimony of our Savior, v. 3. n. 27. q. 1. Jacob, did
he sin in defrauding his Brother? v. 3. n. 27. q. 4. Jesse's Sons 1 Samuel 16.
and 1 Chronicles. 2. how reconciled? v 3. n. 27. q. 5 Jacob, did he wrestle with an
Angel, or with God himself? v. 3. n. 28. q. 1 Jephthah, had he sinned had he
broke his Vow? v. 3. n. 28. q. 2. Interrupted Discourse, etc. create Aversions
or Love? v. 4. n. 3. q. 5. Infants, if saved without Baptism, what signifies
it? v. 4. n. 14. q. 7. Infants have they Faith, since that is necessary to
Baptism? v. 4. n. 14. q. 8. Jacobites and Williamites, v. 4. n. 27. q 1.
Informer against Vice whether well, v. 4 n. 29. q. 5. Informer against Vice, is
he a Busie-body? v. 4. n. 29. q. 6. Informers against Sin, what benefit do they
get? v. 4. n. 29. q. 7. John Whitehead's Miracle, v. 4. n. 30 q. 2. Japan,
whether an Island or no? v. 5 n 7. q. 8. Iury-man, how to act in Causes of Life
and Death? v. 5. n. 12. q. 1. Irenaeus Doctrine about the Soul, whet her
Scriptural? v 4. n. 15. q. 4. Jephtha's sacrificing his Daughter, how
contradicted? v 5. n. 16. q 8. Impostor, M. Wickam, did he believe he should
di^? v. 5. n. 16. q. 9. Infants incapable of being taught, v. 5. n. 19. q. 1.
Infant Baptism never appointed of God, v. 5. n. 19 arg. 2. Infants of all
nations ought not to be baptized, v. 5. n. 19 arg. 3. Infants are not required
to believe, v. 5. n. 19. arg. 4. Infant Baptism does not tend to the Glory of
God, v. 5. n. 19 arg. 5. Infants ought not to be Baptized, v. 5. n. 20 arg. 6.
Infant Baptism has no precedent in Scripture, v. 5. n. 20 arg. 7. Infant Bap^.
is not in Scripture, v. 5. n. 20. arg. 8. Infant Baptism no institution of
Christ's, v. 5. n 20. arg. 9. Infants of believing Gentiles, v. 5. n. 21. arg.
10. Infants have no spiritual Benefits by Baptism, v. 5. n. 20. arg. 11. Infant
Baptism, no promises made to it, v. 5. n. 21. arg. 12. Infant Baptism, no
Ordinance of God, v. 5. n. 21. arg. 13. Infant Baptism added to the Worship of
God, v. 5. n. 21. arg. 14. Infant Baptism of Human Tradition, v. 5. n. 21. arg.
15. Infant Baptism reflects on the Honor of Christ, v. 5. n. 21. arg. 16.
Jewish Proselyte, v. 5. n. 21. arg. 17. Infant Baptism of positive Right, v. 5.
n 21 arg. 18. Infants not Baptized upon their profession of Faith, v 4. n 22.
arg. 19. Infants not capable to enter into a marriage Union, v. 5. n. 22. arg.
20. Infants not to be baptized for forgiveness of sins, v. 5. n. 22 arg. 21.
Infant Baptism, no Baptism of Christ, v. 5. n. 22 arg. 22. Infants baptized are
not in Scrip v. 5. n. 22. arg. 23 Infants not to be admitted into the Church,
v. 5. n. 23. arg. 24. Infant Baptism no lively Representation of Christ, v. 5
n. 22. arg. 25. Infant Baptism frustrates Christ's end, v. 5. n. 23. arg. 26.
Infant Baptism, an Appendix to it, v. 5. n. 23. Infants Right to Baptism, v. 5.
n. 27. q. 3. Infants, are they to be brought to Christ, v. 5. n. 27. q. 1.
Infant Bapt. a mistake of the Text, v. 5. n. 27. q. 2.
[]
ITrigius's Discourse of the Arch-hereticks in the Apostles Age, 3 sup. p. 16.
Italy, a new Iounrey thither 4 sup. p. 15. Iod, why the least in the Hebrew
Alphabet? 5 sup. q. 3 p. 9. Justification and Forgiveness of sins, as it all
one? 5 sup. p. 24. q. 22.
[]
JUrien's true System of the Church, p. 72. -- His Accomplishment of Prophecies
with the Explication of all the Visions of the Apocalipse, p. 76. -- His
Treatise of Nature and Grace, p. 458.
K.
[*]
KIngston-Bridge, why the Water always runs? etc. v. 1. n, 16 q. 11.
Knighhtood, is an unbaptiz'd person capable of it? v. 1. n. 21. q. 1 Know our
friends in Heaven, v. 1. n. 25. q. 7. Kite, how suspended in the Air? v. 2. n
5. q. 8. Knowles Thomas his marriage, v. 2 n. 8. q. 2. Knowing nothing new, v.
2. n. 17. q. 2. Kittens crying in a Cat when she was hanged, v 2 n. 20. q. 8.
Knowledge of things known or unknown, which most desirable? v. 2. n. 23. q. 5.
Kings Evil, how cured by Englands Kings? v. 2. n. 24. q. 22. Knowledge of
future State, will it be gradual? v. 2. n. 30. q. 3. Knight-Errantry, v. 3. n.
1. q. 3. Kingdom of the peoples giving; whether worth taking? v. 4. n. 11. q.
7. King James, why do you reflect on him? v. 4. n. 27. q. 1. King William, why
has he never touched for the Evil? v. 5. n. 15. q. 1. Kings of England, can they
cure the Evil? v. 5. n. 15. q. 3.
[]
KNowing little of all things, or only one thing solidly, whether better? 1
sup. p. 25. Knowledge in Women, 2 sup. p. 29.
L.
[*]
LAzarus's Soul, v. 1. n. 1. q. 4. Lawful to beat a Wife, v. 1. n. 1. q 6. Last
query, who the Author of it? v. 1. n. 3 q. 10. Lazarus's Estate (if any) who
enjoyed it? v. 1. n. 5. q 7. Land of Nod where was it? v. 1. n. 7. q. 2. Louis
le Grand, of the French King, v. 1. n. 11. q 6. Light, is it a Body? v. 1. n.
11. q. 8. Lawful to marry Cousin German, v. 1. n. 12. q. 4. Lawful to marry
first Wifes Sister, v. 1. n. 12. q 5. Lawful to make Addresses to young Ladies,
v. 1. n. 13. q. 1. Lawful to marry a person one cannot love, v. 1. n. 13. q. 2.
Ladies Aversion, what course to take to remove it? v. 1. n. 13. q. 4. Lawful to
look on another than ones Wife, v. 1. n. 18. q. 4. Lines, whether there be not
an infinite power? etc. v. 1. n. 22. q. 14 Lucretia, Codrus, Plato, etc. did
well or ill in Suicide? v. 1. n. 22. q. 19. Lawful is it to do evil that good
may come, v 1 n 30 q 1 Levi's paying Tithes in Abraham, v 1 n 330 q 2 Language
before the Confusion of Babel, v 1 n 30 q 9 Love when it decays, v 2 n 3 q 3
Love twice, whether possible with a like Ardour, v 2 n 6 q 3 Language if an
infant should be kept, v 2 n 6 q 6 Lion, whether it will not prey upon a Virgin? v
2 n 8 q 5 Learning, etc. whether less now than formerly? v 2 n 11 q 2 Lord's
Supper, how to approach worthily? v 2 n 12 q 1 Love, what is it? v 2 n 13 q 2
Love, why it turns to Coldness after marriage? v 2 n 13 q 3 Love, its Remedy
and Cure, v 2 n 13 q 4 Love, whether absence or presence best? v 2 n 13 q 6
Lover, when true, whether offer injury to the beloved? v 2 n 13 q 8 Litany,
whether defective? v 2 n 20 q 4 Love, whether diminishes by fruition, v 2 n 23
q 6 Lady courted by several, v 2 n 24 q 5 Lucifer, when cast out of Heaven v.
2. n. 27. q 2. Lincy Woolsey, why forbid the Jews, v. 2 n. 30. q. 1. Love or
Hatred which strongest? v. 3 n. 2. q 5. Love to two Mistresses, whether real?
v. 3. n. 4. q. 5. Lady granted me some secret Favors, v. 3. n 4. q. 8. Lady's
consent, how to carry it afterward? v. 3. n. 4. q 9. Love, which most constant?
v. 3. n 4 q. 10. Lady, whether to hide a private Amor? v. 3. n. 4. q. 15.
Love, how to make the men know we love 'em? v. 3. n. 4. q. 19. Learning in the
Hebrew, etc. whether it makes a Divine? v. 3. n. 5. q. 3. Lady of a Noble
Family found with a Lord, etc, v. 3. n. 7. q. 3. Lawful for Christians to
swear, v. 3. n. 8. q. 6. Loadstone, why turns to the North? v. 3. n. 11. q 4.
Love or Friendship, will it last after this life? v. 3. n. 13. q. 6. Lady,
should she answer a Lovers Letters? v. 3. n. 13. q. 11. Light, why seen at
first waking in the night? v. 3. n. 14 q. 5. Language, whether ours is in its
perfection? v. 3. n. 16. q. 5. Lord's Prayer, when we live in Hatred, etc. and
say we curse our selves? v. 3. n. 20. q. 2. Ladies Dress and Topknots, whether
a sign they be going to the Devil? v. 3. n. 20. q. 3. Lawful to separate from a
whoring Husband? v. 3. n. 21. q. 4. Laughter, how caused by contrary Effects?
v. 3. n. 22. q. 2 Letter sent us upon Psalm 133.5. v. 3. n. 23. q. 5. Lazarus,
why did he never laugh, v. 3. n. 30. q. 6. Lover, what Expressions fittest to
declare his Passion? v. 4. n. 3. q. 3. Love you say is a pretty little soft
thing, pray Explain it? v. 4. n. 3. q. 8. Life of Man divided, into several
parts, v. 4. n. 5. q. 1. Lawful to swear, v. 4. n. 9. q. 12. Lovers sing,
should we praise'm? v. 4 n 13. q. 2. Lovers, how handsomely to put 'em off, v.
4. n 13. q. 3. Lawful to marry a vicious man? v. 4. n. 13. q. 8. Livelihood,
what course best to take for it? v. 4. n. 19. q 7. Liver swimming, the reason
is desired? v 4. n. 22 q. 9. Letter G, is sounded Ghe, before the Vowel etc. v.
4 n. 28. q 2. Lot's two Daughters, whether lawful to go in to their Father? v.
4 n. 29. q 3. Laws against Vice, whether duly executed? v. 4 n 30. q. 4.
Lovers, can they break off after solemn Engagements? v. 5. n. 2. q. 4. Letter
from a Mistress, its strange Effects, v. 5. n. 2. q. 5. Light or day, what was
it before the Sun was made, etc. Genesis 1. v. 5. n. 2. q. 7. Lady not learned,
but having Children? v. 5. n. 3. q. 1. Lady troubled with Corns, v. 5. n. 3. q.
4. Language, what was it our first Parents spoke? v. 5. n. 4. q. 2. Lady I
married in my minority, may I marry her again? v. 5. n. 5. q. 2. Lady affirmed
their Sex more excellent than Man's. v. 5. n. 5. q. 5. Lightning never hurts the
Laurel, your Opinion of it, v. 5. n. 6. q. 11. Ladies Lover after engagement
declares himself a Papist, v. 5. n. 9. q. 8. Lovely tempter, how to avoid her?
v. 5. n. 13. q. 1.
[]
LOve of Inclinations, 2 sup. p. 29. Lean persons, whether healthier than
others? 2 sup. p. 29. Leti's universal monarchy of Lewis 14th. 3 sup. p. 20
Leti's second part of the forementioned Book, 3 sup. p. 22. Lovers Letter and
postscript, 5 sup. p. 10. Lenten Mercury, 5 sup. p. 12.
[]
LEusdens Abridgment of the Hebraick and Chaldaick Grammar, p. 293. Lightfoot's
Works, p. 1. Lock's Philosophical Essay on human Understanding, p. 162. Lives
of Saints and Saintesses, drawn from the Fathers of the Church and
Ecclesiastical Authors, p. 418. Le Moin's Works, p. 467.
M.
[*]
MOnster of a Man that calls in the French, v. 1. n. 2. q. 2. Married State,
whether happy or no? v. 1. n. 4. q. 4. Miracles, whether ceased? v. 1. n. 4. q.
14. Mons, Wagers about it, v. 1. n. 5. q. 1. Man well educated, how to live? v.
1. n. 5. q. 4. Moon, the world in it, inhabited by whom? v. 1 n. 7. q. 1.
Monsters, whether endued with rational Souls? v. 1. n. 8. q. 3. Men, whether
before Adam? v. 1. n. 9. q. 1. Man, how shall he know when he Dreams? v. 1. n.
9. q. 3. Mount Aetna, why Eruptions in stormy weather, v. 1. n. 10. q. 4.
Melchizedecks father who was he? v. 1. n. 10. q. 11 Mermen and Mermaids, have
they Reason? v. 1. n. 11. q. 2. Man turned out of his Employ with Wife and
Children, etc. v. 1. n. 11. q 3. Melancholy, its Symptoms, Causes and Cure, v.
1. n. 11. q. 4. Men, why some black some tawny? v. 1. n. 12. q. 2. Matches in
this Age made for Money, v. 1. n. 13. q. 8 Marriages of persons under Age,
whether lawful? v. 1. n. 13. q. 10. Marrying where there is an aversion to
please Parents, v. 1. n. 13. q. 13. Man know when a Lady loves him, v. 1. n.
13. q. 14. Majesty what is it? v. 1. n. 16. q. 10. Motion, its efficient Cause.
v. 1. n. 17. q. 5. Man, what is the sin, etc. the Lady, v. 1. n. 18. q. 2.
Mountains, Springs found there, v. 1. n. 19. q. 4. Matter the least particle,
v. 1. n. 20. q. 16. Mouse going into a man's Body, when asleep, v. 1. n. 21. q.
4. Man defend himself against Attempts to kill him, v. 1. n. 22. q. 4. Man, how
to know himself, v. 1. n. 22. q. 7. Melancholy, natural or accidental, v. 1. n.
22. q. 8. Methods to reconcile our differences, v. 1. n. 22. q. 10. Marbles and
Stones, why in rainy weather dewy? v. 1. n. 22. q. 15. Marking, Longing,
Swounding at a Cat, etc. v. 1. n. 23. q. 3. Mechanism, Nutrition, how regularly
ordered, etc. v. 1. n. 23. q. 6. Monkeys, how they came into the World? v. 1.
n. 25. q. 10. Meaning of that Text, 1 Cor. 7.36. v. 1. n. 28. q. 7.
Melchizedeck, who was he, Christ, or, etc. v. 1. n. 28. q. 8. Men, whether they
do marry in vain? v. 2. n. 3. q. 7. Marriage, whether the Ceremony was before
Moses? v. 2. n. 3. q. 8. Mankind, whether multiplying like Trees? v. 2. n. 3.
q. 9. Marriage, whether of Divine Right? v. 2. n 3. q* 10. Members, what
deprived of, and yet exist, v. 2. n. 4. q. 6. Memory of things we have
forgotten, v. 2. n. 5. q. 15. Monkey, is it capable of learning, v. 2. n. 6. q
5. Man, born as his mother was carrying to the Grave, v. 2. n. 9. q. 3.
Miracles, their nature how know true ones? v. 2. n. 9. q. 7. Men, how many
sufficient to form a Square? v. 2. n. 12. q. 7. Marriage of two wives, whether
lawful? v. 2. n. 12. q. 10. Mother or Mistress which to be preferred? v. 2. n.
13. q. 7. Married or single life, which best? v. 2. n. 15. q. 3. Mouth, why it
waters at the sight of Lemons? v. 2. n. 16. q. 10. Majesty's, how best to serve
them? v. 2. n. 18. q. 2. Money that is Counterfeit, may I pay it away? v. 2. n.
18. q. 13. Money and Linen conveyed away without knowledge, v. 2. n. 19. q. 3.
Millers, why more deaf than other persons? v. 2. n. 19. q. 8. Mandrakes,
whether Fictitious or real? v. 2. n. 2. q. 3. Man, when marrying, says with, my
Body, etc. v. 2. n. 21. q. 5. Master who is severe to me, v. 2. n. 24. q. 2.
Matter, whether divisible into infinite parts, v. 2. n. 24. q. 6. Monstrous
Bones at Gresham College, v. 2. n. 24. q. 9. Man and Woman, when drowned, how
they swim? v. 2. n. 24. q. 12. Maggot when put in a Box, how't will turn to a
Fly, v. 2. n. 24. q. 23. Martyrs, were they not fools? v. 2. n. 25. q 5.
Magicians of Pharaoh, why could they not do all Miracles? v. 2. n. 26. q. 8.
Man, why not created without sin? v. 2. n. 27. q. 10. Man when under Water? v.
2. n. 28. q. 2. Malefactor at Tyburn. v. 3. n. 1. q. 2. Man, how far to to
accuse himself, n. 3. v. 2. q. 3. Man in debt, whether obliged to acquaint his
Mistress? v. 3. n. 4. q. 7. Mistress lost, how to forget her? v. 3. n. 4. q.
16. Minister in Gloucester, whether for sworn? v. 3. n. 5. q. 1. Marriages
whether made in Heaven, v. 3. n 5. q. 5. Means to prevent self-murder, v. 3. n.
12. q. 12. Marriage of a young man and old woman wholesome v. 3. n. 15. q. 6.
Memory of past things, v, 3. n. 15. q. 8. Moon when totally Eclipst, what
causes the Light, v. 3. n. 15. q. 10. Mason's short hand, several questions and
answers in one. v. 3. n. 16 q 4. Memory of things we had forgot, v. 3. n. 23.
q. 5. Marrying by the Law of the Land, but not by God's Law, v. 3. n. 25. q 6.
Man buried his Wife, etc. whether best to live single? v. 3. n. 25. q. 7. Matt.
26.29. the meaning of that Text, v. 3. n. 27. q. 3. Monstrous Births, have they
rational Souls? v. 3. n. 28. q. 7 Moses sight of Mount Pisgah, v. 4. n. 2. q.
3. Marriage contract whether by a mutual consent dissolved, v. 4 n. 2. q. 6.
Music and Singing, how far proper in making Love; v 4. n 3. q 6. Mistress, how
far prudent to acquaint her? v. 4 n. 3. q. 7. Millennium, is it past or to
come, v. 4. n. 6 q. 1. Marriage, how shall we decently give consent? v. 4. n.
13. q 4. Man and Woman shut up together, would they know their Sex? v. 4. n.
13. q. 5. Marry, which best, a good temper, or a Shrow? v. 4 n. 13. q 9 Means
used to dream of a Sweetheart, v. 4. n. 15. q 5. Males of all creatures will
not fight the Females* v. 4. n. 17. q. 3. Mouth, how blow cold or hot out of
it? v. 4. n 17. q 6. Married man's Address to a young Lady, v. 4. n. 23 q. 3.
Man at sixty, falls in love with a Lady of 20, v. 4. n. 23. q. 5. Motion, was
it before the Creation, or not? v. 4. n. 23. q. 6. Man who had two Wives, his
last Wife had two Husbands, v. 4. n. 24. q. 1. Male and Female in Trees why
ridicule their Notions? v 4. n 24. q 6. Man's Goods seized for being at a
meeting, and for swearing, v. 4. n 29. q. 10. Marry for Love or Convenience,
which best? v. 5. n. 3. q. 3. Man set on by Thieves, is his Oath to 'e^
binding? v. 5. n. 4 q. 1. Methuselah, was he the longest Liver? v 5. n. 4. q.
4. Motion of the Earth and Sun, v. 5. n. 7. q. 11. Mr. S -- is thought to be
the Author of those lines, v. 5. n. 10. q. 7. Music, its effect on the Fancy,
v. 5. n. 11 q. 2. Man who promised two Women marriage, v. 5. n. 13. q. 4.
Marriage promised without parents consent, whether void? v. 5. n. 13. q. 5.
Marriage promised betwixt two, whether they can break off? v. 5. n. 13. q. 7.
Milton or Waller which the best Poet? v. 5. n. 14. q. 3. Manna of Calabria,
whether the same nature with the Israelites? v. 5. n. 14. q. 4. Man
dissatisfied about his Creditors almost to despair, v. 5. n. 15. q. 3.
Murderer, whether he ought to deliver up himself to free the innocent? v. 5.
n. 16. q. 6. Man promised to marry another man's Wife, v. 5. n. 18. q. 3.
Mosess Body the Dispute about it, v. 5. n. 28. q. 1.
[]
MOntausiers Funeral Oration, 1 sup. p. 4. Meditations on the duties of a
Religious life. 1 sup. p. 10. Mertena's Ancient right of Monks, 1 sup. p. 11.
Man or Woman whether be most noble, in favor of the woman, in favor of man, 1
sup. p. 24. Mazarin's Letters, 2 sup. p. 12. Marry or not to marry, whether
better, 2 sup. p. 30. Marc Antonines moral Reflections, 4 sup. p 4. Morrie's
great Historical Dictionary, 4 sup. p. 8* Mayers Election of the Pope of Rome,
4 sup* p. 23. Monster, where its defect lies, 5 sup. p. 14. q. 10. Murder, if
after pregnancy, 5 sup. p. 15. q. 14.
[]
MAnner of thinking well, as it has a relation to the operations of the mind. p
152 Mayerus's Christian Wife, or three Dissertations about Wedlock, Incest and
Divorces, p 408 Maecenas Life written by the Illustrious Maria Cecini p 426
Mathews Treatise of Law, wherein he treats of Nobility, of Princes, Dukes,
Counts, Knights, Esquires, and of all kinds of Gentry, p 430
N.
[*]
NEedle in the Sea Compass, v 1 n 2 q 11 Number, what is that, whose square
being, etc. v 1 n 12 q 9 Noah's Flood, what became of those Waters? v 1 n 16 q
5 Nation, which most populous and ancient? v 1 n 16 q 9 Nature, whether any
such thing? v 1 n 21 q 12 Number if infinite, v 1 n 21 q 14 Naturals, what
defects in their Souls? v 2. n 2 q 4 Nativity, whether calculated right? v 2 n
9 q 10 Names, whether set to the queries? v 2 n 19 q 5 Noisy and Troublesome
person? v 2 n 19 q 9 Number, how more than one, and ^ess than two, v 2 n 23 q 2
Night-Walking, v 2 n 23 q 11 Naked Gospel, why censured? v 2 n 29 q 2 Ninias
and Amraphel, whether the same? v 3 n 2 q 9 Night-Rambles, an account of 'em, v
3 n 3 Natural and spiritual man, what distinction? v 3 n 5 q 3 Night-Walkers or
rebelling against parents, compared, v 3 n 5 q 7 Nero's Soul whether it dwells
in Lewis the 14th. v 3 n 12 q 4 Natural modesty, is there any such thing? v 3 n
17 q 7 Negroes, shall they rise so at the last day? v 3 n 29 q 6 Negroes, is it
lawful to Trade with them? v 3 n 30 q 1 Nature of Blights, v 4 n 9 q 7 Number,
even or odd, which the greatest? v 4 n 17 q 4 Navigation, deaf man's Skill in
it, v 5 n 9 q 1
[]
NOrris's Discourses upon the Beatitudes 3 sup p 1 Norris's Reflections on the
Essay about Understanding, 3 sup p 2 Norris's Discourses on several Divine
Subjects, 3 sup p 28
[]
NEw Lexicon in Hebrew and Latin, p 293 New Relation of China, containing the
most Considerable things of this great Empire, p 83
O.
[*]
OWL, why see better by night, then by day? v 1 n 10 q 3 Origin to be praised,
or censured for, etc. v 1 n 20 q 10 Ovids Banishment, the reasons, v 1 n 21 q 6
Onan his Sin, what was it? v 1 n 25 q 1 Ostrich, if it digest Iron? v 1 n 25 q
8 Orphans, how to get their Money? v 2 n 1 q 5 Osiers, why smooth one Year v 2
n 2 q 10 Ox, why longer Horns then a Bull? v. 2. n. 5. q. 19. Oracles, how they
could give account of things? v. 3. n. 11. q 6. Oil, why some love it, and yet
hate Olives? v 3 n 14 q 4 Opinion is it not the strongest thing: v 3 n 19 q 3
Oaths, whether it ^e sinful to rehearse 'em? v 3 n 22 q 8 Oracles of old,
whether of God, or the Devil? v 4 n 4 q 1 Oak-apples their use: v 4 n 9 q 6
Oaths Equivocations in 'em: v 5 n 6 q 4
[]
OPinion, Questions about it: 1 suppl p 22 Oliver Cromwell the History of him: 4
suppl p 16 Ozanams Mathematical Dictionary, 4 suppl p 25 Onan, whether he was
guilty of Murder: 5 suppl p 15 q 14
[]
ODE on the French King: p 114
P.
[*]
PRe-existence of the Soul, v 1 n 1 q 2 Poorest men, who they are? v 1 n 2 q 5
Philosophers stone: v 1 n 3 q 9 Polygamy, whether lawful? v 1 n 4 q 3 Perpetual
motion, why not invented? v 1 n 7 q 5 Paradise, where was it? v 1 n 8 q 1
Philosophical or Moral Sin, be a humane, etc. v 1 n 12 q 8 Public or Private
Courtship is the best, v 1 n 13 q 3 Persons Marrying too ^oung: v 1 n 13 q 5
Praying for Husbands, whether a Duty? v 1 n 17 q 4 Platonic love: v 1 n 18 q 9
Philosophers, what Sect best? v 1 n 20 q 7 Passive Obedience, and
Non-Resistance: v 1 n 21 q 10 Phoenix, why but one? v 1 n 23 q 9 Patriarchs,
whether their lives was really lon^? v 1 n 24 q 4 People before the Flood,
whether stronger, etc. v 1 n 24 q 5 Pigmies, whether any such Creatures? v 1 n
24 q 6 Pentat^uch whether written by Moses, v 1 n 24 q 8 Philosophers ancient
whether damned v 1 n 26 q 5 Parents forcing their Children to worship, v 1 n 26
q 9 Pope Joan was there any such person, v 1 n 28 q 10 Peter^ second denial
^econciie^^, v 1 n 29 q 6 Paul's words Romans 9.3. how understood, v 1 n 29 q 8
People whether am ^ith Eres in their breast, v 2 n 1 q 11 Philosopher his
defini^^on of the Soul, v 2 n 2 q 7 Persons why two no^ ali^e, v 2 n 4 q 4
Punciiio the meaning of the word. v 2 n 6 q 7 Prophet Elijah in (...) by be
already come, v 2 n 10 q 3 Pride instanced in the Aldermans Daughter, v 2 n 12
q 5 Poet and Poem which the best, v 2 n 14 q 3 Popes Election the manner of it,
v 2 n 21 q 4 Pump why may it not be made to draw, etc. v 2 n 22 q 2 Parents
unreconcil'd are they fit for the Sacrament, v 2 n 24 q 16 Providence
vindicated, v 2 n 25 q 1 Pharaoh whether a proper name, v 2 n 27 q 8 Papal
Chair, v 2 n 29 q 9 Paul's Conversion, contradictions reconciled, v 2 n 29 q 13
Pope is he Antichrist, v 2 n 30 q 5 Polygamy if allowed whether better, v 3 n 4
q 4 Pictures of former Lovers whether prudent to keep, v 3 n 4 q 14 Papists why
not banished the Nation, v 3 n 6 q 5 Pamphlets reflecting on Mr. B v. 3. n. 10.
q. 1. Parthenissa was it ever finished, v. 3. n. 11. q. 10. Pride what is there
in it that tends to happiness, v. 3. n. 12. q. 10. Plagues from Heaven why
don't they better people, v. 3. n. 12. q. 11. Public house what rules to
observe, v. 3. n. 15. q. 3. Psalms it is said who feeds the Ravens, what meant
by it, v. 3. n. 18. q. 10. Popes name when began to be changed, v. 3. n. 20. q.
8. Pilate's Lake what description in History of it, v. 3. n. 21. q. 1. Pilate
what Countryman was he, v. 3. n. 21. q. 2. Pride or Passion which the greatest
sin, v. 3. n. 21. q. 5. People that have ^ed hair the whitest skins, v. 3. n.
24. q. 4. People that are crooked why good conditioned, v. 3. n. 24. q. 5.
Pardon begged before sin commit'd or after, v. 3. n. 28. q. 5. Peter and Paul
did they use notes, v. 3. n. 29. q. 1. Prisons whether not necessary to be
looked into, v. 4. n. 1. q. 2. Philosopher who was the first, v. 4. n. 2. q.
10. Physical Difference is there in Thunder, v. 4. n. 2. q. 11. Public
rejoicing (Oct. 13.) Limerick surrendr'd, v. 4 n. 6. q. 2. Popes pretense a
Triple Crown, v. 4. n. 9. q. 11. Parliament members whether a regulation of
'em, v. 4. n. 11. q. 2. Parliament men should be the best of men, v 4 n 11 q 3
Persons elect'd for Parliament how duly returned, v 4 n 11 q 4 Purchase Votes
with money unfair dealing, etc. v 4 n 11 q 5 Parliament assembled whether not a
Fountain, etc. v 4 n 11 q 6 Passion whether possibly subdued, v 4 n 19 q 4
Picture of a Lady sitting upon the Grass, v 4 n 22 q 8 Parrots and Magpits why
talk, and not other Birds, v 4 n 23 q 7 Patent have you any for answering
impertinent questions, v 4 n 27 q 2 Propbane swearing, v 4 n 29 q 8 Parish
Officers how they should return the money, v 4 n 29 q 9 Pastoral Poem your
thoughts on it, v 5 n 1 q 5 Prayer extempore any example of it, v 5 n 8 q 3
Paper and Bone found in the Street, v 5 n 9 q 5 Poet one born so with notes on
him, v 5 n 11 q 1 Parrot in Sir William Temple's Memoirs, v 5 n 12 q 1
Prudentials what that disease is, v 5 n 13 q 4
[]
PReface to the first Supplement giving an account of the design and use of it.
Perrault's Parallels of the Ancient and Modern touching Eloquence. 1 Suppl. p.
9. Pool (the Cardinal) his Life, 1 Suppl. p. 21. Pleasure (...) ^ain whether
easier to resist, 1 Suppl. p. 23. Princ^^ ^^^losophy, 2 Suppl. p. 13. Proposals
for Printing the Young Students Library, fronting p. 1. in the 3 Suppl. Patin's
choice Letters, 3 Suppl. p. 13. Preface to the fourth Supplement* giving an
account of an ingeneous attempt, Preface to the fifth Supplement containing a
brief account of the new project concerning the Rarities of England,
Persecution a proper description of it, 5 Suppl. p. 16. q. 19. Perfection that
is sinless is it possible, 5 Suppl. p. 26. q. 29.
[]
POem on the King of Poland with other things, p. 115. Parallel of Julius
Caesar and the King of Poland, p. 116. Prerogatives of Saint Ann -- p. 120.
Q.
[*]
QUaeritur number Argentum Vivum, etc. v. 1. n. 4. q. 12. Quakers Marriage,
whether Lawful? v. 1. n. 13. q. 12. Question a full and satisfactory Answer to
any one? v. 1. n. 21. q. 11. Queen of Scots: v. 1. n. 22. q. 5. Questions, why
so many silly ones answered? v. 2. n. 17. q. 7. Queen of Sheba had she a Child
by Solomon, v. 2. n. 27. q. 3. Queen of Sheba, if now alive, whether she? v. 2.
n. 29. q. 7. Question about Mistress and Mother explained, v. 3. n. 4. q 18.
Querys, whether proper to be shown a Mistress? v. 3. n. 15. q. 7. Quid vult,
etc. v. 4. n. 19. q. 3. Querists very troublesome instanced in several things?
v. 4. n. 26. q. 1. Quaker, or a Papist, which Religion would you choose? v. 4.
n. 30. q. 1. Questions, how often sent before answered? v. 5. n. 16. q. 8.
Quakers Letter to the Athenians: v. 5. n. 29. Athenians. Quakers ten Questions,
proposed to 'em: v. 5. n. 29 Athenians.
[]
QVakers light within, 5. suppl. p. 25. q. 27. Quakerism or Popery most absurd:
5. suppl. p. 25. q. 28.
[]
QUes^io Theologica, etc. p.
R.
[*]
RObbery suspected v. 1. n. 14. q. 1. Reason that the extreme part of the
Wheel, (B) etc. v. 1. n. 15. q. 3. Righteous Man Noah. Daniel, or Job, v. 1. n.
15. q. 12. Rook whether it ^ats Carrion? v. 1. n. 18. q. 11. Rats, Toads,
Ravens, why Ominous? v. 1. n. 22. q. 1. Resurrection, in what estate shall we
arise, v. 1. n. 23. q. 3. Roman Soldiers how numerous, v. 1. n. 28. q. 1.
Reason what is it, v. 2. n. 1. q. 15. River Nile its Original, v. 2. n. 11. q.
7. Rain why none in Egypt, v. 2. n. 16. q. 6. Riches and Honor are they of an
intrinsic value, v. 2. n. 19. q. 1. Rainbow it cause, v. 2. n. 20. q. 1. Rain
why not more in Summer than Winter, v. 2. n. 23. q. 3. Rock split in two, v. 2.
n. 24. q. 10. Red Sea which Israel passed over, v. 2. n. 24. q. 15. Revelation
is it an invention, v. 2. n. 25. q. 4. Room haunted by Spirits, etc. v. 2. n.
26. q. 4. River Save at Belgrade, v. 2. n. 28. q. 3. Rivers all naturally tend
to the Sea, v. 2. n. 28. q. 5. Revolution who has writ best of it, v. 2. n. 29.
q. 15. Reformation how to effect it, v. 3. n. 3. q. 1. Religious converse why
not practiced, v. 3. n. 6. q. 3. Reformation many Quest. under one head, v. 3.
n. 7. q 1. Reformation whether not to begin at the great ones. v. 3. n. 7. q.
2. Reformation whether not obstruct'd by selling Offices. v. 3. n. 7. q. 5.
Rudder by what means it guides a Ship, v. 3. n. 9. q. 11. Restitution of
unknown sums, v. 3. n. 12. q. 3. Rochester, a strange relation happened there,
v. 3. n. 16. q. 1. Restitution whether a Wife should suffer by it, v. 3. n. 17.
q. 2. Reason how to distinguish between rational, etc. v. 3. n. 22. q. 3. Rock
Fish why it appears when a Ship, v. 3. n. 24. q. 1. Rooks why they eat Carrion,
v. 3. n. 24 q. 9. Romans 8.21, 22. the meaning of it, v. 3. n. 26. q. 3. Rogers
Trouble of Mind abridg'd, v. 4. n. 1. Reformation encouraged for Gods sake or
their own, v. 4. n. 11. q. 8. Royal Society what have they done these last
years, v. 4. n. 17. q. 1. Remarks upon the Depositions of the Apparitions, v.
4. n. 21. Rule what can be given to measure reason by, v. 4. n. 22. q. 6.
Reformation a letter relating to it, v. 4. n. 29. q. 4. Reformation, one
concerned in it like to lose all by it, v. 4. n. 30. q 3. Richmond a strange
creature found there, v. 5 n. 3. q. 6. Rebukes from a Stoical Gentleman, v. 5.
n. 3. beginning Rational Soul distinguishable by its actions, v. 5. n. 6. q. 6.
Rain in it is contained salt, ^ Virtuoso affirms, etc. v. 5. n. 6. q. 10.
Righteousness of Christ imputed, v 5. n. 8. q. 1. Remarks on the Poetical
Observator, v. 5. n. 11. q. 3. Reflections upon H. C. rejoined, etc. v. 5. n.
24. q. 1.
[]
REligious Slave and his adventures, 1 suppl. p. 5. Reading of Books or Word of
Mouth which most instructive, 2 Suppl. p 29. Rogers Practical Discourses on
sickness and recovery, 3 Suppl. p. 31. Regis entire course of Philosophy, 4
Suppl. p. 10.
[]
RAys History of plants first Tome, p. 478 Raius second Tome of the History of
plants, with a Botanick Nomenclature, p. 78. Reflictions on the cruel
persecutions that the reformed Churches suffered in France. p. 94. Reflections
upon ancient and modern Philosophy, and the use that may be made thereof, p.
187. Recital of the conference that Luther had with the Devil, p. 413. Ruens
notes on Virgil, p. 465.
S.
[*]
SOuls whether all alike? v. 1. n. 1. q. 5. Spots in the Moon, how they came?
v. 1. n. 1. q. 7. Sea spouts their Cause and Nature? v. 1. n. 1. q. 3. Sin
committed without an Idea of it, v, 1. n. 2. q. 9. Sea, why Salt? v. 1. n. 2.
q. 12. Smith the Coffee man, v. 1. n. 3. q. 1. Sea its Ebbing and Flowing, v.
1. n. 3. q. 2. Sherlock upon the Oath of Allegi^nce, v. 1. n. 4. q. 5. Straight
line, is 6000 foot, the Hill 6620. v. 1. n 4. q. 6. Star in Cassiopeia, whether
a Miracle? v. 1. n. 4. q. 7. Soul of Man, what it is? and whether Eternal? v. 1.
n. 6. q. 1. Swallows, where in the Winter time? v. 1. n. 8. q. 4. Soul is it
subject to Passion? v. 1. n. 8. q. 9. Souls of Brutes what they are? v. 1. n.
9. q. 2. Sheep since 100 are killed for one Fox, v. 1. n. 10. q. 6. Soul
whether born with the Body? v. 1. n. 12. q. 3. Stone Bullet, or other heavy
Body let fall? v. 1. n. 14. q. 11. Serpent, whether real that tempt'd our first
Par. v. 1. n. 15. q. 4. Stones whether porous? v. 1. n. 15 q. 10. Sky, whether
it be a substance, and may be felt? v. 1. n. 15. q. 11. Sun, why does it dance
on Easter Day? v. 1. n. 16. q. 2. Superstition the meaning of the Word? v. 1.
n. 16. q. 8. Sound no Substance, v. 1. n. 20. q. 15. Straight Stick in Water
appears crooked, v. 1. n. 20. q. 19. Storks never found, but in Commonwealths,
v. 1. n. 21. q. 2. Smallpox, why so many marked with them? v. 1. n. 21. q. 3.
Solomon's Temple, why not reckoned among the wonders of the World? v. 1. n. 21.
q. 5. Satyrs or Sermons most successful, v. 1. n. 22. q. 12. Sexes whether ever
changed? v. 1. n. 23. q. 2. Sherlock, whether Dean of St. Paul's? v. 1. n. 24.
q. 2. Saints Bodies which arose with our Savior? v. 1. n. 25. q. 4. Salvation
of Cain, Eli and Sampson. v. 1. n. 25. q. 5. Sin of felo de se, it is Nature. v.
1. n. 25. q. 6. Snail, the cause of it is Shell? v. 1. n. 25. q. 9. Salamander,
whether it lives in the Fire? v. 1. n. 26. q. 1. Soul, whether knows all
things? v. 1. n. 26. q. 11. Samuel, whether he or the Devil, etc. v. 1. n. 27.
q. 1. Sabbath how changed? v. 1. n. 27. q. 2. Souls of good Men, where
immediately after death? v. 1. n. 28. q. 3. Souls when separate, can they
assume a Body? v. 1. n. 28. q. 4. Shuterkin, whence it proceeds? v. 1. n. 29.
q. 2. Scriptures how know we'em to be the Word of God? v. 1. n. 30. q. 7. Sense
of the Words, when we differ? v. 1. n. 30. q. 8. Serpents, whether they were
real, etc. v. 2. n. 1. q. 9. Soul in what part of the Body it is? v. 2. n. 1.
q. 13. Sight, from whence proceeds? v. 2. n. 1. q. 17. Sun, how it comes to
shine on the Wall? v. 2. n. 2. q. 5. Substance Corporeal, and spiritual how
act? v. 2. n. 2. q. 9. Spirits by what means do they speak? v. 2. n. 2. q. 9.
Saul went into the Cave, etc. the meaning? v. 2. n. 5. q. 7. Scripture, why it
forbids Linsy Woolsey? v. 2. n. 5. q. 12. Senses, which of 'em can we best
spare? v. 2. n. 5. q. 16. Soul immortal, whether breathed into Adam, etc. v. 2.
n. 5. q. 17. Small Pox, the Cause of 'em? v. 2. n. 5. q. 18. Spell, what is it,
and whether Lawful? v. 2 n. 6. q. 2. Sleep, how to make one Wakeful? v. 2. n.
6. q. 4. Soul, how is it in the Body? v. 2. n. 7 q. 2. Souls going out of our
Bodies, whether, etc. v. 2. n. 7. q. 3. Soul seeing it is immaterial, whether,
etc. v. 2. n. 7. q. 4. Souls when separation do they knows the affairs of
earth, v. 2. n. 7. q. 5. Souls separate, how do they know one another? v. 2. n.
7. q. 6. Souls departed have they present Joy or Torment? v. 2. n. 7. q. 7.
Souls departed, where go they? v. 2. n. 7. q. 8. Souls has a man three, viz.
the Supreme, etc. v. 2. n. 7. q. 9. Souls, where remain till the last day? v.
2. n. 7. q. 10. Souls, what have the Philosophers said of 'em? v. 2. n. 7. q
11. Soul, how it is Union with the Body? v. 2. n. 7. q. 12. Stone in a
Toads-head, Swan sings at Death? v. 2. n. 7. q. 13. Snow, whether white or
black? v. 2. n. 8. q. 3. Sun, why looking on it causes sneezing? v. 2. n. 8. q.
6. Skeleton, a strange Relation of it? v. 2. n. 9. q. 1. Sin whether it might
be ordained? v. 2. n. 10. q. 1. Sin, whether not ordained? v. 2. n. 10. q 2.
Savior, how did he eat the Passover? v. 2. n 11. q. 3. Spirits Astral, what is
it? v. 2. n. 12. q. 3. Sensitive Plants, why emit their Operations? v. 2. n.
15. q. 5. Salamander, whether any such Creature? v. 2. n. 15. q. 9. Soul of
Man, whether by Trad^ction or Infusion? v. 2. n. 16. q. 5. Smoke, what becomes
of it? v. 2. n. 17. q. 6. Sounds, why ascend? v. 2. n. 17. q. 8. Sun, what
matter is it made of? v. 2. n. 18. q. 3. Speech and Voice, from whence
proceeds? v. 2. n. 18. q 10. Saturn, whether he be Noah? v. 2. n. 18. q. 12.
Step, if Persons can walk far in it? v. 2. n. 20. q. 2. Sure to one three
years, and now sure to? v. 2. n. 20. q. 9. Several Questions about the Soul all
answered in one, v. 2. n. 22. q. 1. Sciences, whether the Practick or Theory
preferable? v. 2. n. 22. q. 3. Smoke and Fire, a Wager L^id about it: v. 2. n.
23. q. 1. Solomon's Bounty to the Queen of Sheba, v. 2. n. 23. q. 12. Stone cast
into the Waters, its figures, why such? v. 2. n. 24. q. 8. Scripture, whether
retrieved by Esdras? v. 2 n. 25. q. 2. Synod of Dort had they Truth on their
side, v. 2. n. 26. q. 2. Sermon, any reason for the clamor against it? v. 2.
n. 26. q. 6. Soul, when it leaves the Body, where goes it? v. 2. n. 26. q. 7.
Savior, and the Thief on the Cross: v. 2. n. 27. q. 5. Sodom's overthrow, v.
2. n. 27. q. 6. Savior his Humane, and Divine Nature: v. 2. n. 27. q. 9.
Snake, when cut into Pieces? v. 2. n. 27. q. 16. State of the Sun, Moon, etc.
at the last day, v. 2. n. 28. q. 1. Sea, how comes it not to overflow the
World? v. 2. n. 28. q. 6. Silkworm, how it lives? v. 2. n. 28. q. 7. Spiritual
Substance, whether distinct parts? v. 2. n. 29. q. 4. Soul it is seat, v. 2. n
29. q. 5. Soldiers, who has most? v. 2. n. 29. q. 12. Serpent, how could he
speak with man's Voice? v. 2. n. 29. q. 15. Scripture and profane History, why
they differ? v. 2. n. 30. q. 7. Superstition of abstaining from Flesh: v. 2. n.
30. q. 12. Sun, where does it set? v. 3. n. 1. q. 4. Spider, how does it Poison
a fly? v. 3. n. 1. q. 5. Singing Psalms, why not used? v. 3. n. 6. q. 4. Sea
Water, why Salt? v. 3. n. 6. q. 7. Souls, whether all equally happy? v. 3. n.
8. q. 5. Soul of a Child quick in the Womb? v. 3 n. 8. q. 6. Shooting at Sea,
why heard at a distance? v. 3. n. 9. q. 6. Soul, after what manner it enters
into the Body? v. 3. n. 9. q. 7. Shell fish, why the shell applied to the Ear?
v. 3. n. 9. q. 11. Sermon of one hour, why seems longer than two? v. 3. n. 11.
q. 8. Shoot right, why they wink with one Eye? v. 3. n. 12. q. 5. Self-dislike,
whether Wisdom? v. 3. n. 12. q. 7. Senses, which can we best spare? v. 3. n.
14. q. 1. Self-murder for a Mistress, whether Lawful? v. 3. n. 16. q. 2.
Socinian Heresy, when broach't? v. 3. n. 18. q. 4. Spring, how visible? v. 3.
n. 19. q 5. Stones on Salisbury Plain? v. 3. n. 19. q. 6. Sky is it, of any
Color? v. 3. n. 22. q. 5. Sacrament, whether a Person may receive with 2 Chapter
v. 3. n. 22. q. 7. Snakes, when kept tame? v. 3. n. 23. q. 2. Snakes,
Water-snake and Land-snake, how different? v. 3. n. 23. q. 3. Solidity, what is
it? v. 3. n. 24. q. 16. Substance and Body the difference? v. 3. n. 25. q. 2.
Soul, whether it presently enjoys God after Death? v. 3. n. 25. q. 7. Souls of
learned men and ignorant, whether alike next? v. 3. n. 25. q. 8. Saviors
Birth, why in Bethlehem? v. 3. n. 26. q. 6. Scepter, why not to depart from
Judah, Genesis 49. v. 3. n. 26. q. 7. Sins, which most destructive? v. 3. n. 28.
q. 6. Swoon, where is the Soul then? v. 3. n. 29. q. 3. Savior and his
Miracles, how proved by History? v. 4. n. 1. q. 1. Species in Nature, whether
any? v. 4. n. 1. q. 4. Sleep-walkers, a strange Relation of one? v. 4. n. 5. q.
2. Such a Serpent as an Amphisbaena, or double-headed, v. 4. n. 5. q. 6.
Seduced into a great Sin, Oaths, Promises, v. 4. n. 7. q. 8. Sweating sickness
mentiond, Present-state of London, v. 4. n. 8. q. 7. Sprinkling Infants, why
not Dipping in Baptism? v. 4. n. 14. q. 5. Secret Sinner, whether obliged to
confess all to a Minister? v. 4. n. 16. q. 2. Sympathy and Antipathy, how is
it? v. 4. n. 19. q. 2. Surgeon, whether sins in curing the French disease? v.
4. n. 23. q. 9. Shipping and Navigation, whether improved? v. 4. n. 27. q. 3.
Soul when out of the Body is it active or inactive? v. 4. n. 28. q. 5. Soul,
how long may it be absent from the Body? v. 4. n. 28. q. 6. Soul, into what
place does it go after Death? v. 4. n. 29. q. 1. Songs on Moral or Divine
Subjects impress virtue? v. 5. n. 1. q. 5. Spirits, how big are they? v. 5. n.
2. q 3. Soul of Woman, is it inferior to Man's? v. 5. n. 3. q. 2. Sun, is it a
Mass of Liquid Gold? v. 5. n. 4. q. 5. Sun, whether ever totally eclipsed? v.
5. n. 4. q 6. Sun, what supplies it with heat and motion? v. 5. n. 5. q. 1.
Suns, three appearing at once, whether true? v. 5. n. 6. q. 8. Specific cure
for the biting of a Viper or Mad Dog, v. 5. n. 7. q. 4. Satyrs, etc. or other
discoursing Creatures, etc. v. 5. n. 7. q. 7. Sons and Daughters of God
mentioned. Geo. 6.4. v. 5. n. 7. q. 9. Stroke on a Mules back, the reason often?
v. 5. n. 10. q. 3. Sun, why the spring of Light, a Poem? v. 5. n. 11. q. 6.
Sappho, or Mrs. Behn the best Poetess, v. 5. n. 13. q. 8. Samaritan Character
or Vulgar Heb. the ancientest, v. 5. n. 14. q. 2. Solomon's meaning in Prove.
30.19. what was it? v. 5. n. 16. q. 2. Saints, why Pictured with Circles? v. 5.
n. 16. q. 5. Souls, are they all equal? v. 5. n. 29. q 3.
[]
SVm of the Bible: 1. suppl. p. 15. Speaking or Writing, whether is better? 1.
suppl. p. 25. Speaking or keeping silent, which is better? 1. suppl. p. 27. Sum
of the Bible, Tome 1. 2. suppl. p. 4. Siam the Revolution of that State: suppl.
2. p. 8. Spain a Relation of a Iurney thither, 4 suppl. p. 1. Sherlock on
Judgment, 4. suppl. p. 26. Swifts Letter to the Ahenian Society, 5. suppl. p.
1. Swifts Ode to the Athnian Society, 5. suppl. p 2. Selah, what is the
signification of it, 5. suppl. q. 4. p. 9. Syllogism about Infan Baptism
answered, 5. suppl. p. 11. Son that has wrong his Father, desires to
communicate at Easter, 5. suppl. q. 6. p. 12. Soul of an Emoryo how shall it
rise at last, 5. suppl. p. 14. q. 11. Sun and Clouds, when looked on, 5. suppl.
p. 16. q. 18. Sin, whether migt not be ordained for Gods Glory, 5. suppl. p.
16. q. 20. Sin were it ordai'd, or all possibilities of Adams standing, 5. sup.
p. 16. q. 21. Souls of Brutes heir Natures. 5. suppl. p. 25. q. 26.
[]
SYnopsis of t^ New Polyglot Bible, p. 292. Seldom oath use and abuse of Books,
p. 80. Bishop Stillingleets Antiquities of the British Churches, p. 135.
Stanly's Histry of Philosophy, containing the Lives, Opinions, Actions, an
Discourses of the Philosophers of every Sect, p. 190. Sylloge varirum
opusculorum, p. 467. Seldens Cricks in Divinity, p 311. Sprats History of the
Royal Society. p. 315.
T
[*]
TOrm^^s, of the Torments visible to the Saints, v. 1. n. 1. q. 2. Titillation
that is the cause of it, v. 1. n. 4. q. 9. Transmig^tion of Souls, v. 1. n. 7.
q 6. Thunder it cause, and what it is, v. 1. n. 8. q. 7. Ten Tribe where they
went, v. 1. n. 10. q. 2. Time, an Eternity their difference, v. 1. n. 14. q. 3.
Tree whyoes its fruit in grafting, etc. v. 1. n. 16. q. 12. Toads ar Serpents
production in Rocks, v. 1. n. 17. q. 8. Taranti^, whether such a Spider, v. 1.
n. 27. q. 4. Truth is to be spoke at all times, v. 2. n. 1. q. 14. Time wether
any Crisis wherein persons, v. 2. n. 9. q. 4. Trade ^nds, v. 2. n. 11. q. 5.
Tobacc whether good or hurtful, v. 2. n. 14. q. 2. Tara^la, etc. real or a
Fable, v. 2. n. 14. q. 8. Turk^ Spy his Books whether a Fiction, v. 2. n. 17.
q. 4. Toad and Spider the Antipathy betwixt 'em, v. 2. n. 20. q. 5. Temporals,
whether they can be made sure, v 2 n 28 q 10 Thoughts uneasy and painful in
Devotion. v. 2. n. 21. q. 2. Trembling at the sight of a Mistress, v. 3. n. 4.
q. 6. Thunder why more terrible by Night than Day, v. 3. n. 8. q. 1. Thunder,
Lightning and Earthquakes their force, v. 3. n. 8. q. 2. Tree of Life and Tree
of Knowledge how differ, v. 3. n. 17. q 4. Turks and Pagans why so little care
of their Conver. v. 3. n. 23. q. 1. Trade which is the best, v. 3. n 24. q. 6.
Thieves the best way of punishing 'em, v. 3. n. 25. q. 3. Thoughts when wicked
how know 'em, etc. v. 3. n. 29. q. 2. Tyburn an account of the antiquity of it.
v. 4. n. 2. q. 4. Tears, sighs, etc. of greater force to obtain a Lady, v. 4.
n. 3. q. 4. Thunder what causes the noise, v. 4. n. 8. q 9. Trees does the sap
descend, v. 4. n. 9. q. 2. Trees have they Male and Females, v 4 n 9 q 3 Trees
whether cutting off the bottom Root. v. 4. n. 9. q. 4. Toad in a solid Rock, v.
4. n. 9. q 8. Triumphal Arch in Cheapside your thoughts on it, v. 4. n. 12. q.
1. Torments and happiness is there a cessation of them during Judgment, v. 4 n.
29. q. 2. Text extant of the old Testament, the Hebrew or Septuagint, v. 5. n.
7. q. 3. Tears of a Maid red as blood, v. 5. n. 9, q. 6.
[]
THomassins method to study Grammar, and the Tongues 1 Suppl. p. 1. A.B.
Tillotson's necessity of frequent Communion, 2 Suppl. p. 28. Tobacco Questions
about it, 2 Suppl. p. 29. Tollius's mad Wisdom or Chimical promises, 4 Suppl.
p. 6. Traveling, whether necessary, 2 suppl. p 28.
[]
TAvernier's collections of several Relations, p. 106. Themistius 33 Orations,
p. 118. Transactions of the Royal Society, Extracts of several L^tters English
Iournals, Registers and Experiments, from p. 208, to p. 321. Tentamen
Porologicum, p. 236. Treatise of the Loadstone, p. 237. Travels of Mars or the
art of war divided into 3 parts, p. 307. Treatise of the excellency of
Marriage, of its necessity, and of the means of living happy therein, wh^re is
an Apology made for Women against the calumnies of men, p. 415. Treatise of the
Trial of Witches, wherein diverse questions relating to this subject, are most
learnedly, and pleasantly resolved, p. 427.
V.
[*]
VAcuum whether any, v. 1. n. 4. q. 8. Unmarried persons whether lawful to
cohabit, v. 1. n. 5. q. 3. Virgin let a man know she loves him, v. 1. n. 13. q.
15. Virtue, Theorick and Practical the difference, v. 1. n. 14. q. 8.
Undertaking, rash, how to shun the reproach, v. 1. n. 17. q. 22. Union,
Prebyterians and Independants, v. 1. n. 19. q. 1. Unicorn, whether there be
any, v. 1. n. 20. q. 3. Virgil, whether impossible to make better verses than
his v. 1. n. 21. q. 8. Viols, two tuned in Unison, v. 1. n 22 q. 18. Urine its
Motion in Water, v. 1. n. 23. q. 8. Vipers its venom where it consists, v. 2.
n. 8. q 4. Usurper who is the greatest, v. 2. n. 12. q. 4. Utrum Androgyna,
etc. v. 2. n. 17. q. 11. Virtue whether it consists in intention, v. 2. n. 17.
q. 15. Virtue to an ill man, or Vice to a good man which hardest. v. 2. n. 23.
q. 4. Vault why colder in Summer than Winter, v. 2. n. 24. q. 17. Union, is it
desired by the Dissenters, v. 2. n. 26. q. 5. Urine why emitted by putting the
hand in cold Water, v. 2. n. 29. q. 8. Vacuum what are we to think of it, v. 3.
n. 1. q. 6. Vow never to marry whether lawful, v. 3. n. 8. q. ^ Unruly wife how
to reclaim her, v. 3. n. 131.1 Union of Soul and Body how is it, v. 3. n. 1^ q.
11 Virtue and Goodness is it any defense against misery, ^. 3. n. 18. q. 1.
Unjust steward why did the Lord commend him, v. 3. n. 26. q. 2. V^^dois have
they maintained the Christian R^^gion, v. 4. n. 2. q. 1. Vow to relinquish
suddenly an employ is it s^sul, v. 4. n. 8. q. 2. Variegation in Plants as
Holly, etc. be ^ defect, v. 4. n. 9. q. 5^ Vnbaptiz'd Infants what becomes of
^^, v. 4. n. 14. q. 6. Voice calling a Woman who soon aft^^ died, v. 4. n. 15.
q. 3. Venomous Creature why not live i^ Ireland. v. 5. n. 7. q. 6. Verses on
pain and pleasure, etc. v. 5. n. 11. q. 4. Vrim and Thummim their meaning, v.
5. n. 15. q. 6. University instructions to ^ Youth going there. v. 5. n. 29. q.
2.
[]
VAudois the History of 'em, 2 Suppl. p. 19. Vaudois a further History of 'em,
3 Suppl. p. 36. Vo^age into the World of Descartes, 3 Suppl. p. 3. Vicious
Liver desirous to reclaim, 5 Suppl. q. 7. p. 13. Usury a vindication of it, 5
Suppl. p. 26.
[]
Usher Bishops Lif^ with a Collection of 300 Letters, published from the
Original. p. 21. -- His Antiquities of the British Churches, p. 31. and p. 65.
-- His succession and state of the Christian Churches, p. 37. Vindication of
the Church of England, p. 122. Vossius book of Observations, p. 476.
W.
[*]
WIfe whither she may beat her Husband? v. 1. n. 2. q. 7. Weeping and Laughing,
whence proceeds? v. 1. n. 3. q. 5 Witches, whither there be any? v. 1. n 3. q
6. What two Numbers are those; v. 1. n. 5. q. 5. Words express things, v. 1. n.
6. q. 2. Wind, whence it has its force? v. 1. n. 8. q. 5. Weapons, which most
serviceable, Gun or Bow? v. 1. n. 11. q. 5. Woman's Condition in Marriage, worse
than Man's, v 1. n. 13. q. 6. Woman believed when she says she will not marry,
v. 1. n. 13. q. 11. Wind, its causes, and whether they go? v. 1. n. 14. q. 10.
Woman with Child's longing, the Reason of marking, etc. v. 1. n. 15. q. 2. Works
de^raded through Malice or Ignorance, etc. v. 1 n. 15. q. 13. Weeping on the
Wedding night, from what it proceeds? v. 1. n. 16. q. 3. Wounds, an experiment
about them? v. 1. n. 17. q. 3. Women's Voice shriller than Men's, v. 1. n. 17. q.
6. Women, whether proper to be learned? v. 1. n. 18. q. 3. Women supposed to
have no Souls, v. 1. n. 18. q 7. Women an Army of 'em, do more then Men: v. 1.
n. 18. q 8. Whores common ones seldom have Children: v. 1. n. 18. q. 10. Wood,
a Petrifaction of it, how effected? v. 1. n. 19. q. 2. Water, spring, hot in
Winter, v. 1. n. 20. q. 14. Wife, that forsakes her Husband: v. 1. n. 21. q.
15. Wood rotten, why shine in the dark? v. 1. n. 22. q. 17. Wine was its use
unknown, v. 1. n. 24. q. 5. World, what was it made of? v. n. 24. q. 7. Woman
taken in Adultery, v. 1. n. 30. q. 3. Words in 1 John 5.7. why only Marginal
noted? v. 1. n. 3. q. 6. Wagers, where had the Observator his Story of 'em: v.
2. n. 2. q. 6. Women, if mere Machines? v. ^ ^. ^. q. 4. Women, whether not
Banter'd into a belief of being Angels? v. 2. n. 3. q. 5. Women, whether Wiser
than Men? v. 2. n. 3. q. 11. Women, whether they have Souls? v. 2. n. 3. q. 11.
Wa^, whether better to carry it? v. 2. n. 5. q. 4. Water or Earth, which the
coldest Element? v. 2. n. 11. q. 6. Women when bad, why worse than Men? v. 2.
n. 13. q. 11. Word Culprit, the meaning of it? v. 2. n. 15. q. 6. Wife, taking
for the Maid: v. 2. n. 15. q. 7. Wives, a form of Prayer for 'em: v. 2. n. 16.
q. 1. World, does it hang upon nothing? v. 2. n. 18. q. 6. World, what quarter
of the Year it began? v. 2. n. 18. q. 7. Wagers about King William: v. 2. n.
23. q. 15. Wheels of eighteen Inches, etc. v. 2. n. 24. q. 1. Wound, when its
proves incurable? v. 2. n. 27. q. 15. Witches, how they contract their Bodies?
v. 2. n. 28. q. 4. Wits, why generally the greatest Sots? v. 2. n. 28. q. 8.
Woman plagued with an ill Husband: v. 3. n. 4. q. 2. Wife doubly married, whose
is she? v. 3. n. 4. q. 13. Worlds, are there more than one? v. 3. n. 6. q. 2.
Women, why fonde^ of those Men that slight 'em? v. 3 n. 13. q. 9. Witchcrafts,
and other Possessions, whither Credited? v. 3. n. 17. q. 1. Word of God to
resolve all Difference in Religion, v. 3. n. 18. q. ^. Word of God, how shall
we know our Translations to be true? v. 3 n. 18. q 9. World has it any
kindness in it, besides Interest? v. 3. n. 19. q. 4. What will make Persons
wakeful? v. 3. n. 24. q. 8. Woman clothed with the Sun, what the meaning of it?
v. 3. n. 28. q. 3. Wagers laid about Methuselah^ Age: v. 4. n. 5. q. 3. Woman
at Maryland, when she is with Child: v. 4. n. 8. q. 5. Walnut trees, what use
is the Iulus that falls in May? v. 4. n. 9. q. 1. Woman proper to yield at
first to a Man we love: v. 4. n. 13. q. 1. Widows more forward to marry than
Maids: v. 4. n. 13. q. 6. Woman, how soon Marry after the death of a Husband?
v. 4. n. 13. q. 7. Wife, whether obliged to discover her Husband, who has
murdered? v. 4. n. 16. q. 1. Witchcraft, a long Relation concerning it: v. 4.
n. 22. q. 1. Welch-light, before Persons die, v. 4. n. 22. q. 8. Wronged a
Person, who is now Dead: v. 4. n. 24. q. 7. Wind in our Body, from whence it
proceeds? v. 5. n. 7. q. 2. Wife, whether she may dispose of her Husbands
Goods? v. 5. n. 9. q. 2. Woman impoverished, by relieving her Relations, v. 5.
n. 12 q. 3. Wife abused, how to demean her self? v. 5. n. 13. q. 2. Women, why
commonly fonder and falser than Men? v. 5. n. 13. q. 6. Weed called Cats-tail,
why does it come but once in three years? v. 5 n. 14. q. 6.
[]
WIsdom acquired, 1. suppl. p. 23. Wise, or the Fools, which most Happy* 2
suppl. p. 28. Wine, whether it (...) Digestion, or binders it? 2. suppl. p. 30.
[]
WAkes, Dr. Vindication of the Church of England against M. de Meiux Bishop of
Condom. p. 122. His Discourse of the Holy Euchari^* p. 134. Wheelers Voyages.
p. 81.
Y.
[*]
YAwning why catching, v 2 n 16 q 7 Young Man whether fit to hear Philosopy, v
3 n 5 q 6
Z.
[*]
ZOpyrus his stratag^m fit for imitation, v 2 n 27 q 14 Zerah the Ethiopian and
his men who were they v 5 n 18 q 1
FINIS.

