A Fond Husband: OR, The Plotting Sisters.

A COMEDY: As it is Acted at His Royal Highness THE DUKE's Theater.

Haec, dum incipias, gravia sunt, dumque ignores, ubi cognoris, facilia,
Terent. Written by THO. DURFEY Gent.

Licensed June 15. 1676.

ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

LONDON: Printed by T. N. for James Magnes and Rich. Bentley, in Russelstreet
in Covent Garden, near the Piazza's. 1677.

To His GRACE, The Duke of Ormond, Lord Steward of His Majesty's Household,
Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter, One of His MAJESTY'S most Honorable
Privy Council, etc.
May it please your GRACE,
THE Arrogance a Poet may be guilty of in a Dedication, often brings him more
terror, than his fear for the success of his Play; and I always thought the
Frowns of an offended Patron a greater Punishment than the Censures of the
Partial Critics. But the Sin of Confidence is so natural to a young Poet, and
so suitable to his Character and Business, that an Excuse, or Reproof (as it
would be extremely unnecessary, so it) might perhaps be a hinderance to his
Fortune. My sense of this, has encouraged me to present this Comedy to your
Grace; with this humble Suit, That as it has indifferently past in the Opinion
of the Town, it may have the Honor to stand as Neuter in your Graces Favor:
The greatest Confidence of a Poet can ask no more; nor can you, (My Lord)
Governed by your Excellent Temper, grant less. This I know I need not repeat,
nor urge a second time: For who ever yet made an Humble Address to your Grace,
that went away unsatisfied? You are so far from Singularity, so Nobly Just, and
so unwearied in doing good, that to Pen your Applause, were as impossible a
work, as to Pen the Actions of your Life, every hour producing some memorable
thing as an Addition to the Volume. My Lord, It Is not only my particular Grief,
but every ones for your Graces departure from England: And though the great
Place of Trust conferred upon you by His Sacred Majesty, (and which none can be
more worthy of) gives us proof as well of your Pious Loyalty, as Unequaled
Grandeur; Yet such an Influence you have gained on all Hearts, that they had
rather the Kingdom of Ireland should lose its Preserver, than they so good a
Patron. This I confess I am most sensible of, perhaps having as much cause as
any; which Relation I Will smother, lest it is thought Interest more than
Gratitude makes me resent it.

If I have presumed too much, I have this Excuse, That a Dedication to such a
Person cannot be Writ without it; and it is the only Honor a Poet is ambitious
of, to have a great Name before his Play. I confess I was guilty of this; and
have only this Excuse for the Arrogance of a Dedication, That your Grace was
pleased to favor my Last, and that this was Writ with the same Integrity. For
the Play I can say nothing; only that it was my own, though some are pleased to
doubt the contrary, (the Scotch Song excepted, a part of which was not mine;
nor do I desire any Reputation from it.) Be pleased, My Lord, to forgive this
Prolixity; and believe my sense of the Honor I have in Addressing to your
Grace, almost equals the Ambition I shall ever own, in Stiling my Self,

My LORD, Your GRACES most Humble and most Obedient Servant, THO. DURFEY.

Drammatis Personae.
RAshley, a Gentleman, Friend to Emillia. Mr. Smith. Ranger, his Rival. Mr.
Harris. Perrgrine Bubble, A credulous fond Cuckold, Husband to Emillia. Mr.
James Nokes. Old Fumble, a superannuated Alderman, that dotes on Black Women:
He Is very deaf, and almost blind; and seeking to cover his imperfection of not
hearing what is said to him, answers quite contrary. Mr. Anth. Leigh. Sir Roger
Petulant, a jolly old Knight of the last Age. Mr. Sandford. Sneak, Nephew to
Sir Roger, a young raw Student. Mr. Ievan. Spatterdash, Servant to Fumble. Mr.
Richards. Jeremy, Servant to Rashley. Apothecary. Mr. Percival. Emillia, Wife
to Bubble. Mr. Barrer. Maria, Sister to Bubble. Mrs. Marshal. Cordelia, Niece
to Bubble. Mrs. Hughes. Betty, Woman to Emillia. Mrs. Napper. Governess. Mrs.
Norrice. Servants and Attendants.

Some Books Printed for James Magnes and Richard Bentley.
PLato's Apology of Socrates, or Phed^: Two Dialogues concerning the
Immortality of Man's Soul. A Natural History of the Passions. Country Wit.
Sophonisba. Nero. Augustus Caesar. Abdellazar. Sir Timothy Tawdery. Madam
Fickle. All Mistaken. English Monsieur. Tartuff. Andromache. Calist^^. Forced
Marriage. The Fool turned Critic. In the Press. The second Part of the Happy
Slave. In the Press. Moral Essays, the second Part. In the Press.
English Novels New.
Zelinda. Count Brion. Happy Slave.
French Novels.
Princess Monferat. L' Heureux Esclave. L' Heureux Esclave, Second Part. L'
Heureux Esclave, troisieme Part. In the Press. A French Play Acted at
Whitehall, Entitled, Rare-en-tout. The Disorders of Love. In the Press. The
Destruction of Jerusalem by Titus Vespatian, in two Parts. The Rival Queens, or
the Death of Alexander the Great. The Plain-Dealer, by Mr. Wicherley. Madam
Fickle, or the Witty False One. A Fond Husband, or the Plotting Sisters. All
these six last have been Printed these two last Terms. The Education of a
Prince, being the second Volume of the Moral Essays, is now in the Press.
Prologue.
IF Plot and Business Comical and New,
Could please the Critics that sit here to view,
The Poet might have thought this Play would do.
But in this Age Design no praise can get:
You cry it Conversation wants, and Wit;
As if the Obvious Rules of Comedy,
Were only dull Grimace and Repartee.
Such, Sirs, have been your Darlings proved of late:
The Author therefore careless of his Fate, --
And knowing Wit a Chattle hardly got,
Has ventured his whole Stock upon a Plot:
He says a Mock-Song, or a Smutty Tale, --
Can please the Town; and why not this prevail? --
I friendly told him, all that I could say,
Was, that your Fancies leaned the other way;
And you loved Wenching better than his Play.
For the Body still you Luxury prepare;
But let the Mind be desolate and bare:
Thus lose your selves in the Worlds prudent thought, --
Then strive to get Reprieve by finding fault.
A Critic is a Monster that can sway
Only over Ignorance, and yet dares prey
Upon that Power that formed him out of Clay. --
Adulterate Age, where Prudence is a Vice, --
And Wit's as scandalous as Avarice: --
Yet in despite of this, -- you are Poets too;
And what two Fops rail at, a third shall do.
Upon our Privileges you incroach,
And with dull Rhimes the Noble Art debauch.
For Writing Plays you scorn a Poets Name;
A Bawdy Song's enough to get you fame:
Where midst the Reputation that is due,
You will be sure no man shall censure you.
Yet though your Faction does infest the Town,
There is a wise Cabal dares judge and own
Desert and Wit, and our Endeavors Crown:
To these we humbly Dedicate our Plays,
Whilst at their Feet our Poets throw their Bays.
THE FOND-HUSBAND: OR, The PLOTTING SISTERS.
ACT I.
Scene 1.
A Dining Room, a Table, Shuttle-Cock and Battle-Dor's. Rashley and Emilia
sitting. Betty sings. IN vain, Cruel Nymph, you my Passion despise,
And slight a Poor Lover that languishing dies:
Though Fortune my Name with no Titles endowed;
Yet fierce is my Passion, and warm is my Blood.
Delay in Affection exalts an Amor;
For he that loves often will soonest give over.
2.
But Vigorous and Young I Will flee to thy Arms,
Infusing my Soul in Elysium of Charms.
A Monarch I Will be when I lie by thy side,
And thy pretty Hand my Scepter shall guide;
Till cloyed with delight you confess with a Joy,
No Monarch so happy, so pleasant as I.
Rashley. BY Heaven, There Is nothing so dear to a free and generous Spirit, as
this roving and uncontrolled way of Love: Me thinks we live like Angels, and
every Kiss brings a new life of pleasure.


Emilia. You have reason to believe I think so, for suffering this early Visit
from you in my Husbands absence; who, poor Man, went from me by break of day to
see a Horse-Race a Mile beyond High-Gate.


Rashley. Nay, I confess, it is a sign of your kind resentment of my passion: Oh
Heaven! that happy thought has made me all rapture: I Will cherish it, Madam, as
I would my Youth, or the best of all my Senses, the Sense of Feeling.


Emilia. Cherish it rather as the means of keeping our love from my Husbands
knowledge. Well! I swear the thought of my indirect plot sometimes makes me
very melancholy.


Rashley. Melancholy? -- Fie, Madam, banish such thoughts for ever from your
breast: If you are melancholy now, what would you have done, if I had not known
you, when the Clog of your Conscience (I mean your Husband) would have been
your perpetual plague, and given you cause for more melancholy than the
contrivance of the plots you speak of? --


Emil. Ay; but to break a Vow, Sir, a Vow: Little do you think what it is to
break a Vow.


Rashley. Little do I think? Madam, I thought you had known me so much a
Gentleman, to imagine I know what belongs to the breaking a Vow as well as
another man. To undeceive you, I have broke twenty Vows, that is, unnecessary
Vows, (such as yours are!) nay, and without a scruple of Conscience: I thank my
Stars, I Am of a tougher Constitution.


Emil. Besides, you consider not the other inconveniences; you know my
Husband's Sister Maria loves you, and is of that untamed, malicious nature,
that she will revenge my invading her propriety in your heart by discovering our
love to my Husband: I know she plots it hourly; and though her pretense is the
Honor of our Family, her real design is through her love to you.


Rashley Never doubt your Husband, Madam, he has so strange a confidence in my
fidelity, that to possess him otherwise, were utterly to take away the little
sense is left him. You know he brought me to lodge in his house, which
prudently I refused at first, and seemingly fled from the Heaven I desired, to
make him more importunate: Since I came here, you know how he has carrest me;
and to color my design, and divert you, have feigned a Mistress in this
quarter of the Town; and then, as if I spoke of her, have told him all that has
past betwixt my self and you, at which the good-natured Creature has laughed
extremely, and wished me good luck a thousand times; and can we now doubt
further success? By Heaven, we cannot Madam.


Emilia. Then you know there is another great obstacle; Ned Ranger has long
professed a passion for me, and doubtless is not ignorant that my love for you is
the cause of his no better success: A jealous man sees more than twenty others;
and 'twill be very necessary for us to be careful of so dangerous an Enemy.


Rashley. Dangerous? -- not at all, Madam, -- never think him so; success,
which animates the Hero, and leads him on to greater enterprises than before he
durst attempt, has cherisht hopes in me: Let me alone with him; and for thy
part, Igad I Will turn thee loose to any Female-Devil on this side Lapland,
either for plot or repartee.


Emilia. Yet still I fear the worst.


Rashley. Fear nothing, Madam: Fear is the worst of passions, and incident to
base, not noble Hearts; besides, our love, considered rightly, is a second-rate
Innocence, where affection, not duty, bears prerogative; it is the great and
primitive business of our Souls, suspicion and fear came in by the by.


Enter Betty. Betty. Madam, Mr. Ranger, in spite of my resistance, has rudely
pressed into the House, and is just coming hither.


Emilia. Call up the Footmen: Lock the door. --


Enter Ranger. Ranger. Stand still, Mrs. Jilt, or I shall spoil your
door-keeping hereafter. Jack Rashley, here -- Hell and the Devil --


To Betty. Emilia. What insolence is this? pray, Sir, your business?


Ranger. Only my zeal, Madam, to give you notice of an approaching danger: Your
Husband has so intangl'd his Horns yonder in a Hawthorn-Bush, that it is to be
feared without immediate help he will lose the decent and commodious ornament
of his Forehead.


Emilia. Most impudent of men! how dare you talk thus?


Ranger. Most infamous of women! how dare you do thus?


Rashley. Do what, Sir?


Emilia. Hold, and as you love me, move no farther. Basest of men! have you the
folly to believe this way can prove beneficial to your love? No, I hate thee
mortally, nor shall thy malice from henceforth be successful; I Will disarm it;
and when thou think thy plots are surest laid, be sure of a surprise. --


Ranger. O infamy! -- 'Sdeath, is your Forehead Steel? and is your Skin of that
obdurate temper you cannot force a Blush into your Cheeks at the confession of
your obscene Crime? -- How great a Friend to Hell is Impudence!


Emilia. Pray, Sir, -- forgive him, it is an insipid Fellow that I am often
troubled with, and believe his insolence for the future shall be prevented: in
the mean time to express my gratitude, give me leave to present you with this
Necklace; this Ring too will fit your Finger; -- nay, and swear you shall not
refuse 'em, my Husband gives me often such as these, it is all the good I get by
him.


Ranger. Very well; -- the blessing of a wife let all men judge. What envious
Fiend to plague me makes me love this Creature?


Rash. I will preserve your favors as my life; your memory shall possess my
Soul, and all your charms live ever in my sight. -- My kindest, sweetest --
dearest --


Kisses her hand. Rang. Death and Damnation, must I stay and see this? Madam,
-- this modest carriage before a jealous Lover makes --


Emil. Little for your contentment I doubt not, Sir. -- But it is a fate proper
enough for such busy and inquisitive persons. --


Rash. Fa, la, la, la, la. -- Sings.


Rang. Go -- you are a Devil; so far from being a Woman, that I begin to doubt
whether Nature had any hand in your Creation. Is It not enough, Vile Creature,
that I know you abuse your Husband, but that you dare give me an ocular proof?
Dispense your favors to the man that horns him before my face? Oh
unparalleled impudence! --


Emil. Incorrigible Fool, think thou to daunt my will? the little ill I do
can raise no infamy, nor will I ever doubt it.


Rash. Fa, la, la, la.

The joys of a Lover in passion remains,
In passion that is fervent and free, etc.

Enter Betty. Betty. Oh Madam, my Master's just come home and coming up.


Rang. Blessed minute! now I hope his eyes will be unsealed, and through the
right end of the Perspective see you: Madam, assure your self there shall want
nothing in me.


Emil. I know, Sir, and am prepared for the worst of thy malice. Here, take
this Battle-dor, and let us play.


They play. Rash. Out, out, Madam -- you are out.


Enter Bubble. Bubb. Ha, ha, ha. -- Chicken; Good morrow, Chicken. -- Morrow
Tom. -- Chick, prithee let me kiss thee: What, in the mumps? -- This morning,
pop -- no more of that -- hoh -- What my old Friend Ranger too! Morrow Ned.
Faith! would you had been with me this morning, I have had the rarest sport
yonder at High-Gate with two or three Country-fellows -- Harkee, Chick, I have
invited 'em all to Dinner one day this week, good blunt course Fellows Faith,
but damnable rich: -- as Gad jidge me, I past for a brave Fellow amongst 'em.
--


Emil. You need boast of applause from such Clowns.


Bubb. Clowns? What, honest, tough, hard-fisted, plain-dealing Farmers, Clowns?
-- Pop -- I say, you are an inconsiderable Varlet, Chicken, -- and know not
what belongs to such good company.


Rang. She is so well diverted at home, Sir, that all Rural society is
distastful to her. --


Emil. I guess 'em to be much of your humor, Sir, Owners of a great deal of
dull, insipid noise, and very little or no sense. --


Bubb. Well said, Chicken. -- Ned. To her. -- To her again, Ned; It Is a raging
Turk at Repartee. -- Invent, invent; strike her home; prithee try her wit. --
Thou art a Scholar, -- for my part I dare not: (As Gad jidge me!) she is always
too hard for me. --


Rang. And me too, I assure you, Sir. -- But there is a Gentleman that has the
good fortune to be more intimate: -- his address is far more pleasing than
mine. --


Bubb. Who, Tom! Come, I Will hold a Guiney she is too hard for him too; why, it is
the readi'st, witti'st, jeering'st, flearing'st Queen -- 'Sbud she is one of the
pearls of Eloquence. -- And Pop, -- by the way let me tell you, there is never
an Orator in Christendom has more Tropes and Figures, take her when her hands
in --


Rang. Nor knows the Art of Wheadling better, I Will say that for her. --


Bubb. Gad, thou art in the right, she is a Non Parelio at it: but now you talk
of Wheadling, prithee, Tom, how goes thy Love-affairs? Thou look but ill
upon it? -- Any plots? adventures of late? Hah!


Rash. None that can make me frown, Sir: -- My Stars have allotted me so mild a
destiny, that I can caress my Friend with my wonted Air, without being
discouraged by my success in Love-affairs.


Bubb. I Am glad on it, Faith: Come, prithee let me be partaker of thy good
fortune; -- when were thou with her?


Emil. Tell him, tell him, Sir: Lord, you never used to be so cautious in these
matters: -- pray tell him and tremble: -- Now observe.


To Ranger aside. Rash. Why, Sir, -- I was with her this morning.


Bubb. So! and what success prithee?


Rash. Why at my first coming she entertained me with a Song, softly expressing
the delights of Love in an excellent Air, and added to it a thousand kind words
and kisses: I had all the privilege imaginable, and 'twas my good luck to come
at a very happy hour, for her Husband went out early in the morning a Fowling as
far as Holloway.


Bubb. Holloway? -- a Pox on it, -- what damned luck had I? if it had been
High-Gate I should have met the Fool; for I have been there all this morning.


Rash. Ah! it is no matter, Sir his company can add little to anyones credit;
for he is but a kind of a soft-headed, a half-witted Fellow. --


Bubb. A Ninny, a Fool. -- Ha, ha, ha.


Rash. Ay, and the most credulous of all the Cuckolds I ever met with.


Bubb. Poor Animal! Faith I pity him, but there is a number of 'em about Town
in faith, -- we men of wit should want diversion else.


Rang. We men of wit, quoth a! Dam him, he is duller than a Justices Clark. --
To be made a property all this while, and not discern it, Oh insufferable
stupidity!


Emil. Observe, Sir, observe.


Rang. Yes, Devil, I do observe; I doubt not but my observation shall add
little to your quiet. Oh curse of --


Bubb. Why how now, Ned? what, grinning like a Monkey eating of Chestnuts? --
prithee what art thou thinking on? As Gad jidge me, I think thou art grown
insipid, as my Wife says; How do like Tom's Intrigue? Ha, -- is it not
pleasant?


Rang. Very pleasant, Sir, and faith in my judgment represents as nearly as any
character I ever saw. --


Bubb. Represents? -- whoo pox you're at your Quirks and Quiddits, your
Cambridge-Puns and Westminster-Quibbles are you?


Emil. Pray forward, Sir, me thinks it is very divertive.


Rang. Very divertive! Dam her, she was sure the Offspring of Beelzebub.


Rash. After a thousand other caresses intermixed with kisses and smiles, and a
world of happy thoughts and fancies extravagantly rendered upon so happy an
occasion, she obliged me in a new and most sensible way, presenting me, with a
sweet and incomparable grace, this Gold-Watch, and this Diamond Ring.


Ranger looks amaz'dly. Bubb. Prithee observe Ned there, he is grown a strange
whimsical Fellow; -- Ha, ha, ha, look how he stares.


Rang. Was ever such an Impudence? sure I dream! and this is all delusion. --
Harkee, Sir, are you irrecoverably blind?


Bubb. Blind? what I blind?


Rang. Methinks that Watch looks very like one I have seen your Wife wear often.


Bubb. Ha! as Gad jidge me, and so it does; but much good do thy heart, Tom,
I Will warrant it right.


Rang. Me thinks that Ring too much resembles yours.


Bubb. The square is right, -- but I think my Stones were a little bigger.


Rang. Now the Devil take thee for a dull Rogue.


Aside. Rash. But the best jest was, before she gave me these, there happened
to come rudely into the Room a wild, young Fellow, that I found afterward to
be my Rival, and one she hated for his ill nature and impertinence; but to see
how pitiful he looked to see me so presented before his face, would have made
you die with laughing. -- Ha, ha, ha.


Bubb. Ha, ha, ha.


Emil. Ha, ha, ha.


Rang. Hell and Furies, what is this I hear? am I made a property too? If I bear
this, may I be posted for a Coward, and my infamy known to all Nations. --
Harkee, Sir.


Rash. Well, Sir.


Rang. By your ridiculous fleering behavior, I guess I was concerned in your
last description, an affront that requires instant satisfaction; and believe,
Sir, you shall not carry it off so clearly as you imagined: Though he is such a
fool to be bubbl'd out of his reason, -- I am not --; follow me, Sir, if you
dare.


Rash. Dare! Lead on, Sir, -- you shall see how much I dare.


Emil. Hold, Sir, you shall not go.


Rash. Dare follow you?


Rang. Ay, Sir, 'twould be a doubtful question if your protection there were
out of the way.


Points to Emil. Rash. What Is that? protection?


Bubb. How now? -- what Jokes? hard words? what is the matter, Tom? -- I must
have no quarrels here.


Emil. It Is Mr. Ranger's ill humor; prithee, Love, speak to him, he is always
disturbing good company; tell him, he is Impertinent.


Bubb. Gad, and so I will. -- What a pox, a man cannot be a little jocose in
his own house but he must disturb him; you shall see me go and huff him.


Rang. His Horns I am sure are large enough; -- Horns of sufficient growth,
substantial Horns; Horns visible, large, craggy-brancht, rough Horns, and yet
he may not believe it.


Bubb. Believe what, Ned? Ha, ha, ha, -- He Is mad. -- Downright out of his
Wits: It Is a thick scull'd Fellow, God knows, -- but we were not all born to be
Wits. -- What do believe, Ned?


Rang. Why, Sir, I believe you are mad.


Bubb. I mad? -- Damme Ned, you're an impertinent Fellow. Now observe, Chicken.


Rang. How, Sir?


Bubb. I say, Sir, an impertinent Fellow, Sir, and deserve to be cramb'd into a
Powdering-Tub. --


Rang. Dam this Fool, how he tortures me! but my revenge lies another way; I Will
instantly go to his Sister Maria, who I know loves Rashley, and will willingly
join with me in my revenge. This must do, and I Will about it instantly.


Exit. Bubb. Ah -- he is gone; I thought when I began to roar once he would
quickly vanish: I warrant I have frighted him into an Ague. -- Poor Fool, he will
hardly trouble us again this good while.


Rash. An uncivil person, first to intrude into our company, and then to hinder
our discourse, especially of so pleasant a Narration: Gad! 'twas too much. --


Bubb. Too much? -- Why 'twas the Devil and all; and as Gad jidge me, -- he is
the Son of a Whore, and I Will make him an example.


Enter Footman. Footm. Sir Roger Petulant with his Nephew, and old Mr. Fumble
are come to visit you.


Bubb Gads so! -- Sirrah! wait on 'em up, and call my Niece down. This is the
man, Chicken, I told thee that I intend for Cordelia's Husband: He Is very Rich,
I am told, and his Father's a Knight, and Sheriff of the County.


Emil. But who is the other, Sir?


Bubb. Why, do not know him? It Is old Alderman Fumble: He Is a little deaf,
but in faith very good company, and will so fumble about the Women. -- You shall
see he is a very jolly Fellow, and repartees, and talks, and chats at all rates;
-- but the Devil a word he hears, for he always answers quite contrary: --
He*ll make us all laugh in faith. --


Emil. I Have heard he dotes on all the Women he sees, and is as passionate and
inconstant at his age of Seventy Three, as the brisk Sparks of our times are at
Five and Twenty.


Rash. He says (the Devil take him that believes him) nothing fails him but his
Eyes, which defect he has lately amended by a pair of Venetian Spectacles.


Bubb. Ha, ha; it is a pleasant old Fellow. -- But here they come.


Enter Sir Roger, Sneak, Fumble. Sir Rog. Cob! come, Cob, come! along, I say,
and hold up thy head. -- Fie, fie, -- be not so bashful, Child. -- Nay, Cob, --
what do think I Will forsake Thee? -- Pish, in verity I will not: Wipe thy
Eyes, I say.


Enter Cordelia. Bubb. He Is a little moody-hearted, that is the worst on it: --
But the young man will show his parts by and by, I warrant ye. -- Come hither,
Niece: Sir Roger, Your most humble Servant.


Old Fumble pulls out his Spectacles, and looks on Cordelia. Sir Rog. Yours,
good Mr. Peregrine. You see, Sir, I am as good as my word: I have brought my
Nephew, Cob, here is your Mrs. Cob. -- Look, look up, -- and go and salute her.
I Will show thee the way. Nay, Cob, still in thy dumps? -- Look upon me, Man!
I Will do it first.


Sneak. Well, well! I Will follow you, Uncle: I am a little bashful at present,
but I shall come to it anon.


Sir Rog. Well said, Madam! I am your humble Servant. --


Kisses her. Sneak. And I likewise, Madam!


Fumble. Ifack, ifack! a pretty well-favour'd Woman that there* A good Eye,
good Hair, and ifack I think every thing good -- ha -- Hem, Mr. Peregrine,
prithee who is that there? that Woman there?


Bubb. Who, she yonder?


Fumb. Hah!


Bubb. Why, she is a near Friend of mine, Sir. --

Aloud. What an ignorant old Fellow it is, not to know my Niece?


Fumb. A Friend? Well I could have heard you, I could have heard you without
this exclamation: What ifack, I am not deaf, I could have heard you: but if she
be a Friend, I hope an old Friend may salute her; it is a civility well paid. By
your leave, sweet Lady.


Goes to kiss Cordelia, and kisses Sneak. Sneak. What the Devil does this old
Fellow mean? Uncle! did you ever see the like?


Sir Rog. Ha, ha, ha! a pleasant mistake in faith.


Fumb. Ha! ifack I think I was mistaken, was I not, Gentlemen? was I not? I
doubt my false light guided me to the wrong person; -- Hah! But come, no
matter, I meant it right, Madam, I meant it right: Never the older for a
mistake Ifack! I meant it right.


Cord. I am glad I mist it for all that.


Sir Rog. Mr. Rashley, you are not merry; in troth I fear I have disturbed you,
-- Hah!


Rash. Not at all, Sir; it is impossible your free humor can be troublesome to
any one.


Sir Rog. You know my old way, Sir, jovial and inoffensive. -- Pray let me
commend my Nephew to you. Cob, come hither: --. He Is a little too modest, Sir;
-- but else I think I may say, -- a youth of notable parts: Come hither, Cob.


Rash. I can believe no less: Sir, your humble Servant.


Sneak. With all my heart, Sir; and I am your Servant in like manner.


Cord. Bless me! what a Figure of a Husband shall I have?


Sir Rog. You know, Sir, when I was a Bachelor I delighted much in merry Songs
and Catches. -- 'Ah! Sawny Broom rare Fellow; and when a dozen of us Royalists
were met at the Miter under the Rose there, the Leveller went round, round,
in faith. -- I hold out still, Sir, as well as I can; and though I cannot sing my
self, I keep those that can. --


Bubb. Ay, and so do I. -- My Wives Maid shall sing you a Scotch Song: -- Come,
sing it Betty. --


Betty sings. A Scotch SONG.
IN January last on Munnonday at Morn,
As along the Fields I past to view the Winter Corn,
I leaked me behind, and saw come ore the Knough,
Yen glenting in an Apron with a bonny brent brow.
2.
I bid Good Morrow, Fair Maid, and she right courteously,
Bekt lew and Sine kind Sir, she said, Good Day again to ye.
I speard o her, Fair Maid quo I, how far intend you now?
Quo she, I mean a Mile or two to yonder bonny brough.
3.
Fair Maid, I Am weel contented to ha sike Company;
For I am ganging out the Gate that you intend to be.
When we had walked a Mile or two, I said to her, My Dow,
May I not light your Apron sine kiss your bonny brow?
4.
Nea, Good Sir, you are far mistean, for I am nean o those,
I hope you ha more breeding than to light a Woman's Cloths;
For Ive a better chosen than any sike as you,
Who boldly may my Apron light, and kiss your bonny brow.
5.
Nay, gif you are contracted, I have no more to say;
Rather than be rejected, I will give ore the Play:
And I will choose yen o my own that shall not on me rue,
Will boldly let me light her Apron, kiss her bonny brow.
6.
Sir, I see you are proud-hearted, and leath to be said Nay;
You need not tall ha started for eaght that I did say:
You know Wemun for modesty no at the first time Boo;
But gif we like your Company we are as kind as you.
Bubb. How dee like it?


Sir Rog. Oh! I have hundred such as this, Sir.


Fumb. A pretty matter ifack, a very pretty matter.


Rash. I doubt, Sir, you heard it not.


Fumb. Ay, is it not, Mr. Rashley, is it not? Ifack I like it well.


Rash. With all my heart, Sir.


Fumb. Right ifack, it was sung well indeed.


Omn. Ha, ha, ha!


Bubb. Well said, Grandfire Fumble. -- Come, Sir Roger, now let us in, and toss
a Bumper about.


Sir Rog. I wait upon you, Sir. Cob, lead in your Mistress. --


Exeunt. Manent, Rashley, and Emilia. Rash. So! thus far all is well. -- But
what is next to be done? for I know Ranger and Maria are plotting mischief.


Emilia. To prevent 'em we must counterfeit a falling out by railing at you to
my Husband. I Will soon confirm it in his opinion; but be sure you are melancholy
enough; and by this means their designs are frustrated, and we still safe in
our Intrigue.


Rash. Excellent! -- And I Will warrant you, Sweet, I Will play my part well.


Emilia. The better will be the success: but let us go in for fear we are seen.


Rash. Thus whilst we are equally involved in thought,
That side fares best that lays the wisest plot. --

Exeunt. The Second ACT.
Enter Ranger and Maria. Rang. NEver was an Intrigue carried with so much
confidence; every word they spoke retained a double meaning; but so evident,
that any Animal, but a dull Husband, could not fail to understand it: for they
were so far from hiding their Amor, that they openly confessed all; only
speaking in a third person for a slender security. He stood and heard it, and
often would laugh heartily to hear himself notoriously abused.


Mar. An insipid Fool! Oh that I had been there to have changed the Scene a
little! But, Sir, could you be idle on such an occasion? Why did not you play
your part cunningly, and discover 'em? --


Rang. Faith, I did what I could: but the cunning Devil your Sister, still as I
was speaking something toward the discovery, would interrupt me, and in a
minute dash all my hopes by turning what was said into raillery.


Mar. Is she so politic? it is very well: I once imagined I could best design,
and thought my Talent of Wit equal with any. But are they so intimate, say ye,
Sir?


Rang. As Man and Wife.


Mar. Impudent Fellow! dares he insult over my Love? Baffle my passion with a
sly pretense? I am not fair enough; but he shall find my Brain has Wit enough
to ruin his design, Fool as I am.


Rang. Now the Devil in her is working hard for me; we shall have it anon. --


Aside. Mar. Fooled by a Brothers Wife! A Creature that the Law makes kin to
me! No, 'twas tamely thought, and I as tamely now should suffer wrongs had I a
Dastard Spirit. But in me Nature has shown her Masterpiece, and to a Masculine
person Providence has bestowed an Active Soul so sensible of wrongs, that to
forgive would argue me as base as is their treachery.


Rang. Now she thunders; the Devil has been priming her all this while, and now
she scatters like a Hand-Granado.


Aside. Mar. My love refused! It Is Death to the dull Fool; Death, double Death;
Damnation too it is likely. -- But why did I name it Love? there is no such word;
for with this breath I banish it for ever, and in my ^^east receive obscure
revenge, my Hearts delightful Darling! Oh the pleasure in that slender word
Revenge! -- I Will plague the Fool her Husband with a story shall make his Gall
flow upwards.


Rang. Plague him with doubts, and make his jealousy break into violent fits
of rage and passion: I Will further all, Madam; by Heaven I will not fail you.


Mar. Enough; and doubt not we'll soon turn the Current.


Rang. We'll catch 'em in his Lodging.


Mar. Entrap 'em there, and bring him in to see it.


Rang. Right: What else? We'll shame 'em. --


Mar. Slight 'em. --


Rang. Laugh at 'em. --


Mar. Vex 'em. --


Rang. Ruin 'em. --


Mar. Dam 'em. --


Rang. Hey! By Heaven it is excellent; and now I see the sense of wrongs can arm
a Female Spirit, and make it vigorous. -- Oh I adore thy temper!


Mar. I Will instantly go to her, and first charge her with the fact, then
upbraid her: for I am resolved never to let her rest till she deserts his
passion. --

And whilst she suffers that base Wretch to woo her,
I Will plot, and counterplot, but I Will undo her.

Exit. Rang. I am glad I met with her; for of all the persons I am acquainted
with, she only has enough of the Divil to follow such a business closely: for
she will never rest till she has betrayed 'm, which still will further my
revenge; and I am resolved to enjoy her Sister, if it be but only for the dear
pleasure of boasting it hereafter. I Will strait to Bubble, and once more infect
him with my poison: Maria is my Pilot* and her being thus slighted by Rashley,
will still augment her desire of revenge; it is natural to the Sex:

For baulk a Woman once, and love rebate,
Not all the Devils shall reclaim her hate.

Ex. Scene 2.
Enter Rashley, Emilia. Emil. MAnage it but carefully, you need not doubt the
consequence: I have already possessed my Husband with a belief of our variance,
and I know he is coming up with an intent to reconcile us. I Will not be seen; the
rest is your part, carry it but handsomely, and Ranger's plots are fruitless.
Maria has sent also to speak with him; I guess the business, and I am
accordingly provided. -- But remember you are not tardy.


Rash. Never doubt me, Madam; I am more a Lover than to be idle in a business
that so nearly concerns us: besides, it is so well contrived, and so easy to be
followed, that to fail now would demonstrate me as defective in sense as your
Husband is. But what business can your Sister have with you? The Devil and She
have been plotting together about this Intrigue.


Emil. Let 'em plot: -- I am so much her Sister, that my part shall never be
wanting to furnish the Comedy. I Will go to her strait: in the mean time be you
sure to play your part with him. -- Hark! I hear him coming.


Naise within. Exit. Rash Well! I never thought a Woman till now so necessary a
Creature: Intrigues are their Masterpieces, and as readily they undertake 'em
as a Country-Lawyer a bad Cause from a half-witted Client: 'twould be excellent
sport to hear the two She-Wolves bark one at another: but since I cannot be
there, I Will divert my self with entertaining the Fool her Husband. -- Here he
comes! Now to my studied posture.


Enter Bubble. Bubb. Why how now, Tom? What, all-a-mort? In verity this is
Foppery, as Sir Roger says. Come, cheer up, cheer up, Man, and hold up thy
head; in troth thou make me sad to see the look so like -- so like a --
Gammon of Bacon. There I was sharp upon him: -- Ha, ha! a good jest afaith.


Rash. Dam him, what a simile the Fool has found out!

Aside. Sir, it lies not in any man's power to banish serious thoughts at all
times: -- Besides, I have some cause for my present melancholy.


Bubb. The cause? -- Come, come, Tom, -- I know the cause, ha, ha. -- You
thought I warrant to have carried matters so privately; but if I once go about
such a business, there is never a man in Christendom (though I say it) can find
out a cause sooner than I.


Rash. You may be mistaken in mine, Sir, for all that.


Bubb. Mistaken? ha, ha! -- I see, Tom, thou know not what it is to be
ingenious: I tell thee once more, I do know the cause, the very cause; I, and
more then that, the cause of that cause; -- 'Sbud there is never an Attorney in
the Inns of Court knows more causes than I do.


Rash. I doubt not but in the end you will be brought to confess your self too
positive in this particular: but since you have such an excellent faculty, and
imagine your self so well skilled in finding out secrets, -- come, what is it?
what is it?


Bubb. What is it? Why, ha, ha, ha! -- My Wife -- my Wife, Tom, and you're fallen
out, ha, ha, ha! -- have I mumpt you now in faith? --


Rash. I must confess you are in the right, Sir.


Bubb. O must you so, Sir? What a pox I warrant you thought we Husbands had no
wit but what our Wives lend us? But I would have you to know, Tom, that I am a
Leviathan at these matters: to be plain, that is as much as to say, a Whale. --


Rash. I am sufficiently convinced of your excellent judgment, Sir; and as I
have confessed to you freely the cause of my sadness, to be your Wives ill usage
of me, so I am continually tortured to guess the reason: for I am confident,
Sir, you know I always honored her, and loved her.


Bubb. Faith! so thou did! I Will say that for thee; and by the Lord Harry she
shall love and honor thee too, or I Will be very sharp upon her; I Will pinch her
severely faith, for all she is my Chicken: nay, if she*ll be still refractory,
rather then fail thou shall pinch her too, Tom. I am not like your
surly-burly-waspish-cross-grain'd Fellows, that fall out and fight about their
Wives: 'Sbud I Will give my friend leave at any time to chastise my Wife if she
don't behave her self civilly.


Rash. You ever load me with your kind expressions, Dear Friend! --


Bubb. Dear Dom, Faith you are an honest Fellow.


Embrace. Rash. This ever is the fate of Cuckolds. --


Aside. Bubb. Never doubt; -- I Will bring you together again with a vengeance:
nay, I can tell you the reason of her anger too, if I thought 'twere convenient.


Rash. Convenient! Why, Sir, it is the only thing that conduces to my
contentment; for I have long studied in vain, and could never yet so much as
guess at it: Let me beg it of you, Sir; come, I Am sure you cannot deny so near
a Friend.


Bubb. In Faith I cannot, -- that is the truth on it, and thou shall have it. --
Why, you must know, Tom, one night (when I was examining her about you) she
told me very seriously that the cause of her anger was, that you promised to
give her a Squirril that night, and never kept your word; and she loves
Squirrils passionately.


Rash. It Is true, I confess I did promise her; -- but as the Devil would have
it, I was disappointed utterly of my Squirril that night my self; for I got
very drunk, and from thence sprung this fatal consequence


Bubb. Pugh! -- no matter; I Will warrant thee I Will bring all about again. --


Rash. Oh it is impossible; -- I am sure she will near be brought to it,


Bubb. Not brought to it? Yes, I Will lay my commands upon her, and I Will have you
know she shall be brought to it: I Will lay a Wager I Will reconcile you both before
night. --


Rash. Done: any Wager. --


Bubb. What shall it be?


Rash. Why, Five Guinneys to be spent in a Treat of Ven'son and Champaine.


Bubb. Agreed in faith; and we'll drink and sing Tory-Rory. Not reconcile you!
You shall be all one before to morrow-morning. -- I have a spell for that; I Will
do it, I say; come along, Boy. --


Rash. A petty Friend for pimping we applaud:
But of all Men a Husband's the best Bawd. --

Exit. Scene 3.
Enter Sir Roger, Cordelia, Sneak. Sir Rog. MAdam, You, as being the Niece to
Mr. Peregrine, truly deserve the favor I intend you by this Alliance: You are
a handsome Woman, and in verity were I a young Man, none should be more forward
than I for a place in your affection. I like your Air well; and upon my Faith
you have the right way on it. Ah! -- Madam, I once saw the days when such an Eye
as yours -- Well, I say no more on it, -- it is for my Nephew now I make
addresses; -- you see what he is, Madam; -- His Face is none of the worst, nor
his Person I think any way defective. -- In brief, Madam, I present him to you,
nor shall he want an Estate to make him worthy.


Cord. It Is well he named an Estate to Candy over his bitter Pill, my squeamish
Stomach would else have hardly digested it. -- Lord! how he looks? --


Sir Rog: Cob! go; -- prithee go and make your address to the Lady. He Is newly
come from the College, Madam, and is as the rest of 'em are, a little bashful
at first; but by that time h'as seen a Play or two --


Cord. Me thinks this silence becomes him very well, Sir: A Student should
always be contemplative; it is a great sign of Learning. --


Sir Rog. It Is a sign he thinks the more: But, Madam, Ladies of this Age are
not to be won with Imaginary Courtship, it is the practick part they love; and
he that can sing well, dance well, talk well, rhyme modishly, swear decently,
and lie confoundedly, -- is certainly the happy man, whilst others pass
unregarded. --


Cord. I see, Sir, you are well skilled in Modish Address; but give me leave to
tell ye, perhaps few other Ladies are of my humor: -- I love words
considerately spoken. --


Sir Rog. And I too, Faith Madam. Cob, Dee hear that, Cob? --


Sneak. Ay, ay! it is a fine Woman, by Ierico, and now I begin to be a little in
heart: I shall put up well enough anon, Uncle. --


Sir Rog. Well said! Why now I love thee: And, Madam, as to his Interior
Virtues, I dare speak for 'em; His Wit is hereditary; Ah! his Father, old Sir
Jeremy Sneak, had a notable Headpiece, and troth Cob comes very near him;
you will find it, Madam, when he talks with you.


Cord. Your Character of him, Sir, gives me the satisfaction I should receive
in his discourse: I imagine him to be one of those that hoord up Wit for
Plato's great Year, and are very shie of using their Talent for fear of
diminishing the value in making it too common. --


Sir Rog. In verity, Madam, I always held him so. -- Cob! --


Sneak. Ay, Madam, you may say of me what you please; I am your Slave, -- your
Vassal, -- your Pigg, Madam: But as for Wit, as my Nuncle says, I think I may
compare with another, take the Court-Cabal away. -- It Is a blessing thrown upon
me: Besides, mine is none of your Wheadling Wits, that cheat for a Livelihood:
I am no Parasite, Madam; -- I am a Scholar, I!


Sir Rog. In troth he is in the right: -- Did not I tell you, Madam, he would
speak notably? -- Ah, it is a Wag.


Cord. His Disputes in the College have added extremely to his Rhetoric; he
speaks with good Emphasis, and gives a delightful period to every Jest, of
which I see he has many. But I would fain have the Gentleman speak himself, a
little talk I am sure would become him.


Sir Rog. He shall do it, Madam. -- Cob, now is your time; -- she is wrought
finely. -- Madam, -- I Will take my leave for a minute; -- I know his temper,
Madam; -- he will speak the better for my absence. --


Exit. Cord. Pray, Sir, what University was blessed with your presence?


Sneak. Cambridge, Madam. --


Cord. Will you not be angry if I ask you one Question more?


Sneak. O Lord, Angry, Madam? You do not know me. Angry! You mistake me
clearly: We of the Round Cap are not given to*t; it is your Graduates are the
angry people.


Cord. Pray, what have you learnt at Cambridge?


Sneak. Learnt! what a Plaguey Question's that? -- where is my Uncle now? --
Learnt, Madam?


Cord. Yes, Sir, Learnt!


Sneak. Why, Madam, -- I learnt Nothing.


Cord. Nothing, Sir!


Sneak. No, -- but to wear a Daggled Gown, as the rest do, and eat dry Chops of
Rotten Mutton: We Fellow-Commoners don't go thither to learn; -- Madam, we go
for Diversion, we. --


Cord. I thought you had gone to learn the Sciences. --


Sneak. Right, Madam; -- but not Gentlemen: Your green halfwitted Pupils, I
confess, come thither for some such business; that is, Madam, your Priggs that
would be Parsons. But the Sciences of your Persons of Quality; -- I ll give you
a description; -- Hum? -- It Is to Wench immoderately; -- To be Drunk hourly; --
To wear their Clothes slovenly; -- To abuse the Proctor damnably; -- And so be
expelled the College triumphantly: -- There are sev'n, -- but I contented my
self with these.


Cord. This is ever found, -- Your sly Fool is in his nature more impudent
than the greatest Professors of Debauchery. -- I must shift him off. --


Enter Fumble. Fumb. Oh! -- here she is; -- and ifack I Will put up to her now I
have found her. How do thou do, Girl? -- Hah! how do thou do? Give me thy
hand. Ah, little Rogue! -- Well, I have been with my Goldsmith about the Ring I
promised thee; Thou shall have it, Bird, thou shall have it. -- How now, who is
that there? --


Sneak. O the Devil! -- Now will the old doting Fellow disturb us before I have
told her half my mind. Who am I, Sir? Why, Sir, I am one that cares as little
--


Fumb. Thank you heartily, Sir, Ifack; -- I am very well; only cold weather,
cold weather. -- It Is Sir Roger's Nephew! A pretty Fellow, -- a very pretty
Fellow.


Sneak. Very well, Sir; would you were very sick, Sir. 'Ounds, I must beat this
Fellow. --


Cord. Here Is like to be rare sport.


Sneak. Pray, Old Philosopher* depart in silence for fear of further damage;
this Lady and I have business.


Fumb. Ifack, and so she is, Sir, very pretty, very pretty, bona fide. Ah that
black of the top there! Well, I Will say no more. But, ifack, Black Hair, Black
Eyes, and a Black -- (Gad forgive me, what was I going to say?) -- Patch or two
further Generation more than Tissues and Embroideries.


Sneak. Generation? O Lord! was ever such an Impudence? An old doting impotent
Fellow, one that was rotten in his Minority, and now has lost three of his five
Senses, to talk of Generation! I am impatient: Will you begone, Sir? 'Sbud I
will so swinge you else.


Cord. Held, Sir, and pray forbear this rudeness; I like his Company very well.
--


Sneak. How! like him? Why, he has Nothing, Madam: A Lady can like no Hearing,
no Smelling, no Tasting, no Teeth, no Strength, no -- nothing I say that a man
should have? Besides, he*s above fourscore; and by being a Stallion in his
Youth, has acquired to be a Baboon in his Age, by Ierico. -- 'Sbud, like him,
quoth a?


Fumb. What does the Wag say? Hah! What does he fay? He Is a pretty spruce
Fellow, Madam, and ifack knows a Hawk from a Handsaw, as the saying is. -- But
here are those not far off that ifack know as much as he, if that were all;
what think thou, Bird? do they not? do they not, Rogue? Well, still I say
that Hair of thine. Ah, Rascal!


Cord. I am glad it pleases you, Sir.


Sneak. But, Madam, when shall I begin? 'Sbud me thinks we lose time.


Cord. Begin! what, Sir?


Sneak. Why, my Courtship. Pox of this old chatt'ring Fellow; if he had not
come, I had been out of my pain before now: -- Hark ye, Reverend Sir, 'Bud!
what do you do prating here? why don't you go and chat to your Granddaughter at
home, if you love Women so well? --


Fumb. Hah! -- what does the Wag say, Madam?


Cord. He says, Sir, he is extremely in love with your Granddaughter.


Fumb. My Grand -- daughter? and ifack she deserves it, Madam: She Is a juicy,
spritely Girl; she will make a Pottle of Water of a Pint of Ale; a Chip of the
Old Block, bona fide, and shall turn her Back to never a one in Christendom of
her Inches, I Will say that for her.


Enter Betty. Betty. Sir, there is one Mrs. Snare below desires to speak with
you.


Sneak. Snare! O Lord, what shall I do? how the Devil came she to know I was
here? Hark, -- prithee, Sweetheart, tell her I am gone: Oh! I would not see
her for the World.


Betty. Sir, she says she dogged you hither, and swears and rants yonder
strangely.


Sneak. O damned Queen! what shall I do?


Betty. And vows if you come not instantly, she will go into the Parlor to Sir
Roger, and discover something to him, I know not what; but I saw she was a
Big-bellied Woman, and I was loath to discourage her.


Ex. Betty. Sneak. Well, well, -- tell her I Will come; why how the Devil could
she get from Cambridge already?


Cord. What Is the matter, Sir? Not well?


Sneak. Yes, I thank you, Madam, very well, only thinking of a little business
I have; I must about it presently: Madam, Your Servant, I Will wait on you some
other time. I must go and pacify this Queen* This comes of Learning the
Sciences with a Pox* --


Exit Sneak* Cord. Come, Sir, shall we go in?


Fumb. Ifack, -- and so he is, Madam: but the Fellow has some pretty parts, and
will grow better in time: But come, let us go in and see Sir Roger.


Cord. 'Twas that I asked you.


Fumb. Hah! do like me, say thou, ifack? I Am glad on it. Shall we not have a
word or two in private, my little Queen of Fairies? We must, I say, we must. --
Ah Rogue! -- I Will warrant thou art a Swinger: -- But come, let us go. --


Ex. Scene 4.
Emilia's Bedchamber. Enter Maria and Emilia severally. Emil. NOw for my
Talent of Women! I see by her looks I shall have occasion for it.


Mar. Sister!


Emil. Sister!


Mar. The natural love I bear you, and my desire to prevent your growing
Infamy, has brought me hither to give you counsel.


Emil. The sense I have of your ill nature, and my knowledge of the little good
it will do you, has brought me hither to give you advice.


Mar. Your Reputation is lowdly branded by all tongues, and I only as a Sister
have power to speak indifferently of your Life in hopes of your Reformation.


Emil. Your Malice and unexampled Envy is mortally hated by all people; I only
as a Sister retaining so much pity as to desire its utter Dissolution. --


Mar. Why do you echo me?


Emil. Why do you question me? What have I done deserves it?


Mar. Done! Recollect your thoughts, and then confess; for my part, shame ties
up my tongue I dare not speak it.


Emil. Dare not! Nay, that I am sure is false, you dare speak any thing: Come,
prithee don't fright me, what is it you mean?


Mar. Excellent cunning! she has fitted me. --

Aside. Why would you seem ignorant? I confess to a stranger you might be
cautious of a nice Confession: But this artifioe to your Sister, fie, Emilia.


Emil. Now I Will lay my life your design is to wheedle something out of me to
make your self merry withal.


Mar. Rare still! -- No, Madam, this is no such merry matter; the Infamy of a
Family is not so to be jested with.


Emil. Infamy! Nay, then I see it is time to be serious: Come, express it; I
suppose it is the Invention of your Envy, some new stratagem to affront me with;
I am no stranger to your temper.


Mar. This is an impudence beyond a prostitute: Do I not know you are false?


Emil. False! How?


Mar. False to your Husband; False with Rashley: I need not tell you how, you
best know that.


Emil. I know you love him! and am sensible of the Intrigues and Assignations
which you have had, which makes your meaning visible. But me thinks this is so
strange a design.


Mar. Design! What is it she means? I hope you can tax me with no such crime
with him.


Emil. Not I; it is not my business; I have only liberty to guess: yet indeed
your often private meetings were a little suspicious, and I suppose your late
raillery was only a design; but you might have took a better way with your
Sister: -- I am not so talkative.


Mar. Exquisite Devil! -- Death, I am incensed beyond all bounds of reason: I
private with him! An Intrigue with me! Fury! thou know --


Emil. I do; -- and to exasperate thy rage, will now confess all* I do love
Rashley more than I love Fame: Nay, more than you could do, could you die for
him. -- But why should that offend you?


Mar. Oh Confusion! I am all over Fire: Dare you be such a Devil? dare you love
him?


Emil. Yes; and to vex you more, dare make you of my counsel*


Mar. Can I endure this? Oh for a look now of a Basilisk that I might kill thee.


Emil. Thou art worse. --


Mar. Expect to find me so; for if there be a stratagem of Malice in all Hell,
I Will have it thence: Ah, I Will be a tender Sister to thee.


Emil. As ever Woman yet was blessed withal.


Mar. Not all the Infernals clad in the secret darkest Robes of Malice, did
ever watch a Soul they meant to ruin, as I will thee: Thy very sleeps shall be
discovered to me, and every dream I Will trace with so much care, that if thou
scapest thou art the wiser Sister, and I a poor unthinking Creature good for
nothing.


Emil. I slight thy threats, and dare thee to persevere: Manage thy hate with
such dexterity, the World may wonder at thee, and confess thou had the
practick part of Policy: Design thy plots so subt'ly, that the Devil should own
himself out done in his own Mystery; yet in the Arms of him I love, I Would laugh
to see my Wit outdo 'em.


Mar. Thy Wit! thy Wit compare with mine, insipid Fool?


Emil. Yes; and my prosperous Fate shall mount me far above thy shallow
Stratagems.


Mar. I Will pull thee down from that ambitious height, and trample thee in
Ashes. --


Emil. Do.


Mar. Expect it.


Emil. And from that low recess I Will forge a plot shall blow thee into Air. --


I Will make that Devil in thy Envy tame.
Mar. And if I fail thee may I sink and dam.

Ex. The Third ACT.
Enter Sneak and Mrs. Snare. Sneak. NAy! prithee, Pegg, have patience.


Snare. Tell not me of patience, Sir, for my part I can stay no longer; you see
my condition; if you will consider, so; if not, Sir Roger shall know that the
abuse of so innocent a person as I was, deserves better satisfaction.


Sneak. Innocent! -- 'Sbud, she was a Strumpet to the whole College before I
knew her: Innocent, with a pox!


Snare. Sir, do not grumble, nor say your Devils Pater Noster to me, but give
me money; Fifty Pounds I demand, which I think is reasonable enough considering
the charge of my journey.


Sneak You might have staid till I came back again, I was not running away.


Snare. But I was, Sir* and so might you for any thing I know: Come, come, Sir,
I am to be baffled no more; I am grown older now, make me thankful.


Sneak. Ay, in impudence, by Ierico: she has been snapt it seems formerly, --
but has now learnt cunning. Ah, plague of these Sciences, I say still! -- Come
will thou be civil? will thou take Twenty Pounds? Pox, use a little Conscience
in thy dealings; thou will thrive the better for it.


Snare. I Will abate not a Farthing, Sir; Don't tell me of Conscience.


Sneak. 'Sbud, would she were in the Sea, and a Millstone about her neck: I must
give it; for if my Uncle comes and sees her, I am undone.


Enter Betty. Betty. O Sir, what shall we do? Sir Roger and my Master are just
coming.


Sneak. Oh unhappy minute! if he sees me I am lost for ever: No hole nor corner
to hide us in, my little Rogue? 'Sbud here is a Guiney for thee do but contrive
handsomely.


Betty. Well, Sir, -- I see you are a Gentleman; therefore I Will help you: this
door opens to my Ladies* hamber; there you may hide your selves; -- and at
night when it begins to grow dark, I Will come and let you out.


Sneak. With all my heart! Oh I Have an Ague on me. --


Exeunt. Enter Ranger and Emilia. Rang. Are you still resolved?


Emil. Assure your self I am and shall be ever.


Rang. Give me but hopes, and I Will forget all injuries, and ask your pardon.


Emil. Fie, this from a Man of Wit, one that can plot so well? it is impossible:
what would you have me do?


Rang. Desert young Rashley: Come, I beg thee do it.


Emil. Not for the World! Oh Heaven! desert him! I love him, Sir.


Rang. Go on then, Devil, and if I don't plague thee! --


Enter Bubble, Sir Roger, Rashley, Fumble. Bubb. Now for the Venison, Tom!
you will stand to your Bargain?


Rash. Firmly, Sir, win it, and it is yours. -- Ha! -- what a Devil makes Ranger
here?


Sir Rog. Madam, I hope you will excuse my last abrupt departure: my nature,
Madam, is merry, and in verity careless sometimes. I have not since I came to
England achieved the Polite Method of Courtship and Address; but if blunt
Actions, kind Behavior, and merry Songs can do it, I think I have shown an
example, have I not, old Signior!


Fumb. Ifack, Sir, and it is right, let who will say the contrary; what does he
say now? Madam, you may believe him.


Emil. Any thing, Sir, rather than put you to the trouble of an Apology*


Emil. frowns on Rashley. Rash. What think you now, Sir? do you observe her
angry Look? do but see what an Eye of indignation she casts upon me!


Bubb. Ay, ay, -- I Will put out her Eye of indignation presently; I Will fetch her
down with her haughty looks in a moment; I Will make her look as I Would have her, or
I Will put her head into a Pudding Bag.


Rang. Sdeath, how she looks! here is another plot a hatching.


Bubb. Wife! I have brought honest Tom here to be reconciled to thee; and to
take away all manner of distastes, he says he will give thee a Squirril at any
time, woult thou not, Tom?


Rash. Sir, and my heart into the bargain, if she please to pardon me.


Bubb. Why, look ye now; -- he is as honest a Fellow as lives, I Will say that for
him.


Emil. Sir, the affront he offered me was so contrary to my nature, and his
behavior so opposite to his Duty and Character, that to forgive him, would
argue my Spirit as mean as by his late deportment one might guess his breeding.


Bubb. What! dare you be refractory? -- Hoh! -- do it, or by the Lord Harry I
shall be very sharp upon you, that is in short. --


Rang. Now all the Fiends that dwell beneath the Center,
And hourly study deeds subtle and horrid,
To sooth and snare the Souls ye mean to dam,
In favor of your Commonwealth appear,
And to be still more Devilish, copy her.

Bubb. Still refrectory? Then thus, I break the Truce, and fally out with my
full power.


Rang. Sir, do you not see her artifice? This is nothing what she intends; it is
all feigned, and you are abused, by Heaven: Sir, there is nothing of this real.


Bubb. Ah! would it were not. But Ned, thou can talk well, prithee go and try
if thou can reconcile 'em; Faith I Will do as much for thee; prithee try. --


Rang. Insufferable ignorance! No Brains! No sense of feeling! Sir, this is all
dissimulation, and to carry on their design of abusing you.


Bubb. Why, peace, I say, not a word of this; 'sbud I shall lose my Venison by
this Fools prating, if I let him alone a little longer. Wife, I command you
once more; and instantly obey upon this Summons, or I Will turn you away like a
Vagabond for contempt of my Government. Sir Roger! try you to persuade her;
'sbud this Ned here had liked to have spoiled all; but what says Scoggen?


Emil. It Is hard to force lost friendship to the blood when once it is banished.


Rang. Had she been bred a Witch she had lost half her Character.


Sir Rog. Come, Madam! forget and forgive; it is necessary your Husband should
be obeyed. Mr. Rashley, I am sorry to see you so deserted by the Ladies you
used to be most in favor withal.


Rash. Not I: but you weigh my Merits in your own Scale, Sir Roger.


Sir Rog. No faith; I am old now; but about some thirty years ago I could have
said something; I could have fetched 'em about with a Horse-pox in faith; I never
flincht, I was a true Knight Errant, I.


Fumb. What is the meaning of all this? Ifack I cannot guess the matter: but
mum, I must not discover my failing.


Emil. Well, Sir, rather than be thought disobedient I will submit; but Heaven
knows with what an ill will --


Bubb. Why so, now all is well, and the Venison's mine, -- ha, ha, ha* -- I
thought I should have it: Faith, Tom, be civil, and kiss her, it is no
confirmation else.


Rang. Oh dam him, dam him! was ever such a Coxcomb?


Rash. It Is now about Five; at Seven I will not fail ye: Madam, -- you have
given me new life with this favor.


Aside. Rang. At Seven? (Good!) Thanks to my Ear for that discovery: I shall go
near to spoil your assignation.


Aside. Bubb. Go now, get you in, and begin a Set at Ombre, and I Will come and
make one presently. By the Lord Harry I am glad they are friends with all my
heart.


Ex. Sir Roger, Fumble, Rashley, Emilia smiling. Enter Maria. Rang. So Paris
stole the Wife of Menelaus, and Troy grew bright with Fire. --


Bubb. Hey day! -- Troy! why what have thou to do with Troy? Ned, prithee let
us talk of our own affairs.


Mar. And wisely too; for your Reputation suspended one hour will grow
nauseous; the Rabble will shout at ye, and point their fingers, and by your
Name you will grow infamous.


Enter Betty at door. Bubb. My Name, Sister! what do mean? what name?


Mar. A Cuckold: Can you bear it, Sir? A Cuckold-Buz.


Bubb. By the Lord Harry it is but a scurvy Name for a Man of Honor, that is the
truth on it; but what is it to me?


Rang. Nothing, Sir, nothing; only you are the Man, that is all.


Bubb. That Is all, quoth-a? what a pox does he mean?


Mar. Dull Man! I blush to call ye Brother, that kind name, your want of sense
taken from you: Can you see the guilty Love 'twixt Rashley and your Wife, the
melting Touches, and the glancing Eyes? the often Pressings, Sighs, and kind
Caresses, and all the signs of shame and burning Lust, and yet be patient? Oh
the insipid dullness of a Husband! A Husband.


Bubb. Rashley and my Wife! Pish, -- why, I reconciled 'em but just now; she
has been angry with him this week for not giving her a Squirril he promised her.


Rang. A Squirril? -- Hah! a very fine present that, if you understood all.


Betty. Happy discovery! this shall to my Lady immediately.


Ex. Mar. That anger was designed: You are abused, and I that have a share in
all your ignominy, have now resolved prevention. Oh that ever I should live to
be a Witness of this shame!

Weeps. Heaven knows how I have loved her, instructed her, and told her the
Duty of a Wife was to obey and be constant; yet all would not do: therefore I
am resolved to right my self and you in the discovery; nor shall our race in
future times be branded with any Spurious Offspring.


Rang. I could not be believed, I was impertinent; but if you knew what I have
seen, Sir.


Bubb. Seen! why prithee what have thou seen, Ned?


Rang. Faith, 'twill be no secret long, therefore I Will tell you: I have seen
her lie in Rashley's Arms and kiss him; play with his Nose, and clap his
Cheeks, and laugh till her whole Frame was shook with Titulation; I guess, Sir,
'twas at you, but will not swear it. -- She Would sing, and breathe upon him, and
with her Hand locked fast in his, and Eyes with rapture gazing on his Face,
she would tell him wanton Stories of her love, and of her easy Husband. He, to
requite her, would display her Charms, and betwixt every word imprint a Kiss to
prove his amorous Argument.


Bubb. And you have seen this?


Rang. More than this, Sir, I have seen (but to tell you is to be called
Impertinent!) such things, such monstrous things.


Bubb. My Head begins to ache; -- all is not well; prithee, Ned, out with 'em;
come, I am thy Friend; and 'sbud, if I thought any thing were done in Hugger
Mugger.


Mar. What would you do then?


Bubb. Do! -- Why, I Would ask him civilly whether his meaning were good or no.


Rang. His meaning? --


Bubb. Ay: -- you know it is best to begin mildly, that afterward, if occasion
be, a man may cut his Throat with greater assurance.


Mar. Stare on your Infamy with Eagle-aspect! Behold the evidence of Shame writ
in her Eyes and Actions! See every Glance, each Touch, each kind Embrace; and
when you have seen 'em in the very fact, stand coldly unconcerned, and ask the
meaning. Ah! Curse upon all dullness. --


Rang. Let Rashley smile and point his Fingers at ye, tell you a Story of a
Quondam Mistress, (which is indeed your Wife) how often he has lain with her, and
pleasantly deceived the easy Cuckold; -- yet as a President of excellent
Nature, I could advise you still to ask his meaning, -- his meaning. --


Mar. Watch all his Actions; and when some kind Genius has, to undeceive you,
made you a Spectator of Rashley, full of hopes, and all undrest, entering your
Bed with a glad Lovers haste, step in, and pull him back; and ask his meaning,
his meaning!


Bubb. My Bed! my Bed is my Castle; and, by the Lord Harry, he that violates it
but with a look, my First shall crush him into Mummy.


Rang. So! now he begins to take fire. --


Aside. Bubb. He Is a Son of a Whore, a Dog, a Bitch, a Succubus; and if I find
this true, I Will cut him piecemeal though he were Sword-proof, and had a Witch
to his Mother.


Mar. Ay, this is meaning now! Go on and prosper.


Rang. These words display a revived sense of Honor, nor shall you want
encouragement to forward it; and since I see your Eyes and Understanding are
opened, I, as your Friend, will give this secret to you: 'Twas my good fortune
to hear an Assignation appointed between 'em this night at seven a Clock; I
guess it is now very near the hour; you have a Key to the Chamber, go thither at
the time appointed, and then never trust your Friend if you find her not the
falsest of Women.


Bubb. If I do, I Will make her the ugliest in Christendom: for I Will cut off her
Nose, and send her to the Devil for a New-Years-Gift.


Mar. Here she comes, we must not be seen, 'twill spoil all: talk of going
abroad, and carry it handsomely, for fear she mistrusts.


Bubb. But where shall we meet?


Rang. At my lodging in the Strand, about half an hour hence.


Exeunt. Enter Emilia. Emil. What, studying, my Dear? Come, come, indeed you
must not be so thoughtful: Did you not promise to come and make one at Ombre.


Bubb. Now if I might be hanged, cannot I speak an angry word, no: -- I wont
play, I am busy, I am going abroad for two or three hours. -- Farewell.


Ex: Emil. It Is so; our Intrigue to night is discovered to him, I find by his
actions; the Infernal Colleagues, Ranger and Maria, have been possessing him
with some strange resolutions: But since it is but what I expected, it gives me
the less trouble, and it is ten to one but I have a Counterplot left that shall
undo their policies, (...) the Devil made one in the Invention. Did you meet my
Husband?


Enter Rashley. Rash. Yes, but in a strange humor: He looked with so dull an
aspect, and returned my salute so coldly, and so far from his usual manner,
that I more than half fear -- our Intrigue is discovered.


Emil. Without doubt it is: -- They have played their parts to discover, and it
now belongs to us to study to repel. Come, summon your Wits together, and
advise what is to be done in so Critical a Conjuncture; you had a contriving
Genius once.


Rash. Ay, it is true, Madam, I had once: but this damned Champaigne has so
dulled it, that Igad it is now worth little or nothing: Madam, you know my
Talent in plot is insignificant; but if a Rancounter, or cutting Ranger's
Throat may do the business, I Will thrust my hand as far as any man. I Will spoil
his plotting by Heaven, say you but the word.


Emil. No! fighting will do in any other business better than this: for in
stead of defending, it blasts my reputation.


Rash. The Devil take me, if I had not like to have forgot that too: well, I am
a dull Rogue, Madam, that is the truth on it.


Enter Betty. Betty. Oh Madam, you are betrayed! Mr. Ranger, by what means
Heaven knows, has been informed of your Assignation, I accidentally overheard
him telling it to my Master, and Madam Maria coming in, seconded his Story with
an extravagant fury; and in conclusion 'twas designed that he should pretend
business abroad, but privately return home and surprise ye.


Emil. It Is as I imagined, and I am glad of this caution: Now we may take
breath again.


Rash. Gad and so am I. -- But is there no way to keep on the plot, and deceive
'em still? --


Emil. It Is in my head, and will have birth presently. -- Betty, you have Sneak
still fast in my Chamber?


Betty. Yes, Madam, he is securely locked in, and here is the Key.


Emil. Follow me then, and do as I directed you: In the mean time, Sir, go you
to your Chamber, and put on your Gown and Nightcap as if you had been in Bed;
and when you hear me stamp come out, and wonder: Let me alone for the rest, --
I Will plague 'em with an after-plot. Away, the minute's near. --


Ex. Emil. and Betty. Rash. What she intends I know not, but am certain of the
success by the assurance she does it with. -- Hah! It Is a rare Creature, and by
Heaven is Mistress of ^he sweetest Nature, and noblest Trust, and most
substantial good English Principles of any Woman in Europe. Well, -- if
Cuckolding be a Crime, it is the sweetest Crime in Christendom, and has
certainly the most Practisers. But let that pass; now to my Gown and Nightcap.


Exit. Enter Sir Roger, Fumble, Cordelia, and Servant. Sir Rog. 'Sdeath! I have
had confounded luck to night; -- not a good chance since I begun; nor no Mirth
neither, there is the plague on it. -- Had I had the liberty to have sung two or
three merry Catches, and have lost my Money with a Trolly Lolly -- Lo, -- it
had been nothing. -- Here; -- Hey; -- where is Cob, call him hither quickly, and
let us go.


Servant. Sir! I have not seen him these two hours; I believe he is gone home.


Sir Rog. How! what without taking leave of his Mistress? it is impossible.


Fumb. Sir Roger, you are disturbed me thinks; what is the matter? Hah! your
behavior seems to publish that --


Sir Rog. No great matter, Sir: Pox of this old Fool.


Cord. Sir, it ill becomes a person of your gravity to be angry on so small an
occasion. --


Sir Rog. Small! By Heaven, Madam, -- it is a matter of moment: What, run away
without taking leave? In verity it is barbarous, and derogates from his Birth
and Breeding; nor can I, though his Kinsman, excuse --


Fumb. What does Sir Roger say, Madam? does he rally. Ha! he is a merry Man, and
a good Fellow, and ifack I love mirth: for my part I hate your drowsy,
insipid, phlegmatic Fellows, that sleep over a Glass, and talk of nothing but
State-Politicks: -- But Sir Roger is a man for the purpose, a merry jolly-man,
He.


Sir Rog. Sir, you may spare your Commendations for them that delight in 'em.
What an impertinent old Fellow it is? -- Pray, Sir, no more of this, I am not
pleased with it. --


Fumb. Your Song of Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the rest of the brave old Fellows,
was very fine, Sir Roger. -- Well! I Will not be positive, but there was
certainly a great deal of Judgment and sheer Wit in some of those Rump-Songs.


Sir Rog. 'Sdeath! this is the most insufferable old Fellows: Pox, tell not me
of Rump Songs* Sir in Verity, would you had been hanged up in stead of the
Rump, -- that I might have been free from the noise. -- But, Madam, as I was
saying* -- upon my Honor I never knew Cob* in such an error.


Fumb. Then, Sir Roger, Chevy-Chace, and the Hunting of the Hare, is finely
penned! finely penned! Ifack it was --


Sir Rog. Oh the Devil, is there no riddance of this Clack? because he can hear
nothing, he would speak all.


Fumb. Ay, so it was, Sir, so it was. -- But Ifack that Hunting was most
excellently contriy'd* Ah! he makes the Dogs speak notably. Ieod and the Hare
repartees again very well for an Animal of her Magnitude. --


Sir Rog. 'Sbud. I shall grow as deaf as he if I stay longer: I must go seek my
Nephew: Come, Madam, lets go away and leave him; I am sure his Eyes are so
defective he cannot miss us presently. --


Exeunt. Fumb. solus. And though some petulant, insignificant, and disaffected
persons have raised Calumnies by calling it Doggrel and fustian, and such like;
yet Ifack the thing is really a witty, sacetious, (nay, and as some think) a
Moral Satyr: for mark me, Sir Roger, and Madam pray give your attention, for
the Dogs were Hieroglyphick-Characters of Fanatics, as the Hare was of the
Quakers, and ifack I have often heard the Sisters sing it in stead of an Hymn
or an Anthem, for the Conversion of Unbelievers; and nay, and as a greater
rarity I have heard it acted to the life betwixt a Dog-Phanatick and a Conny*
Quaker. -- But ifack, -- I think you mind me not. -- Ha, Sir Roger, -- Madam,
-- Sir Roger, Madam, -- what, a vacuity? -- Gone? well. --

Pulls out Spectacles. I Will after, and redeem all; but Ieod, this was a little
uncivil.


Exit. Enter Ranger, Betty with a Candle sets it on the Table. Betty. Come,
Sir, and with as little noise as you can for fear of discovery. I swear were
you not a man, to whom I am sensibly obliged, I should not be drawn to this
Infidelity.


Rang. I will reward thy care; are they together?


Betty. Yes, Sir, in that Room there.


Pointing to the little door. Rang. Take this, and begone, I have no further
service for thee, and I would have her ignorant that this is thy discovery:
Away. --


Betty. The discovery will add little to your content: but since I have the
profit, I care not.


Aside. Exit. Enter Bubble and Maria. Bubb. Ned! what says she? are they met?


Rang. Securely, and with a great deal of content, they are in that Room in the
dark; (met!) Ah, Sir! they are both better practiced than ever to be tardy in a
Love-Intrigue.


Mar. Now I think I have trapt her finely. -- Oh my Joy! -- I shall not be able
to contain my self. --


Aside. Bubb. A Man of Wit and Honor thus abused! It Is horrible! A Cuckold!
'Sbud, it is a worse Name than a Conjurer, -- and has more of the Devil in it: --
but I Will be so revenged, the World shall tremble at it: I Will first cut off her
Hair, to affront her Family; then the want of a Nose shall proclaim her Bawd,
and the Penny-Pot-Poets shall make Ballads on her. --


Exit. Rang. So! this thrives as I would have it, and we have snapt 'em finely
in the nick! just when the Intrigue was at its best perfection! Oh Revenge! --


Mar. Ha, ha, ha! Nay, and at such a time when all help is denied 'em; when her
Blushes, Sighs and Entreaties are all fruitless; when her exasperated Husband's
rage flows high, and best of all when Rashley is defenseless. O Wit! I love
thee for this Stratagem!


Rang. She dared us to persevere; slighted our plots, and had the confidence to
make descriptions of her kind Intrigue before her Husbands face, then laughed at
us.


Mar. It Is now our time; Ha, ha, ha! I thought I could not fail.


Rang. No; and this happy Minute brings me more perfect pleasure, and more true
delight, than pristine Ages: For she is one whom Hell designed for its chief
Instrument; She will out-lye a Siren, cheat the Devil, and dam more Souls to
further her Intrigue than Charon's Boat has room for; yet I own a kind of
Mungrel love, and must enjoy her though Legions were her guard.


Aside. Mar. Hark! --

A shreik within. He Is as good as his word: Now I hope she will own her Sisters
Wit above her. -- Well! -- this was rarely plotted. --


Rang. By Heaven it was, -- and fit to be Chronicled, Madam: -- Your Wit
surpasses humane thought, and should be spoken of with wonder: You plot with
such assurance, that --

Enter Emilia. Hell! Death! and Confusion! Can I believe* my Eyes? She here!


Mar. I am confounded, and have lost my senses. Sure, Sir, we dream: Are we
awake, think you?


Emil. No! nor shall never wake when I design to raise my Wit above the poor
weak Creatures. I could laugh now, but I swear I pity ye. Wear out your tedious
Nights in dull design, and then in the Morning hatch the Abortive Brood which
ere Night turns to nothing; slender Encouragement, Heaven knows, for Wit: And
you, Sir, plot and sweat, and plot again for Moonshine in the Water: Poor
reward, Sir, for one so well skilled in Intrigue as you are! --


Mar. Oh that I had thy heart here in my hand! How pleasant were the Diet? --
Fate and Death! was ever such a Devil?


Rang. No! never! Therefore since thou art a Devil, as I now am sure thou art,
have mercy on me, and do not take my Soul for my first Crime, -- and I will
plot no more. my Conqueror; I Will honor thee; -- Good Devil, do not hurt me.


Kneels. Shreiking within. Enter Bubble dragging in Snare. Bubb. Strumpet!
Whore! Witch! I Will spoil your Curls by the Lord* Harry. O Lord! my Wife; -- and
she that I have beaten a stranger. --


Snare. Oh Heaven! was ever poor sinner so abused? --


Weeps. Bubb. Madam, I beg your pardon, and am ashamed of my fault; but I Will
make you amends presently. --


Bubb. Looks amazedly at his Wife, then at Snare, then at a lock of black hair
in his hand. Rang. Well, nothing but the greatest Devil could have brought this
Woman hither for this Intrigue, and therefore once more I acknowledge thy
power. --


To Emilia kneeling. Bubb. Ay! you had need ask her pardon; it is you have
betrayed us. Chicken! dear Chicken, -- don't srown so: -- I confess I was a
Fool; -- but forgive me but this once, and if ever I offend again, I Will give
thee leave to Cuckold me indeed.


Emil. Indeed, Sir, your jealousy is a little severe, I wonder what I have
done to deserve it.


Bubb. Nothing, I know thou have not; prithee forgive me.


Emil. But to be disturbed thus when I was at my Devotion.


Bubb. Prithee forget it: Come, Tom, you may come out now, here is none but
Friends.


Emil. Who do you mean, Sir?


Stamps with her foot. Bubb. Tom Rashley: -- Poor Fellow, I warrant now he will
be so bashful.


Rang. So, that is something yet, and I Will fetch him out or bleed for it. --


Ex. Enter Rashley at the other side. Emil. Look, yonder he is!


Mar. I find it now, -- and this is all designed: O Devil! Devil!


Enter Sir Roger after Rashley. Sir Rog. What Is the matter, Mr. Rashley? what is
the matter.


Bubb. Rashley here? Hey day! who the Devil is that yonder then?


Enter Ranger dragging out Sneak. Rang. Come, Sir, appear; I find you are now
no Hercules. Hah! -- Death more Miracles, Sneak!


Sir Rog. 'Sdeath, my Gob! -- and taken with a Wench: Why how now, Sirrah?


Emil. Now it works to my wish: prithee observe how they look.


Rash. Hush, -- I do.


Sneak. O Lord, Uncle, your mercy; -- I was betrayed, seduced, as a man may
say. -- Go, go, -- begone, I Will speak with you to morrow. --

To Snare. I say, Uncle, I was seduced, chowsed, cheated.


Sir Rog. Caught with a Wench? -- Come, Sir, I Will talk with you. -- Oh disgrace
to the Family. -- With a Wench? a lewd Wench? Come along, Sir; -- I Will watch
you henceforth. --


Ex. Sir Rog. Sneak. Rash. Ha, ha! Why, here has been a great deal of Intrigue
to night I see, Ha, Sir? -- I am sorry now I went to Bed so soon: -- But I have
been in the sweetest Dream yonder. --


Gapes. Bubb. Here has in troth been a great deal of Intrigue, as thou say,
Tom: But no matter; now all is well: And since it has happened so well, a Day of
Jubilee shall Crown it. To morrow is my Wedding Day, and in memory of that
happy hour that conjoined me and my sweet Chicken there together, we'll have a
Feast; -- and I Will sing, and roar, and drink cum privilegio. Go, wait on her
in, Tom: -- Chicken, remember we are Friends; Go, -- I Will be with you
presently. --


Ex. Rashley bowing scornfully to Ranger and Maria. Rang. Never was such a day,
nor such a deed.


Bubb. Ned! let me have no more of your doubts nor counsels. Do You hear! 'Sbud,
I say once more my Wife is the honestest Woman in Christendom, and you shall
hear from me.


Ex. Bubble. Mar. Was ever the like known?


Rang. Never since Adam; but she was a Devil before the Creation.


Mar. I Will not give over thus. --


Rang. Nor I. --


Mar. Your hand on it --


Rang. Here! and may all the Demons that have power
In subtle plots help now, though never more.

Mar. I Will die but I Will perform it. --

My Slights shall with Immortal Wit be wrought:
And all my Senses shall convert to Thought.

Ex. Ambe. The Fourth ACT.
Enter Sir Roger and Sneak. Sir Rog. SIrrah! haunt me no more, I know thee not.


Sneak. Nay, Uncle.


Sir Rog. Go to your Wench, and let her entertain you; then stock Sir Ieremy's
Mannor-house at home with Bastards, -- Birds of night, and teach 'em all to
know their Father when you have done. --


Sneak. Good Uncle, let me speak. --


Sir Rog. No place to bring your Cattle to but thither, under your Mistrisses
Nose, thou most notorious Ass? Mercy of me, what will this World come to? who
could imagine that Sheeps Face of thine; that Mouth, whence never came any
thing that had sense; that Person that has as often been thought a Puritan as
thou have been a Fool? Then that hanging Dog-look. I Will say no more, but the
Devil is subtle.


Sneak. Uncle, you know it is an old saying, We cannot appoint our own
Destinies; nor did I foresee this: besides, Sir, if you knew her as well as I
do, you would find the Woman has some parts that are not contemptible. -- 'Sbud, I
know what is what; I am not such a Fool.


Sir Rog. Not such a Fool! In verity if thou were but a grain nearer to a
Natural, I Would beg thee of the King, and adopt another to inherit thy Estate. Not
such a Fool!


Sneak. No, so I say, Sir, since you go to that: Whoop! what a Pox you have
forgot since you were young your self?


Sir Rog. I young! why, Sir, I hope I got no Bastards.


Sneak. No: -- But you kept Whores that you did, and that is all one, bona fide.


Sir Rog. This Rogue has heard all; I must stop his mouth. How, Sirrah, I kept
Whores?


Sneak. It has been thought so, Sir, since you go to that: Nay, it is no such
Miracle now adays; there is many an old Badger about Town does the like; it is
grown a custom now.


Sir Rog. But it is not so customary with your Uncle, Sir: but come, pray
express your self; what Women do the infamous World lay to my charge?


Sneak. What Women! 'Bud are you ignorant? Hum, Nan, Pegg, Joan of the Dairy,
Sara, Ienny, Dorothy, Mary, Bridget.


Sir Rog. Hold! hold, I say; 'Sdeath he will reckon the whole Country presently:
I must quiet him, the Rogue has me upon the hip; Harkee, Cob.


Sneak Then the Parsons Wife, Sir, and the old Hostess at the Townsend: You see
the Fool has a good memory.


Sir Rog. A waggish one I see thou have: Ha, if thou could remember
Law-Cases as well, thou would be a brave Fellow. Why, Cob, thou think thou
have paid me off now, do not?


Sneak. I know not, if my Wit flow too fast, Sir, I cannot help it* it is a good
that is thrown upon me, it is not my seeking: it is true, I have an unhappy way
with me sometimes, but it is over presently, it never lasts long, that is one
comfort.


Sir Rog. In verity I see thou have Wit, and now I Will cherish it. Why, Cob, my
instruction is for thy good, Child, what will thy Mistress think when she hears
of it? -- Come, come, in verity, Cob, 'twas ill done, 'twas in faith. -- But mum,
no more words on it, I Will make all well again.


Sneak. So, so, I have brought him about finely; 'Sbud I did not think I had so
much Wit, but I see a man may be mistaken in his own parts.


Sir Rog. But do you hear, Cob, not a word more of these Wenches, let the foolish
World say what it will. -- Thou art a good Boy in verity, I like thy Wit well:
Thou know I have no *Heir, and when I die, Cob, I will not say I Will give
thee any thing, lest I should make thee proud; but expect, expect wonders may
fall, who knows? --


Sneak. By Ierico I would not have spoke on it now, but that I had nothing else
to say, and you know it is a disgrace to a Scholar to be silent in company.


Sir Rog. It Is no matter, it is no matter: prithee how came thou to know that
Pegg and I were so intimate?


Sneak. Ah, you will be angry if I should tell you.


Sir Rog. In verity not I: -- Angry? -- Come, come, out with it, Cob, out
with it.


Sneak. Why, the truth is, I lay with her one night, and the Queen told me all.


Sir Rog. Did thou! God a mercy. (Dam him! what a Snake have I fostered?)
Done like a Cock of the Game in verity. Ah, when I was of thy years I could have
done as much my self.


Sneak. Yes, she told me you had done as much: but mum, Sir, not a word more, I
know my Kew.


Sir Rog. 'Sdeath, I shall be a byword to the Town. -- How now?


Enter a Servant. Serve. Sir Roger, I was just coming to your House for you; my
Master desires yours and Mr. Sneak's company immediately.


Sir Rog. What, the Solemnity holds? this is his Wedding Day?


Serve. Yes, Sir.


Sir Rog. Tell him I am coming. --

Ex. Servant. Come, Cob, let us go; and mum, do you hear? you understand me?


Sneak. I warrant you, Sir. --


Exeunt. Scene 2.
Bubble, Emilia, Maria, Rashley, Ranger, Cordelia, Fumble sitting at a Table.
Bubb. COme, come, another Bumper about; my Chickens Health: Here, I am not wet
through yet; Tom, what say thou?


Rash. With all my heart, Sir! Oh here comes Sir Roger and his Nephew.


Enter Sir Roger and Sneak. Sir Rog. Mr. Bubble and Gentlemen, your most humble
Servant.


Bubb. Yours, good Sir Roger; I am glad to see you in faith; and you, sweet Mr.
Sneak. Well, Faith, Sir Roger, we have been Bumping it about here, we have been
dipped, as the saying is: Tom Rashley, send it round; come, Sir Roger's a
Freshman, he will drink an Ocean.


Rash. Fill every Man's Glass there: Mr. Ranger, you want it, it is Madam
Emilia's health.


Rang. I Will do you reason, Sir; --

All drink. And ten to one but I have a stratagem shall dash this mirth.

Aside. Are they ready?


Mar. Hush! we are observed; they are --


Bubb. So, so! Come, now the Song, and then the Dance. Look ye, Gentlemen, you
must know.


Fumb. Come, come, Mr. Bubble, let us have the other Soop, I say; ifack we loose
time. Ah Sirrah, are you there? Gad I Will be with you presently; dust it about
once more, I say; the Wine has a pretty smack with it; -- it cherishes, I like
it well: come, another Soop, and then do what you will.


Bubb. Fill Wine there! -- Gentlemen, (as I was saying) I got this Song made
purposely, it is in praise of Marriage, and there was not one ready made of 'em
in Town; I searched it all over.


Rang. Were you at the Poets Lodging?


Bubb. Yes, but they had none; for they told me 'twas a Song would not take:
besides, they were so busy getting Plays up for the next Term, that I could
hardly get one made.


Sir Rog. Sir, you needed not have troubled 'em; you once had a very good Vein
that way your self. --


Bubb. Yes, I was mightily given to rapture and flame once: I writ Tom
Farthing: -- I had a hand too in Colly my Cow, a Song that took well I can
assure you: but this is of another kind in praise of marriage, Sir; and they
told me the Town loved nothing but Satyrs against Marriage, and the reason was
because they were afraid of being Cuckolded: -- When, alas, poor silly Rogues,
there is no such thing in Nature.


Rang. Well, of all stupid Animals a drowsy Husband is the most notorious: --
-- but I shall change your note presently I doubt not, Sir. -- --


Aside. Bubb. You shall hear, Gentlemen: Hey, the Song there and the Dance?


SONG.
UNder the Branches of a spreading Tree,
Silvander sat, from care and danger free,
And his inconstant roving humor shows
To his dear Nymph, that sung of Marriage-Vows:
But she with flowing Graces charming Air,
Cried, Fie, fie, my Dear, give over,
Ah, tempt the gods no more!
But thy offense with penitence repair:
For though Vice in a Beauty seem sweet in thy Arms,
An Innocent Virtue has always more Charms.
2.
Ah Phillida! the angry Swain replied,
Is not a Mistress better than a Bride?
What Man that Universal Yoke retains,
But meets an hour to sigh and curse his chains?
She smiling cried, Change, change that impious Mind;
Without it we could prove not half the Ioys of Love.
It Is Marriage makes the feeling Ioys Divine:
For all our Life long we from scandal remove,
And at last fall the Trophies of Honor and Love.
Bubb. Well sung in faith: Look'ee, Gentlemen, is it not as I told you?


Sir Rog. In verity very well, very well, Sir.


Bubb. Come, now the Dance. --


Dance. Enter Servant. Serve. Sir, here is a Letter for you; it was left by a
Porter, who said it required no answer, and is gone.


Rang. So, now for a change of Countenance. -- I think this will do.


Mar. If not, I Have writ a Letter that will: but let us observe. --


A DANCE. Bubb. What the Devil has this Fellow given me here? A Letter? Pray
Heaven it be no challenge. -- How? -- What Is here?

Reads. Sir, That you are blind, I have heard; that you are a Fool, I know; and
that you are a Cuckold, I believe. -- However, as a Friend, though unknown, I am
bound in Conscience to give you this Information; Your Wife is false; You are
abused; The Author of your wrong you know as well as your self, if you know
your self as well as you know Rashley.

Oh Heaven! was ever such fate? -- But hush, I Will smother my resentment till
they are gone. -- Come, Sir Roger and Gentlemen, there is a Tongue in the next
Room, pray go and eat; -- I Will be with you presently. --


Ex. all but Bubble, Ranger and Maria. Rang. So, I see by this behavior it
takes, and I Will away, lest he should suspect me. -- Now for my the other plot.


Exit. Bubb. O Sister, here is a new discovery; the Devil is come abroad again.


Mar. How? the Devil?


Bubb. Ay, in the likeness of a Letter: Here, prithee read it; it is his
Character; I am sure it looks as if 'twere writ with a Cloven Hoof. -- Hah! --
what think thou?


Mar. Sir, he calls you Fool here.


Bubb. Ay, he is a little uncivil, that is the truth on it: but what is to be done,
Sister?


Mar. A Cuckold too.


Bubb. Ay; -- was ever such an impudence?


Mar. I never heard of any: but it is no more, Sir, than I expected: Alas! it is
nothing to be a Cuckold now.


Bubb. Oh unfortunate estate of Marriage! by the Lord Harry, if this be true, I
have praised it to fine purpose. But, Sister, thou were wont to be kind;
prithee advise me.


Mar. It Is to no purpose, Sir, you know I am envious, my words have double
meaning: I did my Sister wrong in my last Story, pray let me offend no more.


Bubb. Well, I confess I was to blame; but who the Devil could have mistrusted
her when the plot was carried so hansomly?


Mar. Oh you will find, Sir, she has still more plots, and I find you so
credulous and so wedded to your infamy, that for my part I am afraid to have
any thing to do with it.


Bubb. Help me but this once, and if I fail thee again, may I be proved a
Cuckold to the whole County, and my Case tried in Westminster Hall.


Mar. Well! once more then I Will assist you, and to confirm what that Letter has
informed, -- know, Sir, she is false; and though she frustrated our last plot by
her Waiting-Womans means, she certainly met Rashley that night. -- I am glad
you credit a Strangers Letter; for my part I love her so well, I should have
hardly caused a second breach between ye else: but since it is out, and you
desire my assistance, follow me, and ere night I doubt not but to give you
sufficient proof of your misfortune


Bubb. With all my heart, dear Sister. -- 'Sbud, a Cuckold? -- It Is impossible,
I have no Cuckolds face; -- but I Will be resolved immediately. --


Exeunt. Enter Ranger and Governess. Rang. Do this, thou shall command me.


Gov. In truth, Sir, I am afraid 'twill be discovered, and I would not have my
Lady know it for the World.


Rang. I swear she never shall. What, do thou doubt me? Besides, I Will be so
grateful to thee, thou shall never have cause to repent this Courtesy. --


Gov. Sir, you know you always might command me in any reasonable thing: pray
speak it again, Sir, what would you have me do?


Rang. Why only plant me in or near her Chamber for a design I have, she shall
be ignorant why, -- or by what means I got thither; I Will still be careful of
thy reputation: Come, take this Purse, and prithee do it willingly.


Gov. Well, Sir, what you mean I know not; but Heaven direct all for the best:
I can deny you nothing, Sir; I lie in a Closset that joins to her Chamber,
where you may both over-hear and speak to her. --


Rang. That above all things! prithee let us go.


Gov. But for Heavens sake take care she knows not that I brought ye thither; I
would not be seen in such a business for the World. --


Rang. Never doubt, I warrant thee I Will be careful.


Gov. Follow me then, Sir. --


Exeunt. Scene 3.
Enter Fumble and Spatterdash. Fumb. SPat. Sirrah!


Spat. Here, Sir, here.


Fumb. Whither is this Rascal gone? Well, ifack, I am too full of clemency; I
must swinge this Rogue, or he will never be good for any thing; he is at
Nine-holes now, I Will lay my life: A damned Villain, that spends me Threepence
a day I know not how.


Spat. O Lord, who I, Sir?


Fumb. Who Is within there? what, will no body hear me? Am I left desolate? I
have not the plague I think. -- Ha!


Spat. Why, here am I, Sir; I have been here all this while. --


Fumb. Oh Sirrah, are you come? where have you been, ha? I say, where have you
been, Rogue?


Spat. No where, Sir, not I.


Fumb. Sirrah! I must be left alone! must I! and when I have a message to send,
go my self. -- Hah! -- Sirrah, Mr. Little-Pox has a Boy, that though he was
stinted at Nurse, and is not above pockethigh, can run, and frisk, and jump
upon occasion, Sirrah, know a Bailey by his Nose, and a Wench by her Buttocks,
ye Rogue, and a good Linguist, and a pretty Pimp, Sirrah, and can hold the Door
with a steady hand, ye Rogue: but thou, a Rascal, a Drone, art good for nothing.


Spat. Any thing, Sir, I warrant you: try me, and you shall find I can hold a
Door as well as he.


Fumb. Why, how now, Sirrah? what, make mouths at me? is your Master grown your
mirth? Ha, this will teach you better; this will new-mold you; I Will fetch you
out of your damned looks ifack: French Grimaces, Rogue, French Grimaces?


Beats him. Spat. O Lord, what shall I do? Because he is deaf, and cannot hear
me, he thinks I mock him. -- Hold, Sir, -- for Heavens sake; upon my Faith I
don't mock you;

Aloud. It Is all a mistake; and, Sir, you have beaten me for nothing.


Fumb. What a noise the Rogue makes! Why, Sirrah, cannot you speak temperately,
but you must roar thus? I am not so deaf, but I can hear without this
Thunderclap. But you do it in contempt, do you, Sirrah? Bless us, to what an
impudence this Age is grown! But I Will fetch the Devil out, lest he should grow
in ye, -- thus. --

Beats him. I should be loath to see thee hanged till you come to years of
discretion.


Spat. Mercy of me, what a Master have I? If I stay long here I shall be beaten
into Mummy.


Fumb. Come, Sir, now I have performed the part of a Master and a Friend in
your Castigation, I have now a word or two by way of Instruction. Mark me,
Sirrah, -- nothing exasperates more than scorn, nor nothing pleases more than
observance; a Master should be strict in finding occasion to beat his Servant,
and a Servant should be careful in avoiding the beatings of his Master.


Spat. So, he has taught me, now I shall be careful of avoiding it hereafter if
my legs will carry me.


Fumb. What, mouths again, Sirrah, mouths again?


Spat. Umph. --


Makes a low Congee, -- says nothing. Fumb. Oh this submission pacifies: Come
hither, I have a message for ye, and let me see how you can behave your self;
it is a matter of moment.


Spat. I Will do my best to please ye, Sir.


Fumb. What do thou say now? -- Look, look! -- was ever such a Rascal as
this? This Rogue knows well enough that I cannot hear him. Sirrah, come and lay
your mouth to my ear, and then speak, if you would have me understand ye.


Spat. Yes, Sir, I shall be very careful to remember it hereafter.


Fumb. Rafters? -- what Rafters, Rogue?


Spat. Sir, I shall be careful to remember it hereafter. --


Aloud. Fumb. O shall you so, Sir? and 'twill become you ifack: for look'ee,
Sirrah, it is my humor as long as I am healthy and jovial, to cover failings
and imperfections in Nature as well as I can; it is a Wise-mans virtue, and I
have paterns for it every day. Ah! here are a sort of jolly, brisk, ingenious,
old Signiors about Town, that with false Calves, false Bellies, false Teeth,
false Noses, and a false fleering Face, upon the matter fill up Society as well
as ere a Masquerading Fop of 'em all. -- But to the matter: Sirrah, you must
carry this Ring to Cordelia, and possess her with my love in an elegant manner:
Stand there, and let me see how you can carry your self in such a business.


Spat. Thus, Sir: I had my Honors from the Dancing-School. --


Fumb. O damned Rogue! what a Bow's there? it is worse than a Country
Counselors to a Client that has no money. Sirrah, -- pull me your Hat off
thus, -- with a Grace: -- Ah! I could have done it rarely twenty years ago; --
but ifack Time and Gravity defaces all things. -- Come, Sirrah. --


Spat. Madam! my Master too well knowing the Charms of your Wit and Beauty are
too sharp at all times to be opposed, has by me sent this Ring, and humbly
desires --


Fumb. Well, that last Honor was pretty well: -- but come now, let us hear what
you can say?


Spat. 'Sdeath! he has not heard me all this while; -- what shall I do?

Knocking. Oh somebody knocks; this was happy: Sir, there is somebody at door
to speak with you. --


Aloud. Fumb. Go see who it is, I Will follow. -- This is a plaguey dull Rogue, but
I must have patience, and take pains with him. -- Nor should he do any thing in
this business had I not a design in it; and ifack I like the Woman well; --
she is young, and plump, free in her Nature, and of a Sanguine Complexion, and
bona fide, I never see her but some secret motions in my blood seem to imply
that she is the cause. -- What? I am not Bedrid; -- I can dance yet, ay, and
run and jump too if occasion be, and why not the the other thing? -- Come, come,
-- it must, it must; -- mine was ever a stirring Family: -- it must, I say, and
she shall know it suddenly. --


Ex. Fumble. Scene 4.
Enter Maria and Bubble. Mar. COme softly, Sir, and plant your self here at
this backdoor, I have already made a discovery.


Bubb. Are they together?


Mar. I believe so; they seldom miss such an opportunity, especially when they
think you absent.


Bubb. No; they are politic with a Pox to 'em: Sister, what revenge, ha? I am
resolved to be a Tyrant: 'Sbud I Will pinch her to death with a pair of Tongs.


Mar. O fie, that will be too cruel. --


Bubb. Cruel! by the Lord Harry it is Justice, -- palpable Justice! Why, should
she live, she would Cuckold the whole Nation.


Mar. Consider better on it, it is but a venial Crime, and deserves not such
rigor. -- But come, -- meditate of no revenge till you are certain of the
fault: -- keep close at that door, be sure you discover not your self till I
come to you; I Will go and observe.


Bubb. I Will try my patience; -- but it is a damned Cause. --


Exeunt. Enter Rashley and Emilia, Scene a Bedchamber. Emil. Our Intrigue as
yet goes well.


Rash. I swear to admiration; and had I not seen each passage, I should have
thought 't had been impossible. Oh my Dearest! how shall I gratify thee? My
love's too poor, and my desert too mean ever to equal it. --


Kisses her hand. Enter Ranger. Rang. I am glad I Have got air again; this damned
old Gib-Cat has mewed me this half hour into such a hole, that had I staid a
minute longer I had certainly been smothered: it stinks worse than a
Pothecaries Shop, and is furnished with nothing but Gally-pots full of nasty
Oil, into which groping about I often thrust my Fingers: -- Fough! --
Assafoetida, as I live! -- a most intolerable stink! -- -- Ah! the Devil grind
her old Chops. -- Stay; -- this is sure Emilia's Chamber, and if I am not
mistaken, I heard a whispering here; -- it may be they are together; -- I Will be
still and listen.


Rash. Our love shall last whole Ages, and each Kiss add new and fierce
desires: Death shall want power to separate us, and Envy droop and pine it self
away to see its ^^^^agem succeed no better.


Rang. By Heaven it is so; -- They are here: -- Blessed minute! now I shall make a
rare discovery.


Emil. I am confirmed, and will proceed in loving. A Husband is a dull insipid
thing, palled and grown stale within a week: But a Lover appears still new and
gay, and is to perpetuity the same he was at first, -- all mirth, -- all
pleasure.


Rang. A most excellent Theme: -- Oh that that Property, that Fool her Husband,
stood now to hear this Devil of a Wife make out this free Confession! --


Rash. He, dull Creature, Heaven knows, is blind to all your Charms. Marriage
acts only the Decrees of Duty, Love has the least share in 't. In this Age a
Husband with a Wife is like a Bully in a Church; -- the only pleasure he takes
is to sleep away the hours should be employed in Conjugal Duty.


Emil. Well! I am very glad our plots succeed so well: I swear I was half
frighted the other day when my Sister-in-Law Maria discovered us. Was it not done
subt'ly? Did I not fetch all off again with an excellent Invention?


Rang. Good! rarely good! This Devil cannot sure have so much impudence to deny
this again.


Rash Ha, ha, ha! By Heaven I Am ready to die with laughing when I think what
Asses we made of 'em. -- Ranger too, that busy Coxcomb, -- what a fretting,
and plotting, and sweating did he make for nothing! -- Alas, poor Fool! -- Ha,
ha, ha!


Emil. Ha, ha, ha!


Rang. O the Devil fleer you. -- 'Sdeath, am I still their Property? I shall
have a slice at your Nose ere long: I doubt not, my young Gallant, -- I shall
dash your Mummery. --


Rash. Come, we lose time: -- Let talk be our diversion when we are old and can
reap nothing else; our minutes now should all be spent in rapture. -- -- Thus,
thus, my Sweet! -- Oh that we could live thus ever! -- How now, what noise is
that?


Bubble within. Bawds! Strumpets! Whores! Witches! Break open the door there,
break open the door. --


Mar. Fetch a Leaver, or call the Smith over the way presently.


Emil. Oh Heaven, my Husband and Maria! we are undone.


Rang. It Is Bubble's voice sure! this compleats my joy. Now let Beelzebub, if he
owes her any kindness, fetch her from hence, I Will guard this passage.


Rash. What! what shall I do, Madam?


Emil. Here quickly, run into this Closset, Sir, and jump out of the Window
into the Garden; if you were gone, let me alone for the rest.


Rang. Who steps a foot this way, steps on his death; his Soul shall not be his
a minute.


Emil. Ha! Ranger here? I am lost in my amazement.


Rang. Death! and Hell and I defenseless too! O cursed Minute!


Rang. No, Madam, I Will secure you from this stratagem: This Window shall be no
Bawd to the Intrigue now, that I Will be sure on. --


Ex into the Closset. Bubble within. Quickly, quickly! a Leaver, a Leaver!


Rash. No way to escape? Can I not climb the Chimney? Any thing to get free
this once. -- Oh fate, taken in the midst of our security, when we least thought
of it! what shall we do?


Emil. I have it: Come hither, get ye under this Table, and diligently listen
to what I say: It Is ten to one he never searches here. Come, in, in, quickly,
and pray the rest may prosper.


Rash. I never had more need of prayers: -- I Will try. --


Goes under Table. Enter Ranger from the Closset. Rang. So! that conveyance is
fast enough. Now, Madam, what think'ee of a fleering Jest upon the Fool Ranger,
the Coxcomb, the Ass Ranger, and your jolly spleen to laugh, Ha, ha? I think
the Dice are mine now: Now, Devil, I have trapt ye. --


Knock within. Emil. This Key may add to my design. --


Takes out the Key of the door. Bubble within. Down, down with it, break it open
there.


Rang. What think you of that, Madam? Does your Husbands voice refresh you
extremely? --


Emil. Now help me, Wit, or I am lost.

She goes and puts the Key into his Coat-Pocket, and then lays hold of him, and
cries out. -- Help, help there, for Heavens sake, I am undone, ruined for ever:
A Rape, a Rape! -- Help, help! --


Rang. Hell and the Devil, what does she mean?


Emil. Ah, cruel Man, cannot these Tears prevail? will nothing stop Barbarity?
what have I done that could deserve this usage? O most unfortunate of Women.


Rang. Dam her, I shall be finely caught if this hold; I must get away. --


Struggles, she holds him. Emil. A Rape, a Rape! Help there, for Heavens sake,
help. --


Enter Bubble and Maria with a Light. They stand amazed. Rang. By Heaven, I am
snapt again, caught in my own snare.


Emil. Has my Husband been so much thy Friend, and would abuse him thus,
(thou base man?) but Heaven forgive thee.


Bubb. 'Sbud, what is this I see? Ranger?


Mar. Ranger here, and Rashley absent: I have plotted finely. It Is plain now
that Traitor loves her, and has only made me an Engine to work his design with
more facility.


Rang. Rashly gone too? Now has the Devil to spite me conveyed him away in a
Mist: Here Is like to be fine work toward; but I must stand the brunt now I am
entered. --


Bubb. Now, Sir, what a Pox make you here with my Wife? Hah? --


Rang. So, it begins rarely! O this subtle Devil! Why, Sir, as I am a
Gentleman, and upon my Honor.


Emil. O my Dear, a thousand thanks for this deliverance; and by all our love I
charge thee, by our Marriage-Vows, by all our Pleasures since, and Joys to
come, I charge you revenge me upon that Traitor there: -- He would have Ravished
me! -- Oh Heaven, that ever I should live to be so put to it! --


Bubb. 'Sbud! Ravish my Chicken? Ranger, you are the Son of a Whore, and I
shall presume to cut your Throat.


Rang. Sir, do but hear me, upon my Honor all this is false. --


Mar. It must be true! what should he come hither for, but upon some ill
intent? I am resolved I Will be revenged on him however. --


Aside. Rang. 'Sdeath! she against me too? this is worse and worse.


Bubb. Discover the matter, that I may do Justice on both sides.


Emil. Sir, know then, -- Ranger long has loved me; often solicited me
unlawfully: -- but finding something in my Virtue that shook his designs, his
recourse was to make you jealous of me and Rashley; - who, poor man, has often
told me with sighs how deeply he has resented your unkind suspicions. --


Bubb. Alas, poor Fellow!


Rang. O confusion! he begins to believe her again. --


Emil. At last, Sir, finding his suit to be too troublesome for me to bear, and
being loath to vex you with such fooleries, -- I told Rashley, who promised all
assistance imaginable: -- I desired him also to be careful, and watch lest I
should be surpised; as to night (Heaven knows) I was.


Rang. Dam her, what a Lie is this! Pray, Sir, let me speak.


Bubb. Not in my House, Sir, you have talked too much already; and by the Lord
Harry I Will talk with you anon: but let that pass, go on, Chicken. --


Emil. At last, Sir, this unhappy night coming hither as I used to do to my
Devotions, -- He it seems having corrupted some of my Servants, got into the
Closset, and thence came and surpised me; -- first locking the door, and
putting the Key into his Pocket.


Rang. I a Key? Sir, as I live I saw none: This is the most notorious Lie --


Emil. Oh wretched man! was it not Crime enough to make such an attempt, but
you must persist in falsehood? Sir, he has it now about him there in that
Pocket, I saw him put it in.


Rang. This Pocket? -- Why, thou Devil! hah! --

Puts his hand in's Pocket, pulls out a Key. 'Sdeath, how came it here? Magic,
Witchcraft, -- the Devil and all, -- combine against me! would I were well out,
-- if ever I plot again, --


Mar. It Is evident now he would have Ravished her! Locked her in for the purpose.
-- Perfidious Traitor, see me no more.


Rang. A very fine business this!


Bubb. Is it so, Sir? I Will do your business for you. --


Goes to run at Ranger, and overthrows the Table. Emil. Discovered? I am lost
again.


Bubb. 'Sbud, Rashley!


Rash. 'Sdeath and Hell, what will become of me now?


Rang. How! Rashley under the Table? Then Fate is mine again. Now, Sir, do you
perceive any thing yet.


Mar. Stranger and stranger! what can this mean? or what could they both do
here?


Bubb. 'Sdeath! how came he here? -- Hoh! --


To Emil. Rang. Ay, -- examine that point closely; sure this will make for me.


Bubb. As Gad jidge me, and so I will: speak, I say, how came he here?


Emil. Nay, Heaven knows, not I; I believe for the same design with Ranger.


Rash. 'Sdeath, she will betray me too.


Emil. Tell him, tell him, Sir: -- speak for your self; -- say any thing.


Softly. Rash. Speak? why, -- 'Sbud, Madam, have I not done as you commanded
me? Have I not watched here this two hours to frustrate Ranger's design? What,
do you think to make an Ass of me?


Rang. How, Sir, -- my design? Dam me this must not pass upon me, Sir.


Rash. Nor you shall not pass upon my Friend here neither, Sir; I heard you
this evening when you corrupted one of the Women to get you into that Closset,
that you might accomplish with more ease, Sir. But, Madam, this is a little
unnatural, to make me suspected as his Colleague, when my design was so far
different.


Bubb. 'Sbud I cannot find the meaning of this.


Rash. The meaning! Why, Sir, -- she hid me under the Table as a defense
against Ranger's insolence: but when she heard you at the door, and knew you
were coming in, she conjured me by all the love I bore her to sit still, and
not discover my self; -- and all her excuse was your jealousy; (Jealousy with
a Pox!) a very fine slight for the abuse she intended to me: -- 'Sdeath, Madam,
my service deserved a better reward if you consider it. -- (Pray Heaven this
Lie prosper.)


Emil. Ha, ha, ha! -- I knew I should vex him; but I confess it is all true: --
For (my poor dear Rogue!) I am so hourly tormented with fear of thy naughty
jealousy, that I dare not tell thee any thing. -- Prithee desert it, do, my
dear Sweet; -- Ifads thou would be the best Husband in the World if thou
would but leave it. --


Kisses him. Bubb. Well! it must be so; this cannot be feigned: -- Come hither
to me, -- I will forsake it: -- By the Lord Harry thou art the best Wife in
Christendom, -- and I the most ungrateful Husband; but forgive, my Dear,
forgive. --

Kisses her. We have all failings thou know, prithee forgive me.


Rang. So! now may I hang my self. 'Sdeath! all the Fiends are Asses to her. --
I Will begone for shame, lest worse befall me:

-- -- Succubus, Farewell; --
There is not such a Sorceress in Hell. --

Exit. Bubb. Come! have thou sealed my pardon?


Emil. You know the softness of my temper; but your unkind jealousy will kill
me one day. --


Bubb. Igad I Will kill my self first. Come, prithee no more. Tom, thy hand too;
-- come, I know thou can bear with my frailty. --


Rash. I Sir, I can bear well enough! but me thought 'twas a little strange to
tax me.


Bubb. Come, come, all shall be well; -- Faith, we'll go in and frolic. Oh my
Dear, suspect thee; -- Well, I am a Fool, that is the truth on it. --


Ex. Bubble and Emilia. Mar. The Devil helps her sure; for this was certainly
an Assignation: I Will after Ranger and know the truth on it.


Exit. Rash. Ha, ha, ha! -- Was ever plot carried thus? Sure never! Her Wit has
more supplies than I have thoughts, and happily they end still; and Gad for my
own part I shall love lying the better as long as I live for the success of
this -- Once more all is well, and he the Cuckold still, Ha, ha, ha! I must go
in and laugh with her.

Intrigue's her Masterpiece; and all may see,
A Woman's Wit's best in extremity. --

Ex. The Fifth ACT.
Enter Cordelia. Cord. Well, of all Creatures that vex Mortality, a
superannuated Lover is certainly the most troublesome, especially to one of my
years: our inequality is so preposterous, and his address so unnatural, that I
always entertain rather hate for his person, than compliance for his love: From
Fourscore and five, Heaven deliver me; it is an Age of doting. -- Here he comes,
I knew I could not be quiet one hour.


Enter Fumble. Fumb. Sirrah, Sirrah! Rogue, Rogue! and how and how! Hah! art
thou jolly, blithe, like a Bird in a Tree? Ifack I was impatient till I came to
see thee: well, and how sits the Ring? does it shine? does it glitter? Hah,
little black Rogue! -- Ifack I bought it of the best Goldsmith in Cheapside, a
Man of good Reputation; A Cuckold too, and they are always the honestest
Fellows. --


Cord. From henceforth let me desire you, Sir, to bestow your presents on some
body else: -- I sent your Ring back by your Man, he can best give you an
account of it. --


Fumb. Hah! -- what say thou? Counterfeit? Ifack thou art mistaken, Bird; --
thou art, bona fide, they are as well cut as any in Christendom, and of the
right Black-water: What, do thou think I Will put any false Stones upon thee
ifack? -- I am more civil, Ieod, there I was waggish; -- But she is a witty
Rogue, she will apprehend the jest.


Cord. Was ever such an insipid piece of Antiquity? Pray, Sir, forbear these
impertinences, and assure your self I hate an old Fellow for a Husband, as much
as an old Gown, or an old piece of Wit, that after forty years Oblivion, with a
new name, is published for a new Lenten Play. --


Fumb. What does she say now? But no matter, I Will go on. Well said, Bird, well
said: Bona fide, thou have Wit in abundance; that Color, and such a sort of
Nose, never fail. But come, we lose time, I know it is ordained I must marry
thee: I am the Man that must gather the Rosebuds. -- Ah Rogue! -- I Will warrant
you are a swinger, and Ifack that black a top there fires me strangely, I am
all flame, and bona fide, me thinks as youthful and Mercurial as any Spark of
'em all. SONG.
ANd he took her by the middle small,
And laid her on the Plain;
With a hey down derry down, come diddle,
With a ho down derry, etc.


What think you, Madam? am I old?


Cord. So old, that your presence is more terrible than a Deaths-Head at
Supper: for my part I tremble all over. There Is a kind of horror in all your
antic gestures; 'specially those that you think become you, -- that fright
worse than the Devil; than the Devil, Sir. --


Aloud. Fumb. The Devil! what of him, Bird? Pish, the Devil's an Ass, I have
seen't in a Play; -- and ifack we lose time in talking about so worthless a
matter. Lovers should never be slow in their affairs: -- For, as my good Friend
Randolph tells me, Nothing is like opportunity taken in the nick; in the nick,
Sweetheart! -- Icod, I was waggish again, I was waggish again ifack. -- Come,
Bird, come.


Cord. What will you do, Sir? Heaven, how he tortures me!


Fumb. Come along then; -- I have got a Priest ready, and paid for the License
and all: -- Prithee let me kiss thee; I long to practice something that might
please thee: Never was man so altered! never! Come, prithee Bird, -- come,
ifack I have not patience.


Enter Governess and Sir Roger. Gov. Here Is Sir Roger Petulant! my dear Mouse
desires to speak a word or two with you.


Cord. Oh here is some hope of deliverance! Sir Roger, your humble Servant. Come
hither, Lettice, and stand just in my place: I am so tortured with this old
Fellow, -- prithee be kind to him, and follow him whither he would have thee; it
may be a Husband in thy way, and a good Estate.


Gov. A Husband! marry that is fine! I warrant you, sweet Mouse, I*ll be very
punctual.


Cord. So, now let us slip aside and observe; 'twould be an excellent revenge
if he should marry her. -- He Is coming to her already, and his eyes are so old
and dim that he perceives not his mistake.


They step aside. Fumb. Delays, Sweetheart, are dangerous ifack; I have
considered it: The time I have lived in the World has given me the benefit of
knowing more than another of fewer minutes. -- Along, along, -- I say, thou
shall be my Queen, my Paramour, my Cleopatra, -- and I will live another Age in
Love, and then farewell old Simon ifack. Come, come along.


Gov. Oh sadness! what happy fortune's this? Well, I Will go with him, pray
Heaven he be blind enough, that is all I fear.


Fumb. She seems kinder than usual; -- ifack I have wrought her finely. Come,
poor Rogue, come. --


Gov. I am ready, Sir; -- this was a happy hour;
And if it hit but right, I Am made for ever. --

Exeunt. Sir Roger and Cordelia re-enter. Cord. Ha, ha, I am glad I am rid of
him any way: but now, Sir Roger, to your business. -- I hear your Nephew is
sick.


Sir Rog. In verity, Madam, most dangerously sick, and the cause of my giving
you this trouble was in verity to give you information of it; for by his
melancholy I find love is the cause. Ah, Madam, your last indifference was very
prejudicial to him: It Is true, he denies it; -- but I am old enough to judge of
the contrary, and therefore have found out it is Passion, nay Passion for you
has laid him thus low, and nothing but your smiles can raise him, it is gone so
far in verity. --


Cord. I am sorry, Sir, I have the misfortune to be the occasion of such a
disaster: -- but is there any remedy? what would you have me do?


Sir Rog. Madam, my suit to you is, that you would be pleased to go with me and
give him a visit; the surprise of your presence I am confident will dissipate
his melancholy, and perhaps totally banish his distemper.

Enter Maria. But I see we are interrupted; let us retire, Madam, and if you
please now will be a very good time to visit him.


Cord. Softly, Sir, I would not have my Cozen Maria know any thing of it; but
if that can do him any good, I Will not be so cruel to deny it, -- it is an act of
charity. -- Come, Sir, I Will go with you.


Sir Rog. Madam, you oblige us both --


Exeunt. Mar. Still baffled! sure this cannot last long; the Devil will be
weary of obliging her in a little time. I have been yonder sifting Ranger about
the last plot, and by all circumstances find what he said was true, and shall I
leave off thus poorly? Pish, I cannot for shame: -- I have Truth and Honesty on
my side; -- she is only cunning, and it is impossible that should last ever. --
Once more then have at 'em: -- I have by several false messages buz'd it again
into my Brothers ears; he believes, and will once more follow my counsel:
besides, I have here a false Key to her Chamber, and can surprise 'em when they
least suspect: this, if Ranger be at all diligent, must needs effect it; -- for
I am resolved not to rest till it is done, for the satisfaction of my revenge on
that false man. --


Ex. Maria. Enter Apothecary and Sneak in a Nightgown. Sneak. Uh! Uh!


Apoth. Nay, Sir, if you would have the effects answer your expectation, you
must suffer, Sir, and be patient.


Sneak. 'Ounds! I cannot have patience: -- Sure a civil Clap might be cured
without all this stir. It Is not a Miracle in this age. -- Oh Lord!


Enter Sir Roger and Cordelia. Sir Rog. O horrible! what is this I see?


Sneak. My Uncle! Oh I am undone, lost for ever.


Apoth. But, Sir, your civil Clap might have been an uncivil Pox in time.


Cord. How, Sir Roger? was it fit to make me Spectator of this object?


Sir Rog. The Pox? In verity I have brought his Mistress to fine purpose: Ah
damned Rascal! The Pox? what shall I do? I am disgraced for ever. --


Aside. Cord. Hark ye, Sir, pray what is that there?


Pointing to a Sweating-Chair within. Sir Rog. What shall I say? (Death, she
has found out his Sweating-Chair!) Why, Madam, it is -- umph -- it is a
Mathematical Engine they use at Cambridge. -- Cob was always addicted to study.


Cord. 'Twere a fault to hinder him then, Sir, being so well employed. --
Farewell. --


Ex. Cord. Sir Rog. She has found it out. -- Sirrah, see my face no more: from
this hour I abhor thee, a damned Rascal!


Sneak. Good Uncle! --


Sir Rog. The Pox! A sneaking, sniveling Rogue! Heavens, was ever the like
seen? -- But it is now a general Maxim, and your Sandy, Sheeps-face, unthinking
Villain, is always the greatest Whoremaster.


Sneak. Why, by Ierico, it was by chance, Uncle; Hab-nab as a man may say: As I
hope to be saved 'twas against my will.


Apoth. Sir, your anger makes an addition to his distemper.


Sir Rog. What, you are his Pandar, Sir, are you? but I think you may be the
Devil for your honesty; -- so may ye all; -- such as you sooth 'em in Vices; --
I warrant you are tired with such Customers, -- Ha, Sir, -- are you not?


Apoth. In troth, Sir, my rotten Patients are so loath to die, and my sound
ones, which for my Arts improvement I would make rotten, -- so hasty to
recover, that I confess I am often weary, but not tired, Sir.


Sir Rog. So, Sir, in verity you are all a company of Rascals; -- and as for
his part, I Will instantly write to his Father to disinherit him, that I may
revenge my disgrace, and punish his folly. -- The Pox! a Son of a Whore! the
Pox!


Exit. Apoth. A mad old Fellow, but your penitence will recover all.


Sneak. Would you were hanged, by Ierico, for leaving the door open. -- Oh what
shall I do? This comes of learning the Sciences in the Devils name. --


Apoth. Patience, Sir, have patience. --


Scene shuts. Ex. Enter Rashley, Emilia and Betty. Rash. A Trap-door, say you,
Madam?


Emil. Yes, we happily discovered it yesterday looking for a Ring accidentally
dropped; -- it opens upon the Stairs the backside of the Kitchen; -- I am sure
'twill be very necessary in our Intrigue: -- Here, take the Candle you, and go
and watch; -- and when I give the sign, be sure be ready.


Betty. I Will not fail, Madam.


Emil. It Is good to be secure, for I know Maria has still an eye over us, and
my Husbands new jealousy gives me fresh cause of doubt. --


Rash. Igad, it is unnecessary: -- This Trap-door must needs be very useful; --
I see Fortune is ours still, and will not leave us. -- Let us doubt when we see
danger; there is none now, nor can be whilst our love continues. --


Emil. Which I fear will be but a short time: for what is indirect is seldom
permanent; therefore let us consider on it.


Rash. Dam Consideration; It Is a worse Enemy to Mankind than Malice: Let
impotent Age consider, that is fit for nothing but dull tame thoughts of what
he has been formerly: Let the Lawyer and Physician consider, what Quibbles, and
what Potions are most necessary: And let the fly Phanatick think his time out,
and consider how to be securely factious: But let the Lover love on, still
transported, whilst all his thoughts and senses are employed in the dear Joys
of rapture, endless passion, without a grain of dull Consideration.


Emil. I swear the softness of our Tempers abuses half our Sex, we should not
else be won so easily: -- But we are such kind Fools!


Rash. Ay, we are all Fools, Madam, that is the truth on it; but how shall we
help it?


Emil. Resolve upon a remedy; -- Love no more. --


Rash. Resolve upon the contrary; Love for ever: Gad the World would be at a
fine pass if all were of your mind. How now?


Noise of a Lock. Enter Maria with a Light. Mar. Stand there till I fetch you
in; I Am sure they are here.


Emil. My Sister as I live! Malicious accident!


Rash. Hah, -- with a Light too! How the Devil got she in?


Emil. Heaven knows, unless with a false Key.


Mar. Nay, You Are caught, and finely too, I Am cozened else. What plot now,
Madam, to convey you hence? -- Now show your mighty skill; and if there is a
Devil at your service employ him now, you never had more cause. -- Me thinks
you are melancholy, why do you not laugh? smile at your Wit and great security?
You, I know, have a thousand ways to get off still; or if you want, that
Gentleman can supply you.


Rash. I supply! A plague of your damned jest!


Emil. Hush, -- and leave me to her. -- Nay, Sister, this is barbarous to
triumph over our misfortunes; You know your self what Love is, and what
inconveniences it brings poor Women too.


Mar. You can confess now; -- and here is a Gentleman not far off, -- your
Husband, Madam; I know this cannot choose but be grateful to him, I Will call him
to hear it.


Emil. Ah, be not so cruel to undo me quite! -- I Will confess all to thee, and
from this minute be converted. -- Ah, had I taken thy counsel before I had been
happy.


Mar. Ay; -- but you would persist, and now see what comes on it.


Emil. Oh! I am miserable! Forgive me, dear Maria!


Weeps. Mar. Nay, Heaven forgive you: -- but come, will you confess? I have her
at a rare advantage. --


Aside. Emil. Most faithfully; -- but let me do it in the dark; -- let no light
see my guilty blushes; -- it is enough my tongue dares utter it: -- Dear
Sister, let me not be too much ashamed: -- Oh misery! misery! --


Weeps. Mar. Well, here is a Light not far off, and thus much I Will comply with
you. -- Now begin. --


Puts out the Light. Rash. By Heaven I grow cheerful; -- we shall 'scape, I am
sure, we shall. -- Oh this dear Devil! --


Emil. My grief ties up my tongue. --


Mar. It Is time to grieve: But come, when do you begin?


Emil. This cruel man seduced me: Cruel Rashley. -- Where are you, Sir?


Aside. Rash. Here, Sweet, here! --


Softly. Emil. First won upon me with his comely presence, hansom demeanor: --
every several Grace my Soul admired -- Give me your hand. --

To Rashley. But when he came to speak, his Tongue, his Charming Tongue, Oh
Heaven, that I shall live to utter it! so ensnared me, that I no longer knew my
liberty, -- but as his Victim gloried in my passion. --


Mar. With shame you live to speak it.


Rash. 'Twas my misfortune too: -- but Heaven forgive me, I shall laugh out, --
I am not able to hold. --


Emil. Down, quickly down. --


Both sink in the Trap. Mar. Now could I laugh till my heart ak'd again to think
how I have caught 'em. -- I knew 'twas impossible she should 'scape always, --
and I will tyrannize more than a Turk over his Slave: -- For my part I am sorry
for your infamy, and were it not that by the Laws of Nature I have a great
concern in any of my Brothers injuries, you might love on for me; but since my
Blood runs in his Veins, I dare not see his infamy and let it pass
unquestioned: Therefore either swear from this hour to desert Rashley, and
never see him more; or your disgrace I will this instant publish, or call your
Husband to be Spectator of his shame and yours. -- What, are ye dumb? Not
answer me! It seems you dislike this Proposal; but do not provoke me. -- Not
yet? Nay then -- within there? -- Brother, -- here they are, a light, a light,
-- quickly.


Enter Bubble with a light and long Sword. Bubb. Where? where is this Traitor?
this Strumpet? by Scanderbeg, -- I am ready for a Charge: I Will push him with a
Vengeance; -- Where is he?


Mar. Here, here! How now? What, are you got under the Table again? or into a
corner? -- Give me the Candle, Brother, -- I am sure have em fast. --


Looks about. Bubb. Here Is nothing; another mistake, as Gad jidge me.


Mar. She is a Devil, and I lose my labor. Gone! what both gone? Oh I could
tear my self: Which way? -- How! by what means could they escape?


Bubb. 'Scape? -- 'Sbud! it is impossible they should escape if they were here.
-- Pish, -- this is only one of your Maggots, Sister, you do but fancy you saw
'em. --


Mar. Fancy? -- Eternal Light forsake me, if I did not both see and speak to
'em two minutes since; heard her confess the Crime, and vow repentance; here,
in this very place: but by what means they 'scapt, I only can admire, not
imagine. --


Bubb. Prithee hold thy peace; I say once more it is only a Maggot: -- Sleep,
Fool, and purge thy head from fancies. How now, Ned?


Enter Ranger and Betty behind. Rang. Sir, I know not whether the News I bring
may please you; but I have made a strange discovery yonder.


Bubb. Discovery! of what prithee? --


Rang. Sir, I saw Rashley and your Wife -- going laughing Arm in Arm through
the Entry -- the Backside of the Kitchen into the Parlour, -- where, if you
please to give your self the trouble, you may find 'em. --


Betty. This is as my Mistress suspected, and I Will inform her immediately.


Bubb. Hey day! My Wife and Rashley? Art sure on it, Ned?


Rang. As sure, Sir, as I live, I saw 'em there: -- nay, what is more, my
curiosity inducing me to peep through the Keyhole, I saw his Head lie in her
Lap, -- whilst she with a fond passion strok'd his Cheeks, and dalli'd with his
Hair: Faith, Sir, I could not see this and be silent; but you I fear will think
the worse of me for it. --


Bubb. In the Parlour, say thou? 'Sbud, was ever such a confusion? Why, my
Sister says that within these two minutes she saw and spoke to 'em here in this
Chamber. They are here, and there, and every where, and yet I can find 'em no
where; what a Pox should a man think of this?


Rang. They are there this instant, Sir, upon my Honor.


Mar. Sure, I have not dreamt all this while! Did I not see here ^^ by Heaven I
saw the Devil in her likeness then.


Bubb. Why, peace, I say, -- if you are mad, offend no one but your self with
it. -- What a Pox shall I not believe my eyes? The House is not haunted that I
know of, unless it be with Fools: -- There Is a Bob for you by way of Conclusion.


Mar. Yes, Cuckolds too! There Is a Bob for you by way of Repartee.


Bubb. Cuckold? -- I Would have you to know I scorn your words; -- and were you not
my Sister, I Would fetch you out with your Repartees. What, because you are a Fool,
you guess all persons are alike? -- Do you but conceive me, Mrs. Juniper? I am
a Turk at matter of fact when I see occasion. --


Rang. Good Sir, -- no more of this, -- but go down and satisfy your self in
the truth of my Story: -- if I tell you a Lie, call me Fool, -- Horse, -- any
thing, -- do but go and see.


Bubb. 'Sbud, I know not what to do: One brings me up, another carries me down;
one jilts me, another abuses me; a third laughs at me; -- and yet I find
nothing, nor see nothing, -- nor know nothing, -- and you are nothing but Fools
to make all this stir about nothing. But come, I Will go with thee, Ned.


Mar. And I, that I may say once in my life I saw a Miracle.


Rang. I have her once more in the Noose of the slip; now the Devil hold her
fast in the other World: -- It Is above mortal power! Come, Sir. --


Exeunt. Scene 4.
Enter Rashley and Emilia in Night-Gowns, Betty, Jeremy. Emil. HEre, here,
quickly take my Nightgown, and put it on, you are sure they are coming.


Betty. Very sure, Madam; -- I stood at the door and heard all.


Rash. What must I do, Sweet? -- Prithee do not let us be surpised again.


Emil. Uncase, uncase, Sir; -- and let your Man represent you as Betty does me:
Jeremy, be sure you play your part well, and Court her to the life. --


Put on the Gowns. Rash. Do You hear, Sirrah!


Ier. I Will warrant you, Sir. Come, Mrs. Betty.


Emil. Stay, a word more in thy ear: -- I see this Fellow is but a Blockhead,
and therefore am afraid of trusting him too far: -- Keep him as ignorant of our
Intrigue as thou can; and if my Husband ask where I am, tell him I am gone to
visit my Lady Courtly: -- I Will be in my Chamber; -- and when they are all gone,
bring me word what Ranger and Maria are doing.


Betty. Yes, Madam, I Will be very careful.


Rash. I will reward thy care, my pretty little --


Emil. Hark! I hear 'em coming; -- now to your postures. --


Noise. Ex. Rashley and Emilia. Ier. Now, Mrs. Betty, we having so fit an
occasion, let us make Love in some Heroic Vein.


Betty. No, I am for the plain-dealing way. --


Ier. Pish! to others a great deal better, as thus:

Your Eyes with so bright Charms are decked about,
That I could kiss 'em till I kissed 'em out.

Betty. Oh I hate that; -- I vow it is very silly.


Enter Ranger, Bubble and Maria. Rang. There, there, Sir; -- Do You see 'em now?
will you believe next time?


Bubb. O dismal Object! -- I am a Cuckold then.


Mar. This is miraculous; how was it possible they could get hither? But I am
glad they are here however.


Bubb. Now for a good full blow at his head before he sees me: it is a Cuckolds
way of revenge I Am sure; Have at him! --


Offers to strike. Ier. Oh Lord, what mean you, Sir, what mean you?


Bubb. Traitor! Rogue! Rascal! I Will -- Hah, Jeremy?


Ier. Ay, Sir, it is I, poor Jeremy, Sir.


Mar. And Betty in her Mistrisses Nightgown. --


Ranger's amazed. Rang. Their old Friend the Devil has fetched 'em away again.


Bubb. What make you here in their Night-Gowns?


Betty. Only, Sir, through an ambition to make Love as Gentilely as we could.


Bubb. Go, go, and find your Mistress out, and tell her, Her humble Servant and
Husband desires to speak with her. -- Look ye, Ned, you are a Fool, I see.


Rang. I am so, Sir, I acknowledge it.


Bubb. And you, Madam, are a little leaning that way, are ye not?


Mar. I can say nothing for my self, Sir.


Bubb. Then I can say you are a Couple of Fools: Did I not tell you what all this
would come to? Ha, ha, ha! It makes me laugh to think how busy you two Asses
have been about nothing; and I am no better than a third Fool for believing
you: But from henceforth, he that speaks against my Chickens Virtue, is the Son
of a Whore; for 'Uds Bood she is the honestest Woman in Christendom, and he that
denies it, I will immediately invade him with Battle-Ax, Poinard and Pistol.


Rang. She is a very Saint, Sir.


Mar. A very Devil, Sir! O Death, is there no remedy?


Bubb. I Will go instantly and reconcile my self to her, with a strict Vow never
to doubt her more. -- Oh Sir Roger! welcome.

Enter Sir Roger and Cordelia. Faith! I was wishing for some good Company to be
Witness of my Reconcilement to my dear Chicken. You are melancholy, Sir, -- I
heard your Nephew was sick, I suppose that is the cause.


Sir Rog. If he has heard of what, I am disgraced for ever.


Bubb. Come, Sir, cheer up, cheer up, he will be well again, doubt not.


Sir Rog. I hope so, Sir. Madam, this Generous Act of concealing the infamy of
our Family, has so wrought upon me, that if I could requite --


Cord. No more, Sir: -- Your Nephews forbearance is all I desire: You are
sensible now that I have some reason to request that.


Sir Rog. I am, Madam, and am extremely bound to your Generosity; and Gad I
have another Nephew whom I Will make better by 200 l. a year to make you amends.
-- Well, Mr. Bubble, I am glad to come at so good a time, when mirth is going
forward: you are a merry man, Sir, -- and in verity I like your company.


Bubb. And I yours, Sir Roger; -- for I am very merry for some private reason
best known to my self: -- We'll toss a Bumper about by and by, Faith!


Enter Fumble pushing in Governess. Fumb. An old Cronee, a Sorceress; -- What
ifack, and in the Devils Name, am I to be popt in the mouth with Fourscore and
Twelve? A Beldame, a Witch, that expects next Winter to be turned into a
Gib-Cat, -- thought fit to be yoked with me! No, no, some wiser than some; and
I Will have her know within this week that I am as fit for Two and Twenty, as Two
and Twenty is for me: -- In the mean time avaunt Iezabel, -- I like thee not,
Icod; thou have no black of Top, ifack, thou art not for my turn.


Bubb. What, old Signior Fumble? what is the matter, Man?


Fumb. Yes marry am I, Sir, and chows'd damnably too, and some shall know it
when I can find 'em.


Cord. He Is groping for his Spectacles; now I expect to be rated.


Fumb. Ah, -- are you there, Rogue, are you there! Why, you very Wag, would you
offer to serve me so? But hang thee, you are a Rogue, and come ifack though 'twas
a Knavish Trick, I am pleased with the Wit on it: -- Give me thy hand, and come
and kiss me, and all shall be well again. --


Cord. Upon condition you never trouble me more, -- there it is. --


Fumb. Icod, she has a pretty Touch with her, she has ifack; I forgive thee
with all my heart. -- Well, old Woman, depart in peace; old Woman, I say,
depart, and trouble me no more: -- I am busy, and cannot dispense with the
Fopperies of Age now.


Gov. Well, this comes of eating Sweet-meets when I was young: He had never
found out the trick, if my want of Teeth had not discovered me.


Bubb. Ha, ha! -- Here had like to have been fine sport in faith: -- but would I
knew where my Wife is, that we might all go and address, now I am in this good
humor.


Gov. Sir, just as I came in, I saw her go up into her Chamber.


Bubb. Did thou? I am glad on it in faith: Come, let us all go.


Enter Betty. Betty. Sir, I cannot find her; but I heard her say about an hour
since, she intended to go and visit my Lady Courtly.


Bubb. No, no; -- I know where she is now: -- Poor Creature! I warrant she sits
so melancholy above now. -- Well, -- I dare proudly say I have the best Wife in
Christendom: for in faith I have been very jealous of her, but I was wrought
upon, -- when of my Conscience the innocent Wretch would not hurt a Worm: -- *
But come, we'll all go to her, and be sure, Sir Roger, you plead for me; -- in
troth my heart aches to think how I have used her.


Betty. I must prevent their going up, or we are undone.


Is running, Maria stops her. Mar. Whither are you running? I have some business
with you.


Betty. Good Madam* I Will wait on you immediately.


Mar. Ye shall not stir till I have spoke to you: -- Here must be something in
this I find by her eagerness to be gone.


Sir Rog. Well, Mr. Bubble, -- in verity I Will do my best in your behalf; my
Tongue is at your service at any time.


Bubb. Sir Roger, you will oblige me in it. -- She is the most innocent,
sweetest, and most virtuous Person in the whole World, and I shall never be
able to make her amends. -- Come, let us go.


Rang. Now will I see how she behaves her self, and wonder at the prosperous
Impudence Hell has endowed her with, though it lies not in my power to repel it.


Mar. Now I think better on it, I Will defer my business till another time: -- You
may go where you please.


Exeunt. Betty. This cunning Devil has undone 'em; -- nor lies it now in my
power to hinder it. -- Oh I could Curse --


Exit. Scena ultima.
Enter Rashley and Emilia. Emil. THe Plague of living with such a Husband you
must imagine is very disagreeable to my Temper; -- and were it not for the
happy hours I have the good fortune to enjoy in thy society, my Life would be
wholly uncomfortable: -- But, my Dear, thou will forget me, one day I shall
grow cheap to thee, shall I not?


Rash. No, never, -- never, my Sweet! -- Thou have more Charms each hour added
to thee, rather than one diminisht. -- Forget thee! I sooner shall forget to
feed my self, or that the Sun ere shone in midst of Summer, than thy more
precious Favors. Thou bring'st each hour new Sweets, and every minute a
thousand thousand Graces throng about thee, my Dear, -- Dear, Charming, Sweet,
-- Precious! --


Kisses her. Enter Bubble, Sir Roger, Fumble, Ranger, Maria, Cordelia. Bubble
entering. Softly, softly, Sir Roger: Poor Soul, -- I warrant she is at Prayers.
-- Hah! what is this I see? -- Gad jidge me --


Rang. By Heaven, they are here a Kissing! -- Oh happy minute!


Emil. Ah, who could have the heart to leave thy Blisses for such a Fool, such
a Beast, such a dull, sordid, filthy, insipid Creature as my Husband?


Bubb. How Is that? Oh Devil!


Rash. I am smothered with thy Charms; Oh for some Air! Hah! -- Oh horror,
cursed minute! taken thus?


Starts. Emil. My Husband! Nay then I am lost for ever. --


Bubb. Ah cursed Creature! is this thy Virtue? -- But I Will --


Goes to wound her. Sir Rog. Hold, Sir, in verity that must not be; No Swords
against Women in my Company.


Bubb. Then here let my Vengeance light. Traitor! have I obliged thee so often
for this? -- Have at thee!


Rang. Your pardon, Sir, I must hinder dishonorable proceedings; in the Field
you may do what you please.


Bubb. Speak, Witch, speak! what reason had thou to use me thus? Thou Limb of
the Devil, -- speak, I say.


Emil. Use you thus? -- Why, -- Sir, your Rage makes you suggest strange
thoughts without cause. My kindness to Mr. Rashley was only because -- he
promised to be my Friend in urging my Reconcilement with you; -- and because I
knew he was your Friend, I therefore -- I say, because I knew you loved him, I
desired him to -- to -- I was very urgent with him -- about -- about -- No I
mistake! 'twas he was urgent with me to entreat you to do me the favor -- no
-- to do him the favor: I mean, hum -- to -- to --


Bubb. Pox! what a Story's here? Oh Strumpet! Witch! --


Mar. To Cuckold him, was that it, Sister?


Rang. Madam, me thinks your speech fails you exceedingly.


Emil. All will not do; O spiteful minute! Taken thus at last? Shame ties my
Tongue, and absence is most necessary.


Exit. Bubb. Oh farewell in the Devil Name! Oh Horns! Horns! found a Cuckold at
last! I have spun a fair Thread, by the Lord Harry; A Cuckold at last! --


Rash. A Cuckold! Why, Sir, -- have I done any thing but by your directions? --
Why do you suggest such things to your self? -- Well, Sir, if I have injured
you* I wear a Sword, Sir, -- and so -- Farewell. --


Ex. Rashley. Sir Rog. In verity his was a strange discovery; -- but such
things* will happen -- sometimes. --


Cord. So it seems; yet this me thinks is wonderful.


Bubb. Oh unfortunate Husband! Well, -- I Will go instantly and get a Divorce,
and spend the remainder of my Life in penning a Satyr against Women; -- I Will
call it, A CAUTION FOR CUCKOLDS; where I will deplorably set down my own Case,
and as a Warning-piece for rash young men, and for the benefit of my Country.

Felix quem faciunt aliena Cornua Cautum.


Exit. Fumb. Something is the matter now, if I could guess: But mum! I must not
yet discover my failing.


Rang. Now the mighty Sophistress is overthrown!


Mar. Thank Chance for that; -- but no Wit of our own. --


Rang. Right, Madam; and by this a Man may see how unnecessary a thing it is,
-- to strive to turn the current of a Woman's fancy, when it is bent to another.
It Is a damned thing this Wenching* if a Man considers seriously on it; and yet
it is such a damnable Age we live in, that, Gad, he that does not follow it is
either accounted sordidly unnatural, or ridiculously impotent. -- Well, for my
part henceforward this shall be my Resolution:

I Will Love for Interest, Court for Recreation;
Change still a Mistress to be still in fashion:
I Will aid all Women* in an Amorous League;
But from this hour never baulk a Love-Intrigue.

Ex. omnes. EPILOGUE
spoken by FUMBLE. WEll, Gentlemen, how do you? -- Icod you sit,
As if you had no Souls, no Brains, no Wit.
What, not a word now in the Poets praise?
Hah! -- Faith, I was a Spark in my young days. --
I Clapped, and Clapped; -- nay, sometimes to my cost:
I Clapped so long, -- Gad, I (was) Clapped at last.
There I was waggish; -- You know what I mean; --
The Devil was in it, a Plaguey Yorkshire Queen. --
But it is no matter, -- 'twas but thought a Jest,
And, Gad, I was as brisk then as the best.
So I am now; for Ifack I Would have you know,
Your Old Man, though he only serve for show,
Yet give him a Young Wench with Black of Top, --
And you shall see him Frisk, and Iump, and Hop; --
Icod, and Wriggle! -- Hah! -- the old Bell will sound,
Though there is never a Clapper to be found.
But let that pass: Now your Applause disburse;
Why, -- what the Devil makes you silent thus? --
What say ye, -- The Play does not deserve it? -- Hah! --
Icod, you are mistaken: -- for I Will tell ye,
I once could Write and Judge, -- and 'Fack did do
Very strange things; -- but I Have forgot 'um now: --
But I remember what a Wag -- I was: --
I had so many Smutty Jests those days,
I could get none but Women to my Plays.
But that is all one; -- Icod, the Youth that Writ,
Does well; -- and who knows, -- may do better yet:
Therefore you should encourage him, Do You hear?
And he that fails, I wish this Curse may bear,
That he be really my Character, --
Lascivious, Deaf, and Impotent as I;
And Gad that is Plague enough, -- and so God bu'y.
FINIS.

