Arcana Aulica: OR WALSINGHAM'S MANUAL; OF Prudential Maxims, FOR THE
STATESMAN And the COURTIER.

LONDON: Printed for James Young, and are to be sold by John Williams, at the
Sign of the Crown in St. Paul's Church yard. 1652.

THE PRINTER TO THE Discreet and Understanding READER.
HEre is a Child of Chance, that like another Moses in a Wicker Basket, was
lately put to Sea; and by the Hand of Providence guided unto this shore, as
unto Pharaoh's Daughter; by the taking of a small Irish Pyrate, in which it was
found; and appearing a Babe both promising, and very beautiful, was recommended
unto me to Nurse. Of what Birth it is, I can give no certain account; all that
I can assure you of, is this, That having perused it through, some very knowing
persons have affirmed, That our Language is yet enriched with nothing upon this
Subject equal unto it. The Clothes that it was wrapped in, say little toward the
discovery of its Parents; for it was directed as a present unto Ormond, the
Titular Viceroy of Ireland, from one Walsingham; who though he professes to
have given it this English Habit it now wears, yet he is able to name no Father
for it: Whether it be some other nameless Author, as he affirms, that first
gave it light, I must of necessity leave that as doubtful as I found it: And it
is a needless curiosity to enquire further, since no man is injured in that
concealment, but the Author; who it seems is well content to loose the glory of
it. What value this Walsingham sets upon it, you may read in a part of his
Letter unto Ormond, which I here insert.

YOur Excellency will herewith receive a piece, that if not too much lessened
in passing through, and from the hand that sends it, truly not unworthy the
acceptance of so great a Person. It is some years since I first met with it in
a Manuscript, and in a Foraign Language, when I took so great a fancy to it,
That it has ever since been an inseparable Companion, a daily Manual unto me:
I have since that time found it published in Latin, but still as nameless as
at our first acquaintance. The divulging of it, seriously, I did much lament,
and that for a twofold Reason; One was, to see it come abroad so lamely, and so
much injured; another was, to find it divulged at all: For surely, it is a
Tract not intended for the unskilful palate of the vulgar; and indeed, only
meant, and fit for the wisest souls, and the maturest, and best tempered
Judgments. And the most part of men are either by nature so depraved, that
they cannot forbear the practice of those evils, that they find discoursed
upon, only for their instruction; or else so sand-blinde and ignorant, that
they must needs be scandalized with, and stumble at those Praecepts which are
here recommended unto no man's practice, but laid by the Authors skiful hand, as
necessary Sea-marks upon the Shelfs of danger and deceit; of which, the Ocean
of a Public life, God knows, is full. And a little after he adds, In this
small Volume, you will find ( my Lord) enchaced skilfully together as precious
Jewels, the choicest Precepts that Story and Experience both together, have
produced for the instruction of those that move within the sphere of Business,
and the Court: It is a curious Landscape, wherein that great Territory, with all
the blemishes and beauties of it, is all contracted to an easy view: It is a
perfect Compass fitted to those Seas, with Points adapted to every wind that
blows there: It is an exact Card, describing all the Coast; and as there is not
a Rode, a Creek, or Harbor, overpast in all that Channel; so is there not a
Rock, a Flat, or Quicksand that is omitted. But surely it is done to keep us
from, and not to lead us to those dangers, etc.

This, and more delivers he in commendations of it; and what he says, cannot
but be of some Authority in the case: Since upon enquiry I do find, That he is
one, who though very young, in a little time grew up under the Wings and Favor
of the Lord Digby, to such credit with the late King, That he came to be
admitted to the greatest Trusts; and was prevented only by the fall of the
Court it self, from climbing there unto an eminenter height.

This much Reader I thought fit to say for thy satisfaction, and by way of
civility to him; contrary to whose design I have published this Treatise, and
until another Father can be found for it, have prefixed his name unto it, under
the Title of his Manual.

Farewell.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. 1.
THe several ends of Courtiers, and the means to maintain them. Fol. 1.
CHAP. 2.
The ways to obtain the Princes favor. Fol. 4.
CHAP. 3.
The ways to become known to the Prince. Fol. 3.
CHAP. 4.
The Humor and Inclinations of the Prince, and his Familiars are to be known.
Fol. 7.
CHAP. 5.
The Princes affections, whether, and how to be complied with. Fol. 11.
CHAP. 6.
The scarcity and Condition of honest men, in corrupt and vicious Courts; The
swarms of ill men, and their arts of ingratiating themselves. Fol. 15.
CHAP. 7.
Whom, when, and how we ought to flatter; the nature of a free and tolerable
flattery, and the necessity of it in Court. Fol. 19.
CHAP. 8.
How to manage the Counsels of a Prince. Fol. 21.
CHAP. 9.
The sudden resolutions of Princes, how to be moderated. Fol. 26.
CHAP. 10.
The several natures, and tempers of Princes, how to be handled; with the art
of Courtiers in introducing their Companions. Fol. 31.
CHAP. 11.
That Age, Business, Custom, and Sickness, alter the temper of the Bodies and
Constitution of the Minds of Princes. Fol. 39.
CHAP. 12.
How much Impostors are able to do by flattering Princes; and how a Prince is
to beware of them. Fol. 43.
CHAP. 13.
Of the Familiars and Servants of the Prince, and the ways to win them. Fol.
46.
CHAP. 14.
Four kinds of Noble Courtiers; how to be handled, and made use of; how warily
we ought to deal with inconstant Princes.
CHAP. 15.
The three other kinds of Noble Courtiers; how they are to be dealt with. Fol.
54.
CHAP. 16.
The meaner sort of Courtiers, how they are to be handled; as also such as are
enemies to us, for the sake of others, to whom we relate. Fol. 58.
CHAP. 17.
How we are to treat with those Enemies that hate us for our own sakes; also
concerning threats and injuries. Fol. 61.
CHAP. 18.
The injuries of the more and less powerful, how to be avoided, and handled;
the several artifices of reconciliation. Fol. 65.
CHAP. 19.
Of Envy, how it is to be overcome. Fol. 69.
CHAP. 20.
Of Emulation, the Sister of Envy, and the remedies of it. Fol. 73.
CHAP. 21.
How to avoid a threatening ruin; and when it is upon us, how to make the best
use of it: Examples of the fall of great men. Fol. 76.
CHAP. 22.
Boasting, Presumption, Arrogance, too much Familiarity, Pride, and Perfidy,
noted with examples. Fol. 88.
CHAP. 23.
How we must, not only take care to preserve the Princes Favor, but also that
of those in Power about him. Fol. 91.
CHAP. 24.
Pride even in the meanest persons at Court, noted with examples; as also
Treachery in betraying the Princes secrets. Fol. 94.
CHAP. 25.
The causes, kinds, and examples of Conspiracies with the Princes Enemies.
Fol. 97.
CHAP. 26.
That our Courtier must not be the Author of Hazardous Counsels, the variety of
Errors, whereby the Princes favor is lost. Fol. 98.
CHAP. 27.
Of the A^ts whereby Courtiers are supplanted by others; and first, under
pretense of specious employments abroad, or of calling them from their
Commands, to attend upon the Kings Person. Fol. 101.
CHAP. 28.
How Calumnies are used to make men suspected, or hated by the Prince. Fol.
105.
CHAP. 29.
Examples of other treacheries in suborned witnesses, and forged Letters. Fol.
114.
CHAP. 30.
Confirmation of slanders under the coulor of a feigned friendship; and the
inclinations of the Prince to the accuser. Fol. 117.
CHAP. 31.
The chief arts and ways of slanderers. Fol. 120.
CHAP. 32.
The deceits and danger of Courtpraises, and Masqued Courtiers. Lastly, The
third way of oppressing our Courtier by force. Fol. 121.
CHAP. 33.
Sometimes the Princes own ill and cruel Nature, envying the deserts of his
Servants, is cause of the Courtiers fall; and this, how it is to be handled.
Fol. 127.
CHAP. 34.
How to preserve our Favor and Office, with the succeeding Prince. Fol. 130.
CHAP. 35.
Ostentation of the Prince's favor, to be avoided: Something also concerning
our Friends and followers. Fol. 134.
CHAP. 36.
How to manage and dispense the Princes favor, advices, and comforts in
adversity, with other rules. Fol. 136.
CHAP. 37.
How to make a judgemeut of the constancy, or change of the Princes affection
to us. Fol. 140.
CHAP. 38.
The Princes favor to Women: Instructions for the Princes Mistresses; benefits
conferred on Princes, often make those persons hated by them, with other
documents. Fol. 141.
CHAP. 39.
Sundry precepts concerning the Pleasures, and Inclinations of the Prince, etc.
Fol. 145.
CHAP. 40.
Concluding with many choice, and necessary Admonitions. Fol. 149.
ARCANA AULICA, OR Walsinghams Manual; Of Prudential Maxims, for the Statesman
and the Courtier.
CHAP. 1.
The several ends of Courtiers, and the means to maintain them.
IT is necessary that all men, who desire with prudence and order, to govern
their Affairs; do in the first place, propose unto themselves, an end whereunto
all their actions must tend? Those that look toward the Court, do not all fix
upon the same ends; some the hope of gain, and others the desire of honor;
leads; the Ambition of Rule; draws not a few; and very many steer that Course,
merely out of a busy inclination, to the Engrossing, Crossing, or Interposing
in other men's affairs; whilst the number of those is very small, who
Princitively intend the Honor, Safety, and Advantage of the Prince.

But though their ends be diverse, yet the way to attain, to whatever end any
man there has pitched upon, is but one, and Common to all that move in that
Sphere, to wit, the Favor of the Prince; in obtaining which the industry, and
labor of all Courtiers is employed. In order whereunto it is in the first place
necessary, that you be known unto your Prince; and then either by your
behavior, your parts, your actions, or some other laudable means, that you make
your self Grateful in his eye; yet there are those for whom the splendour of
their Family, the authority of their Office, or convenience of their employment
(whether it be high, or low, come unto them by inheritance, or got with money)
has prepared an access unto the Princes person; so that they being hereby
exempted, from the toil of seeking how to become known unto the Prince, find
half their work performed unto their hands; whilst those to whom these
introductions are denied, find their greatest difficulties in their first
beginnings: But when they are once known unto the Prince, as he judges them fit
for his Service; they are often preferred and trusted before others; by reason
that being lifted up from a low Condition, or a mean Fortune; they are more
addicted and subject to the Princes will, whom they submissively reverence, as
the only Author of their advancement.

It is otherwise with Courtiers that are born Great, for upon those the Dignity
either of their employment, or their Family, imposes a necessity of having a
regard unto their own Honor, and of referring sometimes their own to the
Princes opinion; who besides is more often unwilling to promote these through a
certain emulation, or fear, lest their swelling greatness should insult at last
against him that is the Author of it; and he not able to repress them without
danger to himself and his Kingdom; whilst on the other side, the oppression of
him that rises from a mean Condition, is far more easy; only let the Prince
turn his back upon him, or abandon him to the great ones (who for the most part
look with envy upon such) and he is lost. I intend here only those wise
Princes that have known, how to limit within due bounds, the Power of those
they love, and advance; not conferring all the authority and trust of his
Kingdom upon one of these men, in subjecting even the Peers unto him; which
having been done by some Princes, did seldom or almost never succeed well.

CHAP. 2.
The ways to obtain the Princes favor.
THe ways whereby Courtiers get into authority and favor with the Prince are
two, above all other most usual and frequented. The one is of those that seek
after public Offices and Dignities, Climbing up the stairs of honor till they
come within a stage of the Favorite himself; The other is of those that follow
the Court, sedulously seeking all occasions of being employed in the secret
affairs of the Prince, and made use in business of the greatest trust.

The last of which ways, is without doubt the shortest, and traced with their
steps, who have lived in the greatest Favor with their Princes; as Mecaenas was
to Augustus, and Salust both to him, and his Successor Tiberius, of whom
Tacitus, Annal. 3. Salust, although the ways of honor were easy unto him,
imitating Mecaenas, without the senatorial Dignity, outwent in Power many that
had been honored, both with triumphs and the consulship, and varying from the
custom of the Ancients through his delicacy, and neatness, seemed prone to
nothing but the Plenty and abundance of luxary; although he had indeed a
vigorous mind, capable of the weightiest business; by so much the more sharp
and active by how much the more he made show of dullness and floth.

Like to him was Mella, of whom speaks the same Tacitus, Annal. 12. Mella born
of the same Parents, that Gallio and Seneca were; through a Preposterous
ambition laid aside all pretense to public honors; to the end, that being only
Roman Knight, he might equal in power those that had been Consuls; Besides, he
believed it the shortest way to the getting of money, to be employed in
Agencies, and soliciting the Princes business.

CHAP. 3.
The ways to become known to the Prince.
THe ways of becoming known and grateful to the Prince are various, according
to the diversity of the Courtiers, and the times; there are some that make
themselves known by their actions signally, either profitable, or glorious; or
else by a more then Common virtue, and honesty. The Commendation of others
gives to many, both access to, and interest in the Prince, which is indeed the
most usual way of all. For Princes live in such a degree of eminence above
others, and are ^o hedged in with the number of Peers, and train of Veterane
Courtiers that a stranger can hardly thrust in amongst the throng that stand in
his way, unless either there be some one to take him by the hand, and make his
passage, or else that himself by some extraordinary enterprise do attract the
Eyes of all men upon him, and amongst others, those of the Prince.

And here the fact of the Architect Dimacrates, or as some call him
Stasicrates, is very memorable. He desiring to become known unto the Great
Alexander, when all the Courtiers had refused to bring him to the King,
bethinks of a way of presenting himself all naked, anointed with Oil, a poplar
Crown on his head, upon his left shoulder a Lions Skin, and holding a great
Club in his Right hand: And thus Accoutred he comes into Alexanders presence,
as he was sitting in his Throne. The novelty of the thing drew the Eyes of all
upon him, and moved Alexander himself so far, as he caused the man to be
brought unto him; And though he approved not of what he propounded, yet he
commanded he should be enrolled amongst his Family.

I do not bring this example to persuade any body with the like foolery, to
insinuate himself into the Princes favor, but to the end I may demonstrate,
That those who are strangers and unknown, unless they be helped by some one in
great authority, can hardly scrue themselves into so great a train, as do
surround the Prince, except either by some memorable action as we have said
before or, by some unusual accident, they deserve as the Poet says.

With fingers to be pointed out,
For some strange thing amongst the rout.
CHAP. 4.
The humor and inclinations of the Prince, and his familiars are to be known.
OUr young Courtier, who desires to be known and loved by the Prince, must
observe well the manners and conditions, not only of the Prince himself, but
also of such of his followers, as he most trusts, and relies upon; together
with the Peers, and all those others who may either afford him any help, or
countenance; or else on the contrary stirred up either with emulation, fear,
envy, hate, their own, or their Friends concernments, work him any prejudice.
It is chiefly necessary that he make a full discovery of the inclinations and
customs of the Prince, that for the most part follow the temperature of his
body; which though by wary Princes, they be much concealed, and smothered, yet
it seldom happens but that sometimes they break out, and as it were laying
aside disguises, show themselves. Since all their actions are so exposed to the
eyes of men, it cannot be, but some one or other, must observe whereunto their
inclinations tend. Sometimes they are so oppressed and vexed with the weight of
business, that forgetting their Artifices, they betray their dispositions;
Tiberius himself although a most skilful Master in dissembling, could not set
so good a face upon it, but that time would by little and little, bring all his
Arts to light.

But since those of other men are so many, the propensions of Princes must
needs be diverse, and almost infinite; yet they may be reduced to two heads.
The one of which, includes all that tends to the greatness of his State, The
other his personal pleasures; His greatness consists either in his Fame and
Authority, or in Riches; the duty of his Subjects; or lastly, in the strength
and faithfulness of his Armies. In these things he ought to accommodate his
endevors to the nature, and disposition of the Princes affairs; which he that
shall with Dexterity and Skill perform, provided he be neither suspected nor
hated for other Reasons, cannot fail of becoming acceptable unto the Prince.

Make the same judgment of the pleasures, and vicious affections of the
Prince. If he be diffident and of a fearful disposition, believe that a bold
informer will be grateful unto him, who sticks not at the displeasure of the
great ones, and is ready to execute the Princes commands, whatsoever they be;
as Tacitus ascribes Sejanus. He had a body ( says he, Annals 4.) patient of
toil, a bold mind; he was a close concealer of himself, and a rash accuser of
others: Composed he was of a mixture of flattery, and pride, with an exterior
face of modesty; and yet inwardly fraught with an excess of ambition.

If the Prince delight in Drunkenness, he will all also take pleasure in men
addicted to the same vice; for which cause Tiberius loved Pomponius, and Lucius
Piso, of whom Suetonius, Cap. 24. de Tiberio. After this, the Prince to the
corruption of public Manners, spent two whole days and nights, eating and
drinking with Pomponius Flaccus, and Piso; to one of which, he gave immediately
the Province of Syria, and to the other the Government of the City, calling
them in his Letters, his most pleasant and familiar Friends. The same Tiberius,
as Suetonius relates, preferred a most ignoble Fellow to the Questorship,
before many Noble pretenders, because at a Banquet, where himself was drinking,
he drunk of Nine Gallons of Wine.

Their society in their lust, did indear Tigellinus to Nero. Tigellinus was
more powerful (says Tacitus, Annal. 14) in the bosom of the Prince, as being
admitted to his most private lusts. So Petronius, that Master of elegance (for
those are the Historians words, Annal. 16.) was taken in, amongst few, to the
familiarity of Nero; who thought nothing pleasant or sweet, but what Petronius
approved of. And according to this example, did Commodus and Heliogabalus,
confer all the dignities of the Empire upon men for lust and licenciousness,
most like unto themselves.

Mutianus was not beloved by Vespasian so much for his fidelity, duty, and the
merit of his passed services; as that, because he was more dexterous then
others, in feeding his avarice. To Isacius Angelus, who after the death of
Theodorus, got the Empire; the same avarice endeared a certain Boy, who though
he scarce knew how to write, kept the Accounts of his Exohequer, out of hope
only of sharing in the Bribes, which were given him largely, from all those
that used his assistance.

Manuel Comnenus, also Emperor, seeking some rough exactor and crafty raiser of
his Tributes, that might supply his prodigality with money, chose John Pucius,
a rude unsufferable man, difficult of access, and intolerable harsh.

Whose language, and his looks did well
His nature and his office tell.
And not content with this, lifted him up to that Authority, that he did not
only excel all others in dignity, but also would dare to violate the Edicts of
the Prince, and Orders of the Senate; abrogating, under pretense of increasing
the Treasury, some of the greatest and most necessary Offices of the Empire:
Such as was the Commander of the Galleys, the chief strength and defense of
that Imperial Monarchy.

CHAP. 5.
The Princes affections whether, and how to be complied with.
BUt that they, who desire to become acceptable to the Prince, ought to sooth
him in all his inclinations, is not only a thing publicly granted, but also
too authorized by the daily practice of Courtiers. An honest man will wonder at
it, and think that by this rule that teaches us to humor all the dispositions
of the Prince, he is shut out from Court; since that Princes often run courses,
much astray from the paths of Reason and Justice. Truly, he that desires to
lead a life altogether innocent, and remote from the conversation of men
addicted to vice, and to their own corrupt inclinations; shall in my opinion,
do very well to absent himself from that great Courtisan, the Court (if I may
so call it) that sometimes corrupts men of the greatest integrity and innocence.

Let us see an example or two of this corruption. Festinus the Friend of
Maximinus* during Valentinians Reign, governed Asia with a wonderful repute of
Gentleness and Modesty; being a sharp reprover of the violence and cruelties of
Maximinus, and of the calumnies and frauds, wherewith he circumvented many: But
at last observing that his Companion by these means had gotten the command of
the Praetorian Bands, next in dignity to the Emperor himself, he changed his
manner of life, and imitating Maximinus, did many unjust and cruel things. John
Pucius (whom I mentioned but a little before) administered for a time the
Affairs and Treasures of the Emperor Manuel with great integrity; which caused,
that the Emperors pride and inhumanity was in some sort tolerable to those that
were well disposed amongst the Subjects: But at last (as N^cetas witnesses)
giving himself over to the desire of wealth, he was in covetuousness inferior
to none, that ever had born those offices before him; exhorting his very
friends and servants, to imitate his example, as many of them did; and the
rest, though better, and incorrupted themselves, yet were fain silently to
suffer others to be depraved, for fear of the danger that hung over those that
should oppose him.

Aristides the first, both in name and nature, being by the Athenians made
Treasurer; In the first place, according to his own disposition, and the duty
of an honest man, went about to hinder all those that were under his charge,
from robbing the Treasury; whereupon they presently accused him of cheating,
and bribery, as one of the corruptest persons that ever bore that office;
insomuch, that he had like to have been condemned: But being at last quit, and
his office still continued, he determined to imitate his Predecessors, and wink
at the thefts of his Companions; by which means, he presently reobtained the
name of a good man, in the opinion of all.

Such things often fall out in the Courts of Princes, either through the malice
of those that are in most authority, who can endure no man more virtuous then
themselves; or else through the folly and imprudenee of the Prince. The
preservation of our integrity in Court, I confess, is therefore very difficult;
yet if any, either through the necessity of his Fortune, the eminence of his
Birth, the dignity of his office, or the desire of serving, either his Friends
or Country, is lead unto it, or called thereunto by the Prince, shall undergo
this kind of life; and as occasion shall require, seek to do thereby good unto
himself, and serve his Friends; in my judgment he may persist therein, without
prejudice to his upright heart, at least-ways for a time.

I speak of the Courts of the worst Princes; for to live in the Court of a wise
Prince, that loves honest and virtuous men, the difficulty is not so great. In
times past, good men did not always undergo Public employments with a desire
of doing service to their Country, so much as merely to keep wicked and corrupt
men out of those charges: And for the same reasons, ought they to seek access
unto Tyrannical, and voluptuous Princes; to the end, That if they durst not
directly, at least obliquely, and as much as in them lay, they might impede the
evil, and pernicious Counsels of the Prince; either by framing delays, and
contriving difficulties in his way, or by offering unto him more mild and
plausible resolutions.

Burrhus and Seneca, who according to the rate of those times, were accounted
not only good Courtiers, but virtuous men also; when being made Governors of
Nero's youth, they observed the humor of this Prince apt and prone to lust and
pleasure; lest he should break out to the rapes of the Noblest Women, they
permitted him a Mistress, whereby for a time they kept him in order: Who took
into his familiarity Annaeus Serenus for a cloak unto his lust, Who faining to
be in love with this freed Woman, did openly own those gifts to be his (says
Tacitus Annal 13.) which the Prince in private bestowed upon her. This must a
good man do, who not being able to master the luxury, liberty, and perverseness
of the Prince, must at least divert them, and bend them other ways, whence
there is least danger like to arise, either to the public, or the Princes
honor.

CHAP. 6.
The scarcity and Condition of honest men, in corrupt and vicious Courts; The
swarms of ill men, and their Arts of ingratiating themselves.
PErhaps some one will say, that it seldom falls out, that a Tyrant or a
dissolute Prince, will take into his favor an honest man; I do not deny but it
is very rare, but yet I must affirm there are few Princes Courts in which there
are not some good me^ found; if not called thither by the Prince* at least drawn
thither by their own desire of doing good to others, and infringing the power
of evil men: Who stand their ground there to that end, through the assistance
o^ the best disposed Courtiers, and through the friendship and patronage of
some Great man, observing carefully there, that wholesome rule of Lepidus, whom
Tacitus (Annal. 4.) brings for an example of a good and wise Courtier, who
neither with an unseasonable Contumacy did exasperate the Prince, nor with a
sordid flattery sooth him in his vices. The same Tacitus for these reasons
commends Capito and Labeo. That age (says he) had at once two Ornaments of
peace; But Labeo was of a more incorrupted liberty, and therefore more
esteemed, whilst Capito's pleasing humor was more acceptable to the great ones.

I do not deny, but a Courtiers life will be far more dificult to an honest man
then to another; But withal I must affirm, that the advantage of Glory and
content of Mind that will arise from thence, will much recompense the trouble
of it. Since that, if he carry himself wisely and accommodate himself to those
things that he sees, he cannot change nor overcome; I dare say, he will at last
become acceptable to the worst of Princes, and dearer then others that are of a
worse repute; who seldom manage the Princes business with a due fidelity and
care; or at least not equal to that he might easily promise to himself from the
hands of a virtuous and honest man. And hither tends the Counsel of Salust and
Mecaen^s, whereby the first recommended to Julius Caesar, and the latter to
Augustus, the choice and friendship of Good men. Because conscience and care of
their reputation restrains these more powerfully from dishonest things, then
the fear of punishment, or the want of power does others.

But as I have said, the vicious are always in Court in greater thrungs; who
chiefly by two ways do ingratiate themselves with the Prince first by
flattering and fulfilling whatever he shall please to command; and that by so
much the more servilely, by how much the more their hopes of gain are greater.
Next for that, Princes are pleased to have those about them in comparison of
whom, themselves, though bad God knows, seem to be good. Some there are that
think also their lives more secure in the company of those that are most like
unto themselves. Dionysius the Tyrant, being requested to expel out of his
Court one, who for his villainy was hated by all men, answered, No, he would
keep him, lest otherwise he himself should become the most hateful person in
the Court. It is natural to those who find themselves obnoxious to any vice,
by comparing themselves to those that are worse, to seek to purchase to
themselves some show of probity; And it has been an old trick of Princes, on
purpose to choose unlikely Successors to the end, their own acts and virtues
might appear better and more illustrious: For Tacitus is of opinion, that for
no other reason did Augustus adopt Tiberius, whose arrogance and cruelty he
knew full well; no^ Tiberius choose Caligula.

It is principally necessary, that a good man be very sober and circumspect in
hi^ discourse; for Princes seldom or never love an unwary and careless liberty
in any kind of men, how virtuous soever they be. Neither did Plato's freedom
with Dionysius succeed well, for therefore was he delivered up to a needy
Mariner, and sent to be sold in the I Will of Creet; whence being redeemed by
certain Philosophers, he was admonished either to abstain wholly from the
conversation of Princes, or to speak plausible things: With the like advices
did Aristotle furnish his Cozen Callisthenes, then going to attend upon
Alexander, to wit, That he should very seldom speak, and then never but
pleasing things, to him upon whose Tongues-end lay the dsposall of his life.

CHAP. 7.
Whom, when, and how we ought to flatter; the nature of a free and tolerable
flattery, and the necessity of it in Court.
THough it be inconsistent with the strictest rules of Morality and Virtue, yet
of necessity, if you live in Court, you must sometimes so flatter the Prince as
may gain him unto you. But all manner of flattery is not tolerable, a base and
servile one was displeasing even to Tiberius himself, of whom it is written by
Tacitus, Annal. 3. that going out of the Senate he was once heard to say of
those flattering Senators in Greek; O men born to slavery. There are
circumstances wherein flattery used, is as prejudicial, as when it is wholly
omitted; For it happens often, that he whom we flatter too grossly, suspects
deceit. It is requisite still that flattery have something of truth, and some
show of liberty mixed with it, (it is the opinion of Aeschines and Plutarch)
whereby we may persuade not only the Prince, that we speak heartily, and as we
think, but others also, and so preserve our Credit.

Craesus, who whilst he was a King himself, had learnt well the humor of
Kings, and what would either please or displease them: When upon a time
Cambyses, King of the Persians, demanded of those that were about him, What
they thought of him in Comparison of his Father Cyrus: They all affirmed, That
he was greater then Cyrus, as who unto his Fathers Kingdoms had added Egypt,
and the dominion of the Sea. When Craesus (then a Captive) came to speak, he
affirmed, That he was much inferior to his Father, by reason that he had as yet
begotten none equal to himself. This answer had some taste of freedom, and
therefore was more pleasing to Cambyses vanity, then all the rest had said.

That flattery is very notable of Valerius Messala, recorded by Tacitus Annal.
1. Messala Valerius added, That it was convenient the Oath of Allegiance should
every year be renewed in Tiberius name; who being demanded by Tiberius, whether
he had any commandment from him to give that advice, he answered, That he spoke
it of his own accord; and that in what concernd the Commonwealth, he would use
no man's advice but his own, whatever the offense or danger were: Which was a
wonderful unpractised kind of flattery.

Like unto this, is that which the same Author relates of Ateius Capito, Annal.
3. Lucius Ennius, a Gentleman of Rome, was accused of Treason for melting the
Image of the Prince, and making it into Plate; Caesar commanded he should not
be prosecuted for it: Ateius Capito, openly complained with a seeming liberty,
that the power of determining in such a case ought not to be taken from the
Senate, nor so great a Crime pass unpunished; and that he was slow in resenting
his own, least he should also punish an injury done to the Commonwealth. It
were easy to bring more examples of this kind, but these are sufficient to
instruct those upon whom there is imposed a necessity of flattering, that they
may take heed, lest their flattery bring upon themselves, or others, any
Private or Public damage; it is sufficient that it be such as may sometimes
satisfy thy Princes vanity.

CHAP. 8.
How to manage the Counsels of a Prince.
OUr Courtier ought to beware how he engages himself (though called) in the
Counsel of a Proud and Violent Prince; for such as those do ask Counsel in no
other sort, then as Xerxes did when he went to invade Greece: He called
together the Princes of Asia, as it were to deliberate with them about the
Conduct of the War; b^^ they being come before him, he said, Le^ I should seem
without your advice to a^ all things according to my own will; (...) have
called you my Lords to Counsel: ye^ I would have you know, that I expect here
from you obedient minds, and not troublesome debates. Cambyses, the Predecessor
o^ Xerxes, being about to Marry his Sister, demanded of his Counselors,
whether any Law of the Persians prohibited such a Marriage; They perceiving the
King did no^ ask this question, so much to resolve himself of any doubt, as to
sound the dispositions o^ the Nobles, answered, That truly there wa^ no love
that warranted expressly this tha^ the King was about to do, but there wa^ one
that affirmed, that whatever the King thought fit to do, was lawful. Thus out
of the Humor of the Prince, and the Nature of the affair, we must first make a
judgment, whether it be fit, or safe, when he asks ou^ Counsel, to deliver
freely our opinions; o^ to humor him in his inclinations.

You have Royal examples of this already, I will now bring you one of a man,
who though he were not a King, yet bore the Office of a King; not above an Age
ago in Spain: Ferdinand being dead, the Pope and Maximilian the Emperor,
exhorted, Charles of Austria then in Flanders to take upon him the title of King
of Spain; although his Mother Ione, Ferdinands daughter were still living, but
wholly unfit for Government, by reason of her want of health. The States were
hereupon assembled, and before them Cardinal Ximenes, to excuse the novelty of
the thing, discoursed excellently of the reasons of what was done. The Grandees
more observant of ancient customs, and the Queen, then was fit against a King
that was shortly to succeed of Course; Protested very obstinately against it.
Ximenes being angry, rises up and tells them, the thing that was treated of, was
not to be called in queston; neither was there any need of their ndvice in the
case: That Kings being to enter upon their Kingdoms, are not to expect the
consent of their Subjects; that they who were assembled, were not called out of
any necessity, but that they might have ^ccasion by the Promptitude of their
suffrages to endear their Prince unto them. But since they interpreted that as
a due, which was only a favor, they should see that without their approbation
he would proclaim King Charles at Madrid; which example all the rest of the
Cities quickly followed.

Such a manner of proceeding, not only in these cases, but in all others in a
manner do Princes use; scarce asking any man's advice, but either to the end they
may Countenance their own resolutions with the consent of many, or else to
discover the disposition of the person they advise withal, as Tacitus
witnesses that Tiberius often did. The Courtier must therefore sollicitously
sift into the Princes Mind, lest otherwise he should chance to give offensive
Counsel. If the Princes inclination in the thing debated be doubtful unto him,
let him seem to discuss the matter, and so laying down arguments both for the
one, and the other side, let him leave the Prince to his own election: Who (if
the thing advised of, be not unalterably resolved upon already) having heard
the reasons that may be brought against it, if he be discreet, will change his
Mind.

Neither in this case will there be any ground for that bashfulness (of
blushing, to seem so much inferior to any body, as to follow their Counsel)
which though it be very hurtful and unbecoming unto them, is very familiar
amongst great men; for having said what you can, you leave the freedom of
determining all to the Princes prudence, whereby you will also avoid the danger
that many times Counselors are obnoxious unto, if their advices succeed ill.
And if the Prince following his first resolutions meet not with success, he
will by so much the more acknowledge and esteem the prudence of that Courtier,
who foresaw the approaching misfortune, when it was yet avoidable.

If you be pressed to deliver your opinion in ^n unlawful matter, either seek
some pre^ence of delay, or else entreat that some third person may be called
for the better discussing of the business; whereby the case being more maturely
weighed, it may appear what is most for the dignity and safety of the Prince.
By this means Burrhus defeated Neroes first attempt against his Mothers life;
Promising that himself would kill her if she were found guilty; But since it
was afforded unto every other person, a trial could not be denied unto his
Mother. Whilst the examinations are taking, Nero's fury asswages, and his
fears grow less, so that his determination, though it was not quite altered,
yet it was laid aside to another time.

But this manner of proceeding takes not place upon all occasions, being proper
only in desperate and ambiguous cases. Moreover, before we adventure upon it,
we ought to know, whether the nature of the Prince is compatible with delays:
for there are some so headlong and impatient, that there is no means more
certain of incurring their displeasure, then by using delays.

CHAP. 9.
The sudden resolutions of Princes, ho^ to be moderated.
WHen as it often falls out, our advi^^ is not asked in the resolution, bu^ for
the manner of execution of what is resolved upon already; if the business do
seem (...) consistent with reason and honesty, we mu^^ propose the remotest
means we can think (...) for the effecting of it; and countenance th^^ our
advice with the pretenses of facility equity, and security; showing withal,
tha^ sudden undertakings, are full of hazard and difficulty. When we have to do
wi^^ those impatient kind of Princes, we ough^ to be ready, and have always
our Wits about us for these sudden occasions, an^ then if they be not
unsufferably rash and wilful, no doubt but they will follow the course which we
shall demonstrate to b^ most safe and easy: Yet if their madness be such, that
they will not hear mild and gentle Counsels, his adviser may yet excuse th^^
his wary prudence with a Care and Affection to the Prince; desiring rather,
that things should be done slowly with security, the^ rashly with the ruin of
his Master.

Now if so be, that in that headlong course that the Prince has wilfully
chosen, difficulties or straits do occur, he will much more reflect upon the
prudence of him that would have dissuaded him in time, and perhaps for the
future, be willing to hearken to him, propounding milder ways. Besides this
gaining of time does frequently afford subject of moderating the Princes
passion, and of bridling his desires, or else of letting him see, that what he
is about is either wholly impossible, or else cannot be effected without great
absurdity.

For it after happens, that the ways which Princes propose unto themselves, are
accompanied with such circumstances of difficulty, as are not to be overcome;
and to these kind of straits, as I would not have you exhort him, so I would
not have you too much dissuade him from them, (rather suffer him with a
respective silence to take his own course, least you dissuading out of these
difficult ways, he seek out some more easy one of compassing his will;) which
otherwise having toild himself out of breath amongst the Obstacles that he met
with, he would voluntarily give the business over. But sometimes it falls out
that Princes commit the execution of some Wickedness or Injustice to an honest
man: In which case truly (though all good men ought to suffer any violence or
misfortune rather then consent to be made the Minister of villainy) I fear the
number of these is very few that are so generously resolved, as by a passive
disobedience to expose themselves to the sacrifice for another; especially if
the occasion offered, and the nature of the Prince admits of no denial, or
excuse, nor affords any way of casting that displeasing employment upon some
third person.

Which later course Burrhus took, Nero resolving the second time upon his
Mothers murder, full of so much the more care and eagerness, by how much the
danger of her contrived Shipwreck in the Tyher had produced no other effect,
then that the Woman always before malicious and greedy of revenge, was after so
great an injury become more enraged then ever. Burrhus and Seneca, being called
to Counsel, stood long ambiguous and doubtful what to say, as Tacitus reports
Annal. 14. saying: They were both of them a long time silent, fearing lest they
dissuade in vain; At last Seneca hitherto the forwarder man, cast his eye upon
Burrhus, as if he would have asked, whether the execution of that Murder
should not be left to the Soldiers; Burrhus prevented him with an answer, and
says that the Pretorian Bands were all devoted to Caesar's house, and so
mindful of Germanicus, that they would act nothing of cruelty against his
Progeny; and therefore that Anicecetus should perform his promise. So he freed
both himself and his soldiers, from the execution of that ugly act.

I confess, he is not beholding unto you, whom, to save your self innocent, you
shall entangle in such an employment: But should such an occasion happen, I
think it fitter that some such man as Anicetus was, should undergo the infamy
of such an act, then any virtuous or honest man.

Yet the safest way of all is in time to foresee, and in their birth to
prevent, and occur to the unjust desires, and the unlawful designs of the
Prince; and before they either take Root, or appear above Ground, to suppress
and pull them up. There are many, who with seasonable and gentle admonitions,
and silken words, as Parisates calls them, have done much good, and had
wonderful success in these cases; yet it is necessary, that whosoever would use
such remedies as these be of great authority with the Prince, who, must hear as
much out of reverence as love: And nevertheless, when all is done, though it
may succeed well in this or that case, it will hardly do so in all. I am much
pleased with the way of those men, who are of a conceited and pleasant humor,
and for that faculty, acceptable with the Prince; who as it were, intending
something else, with a fit similitude, or a well chosen story, will represent
unto the Prince the danger, and foulness of those Counsels, wherewith he seems
to be carried headlong away.

But to do this, there is a great nimbleness of wit, and pleasantness of
discourse required; besides, they must take heed the Prince smell not out, that
himself is the argument of the jest. As Tiberius, who in the Tragedy of Atreus,
composed by Scaurus, believed he was reproached of his Brothers murder; and
Domitian, in that which Helvidius had writ of Paris and Cenon, thought himself
upbraided with his divorces: Wherefore it is necessary, that these kind of
stories be skilfully interwoven amongst other things, not squaring or applyable
to the Prince; and it is very pertinent to this purpose, That they take care
not to inculcate too plainly, that matter which makes most to the purpose;
though, least it should quite escape the Princes observation, it may be, as it
were, by a casual repetition i^erated. The conceit and continuance of the
story, by how much the greater, and more cheerful it is, by so much the more it
will imprint those things that are said; and because they seem to come by
chance, not of purpose, or design, they will not distaste the ticklish ear of
the Prince.

For this kind of moderation, whereby you may neither contribute to the
Princes vices, nor in vain resist them; there are many critical times, and
means, which those that attend upon the persons, and are Employed in the
affairs of Princes, cannot but meet with. If so be that the case be such, that
you must needs contradict the disposition and inclination of the Prince, you
must seek out some other passion or humor in him, whereunto he is equally
inclined, and so beget a strife and contention in the Princes mind; but we
must carefully pretend still, that what we say, comes from the duty and
reverence that we bear him. By this means did Mutianus keep Domitian in orde,
and hinder him from joining with Cerealis, as (out of what hopes, I know not)
he was about to do, says Tacitus, Hist. 4.

CHAP. 10.
The several natures, and tempers of Princes, how to be handled; with the art
of Courtiers in introducing their Companions.
YEt to do these things successfully, it does much conduce, that we know the
inclinations of our Princes, which depend upon the natural temperature of their
Bodies. The difference and variety of which is common to them with other men;
except, that as they are more powerful then others, so they are less masters of
their affections and inclinations; which are for the most part, more violent
and more unreasonable in them, then in meaner persons.

He, in whom Choler rules, is, Hasty, Proud, and prone to Anger; a lover of
Ceremony, and Respect; a sore enemy to those that are but in the least sort
refractory; impatient in execution, and rash in resolution; a contemner of all
men's opinions, that differ from his own; very apt to commit injuries, yet soon
friends with those he has wronged, if they renew not the memory of passed
enmities; but a hater of those that rip up old offenses, and to the end, he may
prevent such as he is afraid of, watching all occasions of doing them a greater
mischief.

Whoever has to do with such a Prince, must always have his eyes and ears
open, that he may readily understand and obey the first beck, without making
any reply or delay, least by contradiction the Prince come to suspect him of
arrogance, as one that would seem to think himself wiser then he; let him not
stick to submit himself to the lowest kind of employments, if need be, though
they suit not with his condition. He must be patient of injuries, and no ways
mindful of them; but after a wrong, so much the more officious: He must not
brag of his merits, least he should seem to reproach the Prince with them; but
rather heap services upon services, least the memory of those that are past
should wear out, and to the end, the pleasure and gratefulness of fresh ones,
may revive the remembrance of the old. When the Prince is angry, let him not
come near him, for all things displease him then; neither are those that are
dearest unto him, grateful in any thing they can devise, to say or do.
Familiarity with such humors as these, turns into contempt; which for that
reason, although the Prince invite us to it, is to be avoided: Let all things
rather tend to modesty and respect. For these Lions, though sometimes they be
meek and gentle, are at other times enraged against those they love best, and
who are in most authority with them.

They that are of a Sanguine Constitution, are for the most part of a pleasant
humor, lovers of mirth, and recreation; flying sadness, the seriousness of
business, and trouble of debates, lovers of peace, leaving the administration
of their affairs to others, in whom they suffer nothing more unwillingly, then
complaints. They are courteous, gentle, and free, if not from all, at least,
from any grievous injuries; more mindful of benefits received from others, then
done by themselves* complacent, willing to help, and for the most part liberal.

He that lives with such as these, must omit no circumstances of veneration and
respect, but very seldom must they treat of business, or serious affairs. Those
that are employed in the greatest, and most important Offices, and concernments
of the Kingdom, ought not to come near these Princes, before they be either
called, or certain that the Prince is not engaged in any recreation; least
otherwise, they should interrupt him in his greatest delights, and make him
blush to be surprised by those, who, he may apprehend, are secretly angry, to
see him no better entertained. For so when Philip of Macedon, was once at play,
it was told him, That Antipater was at the door, who presently troubled, and
conscious of his transgression, hid his dice under his Pillow; blushing, that
Antipater should catch him at that sport. Therefore with such a Prince, as
those that manage the greatest affairs of the Kingdom, in serious and weighty
trusts do exceed others; so also are they out-gone by others, in a familiar and
free access to the Princes person; who naturally avoids these kind of serious
men, as much as may be. Those men that are of a jovial and well tempered
disposition, and capable as well of pleasure, as of business, are chie^ly
acceptable to these kind of Princes. Provided, That whilst they are out of the
Princes sight, they do not with too much facility and complacence, loose their
authority with others; but they must preserve the honor of their rank entire,
for without that (as the Proverh says) Familiarity breeds contempt, and
contempt gives encouragement to quarrels, upon the first appearance of an
injury: Which the Prince being an enemy to trouble and strife, to free himself
of, will endeavor to remove him that shall appear most faulty.

A Melancholy Prince is slow in his Counsels, anxious, thoughtful, diffident,
jealous, witty, and for the most part peevish; given to silence, and when he
speaks, involving himself in ambiguous words, a dissembler, apt rather to sound
other men's opinions, then deliver his own; an enemy of jests, and freedom; a
lover of solitude, difficult of access, a friend to few, and to those but
coldly; prone to hatred, out of diffi^ence, an inseparable companion unto him;
covetuous and fearful, even to absurdity; one that hates equally those that he
has offended, with those that have offended him; implacably greedy of revenge,
and whom, though reconciled unto you, you ought to be jealous of.

With these kind of dispositions, we cannot deal with too much wariness and
circumspection; principally we must take care of our Tongues, and call, as it
were, a counsel upon every thing we say; to the end, we may speak nothing
strange or offensive, nor indeed, scarce at all, unless we be called upon: In
our respect, we must rather exceed, then fall short, and altogether abstain
from contradiction, without pressing him, when he demurs in his Counsels, least
his melancholy once kindled in choler, never quench till it convert to hatred.
In our demands, we must not be importunate, when we see him deny us readily;
for it is not convenient to accustom the Prince, to give us repulses,
especially such a Prince, who being by his nature prone to ill suspicions, will
think that man his enemy, that he has given a refusal unto; neither will you
easily afterward, by any skill, take this apprehension out of him; for with
such, the memory of an in^ury endures long; and measuring others by themselves,
they believe all men as malicious, and as obstinate in their hatred, as they.
In short, these kind of men are the worst, and most difficult of all others;
and whose temper, by reason of the variety of cloudy thoughts, that hover in
their dark imaginations, is most unequal; which makes their conversation
exceeding troublesome.

The Phlegmatic Prince participates of the heaviness and slowness of the
melancholy; but as in understanding, so in peevishness and disturst, is
inferior to him; for his heart is, as it were, congealed with cold; and hence
it comes to pass, that he is diffident of none so much, as of himself; fearing
to undertake great matters, because he despairs of the success, and knows not
how to go about it. He is doubtful in his Counsels, fearful in Execution, not
of a quick capacity; and as his hate is not great, so his love is not vehement.

To supply the heaviness of these Princes, an active and ready Minister is
necessary. When the Prince has once found him capable to effect those things,
that himself thought desperate, discovering the weakness of his own wit; he
loves, admires, and cherishes this man, as necessary unto him. And that kind
of favor, which leans upon the opinion of such a necessity, is of all others
most durable. Which our Courtier once observing, let him make it his business
to bring to a prosperous issue, those businesses that seemed most difficult,
and from which, the Prince expected little or no success; as it was the
constant practice of that great Minister of France, Cardinal Richeleiu, who
always kept the King entangled in such dangerous undertakings, That if he
would, he knew not how to be without him.

Let our Courtier also, if it can be so contrived, compass these things, and
execute the most material part of his business himself alone, taking heed,
however he do, that he take not to his assistance, a helper or companion, more
habile and dexterous, then himself: Withal, let him beware he be not too long
absent from Court, least he chance to loose the Prince, who if he shall once
find one more able or useful then him, he will be either less valued, or at
least be held less necessary; and so being laid aside once or twice, in
employments that shall succeed in other hands, will at last fall into contempt.

Wherefore it is an old art of Courtiers, not to take unto themselves any
Companions, but such as in Virtue and Prudence they shall much excel, to the
end, that in comparison of these, their own luster may so much the more appear,
and that the Prince being surrounded with such as these, may not easily know
where to find one, whom he may either prefer or oppose unto the introducer of
these. Moreover, these grosser souls, as often as he has need of them, to whom
they do now their present, and may ow their juture advancement, are easy and
obnoxious to be debau^hed by him, and ready for corruption, which he cannot
easily expect from one that is his equal in condition, or in parts, and who
stands upon his own legs. These are the several kinds of humane inclinations,
whereunto Princes are no less subject then other men, inclining now to this,
and then to that side, according to the prevalence of this or that temperature
in them.

CHAP. 11.
That Age, Business, Custom, and Sickness, alter the temper of the Bodies, and
Constitution of the Minds of Princes.
NOtwithstanding that for the most part hings are thus, yet these rules are not
infallible and without exception; for Age, Custom, and Business, alters the
temper of the Bodies, yea, and the Inclinations and Actions of Princes. In the
time of war, the Prince cherishes Military men, but peace being returned into
his Kingdom, the Authority and Interest of these men does soon wax old; and
then, if the Prince inclines to pleasure, or any other affection, he will be
apt to save those that can serve or further him in it.

See what Tacitus writes of Tiberius, Annal. 6. He changed his manners strangely
with the times, whilst he was a private man, and under Augustus his
Government, both his life and manners were of good repute; as long as Germanicus
and Drusus lived, he was close and crafty in counterfeiting virtue; as long as
his Mother was alive, he kept a mean betwixt Virtue and Vice: For cruelty he
was infamous, but for his Lusts as long as he either loved or feared Sejanus,
secret. But in the end, he burst out into all wickedne^s and dishonesty, and
casting away both fear and shame, he suffered himself to be carried wholly by
his vicious Inclinations.

Of Caligula, this judgment of Passienus is very notable; There was never a
better Servant, nor a worse Master. It is almost incredible, what variety of
dispositions were found in Marius and Sylla; so that Plutarch doubts, whether
Fortune wrought this change in their Natures, or only brought to light what
before of wickedness lay concealed in them. In which case, if I should speak my
opinion, I would declare, I thought they did not change their Natures; but
only pull of those Masks, that fear and a narrow Fortune had muffled them
withal. Just as Leontius said of Zeno, That a Serpent frozen with cold, hurts
not; but warmed by the fire, thrusts forth his sting.

Tryphon, as Josephus witnesses, whilst he led a private life, to win upon the
people, did personate a good man; but being made a King, he threw of his
disguises, and quickly let them see, that all that virtue which appeared in
him, was forced and counterfeit: And that of Agamemnon is not much unlike, if
what Euripedes writes of him be true; he was modest, affable, and easy of
access, before he was chosen Generalissimo of the Greeks. But after that
election, he became an enemy to his friends, and inaccessible to all, in
keeping himself shut up, whereby he became so distastful, that the Precept the
Poet gives upon this occasion, is worth recording.

These men are wise, that great advancement gain,
And still their ancient modesty retain.
An excellent sentence, but observed by few. Pollio truly seemed to follow it,
if we may believe Seneca. Afterward ( says he) being promoted to the highest
degrees of honor, he, never corrupted by any occasion, deviated a whit, from
his former modesty, temperance, and civility: He was never pufft up with
prosperity, nor with the variety of business was he so disordered, as that any
one could surprise him in a humor, derogating from the reputation he had gained
before.

For truly, the defects and blemishes of Princes and Courtiers, proceed for the
most part out of Pride, the inseparable handmaid of greatness. This is that
makes them despise other men's counsels, being vainly persuaded, that they do
excel other men, as much in Prudence, as they do in Power. And some are so
carried away with this stream, that they think it below them to keep within the
limits of Law or Reason; believing they cannot be Princes, to whom all things
are not lawful, they have a mind unto, according to that of the Poet.

Virtue, Truth, Faith, such private things as these,
Are not for Kings, they must do what they please.
But if these kind of opinions did only corrupt the weakest, and worst of
Princes, I should wonder the less; but I see the minds of the best men to be
blinded also with the witchcraft of Power and Rule. No man ever yet exceeded
the Seven Sages of Greece, in giving Precepts of modesty; nor ever were there
worse Tyrants, then such of them as came to Government. Appianus being to speak
of Aristo, reckoned up not a few that bore the name of Philosophers, that had
played the Tyrants at Athens; naming also some of the very Pythagoreans, who
being called to Government in Italy, did exceedingly abuse their power; which
makes me doubt much, whether most of those Philosophers, who so proudly contemn
honors and dignity, do it in good earnest, or not rather for a cloak and cover
to their small deserts, their poverty and idleness. Surely, if we will believe
Aristophanes, they did not live so frugally and nearly, so much out of virtue,
as necessity; and would not refuse to feast plentifully, when ever they were
invited.

CHAP. 12.
How much Impostors are able to do by flattering Princes; and how a Prince is
to beware of them.
THere are oftentimes Impostors, who with flatteries, and hidden sly
suggestions, creep into the Princes bosom, and corrupt their nature; To these
kind of men, does Tacitus impute the pride and cruelty of Vitellius.
Vespasian, who was of a gentle nature, learnt from these people to oppress his
subjects with heavy Tributes, as the same Tacitus affirms: In short, it is
certain, that many who have used the service of these kind of men, have sadly
degenerated. These Impostors seek favor unto themselves, by showing the Prince
ways to Greatness, Power, and Profit; who by so much the more willingly does
hearken to them, by how much the less he understands himself. He poor man, not
reflecting, nor observing that these men praise and sooth him; to the end, they
may at last betray him to contempt, and expose him to the hatred of his people.
And truly, to humor and comply with the Cruelty, Covetousness, and Lust of a
Prince, is of all others, the securest way to betray him, for he cannot condemn
the Traitor, without discovering his own guilt and vices.

The Franconians, by the help of Aegidius, at that time governing in Gaul for
the Romans, had expelled Clodius Comatus out of his Kingdom, whom one of his
friends desiring to see restored, goes over to Aegidius, and fostered upon all
occasions, as much as in him lay, the Avarice, and Cruelty of the man, which
was but too notorious before; whence the injuries of this Roman growing
insufferable, the Franconians begin to wish for their King again, and at last
recall him to his Kingdom. Thus this honest Franconian made good use of his
flattery, and by feeding him in his own vices, betrayed his Masters enemies.
Sejanus, who gaped after the Roman Empire, see what arts he used: After he saw
that Tiberius, who by his instinct had imprisoned Agrippina, and her children,
grew weary of the City; spurred that inclination on, hoping, that when the
Prince was once retired, the Trust and Government of the Empire should be cast
upon him, as indeed it came to pass; so that for a time, Tiberius was only
Lord of a little Island, and Sejanus Emperor. Perrennius also thirsting after
the Empire, first circumvented and made away all those that stood in his light,
under pretense of a conspiracy, that Lucilla had contrived against Commodus;
and then intices the Emperor to pleasures, whereby he himself might come to the
managing of all things, and at last attain unto the Empire.

The same way took Bardas, Uncle to Michael, Emperor of Constantinople, who
having taken away Theoctistus, his Associate and Tutor to the young Prince,
contrived also his Mothers banishment; persuading Michael to take the
Government into his own hands; whose young years incapable of rule, he soon
diverted to delights, and pleasure; so as he gave himself wholly to these
entertainments, and intended nothing e^^e: Bardas, in the mean time, fishes
eagerly after the love of the people, and to that end, converses with good and
learned men, restored learning in the City, and made many good Laws; by which
means, he would doubtless, have slept at last into the Imperial Throne, if
another had not prevented him. I do not bring these examples, that I may teach
how Princes are to be circum^ented, but that I would have Princes themselves
learn hence, what Prudence and Caution is necessary for them to discern, and
distinguish the Counsels of their Ministers; and chiefly, that they may beware
of those who are apt to sooth them in, and applaud their Lusts and Vices; and
learn to think well of such, as will sometimes modestly adventure to express
their dislikes of their excesses.

CHAP. 13.
Of the Familiars and Servants of the Prince, and the ways to win them.
HAving considered all things, that our Courtiers was to observe in the Prince
himself, let us come to his Servants, who by reason of the Offices they bear,
are continually about his person, and may be useful to those that pretend at
Court, either by procuring them extraordinary accesses, or by making seasonable
mention of them, or by instructing them of the ways, times, and occasions of
doing their business. There are many Princes, who being private, put on a quite
other face, then that they bear in public; and who more willingly do trust
and disclose their thoughts, to such of their Servants, as they think faithful
to them, esteeming the lowness of their condition incapable of treachery, or
wicked practices: Who does not know, that Claudius was governed by his
Freedmen, one of which, called Pallas, he had so enriched, That upon a time
complaining of Poverty to some body, he was advised to get Pallas adopt him for
his Heir. By this man's persuasion, Claudius married Agrippina, after by the
help of Narcissus (a freedman also) he had destroyed Messalina?

Who can be ignorant, that during the continuance of the Eastern Empire, the
Eunuchs many times governed all? if that had not been so, it had been
impossible for Arbetio, the chief Ruler of the Empire, to have escaped with
life, when Verissimus accused him. Borilus and Germanus, two slaves, by the
absolute authority they had with Botoniates, one of the Emperors, made him an
enemy to Isacius, and Alexius Comnenis.

Yet let us suppose, That the Prince does not impart his Counsels to these men,
they are more easily pryed into by these, then any others: For it cannot be,
that Princes always wear their Masks in private, oftentimes the throng, and a
public life, makes him suppress and hide those affections, which when he is at
liberty, and in private, do break out. Wherefore, I conclude, it is very
necessary in Courts, To think all kind of men, even the meanest, useful unto
you. And we must believe for certain, That together with their Authority and
Fortune, their prudence and discretion, will grow up; which Arrian demonstrates
to Epictetus in Epaphroditus, and his two slaves; The one of which coming to
wait upon the Emperor at his Stool, and the other to have the charge of his
Shoes; Epaphroditus himself, who had sold them not long before as unuseful,
sought now their Favor, and praised their Prudence.

Fortune has never scarce been so favorable to any one in Court, as not to
afford him as many enemies as friends; neither has it ever yet cast any man so
low there, as that he was neither able to hurt, nor help another: Whence it
was, that in the time of Tiberius, as Tacitus says, It was a great honor to be
known to Sejanus his Door-keepers. It will therefore be a wisemans part, by all
becoming ways, to endear the Servants of the Prince, whatever their condition
be.

CHAP. 14.
Four kinds of Noble Courtiers; how to be handled, and made use of; how warily
we ought to deal with inconstant Princes.
FRom the Princes Servants, we come to the Nobles of the Court, which are of
sundry kinds: There are some illustrious for their birth, but destitute of the
Princes favor; others in favor with the Prince, but not laden with honors; a
third sort, that have honors and offices, far exceeding their Interest and
Favor; and lastly, Those who flourish both in Favor, and great Employments. The
friendship of the first of these, will perhaps avail our Courtier very little,
who are nevertheless to be honored and respected, according to their quality;
least, though they cannot hurt you themselves, by their friends and followers,
they should do it: For in such Trains of defendancies and followers, great
Families are often very powerful, either by reason of old benefits, or
reverence to their greatness; or lastly, (since Princes minds are mutable) out
of respect to the Fortune and Favor these great men may yet chance to come
into; with this, or the succeeding Prince.

Archelaus, King of Cappadocia, to his great disadvantage, did neglect to Honor
and Court Tiberius, when he came to Rhodes; for Tiberius afterward meditating
revenge, but pretending another cause, called him to Rome, where he perished
miserably: Which respect nevertheless the Historian says, He omitted not out of
pride, but for that he was warned by some of Augustus his Favorites, That
whilst Cajus Caesar flourished, and was sent into the East, the Friendship of
Tiberius seemed unsafe. We must look therefore upon these great men of Fortune,
though not able to deserve well of us, yet powerful enough to hurt us: And
though they be unacceptable and suspected by the Prince, we must yet reverence
them, to avoid the blam of others, and their emnity.

If it chance, that the Prince will oppose you to one of these great ones, as
it is usual with Princes to do; as you must not refuse the task, so you must
with great art, dexterity, and choice of occasions, undertake it; taking care,
that you may both satisfy the Prince, and justify your endeavors to other
men: It is an enterprise full of danger, but if at the Princes instance, it be
taken in hand, it is the way to rise.

Yet after you are once engaged in one of these Brigues, there are the choice
of two ways to be taken, according to the nature of the Prince you act for, the
persons you have to do with, and the times you are in: Some men act all these
things in their own name so boldly, and with so high a hand, That all kind of
men, except those that are great indeed, strike easily sail unto them, for fear
of offending the Prince; who approves (as they believe) all these men say or
do. There are others yet, that take another course more safe and sweet, by
continually waiting upon the Prince, their interest, in whom they will make no
show of, but upon the best opportunities; neither will they take any occasion
for these contentions, but such as with great choice they have selected, as
both likely to succeed; and having took effect, to redound much to the
advantage of the Prince and Public.

For you must take great heed you undertake nothing you cannot go through with;
for besides that, the common people judge of all things by the event, believing
still, that Justice and Prudence, are on the side that Fortune is; by ill
successes, you will soon diminish the esteem and favor, you have with the
Prince. For he to take away the disgrace received, and by reason, That he fears
either to be despised of his Subjects, or contemned by his Enemies, whom he
has opposed in vain, will be compelled to remove his favor from, and abandon
you.

Beware, that when I speak of your contention with these great persons, that
you understand not, that I wish you to intermeddle, when you see it cannot be
done without tumult, or that you should provoke them with contumelies and
reproaches, for that becomes only a base soul, whose judgment is corrupted by
Fortune: The end of which kind of men is seldom happy; as is to be observed in
Piso, whom Tiberius sent into Syria, to cross the hopes and designs of
Germanicus; against whom, he carried himself so insolent^y, that when Prince
Germanicus was dead, Caesar was compelled to sacrifice and abandon Piso to the
public hate.

When I advise you to oppose these great men, it is in cases only, wherein
they are to do something that is unjust, or against the Public good, or
Religion, or that is prejudicial to the Government of the Army, or the
Treasures of the Kingdom: In which occasions, you must so comport your self
with Prudence and Modesty, that all others that are concerned, and all honest
men may perceive, that what you do proceeds not out of any private emnity, but
only from your zeal to the Public good. If you demand an example to imitate,
behold Cardinal Ximenes, chosen by Isabelia, Queen of Castile, on purpose to
tug with those Grandees, that were not so subject to the Kings pleasure, as
they are now: Of a Franciscan Friar, he was first made the Queens Confessor,
afterward by the advice of Cardinal Mendoza, Archbishop of Toledo, and
Inquisitor General of Spain; which Offices he bore with great authority, being
there during the whole Reign of Isabella, and Ferdinand, and was even to the
time of Charles the Fifth, the sole Arbiter and Moderator of all Affairs; ever
contending with the great ones, but so discreetly, That he always held both the
Prince and people fast unto him.

It is reported that he was poisoned, and he himself suspected it, but the fact
could never be proved. Wherefore it is better to attribute so late a death as
his (for he was very old) to age and nature; and not without reason, since he
preserved his fortune and authority (both which he owed principally to his own
industry) entire unto his end. Chico Simoneta had not so good success, who
whilst Francis Sfortia ruled in Milan, was called to the helm of business, and
afterward chosen by young Galeacius Mother, by reason of his known fidelity,
and experience in Public Affairs, to contend with his Masters Brethren. He to
preserve the Dukedom for Galeacius, banished Galeacius Brothers, and Robert de
St. Severin out of Milan, with how much envy you may imagine: Yet see how
wickedly he was afterward deserted, for the Widow, Galeacius his Mother,
reconciling her self with her adversaries, sacrificed Simoneta to their new
friendship; by whom being cast into prison, and there flayed alive, he died
miserably. Learn hence, how warily we must trust Princes, of whose steadiness
we are not assured; for often upon a light occasion, they are wont to
prostitute their Servants to the will of their Enemies.

CHAP. 15.
The three other kinds of Noble Courtiers; how they are to be dealt with.
THere are a second kind of Noble* C^urtiers (as I said before) who are in
favor with the Prince, and yet not very eminent in any dignity or employment.
These though they can contribute nothing else unto us, may make our way unto
the King, seasonable and easy, besides they may be useful in calling to mind
our deserts, or if occasion require, in excusing our errors; protecting us also
from the calumny and detractions of our Enemies; by which means, if they be
really our Friends, they may serve us highly; as on the contrary side, if they
be our foes, they may prejudice us exceedingly: Wherefore we must seek the
friendship of these men, by all means, that are not unworthy our condition; and
we must consider, that they seldom stay any long time about a Prince, unexalted
to honor: Nay, suppose that for some reason or other, they be not advanced, yet
by their help and commendations, they do advance their friends, and lift them
up above others, though either equal or superior to them in desert.

The third sort of Nobles, are those who are in great Offices of Authority, and
have a great share in public business, and yet have little interest in the
Princes favor. And these kind of men are chiefly found about such Princes, who
live quietly, attending to their pleasures, mindless of Public business, which
they commit wholly to one or two of their tried Servants, abhorring the trouble
that is attending it themselves. In such a Court as this, we must rather seek
the Faver of these Ministers, then of the Prince himself; who since he trusts
them with the administration of his Affairs, leaves also the choice of his
Officers to these men, being himself unfit to choose men for duties, which he
knows nothing what belongs unto.

There are other Princes more jealous of their Majesty, and sparing in their
Power; who though they entrust one or two with their Affairs, do seldom or
never admit those men to their Presence or Conversation, but when they are to
treat of weighty business; and do not leave the disposal of places to them, for
fear that by the multitude of Creatures and Dependants, their power should
swell to that height, that it cannot be abated, if they transgress. Wary
Princes are wont to keep their Ministers in aw, and make them believe, That
they can in a moment cast them from all their Authority, and divest them of all
that power, that with the services and labors of many years, they have been
acquiring toward such persons as these; whose power is thus circumscribed, you
will have a hard task, how to demean your self. Their friendship can avail you
little, nay perhaps if the Prince observe it, it will do you hurt. Again, if
they stand in your light, you will hardly come to the management of Affairs,
and yet you must of necessity run the hazard of clashing oftentimes with them.
Wherefore, a most circumspect gentleness of Nature will here be needful, for
you must render them all the duties of respect, and as occasion presents it
self (yet warily) express the inward devotion of your mind unto them: But in
the mean while, without openly seeking to, or relying upon the Patronage of any
other, you must your self, work out your way unto the Princes person, and his
favor.

There remains now unspoke of only the last kind of Noblemen, who are in
short, The Favorites, as being hoth highly in the Princes Favor, and great in
the administration of Affairs: Which kind of men, are to be honored with a
respect almost equal to the Prince himself. Their wills and inclinations are to
be pryed into, as being more necessary to be known and executed, then the
Princes own. Here you see, what you may expect, or hope for, from the Authority
and Patronage of the Peers, and Grandees of the Court; and how you may use each
of them in his several degree and kind.

Truly we must carefully take heed, that we ask nothing of either the Prince,
or any of all these that is impossible, or cannot be effected without great
absurdity; For nothing is more troublesome to humane nature, then not to be
able to fulfill the requests of those we love; and surely, the friendliest and
gentlest dispositions that are, will be offended with an uncivil and
unreasonable suit. Know moreover, that he from whom you have received such a
repulse, is not pleased with seeing you again, for fear lest with the impudence
of a like request, you should make him ashamed; and also, lest he should seem
to want Authority or means to perform what you desire. But you must note by the
way, that access unto the great ones, is not suddenly obtained, we must by
degrees also gain that; and to this end, all that have any interest in them,
whether they be Strangers or Domestics, and the Dependants of these (according
to their usefulness) are to be won unto you.

CHAP. 16.
The meaner sort of Courtiers, how they are to be handled; as also such as are
enemies to us, for the sake of others, to whom we relate.
THere are yet in Courts below these great ones, others of a lower stage; some
of which are our betters, others our equals, and some perhaps our inferiors;
all which, since we are to make use of, we will divide into two kinds: The
first, of those that may help and advantage us; the second, of those that are
likely, or able to hurt us. The interest and power of both of them, is
diligently to be weighed, to the end, we may gather what help or impediment we
are to expect from them. We must consider also, their friendships and
alliances, to the end, that if necessity press us to seek their votes for the
promotion of our designs, if they themselves are through envy or any such
respect, backward or averse unto us, we may work upon them by their friends and
dependants: But we must be sure to take heed, that we do not then begin to seek
their friendship, when we have apparent need of them, or their assistance; we
ought to have it prepared long before, and assured unto us by the pledges of a
long professed kindness, and good will. Let this suffice for the first sort,
(to wit, of those that may help us) for every man's industry will prompt him,
How to insinuate with such, as he finds may be useful unto him.

Of the second sort (to wit) those that may hurt us, there are three kinds;
either those that are our enemies, or those that envy us, or lastly, those that
are our competitors. Those I call enemies that hate us for our own, or our
friends sake; but this latter kind of hatred, is not for the most part so
inveterate and sharp as the first; and it may be mitigated much by our
civilities and professing, That we can love our friends, notwithstanding our
relations to their enemies: Yet the friendships of the Court are for the most
part factious and cruel; compelling us to break off all friendship and
familiarities that may bring us into suspicion: For which reason, many
publicly pretending a friendship to one, have notwithstanding complied
underhand, and kept fair quarter with the adverse party; not out of design to
betray their friend, but to the end, if he should chance to fall, they may
find a refuge and support. And truly, this care of our preservation may be
sometimes blameless, but all kind of treachery is unworthy an honest man.

This kind of Prudence has not only been practiced in the Brigues of the
Court, but in Kingdoms also, and that very fortunately. Syenneses, President
of Tharsus, when the War broke out between Cyrus and Artaxerxes, fearing to
resist Cyrus, took his part in person, and sent his son to Artaxerxes, to the
end, that if Cyrus were vanquished he might be a refuge to his Father. Bar^us
Durus escaping out of the hands of the Saracens, where he was prisoner; seeing
Phocas created Emperor against Basilius, applied himself to gain the friendship
of Phocas, hitherto his enemy, and followed him; but caused his son, wi^h a
contrived flight, to take part with Basilius, to the end, that if Phocas were
vanquished, he might intercede for his Father, as it afterward fell out. Solon
made a law, That in case of a civil discord in the Commonwealth, none should be
permitted to stand neuter; not intending, I believe, that friends taking
several sides, should break off their private friendships, but rather hoping
that friends being severally engaged, could not but labor for the Public
peace, by so much the more eagerly, and with more su^cess.

After this manner in Court, a man though of a different faction, may yet
discreetly, and without prejudice to integrity, retain his friendship with a
man of another party; to the end, That he may both have a retreat in the change
of Fortune, and that if their animosities should begin to assuage, he may be a
fit instrument of reconciliation between the factions: Which is the safest and
most commendable way amongst the strifes and discords of great men; and the
means of gaining at last the favor of both the contending parties.

CHAP. 17.
How we are to treat with those Enemies that hate us for our own sakes; also
concerning threats and injuries.
THose who hate us for our own sakes, do so either, because we have offended
them, or else (as it is frequent from great men toward their inferiors)
because they have injured us; and the Italian Proverb says, He that offends,
never forgives. It is a custom amongst minds, puffed up with a prosperous
Fortune, to hate those themselves have wronged. The injuries that these kind
of men do us, are best remedied in our seeming not to understand them: But if
it chance, that the greatness of the wrong, do wrest out of us some testimony
of our sense of the injury received, we must quickly after our grief is over,
seem to have lost the memory of all; otherwise, if they see us still
impatiently suffer it, fearing our revenge, they will seek to prevent us with a
greater mischief.

Chiefly we must beware of threats, if that we not ready, and sure to execute
them; for threats do both warn our adversary to beware, and provoke his hatred
to double our injuries; affording us nothing but shame, in seeming to breathe
revenge, but to be destitute of power. I know this kind of moderation will not
be approved by all kind of men, especially such as are greedy after vengeance;
who think no injury is to be passed over without resentment, not only by
reason of the sweetness that is found in revenge; but also, because they say by
suffering one injury, you invite another; wherefore we must persecute those
that offend us with an immortal hate: But these men whilst they desire to
render themselves formidable, do effect nothing else but make all men fly
their Company. For since we mortals are Creatures prone to falls, and slips,
and are carried away sometimes with affection, and at other times with passion;
and in consideration, every one for fear of offending, will fly from these
kind of malignant, rash, and revengeful persons; and as wild beasts, leave
them to their own solitude. Since, if any one offends one of them, he must
expect all that rage and malice can afford at his hands; Lastly, if any one
provoke one of the malicious Hot-spurs, he expecting a severe resentment, and
fearing a home revenge, will strive to be aforehand with him.

For this Reason therefore, for the avoiding all these evils, I think the
contrary way is to be chosen, and gentleness to be preferred; which truly, in
the greatest injuries is not hard to be personated, when we consider the
reasons and consequences of a passionate resentment, and the condition of the
persons from whom we receive them. In lighter injuries, that we see arise
rather out of passion, then malice or design, we ought to be so little offended
with them, that it may not be perceived we are sensible of them. If the injury
is great and foul, we must not show our selves wholly careless of our esteem
and reputation; yet without seeming too implacable toward them that provoked
us, as they may have reason to think there is no hope of a reconcilement, or
place for pardon upon any reasonable satisfaction left them. And therefore it
will be pertinent in this case to complain unto his friends that has injured
us, of our wrongs, and to make them judge of our difference.

Injuries that are offered in a petulant insulting humor, I think ought to be
presently vindicated, not so much out of a desire of revenge, as for the
chastisement of him that did them; and to teach him how to demean himself more
modestly hereafter, as well toward others, as our selves. But these injuries
also are not to be prosecuted with an inveterate hatred, nay, we ought to
declare, that the necessity of complaint, and seeking revenge is put upon us,
and that we are ready to be friends after a satisfaction given us, that is any
way compa^ible with the injury we received. And if so be they give any secret
testimonies of ^egret, or seek in the least manner unto us, we must return into
favor with them, and by way of amends, let this suffice instead of a
submission, That they profess they cannot want your friendship.

CHAP. 18.
The injuries of the more and less powerful, how to be avoided, and handled;
the several artifices of reconciliation.
BEcause these kinds of injuries are done, for the most part, by those that
are much more powerful then our selves, and who have some way or other, great
advantage of us: The first way to avoid them, is to treat these kind of men
respectively, and to avoid all freedoms as much as may be with them: Or if they
be very cross and unruly, to fly their conversation altogether. This saying of
Martial is in this case very notable.

Would thou avoid what may displease?
Or seek'st thou for content and ease?
With no man be thou over free;
As joys, so griefs will fewer be.
The second way will be, as I said more then once before, to seem unsensible of
the wrong; for it is neither safe nor prudent for us, to strive too much with
one that is too powerful for us; and the inequality of our forces, will be a
just pretense to excuse our dissimulation. I know there are some that are
persuaded, That if we can but fright our adversaries, they would soon seek unto
us, and desire to be reconciled; and I do not deny, that there are some sly
dispositions that will descend to do so; but believe me, it is always a
dangerous, unsound, and faint reconciliation: And these will seldom or never
omit (if an occasion of injury present it self) to give way to their
disposition; which is by so much the more revengeful, by how much their
dissembling was the tamer; besides, a private enemy is harder to be taken heed
of, then one that is publicly so. It is better to have such as these, our
professed enemies, then out of fear, our reconciled friends; yet I mean, those
who are not greater then our selves, nor whose friendship being lost, can hurt
us notably.

For if we have to do with one that is much superior to us, and whose emnities
will stand in our light, it is better to have a fained friendship, then open
emnity with him; though he offer us the wrong, yet we must endeavor by the
mediation of friends to appease him, as if we had done the injury. To discern
who is most able and likely to prejudice us, we must consider not only their
power, but also the nature of their malice toward us; for some have a desire
of revenge, like a handmaid, always waiting upon their hate; others a fear,
lest that having got what we aspire unto, we should be more able to hurt them.
Though the sting of this revenge is very sharp, yet the fear I mentioned, is
the most violent and frequent cause of our Court oppressions, and far the most
unavoidable. The first may be mitigated with the satisfaction of a continued
duty and respect; but you shall hardly ever persuade fear, to put on the
confidence of friendship, and good will again; yet we must seek by all means
possible to effect it: and occasion will better instruct us how to do it, then
any rule can.

Agesilaus desiring to become friends with those that he had offended, did put
them into great offices and employments, which whilst they ill administered,
bringing euvy (as is usual) upon them; being accused, they were compelled to
have recourse unto the Prince; who delivering them from the danger and infamy,
won them by the benefit, to be afterward sincerely and heartily his friends.
It is an ordinary thing in Courts to supplant one secretly, to the end, that
being supported by your favor, he may become your Creature. It is no less
frequent as Eutrapelus craftily practiced in Horace, to lend those men money
for to seed their lusts and vanities, whom we desire to ruin. So it proves,
that for the most part, they who applaud us in our pleasures, our humors, and
expenses, and exhort us to undertake things that are unreasonable, and above
our strength, do seek our destruction.

But let us now return unto the ways of renewing our friendships with our
Enemies. Amongst all which, it is none of the worst to help both with your
Counsel and Assistance, the desires and endeavors of your Enemy, in such things
as you see by succeeding will nothing hinder, nor prejudice you; to the end, he
may seem to ow you his love, for your benefits. In this manner Cardinal Ascanius
Sforza observing, That in vain he opposed himself to the practices of Julian
the Cardinal, who labored to advance John, the Nephew of Alexander the Sixth, to
that dignity; did so eagerly move in the business for John, that it succeeding,
he got the start of Julian in his friendship. If the stubbornness of our Enemy
be such, as that all our endeavors for a reconciliation are fruitless; we must
at last look out, if there be any body else that he ha^es or fears more then he
does us, and let us fain this man (if the circumstances will bear it) to be a
competitor to us, and him; to the end, That his hate toward the other
prevailing, may induce him either to favor, or less oppose us in our designs.

An a^tifice not much unlike to this, was that which Gerla^hus Archbishop and
Elector of Mentz used, when he intended to create Adolphus of Nassau, his
Kinsman, Emperor: He knew that those Princes that stood for the Empire, (for
which a Governor was now a choosing) were divided amongst themselves; which
discords and factions, he to make use of, dealt thus with the Electors
severally apart. He tells Wenceslaus King of Bohemia, That the Votes of the
Electors, for the most part, would favor Albert, Duke of Austria, Wenceslaus
his Enemy: But if he were certain of Wenceslaus his concurrence, he was ready
to hinder it. Having thus won Wenceslaus, he sets upon the Duke of Saxony, and
tells him, That his Enemy Brunswick was like to carry it; and then assures the
Palatine, That Wenceslaus (at that time hated by him) unless prevented, was
like to defeat them all. So promising to oppose every man's Enemies, he
circumven^ed them all; making by that means, his Kinsman Emperor, who if he had
been first propounded, had without doubt been rejected by the common consent of
all.

CHAP. 19.
Of Envy, how it is to be overcome.
NOw I must say something of Envy, which is so great an evil, that we have need
of a strange felicity, and fortitude to overcome it; which is not to be
satiated with any thing, but the participation of that which it envies in
another; for every one eager after its own advantage, desires to toil in
nothing but that, whence if nor, the whole, at least a great share of the
honor, and emolument will redound unto himself. Yet although, I confess, it be
very hard, yet this envy is nevertheless with industry and prudence, to be
mastered; and that not only by this means alone, of sharing with them, that
very thing we seek for: For sometimes it will suffice to persuade them that
envy us, That the thing they desire, if it chance to light upon us, will turn
much to their honor and profit. To which end, we must court them with
friendship and familiarity; and though their envy to us be very palpable, yet
must we express on our parts great Inclinations and Affections toward them;
professing, That we wish nothing more, then that their desires should succeed,
and that we desire this very thing that we now pursue, for no other end so
much, as that we may become capable to serve our friends, and principally
themselves. In short, we must act our part so, as from the augmentation of our
fortune, they may conceive hope of advancement to their own.

By those that desire to be free from envy, all pride, over-sumptuous manner of
living, unseasonable feasts, and boasting, is sedulously to be avoided;
especially, by those who have risen from a mean condition; unless the pleasure
of the Prince, or the dignity of their Office, require it otherwise; for then a
becoming magnificence, will not be unfit, provided, That in these expenses, he
lets the world see, he does rather comply with the pleasure of the Prince, then
follow his own inclination. With this kind of modesty and prudence, the
beginnings of Cardinal Ximenes were very fortunate, and notable; for he was
born of so mean a parentage, that it was doubtful, whether he were a Gentleman,
or no; although his prosperous fortune found those afterward, that would
undertake to prove his Nobility. This Ximenes whilst the world went hard with
him, became in his youth a Friar, whence soon after for his singular
endowments, he was by the commendation of Cardinal Mendoza, made confessor to
Isabella, Queen of Castile, and not long after Archbishop of Toledo, (as I said
once before) which Archbishopric upon Medoza's death, Queen Isabella having
obtained of the Pope for Ximenes; he finding himself too weak for the envy it
would draw upon him, refused to accept it; and was so stiff in his refusal,
That he scarce suffered himself to be won to the acceptance of it, by all the
Nobles of the Court, who one by one, at the Queens direction, pressed him to
embrace it: And having accepted of it, he was fain to be so entreated over
again, before he could be persuaded to live in a condition and splendour equal
to his dignity; nay, after that, he was personally so observant of his former
manner of life, in this great fortune, that no way else, but by the Popes
express command, could he be induced to change it.

This modesty succeeded so well with him, that hereby he appeased and avoided
that great envy, which must otherwise of necessity have oppressed him, being
the possessor of a dignity gaped after, by all the Grandees of Spain, and of
Revenue, scarce inferior to those of the Crown.

But yet as this manner of proceeding is in the East of our fortunes, an
antidote against envy, so it little avails those who have once already carried
themselves insolently and proudly; for the moderation of these men, is still
looked upon as counterfeit: Of which thing, the Constantinopolitan History
affords us an example in a Metropolitan, called Constantine; who being banished
from the Courts, both of Isacius Angelius, and Alexius, the Emperors, returned
afterward with the Empress Euphrosine; pretending a great aversion from
business, and a Courtiers life; to the end, he might be the more credited, and
sought unto the more eagerly, he took orders upon him: In short, he carried his
business so craftily, That the Emperor himself causing him to be absolved from
the oath of Priesthood, called him to Court; and trusted him with the
management of his greatest affairs: Who presently, not content with his own
advancement, introduced his two Brothers to wait upon the Emperor; and as it
were, to stand Sentinels for him, if at any time his business called him away:
But because his former prosperity had discovered the insolence of his nature,
every body feared him still, although he now made show of great temper and
moderation, which was the cause that he was again supplanted and removed from
Court, without ever being restored more.

CHAP. 20.
Of Emulation, the Sister of Envy, and the remedies of it.
THe same remedies that are good against Envy, prevail also against Emulation,
which has less malignity in it truly, then Envy has; but more of Ambition,
and the treachery of self-concernments. But these Competitors of ours, are to
be stroked with a a certain specious respect, and ceremonious veneration, which
will powerfully divert these kind of humors; especially, if we feed their
hopes with higher thigns then those we aim at, and seem to contribute our Votes
and assistance to them; on the other side, vilifying that which we seek for, as
below them to stoop unto, and fitter for our selves; whose merits as they are
less, so our pretenses ought not to be so high. If we fear that they will smell
our drift, we are to hol^ them in suspense, and seem to discourse the case with
Arguments on both sides; yet giving the greatest weight to those, which we
intend should divert their ambitions. But the surest and best course of all, is
to conceal, if it be possible, what we aim after, till it be out o^ the power
of our Enemies, or Competitors (...) hinder us.

A too great eagerness in our pretenses, i^ sometime odious, even to those that
would if it were more modest, contribute their assistance to us; pulling with
it besides, other greater inconveniences upon us, as if we succeed, more envy,
and if we fail, a great^^ disgrace: It is much more safe, as I said eve^ now,
to hide our designs, and as Rowers do^ turn our backs upon the place we are
goin^ unto. Those that look after the greate^^ Commands, have taken this way;
nothin^ has been more usual unto them, then afte^ the example Agamemnon in
Euripides, to express a greater desire of rest and retirement, then of honor or
employment. And many have found this a singular remedy, to divert the wiles of
those that would oppose them, and to escape the disgrace which attends those
fierce pretenders; nay, they have had hereby the glory, to have it often
thought, That this honor or employment was cast upon them, merely for their
merits, and not obtained by begging or buying of voices, as it too often falls
out.

Last of all, in our pretenses we must take heed, that we clash with no rival,
that is greater or more powerful in Friends and Dependants, then our selves. In
this case we must imitate Marcus Lepidus, a man in Tacitus his opinion, of
great wisdom; who being drawn, as it were, into the Senate by Tiberius, to
stand with Junius Blaesus, Sejanus his Uncle, whether of them should be chosen
Pr^consul of Africa, pretended presently against himself, want of health, the
tender years of most of his Children, and the marriage of a Daughter, that he
was to take care of; fearing doubtlesly to make Sejanus his Enemy, if he
carried away the Province from Blaesus. Neither must we obstinately contend
with him, whom some great man is about to advance, although the Law favor us
against him; for without doubt, Favor weighs down the Law, as Tacitus instances
in Germanicus and Drusus, creating Haterius Agrippa Praetor, notwithstanding
the express contradiction of a Law; But let the Historian speak himself. There
arose a dispute of substituting a Praetor in the place of Vipsanius Gallus
lately dead; Germanicus and Drusus favored Haterius Agrippa, Germanicus his
Kinsman; others on the contrary side, did contend, That the number of Children
should carry it, according to the Law. Tiberius was glad to see his Sons, and
the Laws of the Senate, clash together; without doubt the Law was overcome, but
yet not easily, nor by many voices: By which means, when they were in their
greatest vigor, they were wont to be overborn.

CHAP. 21.
How to avoid a threatening ruin, and when it is upon us; how to make the best
use of it: Examples of the fall of great men.
HItherto we have observed the principal precepts that are to be observed by
our Courtier; if any want, every rational man's (for such only we intend to
instruct) Prudence and Dexterity will supply it. Now because these kind of
Rules are no less necessary, for the preserving our Greatness and Fortune in
the Court, then for the gaining of it; it will not be impertinent to have by
us, the examples of some of those that have fallen from their power and
greatness, to the end, we may grow wise by other men's mischances; and learn, if
not to avoid a ruin, at least to arm and prepare our selves for it: For this
latter is almost as necessary as the first, since the endeavors of those that
seek to escape their approaching misfortunes, are for the most part vain;
whilst he that prepares himself for it long before, makes that fall, which few
or none of them can avoid; that fortune has lifted up on high, to be much more
gentle and easy, then otherwise it would.

These falls happen unto us, either through our own faults, through the arts
and contrivance of our Enemies, or through the perverseness of the Princes
nature, or perhaps his death. Since the lives of all men are obnoxious to
faults, and full of errors, and failings, it is so especially with those that
are on high, who by reason of their greatness, are out of the lists of
reprehension; all that are about them, being compelled to approve of whatever
they do, be it well or ill. Amongst all which faults, the foulest they are
incident unto, is, A treacherous turning against their Prince, who is the
Author of their Dignity, and Power: A crime marked out with the blackest note
of an ungrateful and faithless Soul; and a most just subject of the Princes
hate and indignation. All men that are in Authority ought to fly the very
shadow of this crime, and to the end of taking all ground of suspicion from the
Prince, to decline those honors and places, that are opportune for such
attempts.

Paterculus esteems Sejanus to have been one of the wisest Courtiers that ever
was; and truly it is likely, That he that flourished so long in the favor of a
Prince, so subtle, and diffident, as Tiberius was, did comport himself with
great modesty and wariness. He was (says our Author) in appearance given to
ease, assuming nothing to himself, and by that means obtaining all things;
Crouching still willingly beneath the opinion of other men, and striving to
come behind them in repute; His countenance and his life, was calm and quiet,
although his mind was restless, and ever a wake; yet ambition at last
transported this provident and wary man so far, as to aspire to the Empire. To
which end, Drusus being dead, he married Livia his Widow, that so being linked
into the House of the Caesar's, he might more easily compass his desire: And
although he perceived out of Tiberius his tergiversations, when he demanded his
consent in the case, that it had drawn a suspicion upon him; yet did he not
change his mind; but what he had failed of this way, he sought to compass
another.

He knew that Tiberius was grown weary of the City, whereupon he presently
spurs him on, and persuades him to retire to Caprea; read Tacitus, Annal. 4.
who says, That lest he should either infringe his Power, or weaken his
Authority, by debarring the multitude from the Court, or minister matter of
slander, and suspicion by entertaining them, he took this course: He persuaded
Tiberius to go live in some pleasant place, far from Rome; foreseeing many
conveniences in it. First, There could be no access to the Prince, but through
him; then, That the disposal of all Letters would be in his hands, since the
Soldiers, by whom they were to be conveyed, would be at his devotion; and
lastly, That Caesar now growing old, and waxing effeminate with the privacy of
the place, would easily transfer the burden of Affairs, and Government upon
him. And truly, his hopes deceived him not, for in a short time, under pretense
of easing Tiberius his age, he drew all the power of the Empire into his own
hands.

Yet at last, the event showed, That this way of Sejanus, was both perilous and
tedious; to mention which more accurately, seems worth my labor here, to the
end, That both Courtiers may be more wary in governing their Fortune, and
Princes more cautious in exalting their Mini^ns. Tiberius did either love or
suffer patiently Sejanus, as long as he found his help useful to the oppression
of Agrippina, and her Children, Nero, and Drusus; to which kind of
employments, Sejanus showed himself very ready, knowing, That thereby he should
not only win the favor of the Prince, but also establish his own power and
hopes; there being none left of Caesar's house now but two youths, whose tender
age, if they should come to the Government, must needs leave the Authority, and
ordering of Affairs, to him; until he saw his opportunity of usurping the
Empire it self.

But mark how rash and blind ambition makes us; He did not see, that the
nearer he came to the top, the more he became suspected of this jealous Prince;
who now sought all means of lessening, rather then advancing him; that strove
as much on the other side to climb still on; For though he wanted nothing, but
the name of Emperor (which some did not stick to give him) and the Tribunes
power (which the Emperors never entrusted to any) yet was he not content, but
daily endeavored to augment his Authority. By which course, as he rendered
himself venerable to all others, so he made himself formidable to Tiberius; For
when he saw that Sejanus had not only won the Pretorian Guards, but also very
many of the Senators, and principal Families of Rome, by either benefits, or
hopes, or fears, unto himself; and likewise, That his secrecies were by his own
servants told unto Sejanus, and not Sejanus his to him again; he determined his
destruction, as one that was become his rival: But before he went about it, he
thought fit to sound the inclinations of those about him, to the end, That he
might know how to choose out some that would like of his design.

Lest that Sejanus should smell out any change in Caesar's affection toward
him, he makes him Consul, and calls him both present and absent in his Letters
to the Senate, and the People, His friend and companion of his labors. Lastly,
he faigns himself sick, to discover thereby, the affections both of Sejanus,
and several others. Sometimes he writes to the Senate of his recovering
condition, and that he would shortly come to Town; sometimes praising,
sometimes blaming Sejanus; sometimes receiving those that came recommended by
him, and at other times refusing others; that thus he might keep him ^suspended
between hope and fear, who, whether trusting to his favor with the Prince, or
for fear of losing of his hopes, resolved to attempt nothing by force; hoping,
that the disgusts of the Prince, if there were any, would wear out with time.
In this interim, others who had hitherto fawned upon Sejanus his fortune, not
upon himself, seeing Tiberius stagger, began to carry themselves more warily,
and the devotion of many toward Sejanus, grew cold.

Tiberius having discovered long ago the pride and insolency of Sejanus, and
fearing withal, lest provoked by contempt, he should run some desperate course,
caused it to be given out, That he intended to confer the Tribunical Power upon
Sejanus; and presently after, Commands him to be laid in prison, writing
Letters, to that end to the Senate, which were carried by Macro, Captain of the
Guards: Who coming to Rome, first communicated the Princes pleasure to Memmius
Regulus, then Consul (for the other Consul was more addicted to Sejanus) and
then to Graecinus Laco, Captain of the Watch, it being not yet break of day.
Thence going to the Senate House, he met Sejanus, who startled to see him,
demanded if he had brought him any Letters from Tiberius, he whispered in his
ear, That he should anon be saluted Tribune; whereupon, he entering the
Senate House, not without an inward joy, Macro commanded the Pretorian Guards
to go home, showing them to that end, a Warrant from the Emperor, in which
also, he promised them a Largess. The Pretorian Soldiers being departed, and
Laco's Company placed there in their room, Macro enters the Senate, and
delivers his Letters; immediately going forth, without expecting the reading of
them, to bid Laco stand well upon his Guard, lest Sejanus raising a tumult in
(...) Senate, should break away; and went thence himself to the Pretorian
Guards to hinder them, lest they should attempt any thing.

The Letters that were then a reading, were spun out into a great length, to
the end, That Macro might have time enough to order his business; and truly
they were interwoven with a wonderful contrivance. In the beginning there was
no mention of business, nor any thing concerning Sejanus; a little after he was
touched upon, as they say, with a gentle hand; then some other things
interlaced, there followed a more open, but that also a slight accusation
against him: At last, after sundry excursions about the Affairs of the
Commonwealth, two of Sejanus his favorites were named, and the Senate commanded
to proceed against them; and withal, that Sejanus himself should be secured.
All mention of his death being purposely left out, to the end, That hope might
be left to the accused, of clearing himself of those crimes, and those but
light ones, that were there objected against him.

The Letters being read, many that had waited upon him into the Senate, seeing
things of another nature in hand, then making Sejanus Tribune, rose up and
compassed him in, lest he should escape; which it is believed, that he would at
least have attempted to do, if in the beginning, the Emperors Letters had
thundered any thing sharply against him. But he then despising those slight
touches, sat still in his place; and being called upon, either two or three
times, by the Consul Memmius to rise up, with much ado he obeyed at last, as
being accustomed to give, and not receive commands. When he was risen, Laco
followed him close at the heels, and after him came Regulus, accompanied with
other Senators, who led him from the Senate to the prison; and thence, soon
after, to execution at the Scalae Gemoniae, where he was put to death.

Behold here the ruin of a great Courtier, and a Favorite, who for craft and
power had scarce ever his equal. The contrivance of whose fall, though it may
seem due to Tiberius his Prudence, yet it is rather to be attributed to his own
greatness and prosperity, which ruined it self with its own weight, so
evidently, That all those sleights and stratagems of Tiberius, were not very
needful; as may be gathered out of the example of Perennius, who aspiring to
the same height that Sejanus did, and by the same arts, was subverted by
Commodus, a Prince of a judgment far inferior to Tiberius. It may well be,
that many will not be moved with these examples, because they will seem to be
wiser then others, and to know something more then these did, whose misfortunes
are here recounted. I will not move them to passion, with telling them what I
think; although truly, I will not deny, but in those latter ages, there have
been some, whose projects succeeded less unhappily, as Boylas, whose story we
read in the History of Constantinople; who being caught in a conspiracy against
Constantinus Monomachus, then Emperor, did not undergo so heavy a punishment;
as for such crimes, are wont to be in^licted, the reason being, because he had
the luck to transgress against a mild and gentle Prince.

It will not be amiss to recite the story briefly here, to the end, you may see
how the secretest Counsels, and undiscoverably by the eyes of man, are
oftentimes discovered by the divine Providence, after an unlookt for manner; not
being able to escape punishment, by whatsoever Caution they are managed. No
mortal man would have believed, that this Boylas should have any inclination
to, or could have any ground for, so great a villainy. The greatness of the
favors, which were heaped upon him, had possessed the good Prince with a great
hope and opinion of his singular fidelity, who seemed also by nature unapt for
great undertakings: He was not only of very mean birth, but also stammered so
much, as he could hardly be understood; which stuttering, since he saw it
pleasing to the Emperor, he did afterward affect on purpose: With this
assentation and flattery, he so insinuated himself into the Princes
familiarity, That the Bedchamber and Cabinet of Constantine, were always
opened unto him: At last being enriched by the Prince, he was chosen into the
number of the Senators, and begins to cast his thoughts higher; wherein he went
so far, that he determined by the murder of the Prince, to make his own way to
the Scepter. This design he first opened to those he knew surely hated the
Emperor, promising mountains to such as approved it, and offered him their
assistance; and praising greatly those that disliked it, and refused it out of
their affection and loyalty toward the Prince; as whose spy, he would seem to
propound such things, to discover the inclinations of his subjects.

By which means he was undescryed by all, but such, whose fellowship in the
Treason, make him secure of them; and had at last, effected that abominable
act, if at the very time, when he had the Weapon in his hand, which he had
prepared for the Emperors Throat; one of the Conspirators, touched with a
sudden remorse of Conscience, had not seasonably disclosed, and discreetly
prevented it. The Emperor took the injury so patiently, That having condemned
some of the Conspirators to die, he was satisfied in inflicting banishment
only, on the Author of the Treason.

It were too long to recount all those here, who having undertaken such
Treasons, were caught in them, or else, though innocent, were falsely believed
to be guilty of some such design, and made shipwreck in Court. But contenting
our selves with what we have already said, this only is to be added, That all
Pride, whether through Ambition, Bragging, Reproaches, Detraction, Ostentation,
or other pompous manner of living, it displease the Prince, is the high rode to
ruin.

CHAP. 22.
Boasting, Presumption, Arrogance, too much Familiarity, Pride, and Perf^dy,
noted with examples.
THis Boasting and recounting of services past, destroyed Philotas and Clytas
in the Court of the Great Alexander; and Craterus himself had like to have been
overborn with those winds: Certainly, he had been much more acceptable to the
Prince, if he had contained himself within the bounds of a generous modesty; so
Cajus Silius with Tiberius; Antonius Primus with Vespasian; and Sillas with
King Agrippa; by boasting of their services, deprived themselves of all the
fruit of them: As Tacitus witnesses of the two first, Annal. 4. and Hist. 4.
And Josephus* of the last. Princes do believe their Fortunes and Favors lost,
and cast away upon these Braggadoshaws; for they will have their subjects seem
to ow all they have to them, and their bounty; not to their own virtue, and
merits.

The liberty of reprehending the actions of Princes, or inveighing against
others in their presence, is to be carefully avoided, as bordering upon
Arrogance, and Presumption. Eumenes complaining before Alexander, something
petulantly, That Hephaestion should assign the Soldiers Quarters to Musicians,
Comedians, and such kind of people, incurred the displeasure of the King.

To treat with the Prince over familiarly, or to seem to make one self the sole
Arbiter of his principal cares, savors of Pride, although it may proceed only
out of Vanity and Covetousness; as it appears in the example of Zotirus, once
the favorite of Heliogabalus; and also of Turinus, who scarce worse then
Zotirus, yet more unhappy, was commanded to be stifled to death with smoke, by
Alexander the son of Mammea; the Executioner crying out, Let him perish with
smoke, who sold smoke. He was wont to brag, That the Prince was governed by his
advices; and so by intruding upon the Princes retirements, and with impertinent
senceless whispers in public, pretending to favor, was sought unto by very
many; and gathered together great riches, through the bribes, and presents of
those, to whom all his interest in the Prince, could not avail a straw.

The Arrogance of Plancianus is also worthy of memory, which being accompanied
with great vanity, broke out at last into open perfidy: His arrogance was such,
That he did not stick to contend with Bassianus, the Emperors Son; who was
Author both of his Dignity, and Fortune; and he was withal so vain, that as he
passed through the City, he would not only interdict all access unto him, but
also would not suffer them to behold him; his Ushers going before still to
clear the streets, of all that they could see. Becoming a Traitor at last
against his Prince, and convicted of his Treason, he was Beheaded. In France,
during the time of Philip le Bell, Enguerrandus Marigny, daring to contest
personally with Charles de Valoy, what misery he did pull upon himself, and his
friends, may be observed in the French Histories.

Above all things, we must take heed, That we give not our selves in Court, to
sowing of strife between Princes, and great men; for they becoming friends, do
for the most part sacrifice such unto their friendship; of which, though the
stories of all Nations are full, yet the Bavarian History furnishes us with one
example very memorable, of Otho Crondoferus, who flourishing with Rodulphus the
Palatine in singular favor, was the Author of great emnities between this
Prince and his Mother, for a time; but the Mother afterward reconciling her
self unto her son, Crondoferus had his Eyes and Tongue pulled out.

CHAP. 23.
How we must, not only take care to preserve the Princes Favor, but also that
of those in Power about him.
IT is not enough, that the Princes themselves be not averse unto us, but we
must also keep our selves aright with those that are in favor with them.
Germanicus at his death, gave that advice to Agrippina his Wife, of which
Tacitus, Annal. 2. speaks thus. Then turning to his Wife, he entreated her by
his memory, and for their Children sake, which were common to them both, That
she would pull down her stomach, and submit her great heart to the rage of
Fortune; lest returning to the City, she should with emulation of her
greatness, stir up against her, persons more powerful then her self;
Agrippina's neglect of this document, ruined her and her children. I told you
before, how much Eumenes his favor was diminished with Alexander; after that,
railing against Hephaestion, he carried himself irreverently toward the
Prince; and discovered his spleen and envy, to him that he accused.

Wherefore, when we see any one in the Princes favor, we must carefully weigh
his Authority, and compare it, as it were, in a balance against our own; that
we may know certainly which weighs down the other: And in the trial of this, we
are not so much to observe outward appearances, as the circumstances of inward
causes. Craterus and Hephaestion, for a time did flourish both of them, in
great and equal favor with Alexander; until Alexander himself determined the
business, in calling one of them, The Kings friend, and the other, Alexanders
friend.

Out of which decision, Craterus might have made this judgment, That since
Princes, for the most part, are more in love with their own wills, then their
Authority; they also are held more dear unto them, who rather adore and worship
Alexander, that is their Person, then their Fortune and Kingly Dignity: And
though that afterward upon a strife that arose between him and Hephaestion,
when all the Court was divided into factions, Alexander seemed to incline to
neither side; but chiding them both heavily, threatened punishment, if ever they
should harp upon that string again; yet his manner of dealing with them, showed
rather his singular Prudence, to be imitated by all Princes, then his equal
affection to them both. He apprehended, that this discord might produce great
tumults, and mischief; For he knew both Craterus his great interest in the
Macedonians, and how much Hephaestion was envied for his favor to him.
Therefore to diminish Hephaestions envy, he reprehended him publicly; and to
avoid giving offense to the Macedonians, he reproved Craterus in private.

Amongst those that in this trial and examen of the Princes favor, between
themselves and others, were out of negligence and discretion, most grossly
mistaken: Antonius Primus ought to have the first place, who daring to contend
with Mutianus, learnt at last, That he had better have contested with Vespasian
himself. And in this manner, you will find it is a thing witnessed by the
examples of all Courts, To vindicate more sharply an injury against the
Favorites, then against the Prince himself. Dio tells us the reason of it, when
he had recounted how the same thing happened to Sejanus, thus, As those whom
virtue and consciousness of their own deserts, has lifted up to dignities, do
not much stick upon the vain Ceremonies, and outward Circumstances of Honor: So
on the contrary side, those who seek to ^limb by Ambition, Pride, and Vice,
thereby to hide their unworthiness, and meanness, do presently take ill, and
understand as a contempt, the least neglect of Ceremony, and respect toward
them. Insomuch, that it is harder to preserve the friendship of these men, then
of the Prince himself, for he thinks it a glorious and Princely act to forgive
injuries: When these, lest they should seem to remit that which they cannot
revenge, even to ostentation, do use their borrowed power, in persecuting those
that have offended them.

CHAP. 24.
Pride even in the meanest persons at Court, noted with examples; as also
Treachery in betraying the Princes secrets.
NEither truly has it been destruction to great ones only, to have carried
themselves insolently and amiss, but also to men of the lower stage. John King
of Arragon, loved Alvarez de Luna so much, that he trusted him with all his
Affairs, and even his Kingly power it self, notwithstanding the repining of all
his Nobles. But when he by reason of his prosperous Fortune, fell into that
pride and presumption, That he caused a Nobleman, who in the Kings name
admonished him of his duty, to be precipitated and murdered; he was by the
Kings command beheaded. It is also an ordinary cause of shipwreck in Court,
when any one has rendered, either himself, or the Prince, hateful to the Peers,
or People; For, either the Prince is fain of his own accord, to cast such a one
off, to rid himself of envy, or else others never leave, till they have
overthrown him. During the Reign of Commodus, Cleander once armed the Pretorian
Guards against the Roman people; which was a ground of so great tumults in
Rome, that unless the Emperor had sacrificed Cleander to the peoples fury, he
himself could not have been secure.

The same Commodus, had rendered himself odious to all men, by his affection to
one Anterus; from which envy, that they might free their Master, some of
Commodus his servants being very desirous, slew this Anterus as he was coming
from Court. Eutropius who had been long dear to Arcadius, the Emperor; since,
he was believed to be the Author of the Sedition raised by Tribigildus, was
given up as a price of the Peace, by the Prince, to the Enemies.

Amongst the evils that subvert Courtiers, there are two remaining yet, as very
dangerous, so very frequent; A betraying of the Prince's secrets, and
Conspiracy with his Enemies. Crimes, for the most part, arising out of perfidy,
but many times also out of levity, and indiscretion only. And forasmuch as
concerns the secrets of Princes, I think they do very well, who pry not into
them; and who, if their office exact it not at their hands, avoid the bare
knowledge of them: For if you be the only person, to whom they are imparted,
and Fame (which often makes wity conjectures) chance to scatter any thing like
unto them, you cannot avoid the suspicion, that the secret came out by you: And
although the Prince perhaps has imparted it to some one else, yet it may fall
out so, that he has forgot; or else, that he is more confident of the other
man's silence, and so the foil remain upon you still.

Not without cause, did Philippides the Comique Poet, when he was asked by King
Lysimachus (to whom he was very dear) of what things he did chiefly desire to
be made partaker by his Prince, answer, That he would refuse nothing that came
from the Prince, his secrets only excepted; from which he desired to be
excused. Let us from the example of this man, as much as we can, and esteem it
safer to be ignorant of secrets, so difficult and dangerous to be kept, then to
know them. Hiero, Tyrant of Syracusa, was wont to say, That those who discover
Princes secrets, do wrong both to themselves, and to those they impart them
unto, by exposing them also together with themselves, to the hatred of the
Prince.

CHAP. 25.
The causes, kinds, and examples of Conspiracies with the Princes Enemies.
YEt their condition is, of all other, most hazardous and ticklish, who led
either by avarice, ambition, or desire of providing for their own security, do
conspire with the Princes enemies; whether they be either Strangers, or
Domestics. Cardinal Balaeus, a Tailors son, being by Lewis the Eleventh, made
his Treasurer, and afterward a Bishop, at last also by the Kings intercession,
and the Popes willingness, to oblige one that had been so sharp an adversary
unto him, was promoted to the dignity of Cardinal: But afterward being
convicted of a Conspiracy with the Kings Enemies, he was sent to the Tower of
L^ches, where he dwelt twelve years, until Sixtus Quintus by great entreaties,
and much ado, procured his release. For the like crime, the Cardinal of Prata
underwent the like punishment, in the Reign of Francis the Fifth; and had never,
perhaps, got his liberty, had he not deceived his Physicians with an opinion of
the Strangury, by drinking his Urine: When the King fearing the anger of the
Pope, if consumed with that disease, a Cardinal should die in prison, dismissed
him. Petrus de Vineis, a chief Counselor of the Emperor, Frederick the Second,
being suspected of intelligence with Pope Alexander the Third, the Emperors
Enemy, lost his eyes.

Not only designs of usurping the Empire of the E^st, but also private
intercourse betwixt him and Alaricus, King of the Goths, are believed to have
caused Stilico's death: Which that shameful Peace he made with the same
Alaricus, against the will of the Senate, seems to confirm; Lampadius (who
always disclaimed it) calling it not a Peace, but a Contract of slavery;
whereby the Emperor was obliged to pay Tribute to Barbarians.

CHAP. 26.
That our Courtier must not be the Author of Hazardous Counsels; the variety of
Errors, whereby the Princes favor is lost.
THe Courtier that we are all this while a forming, must chiefly beware, That
he never be the Author of Hazardous Counsels; for the ill success of these, is
always wont to be imputed to the unfortunate adviser, and the good unto the
Fortune of the Prince; not only by the vulgar, who judge all things by the
event, but also by the Prince himself; who is always glad to have some one,
upon whom to derive the envy of an unluckie undertaking, and scarce ever
willing that any one should share with him in the glory of a prosperous action.
A good while before and after Stilico's death, the Argument of the Public
Complaint, was, his unseemly Peace with the Goths; until at last, Olympius who
had procured his ruin, seeking fame from contrary courses, broke the Truce,
Alaricus in vain, pleading the injustice of the deed; But afterward having
made War for some time, still with ill success, this very man was, in the
opinion of the people, esteemed, The Author of all their evils; And at last,
being accused by the Eunuchs, who were in great favor with the Emperor, he was
fain to leave the Court, and fly into Dalmatia.

When either the beginning of a War, or breaking of a Peace, is treated of; the
part of a wise Counselor is to bring Arguments for both sides, and leave the
Prince at liberty to make choice, of what likes him best. And if he be pressed to
deliver his opinion, it will be the safer course to incline to peace; unless
invincible necessity, or an apparent advantage, persuade the contrary: Which
course was prudently taken by Jovius, the Successor of that Olympius, we lately
mentioned.

He, though he was more inclined to War, that so himself might be more
necessary to the Emperor; yet after the manner of some Statsmen, seemed to
prefer a love to Peace, having met with Alaricus at Ariminum, whither he was
sent to confer with him; he sends the Conditions that Alaricus propounded to
Honorius; persuading him in other Letters apart, That he should offer the
command of his Armies to Alaricus, to make him more reasonable in other things.
The Emperor denying, That it was not safe for him to commit the strength of his
Empire to a stranger, that had been hitherto his Enemy, answered, That he had
rather consent to pay him Tribute.

When Jovius had read these Letters to Alaricus, he angry to see himself, and
his friendship rejected by Honorius, broke off the Treaty of Peace, and Jovius
returns to Honorius; who being much offended with the insolence of his enemy,
swore, He would never have any peace with Alaricus; and gave the same Oath to
all his Courtiers and Commanders. Thus Jovius by the same art, removed from
himself, the envy of the broken truce, and endearing himself to Alaricus, by
the testimony of his good will, in adadvising Caesar to give him the Command of
his Armies, engaged Honorius in a War; whereby the power and authority of
Jovius was wonderfully established. There is in story so great variety of those
errors, by the means of which Courtiers have fallen from their Princes favor,
That no man's diligence can reckon them all up so; but when he has recounted
many, he shall find still more behind. Wherefore having here culled out some
of the principal, we leave the rest to the industry and discretion of every
observing Reader.

CHAP. 27.
Of the Arts whereby Courtiers are supplanted by others; and first, under
pretense of specious employments abroad, or of calling them from their
Commands, to attend upon the Kings Person.
WE have seen already, How by his own fault, a Courtier may loose the Princes
favor; let us now show the means, whereby his Enemies are wont to supplant him;
which are of three sorts. Either they will endeavor to remove him from the
Court, under an honorable pretense; or else they will render him suspected, and
hateful to the Prince; or lastly, will by open force compel the Prince to
remove him.

Of the first kind of these three; as there are diverse ways, so the ends are
diverse. For some are with shows of honor, or with the desire of living amongst
their friends, willingly persuaded to depart the Court. Which course, during
the Reign of Manuel Comnenus, Styppiota craftily used, to remove out of his way
Hagiotheodorita that stood in his light: For there arising a Controversy
between Michael Paedagogus, and Joseph Balsamon, Styppiota persuaded the
Emperor, That if Hagiotheodorita were made Governor of Peloponnesus, it would
put an end to the contention of these great ones. Hagiotheodorita out of desire
of assisting his Kinsman, undertakes the employment; not dreaming that
Styppiota having got his rival out of the way, would by this means come to the
sole management of Affairs, as indeed it fell out.

Some men also tired out with the brawls and strifes of their Enemies in Court,
to provide for their own quiet, do easily embrace any plausible employment for
a pretense of their departure, As Agrippa did, who, Velleius testifies, went
into Asia, under the color of a great employment, only to withdraw himself
from Court, where he had private grudges and heart-burnings against Marcellus,
as the report goes.

Tiberius, whilst Cajus Caesar lived, retired to Rhodes, upon pretense of
following his studies, and by his Mothers means (they are Sue^onius his words)
to hide the disgrace of it, obtained to be sent, as it were, Ambassador from
Augustus. If there want a pretext, whereby he whom you desire to remove, may
voluntarily seek leave to go, and esteem it for a benefit; the Prince must be
persuaded to give him some charge, by reason it can be executed by none, so
well as he: So also, if there be any man great and powerful in any of the
Provinces abroad, and have emulators that seek to eclipse him; they must labor
to call him thence to Court, as necessary to the Princes person; that so being
crowded up amongst the Courtiers, his luster may be ^bscured.

This art used Apelles in Polybius, when he stripped Taurion of the Government of
Peloponnesus. So Darius by the advice of Megabyzus, recalled Hyesteus out of
Ionia; not, that he had any need of his presence, as he pretended, but to
weaken his Authority. If these Courtiers would rest contented with removing
others out of their way, for their own advancement, and proceed no further, in
comparison of many worse, these arts and practices would be something
tolerable; but the most of them rest not here: In the Reign of Constantius,
Sylvanus, General of the Foot (as Ammianus Marcellinus tells us) by Arbetio his
procurement, was sent into France, to chastise the Barbarians for the injuries
they offered to the Gauls; whether he being once come, and growing into favor
with the Nation, and also rich; the envy of Arbetio wrought at last his utter
destruction with the Emperor.

Almost the same fortune under this very Emperor had Vrsicinus, the General of
the Horse: Eusebius, the Eunuch, had together with some other Courtiers,
conspired his ruin; and by these men's means, to the end he might be far enough
from Court, he was sent upon some expedition to the Confines of Persia; where
having staid ten years, Sabinianus was sent to succeed him, neither in
judgment nor experience, equal to the charge: Whereupon, presently a rumor
being spread, That the Persians were preparing for a War, he was commanded to
stay there still, though the power was already given to another. Eusebius
contriving it so on purpose, to the end, That whatsoever good success happened
against the Persians, might be attributed to Sabinianus; and what ever fell out
amiss, might be imputed to Vrsicinus, as the event witnessed; for Vrsicinus
cast down for another man's faults, retired and past the rest of his life in
private. The Reign of this Emperor does furnish us yet with another example;
For Ruffinus, the Uncle of Gallus, Captain of the Guard, was sent to appease a
mutiny of the Soldiers, out of no other intention, but that he might perish in
the rage of the tumult: As Clytus did complain, That he was sent by Alexander
against the Sogdians, to no other end.

CHAP. 28.
How Calumnies are used to make men suspected, or hated by the Prince.
THus much for the first way, whereby Courtiers are by their Enemies
supplanted, and stripped of the Princes favor. Now let us come to the second,
which are, The Calumnies that are used to render us hated and suspected by the
Prince: In Calumny, two things are to be observed; the first is, Whether it be
sufficient to deprive him of the Princes favor? the second is, Whether it be
probable? Of the first, We must make our judgment out of the present state of
things, out of the humor and inclination of the Prince, and out of the nature
of the Calumny intended. No kind of slander does subvert more great men, then
that which accuses us of conspiracy against the Princes person, or his Empire,
or else of contempt or disdaining to obey; with detraction, and derision
toward the Prince.

These Calumnies are rendered likely to be true, not only by the words and
actions of those that are accused, and of their servants, friends, and kindred,
but also by contrived Letters, and the disposition of the Prince; too apt to
believe the Calumny, or too prone to think ill of the person accused;
especially, if he were ever suspected before. These things which are by Calumny
converted into a Crime, he that is traduced, either did, or said of his own
accord, or else was ticed into them, by the sleights of his Enemies, and
Competitors: The knowledge and practice of which Malice, whets the wits of
those who will curiously watch their occasions; and know dexterously ^ow to use
them.

There are some men that will put Projects into our heads, to the end, That if
we embrace them, they may make these very things, a subject of Calumny against
us, and accuse us to the Prince of some wicked intention. There was a certain
Magician, called Santabarinus very much beloved by Basilius, Emperor of
Constantinople, but as much hated by Leo, the Emperors Son; who this Magician
desiring to overthrow, did so besiege him with counterfeited duties, and
feigned respects, that at last winning upon him, he grew into credit with the
young Prince: Then having got an authority and interest in him, he takes his
time, and warns Leo, with great art and solicitude, That whenever he went a
Hunting with his Father, he should carry a Poignard under his Garments, to
defend himself withal: He obeying this advice, the Magician goes to his Father,
informing him, That his Son intended to murder him, and for a testimony, told
him, That he always carried a Dagger hidden about him, waiting for an occasion
of performing it. In short, the business came to that pass, the young Prince was
searched, and the Poignard found, whereupon he was cast into prison; and though
he were protected by the joint intercession of all the Court, yet he hardly
escaped with his life.

Whilst Valentinian was Emperor, Aetius accused Earl Boniface, who was very
dear unto Valentinian, and Governor of Africa, unto Placidia, the Emperors
Mother, of Treachery toward the Prince, and of a design he had of subjecting
Africa to himself; persuading her withal, That he should be recalled quickly.
At the same time he warns Boniface by his Letters, That he was accused at
Court, and for that reason recalled; wherefore he should take heed how he
returned, if he loved his own safety. Boniface giving credit unto him, obeyed
him so far, That (resolving to oppose those that would come to reduce him) he
called in Gontarus, King of Valladolid, and Gensericus his Son, then reigning
in Spain, unto his aid; who upon this occasion, possessed themselves of
Mauritania. The deceit being afterward found out, to the end the truth might
appear more plainly, they were permitted the trial of a combat, wherein Aetius
being vanquished, was banished the Court.

Not unlike unto this was the craft of Samona, beloved by Leo, Son to the
Emperor Basilius (by reason of his detection of the Treason of Basilius,
Kinsman to the Empress Zoa) who resolving to ruin Andronicus, that was General
against the Saracens, caused him to be warned by a friend, that he should take
heed of Hymerius, who came to deprive him of his eyes; which was in those days
a punishment usual toward great persons, whose power was overgrown, and become
formidable: Andronicus believing this to be true, which was feigned by Samona,
withdraws himself from Hymerius, unto a place of strength, which he seized
upon. This fact of his, Samona did not omit to exaggerate unto the Emperor,
insomuch, that by his procurement, an Army was sent against him, which forced
Andronicus, driven to despair, to quit the limits of the Empire, and fly unto
the Saracens. A little before, we mentioned Arbetio, and it will be worth
observing, how he added deceit upon deceit: When he observed the Emperor angry
with Sylvanus, and feared, that he should come to Rome to clear himself of the
objected crimes; he gives the Emperor his Letters, wherein he called Sylvanus
to his presence, to an instrument of his own, called Apodenius; who arriving in
France, suppressed the Letters as he was directed, and tells Sylvanus, That
nothing but destruction hung over him; whereby Sylvanus running into Rebellion,
as the only means of his preservation, made good Arbetio his calumnies.

But we have too long been silent concerning Sejanus (to whom being expert in
all these tricks) this artifice we now treat of was very usual. That he might
render Agrippina suspected to Tiberius, He inveigled her friends to puff up her
haughty spirit; and her own kindred were enticed to feed the swelling hopes of
Agrippina, with crooked and perverse discourses; whilst in the interim, he
causes Claudia Pulchra, Agrippina's Cosen German, to be accused by Domitius
Afer; which injury, this fierce and passionate Woman, complaining of heavily to
Tiberius, did thereby exceedingly increase the suspicions of this jealous
Emperor. Yet Sejanus not content with this, but seeking the utter ruin of this
unwary, and sorrowful Lady, sent those unto her, who under a show of
friendship, should warn her, That Tiberius meant to poison her, and that she
should beware of his Feasts; whereupon she over credulous, refused to take an
Apple out of Tiberius his hand at Table, which grievously incensed Caesar
against her. By the same Sejanus now, when Soldiers were set to watch over
Agrippina and her Children, were men suborned to advise her, to fly to the
German Army, or to run to the Image of Augustus for sanctuary; and there to
invoke the help of the Senate and the people.

With the same ugly arts, whereby he indeavored to supplant this Lady, by
making her suspected of Tiberius, he utterly overthrew her friend Titius
Sabinus; which thing, as it is described by Tacitus, you may read here in his
own words, because the circumstances are very notable, Annal. 4.

Junius Silanus and Silius Nerva, being Consuls, the year had a foul beginning;
for Titius Sabinus an honorable Gentleman or Rome, was cast into prison only
for his friendship to Germanicus, which was such, That he never omitted any
occasion of honoring or serving his Wife and Children; Of all Germanicus his
followers, being the only man which visited them at their house, and
accompanied them abroad; wherefore as he was much praised by the good, so was
he much maliced by the bad: Against him, Latinius Latiani, Porcius Cato,
Petilius Rufus, and Marcus Opsius, who had sometime been Consuls, bent their
spite, through a desire of the Consulship, which they could not obtain, but by
Sejanus his means, and Sejanus his liberty could not be purchased, but by some
notable piece of villainy. Wherefore they plotted amongst them, That Latiani,
who was somewhat a kin to Sabinus, should lay the snare, and that the rest
being privately witnesses to what past, they might begin their accusation.

Hereupon Latiani began at first to cast speeches out at random, and to extol
Sabinus his constancy, that he did not as others did, fawn in prosperity, and
shrink from a house in adversity; with other honorable mention of Germani^us
bewayling Agrippina's estate. And seeing Sabinus (as men's minds are soft and
tender in calamity) to pour down tears, and complaints; Latiani began more
boldly to touch Sejanu's Cruelty, Pride, and Ambition, not forbearing to
reproach Tiberius; These seeming dangerous speeches, and such as durst not be
avouched, made a strict friendship in show between them: So far that Sabinus
often frequented Latianie's house, and as unto his faithful friend uttered his
greifs unto him. Those I mentioned before, now began to devise with Latiani how
these speeches might be heard by them all: For the place of meeting must be in
appearance private, and if they should stand behind the door they did
apprehend some noise, or other accident of suspicion might discover them;
wherefore between the Seeling and the Roof the three Senators (in a place no
less unseemly then the Treachery was detestable) hid themselves, laying their
ears close to the holes and chinks, to listen what was said.

In the mean time Latiani having found Sabinus in the Market place (as if he
had some new matter to tell him, inticeth him home into his chamber, beginning
there to rip up things past and present in a great abundance; and to load him
with new fears. Sabinus was not behind hand with him, the nature of greifs
being such, that when once we enter into them, we can hardly make an end. This
done, they began immediately their accusation, and writ unto Caesar the whole
contrivance of their own lewd and shameful act. The city was never in greater
perplexity, and fear then at that time, every man estranging himself from his
nearest Kindred, and acquaintance; avoiding all meetings and conferences as well
with their Friends, as Strangers; yea they grew jealous of mute, and senseless
things, Prying into the Roofs and Walls of their houses. But Tiberius
requesting in his Letters that the Solemnities of the new year might be
Celebrated on the Calends of January, falls at last upon Sabinus, charging him
that he had corrupted some of his Freed-men to attempt something against his
person, and therefore boldly demands a revenge, which without delay was
granted.

Sabinus being condemned, was drawn and haled away with his Garments over his
head, so that he being almost Throtled was heard to cry out: Is this the
beginnings of the new year? be these the sacrifices slain in Sejanus his honor?
Which way soever he did cast his Eyes they all fled that he directed his speech
unto; the places of Assembly and the Streets were empty, some come running back
and showed themselves again afraid for that they were seen to be afraid. And
what days think you now were exempt from executions, if amongst the sacrifices,
and the vows, when the custom was to abstain from profane speeches, Fetters
and Manacles were mentioned. It is believed Tiberius could not be ignorant of
the envy he should incur for doing so, but that he did it on purpose, to the
end the new Magistrates might open the prisons, when they set open their
Temples and their Altars. For after that he sent Letters of thanks, for that
they had punished an enemy to the State.

CHAP. 29.
Examples of other treacheries in suborned witnesses, and forged Letters.
I Cannot avoid bringing here another example out of the same Historian.
Firmius Cato, a Senator, and one of Liboes inward friends induced this simple
young man, easily led to vanities, to give credit to the Chaldeans promises, the
Magicians ceremony, and the interpretation of Dreams, vainly putting him in
mind that Pompey was his Great Grandfather, Scribonia who had been Augustus his
Wife, his Aunt; The Caesar's his Cozen Germans; and that his house was full of
the Statues and Monuments of his Ancestors: He enticed him to Licentiousness,
to borrow money, making himself a Companion of his Lusts, and Familiarities,
the better to entangle him and convince with many evidences. That there might
be witnesses enough, he also debauched such of his Servants as knew any thing
of the matter. Then he desires access to the Prince, and by means of Flaccus
Vescularius, a Gentleman of Rome, one of Tiberius his Familiars, he discovered
both the matter and the man. How after this Liho was treated by Tiberius and
made much of, until accusations were brought against him in such abundance,
that he was forced to kill himself; Tacitus Annal. 2. will tell you at large,
to whom I had rather refer you, then exceed the bounds I had proposed to my
self in this Treatise.

Styppiota, whose deceit in supplanting Hagiotheodorita, I told you of before,
could not avoid being circumvented himself, as Sabinus the Roman was; the
contriver of that plot was Camaterus Logotheta, who being an enemy to
Styppiota, accused him before the Emperor as an impostor, and one that intended
to betray Sicily. And to the end he might give some face of truth to his
Calumny, he hides the Emperor in his Chamber, and in his hearing begins on
purpose to discourse of the affairs of Sicily. At which time many things fell
from the heedless Styppiota that were very displeasing unto Caesar; not content
with this, Camaterus causes counterfeit Letters to be mingled amongst
Styppiota's Papers, which being searched by the Emperors order, were the cause
of Styppiota's condemnation, and the loss of his eyes.

This Story leads me to speak of another means of rendering slanders probable,
to wit, by Counterfeiting Letters; A deceit indeed that for the most part
breaks out at last to the prejudice of him that uses it, but nevertheless is of
great power to make deep impressions of suspicion in the Princes mind, and to
alienate his favor: Which being once observed by the accused, will either
induce him to withdraw himself willingly from business, and the Court, least
something worse should follow; or else cast him upon such attempts and
practices, as will Confirm the slander. Which appears by that example of
Sylvanus I mentioned before.

The perfidy of false witnesses is no slender confirmation of slanders, and
this is chiefly necessary against such as are accused of Treason, and Capital
crimes; And truly Domestic Servants as most proper, so oftnest are made use of
in this nature. In the reign of Arcadius, Eu^ropius seeking the destruction of
Timasius, a great Captain, and a man of much authority; corrupts his friend or
rather his inseparable Com anion Bargus to accuse him of affecting the Empire.
The freindship between Bargus and Timasius gave credit to the accuser, all men
believing that he would not, unless the crime was most certain, accuse him; To
this Counterfeit Letters were added, to prove the Treason, by which means the
innocent man and his son were sent into Banishment, to the Isle of Oasis, from
whence neither of them ever returned.

Caius Petronius was for his skill in pleasures preferred before Tigellinus by
Nero, whereupon the other out of envy accused his Rival of Scaevinus his
friendship, (who was convicted of a Conspiracy against Nero) and brought to
witness it a Servant of Petronius his corrupted by him.

CHAP. 30.
Confirmation of slanders under the coulor of a feigned friendship; and the
inclinations of the Prince to the accuser.
I Said before that to confirm Calumnies, the affection of the Prince to the
slanderer did much conduce, and for this reason did Sejanus endeavoring to make
the E^ip. ess Livia jealous of Agrippina, Germanicus his Widow, choose Julius
Posthumus to do it; who, as Tacitus affirms, by reason of his Adu^^eries with
Mutilia Prisca, the Empresses favorite, was very gracious with Livia. But
calumnies never succeed so easily, as when they are used against one already
suspected by the Prince: For it is very probable, That then the accuser shall
not only ruin the other, but also exalt himself. The familiars of Vitellius
durst not (...) upon Junius Blaesus, till they-observed him to grow less in
Vitellius his favor, and they compassed their desires much sooner, because
Lucius Vitellius, the Emperors Brother, lent them his assistance.

Gracchus, a freed man of Caesar's, and one as Tacitus says, Annal. 13. All his
life bred up in, and by a long experience, well practiced in the Princes house,
thought it the best way to preserve himself in the favor of the Prince, to
accuse Cornelius Sylla, whom Nero he knew was jealous of already. The same art
did ^ige^linus use against this Sylla, and Plautus afterward, of which
Tacitus, Annal. 14. writes thus. But Tigellinus credit increased daily, who
thinking that his lewd practices, wherein he was a great pr^ficient, should be
more acceptable, if he could engage (...) Prince into the communion of his
Villainies, began diligently to pry into all his fears, and perceiving that
Plautus and Sylla were above others suspected: Plautus being banished into
Asia, and Sylla into France, he enters into discourse of their Nobility, and
how one was too near the Army of the East, and the other to that of Germany:
That Sylla was poor and needy, only counterfeiting a laziness; and Plautus
abounding in wealth, did not so much as pretend a desire of a quiet life.

I told you above of Vrsicinus accused by Eusebius the Eunu^h, to the Emperor
C^nstantius, who was already s^ie toward him, by reason of his kindred to
G^^^us; but I did not set down the success of the cause, which was thus. The
accusation faultring, because the Arguments whereby the crime was to be proved,
were slend^r; the Eunuch intending a new mi^chief, causes the accused to be
enlarged: And things standing in this posture undecided, he does strive to
indear Vrsicinus to himself, whom he would seem to have deli^ered from the
danger of a trial; but withal, removes him from the Court (where all his
thoughts were placed) notwithstanding this face of friendship he put on,
persuading the Emperor under hand against him.

CHAP. 31.
The chief arts and ways of slanderers.
WHen any one is accused to have spoke ill of the Prince, how much the nearer
these reproaches come to truth, by so much the easilier is the accusation
credited; as appears in the example of Granius Marcellus, of whom Tacitus,
Annal. 1. Whom Caepio Crispinus accused to have reviled Tiberius, which was an
inevitable accusation, for he having chosen out the greatest blemishes of
Tiberius his life, did impose them the accused; which because they were true,
were believed to have been spoken. This example have many slanderers followed,
reproaching many Princes of their vices, under pretense of informing them of
other men's detractions; which one would think should be a sufficient reason to
persuade them from giving ear to these Calumniators.

And Tiberius truly, who though he was a lover of informations, yet he hated
his own reproaches; and therefore least he should hear them in the Senate,
where they were occasionally brought in by way of accusing others, retired to
Caprea, Believing ( as Tacitus avers) that he ought to avoid the Assemblies of
the Senate, least he should be compelled to hear reproachful, but yet true,
uttered of himself in his own hearing.

This way also do some take only to reprove Princes for their vices; as they
that would reprove Nero for his Mothers murder, did use to inveigh against
others for the like acts in his hearing; yet more with a design to correct the
fault in Caesar, then to ruin those that they accuse. These are the choicest
ways that slander takes, but who will undertake to trace her in all her
turnings? For calumny is a monster that has a thousand shapes, and a thousand
sleights to do mischief with.

CHAP. 32.
The deceits and danger of Courtpraises, and Masqued Courtiers. Lastly, The
third way of oppressing our Courtier by force.
FRom Slanders, let us come to Praises, of which also as we have hinted before,
there is great use in undermining others; for many men do by this means,
Palliate secret Hate, Envy, and Emulation, to the end, they may deceive more
easily. So Fabius Valens with secret criminations, defamed Martius Valens that
suspected no such thing from him; who to betray him more securely, did always
speak well of him in public, Tacitus Hist. 1. So Arbetio with the
blandishments of a great kindness, did assault Vrsicinus, and frequently call
him in public, A valiant gallant person, thereby craftily to entangle in more
deadly snares, that harmless, and well-meaning man. Ammianus Marcellinus, Lib.
15.

Alphonsus, King of Arragon, as one was praising another man unreasonably in
his presence, beyond his wont, turning about to a friend said, Without doubt
this fellow seeks the destruction of him he praises: Neither was the King
deceived in his opinion, for six months after, this intemperate praiser,
accused before the seat of Justice, him that he had so highly extolled; and had
undone him, had not the King interposed for his preservation.

Mucianus having in the Senate heaped many praises upon Antonius Primus, whom
he could not openly oppress; loads him also with secret promises, and points
him out the further Spain, left void for him by the decease of Cluvius Rufus,
giving to his friends and followers, several commands in the Army. And
afterward, when he had filled him with ambition, and desire, he suddenly
undermines his power by taking from him the Seventh Legion, which was
exceedingly devoted to Anthony.

Neither is this way traced by Courtiers only, but also by Princes themselves,
when they desire to abate or take down any body. For Tiberius did thus confer
the Praetorship upon, and invite to his Table, Libo, (whom he secretly
suspected and hated) without change of countenance or showing anger in his
words, till he saw his time (he had so concealed his indignation) as Tacitus
tells you, Annal. 2. By the same artifice, you saw he overthrew Sejanus:
Domitian was never more to be feared, then when he smiled; the praises of
Andronicus were the beginning of injuries. Nicetas called his liberality, An
earnest of the confiscation of that man's goods, and his lenity a forerunner of
a certain death.

Yet there are some that seek by their applauses only, to stir up the Princes
envy toward them they praise, for so Tacitus tells, Julius Agricola was ruined
with Domitian. The cause of his destruction was no Crime nor Complaint against
him, but the Princes envy to the virtues and glory of the man, stirred up by
the worst kind of enemies, unseasonable and treacherous praisers. There is
extant, a saying of the Emperor Julian, That there are no more dangerous
Enemies in the world, then Masked Courtiers; whom Mammertinus describes in a
Panegyric, saying, That with a crafty artifice they did in all company,
slander men by way of Praises, and under the titles of friendship.

But we see that some have used these praises toward one, with an intention of
reproaching another, whom they desired to affront with the dis^^militude of his
merit: Plutarch accuses Herodotus with this spightful kind of dealing in his
commendations of the Athenians, for the brave repulse they gave the Persians,
which says he, was not intended so much for the Athenians honor, as the shame
and disgrace of the other Greeks. Seneca attests, that Kings are wont to praise
their dead servants, to make those blush that are alive: So did Augustus extol
the faithful services of Maecenas, and Agrippa, when his daughters lusts being
discovered; he seeking thereby to reprove his familiars and servan^^, as
negligent and careless of the honor and service of their Prince.

The same was Augustus his end in praising and dispraising of Tiberius, of whom
Tacitus writes thus; Augustus when a few years before he demanded the
Tribunicial power in the Senate for Tiberius, although he did in his speech
touch upon many things of his behavior, his habit, and manner of living; which,
as it were, by way of excuse he did reproach him with, etc. Therefore these
things ought to warn us to look as well into the intention of those that praise
us, as of those that caluminate us.

These two first ways of undermining our Courtier, to wit, Of removing him out
of the way, under some fair pretense; or, of making him hated, or suspected by
the Prince; being sufficiently discoursed of, there remains only untouched,
the third and last way of all, Open violence; which principally takes place,
when either the people or the soldiery offended with the dignity, or manner of
the favorite, run into a public sedition. The tumults of the Parisians, when
the people raged at the captivity of their King John, with the English, are
sufficiently known; as also the fortune of those, upon that sedition, who bore
the principal offices under his Son, then supplying his Fathers place in the
Government.

But few years since, the Janissaries, more then once, have by sedition deprived
the Turkish Emperors of their Ministers of greatest trust and authority: Out of
more ancient stories, the time of Arcadius will furnish us with some examples;
Ruffinus was amongst others, principally beloved by this Emperor, with whom
Stilico being offended, and determining his destruction, sent Gainas with his
forces, as it were, to assist the Emperor, but indeed to deprive him of
Ruffinus, as it came to pass: For Ruffinus going to the Army, the Soldiers of
Gainas upon the signal given, ran together, and compassing Ruffinus in, tore
him in pieces.

Eutropius being then put in Ruffinus his place; when the chief Courtiers
likewise grew discontented with him, by the contrivance of the same Gainas,
Tribigildus raises a Rebellion, overrunning and spoiling all Asia, and denies
to accept any conditions of a peace, till Eutropius were removed out of the
way; which by the persuasion of Gainas, the Emperor consented at last unto:
Neither was this enough, for Gainas being afterward openly joined with
Tribigildus, to the end he might suffer himself to be reconciled to Arcadius
the Emperor, demanded, That Aurelius Saturnius, and John Chrysostom, then the
chief Moderators of the Emperors Affairs, should be given up to him; which
being done, he sent them into banishment, contenting himself with giving them
(before their departure out of his presence) the Edge of his Sword for to
handle, that they might feel how sharp it was.

CHAP. 33.
Sometimes the Princes own ill and cruel Nature, envying the deserts of his
Servants, is cause of the Courtiers fall* and this, how it is to be handled.
OFtentimes, although our Courtiers underprop themselves with all other
supports, yet the nature of the Prince, as being either over light, vain,
jealous, envious, covetous, cruel, or timorous, makes their ruin inevitable.
These diseases as being incorporated into them, do for the most part elude, and
overgrow the circumspection of the prudentest men. Seneca, whose authority had
with Nero far more of liberty, then flattery; in the beginning, being wise and
skilful in the arts of Court, was fain to yield at last, as quite overcome by
the malice of the Princes nature: First, he was envied by him for his
eloquen^e, then for his riches, and lastly, being oppressed with malicious
slanders, he lost both the Princes favor, and his life.

The jealousy and envy of Princes, has been so formidable to some, that they
had rather be lessened to their loss, then incur their envy by doing their
business prosper^^sly and well. Publius Ventidius fearing the envy of Mark
Anthony, under whom he served, contented himself to have beaten the Parthians
by three Victories into Media, and would not prosecute his good fortune any
farther. Agathias tells us, that during the Reign of Justinian, the same was
done by Bellisarius; least the greatness of his Victories, and the acclamations
of the people, should stir up the hate of the Peers, and envy of the Prince
against him.

Truly such as these do not mind their own honor, and the profit of the
Prince, as they ought to do; but the fault is not so much in them, as in the
Prince himself; And therefore it was, that Maecenas persuaded Augustus, not to
impute his ill successes to his Ministers, nor envy their prosperous actions.
For (says he) many of them that manage Public affairs, have done it very
negligently, for fear of envy, choosing rather to hazard their glory, then
their safety. Yet I do much more approve their way, who to avoid envy, whatever
great and fortunate actions they did, would needs ascribe the glory of it to
the Prince, though absent. Agrippa, Augustus his Son in Law, persuades us to
undertake great adventures; but having performed them to attribute the glory of
it to the Prince, as he himself was always wont to do.

So Joab besiedging Rabatham, though he could, refused to take it in, before
David himself came thither. Craterus when the business of Artacena was to be
determined, waits for Alexanders coming; Julius Agricola (as Tacitus writes)
never did boastingly apply his acts to his own glory, but cast all upon
Fortune, as the author and guide of all he did, who was but her servant.

This envy and emulation, though they are diseases incident to the generousest
Princes (such as Philip and Alexander were) yet they are more predominant and
malignant in some, then others. Theodosius, the second Emperor of that name,
committed the charge of building a Wall at Constantinople from Sea to Sea unto
Cyrus, which work he effecting in threescore days; This great dispatch was so
grateful to the people, that they cried out in the streets, That Constantine
built the City, and Cyrus had restored it; which being heard by the Emperor,
brought so great an envy upon Cyrus, that he could not expiate it any other
way, but by putting on a Religious habit.

He that has to do with such Princes, is to consider, That he walks upon
ashes, under which fire lies concealed; and therefore must he still examine
their inclinations with great diligence, to the end, he may either defend
himself against them; or, if it fall out that he cannot, that he may have this
satisfaction of mind at least, That he has done his duty, and all that in
Prudence he ought.

CHAP. 34.
How to preserve our Favor and Office, with the succeeding Prince.
HE is deservedly to be remembered amongst the Darlings of Fortune, whose
Authority and Interest being great with one Prince, continues so with his
Successor. It is truly a thing very rare in Courts, because he that is to
succeed, is for the most part suspected by the present Prince; and therefore,
they who manage his affairs, are necessitated to be adverse unto the Heir
apparent; from whence, commonly deadly emnities arise. Besides this also, the
succeeding Prince has for the most part Servants known, and endeared unto him,
by a long fidelity, and many services; for whose advancement to dignity that he
may make way, he will ordinarily, either of his own accord, or by the
persuasion of those that desire to succeed, lay aside the Servants of the
deceased Prince.

Yet there are some, whom either the state of affairs, for which they are more
able, and apt then others; or some other dexterous quality, and taking humor,
does so insinuat^ them into the succeeding Prince, That one Prince dying, they
loose nothing thereby, but his person. Macro, that he might obtain Caligula his
favor, sets his own wife Ennia upon him, to inveigle him with love, and bind
him in a marriage. The same man commanded Tiberius to be smothered with
clothes, as he was sick and dying, as Tacitus affirms. Julian the Emperor
retained Arbetio still, because he thought him useful, although he hated him
for his pride, and turbulent disposition. And Valentinian after him, called the
same man unto him to oppose against Procopius.

We have hitherto handled only such things as our Courtier, who will enjoy the
Princes favor, ought to avoid; But the sum of all Counsels that can here be
given to him, is, A modesty toward the Prince, such as becomes a man, more
mindful of his duty, then of his swelling fortune; let him never boast, nor do
any thing irreverently; and as much as possibly he can, let him avoid envy;
which has been so dreadful to many, and those great men, That some of them
with pretending a love of ease, others embracing a retirement to study, have
showed themselves averse to public affairs. Examples in both which cases, the
Historians give us in Domitian and Galba. He must take heed, he pass not over
carelessly, either those treacherous kind of praises we spoke of before, nor
the slanders that are cast upon him: They that Calumniate us, do say, That
either we are wanting in some thing that is necessary to serve the Prince well;
or else, That we have said, or done something, either really, or intentionally,
to the prejudice of him, or his service. As to the defects imputed unto us, we
must either modestly excuse, and justify our selves, or else amend them; or
lastly, endeavor with some other virtues to recompense those wants. Our words
and actions ought to be so moderated* and weighed, That they may not be
obnoxious to ill interpretations; we ought always to endeavor to search into
other men's opinions, and inclinations, before we discover our own; And if
either by chance or negligence, any thing slip from us, which may po^sibly
offend, we must when we reflect upon it, by some respective means, or by some
kind of occasi^nal interpretation, amongst other discourse, let them see, what
we spoke was not with an intention of offending any body.

If we shall once discover, that we are calumniated by any one, we ought as
little as may be, be absent^ from the Prince, to whom we are slandered; for
besides that, love abates toward those that are absent, detraction also in
time takes root, if it be not seasonably contradicted with truth; for a
jealousy being once put into the Princes head, in time through the many
suggestions of the accuser, there being no body to gainsay; takes such footing
at last, That oftentimes the Prince hates the person accused, before he
examines the crime.

He therefore that will provide for his safety, must make himself at Court, one
friend or more, to defend him in his absence against the dangerous assaults of
Calumny: But withal, he must take care they be persons of Condition and Honor,
or at least, men of Interest, and such as have access to the Prince's ear, as
readily as our Enemies. I confess, the store of such Friends in Court, is but
very small, where it is the usual custom, almost amongst all, if not to
persecute their companions themselves, at least to suffer them to be oppressed
by others. But yet it happens sometimes, That there is one that either out of
gratitude for benefits received, or with a desire of obliging us, or else out
of hatred, toward our accusers, will perform that office.

CHAP. 35.
Ostentation of the Prince's favor, to be avoided: Something also concerning
our Friends and followers.
LEt our Courtier avoid all ostentation of the Princes favor, not only to
eschew the envy of the rest of his Companions, but also of the Prince himself:
For lately, when the Grandees of Spain went about to supplant Cardinal Spin^sa,
under Philip the Second, see with what a wile they circumvented him: They all
struck sail to him, they all seemed to acknowledge, that their fortunes
depended upon his favor; the very domestic servants of the King, showed
themselves very obedient, and ready at his beck: Which when the Prince
observed, he was removed from Court, and all that power and greatness which he
had acquired, in less then two years fell to nothing.

Let therefore our Courtier learn to be contented with a modest ^rain of
attendants, and with a ra^e of living rather beneath the dignity wherewith he
is honored by the Prince, then above it; which he must be sure never to exceed.
It is unseasonable to lessen your attendants, when your fortune is declining.
It availed Seneca nothing, after he had lost Neroes favor, to hide himself in
his private house, and betake himself to his studies, nor to shut out visitants
with his pretense of want of health. Neither did it advantage Agricola a whit,
to have entered the City by night, and with a slender company of followers:
Wherefore it is necessary, That we put on a face of modesty betimes, and hold
on so.

Yet although I would not have our Courtier be besieged with too great a thr^ng
of Friends and Servants, I would not have him neglect to make many Creatures
and Followers; not to serve him in his pomp, but to support and comfort him, if
any adversity should happen: For although an adverse Fortune finds few of
these prove friends, yet there are for the most part, some among them who will
endeavor to shelter and assist you; if not out of friendship, yet out of
respect to their own advantage, which they may well expect from the
restoration of your Fortune.

CHAP. 36.
How to manage and dispense the Princes favor, advices, and comforts in
adversity, with other rules.
BUt as it is a great content and help in adversity, to have communicated your
prosperity freely and generously to many, in using the favor of the Prince, to
their assistance and advantage; so our Courtier is to be warned, That he warily
and industriously dispense these benefits; for it is certain, That whatsoever
the Prince shall at our entreaty do for any man, a great part of it is by him
imputed, as done to us. Wherefore, unless the Princes favor toward us, be very
large, we must not be too prodigal of sharing it amongst others: And very
seldom must we introduce or commend any unto the Prince, who are not in some
measure known unto him, as well as to our selves, whose deserts we ought first
carefully to look into, observing that saying of Horace.

Till thou art certain what his virtues be,
In no man's praises be thou over-free;
Least he transgress, and purchase shame to thee.
Moreover, let those favors also, which you demand for any body from the
Prince, be fit for the person, and suitable with the times, consistant also
with the dignity, and emolument of the Prince; and lastly, such as you know
have been formerly obtained by others. If the Prince grants it, we must let him
see we take it as a great favor done unto our selves; if he refuse, we must
take heed that he do not perceive we are offended.

That is also to be observed here, which we have touched upon before, That we
must never vainly make show of the Princes favor, nor give it out, That he is
governed by us; for we have told you before, how ill that succeeded with some.
Princes whatsoever they do, desire to be thought to do it of themselves,
without the help and authority of any others, especially their Subjects.

If the Prince shall lay any weighty command upon us, we endeavor to have it in
writing, and as clearly interpreted unto us, as is possible: We must not omit
to represent unto him, such difficulties before we undertake the business, as
we apprehend will occur unto us in the execution. If it be a thing committed to
us in secrecy, and unfit to be written, we are to repeat the Commands over and
over (yet without absurdity) in the Princes presence, to the end we may better
understand the intention of him that gives them, and also that he may not
forget what orders he gave us. We must also show our selves ready for the
meanest employments the Prince will cast upon us; for many times a small matter
is the occasion of a great fortune; and Princes would have their commands to be
weighed not by the importance of the affair, but by the greatness and dignity
of him the giver; being no less incensed at our refusal of slight enterpises,
then our declining of great and hazardous undertakings, when imposed by him
upon us. When we are attending upon the Prince, we ought to watch diligently,
that we be not surprised nor overwhelmed with sudden commands; And to that end,
always as much as may be, we ought to ruminate before hand all things then
afoot, and to prepare our mind and understanding for whatever may come in
agitation. We must likewise take heed, that we importune not the Prince with
unseasonable nor impertinent discourses, but only with what we both know to be
certain, and judge to be fit for him to hear. When the Prince speaks, we must
appear attentive, not as if we thought of something else; not sad, not musing,
least we should seem either to slight, or dislike what he says.

If any one disgusted, or injured by the Prince, shall come and make his
complaint to us, we must let him see we are sorry for his misfortune;
persuading him to patience, and silence, and encouraging him to hope well;
lessening the injury, and excusing the Prince. But with such as these, we must
deal warily, for there are those that counterfeit wrongs and discontents, to
see if they can draw any testimony of an ill will to the Prince out of us, that
thence they may take an occasion to undo us: Others are injured indeed, but yet
are weak and imprudent, not being able to conceal what is out of friendship
communicated to them in secret.

If our condition be such, that we keep a train of servants, we are to take
great care that none of them speak licentiously, either of the Prince, or his
Favorites; for many times the servants fault is cast upon the Master, from whom
his words and actions are often thought to proceed. Amongst the principal rules
of a Courtiers Prudence, this is one, To discover and smell out betimes, the
change and diminution of the Princes affection toward us, to the end, that the
knot of love between you, may rather be gently untied, then cut in sunder. For
so many times the cause of our distaste being removed, or worn away, there is
sometimes an easy return for us unto our former favor, especially, if we seem,
either not to remember, or not to have understood the injury.

CHAP. 37.
How to make a judgment of the constancy, or change of the Princes affection
to us.
TO the end our Courtier may judge of the constancy of the Prince's favor
toward him, It is not enough that he know the Princes humor, with the
authority and power, both of his friends and enemies in Court; but, he must
principally weigh the original cause of the Prince's love toward him: For, if
that once cease, or be found more prevalent in another, without doubt, the
affection of the Prince will either wholly cool, or at least be much diminished.

Yet sometimes it is hard to divine what is the reason, that you are so
beloved; and truly, it is sometimes only a fortunate felicity, for which no
reason can be given, though ordinarily the Princes love arises, either out of
similitude of disposition, out of the pleasingness of your humor and manners,
out of your services done him, or from your virtue; or lastly, from your
obsequious plyableness to his will. That love which comes from the similitude,
or takingness of your manners, although it seem very great for a time, yet it
wears out soonest of all; both, because as we have said before the nature of
man changes daily with age, or with variety of business; and also, because it
is hard to find two dispositions so sympathizing together, as that they differ
in nothing; and many times that wherein they differ, is of more power to divide
them, then all the rest to unite them together.

Yet I know not what Star does so tune and temper some men still to the Princes
liking, and disposition, that they can hardly, if they would, do any dissonant
or displeasing thing to him: And I do confess, That these men may make the best
harvest, with a Prince of all others; especially, if they know skilfully how to
choose and use their times, and how to take in their sails seasonably before a
storm.

CHAP. 38.
The Princes favor to Women: Instructions for the Princes Mistresses; benefits
conferred on Princes, often makes those persons hated by them, with other
documents.
PRinces do sometimes also bestow this favor on Women, according as they are
more or less prone to venereal pleasures; but they also do frequently fall from
favor, if not by their own faults, yet out of the Princes ^atiety, or finding
out a fairer Mistress. Wherefore, such Women as are crafty, are wont to divert
Princes, as much as may be, from all commerce with other Women, especially such
as may be likely to entangle the Princes mind; some also, by counterfeiting
disdain, and keeping state, have preserved their lover; and lastly, some more
audacious and bold, when they saw the Prince once truly love them, have kept
him still drunk in lust, and drowned in pleasure.

Which arts Poppaea practiced upon Nero, For when she saw that he was enamored
of her, becoming proud, if she entertained him a night or two, it was all she
could afford him; saying, She was a married wife, and could not abandon her
Husband Otho, who for his parts and behavior exceeded Nero: That in using a
Bondslave, acts for his Concubine, had learned nothing from that servile
familiarity, but baseness and nigardice: Thus Tacitus reports her discourses,
Annal. 13. And soon after, Annal. 14. the same Poppaea despairing now of
marrying Nero, or of seeing him divorced from Octavia, as long as Agrippina
lived: Sometimes tauntingly, and sometimes merrily, began to reproach the
Prince, calling him a Ward, and subject to others controulment; and said, he
was so far from the Government of the Empire, that he wanted his own liberty.
Some Princes Mistresses have by this means held their affections faster, then
by the dallyings and blandishments of pleasure; yet, as I said before, there is
no constancy in this kind of affection to be relied upon long.

Truly one would think that love, which you have gained by your services,
should be stable and more firm, then what comes from flattery or pleasure, as
arising out of an honest cause; and which being cherished in you, is apt to
stir up others to merit as well by virtuous undertakings. Yet experience often
teaches us, that very great services have in Courts been the ruin of those
that have performed them; by reason, that Princes are wont to hate, whom they
cannot requite. They will not be indebted to a subject, and therefore do fly
the sight of those that have exceeding well deserved of them, as if they did
with their looks reproach them of ingratitude; which is the reason, why the
condition of such men in Courts, is much to be pitied; for when they have
obliged the Prince by any service, they are ashamed by and by, to ask a reward,
least they should seem not to have giyen, but sold the benefit they did him;
who in the mean time, as Princes are often regardless of the service received,
and slow to reward, draws out, day after day, till the memory of the benefit
wears out in the minds of those that were privy to it; whose silent reproaches
he feared before.

Which some men observing, have judged it fit, to strike the Iron whilst it was
hot; and when they were designed for any business, to look to their reward,
before they undertook the employment; knowing well, that with Princes the hope
of future services, is more prevalent to induce reward, then the memory of
those that are past; and that it is better to be obliged to Princes, then to
have them obliged to us; because they believe, whoever they have obliged, to
wish well to them, whilst he that they are indebted unto, because he is
believed not to love the Prince that has denied him, what he pretended unto;
is recompensed only with hate. This Commines tells us, was Lewis the Eleventh
his opinion.

The love of Princes toward the Ministers of their pleasure, would seem to be
stable; and truly, it is of some continuance, as long as the inclinations of
the Prince to pleasure continue; but those changing, the affections to those
that fed them, change also. Sometimes likewise, the Prince inclining to the ove
of virtue, does reject and abominate those that are instruments of his
pleasures. But as some of the inclinations of Princes are more durable then
others, so also is their favor (as I said) of a proportioned continuance,
toward the Servants of those veral inclinations.

CHAP. 39.
Sundry precepts concerning the Pleasures, and Inclinations of the Prince, etc.
I Will not touch here upon all pleasures, whereunto the nature of the Prince
is prone, because all of them are not fit, or apt to have the greatness of any
man's fortune built upon them. Those passions that are of any greatest sway in
Princes minds, and familiar unto them, are three, to wit, Wanton love,
Cruelty, and Avarice: The first, as it is more vehement then all the rest, so
it is more uncertain, and inconstant; for though the vice still remains as to
the Subject, yet it keeps not fixed still upon the same object: Nevertheless,
many have used this as a foundation, whereupon to build their fortunes, not
sticking to prostitute their Wives, so they might gain the favor of the Prince;
as we read in Tacitus, that Otho did, although it ^ell not out well with him;
for Nero removed him from Court, least he should have a rival there.

Others that they might bind their Princes unto them, made themselves
Witnesses and Companions of their wickedness and lusts, by the example of
Tigellinus. These men do not think that Princes have a trick to free themselves
of public blame and envy, to sacrifice oftentimes such kind of men unto it:
And all those servants of their lusts are to expect the same fortune as happened
to Remirus de Orco, the Minister of Caesar Borgia his cruelties; whom at last,
Borgia caused to be murdered, as guilty of all the ill that he had done.

And from the example of this Remirus, we may also read their destiny, who
serve the Prince in his cruelties; for the Princes affection seldom endures
toward them, both because he does, as it were, daily read his wickedness in
seeing them, and also is afrai^ of them, whom he knows so apt to villan^ Nero
although hardened in vice, and of ^ cruel nature, yet after his Mothers death
hated Anicetus, as one whose face daily reproached him with his Mothers murder.

The affections of Avarice are least of all changeable; the diversity of the
object does not vary in these, as in those of love; it is not diminished, but
increases with age; and although it is as hateful to the people; as cruelty,
yet it is longer endured, because it covers and cloaks all exactions, under the
pretense of Public necessity, Parsimony, and the Common good. Therefore,
those that upon this score serve Princes, may long preserve themselves in their
favor, whilst (which is rare in these kind of men) they do not become froward
and peevish, nor too much intend enriching themselves.

Frowardness, which for the most part is likewise contumelious, begets hatred
both to the Prince, and to it self; The author of which, the Prince will at
last cast away, to remove the envy of it from himself.

Riches are also obnoxious to envy, not of the people only, but sometimes of
the Prince himself; who if he be truly avaricious, will hardly be content, till
he have squeezed the full Sponge, as we read that Vespasian was wont to do; but
will rather imitate the Country Clowns, who when they have fatned their Hogs,
do kill and devour them. Truly, France has seen many such, who being proud and
peevish, and who making too much have to be rich, have thereby, and by their
insolence, from a great height of fortune, fallen to nothing.

In the time of Philip le Belle, Peter Berchius, High Chamberlain, and
Treasurer of France, was strangled at Paris; Lewis, Philips Son, afterward
coming to the Crown, Enguerrandus Marigny met with the same misfortune: Under
Charles the Seventh, Gyacensis, in dignity equal to B^rchias, was brought to the
Bar, and afterward sowed in a Sack, and drowned; his Successor Camus Beaulieu
was killed at Poytiers; and the same end had come under Philip the First, to
Peter Essart, if with an Hundred thousand Florens he had not redeemed his life.

I could recount more nearer us, but that I am willing to spare their memory:
In the mean time these examples are sufficient to instruct, That as the too
great easiness of these Ministers brings too great a detriment upon the Princes
profit; so their insolent griping, and frowardness, draws hate and destruction
upon themselves: And that as we ought not to refuse a just occasion of
enriching our selves, so we must not show our selves too greedy after riches,
nor amass so much together, as may expose us to the Public Envy.

CHAP. 40.
Concluding with many choice, and necessary Admonitions.
THere remains only now unhandled the last cause, why Courtiers are beloved by
their Princes; to wit, An aptness, and singular ability to dispatch, and manage
their Affairs: For which reason, When we see that we are become acceptable to
the Prince, we must consider, Whether he love this aptness for business,
because of the usefulness and necessity of it; or else, because the Prince
desires to acquire from us that aptitude to himself. If it be grateful, because
it is necessary, his favor to us will endure as long as the necessity remains;
but his love, will rather be a forced, then voluntary love.

If we see the Prince aspire to the glory of this aptitude for business, there
is no doubt, but when he sees; that he cannot either equal, or excel us, we
shall become an eyesore, and unacceptable to him; for there is in Prince; an
innate desire, as well as in all other men, of excelling all persons in those
arts they addict themselves unto; and therefore no man, almost, is pleased to
be excelled in them by his own servant. As^^ius Pollio, some exhorting him to
make a reply to those Verses Augustus Caesar had made against him, answered,
That he would not by contending to seem the better Scribe, draw his envy upon
him, that had power to proscribe him. There arising a dispute once between
Favorinus the Philosopher, and the Emperor Adrian, about some word, wherein the
Philisopher at last seemed to yield; his Friends wondering at it, he said, I am
not ashamed to be overcome in knowledge by him, that commands Thirty Legions.

To this purpose, that saying of Solomon is very notorious, Do not seem wise
before the King. It is necessary therefore, That whosoever desires to purchase
a Princes favor, must se^ aside the desire of his own glory; and not only in
verbal disputes, but in every thing else, yield him the day: And to that end,
it will not be amiss, on purpose to commit some errors and over-sights; so that
they be not too gross, nor like to take too much from our repute.

Out of our discourse hitherto, it is evident* how little certainty is in all
the greatness and favor at Court; Wherefore, the best counsel that can be given
to all Courtiers, is, To prepare themselves for their fall; for although it is
thought a more generous thing to fight, then to fly, when you are once entered
these lists; yet if you are to do it with greater hazard of danger, then hope
of success, it is not indiscreet to sound a retreat betimes, and in imitation
of the Parthians, to fight flying.

As it is also a more glorious thing to descend gently by steps, and as it
were, to go out at the door, then to be cast headlong out at the Window; so it
is less shameful, under color of some specious and contrived pretenses, to bid
adieu to your Honors and Offices, then to expect to be stripped disgracefully of
them: And hereunto may fitly be applied the saying of an ancient Roman.

Why do thou weary tired Fortune so?
Depart the Court, before thou art forced to go.
Seneca says, it is happiness to die in the midst of your felicity; but I on
the other side think That Courtier happy, who in the midst of his prosperous
race makes a retreat. Perhaps he that shall do so, shall not be applauded by
all, but by some that look upon the outsides of things, be judged unworthy of
the Fortune that he has so abandoned. Yet he that is wise, not regarding such
idle discourses, will provide for his own safety, and remember, that in all
games, it is better to give over a winner, then a looser; as also, that no
prudent man will exchange or adventure certain things, for things so very
uncertain.

Though our ascent to these heights of Fortune and Dignities, is, as it were,
by steps in order; yet our descents, if not timely foreseen, are for the most
part headlong, and sudden: So that those that are flourishing in Favor and
Authority, if they chance once to slip, or stumble, their falls are lightly
desperate and fatal.

Behold here the Compendium of all, that I desired to say, for our Courtiers
instruction: Whether these pre^epts be pertinent, and select or no, I will not
determine, but leave that to the judgment and experience of my Friends. For my
own part, I confess, I have at present no great use of them, and am so far from
being transported with sadness, at my private and retired condition, that I do
heartily say with Seneca; Let him that pleases, stand upon
The slippery Battlements of Court:
I am well content to live alone,
Obscure, and free from all resort.
A sweet reti^ement I desire,
To all things that are Great unknown:
Where I to Virtue may aspire;
Therewith my latter days to Crown.
That so when Time has stolen away
My health, and scarcely left me breath,
Without disturbance, find I may
A quiet, and a happy death.
And that may cheerfully embrace,
As being terrible to none
But those, who known in every place,
Die only to themselves unknown.


FINIS.

