The Campaigners: OR, THE Pleasant Adventures at Brussels.

A COMEDY WITH A FAMILIAR PREFACE UPON A Late Reformer of the STAGE.

Ending with a Satirical Fable OF The DOG and the OTTOR.

Written by Mr. D'urfey.

LONDON, Printed for A. Baldwin, near the Oxford Arms Inn in Warwick lane. M DC
XCVIII.

To the Right Honorable THOMAS, Lord Wharton, Baron of Wharton in the County
of Westmorland, Chief Justice, and Justice in Air, of all his Majesty's
Forests, Parks and Chaces, on the South side of Trent; Comptroller of his
Majesty's Household, and one of his Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
THe Particular favor your Lordship has been always pleased to bestow on my
Genius and Endeavors, and not only on mine, but on Poetry in general, which
has still appeared by your good-natured Condescension, and Readiness to assist
the Stage against its Enemy's Injustice, has engaged me not only to give your
Lordship my grateful thanks, but to beg leave to dedicate my last off spring to
your service; in hopes it will be so happy to make an hour pass pleasantly in
the Country, at a time when your Lordship has a little leisure to retire from
your Affairs at Court.

As I doubt not but your Lordship has been Entertained with the baiting of the
Poets, by a late horrible Severe and Rigid Critic, so I also hope, that now,
or very suddenly you will be diverted with the aforesaid Critick's being
exercised by the Poets. That Performer, by those who are taken with Glosses
more than Realities, has had a mighty Cry of his side; but, as one man's Tale
may not always be so good as it is thought when another comes to be heard, so
it may happen that his ill-manner'd Remarks upon me may give occasion for as
good a Scene to please your Lordship, in an Answer of my Writing, as the
Original Lampoon did of his.

My Lord, it is fit that I inform your Lordship that I would not have presumed
to have troubled you with this Dedication, had not the following sheets been
Encouraged by men of the first rate understandings in England, whose
Commendation made me think 'em consequently fit for your perusal. Besides,
having been for many years so happy to know that your Lordship is of a Judgment
so Clear, a Temper so Generous and Just, and a Humor so Charmingly obliging,
that a Poet is not only Honored and Caress^d, but his Labor from Injustice
and Unreasonable Malice nobly indulged and defended.

It Is certainly therefore proper, that to such a Patron a soaring Muse should
be entirely devoted: The Poet's Song has always the greatest Influence when the
Theme improves the Harmony: And your Lordship's Character is of such Efficacy
with me, that whenever I am Inspir^d with it, which I hope I shall often be, as
well as now, I am very well assured, my Auditory, when they shall hear me sing
on that subject, will never imagine the time lost or ill spent, or me out of
Tune.

But to avoid Prolixity on a subject, which I know is ungrateful to your
Lordships Admirable Temper, (I mean Praise) I will unwillingly leave off here,
and only beg to be ranked amongst those many that have a true sense of your
valued qualities. And if the following Piece diverts, as I hope it will, and
gains that favorable reception, which your Indulgence, Affability and Good
Nature promises, through all your Actions, to all those who are so happy to be
concerned with you, it will be a surprising satisfaction to,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humbly Devoted Servant, Tho, D'urfey.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Prince Landevile, A Volunteer Campaigner. A Noble Italian. Mr. Evans. Don
Leon, A Noble Spaniard. Mr. Sympson. The Sieur Bondevelt, An Affected Finical
Flanderkin, President of the Council of Trade. Mr. Johnson. Colonel Dorange, A
Campaigner, Colonel of Horse in the Kings Army during the War. Mr. Mills.
Kinglove, His friend. A Volunteer Campaigner. Mr. Thomas. Min Here Tomas, A fat
Burgomaster. Mr. Penkethman. Marqui Bertran, A French Gentleman. A Volunteer
Campaigner under Marshal Boufflers. Mr. Cibber. Van Scopen, Footman to Don
Leon, when Ambassador. Born in Holland. Mr. Fairbank. Mascarillo, Footman to
Bertran. Born in France. Mr. Bullock.
WOMEN.
Angellica, Sister to Don Leon, and Niece to Min Here Tomas and Anniky. Mrs.
Knight. Madam la Marquise, Wife to Bertran. Mrs. Verbrugge^. Anniky, Wife to
Min Here Tomas. Mrs. Powel. Gusset, Woman to Angellica. Mrs. Kent. Fardell, An
Affected Tattling Nurse. Mrs. Lynsey.
Musicians, Dancers, Waiters and Servants.

The Scene Bruxells, the Time 35 hours.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. Pinkethman, in a Cloak, with a Poetical Wreath on. I AM come with
tears, and sobbs, with sigh and groan,
To tell the saddest tale that e're was known;
The Stage, the darling Stage is going down.
For since your favor, we no more can trust,
Dear Bays farewell, let Honor lie ^th dust.
Throws his Bays down. Let the Wreath, that as the badge of best renown
So long has Courted been by all the Town,
By noblest Peers bear witness all their works,
By Knights, Squires, Courtiers, Templers, Trading Sparks,
Pert London Prentices, and Lawyers Clerks,
Degraded, from W^ts Temples lowly ^all,
To Crown some Coxcomb, in some ^ity Hall.
I know, to part with ^^me thu^, is great pity,
But we all grow too good now, to be Witty.
Weeping. And therefore I submit, as there is occasion,
To wear this Sackcloath of pure Reformation.
Thus far I^ve like a Poet howl d my share,
Now you shall hear me bellow like a Play'r.
Hard-hearted Critics -- harder than the Stone;
Must to other House have all, and we have none:
Ah, can you see poor Penkethman undone!
As ^ightning Trees so your Neglect has rent us,
You are more dreadful Foe^ than those Present us.
^or Mirth not long ago you made good use on's:
Have I displeased ye, is this Face ^ Nuisance!
Must we, in spite of Labor, shut up Door?
And must -- by way of Punn -- I had like to ha swore,
And must our stanch Friend Mr Rich grow Poor?
Then farewell Playhouse, and all Comic Jest,
And farewell Trojan true, as ever P --
Is no way left to get this humor off?
For if we must not Ioke, you must not Laugh?
No, there is none; a zealous fit controlls,
To starve our Bodies here to save our Souls.
Well then, since it is a blessing to the Nation,
Pray let us see a thorough Reformation.
We Are not the only Guilty, I dare say,
There Is more of the wicked -- every one in's way.
First, for example is a glorious thing,
Let those reform -- be Loyal to the King.
Next; let the Elder-learn'd in our Affairs,
No more upon a Sunday sneak up Stairs,
To take a humming Bottle after Prayers.
With Phiz demure -- let not grave Cassock hide
Rebellion, Spite, Hypocrisy -- nor Pride
Let this be done, we'll choose him for our Guide.
We Will then -- talk Smut no more nor swear odsnigs,
Nor ever after grutch him his Tithe Pigs.
Let such as guide the Laws sincerely speak,
Nor those they put in force against us break.
Let all Professions set up Virtues Schools
And we'll soon bring the Stage to sober Rules.
Correct our Libertines, and gag our Fools.
Let the dull Mizer's Purse relieve the poor,
Let him never cheat, nor go to Church to snore,
And we will sing -- of Rashers broyl'd no more.
EPILOGUE.
By Mr Cibber, Acting the Fr. Marquis. DE simple Poet have done all he can,
To make me here de ver fine Shentelman;
Do, I perceive ver well, dat de Boffoon
Be wat is still most like to pleas de Town.
But since de ting is done, vat sall me say,
To gain your smile, and make you like de Play.
To act de Fool, I know sometime plese best,
But can I act de Fool in dis fine dress.
Fool is a lumpish sneaking ting you know,
Fool can no Cock wid air -- dance like de Beau.
Hoh [ Capers.] did you ever see a Fool do so?
It Is dis be tout charmant, dis be surprise,
Dis draw your heart, and defair Ladies eyes.
Vel but to treat you kind -- mon Chers Ames,
Pardon ne Moy dis once and Ecote,
Me vill to please you do one odor ting,
Not dance en Francois, but en Francois sing,
Such time, sush graces, and such Raree-shew,
Dat you sall tinke you are at Fontainbleau.
Mimicks the French Singers here. O ho, you, laugh, morbleau, dat is ver
strange,
Zoon, me go off den least de humor shange.
PREFACE.
I Must necessarily inform the Partial, as well as Impartial Reader, that I had
once designed another kind of Preface to my Comedy than what will appear in the
following sheets; but having in the interim been entertained with a Book lately
Printed, full of Abuses on all our Ancient as well as Modern Poets, called A
view of the Immorality and Profaneness of the English Stage; and finding the
Author, who, no doubt, extremely values himself upon his Talent of
Stage-reforming, not only (to use his own Ironical words) particular in his
Genius and Civilities, but indecently, unmanner'd, and scurrilous in his unjust
Remarks on me, Collier, p. 196.
and two of my Plays, viz. the first and second parts of the Comical History of
Don Quixote. I thought I could not do better, first as a Diversion to the Town,
and next to do a little Justice to my self, than (instead of the other) to
print a short Answer to this very Severe and Critical Gentleman; and at the
same time give him occasion to deseant upon the following Comic Papers, and my
self the opportunity of vindicating the other; with some familiar Returns ( on
Raillere) upon his own Extraordinary Integrity, and Justness of the Censure.

But first, lest I should plunge my self out of my depth, or like an unskilful
Swimmer, endanger my self by a too precipitate Rashness, let me warily consider
the Office and Habit of this unchristianlike Critic before I Attack him: He
has, or had the honor to wear the Robe of a Clergyman of the Church of
England: A Church, which for its Purity, Principles, and most Incomparable
Doctrines, surpasses without objection all others in the world, which with a
number of its pious, virtuous and learned Rulers and Ministers, I admire and
acknowledge with all the faculties of my soul, heart and understanding; and on
which I never seriously reflect, but I feel a secret shame for my remissness of
duty, and my neglect, in not living hitherto up to its Admirable Principles.
This reflection would indeed have been enough to awe any one in my
circumstances from proceeding to answer his bold Censures, had I not Courage to
consider that the rest of the worthy Gentlemen of that Robe are so good, that
they will not excuse or defend our aforesaid Critick's Injustice or Mistakes in
some places, tho they are pleased with his Truths in others; or be angry at me
for endeavoring to gain their good opinion, by defending my self from most of
his black Aspersions (how fair soever as yet they seem) and by unfolding him be
judged by their impartial reason, start a question, whither he, tho a happy
member of the aforesaid Adorable Church, does not come in for his share of
Immorality, and other frailties; and consequently is not as fit to be detected,
by the Wit of a Satirical Poet, as the Poet by the positive Authority of an
Angry Malecontent, tho in the garb of an humble Churchman.

The Fates, or Poets in ancient times were held in special veneration, even
their Kings, and other chief Rulers, often submitted to the virtue of their
Inspiration: Amongst which, the never enough admired Mr Cowley, in his noble
version of the Davideidos, gives the Royal David this Title, Rex olin and Vates
duo Maxima munera Coeli; and numbers of others might be inserted to prove
Poetical Authority, and the respect it bore in past Ages; which, tho I have not
capacity to parallel, I hope I may be allowed to imitate on another subject;
and in this have leave to acquit my self of several heinous Accusations, which
this Tyrannical Critic has Imposed upon me.

I am not at all Ignorant of his eminent parts, Learning, and other
qualifications; nor am I insensible, as well as the rest of his Readers, that
his Book has a very fair and engaging Title Page, and is no less IlIustrated
with many weighty and just censures upon the Immorality of the Stage, and our
licentious Writings for many years past; and tho this has been proved by the
late Ingenious Author of the Vindication of the Stage to be occasioned by the
vices of the Times, and not those of the Poets; yet thus far we can endure the
Scourge, and kiss his Rod with patience enough: And for my own part, I declare
if I had found his Severity had been moral, and had ended in the good design of
cleansing the Stage from its Impurities, and had been only a kind Instruction
to my Brethren and my self, to reform our Immoral errors, I had, as the rest of
us, with all humility imaginable, thanked him for his wit and good reproof; and
had been so far from answering in this manner, that I should have been proud to
have my name before his Book, with a Copy of Verses in' applause of his
Admirable Design. But when, instead of this, I find he strikes at the root of
our Dramatick Labors, and the Town's diversion, for some sly and selfish ends;
and instead of reproving us with a Pastorly Mildness, Charity and Good Nature,
gives us the basest language, and with the most scurillous expressions,
sometimes raging and even foaming at mouth, taxing the little liberty has
always been used, with horrid horrid Blasphemy, Profaneness, and Damnable
Impiety; when Reason must inform every one we intend nothing of the matter,
besides the p^or privilege of Poetica Licentiae: and pretending to prove this
with false Quotations, unnatural Mistakes, and Hypocritical Hypotheses, I
reselv'd to controvert him, and endeavor to prove that it is merely his malice
that has abused me and the rest, without Reason or Provocation; and that his
own Wit and Morals are not so Infallible, but they lie also open to the censure
of any Poetical Critic, who has Courage and Sense enough to attack em.

I once more therefore address my self to the Reverend of the Gown, from
highest to the lowest, and humbly desire that they will not appear Interested
against me, because I defend myself against one that has abused me, and has the
honor to wear one, (to what purpose the Judgment and Clemency of our
Government knows best) I assure 'em my design is only to turn, like the Worm
that is trod upon, complain being hurt, vindicate my self from abusive malice,
and at the same time am heartily sorry that ever I had the occasion.

It Is a pleasure to me however to know that I have for many years, as well as
now, the honor of the Conversation of several eminent men of the Church; and I
dare say, upon occasion I could easily gain their good words to prove my good
behavior. I do declare I never abused the sacred order in my life, but have
always had, and still have, all the veneration for 'em that is possible; nor
have any of my printed Writings contradicted this, unless when spoken in the
person of Atheists, Libertines, and Ignorants, where it is natural in Comedy;
nay, in my Book of Poems you will find a Satyr against Atheists, and in another
Book, called Colin's walk through London and Westminster, a Moral through the
whole, and designed in the honor of the Church of England, to show the
stubbornness of Romanists, Grumblers, and other dissenting Sects; but this my
partial Antagonist never read, nor heard of; nay, tho by his Book we may
suppose he has read a thousand, yet amongst twenty of my Comedies Acted and
Printed, he never heard of the Royalist, the Boarding School, the Marriage
Hater Matched, the Richmond Heiress, the Virtuous Wife, and others, all whose
whole Plots and designs I dare affirm, tend to that principal instance, which
he proposes, and which we allow, viz. the depression of Vice and encouragement
of Virtue. Not he, he has not had leisure since his last holding forth in the
late Reign, Collier, p.
to do me this Justice, it is enough for him that he has encountered Don Quixot:
And truly, I must own, was a most proper Combatant for him; for if he had not
been mad with the Windmill that was in his pate, or had ever perused that
Giant of an Author, upon whom I am the Pigmy, as he wittily observes, he would
have found the Bockheaded Chaplain had been greazing his old Gassock there long
before I new rigged him: But that is all one, I, poor I, must be denounced as
Criminal; I brought him upon the Stage, I washed his Face, put on a new Crape
Vest, and a clean Band, which, eh, fatal accident, made him look so like
somebody, that I, in his opinion, and condemned by his infallibility, have been
no body ever since, vox and praeterce nihil. Well, however this is determined,
let me beg of my impartial Readers, to give me leave to try what I can be, I
have had good fortune I am told by others in Lyrical Verse, which I am sure is
one principal part of Poetry, I Will see now if I can match my Antagonist in
Rallying Prose. Several ingenious Authors have already, I think, so well
confuted his Assertions against the Stage, by proofs from the Ancient Poets,
the Primitive Fathers, and their Authorities, that they have far excelled what
I can pretend to do there; only, I could have wished one who is best able, and
whose admirable Genius and Skill in Poetry would have been remarkably
serviceable, had drawn his Pen to defend the Rights of the Stage, tho he had
owned the loosenesses of it, and had ventured the being presented for it; but
since we, the forlorn, are not so happy to have that Aid, let my Antagonist,
the Reformer, who, for all the gravity in some part of his Book, and the solid
Piety he would insinuate in his Arguments, I perceive to be a Joker, and as
full of Puns, Conundrums, Quibbles, Longinquipetites, and Tipiti-witchets, as
the rest of us mortals, be pleased to take the length of my Weapon at that
sport, for now I cannot help telling my Audience, which is the Town, that he
has laid his reforming Cudgel upon me so severely, and it smarts so damnably,
that I cannot forbear smiting again if I were to be hanged, desiring only, as
the usu^d method is, a clear Stage, and from him no favor.

To begin then, I shall illustrate my first Scene with a comical hint upon some
part of his Character, and that the Jest may be worthy of making you laugh, you
are to know, that the first view I ever had of this extraordinary Person, was
neither better nor worse than under the Gallows. Well, but think you, I
warrant, 'twas about some Chari^a^le Duty that his sacred Function and Piety
obliged him to, such as Exhorting the poor Souls to confess their Crimes, in
order to be saved, or the like; no, faith, but quite contrary, for he was
rather hardening them, and infusing a strong Portion of his own obstinacy, to
fortify 'em for their dubious Journey; and in few minutes after, possessed
with a stronger Spirit of Priesthood than ever, for some past Ages there has
been Example for, pronounc^d the Absolution, the extremest and most mysterious
Grace the Church can possibly give to the most repentant Sinner, to wretches
Justly condemned by Law to die, for the most horrible Crimes in nature, viz.
the intended Murder of the King, and Subversion of the Protestant Religion and
Government. Now that such a Person should set up for a Protestant Example, and
a Teacher of Morality, is somewhat new, for upon my veracity, this Gentleman
may insinuate as he pleases, that our Church, and its Doctrines govern his
heart; but as to that matter, what may be in his heart I cannot tell, but if a
Pope is not crept into his belly, very near it, I am very much mistaken.

Pliny indeed, in his Natural History, Lib. 28. Cap. 10. tells ye, He that is
bitten by a Scorpion may have relief, if immediately he go and whisper his
grief into the Ear of an Ass. This Historian, perhaps, had so great credit with
these Malefactors, that they thought the remedy, by Auricular Confession, might
serve too in their Concerns. But we are confirmed, they were enough mistaken in
the rest of their Opinions, and so it is very likely were in this. If this
Parallel be found a little gross, I hope the Reader will excuse it, when he
examines the bold Critick^s Style relating to the Poets. Besides, how wise
soever he may be in other things, I Am sure all those that are so, and true Sons
of the Church, when they reflect on that Action of his, will own that he
deserves that, or a worse Title. And so to proceed.

But before we inspect further, or touch upon the Moralist's Immorality, for I
dare engage it is not altogether impossible to prove, the Pulpiteer may be
tainted a little as well as the Poetaster, let us see whether we can find him
guilty of the first Charge against us, which is Immodesty; and upon this
subject indeed, if our Learned Reformer did not impose upon us with a Fallacy,
I should (to show my good Nature walk hand in hand with my resentment) once
more admire him for his Character of Modesty in the 11th page of his Book,
which is, to do him Justice, very fine; but then he only tells us of one kind
of Modesty, when he knows there are two, and therein he is Falacious, in not
exposing the other, which is decency of Speech and Behavior; and truly,
merely, I believe, through a conscious reflection of his own frequent
miscarriages in that case. If therefore, these Papers differ a little from that
Civi^ity which is proper, I beg the Readers pardon, and assure him it is only in
imitation of his Style to me, as all those that read his Book may find.

For, in the first place, he does not show his own, nor, indeed, any part of
decent modesty, in exposing any Gentleman's Name in print, when the subject
matter is Sa^yr, Reflection, Scandal, etc. and in which case I believe the Law
might do Justice, if applied to; but if not, I am sure good Manners, and civil
Education, ought to tie the Cassock as close as the ^ash or Sursingle; but this
our Divine helper, most Bully-like, disallows; for he, pust'd with his Priestly
Authority, calls us boldly to the Bar of his Injustice by our own Names, the
same minute that he is roaringly accusing us of Blasphemy, Smuttery, Foolery,
and a thousand Monstrosities besides, as he would make you believe; unless for
variety, he picks our one amongst the rest, now and then, to abuse a little
more civilly, and then, rubbing up his old College Wit, he Nicknames 'em, as
you may find elegantly made out at the latter end of his Book, (for he shall
see that I have read it quite through, and can hop over pages as fast as he for
the life of him) where he can find no other Name or Character for two Gentlemen
of Honor and Merit, viz. Mr. Congreve and Captain Vanbrooke, who have written
several excellent Plays, and who are only scandalous to our Critic, by being
good Poets, yet these he can give no other Names or Characters, Collier, p. 7^^
but what are Abusive and Ridiculous. The first, for only making Jeremy, in
Love for Love, call the Natural inclinations to eating and drinking, Whoreson
Appetites, he tells, That the Manicheans, who made Creation the Work of the
Devil, scarcely spoke any thing so course. And then very modestly proceeding
onwards says, The Poet was Jeremy^ s Tutor. The the other Gentleman he dignifies
by a new Coined name of his own, viz. The Relapser, and much like an humble Son
of the Church, a Man of Morals and Manners tells us, Collie^, p. 230.
This Poet is fit to Ride a Match with Witches: And that Juliana Cox (a
Non-juring Hag, 'I suppose, of his Acquaintance) never switch'd a Broom-stick
with more expedition. Faith, such sentences as these, may be taking enough
amongst his Party; but if this be his way of Reproving the Stage, and Teaching
the Town Modesty, he will have fewer Pupils, I believe, than he imagines.

But to do that Gentleman Broom-stick Rider some Justice, and because we shall
want a Name hereafter to Christen the t other, as he has given the Name of
Relapser, so I think that of the Absolver will be a very proper one to
distinguish our Switcher, by which the Reader may observe, that we are civiller
to him than he to us however. And first then, I desire all Persons to observe,
that in other places of the same Chapter of his Book, our Absolver, for all his
detestation of the Stage, and of Poetry in general, yet takes a huge dea^ of
pains in taking to pieces, and mending the Comedy of the Rela^^^; nay, and to
show how transcendent his own Skill in these things is, he has helped the
Author to a better Name for his Play, Collie^, p. 210.
and says, The Younger Brother, or, The Fortunate Cheat, had been much
properer. This shows some good will he has to the Comic Trade however; and I
doubt not, but if ^is Closet were Ransacked, we might find a divertive Scene or
two, e^^ects of his idle Non-preaching hours, where Modesty, Wit, and good
Behavior, would be shown in perfection.

And yet, as to his own humor, we find it to be, by his Book, more sickle than
even the Wind, or Feminine frailty in its highest Inconstancy. One while he is
for Instructing our Stage, Modelling our Plays, Correcting the Drama, the
Unity, Time and Place, and acts as very a Poet as ever writ an ill Play, or
slept at an ill Sermon; and then, presently after, wheiw, in the twinkling of
an Ejaculution, as Parsen Say-grace has it, he is summoning together a
Convocation of old Fathers, to prove the Stage in past Ages exploded, and all
Plays horrible, abominable Debauchers of Youth, and not to be encouraged in a
Civil Government. What can we think of this, especially when I find him in
this Paragraph of his Book Collier, p. 261.
raving on at this rate, and quoting to us, That St. Cyprian, or the Author de
Spectaculis, argues thus against those who thought the Playhouse no unlawful
diversion; it is too tedious to recite all, but enough of St. Cyprian for my
purpose runs thus: What business has a Christian at such Places as those? A
Christian who has not the liberty so much as to think of an ill thing, why does
he entertain himself with lewd Representations? Has he a mind to discharge his
Modesty, and be flushed for the Practice? Yes, this is the consequence, by
using to see these things, he will learn to do them; what need I mention the
Levities and Impertinencies in Comedies, or the Ranting distractions of
Tragedy, were these things unconcerned with Idolatry, Christians ought not to
be at them, for were they not highly Criminal, the fo^lery of them is
Egregious, and unbecoming the gravity of Believers And then again, before he is
out of breath, A Christian has much better Sights than these to look at, he has
solid Satisfactions in his power, which will please and improve him at the same
time. Would a Christian be agreeably refreshed, let him read the Scriptures,
here the Entertainment will suit his Character, and be big enough for his
quality. Ah, Beloved, how noble, how moving, how profitable a thing is it, to
be thus employed, to have our expectations always in prospect, and be intent on
the glories of Heaven: Very good, and who is he so reprobated, that will not
allow this to be devout, and admirable good Counsel? But now let us see how the
Absolver, for all Pious quotation, has followed St. Cyprian's Advice; that holy
Father charges him not to entertain himself with such lewd things as Plays, and
he very dutifully reads a thousand as fast as he can; nay, scans and weighs
'em, and, no doubt, not without tickling satisfaction, at the present, for all
his Saturnine Remarks at last. Now if his Answer to this is, That it belongs to
his Office, as a Churchman, and that he could not reprehend the Vices in 'em
without reading the Books themselves, I must tell him, That St. Cyprian, nor
the rest of the Fathers, did not allow that, neither do we find they did it
themselves, for all their inveighing against the Stage; so that he makes his
own Quotation altogether invalid, He not being to do ill that good might come
of it.

And therefore, why may not a Poet now, who, perhaps, is a greater. Votary to
St. Cyprian in other Matters than the Absolver is in this, rally him thus, and
turn his Quotation upon himself, Phrase by Phrase? What business has a Parson
with such Books as these? ^A Parson who has not the liberty so much as to think
of an ill thing? Why does he entertain himself with lewd Comedies? Has he a
mind to discharge his Priestcraft, and flesh himself up for a Poet? Yes, this
is the consequence, by using to see these smutty things, he will learn to write
'em: What need I mention the Sham-Oaths, and looseness of Farce, or the Fustian
raving against the Gods in Tragedy, were these things really unconcerned with
Idolatry, a Parson, of all Mankind, should not be known to ogle them, for were
they not highly Criminal, the foolery of them is Egregious, and unbecoming the
gravity of all that thump the Cushion, or intend to thump a true Belief into
the Pates of an incorrigible Congregation.

And now methinks I see the Spiritual Critic, with a certain fallow
Male-contented Phiz, poring upon this Page, and sucking his Ringfinger, gives
himself an unpleasurable minute to Judge whether I have paraphrased right or
no; well, all is one, fall back fall edge, I Am resolved to ba^e him with St.
Cyprian a little more. A Parson has, or should have, much better Books than
Plays to look in; he has many Authors of Pious and Solid Authorities to please,
and improve himself with, at the same time. Would a Parson be agreeably
refreshed, let him read the Scriptures, let him find out Treatises of Morality,
Meekness, Charity, and holy Life, there the Entertainment will suit his
Character. Ah, Beloved, how noble, how moving, how profitable a pleasure would
it be to us, to see a Parson thus employed, to let the Stage's diversions be
too little for his grave Consideration, and be intent himself on the glories of
Heaven! And here now, I do not at all question but the Absolver, a little
nettled at this last Parallel, will fall to biting of his fingers again, his
Righteous Spirit being offended at my Insolence, in scribbling the Word Parson
so often, it being a Nickname, and only invented by some idle fellow, who
resolved to use the Order with no more respect. Why truly, I confess, in this
Case, Modesty is a little gravelled, but then she may thank him for it, for he
has dignified the Poets with so many Hell-defying, deep-mouthed Swearing,
Relapsing, Witch-riding Titles, that the worthy Ministry cannot reasonably be
angry, especially when the Word is only meant to him, whom I shall prove has
lessened the true Title, by his Immorality and Hypocrisy, more than ever the
Poets did the Reputation of the Stage, by their Time-serving Loosenesses and
Licentious Diversions.

It is, no doubt, a considerable Maim to us, in some Peoples opinions, who
never digested the benefits arising from the Stage in its Moral
Representations, that this smarting Lath is given us by a Clergyman of the
Church of England, that is, good friends, if he be so, for some Judicious Heads
are not resolved in that Affirmative -- but let that be discussed in another
place, I Am sure, if he is, Obedience to Government, in the first place, should
be his principal Tenet; and whether that is a part of the Absolver's Character,
I think has sufficiently appeared. But let him be what he will, I shall now
take the pleasure to inform those People, that but few years since, we had a
Man of Wit and Learning, that w^^^ the Gown, and as true a Son of the Church as
she could possibly (...) that was inc^^ely devoted a Champion in our Cause, and
Asserted (...) Rights of the Stage with Success and Applause; and whoever w^^^
look back a little, and incline his Eyes toward the de^ectable (...) Came, may
Encounter the famed Wit of that University, the Ingen^^^^ Mr. Thomas Randolph,
who in one of his great many admirable Pie^^^ called the M^ses Looking-glass,
makes his whole Moral to be the v^^t^^^cation of the Stage, and its usefulness,
and by showing the passions in their Kinds, coutrives to confute some canting
prejudiced Zealots, whose ignorance and frenzy had conspired before to run it
down; I will treat the Reader here with some of it. Mus^s Looking-Cl^s^.
A Country Lass, for such she was, tho here
In the City may be Sluts as well as there;
Kept her hands clean, for those being always seen,
Had told her else how sluttish she had been;
Yet was her Face, as dirty as the Scall
Of a Fish-monger, or a Usurer's Hall
Begrim'd with filth, that you might boldly say,
She was a true piece of Promethe^s^s Clay.
At last, within a Pail, for Country Lasses
Have often you know, no other Looking-glasses,
She viewed her dirty Face, and doubtless would
Have blushed, if through so much dirt she could.
At last, within that Water, that I say,
That showed the Dirt, she washed the Dirt away.
So, Comedies, as Poets still intend 'em,
Serve first to show your faults, and then to m^nd'em.
Here was a pretty Compliment to our Art now, a good Moral with good Manners
into the bargain; and yet it is certain the times then were as Licentious as
now, and the Poets took as little care of their Writings; but Mr Randolph
always made his good Nature agree with his Wit, and put as favorable
construction upon Scenes of Diversion, as reason would allow, tho he perhaps
had as much occasion for 50 l. as the Absolver when he writ his Book. He knew
that if there was so stupid a Temper, that the Moral of a Play could not
reform, the looseness that was in it could not prejudice; nor if a wild
Town-fellow, or a baffled Bully, or passionate Lover, being characters in a
Play, spoke some extravagances proper for 'em, would he roar it out for
Balsphemy, Profaneness, etc. and make a malicious scrutiny, and unreasonable
interpretation of words, which had no other intention but to make the Character
natural by customary manner of Speech, as he has shown examples by two of his
own, in the extremes of Vainglory and Hypocrisy: And yet this Gentleman was
as Learned, as good a Critic, and as Conscientious a man, as our Absolver can
pretend to be; and if I say,' had somewhat a better Title to Modesty and good
Manners, I think it may be made out, he having a civil regard to the Poets,
defended their Cause, and excused some failings for the sake of some other
Merits, when this treats 'em all like fools, tho he has only raked up a few of
their errors, which he has made a huge heap of Rubbish, by peering through his
own Magnifying Glass, without any allowance to their qualifications, or any
modest care to do 'em justice, which ought to have been one way as well as
another.

So much then for his Modesty in one of its kinds, which is decency of
behavior and expression; as for the other, he has played such a Game at Hide
and Seek with us, that we have been long in a Mist, not knowing how to discover
it: But the Air clears, and it is time for us now to take the right end of the
perspective, tho he would give us the Wrong, and then try if we cannot discern,
in the midst of his Garden of Divinity, a near friend of his called Immorality,
tho he would subtly insinuate him into the world as a stranger, leading his
darling daughter dear Hypocrisy into an Arbor; where, after they had been some
time alone, our Critic knowing how to be civil to his own creature, and to
give 'em time enough to beget a right understanding, he is very glad at last to
be a third in the company.

I should not have put him upon this warm Office, if I had not found him too
hot and bold with our Famous Ancient Truth-telling Poet Iuvenal, when in his
Book he tells us, Collier, p. 70, 71.
he teaches those vices he would correct, and writes more like a Pimp than a
Poet -- But upon just consideration, I believe if the Absolver taught the Art
of Rebellion no more than Iuvenal the Art of Pimping, the one would be
respected in after Ages, as much as we know the other has in the former: But
every one is Fool or Knave that is not of this Gentleman's kidney. A little
while after, at the usual rate of his own accustomed civility, he falls upon
the Renowned Shakespeare, and says, Collier, p. 50.
he is so guilty, that he is not fit to make an Evidence. Why now if'twere
possible for his Complexion to blush, there is never a Robe of any Friend
Cardinal the Absolver has at Rome, that can be redder than his would be for
such a Position: Nor does it end here, but is mixed with some more foolish and
insolent Remarks in another place, upon the admirable Tragedy of Hamlet. And
here he has no other way to show his malice, but by ridiculously quibbling upon
the prettiest Character in it, Collier, p. 10.
the innocent young Virgin Ophelia, who, because the Poet makes her run mad for
the death of her Father, and loss of her Lover, and consequently makes her sing
and speak some idle extravagant things, as on such an occasion is natural, and
at last drown her self, he very masterly tells us, the Poet, since he was
resolved to drown her like a Kitten, should have set her a swimming a little
sooner; to keep her alive, only to sully her Reputation, is very cruel. Yes,
but I would fain ask Doctor Absolution in what she has sullied her Reputation,
I am sure five hundred Audiences that have viewed her could never find it out,
tho he has; but the Absolver cannot help being positive and partial to his own
humor, tho he were to be hang^d, as the Lady was drowned, for he is very angry
in another place with the aforesaid Author, for making Sir Hugh Evens in the
Merry Wives of Windsor, Collier, p. 125.
a silly, eating, chattering Welsh Priest, but vindicates and speaks well of
Sir John, Parson of Wrotham, in the History of Sir John Oldcastle; tho he
swears, games, wenches, pads, tilts and drinks, and does things which our
Reformers Guts are ready to come up at another time, only, forsooth, because he
is stout; but it is indeed only because he is a Parson, and sullen, which he
thinks wise, for he cannot endure that Copyhold should be touched, as you may
see more plainly a little further, where he says in Loves Labor Lost, the
Curate plays the fool egregiously; and so does the Poet too: there he clenches
the Nail, there he gives Shakespeare a bold stroke, there obstinacy and malice
appear in true colors: And yet if a parcel of the ones Plays, were set up by
way of Auction against ^ others Sermons and Essays; nay, tho the Loyal and
Politic Desertion discussed was thrown in to boot, I know not what the Grave
would do, but I am sure the Wise would quickly find dif^erence. And yet to
Remark him nicely, this humor of railing is only where the Poets do not suit
with his design; for in another place you will find this same Shakespeare, that
was before too guilty to make an Evidence, a very civil person new; for the
Reformer is troubled with Fits, you must know, disturbances in the brain, which
makes him forget one hour (...) he rails at another, Coll. p. 154
for here now Shakespeare's Falstaff is called the ad^^^d, because he is to
serve his turn. And that the Poet was not so partial as to let his humor
compound for his l^^^dness, but punishes him at last, the he makes him all hi^
life time a da^nab^e s^^^ty fellow. And now, I think, having said enough of his
modest behavior, twon't be amiss to have a touch or two at his Hypocrisy. And
first, concerning the word Smu^^.

Smutt, Smutt! Why does this tarmagant Correcter of our Lives and Manners
pretend to make us believe that his Mouth or Conscience is so straight, that
the t other word cannot get pa^sage, or did his Mi^^ress (honorable I mean) sit
knotting under his Nose when he was writing, and so gave occasion for the
changing it instead of Bawdy, that that odious word might not offend her, tho
the Phrase was made No^sence by it -- hum -- No faith, the case seems to me now
to be quite otherwise, and really the effect of downright Hypocrisy, unless
d^^e ^^ I said for the last reason; for those that have read his Book, may find
sprinkling up and down the other words extremely plain upon occasion, Ribaldry
and Bawdy, and Whores, and Whoring, and Strumpets, and Cu^koldmakers, with as
fat a ^ignification as any of the last named could with for their hearts;
Collier, p* 30, 31.
for example, by way of Tract, first, he says, Euripides in his Hipolitus,
calls Whoring stupidness and playing the fool; and secondly, does Ribaldry,
(not Smut) and Nonsense become the dignity of their station. p. 74.
Again, Berinthia incourages Amanda to play the Whore; and then sowse upon Don
Quixot, when there is not so much as one little tiny todpol of Smut, p. 208.
that I know of, unless he creates it -- Yet I am Crambo'd with, who, with low,
nauseous Bawdry fills his Plays. Again speaking of Jupiter and Aclmena -- but
her Lover -- that is her Whoremaster. And at last with a Rowzer upon Mr
Congreeve's Double Dealer, where he particularly Remarks, that there are but
four Ladies in his Play, and three of em are Whores; adding, withal, that it is
a great Compliment to Quality, to tell em there is but a quarter of 'em honest.
Why who, in the name of Diana, and all the rest of the Maiden Goddesses, does
tell 'em so, unless it be Doctor Crambo here -- If any one calls 'em Whores it is
he, he that by an assumed Authority thinks he may say any thing; the Ladies, I
dare say for the Poet, were dressed in such clean Linen, and were so far from
being Tawdry, that no Scrutineer but our severe Master of Art but would have
thought Charitably of 'em. Well, but huge Rampant Whores they must be with him
tho, and through that very mouth that simper'd and primm'd before, as if such a
filthy word could not possibly break through: It comes out now in sound and
emphasis, and the m^dest Pen is as prone and ready to write it. So that I once
more affirm, that if it were not done in respect to his Lady, who, no doubt,
peruses him extremely, it must naturally be the effect of ^^po^risie, for, to
be squeamish in one place and not in another is Ridicu^^us, especially when one
word is Innocent in its kind, and makes the sense, and the other when used
makes it wretched Affectation, and almost Nonsense.

Now if the Absolver thought Affectation would appear a virtue in him, he ought
to have squeamifyed the beforementioned Ladies with some title that was new,
and if Smutt was chosen to be his ^ine darling word (and the course one of
Whores slipped out of his Mouth, or from his Pen, by misfortune or chance) he
should, in my opinion, have given 'em the title of Smutters: a primming neat
word extremely proper for the occasion: And I hope I shall ^ive to see the
Master of Art have Modesty enough to thank me for it; or else (for my fancy
would fain oblige him if it could) to make it yet more German to the matter, as
Shakespeare has it, to call 'em Colliers would be as significant as any thing;
for there^s allusion enough to Smutt, or the Devil's in it: For, to deal
sincerely, and without Hypocrisy, I cannot imagine what this learned Gentleman
can mean by all that Smutt, Smutt, when the other word is as decent and more
significant, unless he banters, or dissembles, or feared the Ladies peeping, or
is so full of his own name, that he goes alon^ quib^ling upon it through his
Book, with design that way to make himself more famous.

In another part of his Treatise too I fancy I find the Hypocrite a great deal
more than the Moralist, and that is, in his ^ecking at a word in one place, and
gobbling it up in another. To prove this, I find him very like a Ghostly Father
of the old Roman Kidney, condemning even to the Inqui^i^ion: One Carlos in M^
Dryden's Love Triumphant, for blundring out this horrible Expression, Collier,
p. 82.
as he calls it, Nature has given me my portion of Sense, with a Pox to her.
Now pray observe, the Absolvers Stomach is so horribly squeamish, at this he
belches, turns pale, and is so very sick, that a quartern of Cherry is
administered in vain, to set him to rights; he prints instead of the word only a
great P -- and tells the gentle Reader, (that he is intending to lead by the
Nose) that the Hellish syllable may be found there at length if he pleases.
Would not any one think now, that did not know that the Small Pox is a common
Disease, that this word had been Blasphemy in the extremity, the renouncing the
Deity, or something beyond pardon, and would not one lay a Scholars Egg against
a To^t and Ale, that the Doctor would never be concerned with it as long as he
was able to eat or drink either of 'em. Why see now how an honest man may be
cheated; do but turn to the one hundred seventy second page of his Book, and
you will find this horrible, this hellish, syllable, in its Pontificallibus, at
length, sitting almost a straddle upon the top of the Page, Collier, p. 172.
and used familiarly and friendly, without so much as once kacking at it, or
one invective near it, tho the sense of the Curse is as broad as t other, and
has rather the worse signification.

And pray what can this be else but Hypocrisy; if the word were really
terrifying and horrible to him, it would certainly be so in one place as well
as another. No, no, ^hese are only ^lights and amusements, tricks of his own
stud^ed Legerdemain, to make the bubbled ignorants believe him a Saint, and
admire his Divinity, when, if they could dive to the bottom ^f the secret, it is
solemnly believed by many of the dutiful Sons of the Church, that our
Sham-reformer is a much fitter man to win Money by his skill at a game of Whisk
and Swi^^bers, than as the case of Allegiance and Morality, stand with him, to
win Souls from Reprobation by the Integrity of his Principles.

I must treat ye with one instance more of his Hypecrisie, and then I pass on
to another Head. This instance I find Mr. Vanbrook has taken particular notice
of at the latter end of his Book, where, it is true, every one may see the
Absolvers Foible is very plain, but that Author has not made the Case parallel
with the others Remark upon Mr. Congreve s Comedy the Old Bachelor, which
shows his contradiction of himself, and his fallacy undeniable, Collier, p. 63.
for there he seems to roar at young Belmour for his forgetfulness of Religion,
at a minute when he is desiring Laetitia to give him leave to swear by her Lips
and Eyes, when he is kissing and telling her, Eternity was in that moment. In
short, when he has got her fast in his Arms, and intends to go through stitch
with the matter; for which he calls the Lady Strumpet, and raves at the
smuttiness of the Action; and yet, a little while after, in another page,
rallies, jokes upon, and banters young Worthy in the Relapse, for letting his
Lady slip through his fingers, Collier, p. 227.
and calls him a Town-Spark, and a Platonic Fool for it. Hey Jingo, here s
Riddling for ye! what would this whimsical Gentleman be at? first he rails at a
Lover for holding a pretty Woman fast, and then he jokes upon him for letting
her go; this runs almost parallel with the Fable of the Satyr and the
Traveller; but if the Doctor is observed to have the faculty of blowing hot and
cold thus, I believe he may keep his breath either to cool his Porridge, or to
warm his Fingers, and be much better employ^d, than by using it to make any
Proselytes to his Doctrine; and so much for this Head. Now let us try if we can
scratch another, and find it out under his Nightcap of

IMMORALITY.
It is not enough to prove a Man is a Moralist, only because he is noted for a
Regular Life; that may be one good instance indeed, but it can never arrive to
a proof of the whole, for his living Soberly, and by Rule, may as well be
caused by the defect of his Constitution, as by the effect of his Inclination,
but it is the Spirit and Will, by the fire of whose other Virtues, this of
Morality is kindled and illustrated. Now I will not be so biased by other
Peoples opinions that know him, to say, That our devout Critic owes his
seeming Piety, and good Life, to his ill habit of Body, nor will I load him
with Abuse, right or wrong, as he has done me, particularly through a whole
Chapter, but leave that charitably to natural Conscience, or studied Artifice,
which he pleases, and only reflect a little on the temper of his Mind, as I
have found it blazing in this last, as well as others of his Books. In the
first place, if Stubbornness, which causes wrong opinion of the present Regal
Authority and Government, is an immoral Vice, if he is not tainted, I know not
who is; for let any one, who is not blinded with Partiality, but read his
Desertion Discuss^d, with the admirable Answer to it, and I am satisfied he
cannot help joining with me in this opinion, That what he would insinuate to be
the effect of Right in others, and of Conscience in himself, is nothing but the
effect of Error in one, and Obstinacy and Stubborn Will in the other, a humor
resolved to defend and carry on a hot Argument, though it has been never so plain
and reasonably confuted: the Positions and Answers on this subject I shall not
insert here, but leave the Reader, whose curiosity obliges him, to the Papers
themselves, only I wish the Absolver had made Newgate the last Scene of that
part of his Immorality, and by an humble acknowledgment to his Patron that
redeemed him, (I hope the word will bear in this place) have spar^d his Office
of Absolution in another Scene, and consequently given no occasion to believe
that his disobedient humor, and turbulent nature, still proceeds daily, to
cultivate his Party with the same Principles as far as he can.

Another spice of Immorality I believe I can make appear by his Pride, and though
in other places it is to be found, yet is most fairly instanced in his Book of
Essays, where, though we find one Chapter wholly upon that Vice, which, to show
his Justice, begins with a Compliment upon the same Iuvenal, now he has use for
him whom he called Pimp before, yet it has not bulk enough to Skreen from us
his haughtiness in another, which he calls the Office of a Chaplain, for there
you shall find he has collected the Spirit of them all, and blended them into
one Character; I mean the ill Spirits of the ill Chaplains, those that are good
I honor. Here you may find his Likeness in Don Quixot, Roger in the Scornful
Lady, Bull in the Relapse, Say-grace, Cuff-cushion, and others, all learning
their Lessons of their stubborn Superior our Reformer, and all tending to
governing, brow-beating, snubbing, commanding Families, and the like, but not
one word of humility tacked to it, for fear of spoiling the Character; there you
may find 24 pages, one after another, all written to prove most gloriously,
that it is impossible for a Chaplain to be a Servant; that though you find a poor
fellow in a tattered Excommunicated Gown with one sleeve, Shoes without heels,
miserable Antichristian breeches, with some two dozen of creepers brooding in
the seams; and though you, take him charitably to your House, feed, clothe, and
give him wages, yet he belongs only to God, and not you, and you must not think
him your Domestic, but your Superior. Why, what a Scheme is here laid for
Vanity and Folly, and how much more shining and beautiful does gratitude and
humility appear in such a Depender, than such a bloated opinion as this? Would
any honest Gentleman, that has his senses, show his Indulgence and Generosity
to Wit or Learning, on such terms as these? And does not this Chapter show more
the Spirit of Pride in our Absolver, relating to his own humor, than the
veneration he has for the Clergy, or the Justice he would seem to do them in
it? I dare affirm, most of them are against this Opinion, at least I^m sure all
the modest part are, who cannot but own themselves subservient to their Patrons
that maintain them, though at the same time they are Ministers of Gods holy Words
and Sacraments. Office of a Chaplain, p. 178.
Yet he busfly goes on, He is Gods Minister, not Man's Servant. And a little way
further, he clenches this admirable Notion through and through; therefore, says
he, for a Patron to account such a Consecrated Person, as if he belonged to him
as a Servant, is in effect to challenge Divine Honors, Ib. p. 185.
and set himself up for a God. Here^s Ambition, here^s Persecution, here is old
Bonner for ye. Now by his Hollidame, for I cannot forbear that Oath now, what
can a squeamish Critic, that would make Remarks upon the Remarker call this?
But stay, he is at it again, Collier, p. 113.
Dolopion, says he, was Priest to S^amander, and regarded like the God he
belonged to. Pray mind him, the Priest was worshipped equal with the God -- oh
rare Moralist -- i^ ^e were, 'twas an Egyptian Worship, where only Calves and
Apes, and Carrots and Onions, were Gods. But pray let us see a little, h^^ not
this Divine quotation a rang of Blasphemy in it? Oh si^, no; what, the Moralist!
Reformer of Vices! speak Blasphemy* Impossible! he cannot ^ure! Yes, yes, he
may, when he thinks no body can find him out: and faith, to my sense now, this
smells as rank of Pandaemonium, of fire and brimstone, to the full, if not
wo^^^, Absalom and A^^it. Collier, p. 184.
than Mr. Dryden's Verse, Whether inspired with a Diviner Lust his Father got
him, etc. which is spoken only in the figurative Person of David; yet he says
it is downright defiance of the Living God, and the very Essence and Spirit of
Blasphemy. And here now his Stomach wamb^^^ more ^^^^ly ^han before; so that if
his Friend were by, he mu^^ (...) hold the Basin. Oh me! he reaches and
reaches, and (...) u^ (...) -- eg^ -- I question whether -- egh -- the torments
and (...) of the D^^n'd -- egh -- dare venture at such flights as th^se. And
^ow (...) being held by the same hand, at two reaches (...) up, (...) with ^
^^ncture of old Bonner again -- egh -- ^span thing to writing these Impieties
-- egh -- (...) And ^ow (...) it is over, leaving us to imagine what rare Church
Discipline ^e should have, if this G^^^leman, and his Cat (...) Tails, were in
Power; I think a Couplet or two here, by way of Advice to (...), is not
improper. Your Tribe sh^^^d (...) be in Opinion steady,
Weesils, p. 11.
N^r turn or (...) Power or ^^r Place,
^or (...) in Spiri^^^^ Gra^e.
The Gifts of Mammon you should (...) implore,
Nor wish for Gold, unless to give the Poor;
It makes your A^t contemptible appear,
Less followed too, and look^d into more near;
For if all those that preach up Paradise,
Will have their shares of every human Vice,
They shall Cant long enough e're I believe,
Or pin my Soul's Salvation on their sleeve.
Here now, (...) ^ne* but I shall make our Reformer fall into another sit, by
pretending (...) him, or take his Office of Ordinary upon my self; Collier, p.
138.
for in page 138. (...) not give us that leave, What, is the Pulpit under the
Discipline of the (...)? And are those ^it to (...) the Church, that are not
fit to come into it? (...) Doctor, rub your eyes a little, and see what the
Vindicator of the Stage says, quoting Divine Herbert: A Verse may find him who
a Sermon flies,
And turn delight into a Sacrifice.
Besides I do assure you, spite of your Ghostly Authority, and Uncharitable
Position, that we are not fit, we will come in, and not only imbibe the Mystery
of Divinity from the Pulpit, but un^^ddle the Mystery of Iniquity, if we can
find any there. Ben Johnson found out Ananias and Rabby Buisy; Fletcher,
Hypocritical Roger, Shakespeare, Sir John of Wrotham; Congreve, Say-grace;
Vanbrook, Bull; Shadwell, Smirk* and if Durfey can find out a proud, stubborn,
immoral The Chaplains (...) in Don Quixot.
Bernard, one, that when he was a Country Curate, would not let the Children be
brought to Church to be Christened for some odd Iesuitical Reasons best known to
himself, he shall presume to draw his Picture, tho the Absolver drop another
Chapter of Abuse upon him for so doing.

We find, for many Ages past, Poets have enjoyed this Privilege; our Prince of
Poets, Chaucer, had so much to do in this kind, that we find him weary himself,
and loath to weary others with it. Of Freers I have told before,
In a making of a Creed, Chaucer.

And yet I cold tell worse, or more,
But Men would werien it to read.
This I think is pithy, but here again I think his Counsel to them is much
better. Fly fro the Prease and dwell with soothfastness,
Suffice unto thy good, tho it be small,
For horde has, and climbing tickleness,
Prease has Envy, and well is blent ore all;
Savor no more then thee behove shall,
Read well thy self that other folk can read,
And troth thee shall deliver it is no dread.
Now if he be Moral enough to take old Chaucer's Advice I shall be glad; and so
much for that subject. There is nothing now remains, before I come to vindicate
Don Quixot, but a large Remark of his, upon the little or no swearing in Plays,
which commonly is only a kind of an Interjection, as gad, I cod, oonz, etc.
which I don't defend neither, and if any others have carelessly past the Press
I Am sorry for it, for I hate them as much as he, yet because the Doctor has
quoted the Statute Law against it and Players, to slander on one side, though to
reform on the other, I will in return quote another piece of Law relating to
Oaths, extremely for his advantage, for there is only this quibbling difference
between us, It Is a fault in us in swearing when we should not, and in him for
not swearing when he should; but that now he may have occasion to say my
Civilities are particular to him, I will make him do it.

I J. C. do sincerely promise and swear, that I will be faithful, and bear true
Allegiance to His Majesty King William: And I do swear that I do, from my
heart, abhor, detest and abjure, as Impious and Heretical, that damnable
Doctrine and Position, that Princes excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, or
any Authority of the Sea of Rome, may be Deposed or Murther^d by their
Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

And I do declare that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate,
has, or ought to have, any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Preeminence or
Authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within this Realm. So help me God.

This now, with a sincerity proper, and coming to Church to hear our Divine
Service, with the Prayer for the King in^t, would give one a little
satisfaction as to the Doctors present opinion, for what he has been, if you
will but examine and scan it by his Book, tho it be a Reforming ^ook, is I am
sure very disputable; in one Page of it he seems very zealous for the
Protestant Reformation, and says, being very much piqu'd at Sir John Brute's
putting on a Clergy-man's Habit in the Provoked Wife, Col^^er, p. 1^8.
that the Church of England, he means the Men in her, is the only communion in
the world, that will endure such insolences as these; and thi^, ^ho it ^e
s^mewhat Bonnerish again, and Switcher-like, ye^ how^ver seems to ^^er of our
side; but then presently in another place he^s as zealous for the Roman Sect,
and Jesuitically condemns a little wholesome satyr in the Character of a
pampered hypocritical covetous Spanish Friar, Collier, p. 98.
for incivility in making him a Pimp to Lorenzo, and is very angry at the
Author for calling this virtuous person a parcel of holy Guts and Garbidge, and
telling him that he has room in his Belly for his Church-steeple; and here his
Lash is up again for abusing them -- oh -- if Doctor Absolution were Inquisitor
general, and a Satyrist against Priests came under his hand, mercy upon us, how
that poor Rascal would be flaug'd, for I find it is only the person of the
Priest that he would have reverenced, let his opinion be what it will; nay, tho
he were a Priest of Baal, as may be proved a little further, for here his Zeal
shows itself not only for Christians, Collier, p ^1.
but the very Turks too; and cavils again with Iacinta, in the Mock Astrologer,
for jesting with Alla, and honest Mahomet, for he was a Brother Priest too: But
stay, what is worst of all, have but patience to walk to another Page, and here
you will find him just sinking into a downright doze and despondency, whither
he had best set up for any Religion at all, or at least for one very
indifferent.

Collier, p. 28.
Our Poets, I suppose, would call this Preaching, and think it a dull business;
however, I cannot forbear saying, an honest Heathen is none of the worst men, a
very indifferent Religion well believed, will go a great way -- Will it so,
pray friends de'e not think our hot reforming Gentleman is very Lukewarm here,
or not a little craz^d when he writ this, or, as the vulgar have it, was not
his mighty Wit run a Wool-gathering; for if he be for Protestantism, and
Popery, and then whip -- amongst the Bens of the Arabians for Alla and Mahomet,
and at last for little or no Religion at all, I Am afraid I shall never bring my
self to be reformed by him. And so at him again W^esil. For who with Reason, if
this be your way,
Weesils.
Will ever value what you Preach or Pray.


But now I think I have said enough for the Plays, whose Authors are much
better able to speak for themselves; and therefore will fall off to vindicate
my self a little, and my Acquaintance Don Quixot; in which I will endeavor to
prove another Immoral Vice in our Stage-Reformer, which is

Injustice and Error in Criticism.
And first, his Injustice appears by his ungentlemanlike exposing me and others
by name, upon a scandalous occasion (as he endeavors to make it) without any
Injury done by me to him, or ever giving him any provocation, or the Play's any
way deserving it. Oh, but he will say his Conscience urged him to do it -- No --
not a jot; 'twas dear darling Interest, in good faith, as shall hereafter
appear; but in the mean time I am planted upon the shoulders of a Giant, which
is the Ingenious Author ^f the History of Don Quixote; and there indeed he
guesses right, the (...) ^nows nothing of him or of his History, as I will
prove by and by, (...) confidently, and Absolver-like, he ranges his objections
under three heads, which are every one malicious and false, viz.

First, The Profaneness, with respect to Religion and the Holy Scriptures.

Secondly, The Abuse of the Clergy.

Thirdly, The want of Modesty, and Regard to the Audience. Well, to prove the
Profaneness, he first instances a bold Song of mine, as he calls it, against
Providence; four of the last lines of which he is only pleas^d to show ye. But
Providence, D Quix. p. 1. p. 20.
that formed the fair
In such a charming skin,
Their outside made its only care,
And never looked within.
Here, Collier p. 97.
says he, the Poet tells ye Providence makes Mankind by halves, huddles up the
Soul, and takes the least care of the better Moiety; this is direct blaspheming
the Creation, and a Satyr upon God Almighty. Why, now this, I confess, is
enough to provoke some heat in a fellow of my Constitution, to hear this
Religious Raving; but yet it looks so like Oliver's, Porter's in Bedlam, that I
will be calm, and patiently holding up my hand, plead Not Guilty -- to all of
these objections. But first, pray why does he foyst in the word Mankind here to
express the Female Sex, when the other word is so much more proper. I did intend
indeed a small Satyr upon Womankind, pursuant to Marcella^s Character, and he
has varied from that word, I suppose, to amuse the Reader -- I^ll give ye the
whole Stanza. Did coy Marcella own a Soul
As beauteous as her Eyes,
Her Judgment would her Sense control,
And teach her how to prize.
But Providence, that form^d the fair
In such a charming Skin,
Their outside made its only care,
And never looked within.


I only rally a pretty coy wench here for her sullen ill nature, without any
Satyr on the Deity, or any thing like it; for as to the Blasphemy, as he calls
it, by naming the word Providence, it is generally intended in Lyrical Poetry
for Goddess Nature, or Fortune, as Mr Vanbrooke notes; but never applied
seriously to the true Deity, but only by Dr Crambo. How often have we this
phrase in Poetry, Nature has made her Body charming; see her bright E^es, the
charming gifts of Nature, etc. making use still of the second cause instead of
the first, which we yet know to be the original of all. And it is no more
Blasphemy to say that Providence took more care of a perverse beautiful Woman's
Body than her Soul, than it is to say that the Sun made a gay Tulip flourish in
a Garden to delight the Eye, not caring threepence tho it never smelt so sweet
as a Province Rose.

But I have a Rigid Critic and a Severe Inquisitor to deal with -- He will
have a Satyr upon the true Deity, tho I intend nothing of it. And to go on, my
next advance he says is to Droll upon the Resurrection; and to prove it,
squirts out these two lines, which are picked out of twenty -- which he thinks
are fit for his purpose -- Ibid.
Sleep and Indulge thy self with rest,
Nor dream thou e're shall rise again.
Now you must know this Song was designed a solemn piece of Morality, and sung
as a Requiem or Dirge at the Funeral of Ambrosio -- A young Gentleman that died
for Love of the aforesaid Marcella -- You shall have it all, that you may judge
what Drolling is in it. (1.)
Sleep, sleep, poor Youth, sleep, sleep in peace,
D. Quix. p 20.
Relieved from Love, and mortal care,
Whilst we that pine in Life's disease,
Uncertain blessed, less happy are.
(2.)
Couched in the dark and silent Grave,
No ills of Fate thou now can fear;
No more shall Tyrant Power inslave,
Or scornful Beauty be severe.
(3.)
Wars, that do fatal Storms disperse,
Far from thy happy Mansion keep:
Earthquakes, that shake the Universe,
Cannot rock thee into sounder sleep.
(4.)
With all the Charms of Peace possessed,
Secured from Life's tormentor, Pain:
Sleep and indulge thy self with rest,
Nor dream thou e're shall rise again.
(5.)
Past are the Pangs of fear and doubt,
The Sun is from the Dial gone,
The Sands are sunk, the Glass is out,
The folly of the Farce is done.
Now will I be judged by any reasonable Man, if these words comparatively are
not setter for an Anthem than a Droll, but the Reformers way of doing me
Justice, is to take bits and morsels out of things, that for want of the
connection, they may consequently appear ridiculous, as here he does. Again, in
his third obj^^t^on against my third Song, where he says -- I, (that is in my
own person) make a jest of the Fall, rail at Adam and Eve; and then Oliver^
Porter raving again, says, I burlesque the Conduct of God Almighty; Ibid.
now, pray judge whether it ought to be Construed so or no. This Song is
supposed to be made and sung by Gines de Passamonte, a most notorious
Atheistical Villain, who, as he is going Chained to the Galleys, is redeemed
from them by Don Quixot in his frantic fit; after which, being extremely
pleased at the success, he, to make his deliverer merry, entertains him with
this Vindication of a Rogue, which is indeed a Satyr upon Humanity in general.
I will add again to our Critics morsel, for he notes but the four first lines
in a place, and give ye one whole Stanza. When the World first knew Creation,
A Rogue was a Top profession;
When there were no more
In all Nature but four,
There were two of 'em in Transgression.
And the seeds are no less
Since that we may guess,
But have in all Ages bin growing apace;
And Lying and Th^^^ing,
Craft, Pride and D^^^iving,
Rage, Murder and (...),
Rape, Incest and (...),
Branch out from Stock, the rank Vices in vogue,
And make all Mankind one Gigantical Rogue.
And so on: Now tho I grant this might be looked on as profane in it self,
without application, yet when spoken by one of his Character, whom I design to
expose, it is no more than natural Character, and has so little the quality of
Prohaneness, that my impartial Reader will find a very good Moral in it, by the
odious representation of such Atheistical impudence; yet our good natur^d
Critic makes me the Prophaner. He, crammed full of wonderful Justice, makes me
the Vice my self, that only act the true duty of a Poet, and hold up the Glass
for others to see their Vices in, but his Malice will not be Authentic with
every one, no more than his next Addle Criticism, upon my using the word
Redeemer will bear the Test; for he that will argue that that word may not be
innocently spoken in Temporal Matters, because it is sometimes used as a Divine
Attribute, will prove himself rather a Coxcomb than a C^suist: And yet for only
this poor word the Cat with Nine Tails are up again, and the Inquisitor in a
rage cries out, these insolences are too big for the Correction of a Pen.
Collier, p. 198.
Very fine, what horrible correction this deserves, is easily judged, and I
believe 'twill be owned too, that if Doctor Absolution (when the charitable
Prelates good Nature and Purse got him out of his Stone Apartment yonder, into
which his bigoted obstinacy and not his tender Conscience had thrown him) did
not think him his Redeemer, and thank him as his Redeemer, he does not only
deserve Correction for his wicked ingratitude. (which especially in one of his
Coat, is an immoral Cheat upon Heaven) but to have the same punishment that
another of his Coat and Kidney lately had, for a Cheat upon the Government and
People.

But to go on: In the next place he finds fault with my making sport with Hell,
and recites six Lines, which are made of Dogril Stuff, on purpose by the Duke's
Servants, who, for his diversion, Acting a kind of Farce are to fright Sancho
with Goblings and Furies -- but to show his own Wit in the first Onset here, he
has notably made the two first Lines half nonsense. Coll^er, p. 198.
Appear ye fat Fiends that in Limbo do groan,
That were, when in flesh, the same Souls as his own.


Instead of -- that wore when in flesh, etc. You that always in Lucifer's
Kitchen reside,
Amongst Sea-coal and Kettles, and Grease newly Tried,
That pamper^d each day with the Garbidge of Souls,
Broil Rashers of Fools for a Breakfast on Coals.
Words adapted only to Sancho^s Clownship, course Breeding and Kitchen
Profession, and with no more intent of Impiety in them, than if one should put
on a Devils Vizard to play with a Child, does he note again as horrible
Profaneness, and says he does me no wrong in it; now if he insists that Hell is
too serious a thing to ridicule, why, perhaps, I think so too, in its Intense
quality; but to act a Goblin, a Ghost, a Frog, or a Fury, and to sing to a
Country Clown of such Bugbear matters, only to cause a little Diversion in a
Noblemans House, has always been very customary, especially at Festivals, and
far from being thought to ridicule the main matter. The Absolver, to turn back
a little, affirms indeed, That those that bring Devils upon the Stage, Collier,
p. 189.
can hardly believe them any where else; but I can give an instance, that our
famous Ben Johnson, who I will believe had a Conscience as good as the Doctors,
and who lived in as Pious an Age, Vid. Devil's an Ass, p. 9.
in his Comedy called the Devil^s an Ass, makes his first Scene a Solemn Hell,
where Lucifer sits in State with all his Privy Council about him: and when he
makes an under Pu^ there beaten and fooled by a Clod-pared Squire and his
wanton Wife, the Audience took the Representation morally, and never keck'd at
the matter. Nay, Milton, though upon his sacred Subject, comes very near the same
thing too; but we must not laugh at silly Sancho, nor put on a Devils face to
fright him, but we must be disciplined; nay, more, Presented for it. Here, tho^
I digress a little, I cannot forbear telling some, that were too busy in doing
that Office, that it is more easy to accuse our Writings for Blasphemous, than
to prove them to be so. To detect us indeed fairly, and prove it upon us, would
deserve severe Chastisement; but if it be mistake, and our reputations are
injured by Rashness and Injustice, or Ignorance, reflection upon it is at least
reasonable, and just reproof I think not improper. But to go on; my next fault
is the Ass that is brought upon the Stage in the Epilogue, with two lines
alluding to Balaam's. And as it is said a Parlous Ass once spoke,
When Crab-tree Cudgel did his rage provoke, etc.
Here he says, I brought the Ass in only to laugh at the Miracle: Not I, truly,
Collier, p. 199.
I had no such intention upon my word; I brought the Ass in, and Dogget upon
him, only to make the Audience laugh at his figure at the end of the Play, as
well as they had at the beginning; but I believe if I had put an Absolver upon
his back, giving him a Blessing, it would have been more divertive by half; but
let him alone, the next horrible Crime is, I meddle with Churchmen, and there
my malice makes me, he says, lay about me like a Kright Errant; but I believe I
shall prove, for all the modesty he pretends to, Collier, p. 200.
that his malice is more in reference to Poets, than ever mine was to
Churchmen. Well, my Second Part begins, he says, with the Devil's being brought
upon the Stage, who cries, As he hopes to be saved; and Sancho warrants him a
good Christian. Now this is a ridiculous mistake, for this Devil is only a
Butler, and a Jest of his Giants, the witty Author of the History of Don
Quixot, where one of the Dukes Servants acting a Devils Part to fright the
Knight and Squire, blunders it out before he is aware, and Sancho hearing it,
as foolishly replies. This would be humorously witty now with any one but our
Critic; but he^s resolv^d to see double, as he does p^^^ently again with my
deep-mouth^d swearing which he says is frequent, though he has quoted none on it,
and therefore the Reader is not oblig^d to believe him. But then I have made
the Curate Perez assist at the ridiculous Ceremony of Don Quixot; I have so --
what then? -- but I have made him have wit enough, however, to know Don Quixot
for a Madman; but then Sancho, by way of Proverb, tells him, Ah -- consider
dear Sir, no Man is born wise: Collier, Ibid.
to which briskly replies the Doctor, What if he were born wise, he might be
bred a Fool. Faith, n^ Doctor; and to be free with ye (^n Raillere) as you have
been with me, I must beg leave to tell ye, If you had been born wise enough to
be a Reformer, your Breeding could never have made ye Fool enough to be an
Absolver; I mean in a Case like you know what; but let us proceed. The next is
a swinger, and his Lash cuts even to the blood; for here Sancho, full of
innocent simplicity, says, A Bishop is no more than another Man, without Grace
and good Breeding. Ibid.
To which he presently darts out, I must needs say, if the Poet had any share
of either of these Qualities, he would be less bold with his Superiors, and not
give his Clowns the liberty to Droll thus heavily upon a solemn Character. Why,
faith, now this is very hard, I have known a Country Wench name a Bishop in the
Burning-too of a Hasty-Pudding, and never heard that any of the Reverend took
it ill, because it was a Common Saying, and below their notice. But poor
Sancho, or rather indeed Sancho's Poet, my self, must be corrected for it, tho^
the Phrase be Moral, and no more than an honest truth: But come, since it must
be so, let me ask the Doctor why he does not show me an example for this
himself, and Practice better before he Accuses; for let the Read er look into
his Desertion Discuss^d (for he shall find that I have traced him through all
his Writings) and page the 3d you will find him, I think, somewhat more guilty
of this fault than I have been, for there you^ll see he insolently affirms,
Desertion. Discussed, Anno 1688.
That the Succession cannot be interrupted by an Act of Parliament, especially
when the Royal Assent is given by a King de Facto, and not de Jure. And again;
though this next is hinted covertly, with the meaning disguised, yet Sir William
Temple in his Memoirs, page 295. and the aforesaid Vindicater of the Stage, as
well as my self, have observed, that the Absolver, in the first Volume of his
Essays, page 120. in his Chapter of the Aspect, Essays, p. 120.
tells us, Whether the honesty or dishonesty are discernable in the face, is a
question which admits of dispute; King Charles the Second thought he could
depend upon these Observations, but, with submission, I believe an instance
might be given, in which his Rules of Physiog^omy failed. Now I Am sure the
first is insolently plain, and the next shows enough to let us into his
meaning; which granted, I think I may say, he ought to be less bold with his
Superiors too, and not give himself the liberty to treat at this rate, not only
a Solemn, but a Royal Character. Well, the next is, I, (naming me) take care to
tell ye, that Sancho is a dry shrewd Country f^llow in his Character, because
he blunders out Pro^erbs upon all occasions, tho never so far from the purpose
-- and merrily drolls upon me for making blundering and talking nothing to the
purpose, an argument of shrewdness -- Why truly, I must confess to the Doctor,
there is no great matter in that Argument, and not much whither there be or no
-- But, as unperforming as I am, I fancy I shall find as great ^a Blunder in
his ^^^formance presently -- We ought to be just in our Looks, Essays p. 118.
as well as in o^^ Actions, says he in his Essays, for the mind may be declared
one way no (...) than the other: A man might as good b^eak his Word as his
Face, especia^^^ upon some Critical occasions. Now what he means by a man's
breaking hi^ Face there, unless he is to run his Nose against a Post, I cannot
imagine; and therefore will set it down for a Blunder -- And so there is Ti^ for
Tat, and the Dice in my hand still. But poor Sancho is horribly unfortunate
again, (...) by and by he catches him answering the Cura^^, who threatens him
for calling him Finish^^ of Fornica^ion, and Conjunction Copulative, with
Excommunication, Collier, p. 201.
I care not if you do, says Sancho, I shall lose nothing by it but my ^ap in an
afternoon. Why truly this might be thought a little saw^y from one in Trowsers,
to one in a Ca^s^^^, especially as the Refor^^r would have him reverenced. But
perhaps this Pragmatical Curate Perez was some Non-Iuror, and poor Sancho did
not think he should profit by his Doctrine; and then the honest fellow was much
in the right. This puts me in mind of a passage in one of Mr Crown's Comedies,
where a fu^^^ Joyner is rallying with a Doctor of no very good Reputation too;
Sirrah, Sirrah, says the Doctor, I shall have your Ears -- No, no, says
^^izzel, never when you Preach, Doctor. Our Absolver may apply this now as he
pleases.

And here are a bundle of faults together -- Iodolet, another Priest, is called
holy Cormorant, Ibid.
only because he eats a Turkey, and drinks a Bottle or two of Malaga for his
Breakfast; and the Poet is jerk'd because a gormandizing Romish Priest is
called a Pimp again; and the Duke's Steward, Manuel, is no witty pleasant
fellow, because he calls the Chaplain, whom I mentioned in the beginning of my
Preface, and who is, no doubt, the sole occasion of this Gentleman's Pique to
me -- Mr Cuff-cushion; and because having an insight into his Character, he
tells him, Ibid
a Whore is a Pulpit he loves* but my hope is, that my Reader will think him no
fool for this, tho the Carper does, who then tells the Chaplain Sa^grace, and
he supposes prays to God to bless the entertainment of the Devil, tho there is
not a word of a Grace spoke at all; and after, when he grows hot, positive, and
impertinent, which the Duke his Patron being at Table, only bears with, to
divert himself, he insolently calls Don ^uixot, Don Coxcomb, who justly
enraged, returns him this Language: Collier, p. 202.
Oh thou vile black Fox, with a Firebrand in thy Tail, thou very Priest, thou
kindler of all Mischiefs in all Nations, de'e (...) Homily, did not the
reverence I bear these Nobles -- I would so thr^^ our Cassock, you Church
Vermin -- Here now, to show his Justice he sli^^^ ^^^ps and gives a dash, so
makes it Nonsense, but I shall make bold to piece it out again. Did not the
reverence I bear these Nobles, tie up my hands from doing my self Justice, I
would so thrum your Cassock you Church Vermin -- Now, because my Reader shall
find that I have naturally pursued the character of this Chaplain, as Don
Quixot's Historian has presented him to me, Shelton's Transplati^n of the
History of D. (...) Chap. 3^. p. ^^^.
you shall hear what account he gives of him. Here is, says he, a good
Character of a poor Pedant; one of them that govern great men's Houses, one of
those, that as they are not born Noble, so they know not how to instruct those
that are; ^ne of those, that would have great m^n^s Liberality measur^d by the
streightness of their own Minds; one of those, that teaching those they govern
to be frugal, would make 'em miserable. Now this considerable person as you
find him here, who was indeed for his senseless humor of designing to govern
-- us^d no otherwise than as the Buffo^n of the Family-takes upon him to call
Don Quixot (whom the Author imb^^lishes, with all manner of learning and good
sense, bating his whimsical Chim^^ra of Kight Errantry) Goodman Dulpate and Don
Coxcomb. Well, however the Switcher here has escap^d for his usuge of a
Gentlemen in or near this manner, I believe my Judges will agree, that my
Knight was so far from injuring the saucy Trenc^er^^y* by the reply he give
him, that if he had not known and practiced g^od breeding, better than the
other, he would have broke his head into the bargain. As for his bidding him
adi^u in Language too profane and scandalous for our Reformer to relate, is
impossible, for he has proved often enough the contrary of that in his Book
already. But for the Song in the Fourth Act, where the Country Fellow says,
Folks never mind now what those black Cattle say: Ibid.
He is only supposed for another Bumpkin, that amongst the rest of the
Parishoners, had found out the Parsons blind side, and so behind his back took
occasion to put a joke upon him, as well as the rest in that Satyr mentioned.

And now his third place is to prove my want of Modesty, and regard to the
Audience -- And here he is chewing his savoury word Smutt again, Collier, p. 203.
and says Sancho and Teresa talk it broad; but since his Modesty has not quoted
it, I hope my Reader will believe so well of mine, to think I have not written
it; I assure him I don't know of any. And I have proved our Reformer can
mistake, as he does of Marcellas Epilogue, who Raves, he says, with Raptures of
Indecency, when the poor Creature is so cold, after her hot fit, that she
rather wants a dram of the Bottle -- But now, Bounce, for a full charge of
Small Shot; here he has gathered up a heap of Epithets together, without any
words between, or connection to make 'em sense; and this he says I divert the
Ladies with -- Snotty nose, filthy vermin in the Beard, Nitty Ierkin, and Louse
snapper, with the Letter in the Chamber Pot, and natural evacuation. Why truly
this is pretty stuff indeed, as his Ingenuity has put it together -- but I hope
every one will own, that each of these singly, when they are tagg'd to their
sensible phrases, may be proper enough in Farce or Low Comedy; but as he has
modeled 'em, it is true they are very frightful -- And if I had nothing to sing
or say to divert Ladies better than this, I should think my self so despicable,
that I would even get into the next Plot, amongst his Brother Grumblers -- then
despairing, do some doughty thing to deserve hanging, and depend upon no other
comfort but his Absolution.

I remember, being lately at St. James's, this very part of the Doctors Book
was read or rather spelt out to me, with tickling satisfaction, by one whose
Wit and good Manners are known to be just of the same weight, who, since he can
be merry so easily, he shall laugh at some of the Reformers Hotch-potch too,
Collier's Epethetes
as I have mingled it for him: Jewish Tetragramaton, Stigian Frogs, recking
Pandaemoniums, Debauched Protagonists, Nauseous Ribaldry, Ranting Smutt,
Abominable Stench, Venus and St (...) jusiana, the Witch and the ra^son of
Wrotham, with the admirable Popish Story of the Woman that went to the
Playhouse and brought home the Devil with her -- And the Devil's in it indeed,
Collier, p. 257
if this charming Rhetoric of his, (since he calls mine so) especially joyn^d
with that fine story, from T^rtu^^ian, don't divert the Ladies as well as
the other; for it is very like a ^atholick miracle you must know, and the top wit
of it is, that when the Parson is Conjuring, he asks the Devil how he durst
attack a Christian? who, like an admirable joker as he was, answers, I have
done nothing but what I can justify, for I seized her upon my own ground. Now
let the Devil be as witty as he can, I am sure the story, maugre Tertullian's
Authority, or the Doctor's either, is confounded silly, and downright nonsense,
what credit soever it has with him for its likeness to Jesuiticism. And now I
think I have proved too, that a Clergyman can speak nonsense, pass it for
humor too, and gratify his ease and his malice at once, without a Poet's
putting his into his Mouth. And since we have been speaking of quibbling, I
shall digress a little to entertain the Reader on that subject. Our Critic
rallies Mr Dryden's Sancho in Love Triumphant, for saying, don't provoke me,
I^m mischievously bent, to which Carlos a man of sense replys, Collier, p. 17^.
^ay you are bent enough in conscience, but I have a bent Fist for Boxing. Here
says he (smartly) you have a brace of quibbles started in a line and a half --
Very true, you have so -- But suppose quibbling or punning -- but I think this*
is called punning -- Is this Gentleman's humor -- if so, being a Soldier, I
don't see it calls his sense in question at all -- but now pray let us see, how
our Critic manages a quibble, with a blunder tacked to the Tail on it, in the
page before, there, in the aforesaid Play, Celidea in a passion cries, Collier,
p. 68.
Great Nature break thy Chain that links together
The Facrick of this Globe, and make a Chaos,
Like that within my Soul --
Now, says the Doctor, keen as a Razor, if she had called for a Chair, instead
of a Chaos, tripp'd off, and kept her folly to herself, the woman had been
wiser. Calling for a Chair instead of a Chaos is an extreme pretty Quibble
truly -- but if the Critic had let the Chair-men have tripp'd off with her,
instead of doing it herself as she sat in a Chiar, I Am sure the blunder had
been saved, and I think he had expressed himself a little wiser than he has --
And come, now my hands in, let us parallel Mr Dryden with our Reformer a little
longer -- Churchmen (says Benducar in Don Sebastian, Tho they Itch to govern
all,
Collier, p. 104
Are silly, woeful awkward Politicians,
They make lame mischiefs, tho they meant it well.
So much the better, says he, for it is a sign they are not beaten to the trade
-- Oh, that is a mistake, Doctor, they may be beaten to the Trade, and yet be
bunglers -- And proceeding: Their Interest is not finely drawn, and hid,
Ibid,
But Seams are coursely bungled up, and seen.
These Lines, says he, are an Illustration taken from a Tailor. They are so,
but what Justice is it in him to lessen 'em, whose own flights are ten times
more ridiculous: For example, talking just before of tumbling the Elements
together, he says, and since we have shown our skill of Vaulting on the High
Ropes, a little Tumbling on the Stage may not do amiss for variety. Collier, p.
168.
And now I will refer my self to the severest Critic of his party, whether an
Illustration taken from a Tailor is not better than one taken from a Vagabond
Rope-dancer, or Tumbler, forty times over; but his sense and way of Writing he
thinks will infallibly overcome censure; not with me I assure him, to confirm
it I must remark him once more, and then my digression shall end. He tells ye
Cleora, in the Tragedy of Cleomenes, is not very charming, her part is to tell
you, her Child sucked to no purpose. It pulled and pulled but now, Cleomenes.
but nothing came;
At last it drew so hard that the Blood followed,
And that red Milk I found upon its Lips,
Which made me swoon for fear --
There, says he, is a description of sucking for ye: And then like another
Devil of a Joker runs on, truly one would think the Muse on it were scarcely
wean^d -- Very likely; and here I warrant he thinks his Witty Cricicism, as
safely housed now as a Thief in a Mill, as the old Saw has it, did not his
plaguee want of Memory now and then contrive to disgrace him; for if you turn
to the thirty fourth page of his Lampoon, as Mr Vanbrooke calls it, after he
has been comparing a fine young Lady to a Setting-bitch-teacher.

Lower yet -- down, down, Collier, p. 34.
and after he has been bringing forth a Litter of Mr Congreeves Epithetes, as
he calls them, soothing softness, sinking Ease, wasting Air, thrilling Fears,
and incessant scalding Rain, all Crude, just as he did mine before* without any
connection of sense to 'em: He tells ye more plain in troth than wittily, that
they make the Poem look like a Bitch overstock^d with Puppies, Ibid.
and sucks the sense almost to Skin and Bone. For a Child to suck the Mother
till the Blood follows, I think is not unreasonable, but for a Litter of
Epithetes to suck the sense of a Poem to the Skin and Bone, is such Fustian
Stuff, that nothing but a Creature, only fit for a Sucking-bottle, could be
Author of -- And now I think if he has given me any Crocus Metallorum, I am
even with him with a Dose of ^ollop, and can whisk too from one Play to another
indifferently well, tho not so fast as he; for when I perused him first, I
could compare him to nothing but an Humble Be in a Meadow, Buz upon this
Daizy, Hum upon that Clover, then upon that Butter-flower -- sucking of Honey,
as he is of Sense -- or as if upon the hunt for knowledge, he could fly from
hence to the College at Downy, then to St. Peter^s at Rome, then to Mahomet at
Mecha, then to the Inquisition at Goa -- And then buz home again to his own
dormitory in Sho^elane: And so much for his injustice, now to his error in
Criticism again, and to proceed in defense of Don Quixot.

Mary the Buxom, he says now swears faster it is false, and I deny it, she is so
far from swearing fast, that she does not (rude as her Character is) swear at
all, unless the poor interjection I cod -- by his Authority can be made an
Oath; and then if you will peruse him on, here is a whole page and half upon this
hint, That the Ladies must have left their Wits and Modesties behind them that
came, and liked her Words or Actions; Collier, p. ^^4.
and that her Nastiness, and dirty Conversation, is a Midnight Car^, or a
Dunghill, instead of an Ornamental Scene. Now you don't find out our Gentleman's
malicious meaning by this, but I shall inform ye. He says, I^m sorry the Ladies
brought their Wits and Modesties with them, that came to see this Character;
and yet all the whole Town can witness, that as many of the Ladies as could get
into the Playhouse came thither, to wait upon Her late Majesty of Sacred
Memory, who did me that honor only for my benefit; and who was of so nice a
Temper, relating to Modesty, that if so much as a hint had been given her by
those had seen it before, of such a thing as Immodesty, she had never came,
much less had been diverted, as she was, when she did come; but this I take as
striking at her through my sides; and I think, to use his own words, is above
the Correction of the Pen. The next is such senseless malice, Collier, p. 206.
or ignorance, that it deserves a hoot; he finds Manuel in Don Quixot (playing
in his Farce for the Dukes diversion) addressing to the Duchess in this
manner, in a Jarg^n of Phrase made ridiculous on purpose: Vid. She^ton's
Translation of Don Quix^t, p. 2^5.
Illustrious beauty, I must desire to know whither the most purisidi^erous Don
Quixot of the Manchissima, and the Squireiferous Pa^^^a, be in this Company or
no. To whom Sancho replies, imitating, as he thinks this fine style* Why
lookee, forsooth, without any more flourishes, the Governor Pancha is here, and
Don Quixotissimo too, therefore, most Afflictedis^^mous Ma^o^is^^ima, speak
what you Willissimus, for we are ^il ready to be your Servi^orissimus. And this
now he inserts as my own Invention and manner of S^ile, which is taken verbatim
from the History of Don Quixot, and is by all those that can judge of humor,
very pleasant and ^it for that purpose. Now if he has never read that History,
his ignorance has abus^d me; and if he has, his impudence has, of which it is
perceived he has ^rock enough, for presently he worries me for saying, in my
Epistle Dedicatory to the Duchess of Ormond, Collier, p. 207.
That I date my good fortune from her prosperous influence, and says it is
Astrological. I don't know whether it has that sort of Learning in^t or no, but
it is as good sense as when he says, like a Wag as he is, that the Ladies fancy
is just slip-stocking high, and she seems to wa^ sense more than her
Breakfast. Collier, p 92.
Fancy slip-stocking high? no, no, the merry Grig must mean her pretty Leg was
seen so high, for the Master of Art, I beg pardon of the ^est that their Title
is scandalized, could never mean such Nonsense as the other sure.

And now drawing near to an end, his malice grows more plainly to a head, by
endeavoring to lessen my Credit with my Patron Mr. Montague, whose generous
Cando^ and good Nature to me, and indeed to us all, he perhaps has heard of,
for here our modest and moral Critic, has either mistaken the words, or found
out a slip of the Press, which because it happens to be Nonsense, he has very
gladly exposed for mine; it is in m^ Epistle to my afore^aid Patron, Collier, p
207.
thus: Had your Eyes shot the haughty Austerity upon me of a right Cour^ier,
your valued minutes had never been disturbed with dilatory Trifles of this
nature; but my heart, on dull Consideration of your Merit, had supinely wished
you Prosperity at a distance. Mine in my Copy was written [ due Consideration]
but Doctor Crambo will have you believe, I considered so little to write the
the other; but now I will hold twenty Stubble Geese to the same number of Tithe
Pigs, whenever he is preferr^d to be a Curate again, that I make my Patron
smile more at my Entertainment of him at his own Cost, than ever he did at his
quoting my dull Consideration, which no body but the dull Absolver could
imagine a Man with any Brains could write. And to prove I have yet a few, I
will try to Paraphrase upon his Farewell to me, the Translation in Verse, but
the Reader shall have his first. I like an Author that Reforms the Age, Collier,

And keeps the right Decorum of the Stage;
That always pleases by Just Reason^s Rule;
But for a tedious Droll, a quibbling Fool,
Who with low nauseous Bawdry fills his Plays,
Let him be gone, and on two Tressels raise
Some Smithfield Stage, where he may act his Pranks,
And make Jack Puddings speak to Mountebanks.


Your humble Servant good Doctor. -- Well, now for me. I like a Parson, that no
Souls does Lurch,
And keeps the true Decorum of the Church;
That always preaches by Just Reason's Rule;
But for a Hypocrite, a Canting Fool,
Who, crammed with Malice, takes the Rebels side,
And would, for Conscience, palm on us his Pride,
Let him, for Stipend, to the A Savage kind of People in the West of England.
Gubbins sail,
And there Hold-forth for Crusts and Juggs of Ale.


And so much by way of Prose, I shall only now give the Reformer a little
further Advice, in return of his, in my Lyrical way, which is in a Fable of A
Dog and an Otter; and to turn his own words upon him, the Citation may possibly
be of some service to him, for if not concerned in the Application, he may at
least be precaution'd by the Moral. I find he knows I can sing to other Peoples
sense, I Will try now if I can make him sing to mine: And when he Diverts, or is
Diverted with Vox, then, Preterea nihil.

THE DOG and the OTTER: A FABLE.
The Argument.
The Otter, Tray does friendly greet,
And would persuade him home;
Who proves a Pybald Hypocrite
To Luther, and to Rome.
ON the fresh verdure of a pleasant Vale,
A well-stock'd Park, surrounded with a Pale,
A Crystal River gently gliding by,
To feast the Appetite and please the Eye,
A Mansion stood; the Government.
Patron of it one,
Whose Wealth and Wisdom eminent were known;
Honors right Principles from the Breast he drew,
Just to Just Kings, and to his Country true:
Concerned in a State Change, and thought it fit
To Law, and to new Regal Power submit.
Amongst his chief delights, the pleasing care,
To make wild creatures tame, did most appear;
Tigers and Wolves he from his hands would feed,
And fiercest Pards and Panthers gently breed:
Nay, teach 'em too by wondrous influence,
The Grace of Reason to their Gift of Sense;
Make learned Bards, and fit for State Affairs,
Of purring Cats, sly Foxes, and dull Bears;
And make a Parrot, Starling and Jackdaw,
Prate Ethics, and put Cases in the Law.
Amongst all that on his bounty did depend,
The Otter was best Favorite and Friend,
His Learning being greater than the rest,
A wise Philosopher as well as Priest,
Till lately tainted with a vanity,
Which often attends the Gown-mans quality,
Opinion positive, and stubborn Will,
By which Men scarce distinguish good from ill,
His sense perverting on Ambitions score,
Malice remained, but Wisdom was no more.
This made him, when the Revolution was,
And all took Oaths anew, deny the case,
The Abdication, and the granted Right
Of the new Monarch; and with settled spite,
Desert his Livelihood, his Patron slight,
Then wildly roam abroad a Malecontent,
Railing as mad against the Government.
When Tray, a Setting-dog of famous Note*
Respecting both his Qualities and Coat,
As one besides that had his inside known,
When former secrets they exchanged alone,
When Friends and fellow Servants at one Board,
They used to taste the bounties of their Lord,
Resolved to find out his Abode, and then
Friendly persuade him to return again,
Which to perform he beats the Riverside,
Where the Otter did in Solitude abide,
O'regrown with Spleen each bright revolving day,
Till Night came on, that he might hunt for prey,
Close in a hole, at an old Willows root,
Which over the stream did straggling branches shoot,
He found him lying with his Nose on ground,
And thus his sentiments began t'expound.
Tray. Why was it given ye to understand,
Equal with any Otter in the Land,
To let ye thus that Understanding spoil,
By foolish pride, and obstinacy vile?
Reason I Am sure you cannot forfeit so,
Nor are what really you seem in show.
You know I am familiar with your heart,
Know well your frailty and your just desert,
Have noted by some humors past and gone,
What is for Conscience, what for Interest done,
And therefore would not have ye for a pique,
Of such slight cause, commit this hideous freak,
To leave our House, but friendly Counsel hear,
Confess your fault, go home again and swear.

Otter. He must have much more skill than thou art taught,
Can make one of my Kidney own a fault,
For whilst my Sophistry can stand my friend,
Such Arguments come seldom to an end
I thank thee for thy kindness, honest Tray,
But am resolved, whatever thou can say;
Thou know I know how far thy gifts extend,
What Providence has given, and to what end;
I know thy Wit can tell how far behind,
To set the Covey, and which way the Wind,
Lick Patron, do as he would have thee do,
And if the Times turn, change to Turk or Jew:
And without further reach, when this is done,
Then still to gnaw the self same Marrow-bone.
But there is difference 'twixt thy Parts and mine,
As ought twixt Temporal, and things Divine,
Thy stint of Merit easily is seen,
Mine now begins to be, but has not been,
Nor was I then (whate'r thou think) unwise,
When subtly I forsook my Benefice:
Had that been kept I could not be severe,
Nor let the strength of my shrewd Parts appear,
Sulleness gains respect, and often fear:
If meek, I should be always what I was,
But as I^m ^ullen I stand fair for Place,
It makes the world reflect on my deserts;
^^nsider, and ^^ke notice of my parts;
^^^^cially when dubious I appear;
In mysteries I would not have (...) clear.

Tray. Nay, you have always been a dubious Creature,
Your faith too as amphibious as your nature;
For as you are both Flesh and Fish by ^ind,
Of such ^dd sort of mixture is your mind:
To please your Appetite can lave the Flood,
Or for some dainty Morsel hunt the Wood.
And as by Nature taught, you can devour
Fat Trouts in Rivers, or young Lambs on Shore.
So can your Soul's warm faculty digest,
Each kind of Tene^ from each kind of Priest.
Tope down draught Orthodox like other Bub,
Then warm the stomach with a strong -- Transub*
Argue the Cause on either side with ease,
As matters vex ye, or as matters please.
But in what miserable case is he,
That thus depends on your Divinity:
For if, as I believe, your only rule
Is mere Hypocrisy your Flock to fool,
To preach up each each Religion in each kind,
When neither has the power yourself to bind;
As by your Writings is explained to many,
First you're for one, then the other, than scarce any;
How wretched will your Proselytes appear,
Who are to find their Heaven, but know not where,
And tho my gifts cannot of yours take place,
I hope I still may equal ye in Grace.
I act Obedience to the King and Laws,
Led by the Wise, own Justice in the Cause.
Obey the Apostle and the Higher Power,
Not shuffle off on the conscientious Score.
When what I would insinuate for Zeal,
Is only the effect of stubborn Will,
As yours is now, else why this juggling Arts?

Ottor. Fool, have NOT I said before -- to show my parts.
I^ll make the Government distinguish me,

Tray. 'Twill rather punish your Hypocrisy.

Ottor. Sot, what thou call'st Hypocrisy is Wit,

Tray. Not half so much, as when men draw the Net,
To snare the heedless Partridges I set;
Learned in the craft I was designed by fate,
I wisely act, but you prevarricate,
And simply led by blind opinion try,
To vend for pious Grace rank Fallacy.

Ottor. Have thou observed my life, and can thou say,
My Duty I Have neglected any way.
Are not my Actions regularly known,
And my Devotions seen through all the Town.

Tray. Ay, that is the deepest mischief in your Gown.
A^vicious Priest that holy form does take,
Is the most powerful Villain Hell can make.
For there^s the garb of Sanctity to hide
All Malice, Lewdness, Avarice or Pride.
He has too, when there are invectives made,
Wit to confute, and Learning to evade.
The ignorant Laity have no such power,
They Are but Jackalls, it is the ill Priests devour.
But as I Have shown a bad, -- I^ll now describe,
Dull as I am, -- a good one of your Tribe:
Wise, just, and humble, he that Souls would win,
With modest reason must discourage sin;
Gentle and mild, his pious Cause must plead,
Inform the Brain, and yet not break the Head
With temper his reproofs must be endu'd,
Boys may be snubb^d, but Men will think it rude,
And never by rough Admonishment turn good,
Of Life exemplary, of heart sincere,
Who next his Soul, holds King and Country dear.
Who power and riches reckons trivial things,
Who to the poor his own white Manchet brings;
Who deals in no hypocrisy nor pride,
That Is a good Priest -- if you are such I've^ly*
What Precepts have you taught this impious Age?

Ott. Why, I have writ a Book against the Stage,
Been tickled with their Smutt these seven long years,
And now have published it with sighs and tears.
Another too, where he that makes inspection,
May find in one place against pride objection,
Another, where it is made a chief perfection.
Both Books so fine, as will, for all your railing,
Soon do my work, for I have friends prevailing.

Tray. And then you will swear.

Ott. Sir, I can jests endure.

Tray. I know you will;

Ott. Well, first let me be sure,
In the mean time it is fit I look demure.
Whatever vices secretly I wear*
I^ll be a Saint in show, none shall appear.

Tray. How Is that? you say you will be a Saint in show,
And yet am told, were yesterday a Beau.
Wore Coat of the modish Cut from Doyley piece,
And Peruke long, to grace Canonick Phiz.
How can that parallel with Robe Divine?

Ott. I Will make it do it, to further my design.
My Book already has alarmed the Town,
I^ve pa^^^d their taste, and any thing will down.
The public Vogue is gained -- I^ve moved the stone,
And now you will find it of itself roll on.
Well painted ^ri^les do their sense deceive,
And what they like they easily believe.

Tray. But can your Fallacy on such impose,
That have our Doctrine of Allegiance chose.
Can they be blind to your bifronted look,
Not see your Craft, because they like your Book,
It cannot be -- your -- Actions and your Print,
Too plainly show that on both sides you squint.
Keep both in hand, till offers come so fair,
You may say Conscience did mistake -- and swear:
This, such discerning, Eyes must see a little.

Ott. Some do, but some are blind still as a Beetle;
I have had thanks for showing the Stage Vices,
Spite of Absolving, and such bold Caprices.
I Am a strict, tough Non-juror in opinion,
That wish Le Roy were routed of Dominion.
The Government subverted, Pulpit too,
Unless my Model -- could set up the true.
And y^^^'ve wheedled, some by glossy parts,
To think of a reward for my deserts.
This now I dare confess, to thee, and more,
Because I know thy Nature, Wit and Power:
How far thy little spite can do me wrong,
Which is, alas, no further then thy Tongue.
Know then, your Patron rashly took the Oaths,
Which he believed I Would do for Food and Clothes.
He used me like a Servant of small Note,
Affronting thus my Office and my Coat,
For which I left his House, despised his Glebe,
And like a Spider now will spin my Web.
Till one or the other richly does provide,
For that just Merit, which thou call'st my pride.
So honest well-nos'd Tray, let us shake hands,
'Twill become thee, to busk over stubble Lands.
For near that Cops, I a large Covey saw,
Run home, then make 'em get the Net and draw,
But touch no more Divinity nor Law.

Tray. No, faith, Sir, I^ll go home, straight over these grounds,
And make 'em bring my Patrons O^tor-Hounds,
To ^cowr your Worship from these shady bounds.
For since it is only mischief you design,
And hope to get preferred, by cheats Divine.
I^ll do my banter'd Countrymen this Grace,
To see you worry d 'ere that come to pass.
I Will send ye those shall make you cast your Fleece,
As well as late you cast your Benefice.
Your Duckings and your Divings shall no^ do,
Nor your close holes secure when they pu^sue.
Your own Desertion then shall be discisst,
Whilst all that are to King and Country just,
Shall hall^w the sport, and leave each home,
To view the Male-con^e^ted Ottors doom.

Ott. Fool, ^^ther than he snapp'd, I^ll take a tree.

Tra^. And faith, as you have ^^serv'd; one ^it may be
Where B^^nches grow not from one stock but three

The Campaigners.
Act I.
Scene I. An Eating-House.
Enter Van Scopen and Mascarillo, the first dressed in Blue, Laced with Gold
Galloon, the other Genteely in Black. Masc. DEar Brother in Iniquity, here is to
thee. Drinks. And once more welcome from Paris -- Well, and how do like my
Country, hah -- I see by thy Rosy Gills and these Collops here -- matters have
gone very well with thy Belly -- the Ambassador will not spare the Kings Purse, he
will have good meat and drink, I Will say that for him.


Van Sc. Yes faith, the meat and drink was nourishing enough in itself, it is
true, if it were not always condemned to be spoiled by the damnable Cooks and
Butlers. But your true Frenchman will sit playing with his Plate, talk out the
whole time of dinner, and fast at your Table, if he has not his own favorite
Kickshaw, and the Meat is not dressed his way.


Masc. And when a Dish does come up our way, it is metamorphos'd so, you cannot
know it I warrant, hah.


Van Sc. Know it; no nor taste it neither, when I have expected to have been
Regaled with a good slice from a thing that looked like a Rump of Beef, I have
found my mouth full of Eggs and Herbs, Suet and Onions, Hogo'd with Garlic,
and burnt with Pepper -- oh would the Cook were hanged, then thought I; when
strait to quench my Choler, and make amends, I call for a Brimmer, and then
they give me a Glass of Water, just colored with three or four spoonfuls of
Claret, a little of which is no sooner down, but up comes a curse after it, a
pox take the Dog the Butler.


Masc. To give a right Dutchman Water with his Wine is an absurdity, that
faith Brother I must needs say deserves a Curse; our Blockheads ought to
consider the constitution of your Country, and remember they always live up to
the mouth in water, where, like Ducks, they no sooner come out of their houses,
but they may, if they please, swim to any place of business; and when the
affair is ended, if they are thrifty, and would save Shooe-leather, they may
Dive home again.


Van Sc. Why, how now Scoundrel, what, at your quirks and jee^s, hah? Well, as
much Water as we have, we make it turn to better account, that you do all that
barren land of yours in Gascoigne, and Picardy; how goes the best Wheat a
bushel, hah? but that I think few of you poor Rascals know; you forget your
Brown-Georges, ye Rogue, ye do.


Masc. No, not now in time of Peace, when we can get some of your Dutch Butter
to 'em, Sirrah -- but hang ye, lest my Satirical Wit should provoke a Combat of
Snick or Snee, here is the Embassador's health -- I begin thy Masters first,
because you shall follow with my Monsieurs in its turn. Come, tope away. Drinks.


Van. Sc. Ay, with all my heart, tho gad, methinks I Am so fine, it goes against
the grain to call any one Master now. Prithee how do like me: here is a dress,
here is a shape, Struts about here is an Air of Quality; my Master ordered me to
put on my old Livery when I came away, but gad I looked methought so like an
Officer, that I could not obey him. Wharum Deevil ne Ick bin vne Ambassador
too, why an't I an Ambassador too -- As I was walking in the Paris Tuilleries
the other day, ah how sweetly the sound came to my ears of the poor Rogues
crying, bless the noble Captain, make way there for the Colonel, for by my
garb, all thought me one of these at least.


Masc. Especially when separated from the Ambassadors Retinue.


Van. Sc. And that I took care to be as often as possible, to follow the
intrigue I had with a rich Merchant's Daughter there. You may see by this the
value of good Clothes, Brother. This Coat of mine got me into the Company of
the prettiest Rogue, and so into her Fathers house, from thence into her
Chamber; and had not the plagay Ambassador dispatched me away instantly with
Letters to his Sister here, I had got into her Bed, the night following e'gad,
under the Title of Min Here Flounder Belchman, B^^mce Dender Van Scopen,
Colonel of Horse, and one of the intimates of the Ambasaddor.


Masc. Odso, 'twas a great disappointment to your Excellency I confess, Sir,
and for my part, ^tho I don't glitter so much as you do, yet the Marquis my
Master being in mourning for his Mother, gives me as genteel a garb, as I think
any man of Quality need have, which I industriously strive to improve you may
be sure.


Van Sc. How, pray, an't like your Honor?


Masc. By intriguing with the Washer-woman without doors to wear his Shirts,
and within doors to filch his Cravats, and transform the rest of his Linen.


Van Sc. Very well, noble Sir, my service to ye again, Drinks. Why troth, a man
may see the happy turn of times, and the advantage the Peace brings with it, in
your honors alrer'd air and behavior -- Why who the Devil would take us now
for two Footmen. Both strutting about.


Masc. He must be duller than any thing belonging to the Devil, that does it,
Brother, I Am sure of that. But come, we used to be open hearted, and tell one
another employments. Prithee what can be thy hasty expedition hither from the
Ambassador, what he is jealous of his Sisters Marrying in his absence, I Will lay
my life?


Van Sc. He is so, and since we were always Brother Sterlings in managing and
discovering secrets to one another, thou shall know all. His Nose is bored, the
young Lady has surrendered to some body. We have in Brussels here, a certain
finical spruce Fop, a kind of a Flanderkin Beau, who is President of the
Council of Trade here. His name is Bondevelt, and who, I believe, has entered
the Citadel already, for there is certainly a Kid born, and I am to wait to
night, upon some new Employment of hers, the Louis d'ors will come in fresh, ye
Rogue, and ^ace is the word. Come now, what news on your side?


Masc. Why you must know, I have for some months last past been entrusted by my
Master, as a Spy over my Lady, he having noted some loose carriages of late in
her, and to day an occasion was offered to confirm his suspicion, she sending
me with a Letter to an English Colonel lately come over, and about an intrigue
I Am sure. What the event will be, I shall know hereafter, and then, Brother,
we'll find further leisure to consult.


Van Sc. In the mean time let us conclude, that whilst men are fatigued with
too much Employment, and women lie idle with too little, Horns must infallibly
happen on one side, and brawlings and heart-burnings on the other: And so your
Excellency's most humble. For I think I hear a voice you are acquainted with,
it is your Friend and Companion the Marquis, and some others. Call within. Hey!
Mascarillo. For my part I hate a mixed Company, and therefore I Will take the
Flask, noble Sir.


Masc. And I the Glass, an't like your Honor, and we'll retire into the next
Room. Exeunt.


Enter Dorange and Kinglove. Dor. What, have we dropped the Maquis?


King. Only, whilst he dispatches Orders to his Lacquey; drop him, no, he is of
too nice a Punctillio for that; to part from his Company without the Decorum
and Ceremony proper, would be to him an rudeness unpardonable.


Doran. I never saw him till last night with thee, but he seems to me a fellow
of good sense, and humor, I like him better than any Frenchman I have met with
a great while.


King. Why, faith, I think he has less affectation than most of 'em, and tho he
talks a little more perhaps than comes to his share, yet it is commonly good
matter, which makes some amends.


Dor. And so civilly addressed too, that a man is not so weary as one used to
be, with some of the rest of his eternally tattling, Countrymen.


King. I intend to oil his Tongue if I can with a good Bottle, Powerful
Champaign will discover what imperfections he has infallibly, as well as what
wit.


Dor. Nay, I don't look upon him as a Solon neither, for I hear* he is married
but odly.


King. To old Lafroon's Daughter, a sordid rich Hunks of Blois, I have seen
her, but have no acquaintance.


Dor. Is she pretty?


King. Yes, faith, and I Am told witty, airy, and musical, but coquettish as a
little Devil, a great Bassett-player, and like the Jew her Father, the most
insatiable Lover of Money. And you know, friend, when ever a woman too well
loves that, she will soon be brought to do another thing that we love, for that.


Dor. Ay, that is most certain: And yet I could wish a pretty Charming Creature
that I had a Letter from this morning, had that covetous quality, tho I were a
hundred Pistoles the worse for it to morrow. Come, Frank, you are my friend, and
shall give me thy judgment of it, I Will tell thee a pretty adventure.


King. Come on, all yours used to be pleasant, especially that of the Merchants
Neice you enjoyed at London, and in search of whom you now come hither
Colonel, but pray take care, do you hear, the Plot of it be'nt too knotty, for
if you are for Riddling you may search an O Edipus for me, faith.


Dor. Oh, this is plain 'enough for the Meridian of thy understanding I warrant
it; know then Frank, that standing this morning at the Shop door of a certain
Goldsmith, where I sometimes have exchange of Money for my Expenses, as I was
putting up a hundred Pistoles into my Purse, which I had received there, just
over against me stopped a Coach in mourning, with a Lacqueys behind it, in
which was a Lady of a most incomparable Beauty and Feature, she stood talking
to a Shopkeeper about some of her affairs, and at the same instant, tho she
turned away her Face, yet so pretty a hand lay upon the Glass on the other
side, that it discovered the most delicate sample of the whitest Skin that ever
cased a Beauty of Fifteen.


King Rhyme i'gad, and Rapture, -- very well, Colonel, go on.


Dor. Charmed with the sight, and in an ecstasy, I could not cease from crying
out aloud, and in a Tone she miget be sure to hear me. I Would give these hundred
Pistoles in my hand to enjoy her but one night.


King. A hundred Pistoles -- enough for a hundred Princesses i'gad -- well
well, when is the Assignation, where is to be the Bower of Bliss? there was a
Coronet behind the Coach, I know Colonel it must be quality at least, a
hundred Pistoles -- she took ye at your word I Am sure.


Dor. Quite contrary for that time faith, for presently away rolled the Coach,
and my poor panting heart trundled after it as fast, till distance kept my Eyes
from guiding it farther. Ah Frank, it is a pain to me even to tell thee what
pangs of disquies I felt for two long hours after: but then, as if the God of
Love had seen and pitied the posture I was in, of down-cast Eyes and Arms
across -- walking alone on the Parrade, I saw on the sudden standing just
before me, and offering this Letter, one of the Footmen of my adored Goddess.


King. So, then I hope you had justice done, however -- And dear Colonel, I
beg thy pardon for lessning the Merit of thy office. What a plague did I talk
of Quality for, when I might know, like a sot as I was, a hundred Pistoles is a
price sit for none but a Goddess. Jove himself, who was the first Whoremaster
we read of, that ever gave money, for all his shower of Gold so talked of, gave
his Mistress Danaae not a farthing more.


Dor. Well, prithee hear the Letter, which is penned so cunningly, between
threatening and encouragement, that gad I think I want an O Edipus indeed to
salve it. Prithee observe* LETTER.
Sir,
Be assured, that I think my self very much affronted at the word. I heard you
speak this morning. How dare you insolently set price upon a person of my Rank:
Render your self to the justice of my Resentments therefore, and come to morrow
night at nine, to the House with the little Gate, next to the Ch^quer'd Posts
in the High Street, to answer your accusation, or expect all that can be feared
from a Woman wronged and Angry. (...) -- What think thou, is she in earnest
or in jest?





King. In earnest by Heaven, Colonel, but it is the right way the hundred
Pistoles have made a breach in her heart, wider than a Cannon Ball at a hundred
yards distance would in a plank of three inches.


Dor. Hugh -- I think she means fairly, and will not take the Money sure; for all
her jesting -- However, gad I Am resolved to venture, but not without being well
armed tho. I Will carry a pair of pocket Friends with me, and a good Sword, and
then Love be my guide. I defy treachery.


King. Here comes Monsieur, don't trust his Tongue however with the secret, for
all your good opinion of him. Oh -- Enter Bertran. Monsieur Marqui, the warmth,
the soul of good Company, ye are welcome, you have been too long from us, we
freeze without ye.


Dor. The Campaign, tho never so good, would seem palled to us, Sir, unless
your pleasant conversation gives it a relish.


Bert. Sir, I am your most ver humble serviture. Compliments Dor. And yours
MonCher Monsieur. To Kinglove Mafoy you always do me too much d honor wid your
Gentilesse, your grand grand Courtesy, I am obliged to your generosity
Eterne^ement, ver much for your good ward and civility, but much more dat you
have bring me into de Company and bon Grace of dis noble Sentleman here. To
Dorange.


Dor. I dare not vie with ye in Compliment of Courtly Expressions, Sir,
therefore only can say, that my heart and inclinations are faithfully at your
service.


King. Sir, both the Colonel and my self set a greater value upon the
blessings the Peace brings us, having by it been obliged with the knowledge of
you. Embrace.


Dor. Hey Waiter! Fill Glasses, and give me a brimmer. Come to the great
Monarch of France, Vivat.


Bert. Along Messires, I will do ye de reason wid all min heart, and tanke you
vor your great goodness, brave, brave Colonel ^ Morbleau, Sir, vat wonder have
I hear of this Shentleman, how^ beyond expression Valliant he behaved himself
at Stenikirk, after vish the next Campaign in de most fameux Battle of Landen,
he had his Arse shot, beside have receave two tree wound at the grand Siege of
Namur. Ah, I have no breath enough to speak.


Dor. Oh no more, no more, let me beg ye, Sir.


King. Nay, Colonel, the Marquis does ye but justice.


Bert. Most veritablemen dear vas no oder fame but of de brave Colonel Dorange
and his prodigious Action ma foy Sire. I tell you noting but de grand trute --
Ay, 'twas ver well for us de Peace vas made in de good time, Morbleau, it is one
miracle dat we have held out so long.


Dor. Faith not to flatter our selves, I must think Sir, 'twas a double Miracle
that we did as we did.


King. Oh it is without dispute, that we had the worst of it at Steenkirk by
much, though our Men fought bravely it is true.


Bert. Like de fiery Draggon, besides vat you call de worse, it vas your
Complisance, your grand civility dat give us de betra.


Dor. A very pretty Complaisance truly, but then Sir what think ye of Landen,
were not we --


Bert. Aw, we were beaten dear by dis light -- confoundedly.


King. Nay then Monsieur I must needs think your courtesy does your Country
wrong, did not we retire over the River?


Bert. Yes Morbleau to rally ten time more strong de oder side.


Dor. We lost our Cannon.


Bert. For It negligent to show you could beat us wid only de Sword.


King. Come, come, pardon me, indeed we were worsted.


Bert. Pardonne moy ausi indeed you vere not


Dor. Fie, fie, you know we were a little.


Bert. No no, Sir, not one jot.


King. We were, we were.


Bert. No no, no no.


Dor. Oh you forget, you forget.


Bert. I remember very well da't we were ver mush mawle and dat --


King. Pray Sir hear me a word or two.


Bert. Not on 'dis pray Sir, for it is we were beaten, it is we were beaten, and
derefore I beseech you Sire.


Dor. But Sir give me leave a little, did not we --


Bert. Iernie you did all de brave ting in de warle Sir, and you are no beaten,
nor you ver no beaten, nor you no can be beaten. Speaks so fast that he hinders
them from answering Messires I beseech you receave my obligements, as de real
Efforts of mine sensible opinion, it must be so, it must be so, not van ward
more, it sall be so.


Dor. Nay, if it must and shall be so, the French Complement shall carry it.


King. Ay, besides all things considered, he is not so much out of the way
neither.


Dor. Come then, faith, Sir, we'll e'n make a drawn battle on it and own we had
knocks on both sides.


Bert. Wid all mine heart, but to speak of to beat de brave Officer Englise, it
must never be say. Come here is one Bumper, a health Deliciae Humani generis, to
the Immortal Monarch of Great Britain, along Vivat.


Dor. Come let us sit down -- would we had some Music to it.


King. And that we will have presently, for here is a waiter in the House,
sings well, and a new thing fit for the purpose, call him up there, sing the
Song of the new Reformation. Song here.


Dor. Very well Sir -- de'e hear, score a Dollar into the reckoning.


Bert. Two, two, score two ye, merry scoundrel, in honor of de grand Roy de
Angleterre. Enter Scopen strutting about.


Dor. How now, who have we here?


King. Oh I know him it is one of the retinue of the Spanish Ambassador in
France, sent back hither I suppose on some affair.


Dor. Hum, I should have taken him for my Counterpart, if the Man had been like
his dress.


Van Sco. Gentlemen there is Min Here the Burgo-master below, who made his
Request to me to tell ye, he would speak with the Marqui Bertran -- tholl,
loll, loll. Sings.


Bert. Oh dat is ver true, he is my Neighbor shentlemen, he live next door to
me, and I appoint him to meet me here, hark you Sir, ( to Kinglove) one word
wid you, sall he come up, he has de rare humor vill make you laugh, morbleau
une Estrange Coquin extreme Comic. Hark in your Ear.


Dor. Well Sir I see you're very fine. Dorange and Scopen stare at each other.


Van Sco. Indifferent Sir, -- but I suppose I am well dressed, I Am so like ye,
tholl, loll, loll, loll. Sings and Struts about.


Dor. Ha, ha, ha, saucy puppy -- apart. methinks they might have ordered these
scoundrels tho something else for fools to gape at, than the garb of an
Officer, I find this fellow thinks himself no small fool in it, ha, ha, ha, ha,
ha.


Van Sco. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.


King. Oh I Will speak to him -- de'e hear Colonel the Marqui says, the Burgo
master's a rare humourist, and hates the Company of all Officers, and the
Soldiery, he was lately the chief Voter for disbanding the Army, now if we
could any way disguise ye he should come up and divert us a little -- Waiter,
has your Master never a Cloak, thy Hat will serve.


Waiter. Yes, Sir, here is one hangs up in the next Room. I Will fetch it.


Dor. Quickly and I Will be an English Merchant of your Acquaintance.


Bert. Dat will be ver Pretty -- go Sire fesh him up. to Scopen.


Van Sco. Fesh him up, tholl, loll, loll. Dorange puts on the Cloak and Hat the
waiter brings.


Bert. Yes, fetch him up -- vat a Diable


Van Sco. Tholl, loll, loll, loll. Exit looking scornfully on em.


King. Monsieur le Marqui you must receive him, here he comes.


Enter Min Here Tomas. Bert. Yes, yes, let me alone I warrant you, aw Monsieur
Neighbor dis is ver kind, I am glad to see you Sire, and now I beseech you
give me leave to present you to des two ver wordy Gentlemen both de Natiff of
England, dis de Man of quality at de Cour, and dis de fort considerable
Marchand upon de Exchange Royal.


Min H. I am so little used to speak French gibberish, and this Kickshaw
sputters it out so fast, that snick me, I can scarce understand him. aside Humh
a Courtier and Merchant of England de'e say, well as long as there near a
Soldierly Locust, amongst 'em I think I may venture to drink a bottle, and so
without Complement I Will set me down. Sits down.


Bert. Aw dis be de bon Company assure you Sir, and so here be Monsieur le
Marchands good health. Drinks.


Min H. Well Tope away, he may be a good man for ought I know, but do hear
Monsieur, he mustles himself up so queerly in his Cloak, that he looks as if he
were broke, snick me, ha, ha, ha, ha, I cannot forbear joking, come Sir here is
a Brimmer to you. Drinks.


King. With all my heart, and pray now Sir if you are a little at leisure, what
news to day, you are a great man in business, you know all.


Dor. Ay praylet's hear Sir, what are your Grandees about to day.


Min H. Why snick me, I have been at it amongst 'em till I Am hoarse a voting
down the rascally Soldiery, we have had enough of an Army in conscience, now
Peace is come, down with 'em therefore I say, is it fit that Rogues with long
chines and full Calves, should huff and strutt with our Money, in time of
Peace, no no, disband 'em, pinch 'em, keep 'em low, and we have 'em under:
Cocker 'em, and they will do the same by our Wives, what say you Sir, with the
Cloak is it not so?


Dor. Aw Varlets, Poltroons Cuckold making Rascals, when the Wars are done in
my opinion there should be an order, they should be all hanged.


Min H. Why well said, I have a rich Neice at home you must know, ha, ha, ha,
the Sister to my Nephew the Ambassador, a swinging fat lass I can tell ye,
she is worth two Tun of Gold, worst Penny, and would you believe it, ha, ha, ha,
may the next Poll of Ling choke me, if one of those Poltroons, a Redcoat
Ragg-Carrier of a Regiment, as lousy as fowl Linen could make 'em, had not
like to have snapp'd her away the other day, but we found out the Plot and he
scow^'d, if we could have caught the Lobster we had broyl'd him, snick me.


Dor. And he deserved it richly, an impudent Rascal to pretend to dare to
aspire to any fortune, but what the War allows.


Min H. Which he may very well Improve if he be a Thrifty Rogue: What, half a
Dollar a days pay, snick me, it is a considerable thing.


Dor. Aw too much in conscience faith, Sir, only the Government is so wise, to
let it fall into Arrears now and then; besides the Rogues have got a trick now
of eating Beef too, an utter Enemy to valor.


Min H. They have so, egregiously, egregiously, and I have read in some History
or other, the Army of Hannibal eat nothing but Potatoes.


Dor. With an Egg or two now and then Sir, as they marched by a Barn and found
a Henroost; an Egg, come come an Egg and a good Heart's enough in conscience,
if they cannot live on that, even down with 'em, I Am against a standing Army
that eats Beef, snick and snee me.


Min H. Gadzooks, this is a plaguey close fellow, why he is harder than I am
against 'em, I Will warrant him a true Englishman by that, come hearts of Gold,
begin another Brimmer, come prosperity to Trade; harkee Monsieur, I find this
Merchant a notable fellow, prithee to what part of the World does he deal?


Bert. Ma foy, Sire, I have not ask him dat question, but speaka speaka your
mind, he will tele you presantlee himself.


King. Prepare your self Colonel, here is a question coming will try your
invention.


Dor. Why e're I Will be balk'd, I Will answer him in Greek and confound at once,
his Dutch understanding.


Min H. You are a great dealer, I suppose, Sir. Pray, if I may be so bold, in
what part of the world is your Factory, in what Commodity do you deal?


Dor. Oh, in several, several, Sir, I have dealt in all sorts and sizes.


Min. H. Indico, Cutchin^^^ Logwood, or Pepper, pray Sir?


Dor. Rot his Pepper, how he Devil shall I banter him. Aside. Sir, I Am a
stranger here, and somewhat ashamed to declare my dealings to one so eminent,
till I know you better, till when -- pray, Sir, give me leave in my turn to ask
you what you Merchand'ze in?


Min H. In Herrings, Sir.


Dor. Herrings, Sir, and does the profit arising, allow you Salt and Bread to
'em?


Min H. Ha, ha, ha, That was the simplest question from a Trading Headpiece,
that ever I heard in my life, snick me, sure this is not a fool of a Merchant
after all. Come, Sir, pray now your way of dealing?


Dor. Why, Sir, I deal in Sprats.


Min H. Sprats, Sir?


Dor. Yes, Sir, Sprats, but not such as yours are here. I Would have you know,
mine a^e a sort of rare Oleaginous Sprats, Sprats that will melt in your mouth
like an Anchovy, I have 'em out of the South Sea, and the River of Amazons, and
from Peru, Coquimbo, Gapiago, and Salta. I have also the pleasure to have the
Factory only to my self, for few Merchants else have any.


Min H. Faith, Sir, and you have the pleasure to eat 'em all your self too, for
never were my guts stuffed with any of 'em, what say you Gentlemen?


King. Ah, I Have regaled with 'em a thousand times, we eat 'em with Sugar and
Pepper like a Mellon.


Bert. Aw dey have de flaveur delliceuz ^de grand Monarch of Peru, drink 'em
alive in Plantain Wine like de Losh.


Min H. Sprats of Peru, I never heard of 'em before, snick me.


King. Aw, they turn to another sort of account than your Herrings, Sir, let me
tell you that.


Dor. Another word of a Herring, would make him as Choleric as a Cook half
roasted.


King. Ay, and as snappish as a Dog in a Coach-box, as our old friend Fitty
used to say. Enter Servant and whispers Min H.


Min H. How, my Wife in a rage, say thou, and would speak with me?


Serve. Yes, Sir, there is something happened concerning your Niece, Madam
Angellica, that makes her 'roar like a Tempest: for Heaven's sake make haste
home, Sir, to appease her, or we all split.


Min H. Well, well, I come. Waiter, bring to pay.


King. I find that fellow has called away the Burgo-master. What are yo^ going
already, Sir?


Min H. Something very notable has happened at home, Gentlemen.


Dor. Since our diversion then is at an end, I must beg leave to say, I have a
little business too.


Bert. Dear Sir, wat please you always make me happy, do de loss of your Company
make me miserable.


Min H. Well, friend, what is it?


Wait. Two pound, four Shillings, and four Stivers.


Min H. How, two pound ye Rogue, it is impossible. It may be you reckon ten
Shillings a Flask, but we are no Fools, Sirrah, we understand business; and
there^s an honest Fellow at the sign of the Holland Cheese and Pickled Herring,
that sells as good for five, ye Rogue, so that the Club comes to -- let me see
-- just to five skellings, a half, and one Stiver a man, and a kick in the
guts, Sirrah, for imposing on us.


Bert. Oh damn the five skelling, de half, and de one Stiver, dear Sirrah, dear
is your whole reckoning, and de rest for your self. Waiter bows to Bert.


Dor. Oh Monsieur, what do you mean?


King. Faith, Sir, it must not be --


Bert. If you love me Gentlemen, not one word more, I will Court you to take de
same always, -- Allon, allon, Mon Cher. Messires de ting is not wort dis
Morbleau. Snaps his Fingers.


Min H. Amongst French Prodigals, but I have found One Stiver saved thus every
day, in one year makes one pound. Exeunt.


End of the First Act.
Act II.
Scene I. A Chamber, or House.
Enter Angelica and Gusset. Ang. OH Heaven! she has made me quite deaf, my Ears
will not be able to perform their office for this week, I Am sure.


Gus. Her noise is shriller than if a whole Stye of Hogs were sticking; and you
may hear her further than a dozen of Powder Mills in a still evening: but what
was all this storm for, Madam, only the Presidents being here to night?


Ang. For nothing else, she having my Brothers private order to admit no Suitor
to me; and in hopes her nasty Cubs, if ever she has any, shall inherit my
Estate, which was entailed on me, for life, and after upon^ the first born of
either of us, by my dead Unkles Will.


Gus. And now she has found out it seems her Husbands furtherance of the
Presidents Courtship to ye?


Ang. I suppose so, tho neither of 'em imagine the true reason of my consent to
his admittance, which is, thou know only to blind the world, and cover the
misfortune that happened to me, if the Child I lately had should be discovered,
I know my Estate will make the tame President father what he never got, when
ev^r there is occasion. Have you packed up all its things that were left here
into a bundle, ready to be car^ied to the Nurse.


Gus. Yes; and for fear your Aunt should, by prying about, find 'em out, I have
hid 'em in a hole under the Garret-stairs, ready when the Footman comes, who is
ordered at ten to night, to be thrown to him out of the Balcony.


Ang. That Is well, and so then we can slip out easily after him unsuspected,
for I Am resolved to go to night, I have not seen the dear, dear Creature, this
three long days and nights. Hark, what noise is that, there is some body coming
'dslife it is my Uncle, away, away.


Gus. And by the clapping of her Closet door, your Aunt has seen him come in
and is following, here will be a foul house presently. Exeunt.


Enter Min Here Tomas. Min H. This perpetual Nuisance, my Wife, I find has
discovered my furtherance of the Presidents love to my Niece, whose Heirs, if a
Match should succeed, would frustrate the hopes of her Estate's descending to
mine begotten on her body. Now my reason not to flatter my self is, because in
troth I find I Am not so capable as her inclinations would prompt, and therefore
resolve to be for the easiest way of profit. Here on one side the President is
obliged by Bond, to give me three thousand pounds for my assistance, and this I
keep her ignorant of. On the other side she is for having an Heir, forsooth, and
hooking it in that way; nay, is so ravenously greedy of it, that she plagues me
almost to death. Tomas, she cries every night, remember the Estate Tomas, think
on two thousand pound a year Tomas, tho she be so fat, and so incapable of
Childing, that an Irish man may as soon get a Bantling out of a Bog; and all
the Doctors in Town have declared nothing can swell her bigger than she is, but
a Tympany. Ecce signum, here she comes. Enter Anniky.


Ann. So, are you come, Sir Assinego? you use me very well, don't ye? you are a
kind Husband.


Min H. As far as there is reason, Anky; I have heard too much ^indness once
killed a Good Wife, and therefore I think I Am civil ^hou have no more on it,
snick me.


Atn. To contrive at another marrying my Niece, and so to get heirs to inherit
her Estate, when 'twas designed for the fruit of my own proper body; it is a
baseness like thee; baseness, it is frigidity, I Will be sworn, mere frigidity, as
the Scholards have it; but, if I live a month longer, I Will have one to connive
with me too, I will as I Am a Calvinist.


Min H. Why Lookee Anky, as thou know, we have all from the Government,
Toleration of conscience for our Souls, so will I give thee toleration of
conscience for thy Body: Ply, Ply abroad Anky, with all my Heart, do faith, thy
Fat with another Man's Lean, perhaps may make a tolerable dish, but thou and I
have a Relish so common to one another, that I despair of ever making a good
Meal, for my part, gadsbores I fancy we lie always like two Udders in a Dish
without e're a Tongue.


Ann. Queazy Fellows that have no Appetites, cannot Relish the finest Haunch of
Venizon, when a strong healthy Stomach would feed heartily and be glad of it.


Min H. Ay, but if he were to feed upon ten or twenty years together, as it is
the case of us miserable Husbands, he would be glad to change it for the Hanch
of a Horse, snick me.


Ann. Miserable Husbands, miserable Coxcombs, what wretches would ye be without
us, if we should be fullen and hold out a little, what a c^inging and sighing
and whining, would all the proud pert powdered Puppys make then; but
gadslidikins, would 'twere in my power to dispose of our Sex. I Would plague all
the flashy Town Fellows faith, I Would teach ye to find fault; this is too ^at, or
that is too lean, I Would make ye know, that an Angel Woman is your chiefest
blessing as she is a woman, and like a piece of Gold is of true value, whatever
coin she is of, or whatever impression she bears.


Min H. Say ye so Anniky, what think ye of an Angel Woman that has had the
Impression of a Bastard or two upon her, humh?


Ann. Why you will find her for her Wit and Qualities, always too good for the
fool that got those Bastards, she has the better of her Cully ten to one, she
made him a right Ninny before she left him I warrant her. But why do I throw
away wit upon thee, -- my Conce^pts are always out of thy reach, poor Doodle.


Min H. Ay that may very well be snick me, considering that profundity of
yours, but harkee now you shall hear what you (...), you are. Anky, you are a
Heteroclite.


Ann. A Tro^ke^^ite what is that Sot?


Min H. Why it is Anniky to be explained two ways, figuratively (...) ^^^^^ially,
first figuratively, it is a foul Storm in the shape of a scolding Woman, an ill
wind that blows no body no good, but roars and blusters, without ever ceasing.


Ann. Well, when there is nothing aboard but a Ship of fools, however there will
be no loss if any thing be cast away.


Min H. Hump -- the Jade's as sharp as a Razor, but I Will at her again, snick me;
why then secondly to come to the matter, it is a gross Barren Hen, that is so
rank fed, she is incapable of breed, and yet so greedy on it, that she is
eternally Cackling.


Ann. Because she roosts among Cravens that have got the Pip, if Cocks were
good, Hens would have Chickens, Clodp^te.


Min H. Humh to be plainer, since you provoke me, a Heteroclite in the best
sense is a Noun whose way of declension is different from all others, I mean an
overgrown dowdy Wife, who is just like a Dining Room joined to a great hot
Kitchen, when ye expect to have a good Meal in one, the Nauseousness of the other
turns your Stomach, there is a Heteroclite for ye.


Ann. And there is another Trokellite for you. Strikes him.


Min H. How now Bradamant, how now, is it so indeed -- dare you sawcilly attack
your Governor, I Will pinnion ye, ye Harpy, presently.


Ann. Seellum Hundsfoot, help, murder, murder. he seizes her.


Min H. I Will lock ye up over the Stable, faith, heirs, you shall have heirs,
and the great Gib Cat there shall Father 'em, -- how now Goody Stove, what
strike a Burgomaster, I Will make ye an example faith, you shall eat nothing but
Horse Beans this week for it, snick me.


Ann. Help, help, there, Murder, Murder. He pulls her out.


SCENE II.
Enter Van Scopen. Van Sco, The Clock has not yet struck ten, and I find I am
come a little too soon for my dispatch, there is no stirring above yet, no
light in the Window, nor no appearance in the Balcony, I Will therefore step to
the next Tavern to my Brother Mascarillo, and take one Bumper or two, in the
mean time, to warm my Stomach, it is a cold raw night, and such a Cordial is
very necessary. Exit.


Enter Dorange. Dor. That I may the readier find the place at my hour of
appointment to morrow, I have resolved, tho it be dark, to stumble this way to
night; this is I Am sure the Street, and I suppose yonder is the House with the
Checkered Posts; but where this little Gate of the Enchanted Castle is, that,
wanting Madam Cinthia's aid, is now invisible: Well, I Will content my self with
thus much to night, and leave the rest for my dark Lanthorn to discover to
morrow. Guffet comes into the Balcony.


Guss. Hist, hist, are you there?


Dor. Hah -- what is that a woman's voice?


Guss. Are ye there, I ask ye?


Dor. Ay, ay.


Guss. Come underneath then and catch, and stay below till we come down. Throws
down a Bundle and Exit.


Dor. So, I have got it, but what I have catch^d, or who the Devil they take me
for, I cannot so much as guess -- hum -- it is a bundle, and if I feel right --
Silk and Laced -- oh -- for a rich Purchase of shining Pearl, or glittering
Diamonds, now which some young pretty wanton has packed together to run away to
her Lover, from some damnable cross old Aunt, or confounded Mother-in-Law,
whilst I, guided by my Propitious Stars, in spite of darkness am ordained to be
the lucky supplanter, gad it is a pretty kind of an Adventure this, and I hope
the coming Lady, will answer my vigorous expectation: the door opens -- now
dear Goddess Fortune.


Enter Angellica and Gusset. Guss. Van Scopen, Van Scopen, -- where are ye?


Dor. Scopen, Scopen, -- confound it, what a Names that, here, here.


Ang. Have ye the bundle?


Dor. Yes, yes.


Ang. Follow us then and make no noise, -- softly, softly, Ex.


Dor. Gad she is a delicate Creature for ought I know, but the very hash of her
voice has such allurement in it, that I Will follow her, tho into the Dominions of
Prester John, but I Will have a sight of my little Night-walker. runs after them.


The Scene changes, then all Re-enter. Guss. So now give me the Bundle.


Dor. The Bundle, -- humh -- but harkee, am not I to, to,


Guss. To, to, -- 'dslife give it me, what is the fellow mad.


takes it away. Ang. Quickly, quickly, and de'e hear do you Seal this Letter
and carry it as it is directed presently, do it carefully be sure, and there is
for your pains. gives Dorange money. Enter Fardell with a light. Oh dear Nurse
how do thou, well and how does all within?


Fard. Oh mighty well Madam, I have just now been suckling it I assure your
Ladyships my Milk agrees with the Pretty Creature strangely, it thrives mainly
Madam.


Ang. Oh the dear little Angel, I long to see it, there Nurse I have bought it
some necessaries -- give 'em her Gusset. Exeunt.


Dor. A Plague take that Jade for standing in my light, I could not see her
face, but she has a rare shape, -- harkee, harkee, Mistress, pray a little of
your Light, that I may know how to dispatch away a Letter here, which is in
great haste. to Fardell.


Fard. Ay, with all my heart Sir, and bless your good worship, this is a great
honor to see you here, intruly this must be the Gentleman aside and Courtesys
to Dorange Do^^. Doll, bring up the Child's Barrow and Belly-band, Runs as to
the stairs. and a clean Biggen for its head, do you hear: Hussy make haste: Pray
Sir before you read your Letter, be pleased to honor me with a word or two,
for truly I have even longed to see ye.


Dor. So, here is another comical mistake going forwards; but who she takes me
for I may go read in the Stars. Your Servant Mistress, IN moblig'd to ye.


Fard. Your Worship, I may truly say in truly, are Father to the sweetest Babe
--


Dor. Humh -- humh --


Fard. That ever came into the world of its kind, I think in Conscience. Good
lack, that your Worship cannot stay, and give it your fatherly kiss, and your
blessing, poor heart.


Dor. A fatherly kiss; very good: Instead of a bundle of Jewels, I have got a
Child I find; but methinks by the Mothers dress it should be no very ill
bargain.


Fard. Pray, if I may be so bold, when will your Worship come and have your
bellyfull of kisses?


Dor. Oh, shortly, shortly -- but if this should prove some Harridan, some Lady
of the Game, that wants a Providore for her Bantling, I should be finely fobb'd
after all. aside.


Fard. I Will warrant the Mother kisses it forty times in an hour -- Well -- in
truly it is as like your Worship as if you had carved it with a Chizzel; there
your Nose, and your Eyes, and your Mouth so like; good lack, to see the wonders
of Nature.


Dor. Now, to get a piece of me will this plaguey Cloutwasher lie like a well
feed Lawyer, or a young Shopkeeper new set up. But the Lady has given me two
pieces here, and these to carry on the jest shall serve for her. Aside.


Fard. And then its Limbs are, as if they were made of Wax, I Will be sworn.
Well, Heaven bless your worship, you got it with a good will, I dare say for
ye, for the pretty Creature is most notably marked, in truly.


Dor. That Is well, and to improve its good gifts, there is something to
encourage your care, Nurse.


Fard. Oh dear, in truly, your Worship is too liberal, and I Will indulge my self
with Eringo Roots, and Clary and Potatoes, to make my Milk more nourishing.
Besides, my particular care of his Body, it shall not want for stretching nor
stroking, I assure your good honor -- Doll, why Doll, I say -- Ay, this a lazy
Carrion. Exit hastily.


Dor. Hang her, she has half ^attled me into a belief it is mine indeed, but now
for the Letter -- That I Am to play the Laquey withal, this will, I doubt not,
discover the true Parents. Let me see, first for the Subscription, To the
President Bondevelt, near the great Cathedral. Good! this is enough to find out
the Father in the first place, and and if the Mother have subscribed her name,
the discovery will be perfect. Reads. Sir,
The great respect my Uncle has for you, strengthened with his Commands, and
your Merit, obliges me to set Pen to Paper, to let you know, that it is not by
my means, your access to me is hindered, but by my Aunts Tyranny, who, for her
own selfish reasons, debars me from having converse with any body. However, my
Uncle and she having fallen out, you may have the better opportunity to see me
with him this afternoon, if you value so much as you have often protested

Angellica Mendezo.


Mendezo, and Angellica, -- By fate it must be she, the pretty Creature I one
night enjoyed by a trick at her Unkles house in London, who since died, and
left her his Estate, and after whom, since the Campaign was ended, and the
Peace made, hearing she was come to meet a Brother, I came hither in search --
Ay, but if this should prove her Child now, and she should be married since. I
went to one of that name -- What a damned unfortunate Rogue am I, -- but hold,
this Letter is only a permission of Courtship, that gives me some hopes
however, and I Will go and find the Lover instantly, and in this my mistaken
quality of Laquey. With subtilty his dearest secret sound,
And like a cunning Mole work under ground.


Exit.
Re enter Fardell. Fard. Good lack, what is the Gentleman gone? I was so
fearful this sleepy Queen, should burn the Child's Bed and Blankets, I gave her
to air, that I was forced to run away from him abruptly, well he is much a man
of honor I protest, and I Will collect a dozen or two of the finest words I have
in my budget, against he comes next, that I will intruly.


Enter Angellica and Gusset with the Child. Ang. Come Nurse where are ye?
here is your little charge expects ye.


Fard. Ah Doddy besse it pity face, Doddy besse it, Doddy bless it, was its
naughty Nurse gone from it, and make it cry a Bawl for bubbies, did she so, did
she so, aw 'twas a paw Nurse to leave the sweet Sylds so basely, so she was,
and catchee, catchee, catchee, catchee, catchee, catchee, and catchee, catchee,
catchee, catchee, catchee, catchee, tum a me, tum a me, leta me do a my Nurse
takes it from Angellica and sits down to suckle it. Mamma says he, I want my
Bubby Mamma, says he, ah Doddy bless dat pity face of mine Sylds, and his
pity, pity hands, and his pity, pity foots, and all his pity things, and
pat a cake, pat a cake Bakers man, so I will master as I can, and prick it, and
prick it, and prick it, and prick it, and prick it, and throw't into the Oven.


Ang. Could one believe the Child would ever speak English, that hears her
jabbering to it at this rate.


Guss. Indeed Madam, I have always thought it little less than a wonder.

Nurse sings. I
MY dear Cockadoodle, my Jewel, my Joy,
My Darling, my Honey, my pretty sweet Boy;
Before I do rock thee with soft lullaby,
Give me thy dear Lips to be kiss, kiss, kiss.
Smaks the Child. II.
Thy charming high Forehead, thy Eyes black as Sloes,
Thy round dimpled Chin, and thy right Roman Nose,
With some pretty marks that lie under thy Clothes,
Show thou wilt be a rare one, to kiss, kiss, kiss.
III.
To make thee grow quickly, I Will do what I can,
I Will feed thee, I Will stroke thee, I Will make thee a man;
Ah then how the Lasses, Moll, Betty, and Nan,
By thee will run mad to be kiss, kiss, kiss.
IV.
And when in due season, my Billy shall Wed,
And lead a young Lady from Church to her Bed,
Ah, welfare the losing of her Maidenhead,
When Billy comes near her to kiss, kiss, kiss.
The welfare high Forehead, and Eyes black as Sloes,
And welfare the Dimple, and welfare the Nose,
And welfare the marks that lie under thy Clothes,
For none are more hopeful to kiss, kiss, kiss.

Fard. Well; da, da, Mamma say, I must go a peep, pay Mamma, pay a Doddy besse
me, and make me a dood Man, ah, egh. bows the Child to her.


Ang. Heaven bless my Heart and Soul. kisses it.


Fard. Your Ladyships humble Servant, this is the Child's hour to go to Sleep,
and I always use them to an hour, there must be method used, Madam, in ^ll
things; good night to your good Ladyship, leave little master to me, you shall
hear him say twenty year hence, he had a good Nurse I Will warrant ye. Exit Far
and Child,


Guss. Good night Nurse.


Ang. Good fortune attend thee pretty Angel from henceforth, tho hitherto thou
have had very little.


Guss. You never told me out his History yet Madam, tho often have begun it,
and as much as I remember, was that, whilst you were living at London, in your
Unkles house, a Spanish Merchant, who was our Burgo-masters Elder Brother, to
whom being an Orphan, you were sent from Spain, by your Brother in your
infancy, and who afterward dying left you his Estate; that you came acquainted
there, with a young Lady your Neighbor, with whom you grew so intimate, that
you were often Bed-fellows, she frequently coming to you, and you to her, you
began to tell me too of a young Captain, that was her Brother; but at that part
of the Story, some business intervening you still broke off, and left me to
guess the rest imperfectly, of what now I hope to hear.


Ang. Thou shall, tho the recital is ushered with a sigh, when e^re I tell it;
know then, this Gentleman her Brother, was so like her in face, in shape, in
voice, height, age, and gesture, that when they dressed in one another
Clothes, their Parents and Relations often mistook them; he as ill Stars ordained
it, fancied me, and being young, wild and extravagant, and finding me averse to
all loose Courtship resolved upon the greatest piece of Treachery, that ever
Maid was wronged by.


Guss. By all that is good Madam, I begin to tremble at my own apprehensions.


Ang. Thy fears are certainly too true, for having stolen out his Sisters
Clothes one night he came to me, admitted to our house, taken for her, I was in
bed, and innocently heaven knows n^^staking him as the rest, prayed him make
haste, which too too soon he did, for before Morning, with struggling wooing
kisses and vows of Marriage, backed with the treacherous opportunity, he broke
my first resolves and gained his purpose, took from my finger too a favorite
Ring, with solemn Oaths, within 2 days at farthest to bring another, and a
Priest to join us; but oh, the perjured wretch, instead of this, the next News
I had, I heard he was commanded to his Post in the Army, since when I have
never seen nor heard of him.


Guss. And this little one was the product of that only meeting?


Ang. By all that is good it was, soon after this my Uncle dies, and left me
luckily e're my fault was known, his fortune, but afterwerds finding my self
grow big, and fearing scandal I resolved to go to Madrid, and discover all to
my Brother; I did so, he knew him, and after having generously forgiven, and
desired me to stay here at Bruxells, promised to seek the wronger of my honor,
and force him to do Justice, as soon as he had finished his Embassy into
France, for which employment he was about that time chosen, and by his Letter
now sent he tells me my false friend is come this way toward England, but that
he himself will be here to morrow; then, if we can find the right Father, his
Penitence restores him, but if not, a jolly Widow passes on the formal
President, seeming at my Unkles suit, tho my own cunning, in spite of my Aunts
Machiavilian plotting; and now thou have heard all, let us home and consult, I
know their heads are at it.


Guss. To do you Justice honor would prevail With every man of sense that only
heard your tale. Exeunt.


SCENE III.
Enter Bondevelt, Kinglove, and Footmen with lights. Bond. You have now Sir
brought me to the door of my house, I will therefore only discourse ye with a
word or two more, and then good night. You are Sir a young Gentleman, and I
perceive of singular good parts, prosper me it is very much, you have not
applied your self more to business.


King. Troth Sir, all that I can say ^o your worthyness on this matter is, that
my Father bred me of his own opinion, which was, that pleasure is the only
business a Gentleman should apply himself to.


Bond. Oh vile, you must give me leave then, hearing this, to tell ye, Sir,
your Father was an Epicure, but your Country England is noted by all
considerative Nations, for breeding their Progeny in that manner; oh vile
notion, a Gentleman's business pleasures, why it should be quite contrary, a
right Gentleman's pleasure should be business.


King. Why faith Sir, I must needs own our Countrymen would hardly take such a
one for a right Gentleman.


Bond. I believe so, the reason is, because, prosper me, you let your Souls
rust with idleness, now my sharp-sighted Father, I thank him, seasoned me from
the beginning.


King. Season him, what did he Pickle and Salt him? aside.


Bond. I mean he wisely let me know, some of the rough and untoward part of
Life in my infancy, my seasoning was the early preparing my body for travel and
business; to which purpose, he sent me at seven years old, a Voyage into
Greenland for Whalebone.


King. Now my Father sent me at seventeen to the University.


Bond. To do what, study silly Theories, to lose the solid Practick, learn
Bawdy, under the nickname of Philosophy, or bandy Religion about so hard, to be
all the rest of your Life an Atheist, -- hah, oh vile Management, there is a
whole age lost, misspent and neglected; seventeen, why I had almost finished my
Travels by that time.


King. There Is the hint; now will I set his Tongue agog to tell 'em merely to
save my self, the plague of Repartee, what Travels pray Sir?


Bond. Sir, every where, I have Traveled every where, to the East and West
Indies, from thence to the South America, Panama, G^^n^avellica, Lima, and
Porto Bello, I have rolled in Silver from the Mines of Potosi, and in Gold from
the River de la Plata, and the rich banks of the lake of Parima.


King. What Merchandises I beseech ye, Sir, what Commodities did you vend there?


Bond. Ah things Sir, that in their nature you would laugh to hear of, trifles in
our parts here, tho there of prodigious value, to wit, Thread, Points, Horns,
Catcals, Penny Looking Glasses, Wooden Trumpets, Tin Nutmeg*grater, Brass,
Candles, Saveals, and the like; and then the rare Mechanical invention of
Combs, Knifes, Scizzars, Tooth-picks, Thimbles, Buckles, Buttons, Bodkins, with
the most ingenious Cork*screw and incomparable Nut cracker, bring in a Mint, a
Mint of Money, there is pleasure for ye, Sir. Prosper me, what greater can there
be, than the ingenious overreaching ones fellow creature in the way of Trade.


King. That is, he means cheating ones fellow creature in the way of Trade.
Aside.


B^nd. To do which there are occasions innumerable, would you believe it, Sir,
Riches and Treasure flow there so plentifully that I have had my self a Bushel
of Silver for a pack of Cards, and a large Ingot of Gold for a little
diminutive unmusical Instrument, vulgarly called a Jewstrump.


Enter Dorange with a Laeteer. King. Ay, and if that be'nt a lie, th^n I Am a
Dromedary. Aside.


Bond. And so, Sir, I with yo^ well home. Sirrah, wait on the Gentleman.


Dor. The President Bondeveli's house, Gent* pray which is it?


King. That there, Sir; but here is the President himself -- Hah who is here --
what, my dear Colonel?


Dor. Mum, Kinglove, not a word more, I Am no body. Softly to him. And please
your Worthiness, here is a Letter for ye. To Bond.


Bond. For me, Sir -- But hold, there is no need of Ceremony, I know the hand,
and find now he is but a Footman for all his gaudiness. Reads.


Dor. No questions, Frank, till to morrow, only this, as a doughty Hero once
said before, I am going where Love and Honor call, return if alive to morrow
by twelve.


King. Speed the Plough, Sir, fare ye well. Exit King.


Bond. It Is very well, friend, and on my word you are a very lucky fellow; for
I had just writ a Letter, which I would have early in the morning sent to the
party, in reference to this very affair -- here it is, be careful, and there is
for thy diligence.


Gives Money and E^. Dor. Good again -- What Sot is he now, that disparrages the
function of a Lacquey, additionally graced with the praise worthy industry of a
well-bred Pimp, and so forth -- here is four Pistoles got in three quarters of
an hour, and gad some two years ago in Flanders I should have thought my
Collonelship very lucky in possession of but half as much. Van Scopen is seen
peeping about. But money begins to flutter about again I see now -- Stay, how
shall I get this and my self conveyed to her, after I have read it without her
knowing I have any light in her affair -- hah -- by good luck yonder is my
Counterpart Sees Van Scopen her creature, who without doubt has staid at the
door blowing his Nails ever since my curiosity made bold to supply his office;
for now I Am sure 'twas he that was intended -- I Will accost him -- so friend
well met.


Van Sc. It may be so, Sir, it may be not, Sir, tho^l, loll, loll. Sings.


Dor. Come, come, for all thy surliness, I Will prove my self thy f^iend -- I
know thee -- know all thy business too -- thou stayst for a Letter to carry to
Madam Angellica. Why lookee here it is for thee -- here is the Gentleman too thou
art to guide thither, and here is two Pistoles by way of encouragement to
diligence -- hah -- what think thou?


Van Sc. Think, Sir, gad, Sir, I think ye are much in the right, and my
diligence shall second your liberality, Sir, immediately. Follow me, Sir?


Dor. Why well said. Thus spite of Locks and Bars when Jove did woo,
Almighty Gold never failed to shower him through.


Exeunt.
Act III.
Scene I. Angellica' s Chamber,
Enter Bertran and Madam La Marquise. Mad. COme prithee my dear, let me have
this money, it is but a hundred Pistoles, and I may chance to win five hundred.


Bert. Ma Chere, in van word den, I will let no mor money go upon shance,
shance is de Teefe, de Sheat, de Pickpocket, shance, morbleau, vill empty min
purse, if I give you any mor money for Play, min Dear.


Mad. Because I had a little ill luck last night, which was looked upon as a
Miracle too by all the Bassett-Table, the most skilful of all the Punts blessed
himself to see it; for during the time of play, I had once from an Alpiew or
Paroli, Sept et la va, Quinze et le va, Trent en le va: Nay, once Soissant et
le va, and yet lost all at last, but 'twas a thousand to one, my Dear.


Bert. It Is one towsan to one but min Purse get de dam Consumption wid your
Trent and Soissant, if I give you mor money.


Mad. What for an Accident, Child? No, no, I shall have luck to night I Am sure,
for Mr Shuffle-tallies and I Am to be Croupiere; Ill follow the winning Knaves,
and get Sept and Quince et le*va, before another shall make an Alpeiw; but I
confess this last time I had the Devil of ill fortune, such indeed that it is
almost incredible, I lost a Sept et le va upon an Eighth King.


Bert. Morbleau, and voud lose de Kings Revenue, if you play play on, dat is
most veritable, dis game is fit for none but de King and Queen to play at,
derefore I speak once more ver true, I have no more Money ver de Bassett.


Mad. But I Am engaged in honor to meet my Lady Fatly and take my revenge, for
'twas that hideous Punt that won most of my Money -- I Will tell thee how 'twas,
Child, she fass'd me every Card I set, or when I drew a lucky one it did not
go: she would make Paroli and Sept e le va upon the same Card, and when ^ lost my
King four times in one deal, she upon an odious filthy Knave, every time wone*
Sonica: Did you ever hear the like. Sonica? Oh prodigious! Every time Sonica!


Bert. De divla tak my Lady and Sonica too, vat care I vor -- hear dis: come,
come, be advise and play no more?


Mad. What not have my revenge, shall such a huge Tun-belly'd nasty
Thump-cushion, as my Lady Fatly, make her brags she has stripped me. No, I Will
sell my Skin but I Will have my revenge. Besides, does this consist with your
French Honor, Sir, to have me stripped and made a jest to the Lords,
Gentlemen, and the rest of the Company; 'twould be a very pretty sight, would
it not, for them to see me stripped?


Bert. Yes, Morbleau, dat would be de ver pretty sight, indeed.


Mad. I mean, made incapable of another night's play.


Bert. Gazoon, I mean so too, I should be ver loath to find dat.


Mad. Pish. Pray, Sir, no more of your jests, if you will grant my request, and
save my credit, I shall think my self obliged, but pray spare your wantton
conceits, my virtuous inclinations don't admire 'em?


Bert. Nay, nay, Madam, I hope I may jest without affronting of your virtue;
and I hope I may love you ver well, widout more squeezing min Purse vor de
Bassett.


Mad. Will you deny me then?


Bert. You set your heart too much upon dis ting, Madam Your love of de Play,
make you covetous, and love Money too well. And dat Wife dat love Money too
well, assurement ver often love her Virtue too little.


Mad. It Is basely said, if you reflect on me, Sir, whose virtue has been of so
pure a nature, it never was tainted yet with one bad thought. Virtue as white
as Down of Swans or Ermin.


Bert. I don't know dat, but to be sure, I have tak de care to wash you a
little.


Mad. You will deny me then?


Bert. No, no, no, deny, I will only keep a my Money, dat is all.


Mad. I shall be horribly out of humor, I shall scold confoundedly.


Bert. I shall sing and laugh den ver mush.


Mad. Indeed you had better save my credit, Sir.


Bert. Indeed I had betra save my Money, Madam.


Mad. Phoo, you shall do it for your little Dear this once; what, hang a
hundred Pistoles, I Will oblige you, my dear dear precious, a hundred times as
much: Come, you shall hear a pretty new Scotch Song I made --


Bert. Ay, with all my heart. A Dance. Scotch SONG I.
I.
JOckey was a dowdy Lad;
And Jemmy swarth and tawny
They, my heart no Captive made,
For that was prize to Sawny.
Jockey wooes, and sighs and sues,
And Jemmy offers Money;
Weel, I see, they both love me,
But I love only Sawny.
II.
Jockey high his voice can raise,
And Jemmy Tunes the Vyol;
But when Sawny Pipes sweet Lays
My heart kens no denial,
Yen he sings, and to other strings,
Tho sweet, yet only teize me;
Sawny's Flute can only do it,
And Pipe a Tune to please me.



Mad. There Is for ye, my Life, my Heart, my Vitals; and now you shall do it for
me; I Will do any thing to divert my dear Honey.


Bert. Aw you are de dam cunning Gipsey -- Here is de Honey, and de Honey, but
Gazoon is only for my Money -- Aw but dis shall no do for all dat. Aside.


Mad. And this now my own heart shall command every day if he pleases, and
every night I Will sing my own dear asleep.


Bert. Aw, pure wheedle, morbleau dis is plain, dis is de mere sheate; ve good
den, I will try now vor put de sheate upon her.


Mad. Come Sweet, shall I be obliged to thee? p^ithee say Ay.


Bert. Vell, vell, put off your meeting vor one two day, you know I go to morr
to receive Money, and sall stay out de whole night; ven I come home I will tell
you more; but no more to dat purpose, Morbleau: -- Aside. So, go go and make
your Visit, and present my service to de Lady. Exit.


Mad. Pish, this is only a sham, this niggardly wretch will not do it I see by his
sleering. Well Monsieur, since you dare deny your Wife necessaries, for Money
is the chief of necessaries, she shall try what her Merit can do without ye;
and whether her Beauty will pawn for a hundred Pistoles; for the truth is, I do
love Money so well, and Play for the sake of Money, that I Am resolved to keep
up my Credit abroad with the Gamesters of Qualtiy, tho his Cuckoldom purchase
the means of doing it; and I think I have a Chapman ready too, which I made
sure of, for fear he should prove thus hide-bound. Enter Mascarillo. How now
Mascarillo, what news of the Colonel?


Mase. Why, Madam, I hear there is a Letter left at home for ye, and I suppose
from him; but if you would know more particularly, step into the next room and
you may inform your self, for he is just gone in to visit Madam Angellica.


Mad. Who the Colonel -- ar't sure it is he?


Mase. Very sure, Madam, for I saw Van Scopen my Brother Crony bring him in the
back way about a quarter of an hour ago.


Mad. What can this mean? I am sure she has no acquaintance with him. Ha, ten
to one it is after me he comes, having had information of my being here; go and
pump the the other fellow, dear Mascarillo, and bring me what Intelligence thou
can^t.


He makes sign for Money. She walks off. Mase. Very good, I am to Pump for her,
and I am to Pimp for her, and yet not a penny of Money; humh -- Gad this shall not
do? but hold, she is not fit for the Trap yet, let the Mouse play a little
longer. Aside, and Exit.


Enter Gusset. Guss. My Lady heard you were here Madam, and having this instant
some company with her, she commanded me to wait on you into her Bedchamber,
where she will attend you presently.


Mad. I am her humble Servant: This shows ^he does not care I should see what
company is with her; hum -- is it so? Well, I Will watch her I Am resolved, and if
they proceed to an Intrigue, prevent it, tho I ruin he^ I Am of a nature that
can endure no Competitor. Aside, and Exeunt.


Enter Dorange and Angellica, with a Letter. Ang. Sir, as the Presidents friend
you are welcome to me, and I thank you for the care of his Le^^er; tho you have
ventured into a place so inhospitable to strangers, that I dare not assure your
good usage long.


Dor. Madam, the Courtesy I receive from you has obliged sufficiently one that
has had a character of the nature of this family. Apart. It Is she, by Heaven,
but the Small Pox has so altered me I see she does not know me, which suits
well with my design; and though I am welcome as the Presidents friend now, I
hope, if things are not gone too far, to prove more my own friend than his very
shortly.


Ang. What makes him look on me and mutter to himself? Sure he knows something
of the Child! Lord help me, how every look or trifle frights me, since that
unlucky accident first happened. Aside.


Enter Gusset hastily. Guss. Oh Madam, if you don't intend to have all the
things in the Room thrown at your Head, your Eyes pulled out, and your
Clothestorn to pieces, look about you presently, and clear your Lodgings;
here is Scopen has run himself out of breath, to bring news from the Stable,
that your Aunt is broke out, and is coming like a Fury, her eyes flaming with
rage, and her Tongue thundering out dissolution to her Husband, and all that
withstand her.


Ang. Oh Heaven, what shall we do with the Gentleman?


Guss. I know not; she is such a Fiend now she is in her fit, she will tear him all
to pieces.


Dor. The Devil she will; I Will warrant ye, Madam, fear nothing, I Will tame her
quickly.


Gus. Tame her! O Lord, Sir, it is impossible, she has got Firearms and the
Devil and all with her; she will have a brace of Slugs in your guts before you
can ask what is the matter.


Dor. Humph* Gad I Am like to be finely paid for my postage, if this be true,
I Will get out at the back door.


Gus. The plaguee Footman has taken away the Key -- No, hold. (Studies.) I Have
thought of something at a pinch -- Your Tailor, Madam, that brought home your
Stays to day, left a Coat here of some bodies, to call for as he came back,
and an old Perriwig the Butler can lend him; then, Sir, if you can act a Tailor
a little, you may pass securely.


Dor. A Tailor, ay, ay, I can act the Devil, any thing, come, ^I warrant thee.


Gus. Follow me then quickly, for she will be here in a moment. Exeunt.


Enter Min H. Tomas and Bondevelt. Min. H. Come, Neice, without mincing the
matter any longer, if as your Uncle, I have any interest in ye, I desire ye to
look on this worthy friend of mine, the Honorable President, in a particular
way, I mean as a Suitor, his place in the State ^^ eminent, his parts not to be
questioned, and to sum up all virtues in one, the greatest promoter of Trade in
Europe.


Ang. Sir, I shall always honor your Merits, and in how particular a manner
your admission extends, I hope I satisfied you in my Letter.


Bond. Madam, you did, which, prosper me has given me a universe of joy. When I
was at Qui^o, after coming from the River of Amaz^^s, I saw a Wedding, and the
Bridegrooms method of expressing his joy for his Bride was, by slitting his
Nose, cutting off one Ear, a joint of the Ring finger from each hand, and so
forth. Ah Madam, I could wish it were the custom here to assure ye, I would not
spare the sacrificing any part about me, to show the grand satisfaction I
possess for the honor of your Ladyship's favor.


Min H. His discourse is always so pleasantly larded with his Travels, Niece --
oh -- the President's an admirable speaker, snick me.


Ang. I believe no less, Sir, but pray where is my Aunt, did not she come with
ye? why we have been frighted here with the alarm of her coming? We have almost
been scared out of our Wits?


Min. Aw never fear her, I have laid her fast enough -- I shall rest in my Bed
now, and lay my Legs across as I please; and I think it is but reason, for I have not slept soundly this twenty years.


Enter Van Scopen hastily. Ang. How now? How came you to fright us so, and tell
my Woman my Aunt was coming?


Van Sc. Dsheart, so she is coming, and by this time at the bottom of the stairs.


Min H. How, Sirrah, what the Devil is she broke out?


Van Sc. Broke out, I gad, Sir, and will break your head within this two
Minutes -- She has armed herself like the figure of St. George in the Sign,
with a Headpiece on, and a great Iron-headed Pike in her hand instead of a
Lance, a huge Sword, with a Basket-hilt, after the fashion of Scanderbeg;
besides, a Fusee, and the Devil and all of Firearms.


Min H. Gad forgive me, Fire arms -- Good Sir be pleased to abscond for a
moment, I know it is you the seeks. Here Is a Press used to hang Clothes up in;
in, in quickly, I beseech ye, Sir, whilst I submit my self and calm her fury.


Ang. How, Uncle, is this you that used to say you would show your Masculine
power, and make her tremble?


Min H. Ah, but the Fusee, Niece, the Firearms, if she had come reasonably,
that a man might have box'd with her fairly, I Would have given her a squelch, and
kept her under me till she asked me pardon, but that confounded Fusee, Engine
^f the Devil, or wo^se than the Devil to me; a Soldier, I quake at the thought
^n't. Annik'y within. Where are ye, Skellum? where are ye? I shall ferret ye
presently.


Min H. Ah, it is her dreadful voice, snick me. In, in, pray Sir, she is coming
up the stairs.


Bond. An odd turn of affairs this, I that have been sixteen thousand leagues
off in the wide world, from East to West, to be now confin^d to a Box not above
sixteen inches Diagonical, hugh -- It Is a strange turn of affairs, prosper me.
Goes into the Press.


Ang. I Will get out of hearing I am resolved, let them fight their Battle by
themselves. Exit Angellica.


Enter Anniky, armed ridiculously, with Head piece, Back, and Breas^, Sword,
Half Pike, and a Fusee on her Shoulder. She stares ^t him, and h^ looks
sneakingly. Ann. Lord, Goodman Assinego, how you ^ook now? How does your
stomach stand affected, hoh; I have brought ye a relish here of the Diet you
designed me; there, eat. Throw^ him Horse-beans. Sir, snick and snee me, eat
quickly, or Offers to shoot.


Min H. I will eat, I will eat any thing, dear Wife, any thing Eats.


Ann. Wife! 'Dslife such another word, and the Sun shines through thee
immediately -- Wife! familiar fool, my name shall be Tame^lana, as being the
first Conqueress and Tamer of a useless insignificant Animal called a Husband.
Do You eat, Sir?


Min H. I do, I do, most invincible Tamerlana, I do. Eats.


Ann. The best repa^t in the world for fellows that are troubled with
frigidity. Well, now to Confession; what, you are a Doodle, I suppose?


Min H. I am so.


Ann. Very well. Come, now muster up your offenses with an audible voice, and
explain your self; begin with your notorious misdemeanour in Wedlock -- Come,
own first, that whatever you are, you ought to be -- a Cuckold.


Min H. I do so.


Ann. Leave off that sneaking Dog-look you had best, and speak out, or here is
what shall open your pipes.


Min H. Oh good Wife. Tamerlana I mean*


Ann. Go on to the rest then; own, own.


Min H. Why, I do own, I do own, that when I married the^ first 'twas for thy
Money. Crying.


Ann. So.


Min H. And tho I was indifferently civil the first night, much against my
will; and yet I made a horrible resolution in the morning never to be so again.
Crying ^ut*


Ann. Like a sordid Rascal as I was.


Min H. Like a sordid Rascal as I was.


Ann. Good, proceed.


Min H. That I always hated that goodly plump person of thine, and being
instigated by the Devil, used to call thee a fulsome Dowdy.


Ann. For which I deserve to be hanged.


Min H. For which I deserve to be hanged.


Ann. In thy Garters at my own door.


Min H. In thy Gar^ers at my own door.


Ann. Right. Now to your contrivance with Bondevelt about marrying my Niece --
Own quickly, come.


Min H. Why, I own I have contrived.


Ann. With that Coxcomb the President -- Out with the truth, and loudly -- as
you would keep your Guts whole.


Min H. With that Coxcomb the President -- Oh Lord, he hears me now I Am sure,
Aside. In consideration of a Bond of three thousand pounds given me, to marry
him to my Niece.


Ann. That Is well; now come give me that Bond: Come, come, and set your hand
here to assign it to me, and I Will condescend to be friends.


Min H. Ah, sweet Wife, gracious Wife, gracious Tamerlana, don't exact so
hardly upon the Husband of thy bosom, don't Chick.


Ann. Nay, no delays or evasion^; do that or take this; I have Money and
Friends enough to get my Pardon for killing a thousand such drones as thou art,
and do the State good service into the bargain -- Or else come I Will go another
way, give me Bond and Judgment to get me an heir by Christmas Day next, and
I Will be satisfied.


Min H. Oons, that is a task ten times harder than the other Snick me, that is a
thing the Devil would not undertake -- Come, give me the Paper -- There --
Writes. Well, are we friends now?


Ann. Ay Friends -- what else, come kiss me. He kisses her.


Min H. Ah Anky, Tamarlana, ah Anky -- Away with your Arms then, away with that
Murder-maker now.


Ann. Well Husband, and do you truly She gives him her Arms. forget all now; you
know 'twas only a piece of cunning; we are all mortal, ^o secure my self, in
case thou should dye, and leave me, Honey. Fawning on him.


Min H. Wormwood, Gall.


^nn^ I see thou have a frown or two left upon thy forehead still. Come, we'll
have some Wine to our reconcilement: Would thou drink my health in a Bumper
of Sherry now, and sweeten it with --.


Min H. Ratsb^ne -- Come Cockatice, ye are caught at last, ye are disb^nded
in faith -- Have you laid down your Arms, good Powder-Monkey -- Come, deliver --
'Sbud give me the Papers back again, or --


Ann. How, Sir!


Min H. Instantly, or snick me my double fist shall so mawl thee -- Oh, I lie,
I lie, I lie; oh gracious Tamerlana: Goes to seize her, she pulls out a Pistol.
I did but jest, I did but jest faith and troth. Kneels to her.


Ann. Ah ye treacherous Skellum, is this your reconcilement. 'dlife, why should
not I rid my self of such a Scoundrel?


Min H. Oh Tamerlana, Tamerlana, I am at thy feet, I am at thy feet.


Ann. But hang^t, let the fool live, I know always how to keep him in awe. Go,
get ye out of my sight and study a repentant Speech, you had best. If I find
any more Rebellion, it is but thus: Phiz, bounce, your Puddings shall pay for it
instantly.


Min H. Tarmagant Jade, what a life must I lead now -- Oh, I must go and get
drunk to cure me of my fright. Oh I am a miserable Burgo-master, snick me. Exit.


Ann. So, here is the Bond, three thousand pounds worth of Paper. However,
here is the effect of Wit 'now, this comes of managing Matrimony, as I am a
Calvinist: And now I Will to my Niece, I Am sure she is in some of these Rooms,
and perhaps the President with her, I care not if he is now, the Fish is
caught, I Will go and see. -- If Husbands still are pleased when Wives they fool,
Wives must be so, that can their Husbands rule.


Exit.
Enter Bondevelt from the Press. Bond. A strange unaccountable Creature this!
And I have found since my enclosure in my Hutch here, that this Burgomaster too
is a very timorous rascally Fellow: First, to let a saucy Woman affront me
behind my back; and, secondly, to be baffled out of my Bond; but it is all one
to me who has it, great Benefits are seldom got without good Bribes: And if by
either of 'em I get but the Lady and the Fortune, I shall be repaid well
enough, therefore I Will venture to go, and show my self amongst 'em. Exit.


Enter Angellica and Gusset with Dorange, dressed like a Dutch Tailor wi^h
Women's Stays in his hand. Ang. So this disguise was very lucky


Dor. And very ugly, the Devil take me, as ever I saw.


Guss. Come, come, Sir, it is well for you we had it, the Dragons Claws in her
fury, would have spoiled your Roman Nose else Sir. -- hush -- to your Trade --
here she comes, and Madam la Marquise with her, whom she has met in the Dining
Room: come Sir, look sneakingly and mind your business. to Dorange.


Enter Anniky, and Madam la Marquise. Ann. How now, what fellow's that?


Guss. My Ladies Tailor, Mr. Stichwell Madam.


Dor. How, how, Madam, not like your Stays?


Ang. No not like them, they pinch me here upon the breast, pucker here on the
Shoulde^, and the whalebone hurts me.


Ann. And are not you a foo^ Neice, to employ him then; the fellow looks like a
Blockhead.


Dor Thankee aside. sees Mad. la Marquise. hah by Heaven the charming Creature,
that sent me the Letter this Morning. what a garb has she found me in. aside.


Ang. Ay, it is true Aunt, but he makes some amends by his honesty tho he be a
dull Rogue,


Dor. Very pretty on the other side.


Mad. It Is the Colonel, I^m sure it is he, tho disguised aside.


Guss. Here take a Needle and Silk, and gather in this skirt a little
straighter -- he stares at her. What have forgot thy Tools ah, thou're a
Bungler. gives him Needle and Silk and he sits down cross legged and s^ws
aukwardly


Ann Well, you will never come into our fashion Neice, you will always wear
Armor, and Coats with long Tails that sweep the Rooms cleane^ than the w^^ch
does; if you would have had my Tailor you had not been so clumsi^y served;
'dliflikins this awkward fellow ^ooks as if he ne re hand^ed a Needle in's life.


Dor. Pox on her she might have swore it, my Fingers are a little numbed and
please ye Madam, it is cold weather,


Ann. Well Neice, where have ye hid the President, for I Am sure he was here, --
come you may tell me, I am not now so angry at the matter, as I was, so you
entertain none but he, tell me the truth where is he?


Ang. Then to be ^lain with ye Madam, you frighted him hence, tho he would fain
have spoken with you, and I believe he waits for ye now, at your own apartment.


Ann. Well I Will go to him, and be moderate, lookee Neice, you know your
Brothers order and my power, let me be concerned in your affairs, and then all
will go well, but otherwise not so, as I Am a Calvinist. Exit Ann.


Ang. So, thank fortune, she is dispatched at last. Come, now what think ye of a
Game at Cards?


Gus. Pray let the sham Tailor get into his true shape again first, Madam.


Dor. Ay, gad, for I Am plaguee weary of my Trade -- You Devil, you puzzled me
soundly, about gathering the Skirt there. Exeunt.


Mad. Madam, I have a business that calls me home, or else I should be very
glad to make one at Ombre, but the Colonel no doubt will march ye at Picket.


Ang. The Colonel! What, then I perceive she is acquainted with him; who can
this Colonel be? Aside. You know him then, Madam, pray what Colonel is it?


Mad. Why, Madam, don't you know?


Ang. Not I: He Is an acquaintance of the Presidents, but an utter stranger to
me, and this disguise was to keep him from my Aunts knowledge.


Mad. I am glad to hear that. Aside. And to me too, Madam, as to his name, but
he is very well worth your acquaintance; he is an English Colonel of Horse I
hear, and a man of a very good Family.


Re enter Dorange new dressed, and Gusset. Dor. I believe I shall laugh at this
Adventure very often when I have not the happiness of seeing your Ladyship.


Mad. The occasion will require it, Sir.


Ang. It Is always so, when we are to be governed by Relations. Gusset get the
Cards ready. Exit Gusset.


Dor. And till they come, I beg the favor of a word with you Madam. To M. la
Marquise.


Mad. Madam, I beg your leave a minute. To Angellica. Now for the hundred
Pistoles; Fortune, I hope I shall nick his business. aside.


Re-enter Bondevelt. Bond. Madam, having been engaged lately to hear a little
tumultuous discourse just now between your Aunt and the Burgomaster, and
perceiving at last the main hinge on which the whole matter moved was relating
to me, I resolved to conceal my self no longer, but to discourse her. Is she
gone, I beseech ye?


Enter Gusset with Cards. Ang. Just gone Sir, a minute since; I Am sure you may
overtake her easily; and 'twill be proper, Sir, because now she has a mind to
see ye.


Bond. Madam, I understand ye perfectly. Looks off, and sees Dorange talking
familiarly with M. la Marquise. How oddly that Domestic behaves himself.
aside. I will therefore instantly go dispatch her as soon as possible, and be
with your Ladyship again with my first opportunity.


Ang. Sir, your most humble Servant.


Bond. Madam, I have longed for a Regalia of pleasant Conversation with your
Ladyship too -- But business, unfortunate business, Madam -- To M. la Marquise,
putting by Dorange. How now, how do do? Nods at Dor. To Ang. Oh Madam. I had
forgot to tell ye before I go, you have really a very diligent fellow of that.
Pointing to Dor. I have found him so; a very diligent fellow, and worthy
recommendation -- Your Servant Madam Exit, bowing to the Ladies, and nodding to
Dorange.


Ang. Diligent fellow! what does he mean? he talks of him as if he were my
Footman. aside. Give me the Cards, Gusset. She s^rts 'em.


Mad. The Presidents great business sure makes him forget his manners; he uses
ye very familiarly, Colonel.


Dor. Oh, I know it is his way, and am used to it -- I understand what he means
by a nod, as well as a dumb man the language of the fingers: but to the purpose
of what I whispered, do you believe me, Madam?


Mad. What, that you came here purposely to see me?


Dor. That, or you undo me.


Mad. O fie; try if you can persuade me to it; however, as I find you behave
yourself like a man of honor, I shall be induced to give ye credit; but no
more now, the Lady expects ye at Cards.


Dor. By Heaven I Will not fail -- Oh damned Rogue, now cannot I forbear pursuing
this Intreague, tho I lose this other Angel by it, and a flourishing fortune --
Oh woman, woman, tempting flesh and blood, how wicked do thou make us. They
sit down to play.


Re-enter Bondevelt. Bond. I forgot to ask her before I went whether I should
have any farther private correspondence with her Uncle, the Aunt being, I
perceive, Lady of the Ascendant, and sole Governess of the Family's affairs;
but I hope it is not too late to be resolved -- How now! what is this I see! At
Cards -- and so familiar with a Footman -- Prosper me, can this be real!
Observes 'em.


Dor. For the Point Madam -- fifty seven.


Ang. I Am your equal, Sir.


Bond. Are ye so? I have spent my time fairly then. aside.


Dor. Your Ladyship has a Qui^t, I suppos^.


Ang. No, indeed Sir I am not so lucky.


Dor. Not a Quint? what think ye then Ma^^^ of Terse Major?


Ang. Very good.


Bond. Oh Abominable, it is plain now there^^ ^n Intreague between 'em, a rank
Intreague by Heaven, and I accidentally coming back have surpised 'em, when
they thought themselves secure, -- oh the P^odigious Appetite of Women, that
when the Blood ferments make no distinction, the high born Princely Peer, and
the poor Peasant, are equal in their fancies. However I Am glad I saw this, that
I may sort a season to inform her how I despise her Amity. going out meets
Gusset.


Guss. I hope your worthyness is not going so soon.


Bond. I have staid too long unless in better Company.


Guss. How Sir, what is it you say, better Company!


Bond. Yes 'twas I said it -- besides perhaps I might disturb your Lady and the
Footman at their Game.


Guss. The Footman, Sir,


Bond. The Footman, Mistress: it is not his fine Coat can make him otherwise,
he^s too well known.


Guss. Bless me Sir, he passes here for a Colonel.


Bond. That Is a likely matter, I say once more, he is a Footman; and she knows
it, to whom within this few hours, I gave Gold to pay him for an Errand, and so
I leave her, tell her to her Pastime, and much good do her with her running
Gamester.


Exit Bondevelt. Guss. How is this a Footman^; who the Devil would have thought
it, I wondered indeed he was so over civil, how many raw young Creatures has
that Coat now put a cheat-upon.


Dor. Seven. --


Guss. And how many Guinea's will she give me for discovering this now.


Ang. Five, -- playing the G^me.


Guss. 'Twould be worth some I warrant from this Scoundrel too to conceal it.


Dor. Eight.


Guss. To intreague with a Footman, Lord how many Lovers of Quality has she had.


Ang. Five.


Guss. And some Rampart Damsels this Cheat has had I warrant too.


Dor. Nine.


Guss. It will deserve ten Guinea's from her.


Ang. Six Seven.


Guss. And from him to play false.


Dor. Nine.


Guss. Hah, sure the Impostor does not answer me, but if he did I Will be honest,
I know I shall have ten of her.


Ang. Eight.


Guss. Well Eight with honesty, and for his part. --


Dor. Nine.


Guss. Bragging Puppy, sure he has overheard me, but I Will cross-purpose him
presently. Madam, I beg your pardon for interrupting ye, but I must needs speak
with you on earnest business.


Ang. What, sure you can stay till the Game's up.


Guss. Not a minute Madam, excuse me, it is what concerns your honor.


Dor. Oh by all means Madam, I must not be guilty of detaining ye when matters
of moment engage -- your most humble Servant, I Will wait on ye another time, --
your Servant pretty Creature. to Gusset.


Guss. Impudence, prithee get thee gone. frowns.


Dor. Hey day, what has she left her manners amongst her Ladies foul Linen,
what a pox ails her. Exit Dorange.


Ang. How now, what you did not affront the Gentleman I hope.


Guss. Gentleman, hang him trotting Horse. Madam, you have been the most
damnably imposed on that ever woman was. In short, this gay Fellow that you
have made your Companion, is another Van Scopen, nothing but a Footman.


Ang. A Footman! Why, Madam la Marquise told me he was a Colonel, and a man of
a very good Family; I know too they generally dress in that manner.


Gus. Pugh, what signifies that, or what she says: Here was the President just
now looking over your Play, and in such a passion to see your familiarity, that
I could not pacify him; he knows him, it seems, no otherwise but as a Footman,
and doubtless was angry, believing some intreague between ye. Tell her, says
he, I Will leave her to her pastime, and much good do her with her running
Gamester.


Ang Was there ever such a mischievous ^ccident? What could be the Fellow's
design? he never hinted any thing* of Love to me? and I swear did not look
unlike a Gentleman.


Gus. No, a pox take him, the fellow set a good face upon the matter.


Ang. Well, be sure the Porter locks him out for the future; in the mean time
go you and find out the truth, and give the President our account of him, but
especially let us contrive to keep it from my Aunts knowledge. With Art and
Care, success we now must get,
And since good fortune fails, supply with Wit.


Exeunt.
ACT IV.
SCENE I
Prince de Landvile, Knight of the Order of the Fleece, Min Here Tomas,
Bertran, Kinglove, Dorange, with a Cloak on, all as sitting at a Banquet.
Omnes. HA, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Prince. You have very good reason, ^aith Sir; when a Wife once comes to be
tarmagant and saucy, she ought to be reprimanded. This is the most comical
fellow that ever I met with. aside to Dor.


Dor. Oh your Highness will have more of him presently; but remember I Am a
Merchant. aside. My Lord, I was beginning to tell him an infallible way to be
reveng^d of her -- What, a jolly Burgo-master, the soul of Trade, and the top
of all the Herring Merchants in Brussels, to be as it were imasculated by a
Woman; faith it is egregious; no, no, take thy Revenge, old Butter-gullet.


Min H. Revenge -- egh -- Zooks I Would give half I Am worth to be revenged of her,
and the other full Glass or two will set me purely in for it, Odsbeares: For you
must know I an't such a sneaking Pea goose then, as when I Am sober: Odsbeares,
I can talk to her then and swear; I am a mettled fellow when I Am drunk, snick
me.


King. Why well said, who gives the Burgo-master a Bumper there? Monsieur
Marquis, you are his next man, pray see the Glass come to him -- Come, here is
Confusion to all domineering Wives: Wives that set a greater Tax upon a
Husbands virility than his Constitution is ever able to pay. Here, Confusion to
'em.


Min H. Hem; come, away with it; gad I shall be pure and bowzy presently.


Bert. Along Monsieur, here is one Bumper to you; and hark you, de healt is,
may your Wife break her neck down staire to mor morning. Dri^ks.


Min H. Amen: I Will drink a pint to that, snick me.


Prince. As fairly drank as the occasion is honorable. And now, Sir, as you
are a Merchant, and a Lover of Trade, you are obliged to help a Brother in
distress; you were beginning to tell him a pleasant way of Revenge; come, pray
let us hear it.


To Dorange. Min H. Ay, come Brother Sprat, prithee out with it.


King. If it wants more heads than one we'll all help: I Will give thee some
drops to mix with her mornings draught shall make her so hoarse for a
twelvemonth, that she shall whiz like a Monster shewer in the Fair, and not be
heard the distance of two foot, let her endeavor to scold never so violently.


Min H. Thankee good Sir, snick me, that would do very well.


Bert. And harkee you Mister Burgomastree, I will give you one rare Powder, dat
shall draw her Tongue out of de Mout, de Teet out of de Head, and de Nail of
de Finger, and ven she can neider scold, bite, nor scrash, she vill be ver good
Wife, Morbleau.


Min H. Humph -- odd that is an admirable Powder too, that is Powder would do
mighty well, Sir my service tee. Drinks. but come Brother, prithee now let us
hear thine.


Dor. Why Sir I remember you said some time since, that above all things your
Wife hates a Monkey.


Min H. She does so; nay, and with that Mortal aversion that she will swoon if it
comes too near her, goggle with her eyes, foam at mouth, and play such tricks
as if ten thousand Devils had possessed her.


Dor. There Is your way, Sir, whenever you would gain your point, carry one
under your Cloak you may fright her to any thing.


Min H. Zooks he has nicked it; it is a rare way faith, to get my Bond again; for
the very Devil is not so frightful to her as a Monkey, and I Will carry one
always about me, I Am sure 'twill make her do any thing. Odsears, this is a
notable man, he carries a great deal of Docity, egh -- under that Cloak there.
Kecks


Pr. So, his joy for his Monkey and the last Bumper together, have almost foxt
him; 'twou'd be pleasant to see him and his Wife when they meet now.


King. Pleasant, 'twou'd be an admirable Scene for a Comedy.


Dor. See, he is going to tak^ the other Bumper upon it.


Bert. He will be more dru^k for joy of his Monkey, den he vas when Peace vas
proclaim.


Dor. Ay, or at the safe ^^urn of the Smirna Fleet, tho he had never so great a
share i^'^. So, Sir, by your smiling I see you like my project.


Min H. Like it! I could kiss th^e, faith and troth; but stay, where shall get
I this Monkey? hum -- Oh, Odsears, well remembered, my Niece has a rare one,
which she keeps up always privately for her own diversion, that shall be ^t
faith, and I Will go get it instantly, for I Am resolv^d to have my Bond again.
Dear Brother, I thank thee once ^ore heartily for thy project, and your good
Lordship for my ^r^at. And so, egh -- but hold, my Lord, my Lord, one G^^^s
more faith, here is -- egh -- my Neices Monkey's health, my Lord. Drinks.


Prince. Oh, with all my heart Sir, and to the rest of your Relatio^s, if you
please, Mr Bu^go master.


Min H. And so sit ye merry; I am egh -- almost drunk faith. Odseares if I
light on Aniky now she is a miserable Jade, snick me. Exit.


Bert. Ha, ha, ha, ha -- now he is gone vee sall lose de ver fine humeur, sneeka
me.


Dor. And snick me, now he is gone too, there lies my Merchandise. Throws off
the Cloak.


Enter Waiter. Waiter. My Lord, the Music your Lordship ordered wait below to
know your pleasure.


Prince. Let 'em come up. Come Gentlemen we'll have a Song. The New
Reformation. A Song.
I.
NEw Reformation begins through the Nation
And our grumbling Sages, in hopes of good wages, Direct us the way.
Sons of the Muses* then ^loak your Abuse^;
And lest you s^^uld tr^mple on ^ious Example, Observe, and Obey.
Time-frenzy Cu^^rs,
And stubborn Non-Iurors,
F^r want of Employment, now s^ urge the l^wd times:
They Have hinted, they have Printed,
Our vein is, Profaneness,
The worst of all Crimes;
Dull Clod-pated Ralliers,
Smiths, Cobblers and Colliers,
Have damned all our Rhimes.
II.
Under the notion of zeal for Devotion,
The humor has fired em, or rather inspired 'em
To Tutor the Age:
But if in season, you would know the true reason,
The hopes of Preferment is what makes some Vermin
Now Rail at the Stage.
Cuckolds and Canters,
With Scruples and Banters,
The Old Forty One peal against Poetry ring.
But let State revolvers,
And Treason-Absolvers,
Excuse if I sing
The Sconndrel that chooses
To cry down the Muses,
Would cry down the King.



A Dance. Prince. Do You hear Music, flourish all when I drink this health, To
the Great Umpire of Christendom, Genius of the War, and all our brave
Confederate Princes; Savior of our Lives, Honors, Liberties and Estates; and
eternally renowned Procurer, Finisher, and Protector of our glorious Peace, his
Sacred Majesty of Great Britain. Drinks, and Music flourish.


Bert. May he be dam dat refuse I say, Morbleau.


Dor. Nay Marqui this is not all yet, the next must be your Masters health, the
Most Christian King, then our Mistresses, and then --


King. To reel into a Chair, Colonel, that is the next then I Am sure. But now
ye talk of Mistresses, harkee, does the Intreague I know of hold to night, are
the hundred Goldfinches to fly?


Dor. Love will oblige me to fly thither, but I hope her generosity will spare
the rest, for all my jesting; however, I Am resolved to offer the hundred.


Prince. Nay Gad if you offer the hundred, it is a hundred to one but she will
resolve to take 'em.


Bert. Pardeu she be dam Jilt dat take de hunder Pistole from de Colonel, be
who she vill; do I know her?


Dor. Faith I cannot tell; but if you do, I Am sure I don't; for I never so much
as asked her name; but she is pretty as an Angel, and witty as it is possible;
and if she has an ingredient of old Sa^an mixed with these, and is mercenary,
she only runs the risque of my hate after the business is over; but for the
present I have no forecast.


Bert. Ah, she vill be shenerous no doubt, and so I vish de bon pastime wid all
min heart, ha, ha, ha, dear Colonel.


Enter Bondevelt and Waiter. Bond. Stay friend, I think it most proper to send
my Complement to the Prince before I enter, having been so fatigued with
business, that I could not wait on him here at dinner, in compliance to his
generous invitation -- Ay, do so friend, prithee go to him, and present my most
humble --


Wait. Sir, you should have told me before; you are in the very Room now, and
yonder the Prince sits amongst the rest of the company.


Bond. Od^o, he is in the right -- Well, say nothing then. Sees Dorange. Heavens
-- is it possible, sure my eyes are not defective! is not that yonder that
impudent Footman with 'em, that I lately found so familiar with Angellica? It
is, it must be he, and laughing and prating like a Companion.


Dor. Prithee, my Lord, reach the Glass; I Will begin another health.


Bond. Impudent Dog! he will begin another health! Why, what a shame is this,
when Noblemen debase themselves to mix with Grooms and Vassals: Bless me, what
will this world come to -- I Will introduce my self -- My good Lord.


Prince. Oh Mr President your humble Servant. I wanted ye extremely at Dinner,
but your perpetual business debars your friends still of their expectations.


Bond. My Lord, your Lordships command to me is always business. Ah Sir -- To
Kinglove, pushing Dorange away. Prithee fellow give way, I am glad to see you
in the Prince's company.


King. What, is he drunk? To Bertran.


Bert. I canno tell; I wondra de Colonel noe give him one grand kick, morbleau.


Bond. And harkee, if occasion will permit -- whispers King.


Dor. He takes me for a Footman. Softly to the Prince. Pray carry it so that I
may pass for one, there is an admirable design in it, which you shall know
hereafter.


Prince. Enough, it shall be done. Whispers the rest,


King. I have it.


Bert. Ha, ha, ha, -- oh it is ver well. Aside.


Bond. Now my good Lord, when goes your Lordship for Holland.


Prince. Not till Winter, Sir; I intend f^rst to wait upon King William in
England, Sir -- you may vail you^ Bonnet now if you please, you will be taken for
my Bedfellow a^on else.


Thr^ws off Dorange 's Hat. Bond. Prosper me, my Lord, I had taken him for such
indeed, but that I know him.


Prince. Ah, it is a Gentleman that gives us sometimes the favor of his Company
-- he pays his Club here -- ha, ha, ha.


Bert. Ha, ha, ha, ha. --


Bond. Oh your Lordship's merry -- I see now this was only allowance, a
frollicksome humor to make mirth, and yet had I just now a message from
Angellica, full of seeming wonder, that I should mistake his quality so, he
coming there as such a one, and by my interest; I know not what she means, but
am resolved I Will carry him to her, and there his quality will be proved. Apart.


Pr. I hear amongst the rest of the news, that fame is proud of, that your
worthiness has a design to marry.


Dor. Ay gad, and I hear it is to a particular acquaintance and intimate friend
of mine.


Bond. Scoundrel -- prosper me, but now this fellow begins to be too saucy, I
fear he will put me into a passion. To King*


King. Faith, Sir, he is thus free with us all, he makes no distinctions, it is
his humor.


Bond. It Is an undecent humor, and were I to converse much with the Prince, I
would argue him out of it. There is one of your Country Proverbs, which I
remember, very pertinent to this purpose, which is, Play with a fool at home,
and he will play with you in the Market place. I think it wants no application:
Not but I can wink at his folly my self now, having some present business with
him -- Do hear, fellow? To Dorange.


Dor. Very well, fellow.


Bond. Audacious Rogue. To the Prince


Pr. Ay, he is a very strange fellow, that is the truth on it.


Bond. Well, I know thee, and answer as thou please, so thou will do me one
piece of service. It Is this, that thou will go with me instantly to visit the
Lady I found thee at Cards with yesterday, for a private reason known only to
my self, and I will give thee something to pay thy club hereafter with men of
quality.


Dor. I Will do it, and will it spend afterward upon thee in what liquor thou
like, Bully Rock. Strikes him on the back.


Bond. Ha, ha, ha, ha. They all laugh.


Dor. Ha, ha, ha, ha -- This is as I could wish, for I have been denied
entrance lately, and long to know the reason. Aside.


Bond. My Lord and Gentlemen, I hope you will honor me with your presence, I
know ye are all admirers of fine Ladies, and I Will beg your opinions of this.


Om. With all our hearts, Sir.


Bond. I Will shame her before all the world. Exeunt.


SCENE II.
Enter Min H. Tomas Drunk, with a Monkey. Min H. Come pug -- egh, come along,
by thy notable assistance, and my -- egh, potable endeavors, I make no doubt
but to make a fool of my Wife, therefore thus I embrace thee -- I find now it is
true as the old saying is, that it is good to have a friend in a corner, and in
the Chimney-corner I found thee, the best friend I ever had in my life, snick
me, for thou can cunjure out the Devil that possesses Wedlock, and let the
poor Vermin feed at ease that is enclosed -- egh -- in the Conjugal Mouse-trap.
Why how now, Pug -- thou laugh'st to hear me called a Mouse-trap -- Very well,
Monkey-face, thou would not be so merry if thou were married, for I tell
thee, for all thy grinning, it is a Mouse-trap, a very Mouse-trap, and not only
so, but often baited with damned moldy Cheese, that choaks a man into the
bargain.


Enter Angellica. Ang. Lord, Uncle, the privilege you give the President will
bring us into a strange praemunire presently, if my Aunt knows it* for he is
coming yonder with a whole Train of Gentlemen a^^er him. What he intends, I
know not, but I Am sure my Aunt watches perpetually to see who comes in, and if
she finds 'em here we shall have a horrible House.


Min H. Oh, I warrant thee, Niece, I warrant thee, here are some that shall be
nameless -- as egh -- horrible as herself, that shall make their Party good
with her, I warrant ye; but in the first place, prithee lend me thy Keys, to
lock my reliever here into the Closet, that I may have him forthcoming upon
occasion, and then I defy thy Aunt, egh -- and all her Imps, snick me.


Locks in the Monkey. Enter Bondevelt, Prince, Dorange, Bertran, Kinglove, and
Gusset. Bond. Madam, you sent me an account to day by your Chamber-diligence
there of this most renowned person, Bowing to Dorange. both a specimen of his
Character, and an affirmative of his Quality, to shade no doubt from my shallow
understanding, the intimacy I saw between ye yesterday. My visit to your
Ladyship therefore now is, to confirm before your Uncle, and the Company here,
your honorable proceedings, and admirable choice of a Play fellow.


Ang. Sir, you will do very well to confirm it, for my own part I shall not
repent of my proceedings, till I have a worse account of my Play fellow.


Dor. Sir, tho you wear no Sword, I shall borrow one for ye* if your busy head
vent any thing reflecting on my honor.


Bond. The old impudence -- his honor -- my Lord did your Highness hear him,
-- ha, ha, ha, -- his honor.


Pr. Ha, ha, ha -- ay, Sir, he holds it up still.


King. A strange odd fellow, Sir, he will disgrace ye before your Mistress, if
you have not a care.


Bond. Oh, that is impossible -- if my word were invalid, you can give her
knowledge enough of him.


Bert. Yes, yes, if she would know his merit or qualities -- we can do him ver
good justice.


Bond. Mr Burgo-master, you once thought me worthy of a favor from your Niece,
but she has since thought better of that laced Coat there, than my civil Robe.
Pray look on your Nephew that is to be, dee know him. They stare at one another.


Min H. Odsears, who have we here, egh -- why what my Brother Sprat Merchant of
Peru, what are ye come to put off your Oleaginous Ware to my Niece, dressed
like a confounded Soldade, humh?


Dor. A plague of his memory, I thought he had been too drunk to distinguish
now; no faith, Sir, I only come to know if you remembered the Monkey.


Min H. Ay, ay, ye cunning thief, egh -- I do remember it, and do you remember
too, that your project for me then has brought ye off the danger of your
project upon my Niece now. We have Horse ponds and Blankets for
Fortune-stealers, ye cunning Dog.


Bond. What, the Coat is known then, it is reasonable the Ambassadors Livery
should be familiar here.


Min H. The Ambassadors Livery, ^oons it is the Devils Livery, a Soldiers. Pox
on thee, put it off, egh -- gad I cannot abide to look on^t, and prithee be as
thou art, a Merchant of true blue Protestant Sprats, monopoliz'd to thy self
from Coquimbo, Copiago, Porto Bello, and the Devil knows where.


Bond. What in the ^ame of Mystery does he mean? he must needs know his Nephews
Footman.


^ing. A Merchant in that dress, what Riddles this, my Lord you can inform us
I Am sure, he is your acquaintance.


Pr. He is so, Madam, and when he thinks it convenient, we are ready to expound
his Mystery.


King. There are some people above the vulgar, that may own him without scandal.


Bert. Yes, tru^y, I have seen him sit wid his Hat on among ver good Shentlemen.


Bond. Enigma's still more riddling -- sure this is not the Czar of Musc^vy
disguised, that they make such caution of discovering him -- oh here comes one
I Am sure will unravel all.


Enter Anniky. Ann. So, Niece, is this your compliance to your Brother's
Authority and my Commands -- hah, but I know this is not so much your doings,
as Sir Assinego's there -- What is your Article with me out of date already,
friend -- Have you forgot Tamarlana's power, and your horrid Oaths to encourage
no man's coming here without my knowledge -- it is very well I Will, have a Bone
for you to pick presently, you shall gnaw for this as I Am a Calvinist.


Min H. The Jade has a Pistol in her pocket now I know, but I Will keep the wind
of her till the Company's gone, and I can get Pug out, and then I defy her,
snick me. Exit.


Ann. Gentlemen, pray what business have you here with my Neice, for I must
tell ye, till I know it, and you make an interest with me you are not welcome,
this Gentleman indeed has my suffrage by virtue of his merit, and this Bond
here, but you, if you come by another authority, may walk out, she shall hear
nothing from ye.


Bond. Madam, my Lord and these Gentlemen came at my request to discover a new
Suitor of your Niece's: Here Monsieur Enigma, but since I find them shy of it,
I desire the favor from you; pray what is this doubty person, Madam?


Ann. Hey day, why who is here, the High and Mighty Signior Stitchwell, Viscount
Bodkin, and Baron Thimble. Why how now, Sirrah, what Roguery are you designing
in this dress? hah.


Dor. So, she thinks she has stitched me too. Aside.


Bond. The Lady there affirms he is a person of quality, pray let his qualities
be made public. Come, pray declare, Madam -- What is he?


Ann. What is he, why he is a Tailor.


Pr. K. and Bert. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha Loudly.


Ann. A whimsical, unthrifty, Maggot-pated Rascal, that has put on some
Of^^^ers Clothes, that is his Customer, only that he might brag that once in his
life time he looked like a Gentleman. What say you, Sir Christopher Cros^leg,
are not you a Tailor?


Dor. No.


Ann. Why ye ^itty, spindle shank'd, white liver'd, oyly-fisted, bot^herly
Cuckold, did not I see you with my Niece's Stays in her Chamber to day?


Dor. Yes.


Ann. And have you the impudence then, Sirrah, to say you are no Tailor; if
not, what Trade are ye, and be hanged?


Dor. A Cuckold maker.


Ann. Oh rare Tom Thimble, here is an impudent Rascal for ye.


Bond. This is more intricate still, I cannot understand either of 'em. Harkee,
come hither, did not you bring me a Letter lately for which I gave you Money,
Sir.


Dor. Yes, Sir.


Bond. Very well, Sir, and are not you one of the Ambassadors Retinue, a
Footman, Sir?


Dor. No, Sir.


Bond. What a Devil art thou then?


Dor. Misanthropos -- I hate impertinent Mankind -- This Madam may satisfy you,
pray gives Angellica a Ring. give it to your little one to play with. Aside.
But if you must know more, Sir, for once, let these Philosophers expound me.


King. Why then, Sir, in a word, he'is a Colonel of Horse, his Name is
Dorange, a Gentleman of a very ancient Family, Sir William Dorange's Son of
Norfolk.


Ang. What do I see, by Heaven, the very Ring I gave the Author of my once
forfeited honor, -- oh I faint. Gusset leads her off.


Dor. The rest you shall know hereafter: and then perhaps the Gentleman,
Lacquey, Sprat-Merchant and Tailor, may be qualified, if affronted to pull you
by the Nose, Sir, to Bond. I must now follow my Love affair, I find by my Watch
my intrigue with my beauteous unknown is to be within this half hour, I am a
Rogue for leaving this in such a confusion, but the other is such a darling
Temptation, that I cannot avoid, tho I repent all my Life after, apart, and
Exit.


Prince. You know where I lodge Colonel, if any thing happens, Command my
Sword and service,


King. And mine -- Come Monsieur Marqui, shall we set you down?


(...). (...) Sire, I tank you I am oblige anoder way upon one grand affair.
Exeunt


Bond. I am amazed, and I fear fooled into the bargain, but I must have the
rest on it, for to know this, and no more sets me on the Rack.


Ann. I Will after and piece up the matter, for I find here has been pl^guy
tricks and contrivances, but I Will have no private doings with my Niece without
me, I Will not give up that authority however.


Enter Min Here Tomas, with a Monkey. Min H. But you shall.


Ann. Oh the Devil the Devil -- oh, oh, -- falls into a Chair.


Min H. Why lookee, the Truth is -- here is the Devil -- and egh, there is his
Dam, and when I Have locked the door I intend to m^ke ye better acquainted.


Ann. Oh dear Husband, dear Husband, put it out of the Room, or I s^an't live
three minutes.


Min H. I don't care three Stivers, if thou do not live, egh -- one.


Ann. Dear Husband.


Min. Husband, snick me, such another word as that, and I Will whisper in's Ear,
to go and give thee a Buss -- Husband, egh -- ye saucy Gil-flirt -- no, my name
shall be Don Dominario, from my subjecting and making truckle under me a Devil
of a Wife, and so to take state accordingly. Rise, and give your Betters place,
Hussy. Goes and sits with the Monkey in the Chair, she starts out.


Ann. Ay withal my heart most noble Husband -- Dominario I mean, is there no
way to get out, oh how I tremble. aside.


Min H. Now lookee, tho my Friend Pug here asks ye no questions, it is not egh
for want of copious capacity, but to egh ease himself, and therefore leaves ye
wholly to my examination, upon which he will c^a^er his judgment, -- come, what
have you to say for your self, -- what you are a Heteroclite I suppose now?


Ann. I am so.


Min H. Good, come then, now in your own words muster up your offenses with an
audible voice; egh -- come explain your self, and begin your most notorious
misdemeanor in Wedlock, to which purpose own first, that several times on
several occasions you have properly deserved egh -- to have your bones broke.


Ann. I do so sobbing.


Min H. Good again, well now go on to the rest, and leave blubbering and
screwing your face, you had best, for if Pug should see that, he would think you
were making faces at him, and fly at ye like a Devil -- snick me, therefore
own, own quickly*


Ann. Oh -- gad, what shall I do, this is intolerable, why I do own, I do own,
that when we first married, I was in Love with another man, and that upon the
wedding Night I would have made ye a Cuckold but I could not. Sobbing.


Min H. Like a notorious Jilt as I was.


Ann. Like a notorious Jilt as I was.


Min H. So proceed, Odsears I have her at a rare advantage. aside.


strokes Pug. Ann. That my not trying other men since, to get me an heir was
not for want of my inclination but theirs, and the less grift was brought to
the Mill, the more still I put you to hard Labor.


Min H. For which I deserve to be hanged.


Ann. For which I deserve to be hanged. sobbing.


Min H. In my Garters at my own door.


Ann. In my Garters at my own door. crying out.


Min H. Right, and that I did insolently plunder my Lord and Master Dominario
aforesaid, of a Bond and Assignment of three thousand Pounds, which I now
beseech him upon my knees to receive again, -- and pardon me, -- Come out
with it, and instantly, or here is one shall fetch 'em out of your Pocket, snick
me.


Ann. Oh, which here upon my knees, I give him again, throws the Papers. and the
Devil do him good with 'em, oh, I Am at my wits end.


Min H. Oh, you Servant good Anniky, and now you may go if you please, about
your business, and brag what a gives the Key. doodle and Assinego you made of
me, ha, ha, ha, but hold well remembered faith, let me see, turn out your Pocket
before you go, let me see whither your Gun-room be clear, have ye no Fire Arms
about ye.


Ann. Only this which I was going to throw away indeed Husband. pulls out a
Pistol, he starts


Min H. A Pistol, away with it ye Devil instantly, or I Will bring. Pug to bed to
thee to Night -- Ah ye Cockatrice, she throws it away. ye Crockadile were ye
stealing away with that indeed, -- it is well I had a memory she would have had my
Papers again before morning else, as soon as ever I had parted with my second
here, I had been challenged for 'em at Sword and Pistol.


Ann. Curse on him, if he had not found out this Monster to plague me, I had
kept him always under, but now he has me at his ^eck, and may do what he will,
which to a Wife, that has before been always uppermost, is in-supportable
we^ps. it is a sad Story, but it is true, for I can no more endure the sight of
that odious Devil above here, than I could of the the other below, as I am a
Calvinist. Exit.


Min H. So, here they are once more, ha, ha, ha, this makes me merry, and now
thanks to my dear releiver, come Buss Buss. kisses the Monkey.


Enter VanScopen. Van Sco. Sir there is great News since you were below Stairs,
my Master the Ambassador is newly returned, and just gone up into his Sisters
Chamber.


Min H. Odfears, he must not know of my Agreement with the President till I
have made sure of the Money -- egh -- well I Will go to him, come dear Friend
let us along, Buss, Buss. Exit.


Enter Ma^scr^illo hastily. Van Sco. How now Brother in iniquity, what in haste?


Masc. Yes faith, like a Pot that is boiling over, is my Master here.


Van Sco. No, gone some time since, and I think he said out of Town, why what is
the matter?


Marc. Matter? why the great matter of the world, ye Rascal, matter of
Hornifying ye Scoundrel.


Van Sco. What, the Colonel resolves then to answer her Challenge; and will thou betray 'em, Rogue? -- Will thou spoil sport?


Masc. Why, ye unconscionable Rogue, would you have me Pimp for nothing;
'Sdeath she is as niggardly as a Usuring Jew, her Soul lives in an Alley, and
gad if she were a Cherubim I Would betray her if she has no sense to reward
Diligence -- Yonder they are faith -- close as Pigeons, and I am going to bring
my Master to breakfast on 'em.


Van Sco. There will be some blustering in our family too now the Ambassador's
come home; I believe the President will be routed when the Father of the Kid's
known.


Masc. Angellica deserves to be befriended because she is generous; but my
covetous Devil at home lets Money stick to her fingers like Bird lime; there is
no getting it from 'em; she thinks she^s secure of him till to morrow noon, but
I know where he is gone, and will ferret him away faith -- he will reward me with
a Piece or two I Am sure.


Van Sc. What cursed unhappy hours does he behold,
Who to be proved a Cuckold pays his Gold?

Masc. On the other side how wisely Gold is paid
To one well gifted in the Pimping Trade:
It Is Art sublime -- for as a learned Poet said,
Pimping the Mind inures, and does prepare
For Politics, as Hunting does for War.

ACT V.
SCENE I.
Enter Don Leon and Angellica. D. Leon. YOu are then assured 'twas he.


Ann. I cannot mistake, Sir, this Ring he gave me, which I know was mine, and by
him taken from me that fatal Night, besides his Stature and his Tone of Voice,
tho the Smallpox have altered much his features, and his hair then wore uncut
changed for a Peruke, confirm him for the Man.


D. Leon. And Sister did he make such haste out do you say, when he had shown this
Ring?


Ang. Vanished immediately, e're I had time to rally my lost Spirits, sunk in a
swoon at such unlooked surprise, he disappeared, leaving only these few words
softly with the Ring, this Madam may satisfy you, pray give it to your little
one to play with.


D. Leon. How should he know of that?


Ang. I cannot guess what way, unless the Nurse be false.


D. Leon. Furies and Fire, give it your little one, that looks all insolence,
neglect and scorn, as if he braved ye with his lucky Treachery, or as ye since
were served so by some other.


Ang. I could not understand him, I confess and had no time to Argue.


D. Leon. I Will find time, and force his best occasions to wait on it, to make
him clear the blot that stains my Honor, or in his lustful heart imprint my
wrongs, so deep that all our Family shall read 'em, and own I have revenged an
injured Sister.


Ang. Oh, if you ever loved me, dearest Brother, add not to my misfortune by a
greater, endangering your self in any quarrel, there are much milder ways.


D. Leon. I Will warrant thee I Will use 'em, -- I Will find out Bertran, by him send
a Letter to Dorange, then as he answers nobly I Will proceed. apart. If reason
justly can delay the Fight,
It Is well, if not my Sword shall do me right. Exeunt.



SCENE II.
Enter Dorange unbotton'd, and Madam la Marquise in a Nightdress. A Table and
dressing box by. Mad. I wonder where this lazy fellow is, some body has been
knocking at the Gate this good while; stay here, dear Sir, a little till I go
and see, Il'l be with ye instantly, I know my Husband is secure till noon, and
you shall not go yet I am resolved. Indeed it is too early* Exit Madam.


Dor. Too early did she say, to go -- rather too late that I repent my coming,
now things are weighed in just consideration -- What a vile Creature is
ungoverned man, when merely his own natural heat can change him into a fulsome
Idiot. I have left now the fair Angellica, half dead with doubts; nay, and two
thousand pound a year in Posse, to give a hundred Pistoles to a Jilt for one
nights Lodging, for whieu -- it is gone -- you are paid, and shake your empty
Pockets. Am not I then an Idiot? Faith Colonel Coddle, I am afraid you are.
Besides, Angellica was beautiful as an Angel -- but then the Child, that is
indeed a Thorn which pricks with jealousy; but why should I suspect it is not
mine, it is likely and reasonable, and consequently her Estate mine too by
owning it-and yet I Have am left her; Idiot, Idiot still. As for this Creature,
now my judgment's cool, my Tongue cannot express how much I hate her. And yet
the Jilt is pretty too, but mercenary to such degree, she would kiss for Gold a
Negro, and get a Brat to make the Devil a Page of. When I first gave my Purse,
foolishly thinking she would refund two thirds back, if not all, no juggler
ever played his Cups and Balls with such a slight pass, presto -- it was gone,
at which my heart gave m^ so strange a thump, as if 'twere coming to my head to
break it, or rail at me for my egregious folly -- humh -- let me think, with
what was in that Purse, and little more, a Man might buy a House, with Acres
and a pretty Orchard to it, to live in Fresco, at -- A hundred Pistoles, 'twould
buy a Horse to charge against the Turks, break through their Ranks, and trample
down a Bassa. 'Twould do a hundred things -- indeed any thing -- And what have
you done with it, Colonel -- Nothing. You have played a game at Hide and Seek
with it, and now can neither find that nor yourself. A hundred Pistoles --
well, here, here, they lie. This Box (takes up the Dressing Box.) contains the
treasure of my folly -- hah -- if e're you could dispense with plunder,
Colonel, what think ye now -- But see, that very word, like some great charm,
has drawn her Carcass up to look ou't for her Soul.


Re-enter Madam in haste. Mad. Oh dear Colonel, I am at my wits end, this idle
fellow is gone out, no one knows where, and my Husband, unlooked for, coming
back, has been knocking at the Gate this half hour, the Maid's just gone to let
him in.


Dor. Sings. A hundred pound in Gold, a lusty Purse indeed.


Mad. Oh for Heaven's sake, dear Sir, get into that Closet immediately, and
I Will contrive to get him away as soon as I can -- Bless me, how you stand --
'Dslife if ye don't go in quickly he will come and catch ye.


Dor. Sings. A lusty Purse indeed. Did e're so much in so short time, from one
poor Cully bleed.


Mad. Lord, Sir, what dee mean? is this a time for tuning, why my Husband's
just coming up stairs. Goes to the Stairs.


Dor. Gad I Have a great mind to stay and see who this Cuckold is, then stand
buff to him, and try to take my Money again, but it may be she will get him off
quickly, and give me new occasion to make her compound. I Will try her once more.
Exit into the Closet.


Enter Bertram and Mascarillo. Bert. Good morr, Madam, you rise ver early dis
morning.


Mad. Ah my dear, you know I can never sleep soundly when you are out of the
way, but I confess I did not expect ye home quite so soon.


Masc. That I dare swear you did not, nor desire it neither. Aside.


Mad. Has any extraordinary business happened my dear?


Bert. Yes, yes, ver extraordinary business.


Mad. Come, I know ye have brought me the money now, I Am sure you have.


Bert. Yes, yes, widout doubt, you will be paid for your great kindness.


Mad. Prithee what business Child, I am one half of ye, ye know, and I cannot
rest till I know what accidents happened to the other. Claps his Cheek.


Masc. Ah, very pretty wheedle, coakes him there -- Now would I swear by this
she had certainly made him a Cuckold, tho I had known nothing of the matter.
Bert. peeps about the Room.


Mad. What is it you look for, my dear.


Bert. Vor de Birds-nest, but gazoon, I perveave dey be all fledge and flown
away.


Masc. Into the Closet there, Sir, no further; search there and you may find
one with his Feathers on, I warrant ye.


Mad. That Villain has undone me, what shall I do. Aside.


Bert. Come, Madam, let me see de Key, dear is one Papier dat I must have
presantlee, dat concern me ver much.


Mad. The Key indeed, Sir, the Key, the Key, the Key is lost; Sir, I am just
sending to have another made, you may have it at night, Sir.


Bert. At Night, oh ver good, you are vor de Night work still Madam, but I have
now occasion vor de day, de Sun fall shine upon your grand grand virtue,
virtue, dat is you say of such pure Nature, it never was tainted yet wid one
bad Tought, virtue as white as down of Swan or Ermine fall glitter in de day
light, hey Sirrah, go take de Fork from de Shimmine and breaka open de door.


Mas. Yes Sir, gad I Will desire my Master to let me be at board wages for the
time to come, I shall have my Meat sawe'd with Ratsbane else, I see by her
looks -- come let us see, gets a Fork. what concealed Vermin is here that is
eating my Masters Cheese.


Thumps at the door to open it and Dorange speaks. Dor. within. Dee hear there,
who dares to touch the door once more to open it is a Dead Man that minute.


Bert. Hah vat is dat.


Masc. Oh Lord dee hear Sir, -- there is one within says, he that touches the
Door to open it, is a dead Man.


Bert. Ver good, dear is some body den, who is it in de name of virtue, I
beseech you Madam?


Mad. Indeed Sir some Thief I Am afraid, that has had some private notice of my
Jewels that are there.


Dor. within. I have a Pistol charged in one hand, and a good Sword in the other,
therefore keep off. Mascarillo lets the Fork fall, and starts.


Bert. Hugh, wat do he say?


Masc. He says he has a Pistol charged in one hand, and a good Sword in the other.


Bert. Vell, vell, dat is not matra Morbleau, so have I, go Sirrah and bid him
come out, and if he can show de reason how he deserve it I will give him de
Shentleman satisfaction fairly, tell him dat Sirrah.


Masc. Oh but I am sensible Sir, the man has a spite against me, and will aim
at my Guts through the Keyhole, besides you know Sir, your Worship is much
better armed. Good Sir, walk a little nearer your self, you may hear what he
says plainly, Sir.


Bert. Dog, Coward, look you to her den. Goes near the d^or.


Masc. With all my heart, Sir. Gadzooks I shall (...) what a look was there
again.


Mad. Infamous slave! have I honored thee with (...) given thee so many kind
words for this.


Masc. What a pox was I the better for your smiles or (...) you never gave me a
f^rthing of Money; and pray what is (...) place of a Pimp g^od for, without the
perquisites, therefore in short, Madam, for what has happened thank your self.
Apart.


Mad. Sordid Rascal, I shall find a time --.


Dor. Within. So ho, without there, will you give me leave to speak to the
matter fairly.


Bert. Ay, ay, you sall have leave, speak on.


Dor. Let the Husband of the Lady approach then to hear me.


Bert. Vell, vell, he does approach.


Dor. First then, as I am a Gentleman, which let him assure himself I am, I am
utterly ignorant of his Name or Quality, nor had I ever been familiar with the
Lady, but by her consent and invitation.


Mad. Horrid detraction, Sir, I hope you will not give credit to what an impudent
Thief says, that has broke into your house.


Bert. Patience, Madam, Patience, your Virtue vill clear all dis I make no
doubt.


Mad. Now will this Traitor, because I took his Money a little, ungenerously
tell all, this is an Englishman right.


Dor. Within. But accidentally seeing her, and being charmed with her Beauty, I
could not help saying aloud, I Would give a hundred Pistoles for a nights Lodging;
she over-hearing me liked the Proposal, and sent me a Letter of Challenge by a
trusty Footman of yours, who might, if he pleased, have informed you before,
and hindered all.


Bert. Haw Rascal, is dis true? To Masc.


Mas. O Lord, Sir, I was resolved to be sure, Sir: why I could not swear 'twas
true, Sir, till I was sure.


Bert. Oh dam Rogue, he let me be make de Cuckold dat he might be sure.


Masc. Gad I begin to wish I had not meddled in the matter, that little Witch
there has given me a Spell, I shall hedge my self into beating on my Conscience.


Bert. Vell, Sir, proceed.


D^r. Within. Why, Sir, I received the Letter, answered the contents, and came
to the appointment, where I had the pleasure of her Company, and she the
benefit of my Money.


B^rt. Oh rare virtue, oh fine virtue, virtue more white den Down of Swan or
Ermine.


Mad. ^h^y thou most impudent of Creatures, can thou, wilt tho^, dare thou
affirm this, have thou no remembrance of what I am -- Oh Wretch, do thou ever
expect --


Dor. Within. Expect, no, no, Madam, I expect nothing again, says I give it
over for lost -- Sir, Sir, to prove every tittle of what I say is true, you will
^ind the hundred Pistoles locked up in her Dressing Box upon the Table there.


Mad. So* then, all is out. Oh that I had him but under the mischief of my
Revenge for one hour, Well, if ever I trust an English man again.


Masc. A hundred Pistoles, there is high feeding, there is costly Mutton for ye,
and not one to spare me, there is a niggardly Devil too. aside.


Bert. In de Dressing box, vet good again, -- come de Key, Madam de Key, I must
see de inside of dis box -- nay no struggle.


goes to search her, and finds none. Mad. You Are like to have no Key of me, I Have
none on it.


Dor. within. It Is under ^he Bol^^er.


Bert. Rare still, do you know nothing Madam, he widin know ver well your
private place, I perceive, ^ete me see. goes and finds the Key.


Mad. Confusion, I shall love the money too, and cons^quently my dear
appointment at Ba^^et, curse on him, this is the worst vexation of all.


Bert. Here is de Purse morbleau, here unlocks the Box and takes out the P^rse.
is de material vor d^ Basset, I find Madam do I would no give you de hunder
Pistole my se^f, you knew ver well how to take up de Money of anoder, and I
suppose Madam have only pawn vor dis your virtue Madam, or some such little
trifle, ver fine still, -- Come Sire com^ out, and upon my honor you fall
have^vat liberty you desire. Dorange comes out, both start


Bert. Vat de Colonel -- oh Morbleau.


Dor. Hah my Friend the Marqui -- Hell and Damnation was s^e his Wife; what a
damned chance is t^is, -- I am so confounded with shame, I cannot speak to him.
Aside. Generous Sir, tu^^ing to him. assure yourself I am very much concerned
and ashamed at what is p^st, and should hardly think my life enough to make ye
satisfaction, had I not this excuse, that the offense to your honor was a sin
of ignorance, and the temptation too strong to ^e refused by human frailty.


B^rt. Sire, I am ver well satisfied in your case, and believe I should have
done de some my self; and to show you I design noting but honor and amity,
dear is your Purse again, one hunder Pistole vill serve ver well for your self,
your Arse and your Equipage, to appear v^r de honor of your King -- only one
leetel piece, if you please, I will beg here. Gives the Colonel the Purse, but
takes out one Pistole.


Dor. Oh Dear Sir, any thing -- take what you please.


Bert. No, no, no more, no more, dear Madam. Throws his Wife the Pistole. Dear
is your Sallery, Dear is your price, dear is one Pistole for you, vish is
enough for any Lady of your Trade, de Colonel is my friend, and sall be use
like my self, I never give my wench more, morbleau.


Madam. Then pray give it her now, if you please; I shall endeavor to make my
self easy without troubling your generosity. But for you, niggardly Sir, that
think you can give too much for a Lady's favor, and for a petty sum can blast
her honor, he smiles, and takes the Purse. take this hearty Curse, May you be
charmed to dote on some She-Devil, Ugly, diseased, yet may she hold ye fast,
Torment your sordid Soul, and beggar ye at last. Exit.


Bert. Let her make noice Colonel, let her make noice, her time is but ver
short he^^, ^or gazo^^: I ^ill send her to one Convent to morr morning -- I
have tak care of (...) ^^odee to de small purpose, I will try now vat I can do
for her Soul -- For your part, Colonel, as you are a man of honor, take care
of mine -- dat is all I ask.


Dor. Believe, dear Sir, I^ll study to make satisfaction. Knock within.


Bert. How^ now, vat is dat knock? hah. Looks out. Morbleau, (...) friend the
Ambassador newly returned from Paris: Run Ra^e^^, an^ open de Gate.


Masc. A^ g^d, and glad I Am got off so; but I must hide my self from my
Mi^^ress; for whi^^ she is in the house I Have never a member safe about me, that is
c^^tain* Exit.


Dor. So, here is the Ambassador coming up, the Brother to Angellica, whom I
^afely wronged; and instead of rig^ting her, have been spending my time here in
another lewd frolic, without any honor, justice, or consideration, humh --
what can be the end of this? Why we must fight; he knows me, and I am sure is
brave enough to right his Sister: and for my own part, I am so angry now at my
own mischiefs, I Will give him all the means I can ^o punish em, and so revenge
my self upon my self. Enter Bertran and Don Leon.


Bert. Monsieur, beside my cordial tank vor dis grand honeur of your visit, I
am ver glad de S^entelman is here dat you voud have speak wid -- Dear Sire,
de^e is de wordy Colonel himself.


D. Leon. You extremely oblige me -- Sir, I have spent some time in seeking ye,
and have a business for your private ear. To Dorange.


Dor. I^m ready to attend ye Sir.


D. Leon. Shall I desire, my good friend -- your Garden for us to discourse in
a little, the affair shall not be long.


Bert. Wid ^ll min heart Sir, I beseech you command any ting. Exeunt.


SCENE III. A Garden.
Enter Kinglove. King. I hope my intre^g^ing Colonel has got no mischie^ by
his ^old un^erta^ing, I h^ve b^^n watching about the house all this morning, to
a^s^^t if 'twere ^ece^sary, but I ^ind all still as if twere midnight: However
I Will take another turn or two by Angellica's Lodging, and then if he does not
b^^^, he^s gone another way, and we shall meet at our old Rendezvous. Exit.
Enter Don Leon and Dorange.


D. Leon. Since then you own, Sir, you have wronged my Sister, w^a^ way do you
propose to do her Justice?


Dor. Sir, as I fear the case now stands with her, the question p^zzles me.


D. Leon. Does it so, Sir? what reason can you give?


Dor. Faith Sir, no great one, and yet I think sufficient to stop proceedings
in the affair you drive at.


D. Leon. Sir, that affair as much exceeds your hopes, nay, or your merit, when
compar^d with hers, that it would leave you friendless in the world if you
durst put it to Comparison.


Dor. You have not yet, Sir, tried how much I dare; but for your Sister, I have
value for her, and therefore shall make no Comparison.


D. Leon. Furies! A value for her! Sir, you talk as if you had only heard her
touch her Lute, or known her mistress of some trivial quality; but I must tell
ye, Sir, your value for her should be Adoration, and for her sake neglect all
the world.


Dor. Sir, for her sake I might do much indeed, but there is another since I
went that shares her; the Riddle is, I know, obscure to many, but it is to me
expounded; there has been a Child I hear.


D. Leon. Shame to my honor, dare thou urge my Blood, from my warm Heart to
paint my face with blushes, by hearing thee sp^ak this, and not fear vengeance,
and severe chastisement from a wronged Brother; by day and night I Have heard her
hourly vow, when first she hid the secret in my bosom, that of that Child thou
were the cursed Father; and as I know her full of truth and honor, therefore
thy vice is still more black and odious, to soil a second time her Reputation
-- Draw then, I had some thought at first to bless thee with happy means of
Reconcilement to her, and given thee by Marriage title to a Fortune, exceeding
even the bounds of thy Ambition; but this last baseness has revoked it all, and
nothing but thy blood shall calm my fury. Give me thy heart.


Dor. Much freer than my Sword, Sir. Fight. Dorange is wounded.


D. Leon. That Is something; yet I see you are not Case-harden'd. Pause.


Dor. No Sir, you have found me penetrable. Come on.


D. Leon. I Will try if I can hit the place again. Fight again. D. Leon loses his
Sword, and Dorange takes it up.


Dor. You see the advantage fortune throws upon me.


D. Leon. Make use of it, for I shall scorn a life that e're was in thy power.


Dor. Spoke too hastily, yet by my lewd life past, I must confess I have
deserved w^rse words, -- there, noble Sir, there is your Sword again -- And
once more use it in your just revenge, you have not yet, Sir, drawn out the
wild blood that wronged your Sister, try your skill again.


Gives him his Sword. D. Leon. No, were she dear as my Soul, as she is my
Sister, I would not fight again, thou brave young man; this honor has regained
her honor lost, and fixed me for thy Brother. They embrace.


Dor. Thus, thus for ever I ^^al to that: And now, dear Sir, assure ye, my late
neglectful words of your fair Sister, were not intended basely, as I spoke 'em,
but from a conscious sense of my own mischiefs, and to provoke you to a severe
Justice, which you have done too slightly for a fault of such uncommon nature.


D. Leon. You bleed, pray take this Scarf, which my dear Sister gave me, as a
kind-present, when I went to Travel; and as it binds the wound up in your Arm,
may mine, yours and my Sisters heart, be ty^d in lasting union. Embrace again.


Dor. I long to see her, to throw at her feet a true repentant heart, and beg
to be received without advantage, for her Estate shall still be settled on her,
and on her pardon rest my whole contentment.


D. Leon. Here she comes, fear of our meeting I know has led her to find us
out. Enter Angellica, Prince, Kinglove and Bertran.


Ang. Oh heaven! it is as I feared; here has been mischief.


D. Leon. A little, Sister, but none that long shall keep the paleness on your
Cheek; to prove it, look on the Man whom I embrace, and then receive him as
your long secret Love has given ye cause: I have proved him, found him brave,
kind and repentant -- the secret is locked closely up with us, and so your
honor clear to all the world. Apart to Angel.


Dor. Thus low, I first thank heaven for my blessing -- Kneels to Angel. then
beg your pardon and leave to love for ever.


Ang. My heart^s too full to let me speak my Joy; let then my eyes and blushes
do that office.


Prince. Well, my intentions were good to share with ye, though I chanced to be
out of the business.


King. Faith, Colonel, we have been watching for ye all this morning; right or
wrong, I came to make one of your side.


Dor. My good Lord, and my dear Kinglove, I ever was your Debtor.


Bert. Morbleau, I tought it had bin some State Affair you went about, you
carry de ting so gravely.


Enter Min Here Tomas, Bondevelt and Anniky. Ang. The clashing Swords has
raised the neighborhood, you may be assured of that by my Uncle and Aunts
coming.


Anni. How do you Nephew? I hope you have not been assaulted.


D. Leon. No, no, Aunt, a Trial of Skill only -- nothing else.


Min. H. Do hear Brother Sprat-Merchant, in the first place a Plague on thee,
will thou never leave off this Rakehelly Soldierly Coat again? And in the second
place, what a pox make you cling so close to my Niece, hah?


Dor. Why then, Sir, first to give you a reason, and then to satisfy all that
are here, know, that I am married to your Niece, and have been so this two
years; and more than that, have a Child by her: And so, as I hear, by my Unkles
Will, your Claim is void, Aunt; you may ease your Husband now about an Heir, I
have got one for the Estate already.


D. Leon. Brave and honorable, this was spoke to clear your reputation, if any
malicious Tongue should slander ye. Aside to Angel.


Anni. Well, Niece, art thou married then? And have thou really had a big-belly
before me?


Ang. Not so big a belly as yours, good Aunt; but however, I cannot contradict
the Colonel: You watched very narrowly it is true, but I made shift to dazzle
your eyes now and then, Aunt -- I am only sorry for this Gentleman, that I hear
has been out of his Money about me; but, Sir, I Will wish ye to a good Wife, though
I can be none.


Dor. I think, Sir, I Am indebted to ye two Pieces; there they are, Sir. And now
I hope you will believe, 'twas on my own Errant, and not yours, I went when I
carried -- the Letters -- ha, ha, ha.


Bonn. D^e hear Mr. Burgo-master, give me my Bond of 3000 l. again, and prosper
me I shall be as easy as she, 'twill turn to better account in Trade three
thousand times over. I have been in the South-part of the Globe already, and
now will visit the North, the Ports of Russia and Muscovy will be open; and
some Commodities to warm the Stomach, and qualify the coldness of the Climate,
must be very beneficial, which principally I design shall be French Brandy,
Irish Usquebaugh, and English Ginger-bread. They all laugh.


Min. H. Well, since our hopes are frustrated, there is your Bond again; if she
had not married a Rakehelly Soldier, after all, I had not so much cared, for
now I find he is one: But why the Devil could not I find him ^ut all this
while, I believe he has bewitched me, for I used to smell 'em out; my Nose
would formerly wind out any one that dealt in Powder and Bullet three quarters
of a Mile, snick me.


Anni. What will vex me worst is, that when my Niece keeps House, that Devil
the Monkey will be always frisking about there; and then I shall never be able
to give her a visit. She has stood in awe of me all this while, and kept it
close in a corner, but now she is married and cares for no body, I shall have
the Devil upon my back as I sit at dinner. Weeps.


Ang. Oh, I warrant ye, Aunt, I shall take care to keep it out of your way,
when you come; you may be sure, the respect I bear ye will make me do that.


Dor. And, Sir, since you were bred with such antipathy against our Trade, a
Soldier, I will dress my self always when you come in a Cloak -- ha ha ha- like
one of your Trade, a Merchant, whether of Sprats or Herrings, no matter ^ow ye
know.


Min. H. No, a Pox on ye, you know ye have caught the right Fish, snick me.


Dor. And now, dear Brother, my heart is so merry that I wish we had Music,
that since our first (...) was so priva^e, this second might look somewhat more
like a W^dding, which shall be to morrow, with more joy than ever I saw the
^ig^^. Softly to Ang.


King. Sir, Music shall be my task to procure, for but half an hour ago, I saw
a whole Band of them P^acti^ing at a Tavern over the way, from this Window here
I can becken 'em


Enter Music, then a Song and Dance; which done, enter Gusset, Van Scopen and
(...), with the Child Guss^^. Knowing, Madam, this little Gentleman would add
to your Mirth, I have brought it to finish the Entertainment.


Van S. But pray take Nurse off from me, Madam, for she has worshipped me, I
believe, a hundred times, as we came along; my fine Shew-Coat h^re, has made
the simple Jade take me for in betters.


Prince. Pri^^^e look how the President is gravelled. Bon. stares at VanSc.


King. Ha ha ha -- the Comical mistake of the Lacquey is plain now.


Bon. Well, I see now a traveled head may be erroneous -- I have been too
positive, and will be gone, left undecent laughter offend me. Exit.


Fard. Ods my life, what is here to do, what Riddles are these? Gad, I Will not
have little Master affronted Stares at Van Sco. and Dorange in his P^pp^, not I
-- Tankee, T^nkee, dood Nurse, says he -- Ay, dats my swee^ (...) ^ylds -- dats
my Sugar Sops.


Dor. Well, Nurse, you may venture upon me for the Father now then -- and
there^ for thy diligence honest likeness, Gives both Money. and (...) and my
b^essing on thee, sweet one, Kisses the Child. and since (...) now confirms our
happiness, ^he re^t to morrow, dearest, when we'll try,
With mu^^al Wills, to get another Boy.
Exeunt.


FINIS.
BOOKS printed for, and sold by James Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
DIscourses on the Public Revenues, and on the Trade of England* In Two Parts,
viz. I. Of the Use of Political Arithmetic, in all Considerations about the
Revenues and Trade. II. On Credit, and the Means and Methods by which it may be
restored. III. On the Management of the King's Revenues. IV. Whether to Farm
the Revenues, may not, in this Juncture, be most for the Public Service? V. On
the Public Debts and Engagements. Part. I. To which is added a Discourse upon
Improving the Revenue of the State of Athens. Written Originally in Greek; and
now made English from the Original, with some Historical Notes.

Discourses on the Public Revenues, and on the Trade of England; which more
immediately Treat of the Foreign Traffic of this Kingdom. Viz. I. That Foreign
Trade is beneficial to England. II. On the Protection and Care of Trade. III.
On the Plantation Trade. IV. On the East India Trade. Part. II. To which is
added the late Essay on the East India Trade.

An Essay upon the probable Methods of making a People Gainers, in the Balance
of Trade: Treating of these Heads; viz. Of the People of England, or the Land
of England, and its Product. Of our Payments to the Public, and in what manner
the Balance of Trade may be thereby effected. That a Country cannot increase in
Wealth and Power but by private Men doing their Duty to the Public, and but by
a steady Course of Honesty and Wisdom, in such as are trusted with the
Administration of Affairs.

A Discourse upon Grants and Resumptions. Showing how our Ancestors have
proceeded with such Ministers as have procured to themselves Grants of the
Crown-Revenue; and that the forfeited Estates ought to be applied toward the
Payment of the Public Debts.

Essays upon, I. The Balance of Power. II. The Right of making War, Peace, and
Alliances. III. Universal Monarchy. To which is added, an Appendix containing
the Records referred to in the Second Essay. These five by the Author of The
Essay on Ways and Means.

A New Voyage round the World. Describing particularly, the Isthmus of America,
several Coast and Islands in the West Indies, the Isles of Cap^ Verd, the
Passage of Terra del Fuego, the South Sea Coasts of Chili, Peru, and Mexico;
the Isle of Guam one of the Ladrones, Mindanao, and other Philippine and
East India Islands near Cambodia, China, Formosa, Luconia, Celebes, etc. New
Holland, Sumatra, Nicobar Isles; the Cape of Good Hope, and Santa Helena. Their
Soil, Rivers, Harbors, Plants, Fruits. Animals, and Inhabitants. Customs,
Religion, Government, Trade, etc. By Capt. William Dampier Vol. the First.
Illustrated with particular Maps and Draughts. The fourth Edition, Corrected.

Voyages and Descriptions. Vol. II. In Three Parts, viz. 1. A Supplement of the
Voyage round the World, describing the Countries of Tonquin, Achin, Malacca,
etc. their Product, Inhabitants, Manners, Trade, Policy, etc. 2. Two Voyages to
Campeachy; with a Description of the Coasts, Product, Inhabitants,
Logwood-cutting, Trade, etc. of Iucatan, Campeachy, New-Spain, etc. 3. A
Discourse of Trade-Winds, Breezes, Storms, Seasons of the Year, Tides and
Currents of the Torrid Zone throughout the World; with an Account of Natal in
Africa, its Product, Negro's, etc. By Capt. William Dampier. Illustrated with
particular Maps and Draughts. To which is added a General Index to both
Volumes. The second Edition.

A Collection of Original Voyages: Containing, 1. Capt. Cowley's Voyages round
the Globe. 2. Capt. Sharp's Journal over the Isthmus of Darien, and Expedition
into the South Seas. Written by himself. 3. Capt. Wood's Voyages through the
Streights of Magellan. 4. Mr. Robert's Adventures among the Corsairs of the
Levant, his Account of their way of Living, Description of the Archipelago
Islands, taking of Scio, etc. Illustrated with several Maps and Draughts.
Published by Capt. William Hack.

Three Practical Essays, viz. On Baptism, Confirmation, and Repentance.
Containing Instructions for a Holy Life: With earnest Exhortations, especially
to young Persons, drawn from the Considerations of the Severity of the
Discipline of the Primitive Church.

A Paraphrase on the Gospel of St. Matthew. 8 o.

A Paraphrase on the Gospel of St. Mark, and St. Luke. All Three Writ by Samuel
Clark. M. A. Chaplain to the Right Reverend Father in God John Lord Bishop of
Norwich, and Fellow of Caius College in Cambridge.

Jocobi Rohaulti Physica. Latin reddidit, and Annocatis majoribus ex Clariss.
Newtoni, etc. principiis illustravit S. Clark, A. M. admodum Reverendo in
Christo Patri Joanni Episcopo Norvicensi a Sacris Domesticis. Editio secunda,
correcta and multum aucta. Accessit Index Rerum and Phaenomenorum. Item tres
novae tabulae aeri incisae.

Several Discourses; concerning the Shortness of Humane Charity. The Perfection
of the Mercy of God. The Difference of Times with respect to Religion. The Joy
which the Righteous have in God. The secret Blasting of Men. The Instructive
Discipline of God. The Danger of Unfaithfulness to God. The Malignity of
Popery. The Conversion of a Sinner. Also, the Prayer used before Sermon. Vol. I.

Several Discourses; concerning the true Valuation of Man. The Necessary
Repentance of a Sinner. The Exercise, and Progress of a Christian. The Frailty
of Humane Nature. The Justice of one toward another. The Nature of Salvation
by Christ, etc. Being Twenty Sermons. Vol. II. Both by the Reverend and Learned
Benjamin Witchcot, D. D. sometime Minister of St. Lawrence Jury, London.
Examined and Corrected by his own Notes; and Published by John Ieffery, D. D.
Archdeacon of Norwich.

The God-Father's Advice to his Son. Showing the Necessity of performing the
Baptismal Vow, and the Danger of neglecting it. With general Instructions to
young Persons to lead a Religious Life, and prepare them for their
Confirmation, and worthy Receiving of the Blessed Sacrament. Very necessary for
Parents, etc. to give their Children, or others committed to their Care. By
John Birket, Vicar of Milford and Hordle in Hampshire. The Second Edition, with
a Preface. Price 3 d. 100 for 20 s.

The Government of the Passions, according to the Rules of Reason and Religion.
Viz. Love, Hatred, Desire, Eschewing, Hope, Despair, Fear, Anger, Delight, and
Sorrow. Twelves.

Some Reflections on that part of a Book called Amyntor: Or, The Defense of
Milton's Life, which relates to the Writings of the Primitive Fathers and the
Canon of the New Testament. In a Letter to a Friend. 30.

A Treatise of Morality. In Two Parts. Written in French by F. Malbranch,
Author of the Search after Truth. And Translated into English by James Shipton,
M. A.

The Memoirs of Monsieur Pontis, who served in the French Armies 56 Years.
Translated by Charles Cotton, Esquire Folio.

Processus integri in Morbis fere omnibus Curandis, a Dno. Tho. Sydenham
conscripti. 12 o.

Dr. Sydenham's Practice of Physic, faithfully Translated into English, with
large Ann^tations, Animadversions, and Practical Observations on the same. By
W. Salmon, M. D. 12 o.

The Penitent or Entertainments for Lent: Written in French by R. F. N.
Caussin, and translated into English by Sir B. B. Tenth Edition. To which are
added several Sculptures.

A New Method of Curing all Sorts of Fevers, without taking any thing by the
Mouth. Being a New Prescription for giving the Bark in Clyster. Whereby all the
Inconveniences of administering it in any other Form are avoided; and a more
speedy and certain Cure is obtained. Writ by A. Helvet, M. D. The Second
Edition.

Mr. Wingate's Arithmetic: Containing a plain and familiar Method for
attaining the Knowledge and Practice of Common Arithmetic. The Tenth Edition,
very much enlarged. By John Kersey; late Teacher of the Mathematics.

The Hist^ry of the Inquisition, as it is exercised at God. Written in French,
by the Ingenious Monsieur Dellon, who labored five Years under those
Severities. With an Account of his Deliverance. Done into English, by the
Learned Henry Wharton, M. A. Chaplain to his Grace the late Archbishop of
Canterbury.

The Artificial Clock-Maker. A Treatise of Watch and Clock-work. Wherein the
Art of Calculating Numbers for most sorts of Movements is explained, to the
Capacity of the Unlearned. Also, the History of Watch and Clock-work, both
Ancient and Modern. With other useful Matters never before Published. The
Second Edition, enlarged. To which is added a Supplement, containing, 1. The
Anatomy of a Watch and Clock. 2. Monsieur Romer's Satellite-Instrument, with
Observations concerning the Calculation of the Eclipses of Jupiter's
Satellites, and to find the Longitude by them. 3. A nice way to correct
Pendulum Watches. 4. M. Flamsteed's Equation Tables. 5. To find a
Meridian-Line, for the Governing of Watches, and other Uses. 6. To make a
Telescope to keep a Watch by the Fixed Stars. By W. D. M. A.

A short View of the Principal Duties of the Christian Religion: With Plain
Arguments to persuade to the sincere and speedy Practice of them. To which is
added a Prayer suited to the whole, to be used Morning and Evening. By a Divine
of the Church of England, for the Use of his Parishioners. Price 3 d. or 20 s.
per Hundred.

Arcana Imperii Detecta: or, Diverse select Cases in Government; more
particularly, Of the Obeying the unjust C^mmands of a Prince. Of the
Renunciation of a Right to a Crown. Of the Proscription of a limited Prince and
his Heirs. Of the Trying, Condemning and Execution of a Crowned Head. Of the
Marriage of a Prince and Princess. Of the Detecting of Conspiracies against a
Government. Of Subjects Revolting from a Tyrannical Prince. Of Excluding
Foreigners from Public Employments. Constituting Extraordinary Magistrates
upon Extraordinary Occasions. Of Subjects Anticipating the Execution of Laws.
Of Tolerati^n of Religion. Of Peace and War, etc. With the Debates, Arguments
and Resolutions of the greatest Stasemen in several Ages and Governments there
upon.

A View of the Posture of Affairs in Europe both in Church and State. I. The
Ancient Pretensions of the two Families of Austria and Bourbon to the Spanish
Monarchy Historically stated. II. The Balance of the Power of Europe, settled
by Charles V. and how it came to be broke. III. A View of the Courts of Europe,
and their present Disposition and State relating to War. IV. Of the State of
the Church of Rome, and the Decay of the Protestant Interest in Europe. Written
by a Gentleman by way of Letter.

Devotions: Viz. Confessions, Petitions, Intercessions, and Thanksgivings for
every Day of the Week; and also Before, At, and After the Sacrament: With
occasional Prayers for all Persons whatsover. By Thomas Bennet, M. A. Rector of
St. James's in Colchester, and Fellow of St. John's College in Cambridge.

Confesso, five Declaratio, Sententiae Pastorum, qui in Foederato Belgio
remonstrantes vocantur, super praecipuis Articulis Religionis Christianae. 12 o.

Mr. Boyer's French and English Dictionary. 4 o. -- Idem in 8 o. Tillotson's
Sermons, in Folio. -- Idem, in 8 o. Cambridge Concordance. Folio. Cambridge
Phrases, 8 o. Seneca's Morals. 8 o. Plutarch's Lives, 5 Vol. 8 o. Patrick on
Genesis, Exodus, etc. 4 o. Temple's Essays, etc. 8 o. -- Miscellanys, 3 Vol.
Cowley's Works. Folio. History of England, 8 o. Life of King James II. 8 o.
Salmon's Dispensatory. Sherlock's Sermons. Sharp's Sermons. Scot's Christian
Life, complete. Latin Common Prayer, 12 o. Baker's Chronicle, Folio.
L'Estrange's AEsop, Folio. Dryden's Virgil, Folio. -- Iuvenal, 8 o. --
Miscellany Poems, Folio. -- Fables, Folio. -- Plays, in Fol. and 4 o. Blackmore
on Job. Folio. Oldham's Works, 8 o. Duty of Man's Works, Folio. Collier's
Essays, 8 o. -- View of the Stage, 8 o. South's Sermons, 3 Vol. 8 o. Stilling
fleet's Sermons, 3 Vol. 8 o. -- Origines sacrae, Folio. Quevedo's Visions.
Cave's Primitive Christianity. Justin Delph. 8 o. Terrence Delph. 8 o. Bennet's
Cases against the Dissenters. 8 o. -- his Confutation of Popery. 8 o. Comber's
Works. Folio. Tailor on the Sacrament. Stanley's Lives of the Philosophers.
Horace Delph, 8 o. Limborch Theolog. Christian. Folio. Cambrid. Greek Test. 12
o. Schrevelii Lexicon, 8 o. Sinopsis Commun. Locorum, 8 o. Virgil Delph. 8 o.
Kilbourn's Presidents, 8 o. The Governor of Cyprus, a Novel.
There is in the Press, and will be speedily published, Somatopolitia, or the
City of the Human Body, artificially defended from the Tyranny of Cancers and
Gangrens. In the first is shown how the Human Body may be called a City in
respect of its Parts and Fabric; how it may be compared to a political City,
in Relation to the various Offices of its Parts, and their natural dependence
upon, and subserviency to each other; the state thereof analogically
considered, whether aristocratic or oligartic; together with the proper
Remedies both for reducing it to, and preserving it in a due State. In the
second is explained the various Processes of the Blood, how it nourishes the
Parts, how infected, and what Diseases are contagious. As also, a complete
Treatise of Cancers and Gangrens, and an Inquiry whether they have any Relation
to contagious Diseases; with the Nature, Causes and Signs of the different
Species of Cancers and Gangrens, with the Methods of Cure by the most approved
Medicines. By John Brown Surgeon in Ordinary to his Majesty, and late Senior
Surgeon of Saint Tho. Hospital in Southwark.

Mr. Shadwell's Plays, bound or single, viz.
1 Sullen Lovers. 2 Humorist. 3 Royal Shepherdess. 4 Virtuoso. 5 Psyche. 6
Libertine. 7 Epsom Wells. 8 Timon of Athens. 9 Miser. 10 True Widow. 11
Lancashire Witches. 12 Woman Captain. 13 Squire of Alsatia. 14 Bury Fair. 15
Amorous Biggot. 16 Scowrers. 17 Volunteers.
Also these, and all other Modern Plays.
Mr. Anthony. Abdelazer. Alphonso K. of Naples' Anthony and Cleopatra.
Aurengzebe. Amphitrion. Alcibiades. Altemira. Bellamira. Black Prince and
Tryphon. Country Wit. Country Wife. Chances. Circe. Cheats. City Politics.
Cambyses. Conquest of Granada. Caesar Borgia. Sir Charles Sidley's Plays.
Congreve's Plays Destruction of Jerusalem. Duke and no Duke. Devil of a Wife.
Distressed Innocence. Dame Dobson. Dryden's Plays, in 4 Vol. 4 o. Dutch Lover.
D^n Quixot, 3 parts. Double Dealer. Don Carlos. Empress of Morocco. Earl of
Essex. English Monarch. English Friar. Edward the Third. Emperor of the Moon.
English Lawyer. Etherege's Plays. Fond Husband. Feigned Courtezans. False
Friend. Fortune Hunters. Friendship in Fashion. Greenwich Park. Generous
Conqueror. Gloriana. Henry V. and Mustapha. Heir of Morocco. Hamlet. Sir Harry
Wildair. Herod the Great. Humorous Lieutenant. Ibrahim. Indian Emperor. London
Cuckolds. Mr. Lee's Plays bound or single. Love for Love. Love in a Wood. Loves
last Shift. Ladies Visiting-day. Love in a Tub. Lucius Iunius Brutus. Modish
Husband. Mourning Bride. Sir Martin Mar-all. Mithridates. Nero. Otway's Plays
bound or single Oedipus. Othello. Orphan. Provoked Wife. Rival Sisters. Siege
of Babylon. She Gallants. State of Innocence. Spanish Friar. Soldiers Fortune.
Sophonisba. Tempest. Tyrannick Love. Theodosius. Tamerlan. Venice preserved.
Wicherley's Plays. Way of the World. Windsor Castle. Widow Ranter.

