A Fool's Preferment, OR, THE Three DUKES of Dunstable.

A COMEDY. As it was Acted at the Queens Theater in Dorset-Garden, by Their
MAJESTY'S Servants.

Written by Mr. D'urfey.

Together, with all the SONGS and NOTES to 'em, Excellently Composed by Mr.
HENRY PURCELL. 1688.

Licensed, May 21. 1688. R. P.

Eupolis atque Cratinus, Aristophanesque Poetae,
Atqque alii, quorum Comoedia prisca virorum est;
Si quis erat dignus deseribi, quod Malus, aut Fur,
Quod Moechus foret, aut Sicarius, aut alioqui
Famosus; multa cum liberate notabunt.
Hinc Omnis pendet Lucillius. --
Horat Styr. 4. Printed for Ios. Knight, and Fra. Saunders at the Blue Anchor
in the Lower Walk of the New Exchange in the Strand, 1688.

TO THE HONORABLE CHARLES Lord MORPETH.
My dear LORD,
I Am in Debt so many ways, for Obligations to your Self, and Noble Family,
that, with all the Gratitude I have, I am puzzled in finding occasions to
express my Thanks; be pleased therefore to receive in a Dedication of this
flight Piece, my Hearts true Acknowledgments, and as true an Endeavor to
dievrt you, by Reading a Comedy, which was only designed to please such as look
on this sort of Dramatick Poesy, as you do, with Judgment and good Humor. I
have studied these things long enough to know the Humor of the Town, and what
is proper for Diversion; but I cannot always bring my Inclinations to flatter
the ( Would be WITS,) nor spare the exposing a notorious Vice, tho the price of
a Third Day were the fatal consequence of such an Indiscretion: It is, and
shall be, enough for me at any time, if some few of the many Noble and Worthy
Persons, that did me the Honor to appear for me, in spite of the Party that
was maliciously made by some eminent Gamesters of both Sexes, who thought
themselves touched: If such as your Lordship, and those others of my unbiased
Friends, will please to think it worth their liking, and alluding to a late
Honorable, and Renowned Author; I Declare, If You, and Others, I omit to Name,
Approve my Lines, I count your Censure, Fame.


As to the Play, I will only say this of it, the first hint was taken from an
old Comedy of Fletcher's; and as it was improved, and several new Humors
added, it was generally liked before the Acting. I knew Basset was a Game, only
proper for Persons of great Fortunes; and therefore I thought, that a wholesome
Satyr of this kind might have obliged some Country-Gentlemen; or Citizens of
small Estates, whose Wives never heeding the approaching Ruin, took only care,
they might have the Honor, to be seen at Play with Quality. But some certain,
very nice, Persons, especially one, took it so to Heart, that dear Basset
should be exposed, that my honest Intentions were quite frustrated, and that
the Piece might be sure to be ruined, their Majesty's were told, it was so
obscene, that it was not fit to be Acted; when, I can prove, there has not,
these seven years, been any Comedy so free from it; and some good Judges were
pleased to Declare, they thought that, the only Reason some People had to find
fault. Obscenity is a thing of that abomin^ble Nature, that unless it be
detected so thoroughly, that it may be punished, it were better not heeded at
all, (especially, by a Lady) who, in my Opinion, being too Witty in such a
Discovery, will only give People to understand, how well skilled She is in the
Matter.

My LORD, I most Humbly beg your Lordships Pardon for this Digression, tho I
could not well Publish the Play, without some Defense in this kind; but I have
done with 'em now, and the hottest Censurer shall at leisure cool of himself: I
will only rally my own ill Fortune, and say, with that admirable French
Moralist; Fortune, Ie me repends de t'voir suivie, and cognoissant que tu ne
peux chos. du monde advoue que la virtue est le seul port ou les hommes
peuvent-trouver leur veritable tranquillite.

A Sentence, which, I Am sure, your Lordship thoroughly understands, having been
with choicest Care Bred, and Learned in the nicest Rudiments of Morality, Wit,
and Religion, and therefore skilled in what concerns all Mankind in general, as
well as Poets, who are Condemned to Traffic with all sort of Humors, and to
be obliged to such as will own themselves pleased, with what they like. A
Fatigue, which I can the better bear, because it offends me little, which way
soever it happens, always believing, that, next diverting my Friends, to please
my Self, is the best-method; but as my Friends satisfaction takes Place first,
I hope this Comedy will not appear distastful to 'em, especially to you, being
Corrected, And My Lord, thus Humbly Dedicated, By

Your Lordships most Obliged, And Humble Servant, D'VRFEY.

Dramatis Personae.
Cocklebrain. A half-witted Country-Gentleman, whom his Wife rules, and keeps
in Town spending his Estate at Basset; yet still bubbles him in hopes of
Preferment. Mr. Nokes. Justice Grub. An old Peevish Country Justice, an hater
of the Town, and its Fashions Mr. Leigh. Lyonel. A Well Bred Ingenious
Gentleman: who, being hindered of his Mistress, by the King, fell distracted.
Mr. Montfort. Clermont. Longevile Bewford. Basset-Players and Agents with
Aurelia, in the Bubling her Husband. Mr. Kinaston. Mr. Powel. Mr. Bowman. Toby.
Servant to Cocklebrain, a sly Drolling Fellow that hates the Town, and his
Master's living there. Mr. Ievon. Sir Jasper Lost-all. A foolish Knight, that
has lost all his Estate at Basset. Mr. -- Fleaflint. Sharp. Two Rooks at
Basset. Usher of the Black Rod. Mr. Powel, Sen.
WOMEN.
Aurelia, Wife to Cocklebrain, a Town-bred Jilt, a great Basset-player. Mrs.
Bowtel. Celia, A Maid of Honor. Mrs. Iordain. Maria, Woman to Aurelia. Doctor,
Citizens, Barber, Dancers, and Attendants.
SCENE, The COURT, in the Reign of Henry the Fourth.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. JEVON. A Poets Trade, like Hazard, does entice;
He Is the unlucky Caster, you the Dice.
Constant ill Luck attends at every Throw
You Critics are like Fullhams, high and low,
Yet it is his Fate, he cannot give over so.
Like a young Wife, just ready to Lie in,
That whines and cries, Ple never come to it again:
When the danger's past, and pains forgotten all,
Altering his Voice. Her Heart's not broke, She Will venture 'tother Squawl.
To all new Plays, like Towns besieged, you come,
And each pert husfing Whipster throws a Bomb,
Whilst the trembling Author all the Shot retains
Of several Nations, and their several Brains;
It Is strange, you Beaux at home should do such harm,
Pray find another Buda, if you will Storm;
One good sound Battle would some Thought provoke;
For Brains are never seen, till Heads are broke;
From Famous Fletcher's Hint, this piece was made,
All Mirth and Droll, not one reflection said.
For nowadays poor Satyr hides his Head.
No wholesome Ierk dares lash fantastic Youth,
You wits grow angry, if you hear the Truth,
Old Fumble now, may at Doll Commons strip,
Without being flagn'd by a Poetic Whip.
The Noble Peer may to the Play repair,
Court the pert Damsel with her China Ware.
N^^ Marry her, if he please, no one will care.
The Whore too may with Quality be Box'd,
And set up for a Virtue, though She Is Pox'd.
The Fop in Love may his dull Genius try;
The Soldier Drink, so Quarrel, and so Dye.
The Alderman may Cheat, the Lawyer Lie.
And Satyr now not dare to question, why;
You shall escape too, at the Trading end of the Town,
Your Wit sticks fast, although your Charter's gone;
Therefore brave Knights of the Apron, and the Yard,
All fear of a Satyrick Jest discard;
Let not this Play, through your shrewd censure, fall,
And then cheat on, and prosper great and small,
You shall have Liberty of Conscience, All.
THE Fool's Preferment; OR, THE THREE DUKES OF DUNSTABLE.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A Garden, discovering Lyonel crowned with Flowers, and Antickly dressed, sitting
on a Green Bank. Enter Celia. Celia. YOnder he is: Oh that Heartbreaking
Object,
The Darling of the Times, his Country's honor,
Our Sexes Joy, and Glory of his own,
That was all Bravery, All Wit, All Merit,
Wild as the Winds; lies there bereft of Sense;
Whilst here I mourn, that am the Fatal Cause.
Fall, Fall, ye Tears! and throbb, unhappy Heart!
That, in a luckless Hour, refused such Love;
Threatened by Friends, and forced by Royal Power.
I threw a Dearer, Brighter Jewel from me,
Than ever decked Woman's Beauty.
Oh would to Heaven,
That I had known the Curse of stubborn Will,
Or I had died ever I had done such Ill.
Lyonel sings. I sighed, and I pined,
Was Constant and Kind
To a Iilt that laughed at my Pains:
Though my Passion never cooled,
I found I was fooled,
For all my Abundance of Brains.
But now I Am a Thing
As great as a King:
So blessed is the Head that is addle!
The dull, empty Pate
Soonest comes to be great:
Fate doats on a Fool in the Cradle.

Lion. Madam!


Celia. Ay, Sir.


Lion. How goes the World? From thence the Zodiac, the Sun, the Moon and
Planets; In what Meridian are we?


Celia. Do but hear me, Sir!


Lion. With all my Heart. I know your Cleft Sex are in great Trust with
Lucifer: and can do a man a Favor; a handsome Woman is the Devil's
Soul-Broker, a Place worth ten of his Gentleman Usher; you shall find I have
Court Breeding. Come, pronounce.


Celia. Sir, I am come.


Lion. From the Dread Sovereign King; I know it well: I am all Duty, all
Courtier, all Cringe; as supple as my Ladies Page; he is a Gracious Prince,
Long may he live. Belong you to his Chamber?


Celia. Not I indeed, Sir, that Place is not for Women!


Lion. Not for Women! -- What Place more fit for Women than a Chamber? They
were begot in Chambers! Born in Chambers! Dressed in Chambers! And if you take
a Woman out of her Chamber, you will find her good for nothing --


Celia. For nothing, Sir! Can you say so of me? D' you know who I am?


Lion. Most exquisitely.


Celia. What is my Name?


Lion. Damnation!


Celia. How, Sir?


Lion. The Gossips called you first Phillissida, because of your little Mouth,
and narrow Gaskins: but you are pust out like a Pumpkin since, Hell Gate's not
wider than a Woman's Conscience.


Celia. Fie, Sir, All this to her that loves you!


Lion. Love me, nay, that is a Lie! I had but one Love, and her the good King
Henry has taken from me, to bribe his Favorite for his Legs and Cringes. But
hush -- no more of that; I must be wary, Pitchers have Ears. Some one may call
this Treason.


Celia. That Favorite, Sir, is now in great Disgrace; And the King pitying
you, has sent me hither.


Lion. To soak me like a Sponge: Drain all my Secrets, and then hang me up. Ha,
I find it out: This Woman here is sent to undermine me; to buz Love into me: to
try my Spirits, and make me open and betray my self: Hah, Is not this true?


Celia. No indeed, Sir -- Heaven knows I love you too well to betray you! Weeps.


Lion. Such was the Heavenly Music of her Voice,
sadly raving. Soft as the Flute-like Sounds that charmed my Ear,
When my dear Celia loved me, but she is gone:
The Fiend Ambition bears her on his Wings:
She mounts, she soars, and leaves her Vows behind her.

Celia. Oh my Cursed Fortune!


Lion. Do you weep, let me see? Pray let me taste your Tears. Ha, ha, ha, ha,
Rose Water by this Light: Nine pence a Pint, sold at the Pothecaries: Oh thou
Dissembler! that is, Thou very Woman: All thy Sex carry perpetual Fountains in
their Heads, and make their Eyes spout Mischiefs when they please.

SINGS. There Is nothing so fatal as Woman,
To hurry a Man to his Grave;
You may think, you may plot,
You may sigh like a Sot:
She uses you more like a Slave.
But a Bottle, although it be common,
The Cheats of the Fair will undo,
It will drive from your Head
The Delights of the Bed;
He that is drunk is ^ot able to woo. Ex. Lion.

Celia. Method in Madness, Grace even in Distraction:
I Will never leave him, 'till, by Art or Prayer,
I have restored his Senses to their Office.
Oh most unnatural Vice in silly Women!
We often refuse what best deserves our Love,
And often choose the contrary! --
Thus Shadow-like, we make the Sentence true,
Followed we fly: but if they fly, pursue.
I that this Sun of Virtue could not see,
When long his Beams were hourly cast on me:
Like blushing Flowers wantoned when I shone,
But never his Value knew till he was gone:
Unhappy Sex! Thy Fortune never drew
So great a Blessing as a Love that is true,
But to be sold by Friends, by Coxcombs grieved;
Matched for thy Plague: and born to be deceived. Ex. Celia.

Enter Cockle-brain and Toby. Cockl. Sir, Sir! I say once more, The Court's
a Glorious Place, and I am much honored with the Society of my Wives Noble
Friends there. Therefore leave off your grumbling, and let me have no more of
your moldy Advice, or as I am a true Courtier, and consequently a Wit --


Tob. A Wit! No, no, Sir, you are John Cockle-brain, of Plowden-Hicket, in the
Country of Staffordshire, Esquire.


Cockl. A Squire, which is as much as to say a Fool; is it? Very well, Sir.


Tob. Why the Devil will you be a Wit, Sir, you had as good own your self a
Bastard: For there has not been Wit in your Family since the Conquest.


Cockl. Sir, if I am a Wit, I will be a Wit, and let my Family rise and deny
it if they dare; But whatsoever I am, Sir, I am sure you are an Impudent
Rascal; and don't you think, Sir, because you found me with a Whore the other
Day at Green-GooseFair, when I was drunk, and I desired you not to tell my
Wife; that I Will bear every Flirt from you. The World would be finely governed
indeed, if every Man's Servant, because he is a Pimp, must pretend to be saucy.


Tob. And shall we never go into the Country again then, Sir? Will you run out
all your Estate here, for this confounded Name of a Courtier?


Cockl. Sir, You saucy Rascal, it is a Name that draws Wonder and Duty from
all Eyes and Knees.


Tob. Ay, 'Twill draw your Worship's Land within the walls too, where you may
have it, all enclosed and sure: Oh, here comes your Country Uncle, Old Justice
Grub, he will grub you now in faith; he will firk you for your Feathers and your
Fooleries. He has had no Drink but Juice of Crabs and Vinegar this week, to fit
him for you. He Will make you a Courtier. Enter Grub.


Cockl. Good morrow, good morrow, Uncle.


Grub. Good morrow, Cod'shead: Cockle-brain and Cod'shead are much at one.
Own'z! do wear that damned Cap upon thy Head with a Summer-fly Flap, like the
Fore-Horse of a Wagon? And do thou bid me good morrow? Why, you Ninny, you
Nicompoop, you Noun Adjective, for thou can not stand by thy self, I am sure;
must my Family be disgraced and ruined by a flanting Fopdoodle, that is too
finical to learn any Sense. A Pox on thee, I am ashamed on thee.


Tob. Ay there, there, Sir, there is a Courtier for you.


Cockl. Why, good Uncle, what is the matter?


Grub. Gadzooks. What Is the matter? why, you Scatterbrain! you Son of a Whore;
and yet I think my Sister was honest: What Is the matter? Why you are undone.
Thou art lost. I would not lend thee Two pence on thy Land: Thou art a mere
Bankrupt.


Tob. Very well! Very fine indeed: this is but the first Course. I Will leave you
together and go and laugh. Exit.


Cockl. Not too fast, not too fast, Uncle: Pray consider a little.


Grub. Not a Jot, Faith! What do thou do at Court but to be ruined? Have
reckoned up thy Income? Do thou know the Value of thy Tenants Sweat and
Labor, and thy Expenses here?


Cockl. I think I do.


Grub. Think, nay, that is a Lie: thou have not thought these seven Years, to my
knowledge. Thou have a Wife, a handsome Wife, Men say: Can thou pretend to
have a Grain of Thought, And yet bring her to Court? Ah -- grins.


Cockl. Pray, Sir, what ill can she get there?


Grub. A Bastard, Sir, it may be, to inherit your Estate. Ownz! I shall never
have Patience!


Cockl. Oh Sir, you are Splenetick!


Grub. You are a Jack pudding, A Pragmatick Spend-thrift, A Fellow that I would
beat into a Powder, if I had the Law on my side. Can there come any thing of
Essences, Pulvilio's, and Perfumes, more than the Headache? Take your Wife to
task, ye Blockhead, and Thrum her Jacquet well, she will never be good else;
She Is of the right Strain, I know her to a hair; and if thou would be Famous,
beat thy self, for thou deserve it richly.


Cockl. What your froward Gall can vent on me I bear, but if you rail against
my Wife --


Grub. What then?


Cockl. Why you shall know that I am a Fighter.


Grub. A Fool: That fair 1200 l. a Year will shrink into a Tester, by next
Summer, and all to be a Courtier, in the Devil's Name.


Cockl. Well, Sir: And is not that enough?


Grub. You Dogbolt, Enough! Will that Frothy Title keep firm your Credit, Sir?
Will your Spindle. Shanks there ever carry you to win the Goal of Honor? They
look already as they could scarce drag thee over the Kennel, with a Pox to you,
good Mr. Courtier.


Cockl. Yes, Sir, I am a Courtier, and intend to be a Cherubin. Courtiers are
all Cherubins and Seraphims; and I think I have some Reason.


Grub. How, Reason! I have seen a Dapper thing more like a Courtier, set up to
scare the Crows out of the Corn.


Cockl. Ha, ha, ha, Much good may't do your Heart, Uncle, you are merry, and I
could entertain you with a Joke against your Country Life, were I so disposed;
your Ditches and your Dunghils. I could nettle you in faith.


Grub. Ye Jackanapes, Gadzooks! Speak a word more against the Country and I Will
beat thee, I Will swinge thee, before thy Wife and all thy Family: I will in
faith, therefore don't provoke me!


Cockl. Nay, Why so angry; Uncle? I pass by your Lowing of Cows, Bleating of
Sheep, and your damned Noise of Chattering Rooks in the Morning, that would not
let one sleep. You see I am patient.


Grub. Rooks! There Is never a Fop at Court has half their Sense, to my
knowledge, No, nor their Harmony: The finest Vocal Music in the World, this
Fool calls Chattering. Ah, thou art a Dunce. I had rather hear a Rook sing than
Si Fachi.


Cockl. Nor do I rally on your fine Discourse, which is commonly about your
Dogs and Horses; and for your part, Uncle, you have a Passion for your Wall
Eyed Mare, exceeds the Love of Women.


Grub. Here Is an impudent Rascal, here is a Rogue, to debauch my Darling-Mare
before my Face. And the Dog knows too I love her as well as I do my Wife. Why,
you slanderous Villain! Now could I even weep for Madness: Sir, leave your
Prating, or provide your self a Second. Gad -- I Will fight for the Honor of my
Mare, sooner than for any Lady at Court by the half.


Cockl. Nay, nay, I have done, good Uncle.


Grub. It Is well you have, Sir: Wall Eyed Mare, you Puppy! It Is true she is
queer of an Ogle or so; But what then? Look you into the Park, or into your
Damned Play house, and see what Crowds of Female Sins come thither, and then
let us hear you prate.


Cockl. But, Uncle, why are you so inveterate against the Court? Were you ever
there?


Grub. Not I, thank Heaven: I got down to other day as far as Charing Cross,
and had like to have been choked at that distance.


Cockl. Come, come, Uncle! Leave off your snarling, and ridiculous Anger, and
bring your Wife to Court. I hear she is handsome: let her not live there to be a
Farmer's blowing; and be confined to Serge with Silver Edging; and Petticoats
far coarser than my Horse-Cloath: But give her Velvets, Tissues, Pearls, and
Jewels.


Grub. Oh Lord! Oh Lord!


Cockl. A Coach and Usher, and two running Footmen, and I will send my Wife to
give her Rules.


Grub. 's Heart! I had rather send her to Virginia, and make her plant Tabaco.
This Fellow's mad.


Enter Servant. Cockl. Sir, How slept your Mistress? and what Visitants are
come this Morning?


Serve. Sir, as I came out, two Lords were newly entered.


Cockl. This is great now, do any Lords, Uncle, come to see your new Wife?


Grub. No. Lord have Mercy upon her if they did: Heaven keep my Wife, and all
my Issue Female still from their Lordships.


Cockl. Oh, you are dull and palled! You have no Pallat.


Grub. This Fellow's a Cuckold too, a rank Cuckold! I smell him: well, God
b'w'y': thou art a rare Coxcomb, and I Will not see thy Folly any longer. When
you want Money, Friend, for a new Fund of Prodigality, I suppose, I shall hear
of you; but not a Penny: let thy own Folly feed thee. Ownz! To be a Cuckold
too, that plagues me most of all -- Ah you senceless Ass! Gad! I have a great
mind to take the Dog cross the Face; A Cuckoldly Rogue. Gadzooks! If I stay I
shall murder him. Ex. in anger.


Cockl. A strange dull angry old Fellow this: But just such another Piece to
Dirt was I, before my Eyes were opened by my Wife.


Enter Aurelia. Oh, here she comes: Good morrow, Dearest.

Aur. Good morrow, my Jewel. Thou look well this Morning.


Cockl. Thank thee, Sweet Heart: I have no other reason.


Aur. I am glad on it: Now, then to my present business, which is Money.


Cockl. Faith, I have none left.


Aur. I hope you will not say so: nor imagine so base and low a Thought: I have
none left! Are these words fitting for a Man of Honor, and Dignity that shall
be.


Cockl. The Lord knows when: Thou have been seven Years about it, and yet I am
where I was, Child. But I know thou have daily and nightly labored with thy
Friends for my Advancement.


Aur. Very well, Sir: And do you pop me off with this slight Answer, in faith I
have none left? in faith you must have!


Cockl. I must have!


Aur. You must have. Nay, stare not, Sir; it is true, I must have Money: for be
persuaded, if we fall now, or be but seen to shrink under our fair Beginnings,
it is our Ruin, and then good night to all, but our Disgraces.


Cockl. Why, where is the Hundred Pound I gave you yesterday.


Aur. Oh that! I lost it at Basset, last night.


Cockl. Then you may win it at Basset this morning: Why, can you think, Wife,
I Will endure such Doings? Why, how the Devil could you lose all that?


Aur. I had horrid Luck, Child: Come, I Will tell thee how. Do understand the
Game, Honey?


Cockl. Not I: I understand none of the Game: A Pox of the Game, if this be the
Fruits on it.


Aur. Not understand it! Well, I am resolved I Will teach it thee. It Is the most
Courtly, the most Grand, the most Graceful Game. And has the finest Terms in it
that ever were heard: As thus now! First, there is the Fasse, then the Alpieu,
or Paroli, the Sept and le va, Quinze. and le va, Trent. and le va, Sonica, nay
sometimes the Soisant and le va.


Cockl. Soisant, and the Devil and all: Why this is Conjuring, Confound it --
What a damned Game's here, to lose a 100 l. at!


Aur. I tell thee, Child, I had the worst Luck in the whole World: I lost a
Sept and le va upon an Eight King.


Cockl. Gadzooks! And wilt lose a King's Revenue at this rate. This is a Game
that is fit for none but Kings and Queens, to play at, for ought that I see.


Aur. Ay. It Is a Royal Game, indeed; but prithee do but observe my ill Fortune!
I was Fass'd every Card, I set, or when I drew a lucky one it did not go. I had
lost seven Kings before, and made a Sept and le va upon an Eight: When to see
the Prodigy of ill Luck, A Citt, a strange Punt, that sat next me, a pert
forward pushing Fellow followed the winning Knaves, and won a Quinze and le va
before ever I could make an Alpieu: But what vexed me most intolerably, was to
see my Fat Lady Thump Cushion make Paroli, and then a Sept and le va upon the
same Card, and when I lost my King four times in one Deal, she, upon a filthy
Knave, every time won Sonica.


Cockl. The Devil take my Lady's Sonica, and my Lord's too; What a Noise is
here with 'em?


Aur. I think never poor Punt was so Embarrass'd: but I have done: Come, now
what say thou to this Money? I Will soon fetch up my Losses, Sweet Heart: I
must have, let me see 500 l. by to morrow night: nay, never flinch at it; It Is
for thy Preferment, thou know.


Cockl. Nay, faith, I know not what to say to it: it is such a Devilish hard
World, that my Tennants write me word they are all running away. The last 50 l.
I laid down for your tall Cousin's Horse and Equipage: He that is going to be an
Officer; And I han t a ragg more left, as I am a true Courtier.


Aur. Hark you, Sir, have you no Land in the Country?


Cockl. Why, yes, but I had forgot that.


Aur. It must be remembered: some of it must fetch this Money: Thou shall not
lose Preferment, my Dear, for the sake of a few dirty Acres; Especially when,
by my means, the Sun of Honor is just going to break out upon thee. Do hear,
Child? This Land must be in London by to morrow Night.


Cockl. Well, well, if it must, it must: What, 300 Acres will serve the Turn?
Hum!


Aur. 'Twill do very well: And now you speak like a Man, and like a Courtier
that shall be great, and suddenly; I have said it: Well, adieu! you will
dispatch; I must go get the BassetCards ready; for I expect my Lord's Company,
and all the Punts here after Dinner: Mr. Winnall Taillies, and I am to be his
Croupier: If I want Money I Will make shift to borrow out of my Lord's Fobb.


Cockl. Well, well, prithee borrow what thou will out of my Lord's Fobb. Go,
leave me a little.


Aur. Adieu, Child, Adieu, my Precious. Claps his Cheek, and ex.


Cockl. It Is a good natured ingenious Devil; and does so bustle about the
Courtiers to make me great, and is so caressed by this Lord, and by the other
Knight, that 'twould do ones Heart good to see her: that is the truth on it, she
must have this Money; but how to make this Sale handsomely now, let me see!
Gad, I am almost afraid to tell my Man Toby on it, 'twill break the poor
Fellow's Heart, to hear that I am going to sell: but hanged, it must be done,
and there is no more to be said. Who Is within there? Toby.


Enter Toby. Tob. Did you call, Sir?


Cockl. Ay, honest Toby, I would have you run presently to the Exchange, and
there to Sir John Cutchinele, the Merchant, offer 300 Acres of my Land: Why
do thou stare so?


Tob. Why faith, Sir, see how strangely things will happen, I dreamed last
night that you were in Bedlam, and now my Dream is out.


Cockl. Oh spare your Wit, good Toby, for your Business, Tell him, do you hear?
It Is choice and fertile, and ask upon it 500 l.


Tob. Sir, do not do this; pray take my Cap and consider a little: This honest
Land, that you are parting with, has been true to you, and done you loyal
Service.


Cockl. As 'twas in Duty bound: But whatever happens, my Wife must not want
Money: for if she do, either she or her Friends, I may whistle for Preferment.
Go, go, begone, I say, and when you come back -- look for me in the Presence.
Exit Cockl.


Tob. It Is this damned Wife that is the Cause of all, and this, Oh this is the
dear Marriage Blessing; Man is the Shuttle, and his Wife the Loom; and so they
weave themselves into a Knot, that when it is done, they would hang themselves to
unty: I Will to his Uncle presently, and tell him all, perhaps 'twill stop his
Journey, and make him come and rail, and beat my Mistress: I Would give my Wages to
see it done handsomely: I Will whet him I am resolved. Exit.


SCENE III. Grub's House.
Enter Grub. Grub. There Is no good to be done upon this Fool, my Kinsman, so
I Will into the Country, presently, and leave him to the Fool's Whip, Misery. Let
me see -- I may recover 20 Miles to night. Ho! Within there -- Some body call a
Barber; I Will be shaved first, however: I shall ride so much the lighter. Call a
Barber, there. Enter Lyonel. How now! Who have we here?


Lion. Sir, I have followed you in here.


Grub. So methinks, Sir.


Lion. 'Pray what may I call your Name?


Grub. My Name? Why my Name is Grub, Sir.


Lion. Grub! right: you are a Mohammedan.


Grub. The Devil I am.


Lion. I know it; but am secret: Of what Faction are you? What Party join you
with?


Grub. Prithee, I know no Factions, nor Parties, not I: I am a plain Country
Gentleman, and am just going out of Town. What, a Devil, does the Man mean?


Lion. Then wear this Cross of White, and where you see the li^e, they are my
Friends: observe 'em well, the Time is dangerous.


Grub. I Will wear none of your Cross, not I: I know not what you mean.


Lion. Not know my meaning! you may spare your Cunning, Sir, you can pick
nothing out of this: this Cross is nothing but a Cross, a very Cross: plain,
without Spell or Witch craft; search it; you may suspect Poison, Powder, or
Wildfire; but you are mistaken.


Grub. Well, Sir, I see it is a plain Cross, what then? What a Plague, is this
Fellow?


Lion. Then do your worst: I care not. Tell the King, as I am sure you will, of
all my Actions: and so God save His Majesty. This is no Treason. Exit.


Grub. Tell the King! What a strange, odd, whimsical Rogue is this! But this
Town is full of nothing else: Nothing but Fools and Madmen throng the Streets.
I Will get out on it as soon as I can. Come, where is the Barber?


Enter Barber. Barber. Here, here, Ready, Sir.


Grub. Come, come, away with it quickly: but, do you hear, Sir? Have Not you got
the Itch now, which your Town-Breeding would complement upon my Face? Let Us see
your Fingers.


Barber lathers him. Barb. Oh Clear, clear, as a Sucking Infant, Sir.


Grub. A smooth-faced Rogue: Sir, you are a Whore-Master.


Barb. A little given that way, Sir; but I want Money.


Grub. Alas, poor Fellow! it is great Pity, faith. Claps his Cheek.


Barb. If I were a great Man, Sir.


Grub. You would keep a Whore, and starve your Wife, as they do.


Barb. Yes, Sir.


Grub. Very well: Ha, ha, ha. I have not met with a more honest Fellow: a good
handsome, sleek Rascal too! How many Bastards have you, Friend? Claps his Cheek.


Barb. Not very many, Sir. I have only two at Nurse, and another a coming --
Will your Worship be pleased to give me an old Shirt?


Grub. No, you Dog; I have a Kid of my own in the Country, that must be served
first. But, my bonny Shaver, you get your Living honestly, I hope? You are not
given to Thieving?


Barb. To no Burglaries, Sir, they are troublesome; But for the neat Conveyance
of a Hand into a Pocket, or so.


Grub. Hum! It Is as I said. Thieves, Fools and Madmen overrun this plaguey Town
-- Would I were well a Horseback.


Enter Toby. Tob. Oh Sir, undone, undone, all lost, ruined!


Grub. How now? What Is the Matter? What is there a Fire? ha! Who Is there, Toby?


Tob. Ay, Ay, Sir, poor Toby, undone, utterly undone.


Grub. Be undone, and be hanged! what, a Devil, do fright me about it? -- Pox
-- I thought the Town had been a Fire.


Tob. Sir, If ever you had any Respect for the Ancient Family of the
Cockle-brains, to which that of the Grubs is Worshipfully joined, turn back to
our House, and beat my Mistress.


Grub. Prithee, beat her thy self, and be hanged, if thou have a mind to it.


Tob. 's Bud. Would I might, I Would strap her with a Vengeance -- Besides my
Master is undone, unless you go, Sir.


Grub. I Will not come near him, an extravagant Rascal, he has not a penny of
Money; and I warrant his Land will be going ever long.


Tob. It Is going, Sir, it is going now.


Grub. What Is that? Is he going to Mortgage?


Tob. To sell, Sir, to sell -- 300 Acres are doomed this night, unless you stop
it, Sir.


Grub. Give me my Hat and Gloves. Starts off his Chair.


Barb. What is it you mean, Sir?


Grub. 300 Acres! Oh intolerable Rogue! I Will be with him: Gadzooks!


Barb. Why, Sir, your Beard is not half off.


Grub. Pox of my Beard. I Will go with half a Nose to save 300 Acres. Come along,
Toby -- Gad I Will thrash him into Stubble, but I Will change him, I am resolved
on it. Exit.


Tob. Good Luck be with thee, I never had till now Half so much cause to bid
God speed the Plough. Exit.


ACT II.
SCENE I.
Discovers the Basset-Table; Aurelia, Clermont, Longoville, Bewford, and other
Gentlemen and Ladies sitting round at Play, Winnall is dealing; several are
standing by, and others walking about; Acting the several Humors of Winners
and Losers. Enter Sharp and Flea-flint. Sharp. WELL! What Times, Flea-flint?
What purchase to night? What Rate bears Money? Hah!


Flea. Pox, not worth a Man's trouble: I have lent but Three Eight and forties
yet.


Sharp. But you will draw so many Fifties, I hope!


Flea. Yes, certainly, I should hardly wait here else: there is no Pawn stirring
neither; not so much as a Table-Diamond, nor my Lady's Locket, the Devil's
in it! I think, this Trade will hardly find a Man Salt to his Radishes; Prithee,
what News about Town, Ned?


Sharp. Why young Lyonel, they say, is mad.


Flea. Mad! Prithee for what?


Sharp. It seems the King once parted him and his Mistress, who was a rich
Orphan, intending to bestow her on his Favorite; Grief for which Chance and
her Inconstancy has since that time much distracted him, and now in his mad
Fit, he conceits the King designs to hang him, and trap him speaking Treason.


Flea. Alas, poor Lyonel! Mad! and mad for Love too! Thou art a Miracle indeed.


Enter Lady Lost-all. Sharp. What Lady's that?


Flea. Sir Jasper Lost-alls's Lady, one that is so much in Love with her Coach
that she is hardly ever out on it: prithee let us observe 'em; I find, by his
fidgetting about, the Bank has stripped him.


Lady. Well, Sir Jasper, I have told you of this a hundred times, pray come
away now, I find your Money's all gone, by that sheepish Look of yours. Do You
hear? Pray let some body order my Coach to come to the Door. You Will never leave
this Basset, Sir Jasper, till you have ruined me. My Coach and Horses there,
quickly. Come, I protest, I Am quite tired with coming up Stairs. To a Footman.


Sir Iasp. Gad, Madam, to tell you the truth, I have lost your Coach and Horses
since you went.


Lady. Lost my Coach and Horses!


Sir Iasp. Yes, faith, you must even beat home upon the Hoof, there is no Remedy?


Lady. Why, Thou Monster! thou dare not, sure, put such an Affront upon a
Woman of my Quality; one that --


Sir Iasp. One that shall scold with any Woman of Quality in Town, I Will say
that for her, but I Will not stay to hear more on it. Exit.


Lady. Oh intolerable! Was there ever such a Brute seen! that whilst I was
paying an innocent Visit to my Cousin Doll Feetly here in the House, could have
the Barbarity to lose my dear Coach and Horses, without which, alas! what is a
Lady? How can a Lady subsist without her Coach and Horses? A Husband! A Clown;
A Beast: one I married and got Knighted to have Comfort of him, and now the
Brute, to reward me, has lost my dear Coach and Horses at filthy Basset, the
Devil take him, how does the Monster think, a Lady dressed in a Gown, as I am,
shall foot it Home now? Takes up her Train, and discovers her Stockings down,
Shoes tattered, and Exit.


Flea. Sharp. Ha, ha, ha, ha, this was pleasant enough.


Win. Tree winns, Six loses, Knave winns, Ten loses, Eight winns -- Madam, you
lose the King. to Aurelia.


Aurelia and Clermont rise. Aur. A Curse on all ill Luck; Fass'd so many times,
a Paroli, Sept, and Quinze and le va lost in a Moment Tearing the Cards.


Cler. Plgue on it, I am stripped too, and this is all the Treasure I have left in
this World. Kissing her Hand.


Aur. Well, Sir, do not you complain till you lose that Treasure, I shall
wheedle my Husband and get Flush again within few hours, and then, Sir, perhaps
you may hear from me; in the mean time Good Morrow, it is almost Sunrising,
I Will to Bed now. Ex. smiling.


Cler. She gives me the Ougle to follow her. Oh this damned Itch of Play, yet
cannot I give over, if I were to be hanged. Flea-flint, Prithee come hither.


Flea. What Is your Pleasure, Sir?


Cler. Thou know, I have always been thy Friend, and given thee Barratto
freely, Prithee lend me another Eight and forty upon Honor.


Flea. Not without a Pawn, Sir, I have sworn the contrary.


Cler. As I am a Man of Honor.


Flea. As I am a Man of Honor, Sir, I must not break my Oath.


Cler. Thou will not do me this Courtesy then.


Flea. I cannot, Sir, what, would you have me damn my self for a Trifle: if you
have e're a Pawn? --


Cler. I Will give thee Bond and Judgment.


Flea. Pish, Paper, Paper, I Will do nothing without a Pawn, I tell ye.


Cler. Well, come hither, thou shall have a Pawn.


Flea. Where, what is it?


Cler. And such a Pawn, as never was proposed to Man before. -- thou saw
that Lady that went out?


Flea. Well, Sir, and what of her?


Cler. She is my Mistress, and the dearest Jewel that e're unlucky Gamester
pawned before: One, that I value equal with my Life; yet such a Witchery there
is in Play, that for this Money, I Will contrive it so, that thou shall be
Caressed instead of me, till I return what is lent.


Flea. This I confess is the strangest Pawn I ever heard of, but I lend no
Money upon Faces, Sir, I must beg your Pardon: However I shall make bold to
tell the Lady, what a Faithful Spark she has. Aside.


Clerm. Dog, Rook, Rascal! What a Slave was I to offer such an inestimable
Treasure! Sir, get you gone, or I Will cut your Pate.


Flea. Ay, Ay; Rail, rail! Ha, ha, ha. Ex. Flea flint.


Longoville and Bewford rise Long. Cleared -- stripped: by this Light, not a Rag
left. tears the Cards.


Bew. Ha, ha, ha, I won two Hundred Guineas: What Is the matter, Jack?


Cler. Nothing, nothing, a Pox on him, come, Prithee let us go, and beat up the
Rogues at the Blue-Posts, for a quart of burnt Sherry.


Long. With all my heart, a Plague of this damned Basset-Table. Excunt.


Enter Cocklebrain, Grub, and Toby. Tob. Do but see, Sir, they are at it still,
at this time of the Morning.


Grub. Oons speak to 'em, souse in upon 'em, Nephew.


Cockl. No, pray, Uncle, do you, for my part I Am ashamed.


Grub. Gad, and so I will, what is here to do, what a Pox de'e make an Ordinary
of my Nephew's House? a Bawdy House were a better Name by the half, nothing but
Cheating, and Gaming, and Roaring, and Tearing, Gad-sookers, it is past
Suffering, and as I am his Friend, and Uncle --


Sharp. How now, who have we here, Sir, will you venture Fifty Pieces, here is a
Stool.


Grub. And there it is at your Head, Dogbolt. Draw, Nephew, draw, Toby, draw,
draw, we will Basset the Rogues.


Enter Lyonel, with a Helmet on, and Sword drawn. Lion. What Is here, Treason
going forward, I Will make one against ye, Faith. First attacks Grub, and has him
down, then throws the Cards about, and falls upon the Gamesters, till Grub
rises, and they then beat Lyonel and all out.


Grub. So, so, now lock the Door upon 'm Toby


Toby locks the Door. Cockl. Bravely fought, in faith, why, Uncle, you beat the
Madman too, you fought like Scanderbeg; you are not hurt, I hope --


Grub. No, hang 'em, they are all Polltroons, Rogues that have no more Souls in
'em than so many Fleas, therefore hear me once more, and mark me well: If thou
do not instantly break this damned Custom, and make thy Wife know her self,
Ill desert thee for ever, never see thy Face, but leave thee to ensuing Rags
and Poverty, a thing not worthy for the Dogs to piss upon


Tob. Never think to see honest Toby again neither, I Am too proud of my Parts,
to serve a Beggar, I thank ye.


Cockle. Do you really think my Wife deceives me then?


Grub. 'sbud, think it, it is past thinking, for I know it.


Tob. Sir, she came Home at three a Clock yesterday Morning, and was led up
Stairs between two Thundering Whoremasters, one had a great Patch on's Nose, you
may guess by what, and there they were two Hours in her Chamber: What they did
there, the Lord knows.


Cockle. It Is likely, they were Plotting my Preferment.


Grub. Plotting to make thee a Cuckold, that is your Preferment.


Tob. And a Beggar most certainly.


Grub. For she knows no End in Lavishing.


Tob. And for Eating and Drinking, she is the very Devil, her Belly is a mere
Parson's Barn, all your Tenants pay Tyth to it, and yet it is never satisfied.


Cockl. The Truth is, she has been given to take a Cup, of late.


Grub. A Cup, 'ds Heart I have seen her as Maudlin as a Midwife at a Crying out.


Tob. And when she is in her Beer, she is wondrous Chaste; No doubt.


Grub. Come, come, once more I say send for her, for my Part, I shall have no
Patience if I see her: send for her I say, and pack her into the Country,
instantly, or never see my Face more.


Cockl. Well, Sir, your Hearty Love, and Reasons have prevailed, it shall be so.


Grub. It shall?


Cockl. Yes* Sir, it shall be so.


Grub. Why, that is well said, Gad, I Will slap thee down another Hundred Pounds
in my Will for this, and let Wives know their Duty.


Cockl. She has lost a Plaguey deal of Money lately, at this damned Basset,
that is the Truth on it.


Grub. A Mint, a Mint, the Devil and all, I know it, for it is a greater Cheat,
than the Lottery; it is just like giving a man twenty Pounds. to let you lose
100.


Cockl. But she shall have no more, Uncle.


Grub. You Are in the right, Boy, it makes 'em Wild and Wanton. I make my young
Jade at home leap at a Crook'd Nine-pence: give a Wife Money, give her a
Pudding.


Cockl. Mine has had the Indies.


Grub. Ay, Iacky, thou had better have sent her thither by Half, take heed
for the future, now hold fast, and prosper, I Will presently take Horse, and tell
thy Tenants such a Story; this will be joyful News at Plowden, farewell, good
Iacky, be but resolute, and then the Devil, I mean, thy Wife will have no Power
over thee.


Tob. Blessings go along with ye, Sir, you have made me a New-Man too.


Grub. Farewell, Honest To. I shall see thee in the Country shortly, now little
To. where we will crack a Flagon, and roast Apples, ye Rogue. Farewell. Nephew,
God-b'w'y'. To, your most humble Servant, good Nephew -- Come, my Horse, my
Horse there. Exit Grub.


Cockl. Good Journey to'e, Sir, I Will be with ye to Morrow.


Tob. Oons I could leap for Joy, this is the happiest Day.


Cockl. Go, Toby, and call your Mistress.


Tob. But shall she not prevail, Sir, and out-talk ye -- as she used to do? For
you know she has a plaguey Tongue.


Cockl. I Will not hear her, but rail at her till I am ten Miles off.


Tob. If you are forty, so much the better, Sir, for she is so shrill, that, if
the Wind sit right, she will sound from hence to Barnet.


Cockl. Go, go, call her hither.


Tob. I could leap out of my Skin, my Heart's so light, a Plague of this
stinking Town! now we shall get a little Air, and go a Hunting, and a Fishing
again. Exit.


Cockl. Why, what a thing was I, that such a Creature as a Wife could rule me?
Do not I know that Woman first was made for Man's Diversion: she shall know
now, a thing that few -- do, She has a Husband that can govern her.


Enter Toby hastily. Tob. She Is coming, Sir, and in a Plaguey Fret. Stand upon
your Guard, Sir.


Enter Aurelia. Aur. What Planet reigns? or what mad Whimsey have you now in the
Head, that makes you call me from my Rest, that know I have not been in Bed all
Night?


Cockl. Oh, you shall go to Bed betimes hereafter, and shall be raised again at
thrifty Hours.


Aur. What does he mean!


Cockl. I Will have no more of your Court Tricks, your Honors, your Offices, and
all your large Preferments I Will be content to lose: for, to be plain w'ye, I
now at last begin to smell a Rat,
And understand too late what you would be at.



Aur. The Man is mad sure!


Cockl. The Woman would have him so; but it shall be a Country Madness then,
for I Will be gone this Morning.


Aur. Very fine; and who is Advice is this, Sir, I beseech ye, your Swabber
Toby's?


Tob. I shall have my Head broke, I see by her Looks.


Cockl. No one's Advice, good Wife, but my own Reason; therefore make ready.


Aur. Sir, I hope you will stay till the next Ball be past however.


Cockl. Not I: I have been Balling on it too long, you have kept me here these
seven Years a Balling, treat^ng your Friends, and wasting all my Substance in
Riot and Fine Clothes, which was the way you told me to be preferred: but I
find no such matter, therefore make ready, and in that Gown which you came
first to Town in, your Grogram-Safe-guard and Hood suitable. Thus on a double
Gelding shall you amble, and my Man Toby shall be set before ye.


Tob. Hem, hem, well said, Old Stiff Rump, in faith, I begin to take Heart a
little.


Aur. And will you go then in earnest?


Cockl. Yes faith will I, and how dare you oppose my Will and Pleasure? Was not
the Man ordained to rule his Wife?


Aur. True, Sir, but where the Man does miss his way, it is the Woman's part to
set him right; so Fathers have a right to guide their Sons in all their
Courses, yet you often have seen poor little Children that have both their Eyes
lead their blind Fathers.


Cockl. She has a Plaguey Wit.


Tob. A devilish one, Sir, therefore take care of her, she will talk ye mad else.


Cockl. Come, come, you're but a little piece of Man.


Aur. But such a Piece as being taken away, what would Man do? The fairest,
tallest Ship that ever sailed, is by a little Piece of the same Wood steered
right and turned about.


Cockl. Ay, that is all one, you shall steer me no longer; I Will keep my Rudder
in my own hand now.


Tob. Well said again i'gad, a Plague, how the Jade lears now! Aside.


Aur. It Is your Clownish Uncle, I know, that has put this into your Head, who
is an Enemy to your Preferment, because I should not take place of his Wife;
Come, by this Kiss, Sweet Heart, thou shall not go.


Cockl. By this other Kiss, Sweetheart, I will, and therefore on with your
Trinkets; I know your Tricks. And if Preferment falls e're you are ready, it is
welcome, else farewell to Court, In Faith.


Aurel. Well, Sir, since you are resolved, I must obey.


Cockl. You must, therefore about it.


Tob. Ay, ay, you must, you must, there is no more to be said.


Cockl. Go, go, get ready. Women are pleasant things when once a Man begins to
know himself.


Aur. But hark ye, Sir, because you use me thus, though I did look for present
Honor this Morning for ye and at such an Hour, yet if it does not come e're I
am ready, which I will be the sooner, left it should, when I am once set on a
Country Life, not all the Power of Earth shall alter me, not all your Prayers,
or Threats shall make me speak the least Word to my Honorable Friends, to do
you any Grace.


Cockl. With all my Heart.


Aur. And never more hope to be Honorable


Cockl. Not I, I have been tired with hoping, if that be Court Preferment, I
have enough on it.


Aur. Nor to live greatly, you shall be so far from the Name of Honor, that
you shall never see a Lord again.


Cockl. Why, what care I, if you had never seen one, I think your Honor had
been never the worse for it.


Aur. But amongst Sheep and Oxen you shall live at home bespotted with your own
loved Dirt, in nasty Clothes, as you were used to do, and, to oblige you, I
will live so too.


Cockl. And 'twill become ye well, come, the Day wears, therefore make have, it
shall be my Care to see your Stuff packed up -- Toby -- come. Exit Cockle.


Tob. Ay, ay, Sir, here am I, Lord, how she looks now! Ex.


Aur. It shall be my Care to gull you, my wise Husband. You shall stay, and
more than that entreat me too, you shall have Honors presently. Who Is there?


Enter Maria. Mar. Madam.


Aur. Prithee, bring hither Pen, Ink, and Paper, quickly.


Mar. It Is ready, Madam -- what is the Matter?


Aur. Your Master will not stay in Town, he says, unless Preferment fall within
an Hour. Sits down, and writes.


Mar. Let him command one of the City Gates, the Mobile are mutinying, or get
him made a Constable, and walk the Rounds at Midnight, to catch Drunkards, any
thing that has Hurry in it will please him.


Aur. No, no, I have it for him, I have been prepared a good while for this
Occasion: and when the World shall see what I have done, Let it not move the
Spleen of any Wife, to see me make an Ass of my dear Husband. If they are
Just, and know well how to use a Woman, then it were a Sin to wrong 'em, but
when they grow conceited of themselves, and Ill performers, then show 'em no
Mercy. Here, Carry this Letter to young Clermont, and bid him and his Friends
come hither instantly, and do as I have ordered there.


Mar. It shall be done, Madam. A Duce take him, I warrant he intends to pack us
into the Country, to weed his Barley, or churn his Butter; but we'll churn him,
and make Butter of his Brains first, here is that will fit him. Exit.


Aur. In the mean time, I Will go and dress my self,
In all the Country Clothes, I used before,
Not to be gone, but make the Mirth the more. Ex. Aurelia.

Re-enter Cockle-brain, and Toby, laden with Riding Equipage. Cockl. Is all
packed up, Toby?


Tob. All, all, Sir, there is no Tumbler runs through his Hoop, with more
dexterity, than I about this Business, it is a Day, that I have longed to see.


Cockl. Come, where is my Boots? Sits down.


Tob. Here, here, Sir, and now you are a made man.


Cockl. Ay, Toby, now thou shall know, I can command my Wife.


Tob. I am glad to see it, Sir.


Cockle. I do not love always to be made a Puppy, Toby.


Tob. No, Sir, but yet methinks your Worship does not look right like a Country
Gentleman.


Cockl. I will presently; give me my the other Hat --


Tob. Here, Sir.


Cockl. So, now my Jerkin.


Tob. Yes, Sir.


Cockl. On with it, Toby, thou and I will live so finely in the Country, Toby,
and have such pleasant Walks into the Woods, and then bring home Riding-Rods,
and Walking-Staves.


Tob. And I will carry 'em, Sir, and sturdy Sticks for the Children.


Cockl. So thou shall, and thou shall do all, oversee my Workfolks, and at the
Weeks End pay 'em all their Wages.


Tob. Yes, Sir, if your Worship gives me Money.


Cockl. Thou shall eat Money, Man.


Tob. Beef, Beef, and't like your Worship: as for eating of Money, let that
alone.


Cockl. Give me my Trowzes, and I will make my Wife, thy Mistress, look to her
Dairy well, and to her Landrey, that we may have our Linen clean on Sundays.


Tob. And Holydays, Sir.


Cockl. Ay, and ever we walk about the Grounds provide our Breakfast, or she
shall smoke; I Will make her a good Houswife; she now shall make no Journey to
her Sisters, but live at home and feed her Poultrey fat, and see her Maids in
Bed before her, and lock all the Doors.


Tob. Rare, rare, Sir, Why, this will be a Life for King and Queens.


Cockl. Come, give me my Buff-Belt, and Hanger.


Tob. It Is done, Sir.


Cockl. So, this is as it should be; now, my Gloves.


Tob. Here they are, Sir.


Cockl. A Riding-Rod now, Come.


Tob. There Is nothing wanting, Sir.


Cockl. So, so, How do thou like me now, hah?


Tob. Exceeding well, Sir; Now your Worship looks just like your self; A Man of
Means and Credit; so did your wise and famous Ancestors ride up and down to
Fairs to cheapen Cattle.


Cockl. Go, hasten your Mistress, and make ready, I long to be on Horseback.


Tob. I Will be ready in a Twinkling, Sir; never was Man so jocund; 'ds heart, I
could dance all the way. Ex. Toby.


Enter Clermont and Footman. Cler. Who Is that? Who Is that, Friend?


Foot. I know not, Sir, I think it is my Master.


Cler. Who, he that walks in Gray, whisking his Riding-Rod?


Foot. Yes, Sir, it is he.


Cler. It Is he indeed, and at all Points prepared for his new Journey: Sirrah,
when I wink upon ye, run out and tell the Gent. below, it is time.


Foot. I will, Sir.


Cler. Mr. Cockle-brain, Good Morrow to ye.


Cockl. The same to you, Sir, this is one of my Wife's Court Friends; how
simply he looks now, to see me in this Dress: My Wife's within, Sir, but she is
busy.


Cler. As she pleases, Sir; my Business is now with you.


Cockl. With me, Sir! Your Pleasure?


Cler. It Is reported, Sir, I know not whether by some Enemy, maliciously, that
envies your great Merit, and would be ready to sow Discontents between his
Majesty and you; or truly, which on my Faith I would be sorry for, that you
intend in haste to leave the Court.


Cockl. Faith, Sir, within this half Hour. Toby.


Tob. within. Sir.


Cockl. Is my Wife ready?


Tob. within. Presently, Sir.


Cler. But, Sir, I needs must tell you, as a Friend, you should have taken your
Journey privater; for it is already blazed about the Court.


Cockl. Why, Sir, I hope it is no Treason, is it?


Cler. It Is true, Sir; but it is grown the common Talk: there is no News else, in
Town; and in the Presence, all the Nobility and Gentry have nothing in their
Mouths, but only this, That Mr. Cockle-brain, that Noble Courtier, is now
departing hence: Every Man's Face looks ghastly on his Fellows; such a Sadness,
before this day, I never beheld at Court; Men's Hearts begin to fail 'em, when
they hear it.


Cockl. Sir, I had rather all their Hearts should fail 'em, than I stay here
until my Purse fail me.


Cler. But yet you are a Subject; and beware, I charge you, by the Love I bear
to you, how you do venture rashly on a Course to make your Sovereign jealous of
your Deeds.

For Princes Jealousies, where they love most,
Are quickly found, but they are hardly lost.

Cockl. Sir, I know not what you mean by this! All the Love that I have found
at Court, is, They have let me spend my Money there.


Cler. Have I not still professed my self your Friend?


Cockl. Yes, yes. You have all professed, but you never proved so yet.


Cler. Now, Sir, I will then; because I see you are wise, and give you thus
much light into a Business, that came to me just now. Be resolute, stand
stiffly to it, that you will be gone, and presently.


Cockl. Troth, It Is what I intend.


Cler. And, by this Light, you may be what you will. Will you be secret, Sir?


Cockl. Ay. What Is the matter?


Cler. The King does fear you.


Cockl. Sir!


Cler. And is now in Council about you.


Cockl. About me!


Cler. About you, Sir, I tell you; you will find he is in Council about you:
his Councillors have told him all the Truth.


Cockl. What Truth have they told him?


Cler. Why, Sir, that which now he knows too well.


Cockl. Too well! Prithee what is it? If any Rogue has sworn Treason against me
now, I am in a fine Condition! Aside.


Cler. That you have followed him these seven Years, with a great Train, and
though he has not graced ye, yet you have dived into the Hearts of thousands
with Liberality and Noble Carriage: And if you should depart hence unpreferr'd,
all discontented and seditious Spirits would flock to you, and thrust you into
Action; with whose Help and your Tenants, if you were so disposed, who does
know, how great a Part of this yet Peaceful Realm, you might make desolate: But
when the King heard this!


Cockl. What said he?


Cler. He sneez'd, and shook, as never Monarch shook'd before. And to be short,
you may be what you will: but be not Ambitious, Sir, sit down with moderate
Honors, lest you make your self more feared.


Cockl. I know not what to think of this: his Looks are very serious.


Cler. The Gudgeon bites. Oh, here comes Longoville.


Enter Longoville. Long. Where Is Mr. Cockle-brain?


Cler. There, Sir, he stands: would you ought with him?


Long. I should hardly sweat thus else. Good Morrow, Sir.


Cockl. With all my heart, Sir.


Long. His Majesty does recommend himself most kindly to you, Sir.


Cockle. His Majesty?


Long. Yes, Sir, and has, by me, sent you this Favor, kneel down, and rise a
Knight.


Cockl. A Knight, Sir?


Long. A Knight, Sir, and he does farther request you, not to leave the Court
so soon; for though your former Merits were neglected, after this time, there
shall no Office fall, but you shall stand fair for it as any Man.


Cler. What think you now, Sir? Hark you, a Word in your Ear: if you yield yet
you are a Novice.


Cockl. Do you think so? Softly aside.


Cler. Most certainly, therefore be resolute.


Cockl. I understand you; a Knight, let me see; a Knight. Sir John
Cockle-brain! No: it will not do. Besides, I have known a Cheese-monger a Knight;
a hundred Sniveling, addle-headed Citizens for Cheating, knighted: and Pimps
and Cuckolds innumerable: No, no; I must go, I must desire his Majesty to
excuse me.


Long. I Will bear your Knightly Words straight to the King, and send his
Princely Answer back again. Ex. Longo.


Cler. Very well done, Sir, stand out stiffly, a while, 'twill be the better: I
know there is a Tide of Honors coming.


Cockle. But with my stiff Standing, if I should lose my Knighthood, I should
wish I had been more limber.


Cler. Oh, never fear, Sir, it is impossible: Hark, there is a Noise below: 's
Death, here is my Lord what de'e call him: pull down your Hat over your Eyes,
look Grave and Sullen. So, so.


Enter Bewford. Bew. Where is this new made Knight?


Cockl. Hem, hem; who is that? here I am.


Bew. Let me embrace you first within my Arms: then call you Lord. The King
will have it so: who does entreat your Lordship, to remember his Message, sent
to you by Longoville.


Cler. If you are sneaking, and dare mount no higher, you may yield now. I know
what I would do.


Cockl. Peace, he observes us. A Lord, Hum, to be Lord Cockle-brain! Pox, I
know a Crook-back'd Fiddler called a Lord: No, no, this is too light too.
Besides I have been sick of a Lord, ever since I met my Lord Mayor the other Day,
tied to his Horse, and with a great Brass Chain about his Neck, weighing of
Butter.


Bew. You Will return the King some Answer, my Lord.


Cockl. Yes, my Lord, you may thank his Majesty, but the Lordship is too light.
I must be gone, were he Ten Thousand Kings and Emperors.


Bew. I Will tell him what you say, Sir, but I know he will be extremely concerned.


Long. Oh damnably! the Rogue does it to a Hair. Away, away.


Bew. I must, or I shall laugh in's Face. Ex. Bew.


Cler. Why, this was like your self, my Lord.


Cockl. I think so; The Devil's in it, if that was not stiff enough. But if I
should lose this Lordship by Fooling, my Wife would be plaguey angry. A
Ladyship, you know is a pretty Bawble, enough for her to play with.


Cler. Oh, you will have a bigger Bawble, I warrant you for her to play with.
See, see, here comes the other again.


Enter Longoville. Long. Give me your honored Hand, right Courteous Peer, and
from hence forth be a Noble Marquess, the King so wills, and Subjects must
obey. Only he still desires you to consider his late Request.


Cler. Faith! You are well now, my Lord. I Would consent.


Cockl. 'sBud -- I Will be one Step higher, since I am so far.


Cler. Ha, ha, ha, It Is the finest Lord: I am afraid anon, he will stand upon it
to share the Kingdom with him.


Long. Pox on you. Speak lower.


Cockl. Troth, I must own the King is very gracious: but that scandalous Ballad
of that abominable Marquess, and that damnable Patient Grizel, has made that
Title so nauseous to me -- If his Majesty would but please to change that.


Long. Faith, my Lord, I believe you may be what you please. Here Is another
Messenger.


Enter Bewford, and Footman carrying a Robe. Bewf. Make Room here. Where Is this
Noble Marquess? The King, my Lord, once more has sent me to you, and finding no
Dignity above your Merit, so you will freely grant to his Proposal, he bids you
be a Duke, and choose of whence.


Cler. 'sHeart, if you yield not now, you are undone: What can you wish to have
more than the Kingdom?


Cockl. Why then, so please his Majesty, I would be Duke of Dunstable; Because
I like the Sound.


Bewf. It Is very apt, Sir: I know the King is pleased. There Is your Patent with
a Blank.


Cockl. Pray give his Majesty Thanks, Sir; and you may tell him now that I will
stay.


Bewf. He Will be a glad man when he hears it, Sir.


Cler. I must have vent to laugh, or I shall burst. Aside.


Bewf. Keep your Countenance, and be hanged.


Long. But how shall we keep it from the Worlds Ear, that none undeceive him?


Cler. We'll think of that anon: Why, Gentlemen, is this a gracious Habit for a
Duke? For Heaven's sake each one employ his Hand to pluck the Clouds off from
this Radiant Sun, that must shine on us all -- I Will pluck one Boot and Spur off.


Long. And I another.


Bewf. This scurvey Hat, and plaguey Peruke, do not become his Grace's sprouting
Forehead: For Shame let us off with 'em.


Long. Now set your Duke-like Foot to this of mine, one pluck will do it.


Cockl. Hold! Hold! thou wilt pluck my Leg off; prithee go more gingerly to work,
my Grace is yet but tender.


Long. My Lord, I beg your Pardon.


Cockl. Well -- you have it, Friend.


Cler. So, now off with this Jerkin, and throw away that Riding-Rod.


Bewf. Here, here: on with the new Robe the King has sent.


Cockl. Robe -- It Is but an odd sort of a Robe, methinks: Prithee, what is the
Name on it?


Bewf. My Lord, It Is called a Solomon: It Is made in Imitation of the new
Sultana's; this Mode is for the great Lords, as the other for the great Ladies.


Cockl. Oh ho! Is it so? They put it on.


Long. So, So, Where are his Grace's Slippers?


Enter Toby, booted and dressed for a Journey. Tob. Come, come, Sir, all is
ready: The Horses are brought out; The Pillion on, and my Mistress stays in the
Hall. Ownz! what is here to do? What a Devil do you mean, Sir?


Cockl. My Slippers, Toby, my Slippers. Gravely.


Tob. Slippers! 'sbud, will you ride a Journey in your Slippers?


Long. Oh thou mighty Duke! Pardon this Man, that thus has trespassed in his
Ignorance. Here are your Grace's Slippers.


Cockl. The poor Fellow is honest -- I pardon him.


Tob. Why, what is the matter?


Cler. Fellow, he is a Duke. The King has raised him above all the Land. Toby
starts, and then kneels.


Tob. A Duke! Oh, that ever I was born! Do you hear, Sir, Do you know what I
am, pray?


Cler. Chief Gentleman of the Chamber; Secretary, any thing, what you please:
you may be a Lord in time, if things go right. To Long.


Tob. Do You hear, Friend? Prithee pull off my Boots too.


Cockl. No, let them alone, and get thee into the Country presently, and tell
my Uncle what has happened.


Tob. 'sHeart, here is Luck for you. I Will post thither instantly, and tell his
Uncle this amazing News. Oh what dull Dunghill Country Rogues are we! A Duke!
'sheart, we shall be all Lords at least. Exit.


Enter Aurelia, dressed awkwardly for a Journey. Aur. Thus to your Will, as
every good Wife ought, I have bent all my Thoughts, and now am ready.


Cockl. Oh Madam! I am not worthy to kiss the least of all your Grace's Toes,
much less your Thumb, which yet I would be bold with. All your Council has been
to me as prudent as an Angel's, but mine to thee as dirty as my Boots. Dear
Duchess, there is no going now, we must both stay.


Aurel. Pray, Sir, don't mock me, nor make me dress and undress like a Fool,
because you find me easy: said I not, the whole World should not alter me, if
once I were resolved; therefore let us away.


Cockl. Behold, a Knight does kneel. Kneels.


Aur. A Knight!


Cockl. A Lord.


Aur. A Fool!


Cockl. I say a Lord does kneel, nay a Duke.


Cler. In Trowses, Madam.


Bewf. Without Shoes.


Aur. Are you all mad?


Long. No, gracious Lady, if you dare credit your faithful Servant's Word, Your
Husband's made a Duke.


Aur. What think you now, Sir?


Cockl. Ah dear, dear Duchess! I am made by thee for ever, and here in Token,
that all Strife shall end, 'twixt Thee and Me, I let my Trowses fall, and to
thy Hands I do deliver 'em,

To signify, that in all Acts and Speeches,
From this time forth my Wife shall wear the Breeches.

Exeunt Omnes. ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter Grub, and Phillida. Phil. WELL avads! You are welcome home a thousand
times, dear Hubby; and will my Cousin be here so soon do you say?


Grub. Ay, I have laid it home to him, in faith! I have made a new Man of him!
we shall have no more Court Fooleries now!


Phil. Why, Hubby, is not the Court a fine Place then?


Grub. Not half so fine a Place as my Barn is in Harvesttime.


Phil. What, and so many tall, young, handsome, Scotch, French and Irish Wits
there, that come for Preferment? Why, Hubby, I heard here that my Cousin
Cockle-brain was to have been made a Lord.


Grub. A Lord! A Loggerhead he would have been made, had not I cleared his
Eyesight, what with his Wife's Tattling, and her Bullies Bantring him with
Honors and Titles, he was almost mad amongst 'em: but I roused him, in faith! I
got the better of him at last, and made him forswear ever coming near that
damned Town again. I expect him here to morrow; He Is upon his Journey by this
time.


Phil. What has he forsworn sweet London, to come and live sneaking here in the
Country, Hubby?


Grub. Sweet London! 'sbud I warrant this Fool thinks it paved with Nutmegs and
Ginger; ha, ha: -- besides, why sneaking, you Baggage? why sneaking?


Phil. Why is not our Country Life a sneaking Life, Hubby?


Grub. No, Hubby, and let me hear you call it so again, if you dare: I shall
have her get an Itch of seeing this sweet London, and run away from me there,
if I have not a Care. Aside.


Phil. Nay, Dear, pray don't be angry! what Preferment can my Cousin expect
here?


Grub. 'sBud, is he not Lord of a Manor? which he may thank me for too, for
that was just degrading, had not I been in the way, and exercised upon him:
besides, if he wants more Preferment, he may be a Justice of Peace, as I am:
Lash the Whores out of the Country; live godlily, and take Bribes, ye silly
Jade.


Enter Toby. Phil. He Is coming, Hubby, for look here comes his Man, Mr. Toby.


Grub. It Is he, in faith! What, Toby -- my Friend, Toby! welcome, faith: Spouse,
go lay down the Pheasant Roger shot this Morning: I suppose my Cousin's
alighted at the Gate, and we must get something to entertain him; go, go; why
don't you move? now I see, Toby, he is a Man of his Word. Ownds run, lay down
the Pheasant, I say. Pushes her.


Tob. Your Pheasant must fly into St. James's Park if you intend to treat him,
I can tell you that.


Grub. Why, is not he come?


Tob. No, nor like to come, that is more, Old Fellow.


Grub. How, Sauce box! What Is that you say? Will he break his Word with me?
does the Rascal dare to affront me?


Tob. Rascal! Have a Care what you say, Friend, I have sworn Homage to my
Prince, and hold my Place by my Fidelity, therefore, Friend, keep good Words in
your Mouth. You are but a Justice of Peace.


Grub. But a Justice of Peace! Why, you saucy Rascal, what would you have me
be, a Cherubin? Here Is an insolent Rogue! He makes nothing of a Justice of
Peace.


Tob. Not in Comparison of his Grace, or my self, I thank ye.


Grub. His Grace! whose Grace, Dog? 'sbud, speak quickly, and don't plague me
with these Riddles, or old Crab shall fly about your Ears? Why does that Scab,
your Master, use me thus? and where is he?


Tob. His Mighty Grace is at his House, I suppose.


Grub. Mighty Grace!


Phil. Nay, nay, Hubby, prithee do not call my Court-Nephew such Names!


Tob. Ay, ay, Old Mole hill! things are altered since thou and I met at London:
to be short, the King has made your Nephew Duke of Dunstable: now repent of
what is past, and extend your Manners to me, as my Place deserves, or look
to it. I shall stick upon your Skirts: I shall grub ye!


Grub. The Duke of Dunstable, Oons!


Tob. Even so, Sir, and greatest Favorite at Court, no better, nor no worse,
Sir.


Grub. But, Toby, do not thou dream? Art sure?


Tob. Sir, I Will hold no Discourse without my Title. If you want Court Breeding
I Will teach you some. I am styled now Mr. Secretary.


Grub. Mr. Secretary!


Tob. A little Step to future Dignity. About two Years hence I expect to be a
Duke my self.


Grub. The Devil you do! This must be downright Madness.


Tob. Believe so, and be wretched!


Grub. Nay, nay, I beseech you, good Mr. Secretary, be not angry! It Is such
high News it almost gravels me: I desire only to be satisfied, and if you are
sure my Nephew is a Duke.


Tob. As sure as you are Justice Grub, Sir.


Grub. And that is pretty sure indeed. Gadzooks, if this be true I have undone
my self, I called him Son of a Whore! But, Mr. Secretary, I have great
Confidence in your Worship's Patience and Mercy. Changing his Tone.


Tob. Well, Mr. Justice, I can wink at Faults.


Grub. But if the Sun should dazzle now!


Tob. Yet more Doubts! Have you a Nose on your Face?


Grub. A Nose! Yes, yes; I am sure I have a Nose.


Tob. Why then I am sure he is a Duke.


Phil. O Gemini! If our Nephew be a Duke, I wonder what I am, Hubby!


Grub. A Fool, Hubby. Pox, prithee hold thy peace; I Will tell thee more anon:
this is the rarest News! We are all made for ever.


Tob. I saw the Courtiers bow, and heard 'em cry, Good Health and Fortune to my
Lord the Duke; God bless him, cries another; and to his Grace's right Hand, the
Worshipful Mr. Secretary, says a third: And when I came away to bring this
News, his Chamber was hung with Nobles like the Presence.


Grub. I heartily thank you, Sir, I am satisfied. Why, Great as he is, he is my
Kinsman, Mr. Secretary; I am his poor unworthy Uncle.


Tob. That Is true, Sir; but I could wish his Greatness could make him lose his
Memory; you have been formerly a little saucy with him, you know, Justice.


Grub. I have so indeed, a great Failing in troth: I am ashamed on it heartily;
and will repent and mend. What, I warrant his ingenious Lady was the Means of
all this!


Tob. Even so, Sir; You know I was for having you swinge her, Gadzooks, I would
not have her know it for a 1000 l.


Grub. Nor I have done it for Ten thousand.


Tob. For she has ferk'd out all our Preferments upon her own Anvil, as
cleverly as a Smith would do a Ten penny Nail.


Grub. Ah, I always thought her an ingenious Person. But now to see what
Fortune some Men have! I might have been a Duke too, if I had had but Luck. I
had an Estate and a Wife as fair as his, that could have brook'd the Court as
well as his, and laid about her for her Husband's Honor. Ah, Toby, had I ever
dreamt of this!


Tob. Yet again, Sir?


Grub. I cry your Mercy, good Mr. Secretary.


Tob. Why faith, Sir, it came above our Expectation: we were wise only in
seeking to undo this Honor: which showed our Dunghill Breeding, and our Dirt.


Grub. It Is very true, we were both arrant Puppies, Mr. Secretary. It Is as his
Noble Grace has often said, we understood just nothing.


Tob. It Is Time then that we now improve our selves, that rising, as we may,
with our great Master, we may attain some Wisdom with our Places, and not be
Fools in Office, Mr. Justice.


Grub. Right; and Troth this Grandeur of the Duke's, my Nephew, I cry thy Mercy
that I am familiar, methinks should make for us. Hum!


Tob. How the Fates may order in this poor Thread of Life, as yet I know not;
but I think I was not born to hold a Trencher: Let Time roll on, I shall see
what 'twill come to!


Grub. Well, The first thing I Will do, I Will fit my Wife for the Court; Buy her
new Clothes, and Trinckets.


Tob. That Is the Way, Sir.


Grub. I was a dull Country Clod, to let my Nephew rise and get the start
before me. But I Will dispatch and put my self in Money.


Phil. To buy me fine Clothes, Hubby! O Gemini! And must I go to Court then;
And see the fine Houses, and the fine Horses, and the fine Gentlemen that I
have dreamt of a thousand times, when you have been talking the Night before,
ivads I have, Hubby.


Grub. Thou shall see all: It shall go hard but I Will have Preferment too. I Will
about this Money instantly.


Phil. Oh Gemini! I could leap out of my Skin for Joy methinks!


Tob. You do well, Sir, and now you talk of Money, the former Business, for
taking up the five hundred Pounds, must be dispatched; This little Plat in the
Country lies most fit to do his Grace such serviceable Uses.


Grub. By no means, Mr. Secretary; his Grace shall have it of me, 'twill be a
Courtly Complement, to introduce my self.


Tob. Why, Troth, I thought so, but would not be too forward.


Grub. Oh, by all means, Sin, come, come! pray walk in, Wife, conduct Mr.
Secretary into the Buttery; and desire him to take a Glass of what we have: And
do you hear, recommend your self handsomely to the great Duke, our Kinsman, and
his Duchess; and write them word you shall attend 'em suddenly. I Will go and
dispatch these Bills, and follow you. Zooks! I hardly know where I am.


Tob. Sir, I shall wait on you.


Grub. By no means, Sir, it is much below your Place.


Phil. Come, sweet Mr. Secrecy, please to walk in, I know not what to get
that is good enough for you, for ivads you have made me a joyful Creature!


Tob. Keep your Joy till you come to Court, pretty Mistress!


Exeunt. Grub. And that shall be quickly, in faith, since there are Dukedoms,
and Don-ships, and the Devil and all to be gotten so easily: I Will trouble my
self no more with Sowing and Reaping; but laugh and lie at Ease, let the
Weather change as it will: I know I shall be a Devil of a Courtier the first
Year; But what then, my Wife shall shine for us both.

And toy and treat, whilst I wink at the Matter,
But for the rest, odzooks, I Will watch her Water. Exit.

SCENE I. Cockle-brain's House.
Enter Aurelia, Longoville, Bewford and Clermont. Aur. It must be carried
closely with a Care, that no Man speak to him, or come near him without our
private Knowledge, and then my good dull, honest, drowsy Husband you shall not
hinder me from the Pleasure of Basset: And I will go into the Country when I
please, and not when you think fit.


Long. Let him be kept in's Chamber under Show of State, and Dignity, and no
one suffered to see his Noble Face, or have Access, but we that are
Conspirators.


Bewf. Or else down with him into the Country, amongst his Tenants, where he
may live much safer in his Greatness, and play the Fool in Pomp amongst his
Fellows.


Aur. No, he shall play the Fool in the City first: I will not lose the Honor
of the Jest, that shall be given my Wit, for all his Land in the Country.


Cler. Alas, poor Duke! I do but think how he will sweat when he finds at last
he is made an Ass on.


Omn. Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Cler. In the mean time we'll keep a Guard about his Person, that no Man come
too near him, and our selves always in Company have him into the City to see
his Face swell, whilst in diverse Corners some of our own appointing shall be
ready to cry, Heaven bless your Grace, Long live your Grace.


Aur. 'Twill be rare Sport, and shall be as rarely followed: I Will teach him to
rail at me for losing Sonica. To think Beauty, such as mine, was only fit to
wither in the Country.


Bewf Poor sordid Earth-worm!


Aur. I can scarce hold from open Laughter, when I hear him cry, come hither,
my sweet Duchess; let me kiss thy gracious Lips: for this is still his Phrase.
I shall fear nothing but his Legs will break under the mighty Weight of so much
Greatness.


Cler. Hark, hark! He Is coming: set your Faces right, and bow like Country
Prologues. Here he comes. Room, Room, before there: The Duke is entering.


Enter Cockle-brain, with Attendants. The choicest Blessings wait upon the Duke.

Long. And give him all Content and Happiness.


Bewf. Let his great Name live to the end of Time.


Cockl. I thank you all; and am pleased to give you Notice, at a fit Time, I
shall consider of you: till when be near me: My dear Duchess, prithee let thy
Grace lend me thy Keys; there is a Book of Heraldry in thy Closet, I must
peruse.


Aur. Here they are, my Lord.


Long. He does it to a Hair.


Cler. Is he not a Duke indeed? He Is altered so, he is now scarce knowable.


Cockl. Get Candles there.


Bewf. Lights, Lights there for the Duke. Ex. Cockl.


Aur. His very Style and Air altered: Why, here is the Effect of Grandeur,
Gentlemen.


Enter Lyonel. Lion. The Duke! What Duke is this, ha? Do you know him?


Aur. It Is the poor mad Gentleman I told you of; he runs thus over all the
Town, and where he finds a Door open, he enters.


Lion. Or is the lucky Favorite made a Duke, He that has married Celia?


Cler. What Celia, Sir?


Lion. I know not what I say, Sir: you shall not snap me: this is no Treason: I
said only Celia, she was my Love, Sir, in Diebus illis, But now alas!


Cler. Where is she, Sir?


Lion. Dead! Dead! SINGS. In yonder Cowslip lies my Dear,
Entombed with liquid Gems of Dew;
Each day I Will water't with a Tear,
Its fading Blossom to renew.
Alas, poor Soul! she died of the Heart-burning, in spite of the Benefit of
Crabs Eyes or Spaw-water, Sir: you are an Apothecary.


Long. Alas, poor Wretch!


Lion. You have a strange odd kind of an Apocryphal Phiz; methinks a Face
that is full of hard Words: Zowns, Sir, do you come to pose me? I am a Scholar.


Aur. He knows it, Sir, and knows Celia too, who greets you kindly, and would
not have you be so melancholy.


Lion. Thank her; but it is too late, tell her! SINGS. I Will lay me down and die
within some hollow Tree,
The Raven and Cat, the Owl and Bat shall warble out my Elegy.
How do you like that Dirge now, was it not quaint?


Enter Cockle-brain, with a Book. Cockl. I have found the Book of Heraldry.


Lion. A Book of Heraldry! Have you so, Sir?


Cockl. How now! Who Is this? Yes, Sir, that I have: what then?


Cler. Here Is like to be rare Sport!


Aur. We cannot miss it, now the Fool and Madman are met.


Lion. What then? Why then, Sir, I suppose you were sent to dispute with me
about King Henry's Title: Come on, Sir: I Will be cunning enough, I warrant you,
Begin, state your Point.


Cockl. A strange sort of Fellow this! does any here know him?


Cler. I believe your Grace will find him a Malcontent, sent by some Enemies
that envy your new Greatness, to pump your Loyalty with a fallacious Argument
about the King's Title.


Cockl. Oh, is that the Business? Well; I Will be prepared for him, I Will warrant
ye: Come, Sir, sit down; I Will clear this Business: Henry of Hereford, Son of
John of Gaunt.


Lion. Sir, I shall answer nothing, till these Witnesses depart the Room; you
must not think to trap me.


Cockl. Pray leave us together: I Will have no Man stay; no not my Duchess.


Bewf. Come, let us go, and behind the Hangings hear this fine Argument. Exeunt.


They sit. Cockl. Henry of Hereford, Son of John a Gaunt, Impeached of Treason
by Thomas Duke of Norfolk, demanded Combat.


Lion. Well, Sir, and what then?


Cockl. Pray give me leave, Sir: But King Richard the second loving and fearing
his great Uncle Lancaster, deferred the Fight, and banished both the Kingdom.


Lion. Sir, give me better Reasons for his Banishment, or yield your self
confuted.


Cockl. What, before we have half done. Pray give me leave, Sir.


Lion. Pray, Sir, give me leave: I Will give you better Reasons, They swell
within me, and must have vent.


Cockl. Will you but hear me, Sir?


Lion. I Will hear nothing, Sir, till I have filled your Belly full of Reasons: I
say, King Richard, Sir, forbid the Combat, doubting the Justice of his
Kinsman's Cause; and therefore, Sir.


Cockl. I know what you infer, Sir.


Lion. Sir, you know nothing: for then comes Vortigern the Saxon Monarch, and
cuts off the Entail.


Cockl. Ownds, what Entail? The Devil's in this Fellow; He Is running back to
the beginning of the World, if I don't contradict him: why what has Vortigern
to do with Richard the second?


Lion. How, Sir, not to do with him? Did they not combat on the Bank of Humber,
and thump each other soundly for the Kingdom, with Batts and Sand-bags?


Cockl. No, Sir, that ever I could read.


Lion. Why then you are a Traitor, and I arrest you of High Treason, for not
knowing History better, and seize you on the behalf of Vortigern.


Cockl. Pox on Vortigern and you too. Seize me? alas, poor Fellow! know thou
who I am?


Lion. I care not what you are: Come along to Prison, and willingly, or I Will
plume thee as a Hawk does a Partridge.


Cockl. The Devil is certainly in this Fellow: within there? who waits?


Lion. Do you rebel? Thus I claim the Combat. beats Cock.


Cockl. Help, Help, here. Enter Footmen.


Enter Aurelia, Clermont, Longoville, and Bewford. Aur. How now? Alas, what is
the matter here?


Cockl. Help, help thy Duke here!


Cler. Take him off; forbear his Grace's Person.


Lion. A Horse; a Horse; my Kingdom for a Horse: What Is here, a Woman, charging
at their Army's Head? then we are betrayed.

I Will mount to you, blue Coelum,
To shun these Female Gypsies;
I Will play at Bowls with Sun and Moon,
And scare ye with Eclipses.

Long. Away, away with him.


Lion. How, seized! then here is my Ransom: This was my Father's Sword, I Will
call it Vortigern: It lightens when I draw it, and when I strike it thunders!


Bewf. Away with him, the Man's mad. How does your Grace?


Cockl. Indifferent well; but I believe he has broke my Head with the Hilt of
Vortigern.


Cler. How did you find his Title, my Lord?


Cockl. The Devil take his Title and him too. Dear Duchess, prithee go get me
a Plaster.


Long. It needs not, my Lord; it is nothing but a Contusion, upon my Honor, and
nothing so good for it as Air. Will your Grace be pleased to see the City?


Cockl. It shall be so: prepare there. A Plague of this Vortigern! Aside.


Cler. Your Grace determines not to see the King.


Cockl. Not yet: about some ten Days hence I shall be ready.


Long. Clear the way there: Room for the Duke! Ex. Cockl.


Cler. Away, before, Bewford, and raise a Guard sufficient to keep him from the
reach of Peoples Tongues, and remember how the Streets must be disposed with
Cries and Salutations: in the mean time, Madam, you keep your State at home.
Exeunt.


Aur. Ha, ha, ha; thus far it is acted rarely: what hereafter I do intend, lies
not within your level, my sweet Friends; nor shall not, till it is ripe for a
Discovery. Enter Page with a Letter.


As I live, from my new Country Aunt, I know the Hand: To the great Lady, High
and Mighty Duchess of Dunstable, be these delivered: Ha, ha, ha, Oh for a
stronger Lace to keep my Breath in, that I my laugh the nine Days, till the
Wonder fall to an Ebb! What high and mighty Blockheads live in the Country!

Reads the Letter. My good angry Uncle, I find, by the Contents, you want
Preferment too, and you shall have it, or my Wit shall fail me.

Enter Celia. Cel. Madam, I hope you will pardon this Intrusion: 'twas told me
that a poor distracted Gentleman, that owes his great Misfortue to my Folly,
was seen to enter here; Pray is it so?


Aur. Such a one, Madam, has been here, indeed, but he is gone: Was he your
Husband, Madam?


Cel. That he was not my Husband, was the Cause that he is nothing now: cursed
lawless Force, and impious Cruelty, ravished the Blessing from his longing
Heart, and cast a Mist before my feeble Eyes, blinded by Wealth and treacherous
Dignity, I could not see his Merit, till too late.


Aur. I hope he is not past Cure, Madam?


Cel. There Is a Physician learned in these Extremes, that gives me mighty
hopes, if he were taken!


Aur. I believe, Madam, my Servants can give you some Account of him: if you
please I Will examine them.


Cel. The Courtesy will be both generous and charitable.


Aur. Madam, You should command far greater Services than these, if they were
in my Power. Exeunt.


SCENE III. The Street.
Enter Bewford, and six Gentlemen. Bewf. Every Man take his Corner, here am I,
you, and you in that place, and as he comes by, be sure you salute him with
loud Voices, and Faces full of dejected Fear and Humbleness. Away, he is coming.


Enter Toby. Tob. Fie! How these streets are thronged here with these same
rascally People. I am just come to Town, and, as I am a Gentleman, am almost
choked already, with the very Steam of 'em: They have crowded his Grace almost
to Death yonder, they follow him like a Baboon to the Bear-Garden. There is in
the World no true Gaper like your Citizen: the Bears shall not pass by his Door
in Peace, but that he, and all his Family shall be ready to ride upon the Backs
of 'em. Room, before there.


Enter Cockle-brain, Clermont, Longoville, and Servants. A Pox on you, keep
your Places, and then you may see him till your Hearts ache.

1 Gent. Bless your Grace.


Cockl. And you, with all my Heart.


2 Gent. Heaven grant your Grace long Life, and happy Days.


Cockl. Thank thee, good Friend.


2 Gent. Perpetual Blessings crown you.


Cockl. I thank you all. Longoville.


Long. My Lord!


Cockl. I Will make a Speech to 'em. Hem, hem!


Long. Silence there, his Grace will make a Speech.


Cockl. Good People! I shall divide my Speech into three Branches; First, it
has pleased the King, my Master, for sundry Virtues in me, not unknown to Him,
and the wise State, to lend his Hand, and raise me to this Eminence: My second
Branch is to examine how this may seem to other Men, or stir the Minds of such
as are my Fellow-Peers against me; since I desire, and will deserve their
Loves, as I do yours, good People. My third and last Branch is upon Amity, for
as the Tree --


Cler. Your Grace had best take care, 'twill be informed the King, your
Greatness with the People.


Cockl. A Pox on him! he has hindered me from branching into the finest
Metaphor, and I am the worst in the World to get in again when I am once out:
My last Branch, I say, dear Friends, is, Hem, hem! a Plague of this Clermont!
is, I say, -- Faith, I know not what it is at present -- But if ever you catch
me branching it again, in this Fellow's Company -- I Will give you leave to hang
me upon the Tree I was speaking of, And so I share my Bowels amongst you all.


1 Gent. A Noble Duke! a very Noble Duke! Exeunt.


SCENE IV. Cockle-brain' s Hall.
Enter Aurelia, and Maria. Aur. Is my Uncle coming, art sure?


Mar. As sure as he expects to be made a Duke too, Madam. Lord, methinks, I
long to see his new Country Wife, I wonder how the Creature looks.


Aur. Very prettily, as I have heard: 'Twill be Diversion to see how our Court
Sparks will ogle her Country Dress.


Mar. Yes, Madam, and paddle in the Palm of her Hand.


Aur. Hold your tongue, your Gypsy, and go and see what time the Coach comes
in: I must set another Spring ready to catch the Buzzard, my Uncle; I Will teach
him to preach against the Court and my Town Pleasures. Hark! His Grace, the
Duke is coming. Away, away to your Business.


Re-enter Duke and Train. Your Grace is welcome home.

Cockl. Why, thank your Grace. How fine these Titles sound, Sweetheart, I am
well and merry, never more able to be thy Bedfellow, my Dearest.


Bewf. Bless us, what a hot Meat this Greatness is!


Long. It may well be, for he has not got a snap these two Months, to my
Knowledge, or is she damned for swearing it.


Cockl. I thank you, Gentlemen, for your Attendance, and your great Pains, pray
know my Lodgings better and oftener: do so Gentlemen: now by my Honor, as I am
a Prince, I will consider your Deservings. Toby.


Bew. Where Is Mr Secretary, there? Some body call him.


Enter Toby. Cler. Mr. Secretary!


Tob. Who calls?


Long. His Grace wants you, Mr. Secretary.


Cockl. Toby.


Tob. My Lord.


Cockl. Be ready for the Country once more, Toby: And let my Tenants know the
King's great Love; say I would see 'em; But the weight of State lies heavy on
my Shoulders, and therefore tell 'em, I expect their Attendance. Go, take up
Posthorses, and make haste.


Tob. I begin to find this underhand Dignity a little troublesome, and care
not much for jumbling my Honor thus a Horseback. Well, for this once I Will be a
Servant; but when I come back, I Will try if I can set up for a Duke, as well as
others.


Exit Toby. Aur. My gracious Husband, you must now prepare in all your Pomp, to
entertain your Uncle, who is a Convert now. And with his Wife intends to be
here to night.


Cockl. Alas, poor Country things, how they will blush to see my Grandeur! But
I will be pitiful, Gentlemen, pray be ready, I do intend to morrow early, To
show before my Uncle's wondering Face,
The Greatness of my Pomp, and of my Place.



Cler. We'll all be ready. Away, Boys, till to morrow.


Bewf. This Country Uncle must needs prove a rare new Scene of Diversion.


Long. Most certainly, in the mean, let us to Pontack's to Supper. Exeunt Omnes.


ACT IV.
SCENE, St. James's Park. Enter Grub. Phillida and Roger. Grub. ARE all things
carried to the Tailor! Roger?


Rog. All, All, an't shall please you: che were with 'en by break of Day, along
while avore you were out of your Neast, an't shall please you.


Grub. That Is well; we must know of the Duke my Cousin, Wife, what Fashion his
Grace will please to have us in? For my own part, I have an old fashioned
Velvet pair of Breeches, that when I have made a new Suit and Cloak of 'em,
will steal into the Presence well enough.


Rog. And does your Worship intend to leave Plowden Hicket, and your House in
the Country for good and all, an't shall please you?


Grub. As his Mighty Grace, my Nephew thinks fit: It Is as preferment comes,
Roger!


Rog. Gads bread; and thick vine Gown will make Mistress look like a Countess
too, an't shall please you.


Grub. Ay, ay, before the Duke and the Court have done with her, I hope to see
her look like a Duchess, Roger. Come, Wife; What are you staring at?


Phill. Oh Iemmini! Hubby -- I never saw so curious a place in my life: The
Trumpets and the Drums make so pure a noise, methinks I am almost subtracted
with it: And look, look, Hubby what are these Birds that fly over our Heads?


Grub. Ducks, Ducks, Fool.


Phil. Good me! and why do they fly about so? And, pray Hubby, tell me who is
that naked Black Man, that holds a thing in his hand so.


Grub. O Lord! a naked Black Man with a thing in his hand, was there ever such
a Fool? why, that is a Statue! a Gladiator, a thing set up for Ornament; or to
scare the Rooks here about the Court -- A Pox I cannot tell what it is for? Come
prithee, Come along.


Phill. Nay, pray Hubby; let me know all the fine things. And what are those
that lie there by the Water side, Hubby.


Grub. Geese, Geese, you Fool! odszooks! those! no, those are Gentlemen of the
Guard that lie a Sunning: s'bud She Will tire me with questions! if I stay longer
-- Come, come prithee, come away -- Roger! a word.


Enter Footman Singing. Foot. Lol-throl-lol -- How now! what pretty Country
thing is this, that stares at me? I Will speak to her: Your Servant, pretty
Mistress, whither are you a going?


Phill. Oh Gemini! what a pure sweet fine young Gentleman is here? Indeed Sir,
I don't know! but I think I am going home with my Hubby!


Foot. Her Hubby -- what a pox is that, her Hobbyhorse?


Grub. You're mistaken here, Friend, She Is meat for your Master -- hum hum --
Grub. pulls her away.


Foot. Why then, Friend, I would my Master had her; and so your Servant -- Exit.


Phill. Oh law! Do you know him then! prithee dear Hubby, who is it?


Grub. Odzooks! a lowzy Footman, that I would not have had his Grace seen you
talk with for 1000 l.


Rog. What, a Footman, with thick vine Silver laced Coat on's back, as sure as
cham here, I should have taken him to be a Knight of the Shire at least, if
chad seen him come riding through Plowden.


Grub. Oh thou art come to a new World, Roger, the Lords and the Lacquies are
all brave alike here!


Rog. Would I were at home again for my part, and sitting by the fire with old
Joan -- I Would never come here to seek for parferment, not I; odsooks! the Cries
of the Street, and the rattling of the Coaches have almost mazed me: besides,
chant slep a wink since che come to Town.


Grub. Hold your Tongue, ye Clodpole: Don't you see what preferment your
Countryman Toby is come to? And if I can get to be a Duke, as if my Wife
manages well, I intend to be, who knows, but thou may come to be Secretary as
well as he Buffle?


Rog. Should not a Secretary Write and Read, an't shall please you?


Grub. It Is all one; some do, and some do not, if he has but a Clark that can,
it is no matter whether he can Write and Read, or no? But come, by this time his
Grace is rising: lets go and give our attendance. Nay, prithee come away;
What-a-devil art thou staring at? -- Exeunt.


Enter Lyonel meeting Toby. Tob. Save you, Sir.


Lion. Save the King* Sir


Tob. Pray Sir, which is the nearest way?


Lion. Save the King, I say, Sir, this is the nearest way.


Tob. The nearest way, I mean to the Post house, Sir.


Lion. Gad save the King and his Post horse, Sir.


Tob. Pray, Sir, direct me to the House


Lion Here must be no directions; you cannot catch me, Sir.


Tob. I don't understand you, Sir.


Lion. Read Hugo Grotius then. I say you cannot catch me, Sir.


Tob. Not catch you, Sir?


Lion. No Sir, nor can the King with all his cunning Stratagems and Plots,
although he put his Nobles in disguise, never so often, to sift into my words by
course of Law lay hold upon my Life.


Tob. This must be some business that the Duke my Master is by the King
employed in, and he thinks that I, as being Secretary, am acquainted with it --
hum hum.


Lion. I shall not need to rip the Cause up to you, nor need you tell me the
place you hold in the State -- I know your Name is Phizgigg.


Tob. Phisgigg, Sir!


Lion. Ay -- by the Mothers side you come from the Right Honorable the
Bominellies; you give for your Coat Argent, a Polcat Mountant Azure, a Bar
direct between Culters pendant Sables: You are, Sir, sprung of a great Family.


Tob. An ingenuous Fellow, this, I warrant him: s'bud, he knows more of me than
I ever knew of myself.


Lion. Besides, you have a scar upon the top of your Nose, which denotes
Dignity, a Semicircle upon your Crown, and a double fold upon your right Ear:
your Great Uncle was a Bassaw.


Tweaks him by the Nose, and Cuffs him. Tob. A Bassaw, s'heart, this fellow
will make a Great Turk of me presently -- I have lately come to some preferment
indeed, Sir.


Lion. It Is nothing, you shall have more, and greater: Let me see -- You shall
be before Christmas next --


Tob. A Duke, Sir.


Lion. A Duke at least.


Tob. Odsheart! I thought so always! I know I was not born to hold a Trencher:
this is a most admirable Man!


Lion. But there is one ill Planet that hangs over you.


Tob. An ill one! a lack-a-day -- What is it. Sir?


Lion. Saturn! Saturn! you will within this hour be taken up for High Treason!


Tob. Bless me! for High Treason!


Lion. Has no one seen you talk with me, think you?


Tob. Yes, a great many, Sir.


Lion. There it is, there is your undoing: I am pursued by the whole State!
Continual Treasons laid to my Charge, and all that talk with me fall into the
same predicament. I cannot help weeping, to think you should fall, into such
danger for my sake!


Tob. S'heart! would you had been hanged e're I had fallen into the
predicament, as you call it. weeps.


Lion. You will be apprehended within this half hour, you are beset already --
'oh -- weeps.


Tob. I Will whip out of Town.


Lion. Oh -- then your Head's whipped off the next minute, if you but offer at
that. Oh --


Tob. Why the Devil did you stop me, could you not be contented to be hanged by
your self like a good Christian. But on my Conscience, this comes of my
Ambition, my plotting to be a Duke before my time.


Lion. Oh, oh, oh! Both howl out.


Tob. But, good Sir, is there no remedy?


Lion. Yes, yes -- Fate does allow a remedy; but then you must take a Manly
resolution, and suffer your self to be hanged little, to appease the Fates.


Tob. Oh a little! pray how little will serve, Sir! for you know there is no
jesting with those things.


Lion. Why, two or three hours hanging will do it, I am sure; and if you can
endure that bravely, you will certainly live to be a Great Man.


Tob. Oh Lord; It Is impossible: I know my Constitution so well, Sir, that I
shall be choked in half the time: But if punishment for a High Misdemeanor,
instead of High Treason would serve turn, I would be burnt in the Hand with all
my heart; if that would appease the Fates.


Lion. 'Twas generously said; and it is pity such Honor e're should be a prey to
Fortune: Take Courage, Friend, I will preserve thy life with hazard of my own.


Tob. A Blessing on your Heart.


Lion. This night thou shall be locked within my Doors, and in the Morning I Will
so provide, that in disguise you shall have free access to the Seaside, and
then, e're any know it, be Shipped away for Bantam.


Tob. For Bantam! Gadsooks! that is a devilish way: What shall I do when I am
there? Oh Fortune, Fortune! but come, any thing's better than hanging by the
Neck two or three hours, in hopes to be a Great Man after it.


Lion. Follow me softly then, and no more Thoughts of Honor, do you hear: lest
the Fates frown, and contradict our purposes.


Tob. Ah no, no, Sir, my Pride is fallen low enough by this time. This comes of
my Ambition, Rogue, Pimp, Scoundril as I was -- I must be a Duke in the Devils
name -- Oh, I deserve to be hanged, that is the Truth on it --

Exeunt. Lyonel, Toby go above.


Enter Celia and Doctor. Cel. This is his House, and here I saw him enter; his
better Angel has directed him to leave the wandering streets -- poor, Gentleman,
would I were able, with as free a Heart, to set his Soul right, as I am to
grieve the ruin of his Sense, which Heaven forgive me!


Doct. If you could win him but to take my Medicine, and get some Rest, my Life
upon the Operation.


Cel. I Will call to him: Sir, if you are within, pray speak to me.


(Toby above, Lion above.) Yes Sir, I am within, and will be.

Tob. Oh, oh -- Who is it, Good Sir, Who is it?


Lion. The Captain of the Guards: take heed you are not seen: there the
Disguise lies; on with it immediately, 'twas what I had provided for myself --
but you shall be served first now, Friend.


Doct. Sir -- here is a friend of yours would speak with you


Lion. A Friend! no Sir, you must pardon me -- I am acquainted with no such --
I see you are a Switzer by your Habit.


Doct. Alas! poor Gentleman!


Tob. A Switzer! Oh Lord, what will become of me?


Cel. Sir, I am a Messenger from her ^ou love: nay, and from her that loves you
more than Life, more than fresh springing Flowers the indulgent Sun; or pretty
Birds enfriar'd their liberty: and can you be so cruel not to hear me?


Lion. Let it suffice that you hear me, and hear me loudly, once more, God Save
the King. Come Friend, are you ready -- the Troops are all drawn off, the Coast
is clear now, only the Captain and the Switzer.


Tob. And what is to be done with 'em, Good Sir?


Lion. We Will scow'r 'em, Boy, we will scow'r 'em: you shall bring up the rear. I Will
Charge in the Van! nay, prithee, why do thou shake so?


Tob. Alas! Sir -- It Is impossible for me to Charge, I am turned Woman now!
Toby comes down.


Lion. Why then I Will do it myself: This bloody Sword through millions of our
Foes shall be thy Guard, and let thee safe aboard.


Doct. Come, Madam, let us be gone: This is no time to stay to tempt his Fury:
we will take a fitter season.


Cel. Heaven send it. --


Enter Toby in Woman's Apparel. Tob. They are gone sure! I can see no body. Oh
how I shake! would I were safe under hatches once, that I might be out of my
fears -- Farewell -- the Court now; Instead of being a Duke, or at least a
Baron, I am going the Devil knows where, to Bantam? And farewell, my dear Lord
too -- I shall never see thy Glorious Face again -- Oh, oh --


Enter Lyonel. Lion. How now! Who Is here, another Undertaker? Another Plot upon
me?


Tob. It Is I, Sir, it is I.


Lion. I. Why who are you?


Tob. Your Friend, Sir -- whom you are sending to Bantam?


Lion. Bantam; and my Friend: here is a sly trick now, they know I have no Woman
Friend but one, who is too closely kept from me, to be here: pray, come hither
and let me look on you.


Tob. Why Sir, It Is I.


Lion. You should not be a Woman by your stature!


Tob. I am none, Sir -- I am none.


Lion. I know it then, keep off:
Strange Men and Times! How am I still preserved?
Here they have sent a Yeoman of the Guard,
Disguised in Woman's Clothes, to work upon me,
To make Love to me, to trap my Words,
And to ensnare my Life, keep off, I say.

Tob. Oh do not leave me, I beseech you, Sir, for I shall never be able to find
the way to Bantam, without you.


Lion. Ha -- are not these my Clothes?


Tob. Yes, Sir, you lent 'em me to make escape in.


Lion. Here Is an impudent Rogue: First rob me, and then talks of making his
escape -- Come, strip, sir -- I Will make an example of you.


Tob. Oh Lord, strip, Sir?


Lion. Ay, ay, all off Rogue, and presently, or I will pound thee into Mortar.
Strips Toby.


Tob. Oh dear Toby. What will become of thee?


Lion. The Drawers too, Rogue; the Drawers.


Tob. The Drawers -- Why Sir, I shall be naked, for I Have but a half Shirt on.


Lion. Sir -- If you have but a half Breech on, I Will see what you have!


Tob. Oh the Devil's in this Fellow. I must run for it, he will flea me else.
Starts from him, and runs out.


Lion. Hah, fled -- Why then, like conquering Tamberlain, I carry off the
spoils -- Victoria, Victoria.


Enter Grub. Phillida, and Roger, in tawdry new Clothes. Call Longo, Bewford.
Grub. Wife -- be sure you hold up your Head now; and primm it as you did one
Sanday at Church in the Country, when you put the Parson out of his Sermon,
with staring at you -- and let the Courtiers see you understand your self! do
you hear?


Phill. I warrant you, Hubby, let me alone for primming out.


Rog. This is a woundy gallant place, an't like your Worship. There Is never a
Chamber che ha gone through, but is as big as our Town Hall at Plowden, an't
shall please you.


Grub. Peace! peace, the Door opens, and two Gentlemen are coming this way:
Wife, look to your Enter Longovil and Bewford. self. Roger, be mannerly. I Will
speak to 'em. Save you, Gentlemen! belong you, I beseech you, to his Mighty
Grace the Duke?


Long. We do, Sir, and are your Servants. S'life! What pretty Country
Creature's that?


Bewf. If there be any thing that we can serve you in, to his Grace, Sir, be
pleased to Command us.


Grub. Gentlemen both -- I thank you, Roger, your Hat, under your Arm -- Sir!
when did you hear such words before. Wife -- hush -- Answer nothing: let me
alone with 'em. Pray Gentlemen; is it sit so mean a person as myself should
desire the favor, as that you would be pleased to help me to the Speech of the
Great Duke your Master --


Longo. Sir, we shall be proud to serve you. Pox on him, what a Tone the Rogue
has?


Bewf. Be pleased, Sir, to discuss your Business, and your Name, And we will
presently inform him of ye.


Phill. O Iemini, Roger! I never heard such fine talk in my life; why, our
Minister at home is nothing to 'em.


Rog. Ah, thick Gentlemen would make a fool of him, quick alack, they are too
vine to have much Religion in 'em.


Phill. Well, well, Roger, I hope to be too fine myself too shortly.


Grub. Leave your chattering, and be hanged, and don't discover your Country
breeding, ye silly Baggage -- aside. Gentlemen both -- my Name is Grub.


Longo. Grub. I cry you mercy, Sir, you are his Graces Kinsman, if I mistake
not.


Grub. Troth Gentlemen, I think there may be a quart or two of his Graces.
Blood in me -- if I may be so bold.


Bewf. Sir, no doubt, but you have a gallon of it in you, and we must all be
yours, his Graces Kinsman. And we so much forgetful, 'twas a rudeness, we must
beg pardon for, and beg the favor to welcome you to Town. kess Grub.


Grub. Your servant, Sir, they flabber confoundedly, tho.


Rog. Oh Lord, what do thick Men mean by Bussing my Master?


Bewf. Next Madam, to you we humbly address our selves! A Cherubim, by this
Light. aside. They kiss Phillida.


Grub. This kissing is the worst Fashion in the Court; would they would leave
it off -- Come hither, Wife -- whisper.


Longo. It Is He! this is the Uncle; I find it now; do hear Bewf. He must be
preferred too?


Bewf. And so he shall, if all the Art we have can make him noble. I Will dubb him
with a Cuckoldom -- if his Wife will but join issue.


Longo. Soft and fair, Sir, we must draw lots about that business.


Grub. Throw away that Pole, and be hanged! What a devil do think we are come
to play a Hit at Quarter-staff! we stand upon our preferment; therefore take
care of your Behavior, Booby.


Longo. Wilt please you, Sir, to walk a turn or two here in the Antichamber,
whilst to his Grace we make your coming known.


Grub. I thank you, Sir, -- I shall attend his pleasure. Now, Roger, what
think thou: Is not this rare -- ha!


Ex. Long and Bewf. Rog. The Gentlevolkes are huge loving, an't like your
Worship, Godsdiggers, I was afraid they would have Buss'd me too.


Phill. Oh dear Hubby -- lets never go into the Country again; Foh -- methinks.
Plowden is such a stinking dunghill to this sweet place!


Grub. Odsooks -- the door opens now, now hold up your Head, and Primm, be sure.


SCENE, Discovers Cockle-brain seated with Aurelia, Maria, Longovile,
Clerimont, Bewford, Servants. They place Grub and his Wife in a Chair. Phill.
Oh Iemmini! Is that he, Hubbi?


Grub. Ay -- Godsooks is it: make a low Curtsy, quickly ye Jade. Most Gracious
Duke -- my -- poor Bowing. Spowse, and my Self, do kiss your mighty Boot, and
next to that, the great Hand of your Duchess; ever wishing you Fame and Honor
springing as your years!


Cockle. Uncle, you are welcome!


Clerm. Pithy and short.


Longo. And stately too, I Will assure you.


Bewf. Look, look -- the old Gib-Cat is got down on's Knees.


Grub. Oh! High and mighty Duke. Your Graces Vassal, far unworthy the nearness
of your Blood -- Wife! down on your Mari-bones. She kneels.


Clerm. I swear, the prettiest Wench -- that e're I saw.


Bewf. Oh! is she so, Sir? -- Come, come, here are the Lots!


Longo. Now, Fortune -- They Draw.


Bewf. Mine by Heaven! and you are to assist me!


Clerm. We are so! a pox -- take you.


Cockl. Uncle, you must rise: so must your Lady -- the charge of whom I give to
my own dearest here.


Aur. Oh! how you Coxcombs shrugg, and Ogle this new Face already -- It Is well
my fine Fops, I shall have an hour for you too! Aside.


Grub. Now Phill. now Phill. -- now or never little Phill.


Cock. Well Uncle -- are you convinced yet of your old Error?


Grub. Oh Gracious Duke -- I was a very Rascal -- a Country Rogue! I do beseech
your Grace, out of your mighty Bounty, to lift up your Noble Foot -- and give
me half a score good kicks! Kick me! my good Lord, I beseech you, do it.


Cockle. No Uncle, not so neither: I remember you a little Familiar with me
indeed!


Grub. Ah! Zoons I was bewitched, my Lord, merely bewitched, I called your Mighty
Grace Son of a Whore: for which, besides my begging pardon on my knees, I was
the Son of a Whore myself for my pains, my Lord.


Cockl. Well, well, It Is all forgotten, I know it was your zeal, and therefore
blot it from my memory; have you, according to my Orders, resolved your self
for Court, and utterly renounced the slavish Country, with all its Dirt and
Care.


Grub. I have, so please you.


Cockl. Have you dismissed too your Garlic Eating-houshold, your Hobnail'd
Lubbers, with their crook'd horned Noses, and dry chopped Hands.


Grub. All, all, my Lord: All but my Man Roger there!


Cockl. You mean that Booby yonder -- foh -- how he looks! put him in Livery,
or let me see him no more; away with him: I hate a fellow in Gray, like a
Badger!


Rog. Oh Lord! What am I to be hanged now?


They hurry him out. Cockl. And have you sold your hangings of Nebuchadnezzar,
and the Prodigal, with the ancient History of Baalam's Ass, piec'd out with the
Wisdom of Solomon, and the Two Harlots.


Grub. All taken down, my Lord, and ready for a Chapman.


Cockl. It Is well, for now your Mind must quite be altered, as your Condition
shall be: One word more in private I must impart to you -- your Ear a little.


Grub. In troth, my Lord, I am unworthy.


Cockl. No more words: Come hither when I bid you: whisper.


Aur. As I was telling you first, your Husband must learn Basset, and must be
no more your Master.


Phill. No forsooth: I warrant you I Will order him.


Aurel. Change that forsooth for Madam, when you talk.


Phill. Yes Madam! Oh Iemini! this is rare, I vow.


Aur. Nor must you Eat with him, nor keep him company! If you would make him
great; you see this Duke here,


Phill. Yes forsooth, -- Madam -- I mean


Aur. He was an Ass when he came first to Town, an arrant Ass: Nay, I may truly
call him just such another Coxcomb as your Husband -- Till I pushed on his
Fortune. No more words now: Come to me to Morrow -- I Will put you in a way --


Phill. Yes, Madam, well, Iv'ads I Am sure I shall be a Duchess too, methinks
I Am too proud for a Country Gentlewoman already -- aside.


Cockl. Think on my words, and so farewell for this time: Gentlemen, conduct my
Uncle to his Lodging.


Exit Cockl. and Aur. Grub. I am your Graces Slave, your Vassal! My Lord -- Ah
Gadsooks I am made for ever.


Clerm. Oh! for a private place to ease my Lungs -- I am ready to burst! such a
pair of Jades -- were never ridden sure.


aside to Bewf. Bewf. Take him aside -- Good Ned, whilst I break in upon the
body of his strength, his Wife.


Clerm. Advance then, and be hanged, why don't you board her?


Longo. Ply her to windward, ye Rogue! she rides fairly.


Clerm. Faith, Sir, you have taken the most compendious way, to raise your
self; if his Grace stand your friend, you must be a great man! to Grub.


Grub. Why, troth he puts me in great hopes, Gentlemen!


Longo. What do you think now, Sir, as first step to your preferment, if you
could get to be Dew-beater!


Grub. A Dew-beater; what a Devil's that?


Longo. Why, your Office is to walk before the King a Mornings, and beat the
Dew off: I see you have a good large flat Foot for the business.


Grub. Yes, yes, my Foot would do well enough, you need no doubt: But what is
that Gentleman doing with my Wife yonder!


Clerm. Oh, what is matter what they are doing, or Sir, if you love your ease --
suppose you should put in for Gentleman of the Charcole.


Grub. Gentleman of the Charcoal.


Longo. Ay ay -- To see good Fires made in all the Rooms about the Court, and
disperse News to all the Courtiers that come to warm 'em. This place brings in
a mint of Money, if you can persuade 'em but to pay well.


Grub. Ods-heart! I persuade a Courtier to pay well! that were a work indeed --
Put pray Gentlemen, by your leave, A little -- I don't love to see my Wife
hugged thus!


Clerm. Not love to see your Wife hugged? have a care what you say, Sir, I
would not have the Gentleman hear you for a thousand pound.


Grub. What a Devil care I what he hears: pray, let me go Gentlemen!


Clerm. Not for the World, Sir, s'life do you know what you do?


Grub. Why, what is the matter?


Long. The matter! He Is one of the greatest Favorites at Court, And one that
can do any thing with the King; I swear you are a lost Man if you stir.


Clerm. If you have a mind to Rise, Sir, never mind 'em.


Grub. Zoons, Sir, -- They are kissing!


Clerm. Let 'em kiss, and much good do their hearts, if your Wife can but
niggle him right, Sir -- you are a made Man, I can tell you that.


Grub. But Sir, to kiss her, and in that rumpant manner!


Longo. Ay, ay, any manner, Sir: they must kiss, and double kiss: and kiss
again: or you may kiss the Post for your preferment.


Grub. I know not -- but look, look: he is at it again!


Longo. Again and again too: and the more happy Man you: would he would kiss me
as much, or my Sister, or any of our Family.


Phil. Good b'we, Hubby, good b'we, Hubby --


Ex. Bewf. and Phill. Grub. Zooks, Sir, but this is unconscionable, do but see,
he has taken her into a private room.


Clerm. Has he! why then your business will be done, Sir?


Grub. Her Business will be done, you mean, Sir.


Clerm. You Will be the happiest Man by this days work, except the Duke your
Cousin, of any in the Court; For my part I envy you, and will Marry certainly,
and not let every Man outrun me thus; it is time to be my own Friend now: I
live in Court here, and teach the readiest way to prefer others, and be a slave
myself.


Grub. Nay, good Sir -- be not moved -- I thank you heartily for your
Instructions, but --


Clerm. But, no more but -- but come away.


Grub. I should be glad, methinks, to have my Wife with me.


Longo. Yet again, your Wife! will you ruin all? Go, go! begone! and take no
notice where you left her: let her return at leisure. If She stay a Month
'twill be the better -- I tell you once more, that Gentleman can make ye --


Grub. A Cuckold it may be.


Long. What he pleases, Sir!


Grub. Well -- I will go! and do hear Phill, don't forget Hubby a Duke,
Phill. a Duke! be sure to remember Hubby! Gentlemen, your most Humble Servant
-- I Will leave 'em together for a time; since it is the Court-way -- Gentlemen --
your most Humble.


Exit Grub. Longo. Ha ha ha. To me the gulling of this Fool is Venery.


Clerm. Thus Country-Fops, that of Court-Grandeur heard, Post up to Town; and
thus they are preferred. Exeunt.


The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
Enter Cocklebrain. It Is somewhat strange; that I have had no Letters, nor no
Account of my Affairs in the Country, since I sent Toby down among my Tenants:
I did expect the very Bells of Dunstable, giving the sound to the near
neighboring Steeples, would lead the joyful Tidings, like a Train of Gunpowder,
from thence to London; But I hear nothing: Fame has lost her Trumpet, and the
loud voice of my young flourishing Glory is mute as a hoarse Clerk setting a
Psalm. A noise within.

Enter Servant. Ser. Sirrah, keep back -- here is no place, for such Vermin:
This is no Barn for Beggars.


Enter Toby in a Blanket, forcing the Servant forward. Tob. Beggars! here is a
Rogue now! to rank a Great Dukes Secretary, because he appears a little in
disguise, amongst Beggars.


Serve. Ye saucy Rascal, you will come on! nay then, I Will try my strength --
Goes to force him


Cock. How now, what is the matter there?


Tob. My Lord, my Lord, the Duke! do you know me: It Is I my Lord -- it is I.


Cock. What! Toby!


Tob. Ay! ay! Faith old Toby of the World, that has such things to discover!
such a Catastrophe to tell you: Hark you, Squire of the Curry-comb -- To the
Servant. You may go to your Stable, and make Love to your Coach-Mares! What a
pox, because a Gentleman returns home a little in Disabillum! you cannot know
him again, you Rascal, can you; go rub rub; avaunt Oat-stealer. Turn out.


Serve. What, Mr. Toby? this is wonderful.


Cock. Sure thou have designed some Farce to entertain me! What is the meaning
of all this! What Catastrophe have thou to tell me?


Tob. Oh! a damned Catastrophe: as I was saying, a Devilish Plot -- Will your
Grace be pleased to call for a clean Shirt: Gad! it will make you sweat through
your Clothes in a moment.


Cock. What are all my Tenants run away in the Country? What a Devil can this
be?


Tob. Nay, that the Fates can tell, not I: I have been no nearer the Country
than I am now: Ah, your Grace little thinks, how dangerous it is to be an
Officer in Trust! why, since I saw you, I have been! --


Cock In a Bawdy House; I believe: Ay, ay; it must be so: And there stripped:
this sly Rogue has been in a Bawdy House.


Tob. A Bawdy House at Bantam, my Lord -- Too hot a Country for Whoring, I
thank you.


Cock. Bantam!


Tob. Even so: I was within a stones throw of it, for above two hours, I am
sure: Does not your Grace begin to sweat yet?


Cock. To hear you lie, Rascal.


Tob. Nay -- if you doubt this -- What will you do when you hear that I have
been hanged, drawn, and quartered for High Treason, since I saw ye.


Cock. Away -- Coxcomb -- Thou art drunk sure.


Tob. Drunk, it is with the Cup of Sorrow then, nothing but my Tears have
moistened me. Since I saw you last, -- I am as dry as a Bakers Bavin, and fit
for nothing -- but to be thrown in with them to heat an Oven: for since I left
your Graces House.


Cockl. My House -- what House is that, hah?


Tob. Why, this House, your Graces House here!


Cockl. This House -- why you Son of a Hedge Hog: has it no name, has my House
no name! no Title, Sir -- Dunstable-House, ye Ass. Must a Man be always
telling you these things?


Tob. I beg your Graces pardon -- And as I was saying, my Lord -- just as I had
left Dunstable-House, there comes up to me a Devil of a Fellow, Friend, says he
-- and stares me in the Face -- You are the Man beset -- Come instantly with
me, and be shipped away for Bantam, or you will be instantly apprehended, and hanged
for High Treason.


Cock. A Devil of a Fellow indeed: it must be some mad Man, sure.


Tob. Mad man! no -- he was a Politician I am sure, for he was mightily given
to Music, and Sung one profound Ballad, that to my knowledge, was made of on
old -- Proclamation.


Cockl. This must be some Spy from some foreign Enemy; coud'st not thou have
trained him to Dunstable-House, that I might have examined him.


Tob. No more than I could carry Dunstable-House upon my Back to Dunginess --
Oh he had a plaguey pate of his own, and was, I am sure, a great Courtier, for
he was in 20 several Minds in the space of a minute. First, he was for
clothing me in a disguise to escape, within a minute after -- Wheigh -- with a
Powder le pimp, He fleas me, as a Cook does an Eel; after which I ran away, and
not being able to get into Dunstable-House by mere chance -- my shoul Joy, ish
borrowed thish Irish Cloak here of an honest Clanbriggian of my acquaintance;
and lay all night perdue in thy little worshipful place, called Dunstable
Privy-house indeed.


Cock. There must be more in this, than at present I see, which at better
leisure I will fist into: In the mean time, get ye in and uncase; You are a
fine Secretary indeed --


Tob. The Truth on it is at present, I look more like a Sow-gelder than a
Secretary; the Learned observe, Men of Merits often taste the greatest
misfortunes -- Well Sir, I Will go and uncase, as your Grace Commands -- little
does he think that the Man in the Rugg here has his Fortune told to be as great
as himself shortly. But Mum, Toby -- There Is some comfort still, however. Aside.


Exit Toby. Cockl. Now I have considered o'nt, Since Toby's intended Journey is
so crossed, My State and Grandeur will much more be shown Appearing in my person
in the Country; My Tenants needs must be much better satisfied, with seeing me,
than hearing of my Greatness: It shall be so; I Will down to 'em this Morning.
Who waits there?


Enter Maria. Mar. My Lord!


Cock. Go tell your Ladies Grace; that She must rise, I have instant business
with her.


Mar. Would your Grace have her rise to do your Business?


Cock. Yes that I would, Minx! here is a young Pert Queen already.


Mar. My Lord, it is cold, and she may catch an Ague!


Cockl. Why then I Will Trot her till she catch a Fever to it, How now, dare you
dispute?


Mar. I am gone, my Lord -- on my life he is mad again.


Exit Mar. Cockl. There is no way to grow popular like Courtesy, A gracious
Nod, a wink, or such a trifle will gain the People Love and Approbation, more
than a thousand Messages, or How-de'es.


Enter Aurelia. -- Oh! are you come, Wife?

Aur. What, is the House on Fire, or has your Grace A fit of the Vertigo --
that I am rowz'd thus?


Cockl. Oh neither! neither!


Aur. What then, in the name of Wonder?


Cockl. Why, I am resolved, on good Consideration This day to see the Country,
and it is proper That we set forward early.


Aur. The Country -- for Heavens sake, my Lord, What is it you mean? Have you
forgot the King's Request?


Cockl. Prithee! I Will but show myself: I Will only air my Titles there amongst
'em; and so return, which, by your leave, good Wife, will be for the King's
Honor.


Aur. Well, you may leave me here, you know I am breeding.


Cockl. Oh! Air will do you good.


Aur. Besides, I dare not forfeit my Allegiance. Your Grace may do your
pleasure.


Cockl. Your Allegiance! That is, your Duty to obey your Husband: Go, go, I
say: and bid your Maids pack up your things.


Aur. Nay, pray my Lord be ruled: you know the Coronet that now adorns your
Head, descended by my management.


Cockl. Yes, yes: and the other Ornaments that branch there, were all of your
contriving: what then? go and dispatch, I say.


Aur. The King will surely hear on it; and Heaven knows What the result may be?


Cockl. Well, well; I Will venture that: pray spare your Politics, and do as
you're Commanded.


Aur. Pray hear me, Sir!


Cockl. Yet again, Impertinence! where got you this presumption? Am I the Duke,
or you?


Aur. Well, Sir, tho you are Duke, 'twas I that Dubbed you.


Cockl. Dubbed me; nay, the truth is, you did Dubb me I believe; but no more of
that now: obey my Will, or --


Call Maria. Aur. Will no Reason -- take place?


Cockl. A Woman's Reason! that is good in faith -- prithee away, go, go, good
crooked Rib, and do not provoke me. I know what thou would say; the King
will take it ill: Alas! thou do not know, my main design is for his Glory, by
this Expedition, which I Will recount to him at my return, and what I Have done for
his security, by diving into the Humors of the People: But these are Riddles to
thee, Child -- Begone, I say, and within an hour let your Duty wait in the Hall,
with your Riding-dress on, do you hear?


Aur. Sir, you will be undone!


Cockl. A Dunce, shall I not be?


Aur. Yes -- by my Faith.


Cockl. Oh! nay, if you grow Malepert: I must take other measures: Hear me once
more; if all things are not ready in that time, I Will have thee carried like an
Essex Calf, tied Neck and Heels, stuffed in a pair of Panniers: and I my self
will drive thee on before me -- you shall know who I am? Ex. Cockl.


Aur. I do too well, for a dull stubborn blockhead, and know not how to mend
thee; s'life, if this Humor hold, I am half undone, for I am engaged this
Afternoon to meet the Widow Tireman, pretty Mrs. Primm, and three or four of
the Beaux Esprits, at my Lady Wagbums this Afternoon, with design to play
Crimp, and break the Bank, the Pareli, and Sept et-l^va, being made by those we
have the design upon, for we have agreed what Cards shall win, and Mr.
Shufflewell is so adroit in managing, that it is impossible we should miscarry,
and now in the instant, is this Beast for hurrying me into the Country, but
I Will have another trick to divert that Instantly -- He shall stay in spite of
him. Maria!


Enter Maria. Mar. Madam!


Aur. Quick, quick; thou do not dream, what Eggs are hatching; this Beast is
for the Country again; and all my dear Delights and Joys of the Town destroyed in
the Instant.


Mar. The Devil shall have him first.

I Will bring him one shall swear there is a great Flood,

And there is no likelihood to pass this ten days.

Or that a party of 2000 Robbers have sworn to pillage for a week that Road;
you know he loves his Money.


Aur. No, no, his Grace must be degraded; there is no way like it: Clermont and
his Friends are all prepared for this last Plot; Therefore be swift as Thought,
to find 'em out, we have but an hour of Trial.


Mar. Swift as the Mischief, Madam, never doubt me.

Exeunt. Since Marriage is a yoke two Fools must wear,
The ablest Fool the heaviest part should bear.
Thus let it then my Husbands Neck weigh down,
I Will try to make it easy for my own. Ex. Aur.

Enter Grub, Phillida, and Roger. Grub. What! lie out two whole nights, and no
preferment come, yet; How have thou spent thy time?


Phill. Oh! very well indeed Hubby! for the Gentleman told me you should be a
great huge Man; very suddenly. And for joy of it you cannot Imagine Hubby, how I
briskt up to him!


Grub. Briskt up to him, a pox, tho you briskt up to him so mightily! nothing
comes on it, that I see.


Phill. Oh! all in good time, Hubby, for he told me the King had knowledge of
you already: And how you were resolved to be a Courtier.


Grub. Hush, here comes Mr. Secretary!


Tob. Run you, and see the Sumpter got ready; and let my Lords Clothes be
brushed, and laid in order; tht Trunks and Boxes see nailed fast, and corded,
do you hear? To a Serve.


Grub. What Is the matter, good Mr. Secretary!


Tob. Oownz! Sir, my Lord's going Post into the Country of the sudden -- I am
almost out of my wits here.


Grub. The Country:


Tob. Ay ay, Sir, nay, prithee Mr. Justice, you see I Have a world of Business
upon my hands -- and do you hear, put the Women's things in the new Panniers, the
Linen, and the Box of Cordial Waters: Bid Nurse take care of my Ladies Eagle
Stone too: I hear she is breeding.


Serve. I will, Sir! Ex. Serve.


Tob. The rest I Will do myself: Oh! how I sweat -- Exit.


Grub. Roger: this suits well for me, for when he is gone, my Wife alone can do
my business better: Odzooks, I strangely long to be preferred, that I may twit
my Neighbors in the Country, and contradict our Parson, that is a main matter.


Rog. Zo it is! ant' shall please you: and that will make him contradict all the
Parish.


Phill. And never fear me Hubby -- I Will push it forward.


Grub. Do, do, Phill. do: Why, well said, Phill: methinks I am o'rejoyd at the
conceit on it: But see, here comes his Grace.


Enter Cocklebrain and Aurelia. Cockl. Why, this is well now: though you can
talk, I see you understand Obedience.


Aur. Very well, Sir.

Alas! it is all poor Women were designed for.


Cock. Very Good. Very Good! Oh Uncle. I did not see you. Why, I must court
your Patience, some few days to live without me: We Great Men Dive sometimes:
It Is a State trick that you are yet unskilled in: But have patience, we shall
appear again to your satisfaction.


Grub. Health to your Graces both.


Cockl. Set forward then: Sure Toby has by this time pack't up the things, and
seen the Coach got ready?


Enter Clermont and Longovile. Clerm. Stand, thou proud Man, once more I bid
thee stand.


Cockl. Thieves, Thieves! where are my People all? who waits there?


Clerm. Let 'em stir if they dare. And thus I am to say: Thou haughty Man, Thou
art a Monster; for thou art ungrateful, and like a fellow of a Rebel nature;
have flung from his embraces; therefore he bids thee stand, thou Insolent Man,
whilst thus with whisking of my Sword about -- I take thy Honor off; This first
sad Whisk takes off thy Dukedom, Thou art but a Marquess.


Cockl. What mean you, Sir.


Cler. This second Whisk divides thy Marquifate; Thou art yet a Baron.


Grub. Oh Lord! Oh Lord!


Cock. Prithee be quiet, I Will have no more of thy Whisks: what a Devil do
think I am an Ass.


Cler. You must have patience.


Grub. Oh! that ever I was born.


Rog. Oh! Oh! Oh! -- Howls out.


Clerm. Two Whisks are past: and two are yet behind: yet all must come: then
not to linger time, with these two dismal Whisks I quite degrade thee now;
Goodman Cocklebrain: for that sums all your Titles: Thank the King for
punishing no further.


Aur. Oh! Undone, undone! I thought what his stubborness would bring him too?
Feigns to weep.


Grub. I am amazed.


Cockl. This cannot be in earnest, sure.


Cler. You Will find it so, Sir.


Grub. I am confounded, shot to the Brain, I know not where I am!


Cler. Nay -- for your part, my Gracious Lord, the Fates have a far different
doom -- To Grub.


Grub. How Is that, Sir?


Clerm. Glory attends you, what Honors flow upon you. This Patent will inform
your Grace -- Gives a Patent.


Grub. My Grace! s'heart -- if this should be a Dream now And yet I feel the
Parchment in my hand: Good Sir, explain your meaning -- you have transformed me.


Rog. -- Hum, hum!


Clerm. Thus then in short, my Lord: The King who still so much preserves the
memory of that unhappy Man to let the Honors remain in's Blood, has in his
stead, made you the Duke of Dunstable; And as such, he bids you wear this Robe
of State.


Puts a Antic Robe and Turbant on his Head. Grub. Godzooks! Why Phill. Am I
awake, Art sure I am awake Phill?


Rog. Ods- diggers! I must be a Secretary too I see, there is no remedy!


Phill. Ay, ay, Hubby! and did not I make the most of a thing, think you, to
get to be a Duchess so soon?


Grub. Zooks, Thou have made more of a thing, Girl, than ever Duchess did -- I
am all Air: Gad I can fly, methinks -- A Duke already; why this is prodigious.


Clerm. Your Grace, I hope, will remember your poor Servant.


Grub. O Lord, dear Sir -- you shall have any thing.


Longo. I must beg leave to make my Court to her Grace, that way I am sure
preferment lies.


Grub. Oh! by all means, Sir. Do hear, dear Wife: we must be civil to these
Gentlemen.


Phill. Well, well -- the Gentlemen know I have not been behind hand with 'em.


Aur. False Villain: It Is as I suspected now, tho late, I see his Treachery,
and will revenge myself, tho I undo 'em all. Aside.


Exit Aurel. Grub. John Cocklebrain, tho the Kings Kings Royal Judgment has at
last found where he should place his Honors: it is not fit thou should be
quite forgot -- John, come to my H^use, and Eat sometimes, do hear! I Will get
thee into the Guards, or somewhere, because thou art my Kinsman.


Cockl. The Guards -- ods-heart I Would as leive 'twere the Gallows. Oh! Oh -- I
shall run mad.


Grub. Mad! you Jackanapes! have NOT I told you of your fantastical Humors a
thousand times: Thou fit to be a Duke! Alas poor Fellow!


Enter Toby. Toby. My Lord! the Coachman stays: and all your Equipage, ranked
by my Care and and Order, wait your Motion; I have had the Devil and all to do
amongst 'em yonder; but they are ready at last.


Cockl. Oh! Oh! Oh! Looking discontentedly on Grub. who looks scornfully on him.


Tob. Hey-day! What Farce is now to be acted? What is Mr. Justice going a
Morice-dancing?


Grub. Make him cease his babbling, Friends: and then let the poor Rascal know
who I am.


Tob. Who you are, why you are a Cuckold, and a Justice of Peace -- I know* who
you are well enough.


Rog. How Is that? Have you a mind to be hanged, Sir?


Tob. Why, what is the matter, are you all mad?


Clerm. Sir! he is newly made a Duke, down o'your knees, or --


Tob. A Duke! yes; and so am I as much? What do you think I do not know old
Justice Grub?


Grub. Nay -- if the Fellow grows saucy, let him be whipped, do you hear, and then
tossed in a Blanket: It Is fit I begin a little severely. It Will make me the
more terrible.


Clerm. Long. Away, away with him: you are a saucy Knave indeed.


Tob. Why, my Lord the Duke -- help, help.


Cock. Oh! Oh!


Tob. What a Devil is the meaning of this, S'heart, you will not let me be
tossed in a Blanket, will you?


Enter Bewford, and a Boy with a Robe and Cap. Bewf. Not for the World, unbind
him, Gentlemen, upon your perils.


Clerm. Why how now, Bewford, whence comes this Insolence, that you dare
contradict his Graces Order.


Bewf. His Grace! You Will find he has no such Title!


Grub. Oonz -- but I have, Sir, and will maintain it. Dare you sight, Sir? ha.
Offers to draw.


Bewf. Oh! Rage will do no good, Sir. To explain all, Gentlemen, thus it is,
All you have acted hitherto, is by mistake, a Courtier, that his Lady made her
friend, made shift to steal his name into a Patent, but now it is razed out; and
instead of him the King has chosen this Noble Gentleman; and this is now the
Duke.


Claps Toby on the Back, and Looks big. Tob. Hem, Hem.


Bewf. His Majesty has heard of your wise Conduct, and with this Robe invests
you. Puts on an Antic Robe


Tob. Air, air, good friends! by my troth this news warms mightily.


Bewf. And if for this good news, I may deserve to kiss your Graces Hand, my
Lord.


Tob. My Hand: Faith Friend I Will have it washed first -- Do hear, old Fellow:
prithee fetch me a Basin of Water. To Grub.


Grub. Fetch a Halter, Come, draw, draw: I Will fight for it: I Will not be chows'd
out of a Dukedom so, not I: since you have these tricks, I Will take the right
way to secure my Title, and settle it by the Sword. Draw, Draw, I say.


Rog. Ay, ay -- Draw, as my Lord Duke says: Zowns! I Will thrash some of you!


Omnes. Oh! there must be no Bloodshed.


Tob. The old Fool has often these Fits: some of you that would deserve my
Favor, take the old Dotard away, and toss him in a Blanket a little: there is
nothing like it to cure his Fits.


Grub. How, Sir! a Blanket: s'bud can I bear all this?


Cockl. Have but patience, Uncle, and I Will speak to his Grace, to take you as
under Butler, or something: I know you come to Town for preferment.


Grub. Fool. Cuckold.


Cock. Ay, look at home, Uncle! my Aunt has stirred her stumps, you know!


Grub. A pox stir her.


Phill. Nay, pray Hubby be not so angry: you know I did all for the best.


Grub. Hold your Tongue, Whore -- but do you hear Gentlemen! Have I dreamt all
this while of Dignity, and am I really no Duke?


Tob. No, no: Friend! a Duke! I prithee call thy Wits again.


Grub. What tho I formerly railed against the Court, when I was not preferred
-- I have more Honesty and Conscience now -- for if I am a Duke --


Tob. Yet again a Duke! Why, thou art no more a Duke, than thou art a Dromedary;
but as poor a Clumsie, Clod-pated old Justice as ever was drunk with March Beer
at a Sheriffs Feast.


Enter Usher of the Black Rod, Aurelia, and a Guard. Grub. Ownz! How I could
swinge these Rogues, if I had my Will -- What, my Wife lie with a topping
Courtier two whole nights, and I no Duke! it is impossible?


Tob. I tell thee once more, thou art no Duke: I think the old Fellow is
bewitched.


Vsh. No, no; nor you neither, good Yeoman of the Roppets I shall Un-Duke you.


Tob. What Is the matter now?


Longo. Ha! The Usher of the Black Rod! would I were safe at my Lodging.


Clerm. Bewf. And I. And I.


Vsh. Guard -- Seize those Duke makers, disarm 'em: nay, if you struggle, we
shall hamper you: Here Is a Warrant to bring you before the King and Council.
You are for disposing the King's Honors, and granting Dignities; let us see now
-- how you will dispose your Estates to pay 20000 l. a piece Fine -- besides 7
years imprisonment.


Aur. This I have helped ye to, my lewd Court-swaggerers! you are for every
Face you see, you are for flying at all Games: You! but I Will teach you to
affront your Friends.


Bewf. Ah! malicious Devil, we shall get off some time or other.


Longo. And then the World shall know you.


Clerm. What a fine Jilt you are.


Aur. Do, rail, rail; poor fools.


Tob. I begin to shake: what is the meaning of all this!


Vsh. As for your part, my Lord of Lubberland.


Tob. Lubberland; prithee Friend thou mistak'st my Title, I am Duke of
Dunstable.


Vsh. A Duke, a Dog-whipper you are! such a knot of Fools, that the King,
instead of punishing, pities you -- But I shall make bold to turn you out of
your Dignity, my Lord Duke.


Tob. Heyday, the World's turning upon wheels, sure, What-a-devil do you take me
for.


Vsh. For a Fool I take you, I confess.


Tob. A Fool, you might as well have taken me for an Alderman, But prithee
don't trouble thy Head, man.


Vsh. Sir: leave your fooling, and have a care of the Porters Lodge; there
are Whips with Bells: and so I take my leave of all your Graces: you
Cocklebrain, you shall escape for your Wives sake, because she is my Kinswoman
-- But for the rest, away with 'em. Exeunt Guards, with the Gentlemen.


Grub. Your Humble Servant, my Lord Duke.


Cockl. Ah! the Devil take this confounded Town: would it were burnt again --
Will your Grace have a little more Air.


To Toby. Tob. Thank your Grace; I am very cool of the sudden: Besides, I am
reflecting upon the strange mutability of human Affairs -- But however the
world goes, Brethren -- let us make some show of our Dignity, before we part:
What think you of Dancing the Hey?


Cockl. Agreed.


Grub. To be thus fooled, and in my old age -- well.


Here they Dance the Hey, and whilst they are Dancing; Enter Lyonel in a mad
posture, with Celia, Doctor, Singers and Dancers. Lion. Hah! here they are! and
in the height of Revelling Pluto, Minos, Radamanthus, the King of the
Infernals, and the Judges.


Grub. Oh the Devil: here is the Mad man again --
Come, come away. Come, Duchess, Troop.
I Will not stay an hour in this cursed Town.
Do You hear, Sir, that 500 l. must be paid back again.

Cockl. Not a penny, Uncle, your Grace shall take it out in Offices --


Grub. Plague take you all: Zowns! You Whore, Come away.


Phill. Oh! dear Hubby. Shall I never see a Play, nor lie abroad again? Weeps.


Grub. What! you have a mind to be a Dutchest again: have you? Come away, and be
hanged, I Will Duchess you.


Exit Grub. and Wife. Rog. A Plague of this cursed Town, if this be all one
gets!


Lion. Great Pluto -- know that I am Orpheus, and through the dismal shades of
direful night, am come to seek my long loved Proserpine, I Will charm thee God,
with Music, my soft Aires shall lull the Powers of thy barbarous Empire, and
set my Love at liberty. Sings.


Doct. Pray, sooth his Humor. Till we can lay hold on him, then never doubt his
Cure.


Aur. Madam, I thought he had been seized before.


Celia. He was, but by main strength he broke away; his Madness still
increasing: These are People placed by the Doctors Order, to humor the
distemper.


They seize him, and carry him out* Doct. So, now Madam, never give belief to
Art, if you to Morrow, find him not recovered.


Celia. Heaven grant he may, he shall not want my wishes.


Tob. Nay, Gentlemen: a little of your help will be convenient.

Brothers by Title, what think you to divert our selves, if we should Act a
Farce, and that we call it The three Dukes of Dunstable.


Cockl. Not I; I have been in a Farce lately enough: but I am resolved to go
into the Country -- Eat nothing but Turnips 7 years, to recover the Estate I
have spent in waiting for preferment, and never so much as look toward old
Sodom here again.


Aur. And thus, Sir, on my knees, I promise ye henceforth to be Conforming to
your pleasure with all the Care, and Diligence, and Duty of a most Penitent,
Obedient Wife, to atone for my past Follies: and no more to heed the senseless
Fopperies of the Town, nor the more senseless Fops remaining in it.


Cockl. Well -- I am forced to believe thee: We that are Married, have but
small variety of remedy.


Tob. I have been fooled my share too. But for my part, ince it is so -- I Will
off with my Mantle de la Guerr here, and into the Barn, and Thresh again:
there is no Revolution of State there, if the Harvest be but good; And if ever I
expect to be exalted again, may I be hanged upon a Beam there, in one of our own
Cart-ropes.

And may no Fool for better Fortune look;
That just from Digging, thinks to be a Duke:
Ex. Omnes.
EPILOGUE:
Spoken by Mr. Montfort. Of which (because it was particularly carp'd at) I
desire every one that has more Wit than Malice, to Judge.

FOnd of his Art; the Poet has to day
Mistook, and made me mad the silliest way;
Pride, Wealth, or Wine, may Frenzy often move:
But that is a strange Brute that runs mad for Love,
Few now, Thank Heaven, such lewd examples find,
It Is forfeiting the Charter of our Kind;
Shall Men have all, and Women no remorse?
Then let the Cart hereafter drag the Horse.
Let each Eve wrest the Scripture false, and swear;
She was not made for Man, but Man for Her;
No, this had been a most unpardoned Crime;
Did not the Lady here repent in time.
Besides, the Notion's false, for sure no Man
Can Love so well, and faith no Woman can:
It Is true, degrees of Madness all may fit,
Some with too much, some with too little Wit,
I have been Mad, or I should never have Writ.
It Is a Disease that Reigns in every station,
First, amongst Gamesters I have found occasion,
Sometimes to make a pretty Observation;
At Hazard I have seen a Witty Lad
Eat up a Candle, if his luck were bad;
What think ye, Sirs, Was not that Fellow mad?
A Lady too, in Tears has left off Play
(Alas poor Punt,) for losing Sonica,)
But above all, Wine does worst Frenzy raise,
For then Fop comes, and Whistles at our Plays,
Calls some one Whore, that to some Spark belongs,
Who calls him out, and whips him through his Lungs.
This, on our Nation, a vile blot remains
None but the Dutch and English take such pains
To fill the Paunch, and empty all the Brains.
The last, worst sort too, does your Heads invade,
That Is Whoring, that Vice makes ye all stark mad:
Not Poverty has power to stop its force,
Poor Rogues, that never could pay their Alehouse Scores
Shall brag they have at Command a Leash of Whores.
To the Camp those Militant Doxies yearly stray
Where each mad flitt'ring Fool that is given that way
To purchase Pox, melts down a whole Months Pay.
Many more Theams of Madness I could name,
And quote; indeed too many to our shame.
But, Sirs, to prove that you have all your Wits,
Let every Critic, that in Judgment sits,
Our Poet to an easy Penance doom,
Wink at small faults, for all of you have some.
PLAYS Printed for Henry Herringman, and Sold by Joseph Knight, and Francis
Saunders.
Beaumont and Fletcher's PLAYS. By the Duke of Newcastle.
THE Humorous Lover. The Triumphant Widow.
By the Earl of Orrery.
Mustapha, and Henry the Fifth. The Black Prince, and Tryphon. Sir William
D'Avenants's Works.
By Mr. Wicherly.
Love in a Wood. The Dancing Master.
By Major Porter.
The Villain. The Carnival.
By Sir George Etherege.
She would, if she could. Love in a Tub. The Man of Mode, or Sir Fopling
Flutter.
By Mr. Dryden.
The Dramatick Essay. The Indian Emperor. Tyrannick Love, or the Royal Martyr.
The Mock-Astrologer. Granada, Two Parts. Sir Martin Mar-all. Marriage
A-la-mode. Love in a Nunnery. All for Love. The Maiden Queen. The wild Gallant.
The Rival Ladies. The Tempest, altered by him. Amboyna. Aurenge Zebe. The State
of Innocence:
By Mr. Shadwell.
The Sullen Lovers. The Humourist. Psyche. The Virtuoso. The Royal Shepherdess.
Epsom Wells. The Libertine. Timon of Athens altered by Him
Mr. Killigrew's Works. By Mr. Shakespeare.
Hamlet. Macbeth. Julius Caesar.
By Mr. Cowley. By Sir Charles Sydley.
The Mulberry Garden.
By Sir Samuel Tuke, and several Persons of Honor.
The Adventures of Five Hours.
By Sir Francis Fane.
Love in the Dark.
By Mr. Caril. By Several.
The Usurper. The Roman Empress. The Coffee-House. The Mayor of Queenborough.
The Women's Conquest. The Amazon Queen. Sir Francis Drake. Peleus and Thetis.
Emperor of the Moon. Darius, King of Persia.

NEW SONGS SUNG IN The Fool's Preferment, OR, THE Three DUKES of Dunstable.

In the SAVOY: Printed by E. Jones, for Ios. Knight and Fran. Saunders, at the
Blue Anchor in the Lower-Walk of the New Exchange in the Strand, 1688.

A Song sung in the First Act.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
^ I Sighed, and I pined, I sighed, and I pined, was constant, was constant,
and kind, to a Jilt that laugh -- 'd at my Pains; though my Pas -- sion never
cooled, I found I was fooled, for all my a -- bun -- dance of Brains; though my
Pas -- sion never cooled, I found I was fooled, for all my a -- bun -- dance of
Quick. Brains: But now I Am a Thing, as grea -- t as a King, so blessed is the
Head that is ad -- dle; the dull empty Pate, soonest comes to be great, Fate
dotes on a Fool in the Cradle.

^ There Is nothing so fa -- tal as Woman, to hur -- ry a Man to his Grave; you
may Think, you may Plot, you may Sigh like a Sot, she u -- ses you more like a
Slave: But a Bottle, although it be common, the Cheats of the Fair will un -- do;
it will drive from your Head, the Delights of the Bed, he that is Drunk, is not
a -- ble to Woo.

Mr. Henry Purcell.
A Song sung in the Third Act, by Mr. Monfort.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
^ FLed is my Love, for e -- ver, for e -- ver, e -- ver, gone! O -- h, mighty
Loss! E -- ter -- nal Sor -- row, E -- ter -- nal Sorrow! Yet prithee Strephon,
why should mourn? For if thy Ce -- lia ^ wont re -- turn, to her thou shall
go, to her thou shall go to mor -- row; to her thou shall go, to her thou shall
go to morrow.

^ IT IS Death alone, it is Death a -- lone, can give me Ease, for all the mighty
Pain, for all the mighty Pain, I Have felt; in his cold Tomb my Heart shall e --
ver freeze, since hers could ne -- ver, ne -- ver mel -- t; since hers could ne
-- ver, ne -- ver mel -- t, could ne -- ver melt.

^ I Will mount to you blue Cae -- lum, to shun those Female Gypsies, I Will play
at Bowls with Sun and Moon, and scare you, scare you, scare you with E -- clip
-- ses; and scare you, scare you, scare you with E -- clip -- ses.

^ I Will sail up -- on the Dog -- Star, I Will sail up -- on the Dog -- Star, and
then pursue the Morning, and then pursue, and then pursue the Morning; I Will
chase the Moon 'till it be Noon, I Will chase the Moon 'till it be Noon, but I Will
make, I Will make her leave her Horning. ^ I Will climb the fro -- sty Mountain,
I Will climb the frosty Mountain, and there I Will coin the Weather; I Will tea -- r
the Rain -- bow from the Sky, I Will tea -- r the Rain -- bow from the Sky, and
tie, and tie both ends to -- ge -- there. The Stars pluck from their Orbs too,
the Stars pluck from their Orbs too, and ^ crowd them in my Budget; and whether
I Am a roa -- ring Boy, a roa -- -- ring Boy, let all --, let all the Nation
judge it.

Mr. H. Purcell.
A Scotch Song sung in the 4th Act.
A Dialogue by Jockey and Jenny.
Iockey. ^ IEnny, gin you can love, and have resolved you will try me; sil --
ly Scruples remove, and do no lon -- ger de -- ny me: By thy bonny Black Eye, I
swear nean other can move me; Then if still you deny, You never, never did love
me.


Ienny. ^ Iockey, how can you mistake, that know full well when you woo me; My
poor Heart does so ache, it throbs as it would come through me! How can you be
my Friend, That thus are bent to my Ruin? All the Love you pretend, Is only
for my Undoing.


II.
Iockey. Who can tell by what Art
This Chiming Nothing, called Honor,
Charms my Ienny's soft Heart,
When Love and Iockey has won her?

Ienny. It Is a Toy in the Head,
And Muckle Woe there is about it;
Yet I Would rather be dead,
Than live in Scandal without it.
But if you will love me, and Wed;
And guard my Honor from Harms too;
Iockey I Will take to my Bed,
And fold him close in my Arms too.

Iockey. Talk not of Wedding, dear Sweet,
For I must have Chains that are softer;
I Am of a Northerly Breed,
And never shall love thee well after.

CHORUS: Bass and Treble.
Then since ill Fortune intends,
Our Amity shall be no dearer;
Still let us kiss and be friends,
And sigh we shall never come nearer.
A Song sung in the Fifth Act by Mr. Monsort.
^ IF thou will give me back my Love, for e -- ver I Will A -- door thee; and for
the fa -- vour, mighty Jove, with Souls from Heaven shall store thee: To the
Queen of Shades, she shall advance, and all shall wait up -- on her; ^ Kings
shall A -- door her Countenance, and I Will be her Page of Ho -- nour.

Mr. Henry Purcell.
FINIS.

