The Famous HISTORY OF THE RISE and FALL OF MASSANIELLO.

In Two Parts.

WRITTEN By Mr. THO. D'URFEY.

LONDON: Printed for John Nutt, near Stationers' Hall. 1700.

Dramatis Personae.
DON Tiberio, Prince of Bissignano, Duke of Mataloni. Don Peppo d^ Caraff^, his
Brother. Cardinal Fillomerino, Archbishop of Naples. Massaniello, al^as Thomas
Annello of Amalsi. First a Fisherman, and after made Captain General of the
Neapolitans. Pedro di Amalfi, his Brother -- a Ruffian. Iulio Genovino, -- a
Jesuit, his Counselor. Perone. A famous Banditti; at first, accomplice with
Massaniello, afterward bribed against him by Mataloni's Faction. Rock Brasil^.
A Roguish Insolent Scrivener; afterward made Secretary and Adjutant to
Massaniello. Bartallo -- a Butcher. Principal of the Mob, belonging to
Massaniello. Valasco -- a Tailor. Principal of the Mob, belonging to
Massaniello. Ia^^mo -- a Miller. Principal of the Mob, belonging to
Massaniello. Gaspar -- a Smith. Principal of the Mob, belonging to Massaniello.
Scipio. -- a Cobbler. Principal of the Mob, belonging to Massaniello.
WOMEN.
Dona Aurelia -- the Vice-Queen. Belleraiza -- her Sister. Duchess of Mataloni.
Blowzabella -- Wife to Massaniello. Belvidore -- a Tanner's Wife. Ursula --
Wife to Pedro*
A Servant Wench, with other Women, Wives, Sisters, etc. belonging to the Mob;
together with Suitors, Priests, Choristers, Singers, Dancers, and Attendants.

The Scene, Naples; the Time, Four days.

To the Right Honorable THOMAS Lord LEIGH, OF Stone-Leigh, in the County of
Warwick.
My Lord,
WHen the Great Atticus retired from Rome, to employ his happy Hours amongst
Rural Pleasures, tho his Contentment by that resolution, might be judged most
Dear to him, at a distance from the Town's Hurry and Noise, to indulge with the
charming Quiet, and sweet Diversions of the Country, yet nevertheless, the
Merit and Virtue of such a Patron being too highly Celebrated, to let any
envious Space be a Bar to their Addresses; Horace, Ovid, and the rest, never
failed in their Poetical Correspondence, nor in often Dedicating to so great a
Judge, their choicest of Labors.

It Is from this Scien, my Lord, that my present Ambition Sprouts and Grows; and
tho the Work I present, is not so worthy as it ought to be (aspiring to this
Honor;) and likewise tho my Acquaintance and Knowledge of your Lordship, is
scarce old enough to warrant this Presumption, yet you have so large an
Interest in Fame, that I am well assured, your unquestioned Reputation will
Dignify the one, and your offered Courtesy, and generous Affability, Excuse
and Pardon the other.

The most material part of other Dedications, I am sensible, are generally
stuffed with the Patron's Praises, and tho my Lord, your generous Hospitality,
your admirable Temper of Mind, and many other flourishing Virtues, which the
World owns you to be Master of, may justly exact from a Poet his best Skill in
an Encomium, yet fear to Offend, or lessen the value of a Modest Courtesy,
which in its own Nature, is above all that I can Write to Extol it, makes me
desist from a Theme fit to Inspire the best of Pens, and Improve the richest of
Fancies.

It Is doubtless the depraved Quality of the present Times, which makes that
often appear Flattery, which considering the real Merit of the Person, may
properly be but Justice. The greatest Wits of former Ages, I am sure, were of
this Opinion, that never spared with their highest Elegance, to Illustrate the
Character of their Patrons, who in return, with their choicest Favors,
expressed their Gratitude, without Blushing, or believing that to be a
Compliment, which was Naturally a due belonging to their Merit.

When Sacred Virgil by Augustus sat
To read the Work he was to Dedicate,
The Praises even Extravagant did seem,
Yet Caesar did not think he Flattered him.
But this in our Adulterated Age, is now looked on as an Offense, and
consequently the Meritorious miss of their Plaudit. Be pleased therefore, My
Lord, to believe, I Think what I dare not Write; and if your Lordship will be
pleased to accept of this way of introducing my self into your Favor, it will
be as well the greatest Happiness, as highest Honor,

My LORD, To Your Lordship's Eternally Obliged, And Most Humble Servant, Tho.
Durfey.

PROLOGUE
By Mr. Pinkethman, [holding a Paper with Pricked Notes, in his Hand.] IF I Am
of Age, to know what is Good from Bad,
I must declare our Patentees are Mad;
They Have known my Comic Humor all along,
And yet this Morning sent me here -- a Song,
A nimble dapper Dancing Master too,
And bids me choose, for nothing else will do.
Mad, Mad, stark Mad. Let Us see, Sol la, me, sol. Sings.
Zooks, how like Midnight Screeker shall I howl;
For can they ever think I will comply --
I Dance, I Sing; * Capers awkerdly. they would as good bid me Fly,
For as toth' first, my English Bulk's not made;
I want an Air for Monsieur's Capring Trade:
And for the next, --
If they expect, I Will be a Capon for it,
I Would have 'em know, my Salary's too short;
I Would do much for Diversion of the Town,
But not do something to lose all my own.
Ah, Sirs, you are the cause of these our Streights,
You still have been our dire malignant Fates:
By your lewd Humors first, which when we followed
Our Smutty Plays out of our Doors were Hollowed,
And Zealous Spirits against our Function Bellowed.
And then besides, your Critic Quality,
Makes such a wretched Drug of Poetry,
That we are forced, to help our Withering Bays,
Strangers to Hire, of Sigismundian Race,
At Price so dear, we purchase Voices Killing,
They Are Laughing at us, when we think 'em Trilling.
Oh, what va^t Sums, since our late Vein of Plotting,
Have both our Houses paid, for Quavering and for Cutting:
So much, that I in Melancholy Case,
With looking Gravely, have quite spoiled my Face:
They may be Merry, as their Gains provoke,
Bu^ I, a Lose^ have forgot to Ioak.
I was a taking Fool some time ago,
But now as out of Fashion as a Beau;
My Trade's quite spoiled, I cannot vend my Ware,
Ah, would to Heaven I were a Dancing Bear,
Or any other Monster, but a Player,
A singing French Baboon, just come from Lorrain,
A Hedg-hog, giv't but out that I am Foreign,
I Will draw the City Fops, and Suburb Whores,
And Cheat the Town by Sixes, and by Fours.
But since our Poet is resolved to day,
Once more to entertain you with a Play,
A famous Story, and known lately True,
Mixed with good Humor, and good Music too,
Which there is in it, give the Devil his due:
I Will once more hope too, it will please your Fancies,
As well as if it were all Songs and Dances.
And if some Foes their Malice should pursue,
Let but our Friends do generous Justice too,
We'll Critics fear no more, those Play degraders,
Than Wise Men did of late the new Invaders.
The first, our Heroes of sharp Understanding,
On Wit's fair Island, shall oppose from Landing.
The last, which some say, mere Courtesy retards
From coming, being Civil to our Guards,
Should, ever their Hot-brained Frenzy hither call 'em;
Oh, how our Terrible Train'd-Bands would maul 'em.
EPILOGUE,
By Mrs. Rogers. FOr fear ill-Humour in tour Hearts should reign,
And that you should be in the Damning Vein,
At my Suit, that am not often so bold,
Suspend your Judgment, till the Tale be told.
A Rebel's Rise, we only now Present,
The next Part shows his Fall and Punishment;
And Unjust Judges you may well be thought,
That Sentence, ever you have heard out the Fault.
For my own part, plagued with no envious Fury,
Were I to sit among the Poet's Jury,
He should come off, and have a Plaudit free,
For the Character of my kind Lord and me:
A Husband vent'ring so to save his Wife,
And she, for his sake, slighting her own Life;
Our good Example, is enough to day,
Were there no Merit else to save the Play:
Turtles whom Love, so mutually does Wound;
Such Rarities -- where are they to be found?
Therefore Gallants all, that your Spouses love,
Pleased with the Subject, must our Scenes approve:
And you, fair Ladies, that have Husbands dear,
Concerned must in the Poet's Cause appear;
Nor let the Virgin Stars forget to shine,
As they expect a Lover like to mine.
As for the rest that slight these solid Matters,
The wild Town Doxies, and the Marriage haters,
If them you cannot Convert, you can Confound;
Give but your Hands, and let Consent go round,
Their Hisses soon will in your Claps be Drowned.
The Famous HISTORY OF THE Rise and Fall of Massaniello.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Noise within of Shouting, and crying Down with the Gabells; Down with
Mataloni, and Viva, Viva Massaniello; Viva Massaniello. Then Enter Genovino
Solus. Genov. SHout on, ye Sons of Clamor, louder still,
And fright the Grandees with obstreperous Noise,
Whilst I secure in Darling Policies*
Am pleased with the success of my Designs against this vile ungrateful City
Naples. Did ever Jesuit Wronged die Unrevenged, if he had power to effect it?
No, the working Brain would burst quite through the Skull, with the excess of
Boiling Rage fermented, sooner than leave that Scandal on our Order, That we
forgive those that Affront the Priesthood. They lately chose Philomerino
Cardinal, and the officious Nobles thronged the Conclave to shut out my Deserts
from being President, as I so long Expected; which to revenge, -- I Have subtly
wove my self into the Councels of the new Raised Plebeian, Massaniello, who tho
a Fish^rman, -- has yet a Spirit of unmatched Force; a Head too as well turned
for Mischief as this her^ -- and who now with Resolution and Sense, not found
before in such Course Breeding, has stirred the People to put down the Gabells;
some Numbers are already rose, and -- Mataloni and his Confederates, the Marks
they shoot at. That Bow I Will help to bend; -- Oh! -- here is the Idol Cardinal
and the Great Duke -- They Plot their own Affair;
I Will to the Rabble and do Mischief there.
Exit.


Enter Cardinal, Duke di Mataloni, Don Peppo and Attendants. Mat. Five hundred
Boys, let 'em not Fright your Eminence, Switch^s and Rods will ^end 'em Home
again.


Card. My Lord, I am not Frighted, yet let my Caution be of some use, if only
to prepare Your Grace to take into consideration the danger of such sudden
Insurrections.


Don Pep. What Danger can there be? These Hot-brained Youths that march about
with Weapons made of Canes, I Will undertake at the sight of a Whip and Bell,
Like ^oisting Curs, shall skulk into their Corners.


Mat. The hungry Mice are hunting after Cheese, a Cat will scare 'em all; --
besides the number is Inconsiderable.


Card. They increase hourly, and Men begin to follow 'em; not only so, but
Headed, as I hear, by a Bold Fellow, who tho but a Fisherman, has yet strange
Courage and uncommon Parts; one who I Am told, has, when his Net lay Idle, sat
often down to read in Politics, and in his spare time studied to catch Men.


Don Pep. Yes, Chapmen, -- my good Lord, -- Men for his purpose; Stewards of
Families, or Clerks of Kitchens, Men proper to buy up his F^sh.


Man. Ha, ha, ha, ha. I hear indeed a Ruffian, one Massaniello, is the
Ringleader of a Rout of Beggars, Fellows that wear half Breeches and no
Stockings, cry out against me, chosen by the Viceroy, and the rest that Farm
'em, for imposing Gabells on their Commodities: Your Grace no doubt, has heard
too That I grow Rich -- with such Oppressions.


Card. The Rabble's Voice, My Lord, can give no Scandal. It Is bruited so indeed.


Don Pep. Tripe-eating Rogues.


Card. My Lord, my holy Function does oblige me to preach up Moderation, and to
counsel those I want Power to Govern -- And I could wish Your Grace would make
your self more loved by the People, who, I confess, cry loudly on the Exactions
you late have crushed 'em with: Nay, they now spare not to say the King's
Abused, -- and that your Avarice puts all these Fetters on 'em.


Mat. My good Lord Cardinal, you were just now for preaching Moderation; but
now methinks your Talk seems biased Interest, and as the Rabble Dictate.


Card. I must be plain.


Don Pep. And Sincere, good my Lord: And since that word has escaped your Lips
so Gravely, I must beg leave as plainly too to tell your -- humble Eminence,
that this upstart Humility of yours, is of too new a Date to gain great Credit;
your Scarlet Robe wore late a blushing Dignity, more used to awe the Rabble,
than to sooth 'em.


Mat. Were the Church Slandered, then what Chains, what Irons* what new Device
in the terrible Inquisition, must plague the Heretic People?


Card. Nay, my Lords, Let not your Passion so far blind your Reason, as to
m^^take me, since my only aims are to promote Peace among us, -- which I fear
the People mean to hinder.


Don Pep. Damn the People.


Card. Observe my Lord, that Curse has Echoed back again into your Ears, and
only hurts you, not the People. Shout within.


Man. Hah -- let us hear him, his Eminence is Preaching.


Card. Some Instructions I think in truth are proper; therefore Historically
take this with you, my Lords, an^ ^ have done. What greater Plague can there
befall a City, than a Disunion and divided Interest? What destroyed Carthage,
but two mighty Factions, the Barchiniani and the Hanoniani? What maintained War
in France for Sixty Years, but Jars 'twixt the House of Burgundy and Orleans?
Or what late brought to England Desolation, and caused so many several bloody
Battles, wherein were Eighty of their Nobles Slain, but the Faction of the
Houses, York and Lancaster? And nothing, be assured, can urge our Ruin so soon
as that in Naples. -- A City is like a Ship, Divisions are her Leaks, -- and
whilst the Mariners fight, the Sea runs in and drowns all. -- I have done, only
one word more -- The Neapolitans, as I Have observed 'em, are not like a Top, --
they will not sleep with Scourging. Farewell my Lords.


Exit Cardinal. Duke. This dreaming Churchman, pampered and grown rich, fears
every little Gust will blow his House down.


Don Pep. Ay, that is the Moral of his History -- his Bags; the Cardinal quakes
even at the thought of Plunder.


Duke. How now G^rvasio, what is the News?


Enter Gervasio. Gerv. The Rogues are gathering still, they are now Two Thousand.


Don Pep. What Boys or Men?


Gerv. Both now, and roar like Thunder.


Duke. Mushromes bred out of Dunghills. Brother, stay here whilst I go to the
Viceroy to demand some of his Guards to quell this Petty Hydra: In the mean
time, if any more of the Rascals straggle this way -- speak not in Rage, but
fright 'em with Whips and the Galleys, -- I Will be with ye strait. Exit Mat.


Don Pep. Fright 'em, 'yes, faint-hearted Brother, Timorous Mataloni, I would
do more than fright 'em, for your Office -- which if my Plo^s are prosperous,
-- I shall not long despair of; fright 'em, Confound '^m, I shall never have
Patience to let the Villains waste their Garlic Breath in answering me a word
-- I shall thrust their Souls out.

Massaniello within, crying his Fish. Roches, Roches; come buy my Flounders,
come buy my Flounders.


Gerv. That Is he, my Lord, that is Massaniello; that is their plaguey Ringleader
-- I know his Voice.


Don Pep. The Rascal comes upon us; stand back Gervasio; let us observe 'em a
little.


Enter Massaniello, clothed like a Fisherman, with a long Pole and a Basket of
Fish hanging at's Back; with Bartallo, Valasco, Jacomo, Gaspar, and Scipio,
clothed like their F^nctions. Massan. Buy my Flounders, come buy my Flounders.
-- Bartallo, where is Perrone, my Brother Pedro, -- and the People?


Bart. Taking down the Arms of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, my Glorious Boy,
according to thy Order, to carry to the Marketplace.


Massan. It Is well, those Arms are Badges of our future Freedom, for it shall
come to that, my Lads; be well assured it shall, now we are up.


Gerv. How the Rogue swells and battens in his Impudence; Gad I don't like him,
he has a devilish Look.


Don Pep. Peace, we shall take down his Swelling presently, -- let us hear a
little more.


Massan. Well, my bold Brethren, and how do you like Proceedings ha?


Omn^s. Bravely, bravely; beyond Expectation.


Massan. The Gabells shall all down, Boys, there is my Hand on it; never shall
more Exactions be in Naples.


Omnes. A Massaniello; a Massaniello.


Massan. How many Butchers are come to day, my noble Brother of the Cleaver,
hah?


Bart. Threescore and five, my Child of Thunder -- all brave Fellows, Rogues
used to knock out Brains hourly, without Consideration, and paddle in Blood up
to the Elbows; -- there is never a one of 'em but shall take an Enemy by the
Lugs, -- stick a Knife in's Gullet like a Calf, and hang him up with a Hook
in's Nostrils -- say but thou the word, my brave Backsword Man.


Don Pep. Here Is a rare Rascal for ye.


Gerv. Ay, they are curiously matched indeed, if the whole Pack are such
Beagles, Heaven defend me from being the Game they Hunt for.


Massan. And what says my Vulcan, my Fire-drake here, how many Anvils want
their Hammers to day, ha?


Gasp. Fifty and odd, and more a coming too; woe be to the Gabellers if any of
these meet 'em, -- or a thing called a Steward to any of 'em, -- such a sort of
a Rogue, let him look to his Sconce I faith.


Gerv. Oh Lord! Gervasio Starts.


Gasp. There will be a score of red-hot Forks in his Guts, before he can get
out so many words to beg their Pardon.


Gerv. Oh bloody minded Hell Hounds, what an Ague have they given me --


Valasc. The Princes of the Thimble will be there in shoals too, following a
Colors of their own making.


Iacomo. No Grinding will be neither, the Millstones rest in Peace this day.


Scipio. And all old Shoes soak Water; -- every Cobbler leaves off his Work, and
runs to stitch the Government: -- Not one Profession, but brings in Numbers: --
So that by to Morrow, the City will scarce hold 'em.


Massan. Rare rare News -- Sirs, and merrily strait we'll meet 'em, and then go
hunt for this Leviathan here, the Farmer of the Gabells, -- Duke of Mataloni,
-- and when we have found him --


Don Pep. And what when ye have found him -- you Mouth of these Herring eaters?
-- What stinking Fish would you present his Grace?


Massan. Stinking Fish; -- here if your Lordship's Nose be sound, smell to my
Basket.


Scipio. His Lordship; -- Who is it Iacomo, can tell?


Iacomo. Ay, ay, a rank Enemy, I know him well enough, it is the Duke of
Mataloni's Brother, Don Peppo di Caraffa.


Bart. Don Peppo, Don Pimpo; -- what if he be a Don, -- Hem, here are those
dare look him in the Face, for all his Titles.


Valasco. Ay, Ay, it is not his Whiskers there that can fright us, Neighbors.


Massan. Well, what thinks your Lordship now, are they Sweet or no? -- I
confess, they don't smell of Musk, as your Jacket does there; but for the true
scent of wholesome Fish, I dare vouch for 'em.


Don P^p. Sirrah, Sirrah, for this Sawciness, expect the Lash, and for the
next, the Galleys: -- Go Gervasio, and take account of his Fish; -- demand the
Gabell, if he denies it, Seize 'em.


Gerv. The Dog has a plaguey surly Look, -- I am half afraid to venture on him:
Come Friend, let us see, let us see your Fish; come, come, nay quickly, you had
best.


Massan. What would you see Friend? -- Hum, do love Flounders? Can eat one
raw, Him. Slaps one in his Face.


Gervas. My Lord, d' ye observe this? -- Did ye see the saucy Rascal?


Don Pep. Monstrous! Is your Insolence then gr^wn to such a height, that in the
Person of the Great Duke of Mataloni's Steward, ye dare affront the
Government's Decrees, ordering all Gabells duly to be haid.


Massan. We dare; and to prove it, the said Governmen^'s Decree, and Great
Duke's Order, I Massaniello, Gudgeon Catcher of this City of N^ples, and Friend
to the People, Order, henceforth to be Null and Void.


Scipio. And we'll stand by thee; -- one and all Boys, one and all.


Omnes. Ay, ay, one and all, one and all.


Don Pep. You, most impudent of Scoundrels, -- you Order; why what are you?


Massan. Why faith, one that has formerly sold Fish for Money, but my
Generosity being provoked by these your civil Commands; I will, for once, give
'em your Lordship's Tarrier here free Cost. Flings one at Gervasio.


Don Pep. Hah, -- is it possible? -- Well, here are those coming I hope will ^o
me Justice, -- Lays his hand on his Sword. Shout within.


Massan. That there will indeed, -- you hear they are very near ye; in the mean
time, no Drawing, my Lord -- no showing Weapons, If your Sword peeps, your
Throat will be in danger --


Gasp. No, nor no Gabells and please ye, but as much Fish and like your
Rogueship, as you will -- there is a delicate Roach To Gervasio


Bart. And there is a couple of Flounders, as good as ever Tooth was put in.


Iacom. Nay faith, let us make 'em up a Dish. They pelt Gervasio with Fish.


Shout within. Valasco. Ay, ay, the Gabell Monger shall not say we grutch him.


Scipio. No, no, he shall be frankly used.


Don Pep. The Rabble here, nay, then it is in vain to stay for the Guards, I
must run fort, -- Exit, they Pelting him.


Bart. No, no, hold, a word with you first, good Mr. Steward.


Enter Perone, Pedro, Genovino, Rock, Brasile, and the Rabble, Perone bearing
the Arms of the Emperor Charles the Fifth. They Seize Gervasio. Pedro. How now
Brother, what is the matter?


Massan. Not much, I have only been playing the rough Game a little, told part
of my Mind to Don Peppo di Carraffa, and given a dish of Fish of my own
Dressing, to Mr. Steward there; I mean with the Sauce about his Ears or so,
that is all.


Bart. And troth, since I am come so luckily to know his Worship's Title here
-- I mean to give him a desert of my own preparing too -- when my Knife is
sharp enough. -- You have an ill Voice Friend, and can sing the Duke your
Master's Praises but Hoarsly, yet -- I Will make you an admirable Choirister
presently. Whetting his Knife.


Gerv. You will not use a Gentleman and a Scholar Rudely, I hope.


Rock. Rudely, no not in the least; why look ye, Friend, I Will tell ye how we'll
use ye; First, because you say you're a Gentleman, and so consequently a
Cuckold Maker, and as probably would play upon occasion, your Game at
Hot-cocles with our Wives, Sisters, and Daughters -- you shall only be
sequestered, sweet Sir, you understand me, that is all. And Secondly, As being
likewise a Scholar, -- and no doubt, a Wit, -- a Poet, and so forth, -- the
Waters of Helicon shall sprinkle your Clod-pate -- hey to the Pump, to the Pump
with him Neighbors.


Rabble. Ay, ay, Pump the Gentleman, Pump the Gentleman.


Genov. No, no, hold Friends, and hear me a little, I Will take him aside and
Examine him -- work upon his fear and hopes of Liberty, till he speaks Treason
against the People, or mould him till he abuses the Church, then Impeach him
and deliver him up to 'em, to knock out his Brains.


Peron. There Is the true Humor of a Jesuit to a hair -- do you hear Sir Priest
-- can you think of no Punishment for a Delinquent, but knocking out of his
Brains presently?


Genov. None so effectual, Friend, as the Case stands now with the People, who
have been often oppressed by the effects of this Fellow's Office; and
understanding Corporal limited Punishment, I have cautiously observed, has ran
the risque of future Revenge; -- but when the Brains are fairly out, you may be
satisfied the Understanding can do no Mischief.


Peron. This Fellow's Roguery outvies the worst even of my Inclinations -- that
have been bred a Banditto from my Child hood, I find I am a Novice in Mischief
to this Priest here. Aside.


Massan. Brother, thou say well, it shall be so, let the Gentleman's Courtly
Courage be washed away at the Pump, -- then uncase him like a Rabbet, -- to
bring him as near as can be to the mode and fashion of the People -- and when
his Furr is off, and one Ear lest in Pawn for his good Behavior, turn the
Crop-ear'd Rascal loose -- to complain to his Fellows; for now I think on it, to
make a Capon of him -- will be too much Honor, we'll do that for his Master
when we catch him -- and so away with him Boys.


Gerv. O Tempora! O Mores!


Pedro. Mores, mores. -- What, you speak Latin, to affront our Learning, ye
Rascal, do ye; -- go, go, away with him Boys, sowse him and his Mores together.


Omn. Ay, ay, -- come away Mores, -- jog on Mores; we'll have no Mores amongst
us.


Peron. Hold, hold, Sirs, not so fast -- his Master was once my Patron, and did
me an especial Favor, therefore this once pray let my Interest free him.


Massan. Your Interest* -- why how now Perone, dare you pretend to Interest,
when I have given my Orders?


Rock. We'll have no Interest nor Orders, but Massaniello's; therefore once
more I sa^, away with the Gentleman, Pump the Gentleman, Crop the Gentleman, I
say.


Omn. Ay ay, -- away with him, away with him. Ex. some with Gervas


Peron. No Interest but Massaniello's, have my Life and A^tions been so
worthless, and is my Character ^o Insignificant, that he m^^ or^e^ all -- I
have been thought a Person fr --


Massan. For what? To rob a Marketwoman of her Butter?


Per. And sp^^ your Fish, you mean, for by that deed p^rhaps your Cods-head
might want Sawse, hah.


Massan. Or at ^he head of thy Bandi^ti's Troop, have thou Attacked a poor
^^^nerant Tailor, and Robbed him of his Thim^^e and h^^ Bodk^n?


Per. I Have something sharper th^n a Bodkin her^, shall m^ke m^ Party good --
against any Grig-bobber or Trou^ ca^cher in Naples, if he da^es. They Draw upon
one anether.


Pedro. How now Villain, dare you assault my Brother?


Bart. Part 'em, part 'em, keep 'em as^under.


Peron. I rob a Tailor, a fusty Dog fish.


Val^s^. Look ye Friends -- not too much upon the Tailors do you see; a Tailor is
not a thing to be too much Joak'd upon; a Tailor can cut a hole in a Coat, as
well as stitch it up do you see; and therefore Mum, there is no more to be said of
a Taylor'


Massan. Let me come to him, and I Will paunch the Rogue, I Will use him as he does
a Rifled Traveller, bore out a Gut, and peg it to a Tree, then wh^p him round
till he has spun his Soul out.


Rock. Hey day, what is the Devil in us all on the sudden -- why my Masters,
are ye Bewitched; what a pox, have ye forgot the Proverb, That when Thieves
fall out -- why sure you cannot forget the Proverb -- come, come, for shame put
up; why how the Devil will ye Plunder other Folks Houses, if ye destroy your
own Tenements before hand?


Genov. Come, come, rest thee quiet, Friend, and let 'em try one another, there
may be good Policy in it, -- for do hear, if one of 'em Fall, -- we are sure
'tother has Mettle, and is certainly a brave Fellow.


Rock. Hum -- a fine Counselor indeed, so there be but Mischief done, this
Rogue cares not how it comes about.


Pedro. Brazile's in the right; Is this a time for Fewds? And shall desire of
being Chief, spoil all? -- you know by this time the City's all in Uproar, the
Court Alarmed too, and shall our Jangling grind Swords for our own Throats,
that so late swore to where 'em for our Enemies Destruction? Come, come, let me
propose to heal this Difference: -- Will ye both consent the People shall
decide it, that he who they make Choice of shall Command?


Massan. What I Have already done, was for the People, and therefore you are sure
of my Cons^nt.


Peron. I Am for the Public good as much as any, and therefore never will
oppose their Choice.


Rock. Why, that is well said, -- for look ye my Masters, pray remember the
Faggot in the Fable, -- If we hold together, the Devil cannot break us, but if
we unbind and lie assunder, every Addle-pate will snap us like so many
Switches; -- therefore prick up your Ears, ye Sons of Sedition, and elevate
your Voices strongly; -- which will ye have for your Captain General -- a
Perone, or a Massaniello?


Omnes. A Massaniello; a Massaniello.


Genov. It Is most fit and properly Chosen; I think I have made him my Creature.
Aside. For who can be more fit to lead you on, than he who first propo^'d your
means of Freedom? Proceed therefore my Son, and Cramp these Courtiers, and what
my weak Brain can assist thee in, be sure of and command. I Will do it for
Conscience sake, not worldly Profit, for Heaven knows, I only hope to be --


Rock. Archbishop of Naples -- or so, that is all.


Genov. Recorded in the Chronicle of Time, for carrying on so good a Work.


Per. Rare Dog still; -- if Dissimulation had the effect of Poison, how that
Fellow's Belly had been swelled by this time; Hum -- has this many-Headed
Monster deserted me too? -- Well, since it must be so, I Will work by Cunning,
and seem to join with them, in acknowledging their Doughty General here, till I
have means and power to Revenge -- and then pour on his Head with fiercest
Rancour. Aside Well Sir, since I see the People find ye worthy of this Honor,
To Massaniello. and that I may never be counted hinderer of this Great Work we
aim at -- I am content to submit to your Command -- and to prove it, thus show
my Homage; Shout then once more with me, Friends, and cry, Long live Thomas
Annello of Amalfi, alias Massaniello, Captain-Geneneral of the N^apolitans.


Omnes. Long live Thomas Annello of Amalfi, alias Massaniello, Captain General
of the Neapolitans. -- They Shout.


Massan. My Friends, I thank ye, and my brave Perone, live henceforth in my
Bosom as my Brother; and first then, to endear my self the better, I Will give
thee my Commission for my Major -- Joint with my Brother in Command and Love.
Next my brave Ajax, I appoint thee Captain. To Bartallo. My exquisite
Man-maker, thou shall be Lieutenant. To Valasco. And Stichite cum Stampo, my
brave Cobbler, Ensign; all my Boys, all shall have Offices fitting your Worth
and Bravery of Souls; particularly thou, my witty Currier of the Law, my
Quarrel-Broker, thou Pen and ink Man, as my Bosom Favorite, I create my
Secretary and Pillar of the State. To Rock.


Rock. Thank your good Lordship; -- nay, I knew 'twould come to this, for the
Crown of my Head has itch'd damnably of late, a certain Sign of approaching
Dignity: -- I knew I should be a Great Man, -- Secretary of the People, -- rare
rare Place! Gad I Will make the Money stick to my Fingers bravely, as soon as
ever I come into it.


Massan. Raise high the Arms of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, who b^ his
Charter, granted Naples Freedom, without cursed Gabels, or these late
Ex^ctions; Then let us send a Message to the Palace of Don Tiberio, Prince of
Bissignano, who I design to be our Emissary between the ViceRoy and our dear
loved People; and Trusty Rock, I appoint to Summon him: If he comply with us
and our Interest, he is Safe; if not, immediate Ruin seizes him. Follow me,
Friends all,
To the great Cathedral,
Where we'll hear Mass with show of high Devotion; And as we pass along, be
this our Cry,
Let the King Live, but the ill Government Die:
Then the Saints Invoke, -- and to do all things well,
First we will say our Prayers,



Genov. And then Rebel -- Exeunt.


The End of the First Act.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
The Cathedral dedicated to the Holy Virgin of Carmine, where Massaniello is
discovered lying a Sleep under the Altar, the People Guarding him: Dialogue
Sung between Fate and St. Genaro Recorded Protector of Naples.
St. Genaro, at a distance: Then Music is heard, and a Song, expressing
Revolutions to come; which ended, Massaniello rises and Speaks. SONG between
Fate and St. Genaro.
Fate. FRom Azure Plains, blessed with Eternal Day,
Celestial flowery Groves, that never decay;
From Lucid Rocks that Sol's bright Rays let in,
Where with unclouded Brow,
I sat and viewed the Deeps below,
And saw my Female Drudges Spin;
I Fate am come, thy Courage to improve,
It Is the Eternal's Doom Engraved in Adamant above;
And oh! thou drowsy Deity,
That do in Slumbers bind
The Body of Mortality,
And calm the stormy Mind;
No more, no more his Brain possess
With the soft Charm of gentle Peace;
He must awake to bloody Wars,
Unbounded Fury, civil Iars,
And is by Heavens decree, for wondrous deeds designed.

St. Genaro Protector of Naples, descends and Sings. St. Genesis To mighty Fate
all must obey,
And conquering Hero's greatest Kings,
Amongst the rest of human things,
Yield to his dreadful Sway.
Yet view thy Book of Dooms once more,
Thou there wilt find one happy hour,
When Naples shall be free from Rebel power;
It Is sure as the revolving year,
And I her darling Saint appear,
To stop thy Fury, lest it should exceed,
And tell thee, though permission of this ill
Is Sacr'd Mystery and the Eternal's Will,
Yet he that does the Deed,
For doing it must bleed.

Fate. Hear each Neighboring Destiny,
Who the Souls of Mortalsfree,
Hear my Voice, and strait obey,
Heaven commands, the Work must stay.
Such a number and no more,
Must increase your fatal store,
And he must die, the task being over:
Remember all it is so decreed,
That he that does this mighty Deed,
For doing it must bleed.

Massan. Miraculous Vision! O Celestial Deity! Thou that inspir'st my heart to
undertake by Mystic words dressed in harmonious Sound, things that surpass
Experienced Understanding; as with thy blessed Idea in my Dream I have been
Extasi'd -- so teach me now Kisses his Medal. the way to act, the Sense to
comprehend these Wonders, meant for the relief of Naples; with Sacred Power,
Charm my plebeian Soul; let but my Country's Freedom crown the Period, my
threatened Fall I Will then despise and Laugh at. Mount over all Dangers that
would stop my way,
And make the proudest of our Foes Obey.
Shout within. Here comes my Jesuit, my new Church Engine, used to encourage
Fires, not to quench 'em, whose Head and Counsels till I Am six'd, I yi^ld to;
but when the Sword I grasp with Power Supreme, I Will trust a Prie^t no longer
with my Politics.


Enter Genovino. Massan. How now, my Brain's Inspirer, what is the News?


Genov. News that will make the Viceroy quake, my Son: we are now full twenty
Thousand, Armed and Resolute, and ever the Sun p^unges in Western Seas -- it is
well believed, shall double twice the number: The eager People throng us.


Massan. What meant that Shout?


Genov. They are burning now the House of Don Rocella, Farmer of the Gabells,
with all his costly Furniture and Plate, huge Coffers too, pregnant with Gold
and Jewels, pursuant to your Order lately made, enrich the Flame, and dazzle the
Beholders: Then as each wealthy Burden is thrown in, the People shout their
Joy.


Massan. It Is as I Would have it.


Genov. Now will I sound him in my own Affair, the time is apt, Aside. Troth my
brave Son of Flame, I must deal plainly, -- I confess my Heart was moved with
some Compassion at the Sight.


Massan. Your Eyes were only dazzled too, that was all.


Genov. Zeal for the Cause, my Son, may be too strong, that rashly throws away
the precious means that can empower and arm the Cause-defenders to prosecute
their pious Undertaking.


Massan. Honest Intention must empower and arm us, and the despoiling of
Delinquents Treasure, will let the world know, it is the impulse of Conscience,
and not of Gain, that rights the injured People.


Genov. Call it not Conscience, say Necessity, the word will do as well: -- The
impulse of Conscience; What is it you mean, good Son?


Massan. I did believe, that word would suffocate his Understanding. Aside.


Genov. Conscience is but our tendrest part of Reason; and Reason urging our
Self-preservation, shows it must be too by the goods of Fortune: The Church is
Indigent, which might be helped by sharing Wealth, thus -- strangely thrown
away.


Massan. The Church is rich in Grace.


Genov. Grace -- Grace is no Glebe to gratify the Body, tho it may feast the
Soul: -- Grace buys no Cassocks for one, tho 'tother shine with spiritual
Clothing; therefore I say, these Treasures might be saved for pious uses; my
self I mention not, tho my needs perhaps are urgent, but for the Church, for if
the Church wants Necessaries, its Flock will want Instruction.


Massan. Oh your Charity binds ye to that for your reward Celestial.


Genov. Our Charity! and for reward Celestial: Our Charity! why certainly he is
Crazed, he would else know a Jesuit never had any. Aside.


Massan But now I think on it, you have cleared my sight, and from henc^ forth I
shall discern much better; for who ever understood the worth of Gold, or like
the black Robe, with such sense can praise it? Since then you have inspired me
with such Knowledge, I am resolved to prize the gaudy Mammon, rake up large
heaps, and build my self a Fortune, too strong for Fate to Level: -- This is
thy Policy I know, my Machiavil, to have me Rich, then consequently Great --
and it shall thrive as thou have forged it; -- for thy self, I know thou art so
Temperate -- so Religious, Devotion and the luxury of Prayer, is thy delicious
Banquet; -- feed on my Father, Feast and grow fat with thy Scraphick Toils
Whilst I regale upon these golden Spoils.
Exit.


Genov. Whilst he regales upon 'em -- very good, this snagged Swordfish Banters
me -- it is plain; he will rake up heaps and build himself a Fortune -- as I have
Plotted -- hum -- that was not my meaning; and since he will not understand me
right, perhaps I Will make the meaning -- his Destruction; this fruitful Brain
can work the other way; can, nay, I now resolve on it, it shall do it, since
he will afford me nothing but Devotion to fatten with, I shall not court his
Keeping; he says, I feast on Prayers, Seraphick Joys; but I know he is a Dunce,
and now he is gone, -- he lies.


Rock. Valasco.


Valasc. Sir. Enter Rock and Valasco.


Rock. Come, bring a Table, a great Chair, Pen, Ink and Paper, -- quickly, come
stir, stir -- and don't think to sit still Cross-leg'd at your Work, as you did
when you were a Tailor; remember you are a Clerk now -- and in place to mend
the State -- not with a Needle, but a Pen, ye Rogue.


Valas. Well, well, do you see, your Worship knows well enough how I used to
flourish my Shop-Bills -- I put down all our Trade for Flourishing, that all
our Parish knows -- I made the best M's, O's and B's do you see of any o^ our
Trade; M, for Stay-Tape, O, for Lockram, and B, for Canvas; I out-did 'em all
cleverly, therefore I warrant ye your Worship need not doubt my Clerkship. Rock
reads a Paper, Exit to fetch the things.


Genov. Oh! here is that impudent Scoundrel, his new Favorite; this Fellow must
have Office and Preferment, when I must be neglected, it is very well, let me
consider a little.


Enter Valasco with a Table, etc. Rock. Hum, let me see a list of the
Delinquents: their number, Thirty two: -- Ah. How every one of these will bribe
me, to save their Houses from burning, which sha'n't be obtained with a little,
that I resolve on; rare, rare Fortune! gad I Am Transported at it.


Genov. Oh, now I have it, P^rone must be my Engine; his late disgust against
this proud Fish-General -- is but hid over with some subtle Embers, the Fire
will soon break out again, and shall not want for blowing.


Rock. How now, what makes this Priest here, with a clowdy Lower upon his
Forehead too, as if the Devil and his Conscience had been just quarrelling
about some State Stratagem -- hum, this household Pagod, with a Breath like an
Easterly Wind, this Reverend Caterpillar shall not spoil my Fruit I Am resolved
on it. Do You hear there, it is the General's Pleasure, that all forbear this Place,
appointed for Examination of Delinquents. -- Oh, is your Reverence there, I cry
you Mercy, -- but you must excuse me, I must know my Place. Sits down to the
Table.


Genov. Your Place, Sir.


Rock. Yes, my Place, Sir, -- nay, nay, don't think to fright me with your
Picture of the Inquisition there, your terrible Phiz in Frowns, I say, I say
again, I know my Place, Sir.


Genov. And I mine, Sir, is not this the Church?


Rock. The Church -- good Domine, what then, was the Church made for no more
uses than yours? Was the Church built only to roost the Rooks, I mean the
Jesuits -- Pish, don't ye see we make a Garrison on it. How now, Captain. Enter
Bartallo.


Bart. We have seized on the Horses, and please you, for the General's use,
where must they be put?


Rock. Hum -- stay a little -- put, -- why put 'em up in the North Isle, just
by the Pulpit.


Genov. Here Is fine Management! bl^ss me, is that a place for Horses?


Rock. Horses, yes, Sir, and why not for Horses? -- gad, as things go now, I
think it is filled with a better sort of Cattle, than with your Tribe, by much;
for if a Horse cannot do the General better Service than a Jesuit, my Politics
are very barren. -- Well, what now, Lieutenant.


Enter Scipio. Scip. Why and like your good Honor, Mr. Sec. Sec. Secar --


Rock. Well, well, Mr. Secretary; I know what thou would say; what apox,
does my Title stick in thy Throat?


Scip. Ay, ay, Mr. Secretary, and please ye, there is the great Don -- within,
Don -- Don -- why look now, if my Brain ben't as spungy as an old Shoe Soal,
Don -- Don -- wheigh -- why what a Dickins ails my Pate now? I used to be as
sharp as an Awl, wheigh -- the Great great Man and please ye, that you sent the
Writing -- the what do you called, the Sammon to this Morning.


Rock. The Sammon, the Summons, ye Block-head you; ah, this Fellow will never
make a Statesman: -- Oh I know him now, it is the Great Prince of Bissignano,
Don Tiberio, whom I have frighted hither by the General's Order. Valasco, -- go
you and introduce him -- and do you hear, put on your face of Business and look
Grum upon him -- 'twill draw his Pur^e the sooner.


Valasc. I warrant ye -- I Will look upon him do you see, as another great Don used
to look upon me, when I went to carry in my Bill.


Exeunt Scipio and Valasco. Rock. Come, come, Sir, no more of your Chancel
Grimaces, your Brow Lectures now, -- here is matters of State going forward,
which I know you all long to have a finger in, -- but Mum for that, my good
Mass John -- some wiser than some; therefore Presto I say, -- and let your
Learning please to withdraw it self instantly in^o your Study; -- show, show
your Back side, I beseech ye, Sir.


Genov. I shall, Sir, and show it whole too, which yours shall not be long, if
Whips with Wyre, retain their lashing faculty, if it does, then say this
Brain's fit only to make Sauce on; and so I give ye to old Beelzebub; now my
intention's right, you may depend on it. Ex. Genov.


Rock. Pox on him, what a Jerk the Rogue has given my Apprehension, for tho I
know I Am now too Great to be in danger of such a Punishment, -- yet his words
have made me as uneasy -- as if the Cat with Nine-tails were just coming cross
my Shoulders. -- I have deserved Whipping, and worse than Whipping, I confess,
in many Passages of my Life, but I think that is more than he knows; I was
thirteen Years together bred up under a Roguish Pettifogger, where I learned to
be a Law-Cheat, to take all Advantages by the fore-top that afforded Money, and
bid perpetual defiance to Honesty and Conscience, yet still I 'scap'd -- and
now the Dice run higher, I think my self in a Post rather to cause others to be
Whipped, than to be Flaug'd my self. Oh here is the Prince -- hum, now for a
sullen morose Look, a damned ill-natured Phiz -- like a City Magistrate
pronouncing Sentence of Death upon a young lusty Highwayman, that he was
satisfied a little while before, had made him a Cuckold.


Enter Don Tiberio with a Purse, and Valasco. D. Tib. Well my mighty Sir in
Office -- now I have given ye your Fee, which by your Signs you taught my
Apprehension, what progress will you make in my Affairs? Where must this
Summons lead me?


Valasc. Why yonder, do you see, Sir, -- yonder is the Secretary, and as keen at
his Business as a pair of Sheers upon a Cutting-board: -- Hark ye, Sir, I must
tell ye he is plaguey deaf of this hithermost Ear -- and the Drum on it is not to
be penetrated, unless by the chink of Money; that Purse perhaps may stand your
Friend, or else it will be a hard matter to make him hear, yet I Will try him; --
Sir, Sir, -- here is the great Don -- the Prince you sent for, come to --


Rock. The Duke of Cavano's House too -- noted, that burns to Morrow.


Don. Tib. By Heaven, my Kinsman, one of our Houses Principals -- and if I
heard the Gorgon Head speak right, he said his House -- must burn to morrow --
hear ye, you Sir, you Minister of Fate and deeds of Horror, what said you of
the Duke of Cavano? -- he will not answer me, or hears me not.


Valasc. Oh I told ye, Sir -- he was very thick of Hearing.


Don. Tib. And yet my Pur^e can cure it.


Valasc. Hum -- the Purse has a particular Virtue indeed; Gold has its precious
faculty -- for Ears as well as Eyes, Gold will do it cleverly.


Don Tib. Thou art a very Rogue, through all thy Senses.


Rock. The n^xt, the Duke of Mataloni.


Don Tib. Hah -- my Friend too -- Hear me thou -- Son of Mammon, I charge thee
answer me, -- and for a Bribe, take here this golden Offering -- but speak, I
conjure thee. Gives the Purse.


Rock. Valasco, -- set the Gentleman a Chair.


Don Tib. What must befall my Friend, my Bosom Intimate, dear as its innate
Guest, my Heart -- my Matalo^i.


Rock. He is Proscribed, his Wife is to be Seized, and their House burnt and
Plundered.


Don Tib. When, when, thou Author of damned News?


Rock. At Seven this Evening; -- and now, Sir, no more Questions, you have had
your Penniworth; -- nor is it usual with me to afford such rich Discoveries so
cheap.


Don Tib. At Seven, cursed Chance, how much it wants of that now, I know not,
nor how to be Resolved, for here am I, on forfeit of Estate and Life, Summoned
to attend the General of the Rabble -- and so incapable to aid my Friend -- yet
stay, some Notice might be given: -- Do hear, my Friend, what Hour is it
think thou now? Curse on his sordid Soul, he is Dumb again. to Valasco, he
Grimaces, but will not speak. This damned mercenary Rogue expects Money -- only to
tell what a Clock it is; well there, there is another Sop, good Cerberus -- now
will thou tell me?


Valasc. I on my Conscience, think it may be Five, -- and pray Sir, be Patient,
you will be heard presently, the General do you see, is coming.


Don Tib. These are rare Rogues in Office, they use a Nobleman like a
Dog-whipper: -- Hark thee, Friend, one thing more, if your speaking Clock be
not quite run down, I must request, and there is all I have to purchase it,
which is, to call one of my Servants hither, for I have forgot a Paper at home,
which concerns me extremely.


Valasc. It shall be done, and cleverly. taking the Money. Exit.


Don Tib. I Have yet, I hope, time enough to set down in my Tables their horrible
Resolves, and to forewarn the Duke of his approaching Danger. Writes in his
Tables.


Enter Valasco, with a Servant. Valasc. Come hither with thy best speed, convey
these Tables to the Duke of Mataloni -- run as thy Life were in thy haste
concerned -- he will Reward thee well.


Servant. I Fly, my Lord. Exit Servant.


Rock. Are the Chandlers Wives dispatched to the Hospital, to Rave there, whose
Husbands were Hanged this Morning?


Valasc. All, all, and please ye -- I saw a Dozen of 'em roaring together in a
Flock; and 'twill be a warning to the rest, I Will warrant ye, how they use false
Weights and Scales.


Rock. Nay, I doubt not but we shall bring things to some order in time. Adso
-- my Lord the Prince, what are you here still? -- Alas, my Head is so busied
with things of Imp^rtance, that I p^otest I had forgot your Highness; -- well I
suppose you would fain know the General's Business with ye -- but as for that
matter, without --


Don Tib. Without, if he means more Gold, he must Coin it, for on my Honor,
I Am drawn dry already.


Rock. Without, I say, the Means to procure the Secret, it will, I suppose, be
Impossible: -- Hem, hem -- Times are altered, my Lord, they were yours once --
hem -- hem, now we come in for our share. -- Hum, -- Odzooks, here comes the
General himself -- Pox on him, this was a little too soon tho, or I had had
that Ring on his Finger there for another Discovery.


Enter Massaniello, Perone, Bartallo, Scipio, Jacomo, and the Rabble. Massan.
The Houses I Proscribed, let 'em all down, but on your Lives, no more, without
my Order; the Plunder too, I will consider on -- and henceforth, remember,
without the form of Speaking, to understand your Duty by my Motion.


Iacom. We shall, most Noble Sir, wag but your Hand, Thumb, Finger, or but Nod,
-- it is done as quick as Lightning.


Massan. Begin you at St. Carlo, -- throw your Brand at Cavano's Palace; and my
Favorite Captain, bes^re you singe the Traitor Mataloni, let not a post remain
to bear his Structure, but let your fury burn his Goods as greedily as late he
sucked the Lifeblood of the People -- away. --


He waves his Hand, they start out. Omnes. We Are gone, brave General.


Massan. There Is Discipline; this looks like a Commander. -- Hah, yonder is the
Prince, Perone, a word with thee. -- Thou see that Lord there -- he is the
only Man I Would chose amongst all the Court, to negotiate Matters between us and
the Viceroy; -- within this Paper is my Will contained, -- I Am positive here,
and so I would have thee, If he denies what there is offered to him -- tell him
he shares the Fate of Mataloni; -- go, take him aside, pretend I Have weighty
Business, and cannot hold Discourse with him my self*


Perone. Leviathan Impudence, but I Will smother all yet, let him swell on, and
he will burst himself -- Aside. My Lord, the General's Head being full of
Business, has ordered me to unsold his Pleasure to ye.


Enter Pedro, and whispers Massaniello. Don Tib. His Pleasure, -- insolent
Slave, -- this is another upstart Devil, he look^ too as if he all his Life had
smoked in Pluto's K^^chen; not deign -- a word, Sir, what is his Mightiness so
crammed --


Perone. Softly, my Lord, he has quick Ears, and then -- come, no more words,
but follow me.


Don Tib. I vex in vain -- it is madness to oppose 'em. Oh! Fortune, Fortune,
whither will thou hurry me? Exit with Perone.


Massan. What are the Women up too, say thou, Brother, and Blowzabella my
Wife, at their Head?


Pedro. Most Captain like In Faith -- my Spouse is got amongst 'em too for
Company; these at the head of Numbers, strut in the Streets, and Armed with
such variety of Weapons, 'twould even puzzle Arithm^tick; -- they are ready for
an Attack too, an Attack.


Massan. Hah, Hah, hah. -- What Goose or Turkey walled round with powerful
Crust, are they for Storming?


Pedro. 'Zooks, they talk of battering Castle-walls, and I know not what; and
my Sister Blowze is so wrapped up with the thought of Plundring the Duchess
Mataloni of her Jewels, that her very words are nothing but Pearl and Diamonds.
-- Hark'e, here they come I^aith -- now observe and wonder.


Shout, and strange Sounds made within. Enter Blowzabella, Ursula, and Rabble
of other Women, dressed Ridiculously, and Armed with several sorts of Weapons,
bringing in three Prisoners. Blowz. Bring in the Prisoners, and keep your Ranks
-- Close my Lasses, -- Wheel to the Right, to the Right, to the Right about;
there see now -- Where Is the General? Where Is the brave Tomazo? -- Oh, art thou
there my Scanderbeg, come Kiss me, and then tell me -- how do thou like me,
-- hah?


Massan. Like thee, hah, hah, hah, why this is Wonderful; prithee Wife, what
mean thou? -- What Work have thou been cutting out, hah?


Blowz. Plundring, Plundring, My Lad, Plundring, Stripping Lace off of
Petticoats, and pulling Gold Rings off of Fingers. -- In short, I have been
Bobbing for a sort of Female-Grigs -- they call forsooth your Gentlewomen, --
could thou imagine, whilst thou were fishing for Courtiers, that I would
sitidly at home sleaing of Eels? -- No, no, Child, I rose as thou did, owned
and carried the Cause; then gathering my She Swash-bucklers together, Armed
instantly, and wheree'er we saw a Silkworm crawl, we Seized her; see, here is
one of 'em, this, this is forsooth a Gentlewoman, and as I Am told, belonged to
the Vice-Queen: -- You may suppose the Dress I have put her in, has somewhat
altered her, but upon the Honor of a Fish-wife, she is a Gantlewoman every inch
of her.


Massan. Why Faith that may be, but her Air seems to have very much of the
Vulgar in it at present.


Ursula. This is the supe^fine Madam de Rocell, Wife to the Prior, Farmer of
the Gabells, she had Brooches of Diamonds about her when I met her first, and
Bobs of Pearl in her Ears as big as Pears; alas -- what pity it is, that Madam
should be stripped, but Madam, I hope you will Excuse it, we are rude
Common People Madam -- your Servant good Madam, in Troth it is great Pity --


Pedro. My Spouse there may show her sham Pity as she pleases, but if I had met
Madam in a bie Place -- I believe I should have made bold to have stripped her a
little further -- Gad she has a dainty Face for all her Rags, and puts me so in
mind of a plump black-ey'd Beggar-wench I had once.


Massan. But what is the 'tother there?


Blowz. And this here is one of the Marrow-puddings of Trade, a Citizen's Wife,
a sleek, fine, fat, little finical thing, that would melt in a Courtier's Mouth
like a Comfit: I took her Oagling at her Shop-door, and trussed her up under my
Wing like a Gizard: -- she had her Gems and her Pearls too, -- besides a fine
golden Gown, that her Cuckold bought her by Cheating the People, at Twelve
in the Hundred; -- there she is a little moody, I see, at her odd Rigging; --
her Husband may take his Tortoise again, if he pleases, but for her Shell --
that is disposed of.


Massan. Bradamant -- why ye all have done Gloriously -- gloriously -- and
what is to be the next Exploit, dear Wedlock, hah?


Blowz. The Duchess of Mataloni; we have contrived it, therefore leave it to
our Management, and if before to Morrow Noon, thou see me not tricked in her
Jewels like an Indian Queen, -- then say, which some believe impossible -- a
Woman's Mischief has Miscarried. -- And to show thee that we are capable of
doing greater things than you imagine, you shall see us Exercise, and pray
observe what Diligence has learned, Handle your Arms there.


A Dance here, showing their Exercise. Massan. It Is well, and Soldier-like --
go on then, my Bellona, and you, Brother, to the Gate of San Lorenzo; March
with your Troops, and as you pass, still cry,
Let the King Live, but the ill Government Die.
Ex. severally.


SCENE II.
Enter Mataloni, Duchess, and a Servant, the Duke holding the Tables in his
Hand. Dutch. Oh, I can never bear it, my dear Lord, that moment you depart, my
Lifeblood follows.


Matal. Why then, let Fate contrive its bloodiest Scene, I Will stay and dare all
Accidents, grasp thee thus -- within the circle of my eager Arms, and smile on
the grim Hell hounds that would part us.


Dutch. Could I go with thee, Heaven, what would I venture! what Walls would I
climb, or what vast Deeps would I plunge! for tho I show a Woman in my Tears,
my Courage -- yet for you would hazard Wonder^.


Matal. I know thou could, thou quintessence of Goodness, do more than
Woman; -- but Oh, I must not suffer thee! I know thou would, with me, leap
from the Window into the Moat, as I must, for my Safety, but I Will not do it to
hinder thee, -- no, it is but Death, if I stay here -- and 'twill be that
without thee.


Dutch. Oh, name not Death, I had forgot that Horror!


Matal. Give Friend, your Lord, my best Acknowledgment, but tell him, I Am
resolved to stand my Fortune.


Dutch. Not for the World -- Oh, pardon me dear Life, my Womanish Folly, I had
forgot your danger, you are proscribed to D^e if you are found, yet I would
keep ye here: Oh, racking Torture, was ever Misery so truly great as mine? --
Go, go, my Lord, my Doom in those cursed Tables, is but trivial Imprisonment,
and perhaps a daily Basting by the Rabble, Village Curs, or Cold, or Hunger,
matters of nothing, -- but yours is Death, my Lord, Life's deprivation; -- the
full gust of Horror blows with that word, upon me -- endless Woe, Despair, and
all the Miseries of Humanity fall then at once upon my wretched Head, And make
me, that so late implored your stay,
Distracted beg ye now to haste away.



Matal. Great Providence, whose all-controlling Will, have for our Crimes, sent
down this Plague on Naples, and make the sparks of bright Nobility, lie hid
in the vile Ashes of the Rabble, behold with pity, Beauty in distress, with
Virtue joined, than that more Charming far; Oh, let her still thy Care peculiar
be,
And always blessed, what ever becomes of me.



Dutch. Oh, hear me too -- thus low with bended Duty, I beg the Power that
taught us first to Love, to look on him most perfect in that Passion, and best
deserving it in its Perfection: To guard his Life, Celestial care employ,
And I shall find all Blessings in my Joy.



Matal. One dear Embrace then, and so part. She Weeps. What yet again? Nay, I
must Chide ye now, we both have Prayed, and must not doubt Success.


Dutch. Oh, pardon me, within my Breast is such a Sea of Sorrow, some must
overflow the Banks, I cannot help it.


Matal. I Will make the Fences stronger with fresh hopes of our quick Meeting and
repeated Joy, so once more Adieu, Sweet.


Dutch. My Life's sole Joy, Farewell.


Matal. Come, bear up boldly, and now to the fatal Window, through which my
Brother is already gone, unseen by the Bloodhounds that have us in the Wind,
and stop all other ways and avenues: One kind Look more, and turn that way,
Sweet. Thus when overcome by fierce Diseases power,
The sad Physician gives his Patient over.
Thus does the Tyrant of our Lives, control,
And thus divides the Body from the Soul.
Exeunt.


The End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter Perone and Genovino. Genov. YOU may believe me.


Peron. And may be abused; you have not yet enough, Sir, cleared your Credit.


Genov. You shall have further proof, my venturous Actions shall henceforth
justify my Inclination, and back the force of these bold Words, which are, That
from my Heart, I loath this Upstart Fellow;
This headstong Fool; this Mushroom, Massaniello.



Peron. You say enough; but may one trust a Jesuit, knowing his Principles?


Genov. When the trust proposed relates to his Revenge, be sure you may.


Peron. Nay, Sir, I will be sure; for to deal plainly, I have not yet been bred
with any Candor for Persons of your Order.


Genov. I believe it, and will not stick to say, perhaps with reason, the
People generally, have strange Notions of us, and you, I see, are biased by
Opinion. -- It Is true, Church-Interest, and the forward Zeal we use to prop its
Power, raises u^ many Enemies, some whereof, burst into rude and vilifying
Terms, and in plain words, Abuse us.


Peron. Yes indeed, I have often heard 'em deal so plainly with ye, to say,
You're all a p^ck of Rogues.


Genov. Ha, ha, ha, -- it is likely -- but you must know then, Sir Captain,
these were all Sophisters.


Peron. How, how, Sophisters?


Genov. Even so, you may depend on it; I know it by their word of double meaning
-- for Rogue was meant no more than Politician, a witty Rogue, a subtle Rogue,
a rich Rogue; the word is ost mistook, but means no harm; why Knave, 'cause
'ti^ obsolete, is now Corrupted, which meant of old, a Servant, and no more:
Then, Sir, as you may be a Knave, yet Honest, so we two may be Rogues, and yet
no Villains.


Peron. At this rate, this Fellow will make it out, that a Son of a Whore may
have an honest Woman to his Mother.


Genov. But come, Captain, pray be particular -- a little more; -- What noted
Crime are we found guilty of?


Peron. Ah -- numbers, numbers, Sir, more than your Beads can furnish ye with
Prayers to make atonement for, but one among the rest most Scandalous; they
say, you will set your Penitents a Gaming for Masses for their Souls, and that
the Fortunate delivering you that still sit by, his Winnings, has his si^s
Pardoned him for his luck at Cribbage.


Genov. Why look'e, as to Penitents dole for Masses, truly there may be
something in it, and practicable, but that we play at Cribbage, is a Story, our
Game is always Putt, we know no Cribbage.


Peron. Oh, with your Reverence's leave, I know you will vouch all Games, rather
than lose the Stakes: But come, toth' Point. Suppose thou art Sincere in this
Affair, what is to be done with Massaniello? What shall we Murder him -- ha Boy?


Genov. Convey a Bullet cleanly through his Head, -- not Murder him, no, no,
that were Undecent.


Peron. Nay, nay, I know he uses the Church scurvily, that is he denies 'em
Money, and that is a Damning Sin.


Genov. Oh, past hope of Pardon.


Peron. And if I should Murder him --


Genov. Why ye should have Absolution, the thing is excellent Service, but the
word grates.


Peron. And what Security for no Betraying?


Genov. The sacred Word and Honor of the College, who all will join in the
Confederacy, to animate the giddy Hot-brained People, and in his stead, to make
you General: Come, Captain, it is in vain longer to hide your close Design, a
Jesuit's Head is waking, when others are in Dreams; we have found out your
Correspondence with Carraffa's Faction, and know you are Intrigu'd with
Mataloni: -- Since then we know this, yet make no discovery, -- you see the
Danger's equal, therefore may trust -- let us be Rogues, or otherwise, it is no
matter.


Peron. And you will bring your Brethren to vouch this.


Genov. Go with me and be satisfied, however the World taints us for
Treacheries, we are true to one another; -- come, be Wise, resolve on
Massaniello's Fall -- then Rise.


Peron. Well, Sir, lead on, and as I find this real, a Throat may soon be Cut.


Genov. I ask no more. Be then our General, and take the Church's Blessing.


Crosses him. Exeunt. Enter Massaniello Guarded, and Don Tiberio. Petitioners
waiting with Papers. Massan. My Lord, I lately sent you my Decree, have you
resolved upon it?


Don Tib. What Sir, to negotiate the Peoples Business.


Massan. With the Viceroy; yes, 'twas set down so.


Don Tib. In what Sir, with my Honor I can serve 'em, I Will never re^use to do
my Country good, provided it is no blemish to Nobility.


Massan. My Lord, you so much Idolize Nobility, that you would even make the very
word a Scarecrow, but we are no such Children to be frighted; Nobility, --
what is that but Power and Riches, the Will to Govern, and the Means to do so; a
Titular Nobleness, is vacant Air, a trifling Sound of no Validity: What care I
how the Herald's Art can Blazon, since I Have Power and Riches, I Have Nobility, or
good my Lord, what am I in your Fancy?


Don Tib. You are I know not what, something that amongst all Tongues, must
want a Title; you are beyond Prodigious, Language fails and Reason's at a loss,
that would Expound ye; your Pardon Sir, I am but newly practiced in the Trade
of Flattery and Dissimulation.


Massan. What, and yet a Courtier! Damnation! is that Possible? Did ever
Creature breath in that rank Air, that was not skilled in both those Qualities?
-- Not Flatter nor Dissemble, say not Live; for riotous Meat and Drink, nor
gaudy Clothes, Hounds, Horses, Whores, your constant Properties in their
Perfection, are not half so natural as Flattery and Dissembling to a Courtier.


Don Tib. I shall not make this good, Sir.


Mass. Shall ye Comply? Enter Rock and Petitioners, who give Papers to Mass.
Come, come, you must, it is Death, if you deny.

Don. Tib. Was ever Plague so mortally Severe? Had ever Kingdom so debased a
Curse? the Noble Blood of my great Ancestors boils in my Veins with Anger and
Disdain, and yet the Frown of this Plebeian Fellow, spite of my Nature, Aws
me; sure it is the effect of Witchcraft, Hell i^ just setting up a Common
wealth, and all the Devils conspire against Nobility.


Rock. Your Wife Sir, with the Duchess Mataloni Rifl'd and Plundered, are just
coming in; -- she is as good as her word Faith, she has stuck her self all over
with Jewels, as thick as a Sir-loyn of Roast-Beef is with Rosemary at
Christmas, -- I had a fling at her Grace too, I told her a Lie, and had a
Diamond-Ring worth a hundred Ducats for it. -- Rare, rare doings, Sir, -- gad
little did I think of ever living to see such blessed days.


Enter Blowzabella, awkerdly dressed and decked with Jewels; then Duchess
Mataloni, led by Ursula, and the Duchess in mean Habit, Weeping. Massan.
Attend all to Morrow Morning, and ^'ll give ye Hearing to Petitioner^


Don Tib. Bane to my Eyes -- who would thank Providence for that dear Gift,
that was confined to see such dismal Sights as these?


Ursul. Why Sister, you don't mind my Brother there.


Blowz. Oh -- I look the Greater for that, ye Fool, Husbands and Wives should
be careless of one another; -- besides, what have I Tricked up my self thus
for, but that every Body should see me now, and I see no Body; besides, this is
nothing -- the next time I Dress, the Son, Moon, and Seven Stars -- shall look
like Farthing-candles to me. Sister, prithee mind Tomaz now, do but see how he
stares at me; I Will take no notice of him, but pretend to be full of Business,
as he does.


Massan. She thinks she is Fine, I warrant, 'sDeath and Hell, -- was ever any
thing so Monstrous -- as course Deformity in gaudy Trappings, I nauseate it,
but must not show it now. -- Hah, what was that! methought a Dart shot from
that Mourning Beauty -- pi^rc'd through my Soul; my Soul, tho of a piece with
my course Body, yet feels the smart, obeys the power of Beauty, and makes me
say aloud -- She Is Admirable.


Dutch. No more, my Lord, let my Misfortunes hide me for ever from your sight,
and I do be^eech ye, leave me.


Don Tib. Thou Beauteous Partner of my dearest Friend, thou charming Form that
now make Sorrow amiable; I will, but yet believe, thou Shrine of Virtue, it is
only that I may the better serve thee; my Stars have here condemned me to their
Interest, an Interest that I hate as I love Honor; and if that metamorphos'd
Female Brute there, has any spark of Womanish softness in her, she shall in
spite of Nature, use ye well. They Whisper.


Blowz. Carry the Prisoner to the place I ordered -- What say ye, Sir, would ye
speak with me? -- Hum, w^ll, what is it?


Massan. She goars and wounds me still; and now methinks the whole, composure
of my Frame, is alt^r'd -- I tremble and am ashamed to know my self. -- Hah,
what did I say I Trembled, it is impossible, can my Heart tremble, that is
steeled with Power? Trembling implies a Fear; what can I ^ear, that have
unquestioned Power to command all, and can enjoy what e'^r that Power
possesses: -- Again -- there is no looking on her, I Am all over Flame o'^h'
sudden: -- Well, it is but ask and have, I Will send her word I like her, and if
she prove peevish, fright her a little with her Lord's Proscription and she
yields presently. -- Rock, come hither, Thou saw that weeping Woman there.


Rock. Who, Sir, the Duchess? Ay, she is a delicate bit faith, -- gad I like
her very well.


Massan. You do so.


Rock. Yes, Sir, under favor, I intend -- I intend --


Massan. What is it you intend -- hah?


Rock. Why Sir, I intend, I intend to --


Massan. Sir --


Rock. I say Sir, I intend to make her do your Excellency Justice.


Massan. You shall do so, go get her for me presently.


Rock. Get her, What does your Honor mean? -- Have you a Paper ready? Would
you have her Sign any thing?


Massan. Yes, Sir, and Seal too. -- Therefore good Monsieur Secretary, I would
advise you to practice your Employment, and make her supple d' hear? Supple for
me, fit to take my Impression, and let your Liking flag, Sir Ink-Bottle; these
are your Ears yet I suppose --


Rock. They are so, I suppose my Lord, I have had 'em a pretty while.


Massan. It Is well; i^ you would have 'em so remain, be Diligent; you
understand me. Exit Massaniello and Guards.


Rock. Hum -- sits the VVind there -- understand ye? Yes, yes, a Pox on ye, ye
have given us all occasion to understand ye; we know now what he means by a
pinch by the Ear, a tweak by the Nose, as well as if he had spoke Spanish: --
He, I find, has a mind to the Duchess himself, and I as princip^l Officer in
Trust, must solicit her for him; it is so, there is no avoiding it, if I design
to keep my Place, this must be done; and I see now, it is in vain to think to
make my self a Great Man, without being a Pimp into the bargain. Exit.


Don Tib. Will it please you to give me an Answer to my Suit, Madam?


Blowz. Why look'e Sir, cry Mercy -- I think you are a Prince tho.


Don Tib. And your Ladyship's Humble Servant.


Blowz. Hum, that may not be much a-miss, as things may happen, Od'sfish, the
Man's well made --


Don Tib. It Is Madam, in favor of the Duchess, let me desire --


Blowz. Oh, gad ^o, the Du^chess my Prisoner; and you desire -- why look, my
Lord, if we should all have our Desires, what would the World come to? Why
you may desire one thing, and I may desire another thing, when as things may
happen, you can neither have y^^r thing, nor I have my thing; oh my word, this
is a great thing to consider of -- and you must think I know my Post, my Lord,
what I must do; great things now.


Don Tib. Pox on her, has she forgot already the great things she used to do,
when she sold Sprats at the Castle-Gate? -- Ah, how the State-Mack^rel Surveys
me; it may chance, that I may have a Hook for her, if it be so, the Duchess
shall gain her end I Am sure.


Blowz. Well, I swear, I think I have not seen a more likely Person, the Man
truly has, as one may say, a mighty promising Countenance; well, he has so, and
he has a Suit to me, good again; and perhaps I Have a Business for him to do, very
well still; why the World is altered now, and things are changed from what they
were, and Odsfish, I must not be as I have been -- what, I must do great things
now.


Don Tib. I Am still in hopes, Madam, you are thinking how to gratify my request.


Blowz. My Lord, you speak well, gratify; you would be Gratified you say, and
desire my Prisoner may be tenderly used, and have Servants about her; well, my
Lord, and how, pray, would you gratify for such a Favor? -- Come, you are a
Courtier, I am at present disposed to see a little of those Finicals; -- How
do you begin?


Don Tib. Why, first, Madam, with all respect imaginable, ^ approach --


Blowz. Odsfish, is that approaching? Why, my Lord, you stand stock still.


Don Tib. At a respectful distance, Madam, always when we address to Great
Persons. With Familiars; it is true, we often approach to the Lips.


Blowz. Ay, ay, to the Lips -- Odsfish, that is better by half, if you must
approach, approach as you should approach, to the purpose, my Lord.


Don Tib. Madam, this Favor is too great.


Blowz. Puh, -- never speak on it, my Lord, I am not so strait-lac'd, but I can
be familiar with my Equals upon occasion, and if you have an inclination to
approach once again, my Lord --


Don Tib. The Devil -- this is worse than her refusal; -- Oh, how I hate an
Oyster that opens of its own accord -- but come, once more for the Dutchess's
sake, I Will defy Garlic --


Blowz. So, my Lord, and now what think ye of my Person and Appearance? Pray be
a little curious -- here is no Rumper above, my Lord, nor no crooked Legs below.


Don Tib. Oh, Madam, your Person, like the rest, must be Admired


Blowz. It Is true, Fortune used me a little coursely formerly, as to sell Fish,
or so -- but as to a Person, bring me any of your fine Ladies to discourse with
me, or so, and Gads-fish, then you shall see.


Don Tib. Ah, you are so very exact by Nature, that methinks those Jewels might
well be spared --


Blowz. Why truly Nature has not been niggardly, but by giving me these Jewels,
Fortune I see, designs to be honest, and be out of my Debt, and I must use her
now she is in Humor.


Don Tib. How the Dowdy has stuck her self in the dear Dutchess's Ornaments,
and how like a Devil midst the Starry Region -- does she appear: But hush -- I
must at her again -- Aside. Come, Madam, do but dispatch this Grant, and then
you bind me ever.


Blowz. Well, my Lord, let us walk in, and as I find your Reasons are
substantial -- I shall incline the more. -- A handsome Man I Will be sworn he is
-- and approaches very well -- why look'e things are altered now, and if my
Husband should chance to be a Cuckold, why it is no more than what is in Fashion;
I must not be as I have been, what, I must do great things now -- Come, my
Lord. Exeunt.


Enter Duchess, Rock whispering Ursula at a distance. Dutch. How near are
those poor Wretches to despair, who dare too nicely scan the Acts of
Providence! And, Oh, how grossly vile is poor Mortality, when it too highly
values its Weak Reason, and ^ansies Heaven has done its Merit wrong -- if I
should number all my past Offenses, can they deserve this Scourge, this worst
of Misery? Yes, if Heaven thinks so: Let me then be Obedient, and like Great
Cato's Daughter, bear Misfortunes with more than Roman Constancy; yet if Grief
grows too strong, here is the Means, this dear Reliever Rescues me for ever,
Shows a Viol Yonder are my Persecutors, and some new Plague I find, is hatching
now between 'em: Fate do thy worst, let my dear Lord but 'scape 'em, these
Mischiefs I Will contemn, and seem as Merry -- as if their Villainies were my
Diversion.


Rock. Once more I tell ye, you must deliver up your Charge to me, I have
Business with her from the General, things of Importance Women, weighty
Matters; there is a pressing Affair going forward -- you must give way too,
therefore be gone I say, your Husbands are yonder, toaping a full Bowl for joy
of the good Plunder, at the Duke of Caivano's; go, go, and color your Gills
there, and leave this Lady to my management.


Ursul. Ay, with all my Heart, methinks I long to see how my Husband Pedro
looks in his fine Golden Coat. Adsheartlikins, I warrant he is as proud as
'twere any Don himself. Exeunt.


Rock. Hem, hem, Madam, in short, you must know, Madam, that is, Madam, if you
don't know already, that I am his Excellency's Secretary.


Rock pulls off his Hat awkerdly. Dutch. His Excellency's Secretary! bless me,
how can I deserve this Honor? please ye, Sir, to take a Chair. He sits down.


Rock. You have very favorable Stars -- Madam, for as you say, this Honor is
not bestowed on every one -- especially without Money. Aside.


Dutch. But how comes it, I beseech ye, Sir, that I am made thus Happy?


Rock. Why, you must know, Madam, that the General, who neither sees, says, nor
does any thing without me, thought sit to take my hint of Commendation of that
Forehead, Nose and Mouth of yours, after which too, to speak Unvulgarly, I
expressed my self in praise of the Lilies and Roses in your Cheeks, your white
Neck, and so forth, and at last, gave him signification, that you were
altogether a very tolerable Person.


Dutch. Thou art in all Significations Intolerable I Am sure. Aside. Indeed,
Sir, you oblige me extremely, and I cannot forbear saying, that I am not a
little proud, setting aside the General's liking, Sir, of the obliging Applause
of a Person of your Merit and great Office.


Rock. Hum, it is so, I must be the Man I see, she begins to be sweet upon m^
already. Aside. Why faith, Madam, I must needs think those that ar^ Wise, will
always distinguish a Person of Place and Trust; you may Cringe and Compliment
Kings and Keyzars, if you please, but to us you must come, if you would have your
Business done.


Dutch. True, Sir, I know it very well -- and therefore since I Have the honor
of your liking, what is matter what the General says or doe^?


Rock. Ah, what a bewitching Smile was there -- she has charmed me so I cannot
speak a word, and I must be a Traitor in spite of my Teeth. --


Dutch. Besides, to show my self grateful, Sir, -- and give ye Praise for
Praise, in my fancy now, that Chestnut Phiz of yours, but especially that Nose,
prognosticating strange Events, is wondrous Taking.


Rock. I have her fast, for if she likes my Nose once, the rest follows in
course. -- But hark'e Madam, is this in Earnest? Am I so fine a Person faith --
I should be glad to have some favor from ye as a proof.


Dutch. A Favor, you shall, take this Cordial and drink my Health -- it is a
warm Philtre will increase your Flame: To show you too it is an especial Favor,
I Will use it with a Gust, when there is occasion; come, Sir, take six Go-downs.


Rock. Hum -- what a Plague does she mean? It cannot be Poison sure -- Gad, I
don't like the color on it; why faith, Madam, I must beg your Pardon, I an't
dry at present.


D. Oh, Luxury! Great Men, Sir, are always Thirsty; -- come, you must take it.


Rock. But Madam, I have sworn never to drink between Meals.


Dutch. How, Sir, know then, since you such Grace refuse, Fortune thus flies
ye, and Revenge a Rogue pursues. Exit Duchess.


Rock. That is, she will tell the General, and he shall Hang me -- gad I must
after her and prevent that tho, for all my Fooling. Exit.


SCENE II.
Enter Cardinal and Mataloni. Matal. My Lord, if ever humble Penitence yet
influenced a Heart, believe, mine feels it; Oh, let me kneel and kiss your
sacred Robe, thus low beg Pardon for my past Offense, then from my Soul thank
you for this Discovery.


Card. It Is too much, my Lord, pray rise, Heaven knows, how the vast bulk of
your Misfortunes oppress my Heart, deep sense of which, and pity to your Lady,
who is involved too in the general Ruin, has made me willing to divulge this
Secret, which a bigoted Jesuit, crazed with the Pl^t even forced into my Bosom.


Matal. Hell of Barbarity! a Brother do this, a Brother plot my Ruin and my
Wif^'s, for in her Death, is mine, with greatest Horror, and this too only for
ambitious Vanity, to forge another Plot -- without my knowledge, even as his
Hot-Brain pleased.


Card. There Is the Arch-Contrivance, he knew your tender Passion for your Lady,
a Prisoner now in Massaniello's House, would never give your consent to act
revenge by Fire; and therefore to effect his double Plot, you and Perone were
to be Ignorant, for different Ends, you on your Lady's score, and he as being
designed a Sacrifice with Massaniello, who, they give out, shall fall by Sword
or Pistol; but it is indeed resolved by firing Mines under the Marketplace, and
when the Throng is most, to ^low up both, and to accompany 'em, your Lady and a
hundred thousand Vulgar.


Mat. Prodigious Villainy!


Card. Of Powder for this Action, fifty Cantara's -- are stowed in several
Places under Ground, enough to shake all Naples into Ruins, and glut Revenge
with such a horrid Massacree -- no Age could ever Parallel.


Mat. My Flesh trembles and Blood grows cold, even at the apprehension:
Unnatural Viper! for a Brother's Name from henceforth I renounce, as also a
Brother's Nature, by thy accursed Example, for it is past doubt, that with my
Wife and the rest, when this most dreadful Blow had once been given (had not
your gracious Clemency saved me by this Discovery) I too had shared this Ruin.


Card. That Is not unlikely, for your Brother's aim, compacted with some Dons of
his rank Faction, we find, is now for setting up himself, when Massaniello and
the rest were Dead, Chief Farmer of the Gabells in your stead.


Mat. I see it now, plain as the Sun at Noon, thou venerable Parent of my Life,
for this Discovery gives me all that can be called in Life a Blessing, saving
her who is much dearer than my Life, my Soul: How shall I pay my Thanks? How
po^r out my full Heart? And how Adore thee?


Card. Calm, calm your self, my Lord, and -- cease this Rapture, I Am paid in
the good Action.


Mat. May all Stains be wiped for ever from that Honorable Scarlet, for this
your Piety -- Oh, this base Carraffa! this bloody Brother! But yet it is no more
than what the Scheme of his past Life has promised, a Nature ever prompt to
Cruelty, hardn'd in Ill, he ost would set me on to plague the People, and do
things Unnatural, of which the Gabells late imposed, was one, -- and which
being too severe, has now Undone us.


Card. My Lord, I see your Sense is now serene, and therefore I should be most
Uncharitable to twit ye with your former rash neglect: Oh! what a sacred Tutor
is Affliction? TO instruct Humanity, and give erring Nature the means to know
it self. -- Farewell, my Lord, excuse Paternal Love and honest Care, if it now
sound too harshly in your Ear; -- the Lot is cast, you must divert this
Stratagem, or she you love amongst the common Crowd is lost for ever; they are
now coming hither to their last Consultation; I was Invited, but made shift to
excuse it; indeed I liked it not, I wish the Rebels quelled, but cannot wish
that way; -- but you must stand the brunt, and countenance 'em, say as they
say, and work your Ends the better: Be Wise then, it is the Crisis of your Fate,
One Hour lost now, the rest come all too late.
Exit Card.


Mat. How have I been mistaken in this Man; this Great, and yet this good Man?
This is indeed a Churchman -- studied in Morals too, and has a Conscience: If
the Body of the Roman Priesthood were like him, just in Actions as in Words,
Preaching no more than they would Execute, nor busied but in case of general
Good, how many Converts would approach the Altars, Suck up their hallowed
Breath, and Kneel and Pray?
That now neglect, and heed not what they say.



Enter Gervatio. Gerv. Oh, my Lord, is your Grace here? That Is well, your
Brother and the rest of the Cabal, are just upon Entering, Perone too with the
Banditti, and a whole bundle of Jesuits following -- gad the Mischief will
thrive, I Am sure, because they have a hand in it: We shall broil this King of
Herrings now I'saith -- I have not forgot the Rascal's Fish-Treat; a Pox on him,
he has made me hate the name of Fish ever since.


Matal. This Rascal is my Brother's Creature too, a Bear-Cub, that he could
lick into what Shape he pleased. -- Well, suck your Paws, do you hear, and grow
Fat with hopes of your Revenge, but leave me to my Thoughts. Oh, here they
come; Now rank Dissimulation, act thy Part,
Tongue, hush my Rage, and Looks disguise my Heart.



Enter Don Peppo, Perone, and several Banditti. Gervas. The Jesuits are coming,
-- and one bold daring Fellow among 'em, who says, he will begin first and fire
the Train under the Upstart's House.


Don Pep. Hush, my Brother's here -- not a word more now, bid him -- do it, and
tell him he shall be great as his own Wishes -- Aside to him.


Mat. Well, are all things in a readiness? -- Who fires the happy Piece at this
proud Fellow?


Don Pep. Who but the brave Perone, the Soul of Naples; his Harquebuss is
Charged, and his Heart willing.


Per. Ay, ay, my Lord, let me alone to fire him.


Mat. I heard the the other Rascal talk of firing a Train as they came in;
'sDeath, the Scoundrels quibble with me -- and can ye aim well, Sir?


Per. I think I can, my Lord -- I have killed Black-Birds without a Rest before
now; but if I should fail, here are some more will second me, what say ye, my
bold Lads, hah?


1 Band. Why Captain, give but the word of Command, your Enemy lies there,
look'e, be it who 'twill.


2 Band. Captain -- I Will not only kill who you have a mind to, do you mark me, but
if you command me, I Will Eat him afterward.


Per. There Is a brave Fellow now, my Lord.


Mat. A prodigious brave Fellow indeed -- Damnation! what Devils have I about
me? But what are these? Enter Genovino and other Jesuits.


Don Pep. Oh, these, Brother, these are Friends, woven in our Plot, Fathers of
the Church, who with the rest of 'em, resolve to assist us.


Mat. Nay, then't must be a Powder Plot, I Am sure. -- Hah, I have it now, and
Death shall never alter me. -- But first, for a Decoy; well, Gentlemen, this
Undertaking will be Dangerous, and therefore requires Wariness and Diligence --
you will find me ready at a Minute's warning, but first, I must Disguise my self,
which done, Believe, ye all command my Head and Heart --
Villains, to Ruin ye, not take your part.
Aside. Exit Mataloni.


Peron. Methought the Duke your Brother went out Cloudy.


Don Pep. No, no, his Head is only busy about his Disguise -- he has some
reason tho, if he knew all. -- Aside. Your Reverence is Welcome; these Fathers,
I suppose, come from the rest, all sworn Friends to our purpose.


Genov. All, all resolved, my Lord -- they will first assist with Prayer, and
then with Powder, all sworn to quell the Church's Enemies, -- And now, my brave
Captain, since I Have so well performed the trust you gave me, I hope you will
think a Jesuit may be Honest.


Per. Honest, yes, to his promise to do Mischief, I never doubted that; but
come, I Am glad to see you here however.


1 Ies. When the Laity Rebel against the Church, the Mischief that comes of
it, lies on their Heads, tho the Church Execute it.


Don Pep. There Is Sophistry for ye -- he calls the non payment of Church
Masses, Rebellion against it -- but let him talk, he is a sure Rogue of my side;
-- he is to fire the Marketplace. To Gervasio.


Gerv. A gad, and I Will warrant he will do it -- he has a Face like a very
Salamander it self.


2 Ies. Oh, bloody-minded Villains! If my Discovery to the Cardinal, put no
stop to this Business -- I shall never Sleep again: -- Oh, Conscience,
Conscience. Aside.


Genov. My Sons, be then Courageous, and go on -- to do a deed will gain
perpetual Glory; and to excite the Cause, pray hear this Fable; The Birds and
Beasts, had once a fierce Dispute, how both their Kinds should make one
Government; -- this side set the Lion up as Monarch over 'em, but the Feathered
Kind were for Democracy; both Parties daily strong Excursions made, but neither
for long time, the Conquest had -- till at the last a sly old Politic Fox
spoke to his Comerades thus; -- My Friends, this Iar
must end by Stratagem, and not by War.
I Will undertake when next the Birds appear,
To catch a Hundred Thousand in a Snare --
And then the rest must yield, the Case is clear. --
I think, my Sons, this needs no Application, therefore go on.


Don Pep. The Father speaks like an Oracle, let us Embrace, and then go on.


Omnes. Ay, ay, let us go on, let us go on. Embrace all.


Per. Away then, each to his several Charge -- and when the cheerful Sun begins
to gild the Marketplace to Morrow, in all his Pride I Will fell this Giant down.


Omnes. And we'll to the utmost Second brave Perone. Exeunt all but D. Pep.


Don Pep. Now soar my well plumed Hopes, and -- gracious Fortune once fix thy
Wheel, and on the highest Spoke set me but up; if I fear falling, Scorn me:
Methinks my Heart's grown larger since my Plot. -- Into what a Labyrinth of
knotty Mischief have I involved these overheated Fools, who severally believe
they gain that Prize, which they all work for me, to their Destruction; for at
that very Instant that bold Perone hunts Massaniello's Life, so to succeed him
-- his own, with all the rest, fly up in Fumo: The Jesuits too are Tools; for
that once done, some Troops of Spanish Dons already raised, -- Confederates all
in our intended Greatness, shall crush those Moles to nothing. -- But hold, --
my Brother and his Wife, whose Fate are both inevitable -- there is the worst
twinge -- but what are Brother, Sister, Kindred, or Friends, to him, that bold
Ambition onward guides. Ambition that made Angels once Rebel,
And from Celestial Throne, sink down to Hell.
Exit.


The End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Pedro, Bartallo, Jacomo, Gaspar, Scipio, Ursula, and Belvidore, sitting at a
Table as Feasting. The Fisherman's SONG.
OF all the World's Enjoyments,
That ever valued were,
There Is none of our Employments
with Fishing can compare:
Some Preach, some Write,
Some Swear, some Fight;
All Golden Lucre courting,
But Fishing still bears off the Bell,
For Profit or for Sporting.
Then who a Jolly Fisherm^n,
A Fisherman will be,
His Throat must wet
Just like his Net,
To keep out Cold at Sea.
II.
The Country Squire loves Running
A Pack of well-mouth'd Hounds;
Another fancies Gunning
For Wild-Ducks in his Grounds:
This Hunts, that Fowls;
This Hawks, Dick Bowls,
No greater Pleasure wishing,
But Tom that tells what Sport excells,
Gives all the Praise to Fishing.
CHO. Then who, etc.
III.
A good West^alia Gammon,
Is counted dainty Fare;
But what is it to a Salmon
Just taken from the Ware?
Wheat-Ears and Quails,
Cock^, Snipes, and Rayles,
Are prized while Season's lasting,
But all must stoop to Crawfish Soop,
Or I Have no Skill in Tasting.
CHO. Then who, etc.
IV.
Keen Hunters always take too
Their Prey with too much pains;
Nay, often break a Neck too;
A Penance for no Brains:
They Run, they Leap,
Now High, now Deep,
Whilst he that Fishing chooses,
With ease may do it,
Nay more, to boot
May entertain the Muses.
CHO. Then who, etc.
V.
And tho some envious Wranglers,
to jeer us will make bold,
And laugh at patient Anglers,
who stand so long in the Cold:
They wait on Miss,
We wait on this,
And think it easy Labor,
And if you would know,
Fish profits too,
Consult our Holland Neighbor.
CHO. Then who a Jolly, etc.
Ped. COme, let us have another Song, my Jolly Lads, and then 'tother Brimmer,
which shall be once more, Confusion to all Gentry.


Gasp. Ay, come, away with it -- but I think we have their Heads upon the Anvel
pretty well now, Neighbor.


Bart. Ay, ay, we may lay by our Hammers and our Cleavers; now Broth^r, -- the
Sword is the Tool of Confusion now, and so let us drink about.


Iacom. Gad, I was so fine, my Wife did not know me to day; I gave her a Buss
at the Mill-door, and Odzokers, the Jade took me for a Courtier, ha, ha, ha.


Gasp. It Is a sign a Courtier has been about your Hopper then, Brother, some
body or other has been taking Toll in your Absence; wha^, the Mill must go
round, Brother, the Mill must go round, ha, ha, ha.


Scip. Ay, ay, tho the Soal be rent from the Upper-leather, as the saying is,
That work must go forward -- gad, would my Neighbor would drop once and give
the Crow a Pudding, as the saying is, that I might take a Stitch with her,
she is a rare fresh crummy Lass; -- she is no Pin-buttock, not she In Faith.


Bart. Why well said, Neighbor, -- faith I Am of thy mind -- I Would give a dish of
Marrow-bones, -- nay, all the new Rigging of my Captain-ship here, to beat up
with her for a Voluntier.


Scip. Come, Colonel Pedro, let us have Madam Ursula's Health round, and give
you Joy of your new Title, good Madam, and then to Madam Belvidore there --
Health to your good Ladyships both.


Pedro. Why, well said, Lieutenant, -- come with all my Heart.


Ursula. And I Will yours in Rhenish-wine and Sugar; what we must drink Costly
now, I Am a Lady, and then we'll hear another Song; this Music with Drinking,
is very pretty.


Belvid. It Is so, Sister; but for my part, I love a Song that raises the
Spirits and makes one merry.


Pedro. Why well said, my Lass of Mettle, this was a notable Ditty In Faith:
Prithee Iacomo do but observe my Wife in her new Rigging there; a Pox on her,
she looks for all the World like thy Mare when she has a Martingal on.


Gasp. Come, come Boys, strike up there while the Iron's hot, let us have a Song
and a Dance -- come. Song and Dance.


Enter Rock hastily. Pedro. Oh Mr* Secretary, Welcome -- but why so late, my man
of Politics? why you are six Bumpers behind at least.


Rock. Ay, a Pox on it, and shall not have time neither now I Am come, to drink one
of 'em. -- Odsheartlikins, you must leave off Junketing immediately, for the
General's just coming hither to hear Causes; I brought a damned Fellow to him
this Morning, a lowering, horn-fac'd Banditti Rogue, who pretended earnest
Business, that has put him so upon the fret with some Discovery, that there is
no speaking to him, he snaps and snarls at one just like a Dog in a Coach-box
-- Oons, he called me Pimp and Clod-pate just now, only for telling him what a
Clock 'twas, tho he asked me the question. Table taken off.


Bart. Adso, away with the Bottles then.


Pedro. Do so, and let us talk of some new Intelligence to find out the Duke of
Mataloni, -- that will put him into Humor -- presently.


Rock. Here he comes, and that Devil Banditti with him still; I wonder who he
is -- it is a plaguey poor Rascal -- and I Am sure, had not a Penny about him,
because he gave me no Fee -- for which I would have kept him from the General
-- but 'twas such a surly Dog, and those damnable Whiskers struck such an Awe
into me -- that Egad he made me do what he would, in spite of my Teeth.


Enter Massaniello, and Mataloni, disguised like a Banditti. Massan. Thou have
well deserved thy Life; and thy Discovery is of such weight, as makes me still
thy Debtor.


Matal. Have you given Order to Secure Carraffa?


Massan. It Is done, and Spies are likewise on Perone, to watch his Motion^, who
at this Instant, I hear, waits for Admittance.


Matal. It Is well; and all the Avenues that reach the Powder, are they taken
care of?


Massan. All, all, with strictest Diligence. -- My better Genius, how shall I
pay my Gratitude -- tell me thy Circumstances, that I may reward thee -- for
saving me, and two Thirds of the People: Whence, and what art thou?


Matal. One of Fortune's Bubbles, blown up and down a while about the World,
and when I break, am Nothing: My Race and Birthright, if you can believe me,
perhaps are yet too good for what I seem, but that may be my Pride, so heed it
not: If you would have more know me then by my outside, which in the Figure I at
present bear, expresses me -- a Rogue.


Rock. Pithy and short; it does so indeed.


Massan. This Male contented slander on thy self, -- bears yet a relish of some
hidden Honesty; thou shall be mine, and such a Trust I Will give thee, a^ by its
Profit shall reward this Service.


Matal. Pray, Sir, not too much of your Trust, I may deceive ye; for what I
have done, perhaps I had my Reasons, but if you burden me with Place and
Office -- I shall do like most of the rest in such Cases; I shall serve my self
in the first place, I tell ye that before hand.


Massan. Oh, this Bluntness better recommends thee to me, it shows thou art no
Courtier, no favourer of accursed Mataloni, nor the damned Gabellers, therefore
observe me, some of the Traitors are by this time Seized, and rash Perone
attends his certain Ruin. -- Withdraw a while, till I dispatch some Business,
which done, we'll discourse farther; in the mean time, I tell thee, I am
pleased with thee.


Matal. And I, if my Design succeed, most happy. Exit Mataloni.


Massan. Brother, I ordered you to burn the Plunder, but you will have your
way, I see. -- What my Bull's-head Captain and the Cobbler, Embroidered too --
and the Women foisting here too, pshaw, pull off your Trappings, and send those
things away, -- we have no Smock business now.


Pedro. Smock-business, -- gad if I had said as much, the Tanner's Wife there
would have broke my Head I Am sure; -- what a Devil ail^ him.


Bart. Why, Whiskers that went out there, has bewitched him, I believe.


Pedro. Do You hear Spouse, I see he is in a damned ill Humor, therefore prithee
be gone.


Ursula. Marry gap, what is he too good to speak to us Civilly.


Mass. How now, What Noise is that?


Rock. The People are mad, I think, they throng the Marketplace so, that they
ride upon one another's Backs; the Jesuits Horse one another like wild
Stallions; -- Perone's Exalted too, and to my thinking, would fain get foremost.


Mass. Brother, and the rest of ye, keep here this Post, and on your Life,
observe my Motions. -- Are any yet let in, Sits down at a Table.


Rock. Yes, three or four Delinquents, who were Tried this Morning by the Court
your Lordship set up for such Causes, and who now are sent to you to receive
Judgment; They are a Baker and a Fisherman: But in the Rear of these, -- appear
two Ghosts or ^tarv'd Skelitons, whom the Prince of Bissignano sends hither to
plead their Ca^se themselves to you, strange fleshless Creatures, I would not
have you see '^m Faith; their Bones rattle as they walk like a Bag of
Chess-men, and these accuse a Lawver, -- a rich Lawyer, a Friend of mine, my
Lord, of Roguery -- poor Idiots, they are like to get much b^'t.


Massan. We'll admit 'em all, but let Perone keep at distance till they are
dispatched.


Rock. Valasco, -- do you hear. Whispers Valasco.


Valasc. It shall be done -- Exit Valasco.


Enter Baker, Fish-monger, and two Women Ragged and Disfigured, with shagged
Hair about their Ears, and looking pale and lean, as if just Starved; then
enter the Lawyer, who Whispers Rock. Rock sits down and looks over Papers.
Massan. Read the Bills of Accusation against these Delinquents severally, then
let me know each Man particularly. -- First, What Is he?


Rock. So please ye, a Baker -- Tried and Convicted in your Lordship's Court of
Justice -- For that he not having the fear of any thing before his Eyes, and a
world of such formal Stuff, my Lord, sold Bread to the Poor sixteen Ounces in
six and Thirty too Light -- and that too most of it Dough baked -- to lie heavy
on his Customers Stomachs, that they might not find out his Cheat.


Massan* Hum -- for Bread Dough-bak'd, and too light sixteen Ounces, well, let
his Oven be hea^ed presently, and in it bake that Baker; bake him, do you hear, to
a Crust -- then dole him round in Parcels of sixteen Ounces weight to all the
Poor that are Injured.


Baker. Oh, that ever I was Born -- Mercy, my Lord, Mercy.


Massan. Away, Bake him, I say -- on your Lives see it done. Proceed, who is the
next? Exeunt some with the Baker.


Rock. A Fisherman, who brags he is Related to your Lordship, his Crime is,
That being sent by a poor Labourer, who works by the Week abroad, to his Wife,
lying in with Twins, with some Fish proper for her condition, she pulling out
her Purse to pay him, he robbed her of it, for want of which, she and her too
Infants are since Starved.


Massan. Pshaw, is that all, -- why if they are Dead, the Parish is eased of an
Encumbrance; Ods me, and now I look on him better, this honest Man is a
Relation of mine indeed, for if I have not forgot --


Fish. Oh lack a day, Master Thomas Annello -- why sure you cannot forget your
Cousin Bobber the Smelt-man -- why I am your Si^^er's Son, and please ye; and
you may remember, how Merry we were last Lammas at the H^rring catching -- well
gads bobs, Cousin, I Am huge glad of your good Fortune.


Massan. Thank'e, thank'e -- good Cousin; a Chair ^^ere for my K^nsman.


Fish. Hem, Hem -- A Chair brought and he sits down.


Massan. W^ll, Cousin, and prithee what is this foolish Busi^ess about this
Purs^ -- wha^ I warrant thou took'st it Joakingly, did not -- thou had
occasion ^or a little Money -- for some Frolic or so, I warrant.


Fish. Ha, ha, ha, ha. -- Why in Troth Cousin, I had so, you have nicked it;
Gads bobs, you know I was always given to Frolicks and to play Arch-tricks, --
and I think this was pretty enough: -- You shall hear how 'twas. -- The Woman
you must know, Cousin, was newly brought to Bed, and lay grunting for Fish, and
the Fool her Husband, had no more wit than to send me to her, when she might as
well have come to Market her self, if all be true as I have heard of them -- well
-- in came I -- out came her Purse -- and whip, says Iethro, I had it in a
Moment, so scowr'd off -- and over a Brimmer Laughed heartily afterward, with
my Brother Topers, a^ the dissembling Carrio^ -- and faith; as you say, Cousin,
I think there was good Service done in it, for the D^m and her Cubbs, would have
certainly encumbered the Parish -- and to deal plainly, -- I hear I have
prevented that, for they are all Dead -- ha, ha, ha, she will want no more Fish in
haste, nor her Brats squall no more for the Sucking-bottle, ha, ha, ha.


Mass. So -- and for this notable good Service, this same pretty Joak, Cousin,
these foolish Lawyers have Convicted the^.


Fish. Senseless Law-Rogues, they have in troth, Cousin -- but I knew I had a
sure Card of you; nay, the Pimps thought to fright me with Raw-head and
Bloody-bones too, and told me, that my Blood drop for drop, should be shed for
theirs, and that the liquor in my Veins, who am one of the Family of the famous
Annello's of Amalfi should run through the Streets, like the Kennels in a Rainy
day: -- What says the brave top of our House, shall it, shall it, hah, Cousin.


Massan. No not a drop Cousin -- there is my Hand on it -- let the bold Spirits
of my noble Kindred, Kill, Starve, or Drown, or Poison whom they please, must
knavish Law or foolish Justice control 'em in this Juncture too, when they
hope to be Preferred? No, it is enough that they are ^in to me -- and why am I
in Power, but to Exalt 'em?


Fish. Right, my dear Cousin, right -- Gads bobs, I could kiss thy Foot, hem!
hem! Oons, I Will be revenged of those Law-Rogues that Tried me, as soon as ever
I Am Preferred. Aside. Well, well, and dear Cousin, you were talking of Exalting
-- when, when must I be Exalted -- hum -- I am nearest Related of any -- I am
your Sister's Son, you know.


Massan. Why Cousin, within this Hour.


Fish. Shall I faith, Gads bobs -- I will kiss thy Foot now Falls down and
kisses his Sh^oe. But where, where, dear top of the renowned Annelli of Amalfi
-- where?


Mass. Why, upon a Sign-post.


Fish. A Sign-post -- ha, ha, ha, -- well, well, Cousin, -- I know you're a
rare Joaker; a Sign-post, very pretty faith, ha, ha, ha. They Seize him.


Massan. Go some of ye, and Exalt my Cousin, tha^ is, Hang him instantly upon a
Sign-post.


Fish Ah Cousin, dear Cousin, you carry the Jest too far now, you do I'saith.


Massan. Hang him in Chains -- but let no Blood be spilt upon your Lives, he is
my K^^man, and I Have given my Word; and so adieu good Cousin -- do you hear, besure
you do it decently, and let him be with Ceremony Exalted. -- Come, the next,
the next.


Fish. Exalted, O Lord! why are ye in Earnest then? Why Cousin Thomas, sure you
Joak -- dear Cousin Thomas -- sure you Joak. They drag him out.


Massan. Away, I say. --


Lawyer. Hum, this is somewhat odd, my Friend.


Valasc. Oh -- a poor Rogue -- I knew he would be Hanged, for all the General's
Joaking.


Lawyer. Well, my good Friend -- take care do you hear, and there is your Fee -- I
have given the Secretary a hundred Ducats already.


Valasc. Why look'e, Sir, -- you have given me two Ducats here, if you don't
come off do you see, as cleverly as a husk from a roasted Chestnut, why then my two
Ears are at your Service: -- I heard the Secretary say as much just now -- and
he, he can do any thing; you shall see him wind the General about his Hand like
a skein of Silk. The two Women give Massaniello a Paper.


Massan. What monstrous things are here, that freez my Blood with Horror of the
Crimes, and make me mad with Wonder! -- bless me, what Figures too, I Will read
again -- the Prince of Bissignano's Letter. Your Excellency is to know, your
Suitors are a Widow and her Daughter; the Widow's Husband, some seventeen Years
since, Dying, left his Brother a Lawyer, his Executor, to pay her sixteen
hundred Ducats for her Dowry, and as much for her Daughter's Portion, instead
of which, to defraud both, he has Villanously and Unnaturally Immured 'em
between four Walls in a Cave, giving out* They were Dead, and ever since fed
'em there with Bread, roots and Water; their Miseries will appear visible
before ye, and your Justice on the Offender be Nobly Remarkable, --

Bissignano.


Incomparable Villainy, I Am amazed at it; come forward Wretches, and Express
your selves -- Which is the Widow of you, and which the Daughter?


Pedro. If thou will Marry now Captain, here is a rare Bargain for thee --
here is one will not be proud of her Bills and Bonds -- this Widow will go off
cheap enough -- and the Maiden Daughter too -- I believe, would hardly stand
priming and mincing upon such an occasion, she has a Skin there would make a
rare pair of Fox-hunting Boots.


Bart. Are they Birds or Beasts, I wonder -- and of what World are they? For
ours, in all appearance, they are utter Strangers to -- I warrant that Scoundrel
the Lawyer, is in a smoaky Sweat now -- Ods bobs, this Cause of his looks but
scurvily.


Widow. If Misery extreme can deserve Pity -- or injured Innocence can hope
Redress, give ear to my sad Story, and do Justice, for all that Paper mentions,
is most true, full Seventeen Years forced by that barbarous Brother, we have
told the Hours in that loathsome Prison, fed with the dross of Earth, unwholsom
Roots, Bread candied over with Mould and stinking Water, all that could make
Calamity grow dreadful, and yet not Kill us, we have suffered daily; The damp
cold Earth our Beds, hard Stones our Pillows, and nightly visited with roapy
Snails, that crawled upon our Faces, big swolen Spiders, the scream of Weezels,
Rats, and Croaking Toads in Consort joined, was still our hateful horrid
Music, whilst dismal Darkness added to the Horror.


Lawyer. My Lord, I beseech your good Lordship, let her prate no longer she was
Mad my Lord -- she was Mad -- And it is true, I kept her a little Hardly -- but
'twas only to bring her to her Wits again -- Hark'e, Friend, I would the cretary
would put in a word now. To Gervatio. Aside.


Gerv. O no matter, no matter, he will bring ye cleverly off at last, whether he
does or no, Man*


Massan. Go on there -- What say you?


Daughter. The Summer's choking heat, and Winter's cold, both which with their
alternate Misery torturing our Bodies, have quite changed our Natures, our
Skins like barks of Trees, our Hair like Furies, with Eagles Talons on instead
of Nails, and Savage all, but in doleful Sound, breathing from our numbed,
starved and tormented Bodies -- our Voices, that cry out aloud for Justice, for
Justice, that our wretched Trunks may feel one Hour's Pleasure, tho we die the
next.


Massan. You shall have Justice, sound substantial Justice, as the Fact merits.
or your Revenge could ask; Go take that Lawyer there, that rank rich rascal,
that common Murderer of Common Pleas, that Capias, that foul blotted Writ of
Error -- take him, do you hear, and strip him first Naked, then Immure him between
those very Walls where these have lain, let his Food be Wax and Parchment, and
his Drink, the Liquor that has Damned his Soul, his Ink; And whilst the Widow
his Estate enjoys,
Let him Rave, Groan, and Languish till he dies.



Law. Mercy on me, why Friend, Friend, the Secretary don't speak a word for me.


Valasc. Hum -- why faith your Business does not come off so cleverly as I
thought it would, and I cannot part with my Ears very well neither; but do you
hear, Sir, let 'em Starve ye if they dare, let 'em take your Estate, I warrant
he will maul 'em when you're Dead cleverly, never fear, Man.


Law. When I Am Dead, Oh miserable Comfort! have I Cheated so many to be a prey
to Cheats my self at last; Oh, Lawyer, Lawyer, what will become of thy Soul?


Enter Bissignano, Perone, Banditti. Ped. Brother, the Prince attends to speak
with ye. Exit with Law. and Women.


Massan. Is Execution done then? To Bissignano.


Bissig. I saw it all performed, -- and with Alacrity; Carraffa and his Faction
all are Dead, the Jesuits also, only Genovino, who, as it seems, intending to
discover 'em, has saved himself, but all the rest have Suffered; the eager
People gave a loose to Cruelty, their Heads and Hands cut off, and stuck upon
Posts, adorn the Marketplace, and all their Bodies mangled and torn to pieces
by the Rabble.


Massan. It Is well; -- your Ear, my Lord Whispers It Is most certain so,
therefore stand still and mark the Event.


Bissig. I am Amazed. --


Massan. Fellows in Arms, especially Perone, the chief of my bold Undertakers:
Hear me; some Plots are late found out against my Life, the Authors of it
Seized and Executed, and since for the People's good, I think my Safety -- may
be material, let all stand at distance but those I appoint, till I Explain my
self; What says the brave Banditti's Captain there? Is it not reasonable?


Per. Your singling me out, Sir, to ask that Question, is somewhat odd methinks
-- but let us stand as you please -- I think I all along have kept my Distance
as well as any, I grutch ^e no Respect that I know of


Massan. Surly, but yet my Friend, you know, he is Honest, honest as his damned
Brethren in a Robbery -- you will find it so, let Honesty be tried; Seize him and
Search him instantly, and those Banditti's there, the Villains come to Murder
me. They seize Perone.


Per. Ah, surpised just in the Minute; Oh damned ill Fortune!


1 Band. Fate, guide my Hand, have at thee. Shoots a Pistol, but misses him.


2 Band. And mine --


Massan. Hah -- have they missed me; then thanks to Providence, and thou, dear
Figure of my blessed Angel, that still defends my Life against all Danger, go
drag 'em to their Deaths; tear 'em to pieces, and let their Heads be fixed
among the rest.


Per. I was a Fool, or thine had grin'd there first. Death I deserve for that,
and so Confusion seize ye Perone and Banditti are carried off.


Ped. The Rascals hid their Arms under Cloaks, and by that trick dec^iv'd us.


Massan. It Is well remembered; be it Ordered instantly, on pain of Death, no Man
to wear a Cloak or upper Garment, of what degree ^oever, they shall have no
more coverings for their Knavery; From High, to L^w, Let all Men walk in
Querpo. Go see my Commands obeyed, and strictly, as their Lives will answer it.


Rock. Ay gad, and with all my Heart -- for I know a plaguey r^ch Cardinal that
wears a huge long red Coat, and if he does not B^ibe me well, ^'ll strip him ^o
his Shirt in the first place; 'sdheart, this new Order will bring in a Tun of
Money, -- and I Will about it instantly -- Gervatio -- come Exeunt Rock and
Gervatio.


Bissig. This happy chance, which I Congratulate, shows the Divine Powers hold
ye in regard; Respect them, Sir, and cease your rigid Violence, Burning and
Plunder; the Viceroy greets ye fair too, and now agrees to grant, for the
Peoples good, Great Charles the Emperor's Charter; my self last night was at a
Consultation with him, and the good Cardinal Fillomarino -- who has besides the
Grant, a Present for ye.


Massan. I Will Visit him this Moment; he has a Character it is said, beyond the
Title even of Go^dness -- Honest and Conscientious, yet a Cardinal; it is
wondrous, and I scarce believe it true.


Bissig. Truth, may good Angels guide ye to pursue. Exeunt.


SCENE II.
Cardinal Solus, Reading. Card Immortal Seneca, whose sacred Morals inflame the
Sense, and ease the troubled Minds of those that can discern and taste thy
Learning, how valued were it thou in these sad Times, to Naples, if every one
were skilled in those rich Jewels, which in their value, are Ines^^m^ble; but
as the Peoples Plague is Ignorance, so the d^re want of thy Philosophy, makes
still more sharp to them, the darts of Fortune -- What Noise is that within?
Good Heaven defend me! -- ^he State's Distress, makes every little blast appear
a Whirlwind -- It comes nearer still, this must be of some Moment.


Enter Rock and Valasco. Rock. Bring up the Guards to the door, ye saucy
Slaves, how dare ye contradict the General's Order? -- Is it your Pleasure, my
Lord Scarlet-Cap, to affront the Supreme power -- hoh* --


Card. What mean ye, Sir?


Rock. What mean I, Sir, you shall know presently, Sir, -- Valasco -- strip him
-- if you can read without your Spectacles, there is my Warrant for it. gives a
Paper.


Card. Well, Sir, I see your Power and my Patience, as in other things, must
also appear in this Valasco takes off his upper Robes But pray how far does
your Commission tend? Not to my Skin, -- I hope.


Rock. No, no, my Lord -- to your Shirt only -- I Will proceed no further, I will
not show the Church^s Nakedness -- tho some of you give her but Tinsel
Clothing. -- To your Shirt, to your Shirt -- no further.


Card. My Shirt -- alas, Sir, Age has so crazed my Body -- and long Infirmity
so weaken'^ me, should you proceed so in this cold bleak Season, 'twould Kill
me; -- have you quite forgot Humanity?


Rock. Oh, my Lord, I know you can Talk -- I know you have a large capacious
Wit, my Lord, and a large Purse too; my Lord, if you would save your shrivel'd
Carcass, then let that speak for ye, that is the Philosophy confu^es me always,
the rest is paltry, paltry.


Card. My Purse is the Rhetoric must save me! no, to bribe Barbarity, is to
indulge the sin -- I will not give a Penny.


Rock. Come, come, Uncase, uncase then, the fine Weather will make you chatter
your Repentance shortly, I make no doubt on it. Enter Massaniello.


Valasco goes to strip him further. Massan. Hah, hands off there -- What are ye
doing, Villains?


Rock. Oons, the G^n^ral -- we were only zealous in executing your Order, and
please ye -- and because the old Bishop was obstinate, we thought to fright him
a little, that was all.


Massan. Avaunt, ^e Scoundrels, whose Souls have more of Dirt than the basest
Dung hills; my Orders were to wear no upper Garments, but you will stretch, you
will; put on his Robe again, Rogues, and then be gone. they dress him again.


Rock. He is particular; be gone -- ah, you are a rare Fellow to call a Great
Officer Scoundrel, but come -- Valasco, a pox on him, we must go. Exeunt.


Mass* He bears an awful Aspect -- Gravity with Wisdom joined, appear in every
Feature, and seem to force a Reverence -- well, what then, Looks do dec^ive us
often.


Card. Is this the Prodigy, the Instrument of Heaven, and Scourge of Naples? He
has a daring Front, quick Eye, and a Vivacuy uncommon in such Me^^ness, Fatal,
and through the who^e Physiognomy is something strangely Terrible.


Mass. The Outside's Aw^u^, -- the Inside now I Will try,
And want of Learning -- Reason shall supply.
Well, Reverend Sir, you have surveyed my Figure now sufficiently, would you
know ought besides.


Card. If the strange Frenzy the Age is swav'd with, would permit your Temper
to Reason calmly -- I confess I wou^d, Sir.


Mass. Proceed then, I Am Calm, let us sit down. They sit. And to the purpose
now, -- what would you know?


Card. What you think of your self?


Mass. Why of my self I think -- but yet may Err -- as you do of Religion --
Good I intend I Am sure -- tho in my Practice perhaps are Mistakes.


Card. But we have no Perhaps, Religion is a firm and solid Basis, a sure
Foundation, and the Matter good too we put in Practice.


Mass. So you Preach indeed, but should we come to seek a Heavenly dwelling
amongst your Schisms and Artful Heresies, your Pro and Con, your intricate
Church Sophistry, instead of Pious plain Soul-saving Doctrine, which with sound
Truths should give us safe Retreat, not Babel in all its height of monstrous
Jarring, ever showed such strange Confusions.


Card. The Church cannot Err; --
Some of her Mortal Sons through frailty may.

Mass. And those cause all their Flock to go Astray. Your Learning only serves
to guild your Fallacies; your Words and Deeds are never of a Piece; You prate
of Heaven, tho it is Earth you love,
Your Hearts are here, tho Eyes are fixed Above.
Seven deadly sins blot out the Cardinal Virtues; rank Avarice, abhorred
Hypocrisy, sharp Tongued Detraction, and inveterate Envy, hot Leachery, and
Charity quite frozen; with your dear darling sin, King-killing, Murder, nest in
the Bosom of your Politic Conclave.


Card. I am Amazed, a Fisherman to talk thus, it is most Miraculous. Aside.


Mass. Crimes of all Natures,
That ever did or shall Infest the Globe,
Lie close and brood under your Scarlet Robe.

Card. Nay, now your Passion is predominant, you break your Promise.


Mass. Only a little Zealous for my Cause -- I give you the same liberty, speak
boldly.


Card. So I shall, and Honestly, and therefore must take leave to ask a
Question.


Mass. Do, I will Answer.


Card. Are not you a Rebel?


Mass. I know not by my Soul -- it is a State Title which yet I want a
Definition of, but I will ask the People -- their Logic shall discuss it, and
then I Will tell ye: -- In the mean time, to answer with a Question, resolve me
Cardinal, are not you a Hypocrite?


Card. My Conscience prompts me to reply to that without delay, or more
demurring, -- No.


Mass. Well should I grant you once it may be so,
I Am sure your Tribe cannot such another show.

Card. A Hypocrite, -- Oh let these bubling drops that outward force their way
from their old Fountains, through very shame, that my unhappy Age should be
affronted with so vile a Question, declare my detestation of that Crime -- you
do not know me, Sir.


Mass. Perhaps nor my self neither. Now I have Answered ye; those Tears have
shocked me, I relent of the sudden. Aside.


Card. Then I will teach ye, Sir, to know your self, for should I fail to speak
for fear of Death, or stand in awe of your unweildy Power; or as you have
disgraced my Sacred Function, by stripping off my Robe, tho my Life were next,
yet should I Sue or Flatter ye, to save it -- poorly beg Pity, then I were a
Hypocrite, then you might think me a corrupt Time-server, then you might brand
me; no, no, rash young Man, a Good Man never fears to die, his Sands are still
before his Eyes, he sees 'em run, -- and all his pious Deeds proportioned to
'em -- this makes me dauntless; this controuls your power, -- and spite of
Tortures, strengthens me to tell ye you're a Rebel.


Mass. Very good -- go on.


Card. A most notorious Rebel; a vile Name that bears the greatest and most
odious I^famy, breaker of Laws, contemner of Religion, Author of Murders and
unnatural Riot, Fire, Plunder, and most horrid Devastation. Are not you this?


Mass. In part, yet not a Rebel -- I love the King, and for him and my Country,
have undertook this dangerous Enterprise; the People were oppressed with loading
Gabells, and in the Oppression, the King's Honor tainted, which I resolve to
abolish, tho I die for it -- and so I do this, so by my Labor I give ease to
Naples, so the grieved People are by me Enfranchised, may I be torn in pieces
by the Rabble, my Head be mounted on a Pole, my Body dragged through the goary
Streets, whilst each vein spouts Blood out like a Conduit, I am happy, proud of
my Fortune, shall contentedly die, and gladly yield my Soul without a Sigh.


Card. Miraculous still -- the more I hear him speak, the more I wonder.


Mass. If my design to quell some of the Court -- whose Avarice cramped us all,
be called Rebellion -- or justly punishing of those, be Murder. -- To palliate
that, I Have only this to say, it is the Times Distress that causes it; uncommon
Crimes have forced down Heaven's Vengeance, -- and suppose me, tho unworthy,
chose the means to work its Ends by.


Card. You must not suppose it, -- it is Impious and the height of Arrogance;
it is making Judgment of Eternal Wisdom, and Heaven the Author of the Ills you
do -- you rather ought to think, nay and believe Vengeance will fall on you if
you repent not.


Mass. My Heart melts strangely, my hard stubborn Heart; Oh, what a power has
Piety --


Card. What sacred Vision or Inspiring Prophet gave you commission to be Tyrant
here? -- suppose the People Wronged, are you Omnipotence to scourage the
Wrongers, and anticipate Heaven's Justice, through proud Will and rash
Presumption -- come, come, Repent, cast down your Usurped Power -- and
reverence Heaven, that thus far suffered ye, -- and turned to Benefits foul
Disobedience, but cease from future Ill.


Mass. This is a good Man, Deceit can never have such fair Appearance; his
words have turned my Eyes into my Soul, and his sound Reason changed my very
Nature: -- Thou Reverend best Instructor of my Soul, thou have convinced me,
and I now am Penitent: and if my Actions since for the general Good, may be
forgiven by Heaven and the Viceroy, this to perform, by all that is Sacred,
Carmine's blessed Virgin, and your holy self -- soon as the Articles of Charles
the Emperor are Ratified to the People -- to renounce all my Command and Power,
and return to my poor Occupation, Fishery; There with my peaceful Nett my days
pass over,
And never dream of proud Ambition more. --



Card. Now thy good Genius prompts, -- 'twas spoke Divinely; perform this Vow,
and yet be blessed for ever; -- and from the Viceroy, I have here Commission
to say, those Articles shall all be Ratified, and Gabells quite Abolished --
besides a Present from him to your self.


Mass. Oh, let me kiss the Feet of my Director, -- and beg his Pardon for the
Irreverend Sin late acted, in the rudeness to Disrobe him -- I am a Dog, a
sordid gross Plebeian, untutored in Humanity, a vile clod of Earth, and you
should Spurn Falls at's Feet. me hence, left I defile ye -- but Pardon, I
beseech ye, lest Distraction make me commit an Outrage on my self.


Card. It Is all forgiven, and forgot; thus from my Heart I give ye Absolution:
And now pray rise, and hear what I Am in Charge of from the Viceroy, who as a
forerunner to his future Favor, presents ye with a Suit of rich Apparel -- and
will himself meet ye at your appointment, there to confirm the Articles.


Mass. I Will meet him with all Joy, but for his rich Present, alas, my gracio^s
Father, I Am unworthy -- for a poor Fisherman these I have on, are rich enough
in Conscience.


Card. Your Person indeed, that goes each day Clothed with Renown, Apparel can
never Imbellish more; but yet it is proper now, not as a Fisherman, but
Captain General of the Neapolitans; the Honor of which, obliges ye to wear a
Garb befitting; besides your condescension to the Viceroy.


Mass. I am convinced, and now will act a Courtier, since you will have it so.


Card. Hark, the Cathedral Bell Rings, I must attend, will you be there?


Mass. I Will wait upon your Eminence, and after meet the People, who desire some
Musical Diversion, for joy of my late 'scape: I Will first be Fine, and then
receive their Kindness. -- Thus till the Charter is confirmed, I Will Revel in
fluttering Gayety and frollick Mirth: Which done, the gaudy Trash away I Will
spurn,
And to the Canvas I now wear, return.



The End of the fourth Act.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
Mataloni Solus. Mat. OH, mighty Love -- how is thy wondrous Power shown in the
dangerous round of my hard Fortunes, and what a narrow Isthmus stands between
my future Comfort, and my present Ruin, led on by thee, tho almost in Despair
-- to free my Soul's best Joy, my Belleraiza; I Have 'twix^ the Paws of a fierce
Monster ven^ur'd, whose rancorous Heart thirsts for my Life; whose Hatred,
would make a Feast of Cruelty upon me, and gorge my Blood with Woolvish
Appeti^e -- yet for my Love, my Wife, I venture all -- and only now want
glorious Opportunity to bring it to Perfection -- my late Discovery has fixed
me in the Heart of this bold Fellow -- this bold, nay, I may say, this wondrous
Creature; for is it not a Prodigy in Nature, that a base Boy, poor, ragged, and
bar^-footed -- nay, even the lowest of the wretched Vulgar, should in an
Instant, as by Inspiration, be qualified to hold Dispute with Cardinals,
negotiate State Affairs of grand Importance; draw out a powerful Army to Rebel,
Command 'em, and with a Nod, a Beck, an uncontrolled Motion, subject all
Naples; Naples, the Queen of Cities, Mother of Hero's -- Metropolis and
Rendezvous of Princes, and in her full six hundred Thousand Souls, as Absolute
a^ any natural Monarch -- it is above Wonder -- Let me wait Heaven's Pleasure
then, for now it i^ not in my power to crush him, but with the Ruin of my self,
and Love; here is his Ring, which gives me powerful Trust, and Privilege to
pass the Guards at any time -- This may be of great use to my Design; besides,
he treats me now as his best Friend -- and Spy upon his Enemies -- I Will feed
him with such hopes -- hark, they are coming from Mass -- in Pomp, I hear, and
a Solemnity is made to entertain him -- well, let him mount, Ambitious Fool,
dashed by the turn of Times,
The harder falls, the higher that he climbs.



Enter Trumpets, Kettle-Drums, and Hautboys, a Martial Symphony, Cardinal, and
Mas^aniello in a Fishing Habit; then Don Tiberio leading Blowzabella stuck with
Jewels; then Pedro leading Ursula, then Bartallo, Rock, Valasco, Jacomo,
Gaspar, Scipio; they stop, and Massaniello speaks. Mass. Let twenty Troops be
drawn up round my House; then let two Thousand Halberts line the Gate-way, and
on their Lives, no Noise -- nor none press further. If it were proper your
Eminence could taste a little of our Entertainment, I should be happy, but
since Religious Temperance obliges otherwise, I cease my Suit -- Is there ought
else, my Lord, you would Command?


Card. Only your License for an Hour, to Visit Sir, the Duchess Mataloni.


Massaniello starts. Mass. My Lord, you shall have License. How her very Name,
spite of my Resolves, does kindle my late Flame. Come hither -- Rock -- what
said the Duchess to my Suit? Aside to him.


Rock. Why, Sir, at first, she was at her Hums and Haws a little, but I managed
her so, that her Stomach began to come down apace.


Mass. Oh, she is sweeter than Arabian Odours.


Rock. Ay, Sir, and whiter than the new fallen Snow.


Mass. She is so, but prithee praise her not, it Tortures me.


Rock. Not Praise her, why, Sir, is there any harm in it, or if you should Enjoy
-- her, is that such a Miracle?


Mass. Enjoy her, 'sDeath, that word has shot me through -- no more, I charge
ye -- my late made Vow of Honesty and Virtue, and the awful Look there of that
Holy Man -- they shall, they must restrain me, but then Beauty and such a sweet
Revenge on Mataloni -- Oh, how my Veins swell!


Rock. Pshaw, pshaw, Sir, I hope you a'nt scrupulous -- why, I Will make her as
supple as a Glove for ye, there shall be no need of Courting.


Mass. Well, I Will think further on it, in the mean time, you must go wait on my
Lord Cardinal to her.


Rock. The Cardinal -- what a Devil, must I Pimp for him too -- pray my Lord,
consider my Place, good my Lord.


Mass. Oh, his is only a Visit, and no more.


Rock. A Visit -- gad I don't like him -- he is Gray, but not very Good, I
believe.


Mass. My new Banditto Friend there, shall go with ye too -- Grasso, come
hither, thou see the Love I bear thee, and the Trust I have imposed; take
then a Secret from me; go with the Cardinal, to Visit the young Duchess; the
Ring I gave thee, gets admittance to her -- then plant thy self cunningly ^o
hear their Talk -- and afterward let me be a partaker -- hah, will thou be
diligent?


Mat. Nay, if ye doubt me, y' had best employ another.


Mass. Enough -- I do not, my good Lord Cardinal, these will direct ye to the
Dutchess's Lodging.


Card. Sir, you Oblige me -- Exeunt Cardinal, Mataloni and Rock.


Music sounds, and a Banquet set out here Blowz. Well, my Lord, I am mightily
pleased -- you like my Dres^ so well, and I think, tho I have not been bred at
Court, and perhaps may want a little of their Air, as they call it -- yet these
Jewels don't disfigure me. Odsfish, this upon my Breast here, cost a thousand
Ducats, and this upon my Rump here, as much more. Turns round and shows her
Jewels.


Don Tib. Oh, Madam, and adorning so graceful a Person too, they receive an
extraordinary Advantage -- I wonder those she Plundered of 'em, should tell her
the Price. Aside.


Blowz. Humh -- Adorning my Person -- Well, my Lord, you have the prettiest
words pop out now and then to oblige me -- Od^fish, you have, that I could hear
ye all day methinks: But come, let us hear the Music, and Eat and Drink, and be
Merry.


Pedro. What, my Brother is not in the Dumps still, I hope.


Ursul. No, no, but State Affairs lie a little heavy you must think -- Why
truly I find my self a little Graver since I was a Lady, than I was before.


Blowz. Come, my Lord General -- Odsfish, what are ye posing on the Music, and
Banquet stays for us -- you act a Courtier rarely indeed; why, you are as dull
as if you were a Gudgeon-catching; come away, and seat your self for shame --
what, we must do great things now.


They Seat themselves, and then follows a comical Entertainment of Singing and
Dancing; which ended, Enter Genovino and Soldiers, with the Heads of Carraffa
and Perone on Poles, another bearing Mataloni 's Habit. A Dialogue between two
Fish-Wives.
1 st. Fish. HOw comes it now good Mrs. Sprat,
You are so Impudent of late?
^' endeavor to forestall my Wares,
And thrust your Nose in my Affairs,
What is it you would be at?

2 d. Fish. What means the Blowz? my actions show,
I scorn both your Affairs and you;
I hope my Trade is not so small,
To help it, I should yours forestall,
Sure it is not come to that?

1 st. Fish. Come, come, I know you carry't high,
But yesterday the Neighbors swore
That you did all the Herrings buy,
That I had bargained for before.

2 d. F. They lie, I am the very'st Jade
That ever at door a By-blow laid,
If I did any Herrings buy,
I Would have ye know,
Ye filthy Sow,
I Have other Fish to fry.

1 st. F. Come, come, you did, you did, ye Queen,
And in the Alehouse cross the Green,
To Breakfast drilled my Husband by.

Both Sing together. 2 d. I Would have ye know.


1 st. Ye did, ye Queen.


2 d. Ye filthy Sow.


1 st. Ye did, ye Queen:


2 d. And drilled my Husband by.


1 st. I Have other Fish to fry.


2 d. F. Ye dirty Mawks -- would I but go
To graft my spouse a Horn or so,
I Have Customers of Lords or Knights,
Would be my Friends both days and nights,
And take it for a favor too.

1 st. Fish. Thou long have bragged of this I own,
When only Scowndrels of the Town,
Were still employed to till your Ground.

2 d. F. Of which your Husband's one.


1 st. F. He was, but he soon found his dangerous case,
He knows thou art not Sound.

2 d. F. Not sound -- you Trollop -- by this light,
To vex thee, now I Will tell the truth in spite;
He does love me, thy Husband's mine,
Our Hands, our Lips, our -- we join;
And when we sit and Sing, and Play,
Has wished thee Hanged a hundred times a day

1 st. F. I Will slit that Nose.


2 d F. He says, that Mouth
Is like the Pole, 'twill reach from North to South
And if your there so wide
You know full well,
The Tales men tell,
What they suspect beside.

1 st. Fish. Ye Carrion.


2 d. Fish. Ye Mawkin.


1 st. Fish. Ye Slattern.


2 d. Fish. Ye Puss.
Both together. I Will teach you to slander me thus, thus and thus.
I Will teach you to Cuckold me thus, thus and thus.

Genov. THis it is to bear a Brain -- so well I Have Plotted, I am unsuspected of
the late Conspiracy -- and now have formed another Protean Plot, to seat my
self securely.


Mass. What mean those Objects?


Genov. The Heads of your two Mortal Enemies -- Carraffa and Perone, the People
bring to add to your Diversion; and Mataloni had not Hell aided him, had never
escaped; I was so near him, that I reached his Skin he^e, but the Snake crawled
away.


Mass. Damn the Jilt Fortune, -- had I hooked him too, my Heart had been at
Ease; Oh, with what pleasure could I employ this sword to rip him open, these
Teeth to bite his Heart, these busy Fingers, to tear the Beard from off his
hated Face, as now from this Cursed Traitor, damned Carraffa.


Pulls off the Beard from Carraffa 's Head. Genov. I hunted hard, tho I missed
my Game; and tho some of my Brethren were found Tardy -- of which some twenty
six being since Impeached -- I have seen Executed -- yet I hope the General
heard of my Diligence.


Mass. I did, my Politic Father, thou art Honest.


Genov. Thou art a Coxcomb, and I Am satisfied. Aside.


Mass. But this Mataloni still goads my Heart -- hah, have I no way to Revenge
my self? -- Yet now I have it -- his Wife, his Wife must do it, I Am now resolved
on it -- I Will send this Priest to fright her further, and then Attack my self --
A Bottle or two more, will make me fit -- the Prince there must know nothing --
I Will leave him therefore here -- Go once more, mount the Traitors Heads. And,
Brother -- and you my Officers, I invite ye to my Closet for an hour, to drink
a private Brimmer -- come along Boys, we'll have one Glass before we part,
Success to our next meeting in the Cathedral.


Omnes. Bless the General, Bless the D. Exeunt all but Don. Tib. Blowzab. etc.


Don Tib. 'dsheart, they are all gone, and have left me to be Baited. Aside.


Ursul. Gadslid, did ye ever see such Sneaks as the General and my Major ar^,
^if they have not flinch'd from the Glass, to go and parboil their Guts with
Coffee now -- there is no Spirit in Spanish, poise on it, I hate such Trifling --
if we come to be Merry, let us go through stitch; where does the Prince's Health
stand? Blowzabella sits and throws Pellets at the Prince.


Belv. Here it is, and o'e^ the Left Hand Thumb it comes to himself; here is your
Health, my Lord -- would I had him in one of our Tan-pits at home. Aside.


Blowz. Ah, he is a precious one -- Pelts him.


Don Tib. I must get out some way or other, this rampant Fish-Wife will pelt my
Eyes out else.


Blowz. My Lord, I think I heard you say, you were never Married, and truly you
deserve to be Prized for it extremely -- Odsfish, a Bachelor has such a
peremptory sort of way with him to Married Men; Oh, faugh, a Married Man's
quite another thing, I know it by my Husband.


Don Tib. So, if Cuckolding this Fish General now were a Revenge sufficient for
the Nobility -- I think I Am in a fair way to Oblige 'em.


Belv. Madam Ursula, what thinks your Ladyship of another Song?


Ursul. Why truly Madam, very well, if your Ladyship will oblige us.


Belv. Nay, Madam, the best Voice must be preferred always.


Blowz. Nay, nay, -- rather than let both your Ladyships bustle about it, I Will
do it my self -- my Lord the Prince, prithee come and sit nearer me -- and
don't lie glaring at me with your Twinklers, but come and hear my Song, it is a
merry one I Will promise ye; now how do you like it. Sings here.


Don Tib. Oh, it is most Ravishingly well, Madam -- thus am I obliged to Lie two
or three times a day at least to keep my self in Favor. 'dsDeath, there is no
getting off: Oh, I think I have it -- Pulls a out Paper Odso, I had forgot a
business of Importance, which the General should have seen before; I beg your
Prrdon, Ladies, I must be abrupt and go seek him.


Blowz. Pshaw, not yet, my Lord, not yet, it is time enough to seek him come,
come, pray let our Business be done here first.


Don Tib. Oh, Madam, it is from the Viceroy, and of prodigious Consequence:
Curse on my Fortune, that envy's me this pleasurable Minute, bu^ I Will dispatch
and return, Ladies, with all haste imaginable.


Blowz. Well, you know my Closet, my Lord -- and since you must go, pra^
dispatch quickly -- and you shall find us there; we'll go and settle our
Stomachs with a dram or two of my Water; for you must know, my Lord, I mak^
such Water, such heavenly Water, it will make a young Fel^ow ^^isk up to the
Moon, and an old Fellow's Heart dance the Canaries.


Don Tib. I am instructed, Madam, your Humble Servant: It Is well I fou^ this
Excuse -- I should have been Drunk too, if I had staid, I find. Ex. D. Ti^


Blowz. Well, Odsfish, he is the Prince of a Man every way -- and we'll have his
Health again before we part, In Faith; Come, let us enjoy our selves, we'll think
no more of the sneaking and pinching of our former days, but hug Fortune, and
take Pleasure in by Belly-fulls; come along, Lasses: What, we must do great
things now. Exeunt.


SCENE II.
Enter Mataloni and Rock. Rock. She Is in her private Alcove there -- and the
Cardinal's gone to her, I suppose to help her in her secret Devotion, these
Churchmen are rare Terriers, they can hunt in a dark Corner rarely. Od, she is a
lushious Cr^ature, Friend, have ever seen her? When he is gone, I Will try if I
can Ferret her my self.


Mat. Cursed Imp of Beelzebub, what does he say? But do you hear, Friend, I Am
ordered here unseen, to observe their Actions, let us withdraw then -- the
General at yonder door would have you to wait his coming -- and then give me
Notice.


Rock. Well, Sir, I hear ye; I do most damnably hate this Fellow, and yet I
dare not quarrel with him -- and yet the Rascal interlopes upon my Business --
and I find, creeps into the General's Favor every day more and more -- and
must Ruin me in time; say you so, why then be wise, Friend, and Ruin him first
-- send him packing, and if thou have not two penny worth of Courage, Oons, buy
two penny worth of Rats-bain, and that will do it every whit as well. Ex. R.


Mat. I Have sent that Fellow on a trivial Errand: because he should not hear the
approaching Passages, and see where my dear Belleraiza comes; Oh, how my Heart
pants with uncommon Joy which my hopes give me of my good Success -- she Weeps,
hah, and looks pale -- and talks with Passion; perhaps these Devils may have
wronged her Virtue -- Oh, Hell, if that be so, I Am lost for ever; I am afraid
to hear, and yet must listen.


Enter Cardinal and Duchess. Dutch. Thus every hour they torture me, first,
they fright me with my Lord's being Taken, and then follows the Villain's
Brutal Love.


Card. Let your kind Heart with this assurance rest, he yet is free and safe.


Dutch. Blessed be that Tongue, the pangs and hourly sorrows I must suffer for
him, now I shall bear the better -- for I expect this Evening a fresh Onset,
another odious Love-sollicitation, and now I am prepared.


Mat. Prepared for it! how my Impatience burns me -- I Will go forward and try
her now my self.


Card. Oh, this persidious wi^ked faithless Wretch! he swore to me, and bound
it also with solemn Vows and serious Protestations, to be the Author of no more
vile Actions; he promised to lay down Arms too, and then take up his old
Mechanic Occupation -- but his unbala^c'd Head forgets it; thus want of Honor
in all base Born Creatures, make 'em so little value things so Weighty.


Dutch. Yonder another of his Engines comes -- Oh, how I hate that horrid
baneful Face, and the more horrid purpose he is Employed in, which rather than
consent to, or be forced, I Have yet a means left in my power to help me, one
dear, dear R^medy I Have yet obtained, to keep my Faith to my dear Lord, and free
me. Shows the Viol of Poison.


Card. Take heed best Daughter -- how you offend the Deity, or doubt the aid of
Providence, by using Violence on your self, you have heard self-Murderers
Punishment.


Dutch. Oh, preach it not, good Father -- Heaven were unmerciful; cruel Extent,
to expect generous Virtue should want to the last Moment for a Miracle.


Card. Heaven guard ye sooner, I do not doubt it will -- your Business seems
with us, Sir -- what is your Commission?


Matal. The General expects a private Conference with the Lady -- the Business
is not proper for your Ear, my Lord.


Card. If it is a sin Affair, as I suspect, it is most proper that I should be
near, with holy Admonitions to prevent it.


Mat. Prevent the sallies of hot Love, my Lord, with cold Divinity, it is vain,
vain Labor, good your Grace retire -- to you Madam, I am to tell this News --
your Lord is Taken, and by the General's Order, Dies to Morrow, unless to night
your beauteous Charms repeal it.


Dutch. Peace, horrid Screech-Owle -- Oh, for a Basilisks Eyes to blast the
Author of the dreadfulest Tidings that ever forced through the Ear into the
Heart. Weeps What think ye now, My Lord, of patient Virtue, waiting for
Champion Guards sent down from Heaven, one Hours delay may cause the brave
Intention too late to be effected; the Ravisher's coming, Hells Gates are open,
and he rushes in, methinks I hear him already, no more hope of Divine help then
-- but be sudden. Apart.


Mat. My Lord, your Absense will be very requisite.


Card. My Presence is much more -- I will not still -- but with my Bosom bare,
oppose the worst that Lust and Rage can offer to her Chastity. Oh, thou bright
Mirror of Celestial goodness, thou Pattern in perfection of blessed Women, think
not I ever will leave thee till I Am Dead, no, we'll both die ever Villainy
shall Prosper; then when the Beams of Immortality have ra^ified this Clod we
wear below, The glorious Stars of Piety and Love,
Shall we mount upwards, and be fixed Above.



Mat. Madam, you see the Cardinal's Old and Obstinate, I hope you will consider
better.


Dutch. It is, it is resolved, I Will do it with a Smile, and calm as Infants in
a Lethargy -- and so prevent the Death of that good Man -- that honest Bishop,
for he is one I Am sure. -- I have considered, Sir, To Mataloni.


Mat. Now hold my Temper -- well, Madam, what is the result?


Dutch. Why, Sir, Extremity conquers all Resolves -- my Husband's Death and my
own Misery, are things of Weight -- pray take aside the Cardinal, and mould him
but to give me Absolution, only to satisfy a scrupulous Conscience, and then
I Will give an Answer satisfactory.


Mat. Tho that dire Answer gives me Life or Death -- my fatal Curiosity must
hear it. -- A word, my Lord Goes to the Cardinal -- then she pulls out the Viol.


Dutch. Now aid me, Love -- ye Powers that value Honor, strengthen my Heart
and Hand. Is preparing to drink.


Card. Away -- hold, noblest Daughter da^h the Poison down, famish Despair,
still let us trust to Providence.


Mat. Hah -- the Poison -- Almighty Powers, what had I like to have done! Oh,
thou sweet Angel. Rushes to Embrace.


Dutch. Stand off, blackest Devil. She pushes him back.


Mat. Off my Disguise -- Oh, let thy sight be free, whilst to thy panting
Heart, I give thy Husband -- thy Love, thy Mataloni.


Dutch. Mataloni, Is It possible! Oh, thou Extreme of Joy! Embraces him eagerly.


Mat. My Wife, my Soul, my dearest Belleraiza -- forgive my late Curiosity,
which but for this good Lord's preventing it, had damned me past Redemption --
Oh, thou best of Women.


Card. This is the exactest work of Providence.
The sacred Grace was here even to a Miracle.

Mat. How I Have adventured, and what Dangers passed, I Will tell at better
leisure, let it suffice now -- this Ring gives means for your delivery, which
we'll this Instant put in Execution.


Dutch. New Joy so crowds my Heart, I cannot bear it.


Mat. Hark'e, some body's coming sure.


Mat. It Is so; here is the Secretary -- hah, and that Villain Jesuit that
broac'd the late Conspiracy -- stand still, my Love, I Will get but the Wind of
'em -- and then we are safe enough. Goes behind the Door.


Enter Rock and Genovino. Rock. Look'e, they are together still -- I think the
Devil's in these Cardinals -- when once they get a Woman into their Clutches,
they will never let her go.


Genov. Why, Sir, I hope you don't doubt but we can distinguish Blessings Sir,
of which a Woman is not I think, the meanest, when she is Beautiful and Kind
which this must be through mere necessity, she knows she is in the Trap.


Mat. And so are you -- good Pole-cat, and your Fellow Vermin there. draws.


Genov. Horror -- who is it I see -- the Duke of Mataloni.


Rock. The Devil.


Mat. Stir not a Foot, Villains -- for if you do, your Souls follow the Motion;
and tho your Crimes deserve immediate Hell, yet from the noble hand of Mataloni
-- thus grovelling down, your baseness keeps ye safe. -- Come my fair Love, and
my most honored Father, this is our happy Moment, let us pursue it. On my
Disguise once more, and in my Chamber I Have one for thee, my Blessing; then
through the Guards we'll haste to the Viceroy's Castle, and leave those locked
up close to plot new Mischief. They lock Rock and Genov.


Card. Heaven's Care, admired Mataloni -- go lead on. in, then Exeunt.


Dutch. Thus does just Heaven atone for cares of Life,
With the best Husband,

Mat. And most Charming Wife.


Rock. We have made a rare hand on it; a Plague on your Mouse-trap, you ominous
Vermin, let us see now if you can Conjure us out here: let us hear your
Sophistry; break open the Lock there, with a Pox t'e.


Genov. I might as well Curse your dull Pate, Sir Scribler, to let a slight
Disguise out-Wit ye thus -- how came he into Trust?


Rock. Why the Devil owed me a spite; I brought him to the General first, it is
true, mistaking him for a Banditto -- and finding him even bloated with a
Discovery; -- but what is that to the present purpose? What business had you
there with the Duchess? 'Twas to know that, drew me hither after ye, I had
been safe else.


Genov. I had particular Order, I was to Pump her.


Rock. Were ye so, Timothy Transub -- were ye so indeed; and for which pumping
Design, there is a good Thump for ye Rascal: d'sheart, another Interloper in my
Business, come on Rogue, are ye good at Procuring, as soon as ever ye have got
into the Bobtail'd Mode, a swelled Nose and a black Eye, are proper for ye;
I Will make ye look a right Ba^d presently. They Fight.


Genov. This Purse shall do me Justice instantly -- I Will be revenged, nay, tho
I loose the Money, the Spirit moves now, and thou shall feel my Anger.


In the Scuffle puts a Purse into Rock 's Pocket; they fight on. Enter
Massaniello with a Key. Mass. Heated with Wine, and fit now for the purpose;
Where is this Charming Duchess, whose bright Beauty ever since I saw her, has
inflamed my Heart; my Heart, that has possession of all Pleasures that
Greatness brings in its full range of Power, shall Sat its Wishes with one
Bliss beyond it, the best and dearest, a fair Ladies Love, then I may boast, I
have been truly Happy. -- The Cardinal is gone hence, but where is the Lady; and
where my Creatures, Rock and Genovino.


Rock. Ah, he is Fluster'd, I see -- we shall have a rare time on it -- would I
were any where, but where I am, tho 'twere in an Oven that had just been
heated, I could not be in a greater Sweat I Am sure.


Mass. Hah, are not these they -- or do my Eyes deceive me? Is not that Rock?


Rock. The Ghost of Rock, and please ye, but not the real Substance, that was
frighted away with an Apparition of the Duke of Mataloni, that was here just
now.


Mass. How he tortures me -- what, Mataloni, Dog-bolt.


Rock. Why Sir, in short then, since it must out, the Banditto Captain that you
have Entertained and Trusted -- was that Devil, Duke of Mataloni in Disguise.


Mass. Hell blast thy Tongue, and where, where is the Lady, Rascal?


Rock. Gone, gone, Sir, gone -- he threatened to Murder us if we cried out or
stirred, and then took her away, and Locked us in -- and by virtue of the Ring
you gave him -- they are past the Guards by this time.


Mass. How my Rage Choaks me -- I could tear my self, dash my besotted head,
and with these hands pull from their Socke^s these dull useless Lights -- that
could not guide my sense in such an Exigent -- Sense, Death and Hell, I had no
Sense -- no Soul; for had I either, or my Sight, or Feeling -- I must know what
my Nature so Abhorred -- through the mere force of strong Antipathy. Hah, but
now I think on it Dog, 'twas your Officious Villainy first brought him to me --
how came it? Answer that Slave.


Rock. Alack, by chance, my Lord -- mere chance; he said, he had great Business
with ye.


Genov. Ah, Mr Secretary, no more Deceits, respect your Conscience, good Mr.
Secretary.


Mass. What say thou, art thou privy to any thing? Does he play Fals^ with
me?


Rock. Not I, my Lord, upon my Soul. What does that Rascal mean?


Genov. My Lord, though I see his Conscience is quite ^ear'd, yet I must ease
my own -- the Man is Guilty -- Accomplice with Carraffa and their Faction --
and bribed to assist the Dutchess's Escape.


Mass. Oh, monstrous Hell-hound.


Rock. Here Is a damned Rogue, for ye, here is a Priest for the Devil -- I hope
your Excellency will not believe him -- for may I be Parboiled, or Roasted upon a
Grid^Iron my Lord, if ever I saw Carraffa.


Genov. Oh, vile, vile Sinner, -- dare thou look in my Face and say this?


Rock. Look in thy Face -- why thou confounded Villain -- I confess, thy
Impudence does dazzle me -- but I beseech ye, my Lord don't believe him.


Genov. Not believe me, why, my Lord, he owned it a little before you came,
upon which, my Choler being raised, we had a Bustle and some Blows, which is
the occasion of this my disorder both of Head and Habit: -- But for a more
convincing Proof, search him, my Lord, and without doubt, you may find
Carraffa's Purse, in which the Golden Bribe is now about him.


Rock. Search me, Satan -- send all thy Imps to do it, I fear 'em not -- but
come, I Will do it my self -- I Will make a plain Discovery, my Lord, Empty my self
before ye -- Oh, Murder, Treason. Pulls out the Purse.


Mass. The very Purse, by Jove -- and with Carraffa's Cipher on it; Oh, damned,
damned Traitor.


Genov. You have made a very plain Discovery, in Troth, Mr. Secretary.


Mass. I will be so revenged. -- Here Father. Gives him the Purse.


Rock. I am Bewitched -- I Am not able to speak -- Oh, Dog, Dog, Dog.


Mass. This Key unlocks all the Doors -- where are my Guards there.


Rock. I beseech your Lordship, hear me but a word. He unlocks the Door.


Mass. Away Contagion -- Seize that Traitor there, Whip him round the
Marketplace, then Hang him in Chains, for Crows and Daws to feed on.


Enter Bissignano, Pedro, Bartallo, Jacomo, Gaspar, Scipio 2 d: Jesuit and
Guards. Genov. I think now, Friend, I am better than my Word -- I only promised
ye a Whipping, you know -- and now have added something more.


Rock. Oh, that my hands were at Liberty, Devil.


2 Ies. Alack, is he the occasion of thy Sentence? have Patience a little, and
my tender Conscience shall help thee to a Revenge -- My Lord, be pleased to
read that Paper. Gives Massaniello a Paper.


Mass. What Is here! a List of the Conspirators in the Powder Plot, and
Genovivino's hand amongst the foremost -- It Is so, I know his Character, and
this the Fellow that the Cardinal spoke of, who made the first Discovery --
Guards, take that Jesuit too, and use him like the other --


Genov. Oh, Devil, have thou deserted me at last?


Rock. So, so come along Priest; -- we shall see now how that sleek Back of
yours can bear the Lash -- and your Neck become a Halter -- and now you may
give your self to the Devil too, if you please.


Genov. Well, the gaping Rascals shall not hear me confess any thing; however,
I Will be true to our Order -- who I know, will all vouch my Innocence, pray my
Soul out of Purgatory, and make me a Saint for ^ver into the bargain.


Exeunt Guards, with Rock and Genovino. Don Tib. These were both Rogues, and
have deserved their Punishment. But now, Sir, to some Business of more Weight;
the Viceroy and Great Colateral Council -- have caused the Art^cles to be
Engraved like those of Old of Charles the Fifth and Ferdinand, all that your
Heart can wish* to free the People -- is there Inscribed with care and
diligence. A Marble Monument is Erected likewise, where in large Golden Letters
is Decyphered the Infranchisement of Naples from all Gabells -- by Great
Massaniello. -- You are desired therefore to meet in the Cathedral Church to
Morrow, where after high Mass and Celestial Music, the Deed's to be on both
sides Sealed and Ratifi^d.


Mass. I Will hear no more of trifling Business now, my Head contains a Tempest,
my Brain burns fiercer than AEtna or Vesuvius's Mounts -- I Am mad with Rage,
and therefore let all Nature, like me, be in Confusion; he that speaks of Order
and discretion in Affairs, is my Foe; my hour, shall be Mankind's, and in that
moment when I Wisely act, let them be struck with endless Lethargy: -- am I not
here Supreme? I am; and yet my Soul Wish^s to Sway the rest -- and that the
Globe obeyed my Will -- I would confine the Winds -- stop the due course of
Seas, and make the Sun influence the World by my peculiar Order; but since that
cannot be, let this suffice -- That with a Nod, vast Legions I Command,
And from Tyrannick Yoaks have freed the Groaning Land.



Pedro. My Lord, You must not mind what he says now. Exit Massaniello. Love,
Anger and Claret, have made him at present a little out of Order, but you shall
see he will quickly come to himself again.


Bart. He talks none of the Wisest now, it is true, but for all that, I Will wage
a fat Bullock against one of thy Sacks of Meal, Neighbor, that he goes to
Church as soberly to Morrow as the Cardinal himself.


Iacom. Oh, no doubt on it, no doubt on it.


Scip. Where Is Valasco? I warrant now his Master's gone to be Hanged, that poor
Rascal will be out at Elbows again.


Gasp. Ay and out at heels too, if thou out of thy Noble Compassion do not
help to mend him, Cobbler.


Don Tib. Well, Friends, you will put the General in mind then, you know it is a
Business of Concern.


Iacom. We will, we will, my Lord.


Don Tib. He has sworn to lay down Arms, and yet I doubt him, for Power, like
n^w Wine, in so young a Head, may well intoxicate and turn the Brain -- yet not
to do it, ushers his certain Ruin; for let Rebellion revel for a while, and by
the Almighty's Suffrage -- plag^e a Kingdom, there will be yet an hour marked
out for Vengeance; this then I Prophecy for Massaniello; Though high on
Fortune's Wheel he is seated now,
A time soon comes, when he must fall as low.
Curtain falls


The End of the First Part.
THe First and Second Collections of Mr. D'urfey's Comical Songs: Printed for
Henry Playford, at his Shop in the Temple-Change, Fleet Street, and sold at
most Musick-Shops in Town.

THE FAMOUS History and Fall OF MASSAINELLO OR, A FISHERMAN A PRINCE.

The Second PART.

Written by Mr. DURFEY.

LONDON: Printed for I. Nutt near Stationers' Hall, 1699.

PROLOGUE to the Second Part.
AS some stale Luckless Mis^ress of the Town,
With former Lovers out of Favor grown;
Tries Art in vain new Appetite to raise,
And bring into fresh Play her slighted Face:
In such forlorn condition now are Plays.
The Muses Grace no longer can persuade,
We find their Beauty, or your Taste decayed.
The Season too our Interest does oppose,
Warm Weather and May-Fair are Martial Foes;
For whilst the Great at the Park in Coaches Loll,
And Dames of humbler Fortunes foot the Mall,
And Citts divert themselves at Miller's Droll.
We strut alas, who cease no Pains nor Care,
To empty Boxes, and to Benches bare:
Hear what a Dismal sound from Hollow Walls,
Fills our sad Ears when a fierce Hero bawls.
Thus when you are absent our own Knells we Toll,
And loss of you is our departed Soul:
Hard Fate too, that the Sun that brings us Flowers,
And cheers the Nation round with Genial Powers,
Should to all Harvests be a friend but ours.
Yet thus it is, when as their Zeal's inclined
To praise his Beams, we pray for Rain and Wind:
In Rain to Marrobone no Bowler goes,
And Wind the Ladies from the Circle blows:
But when the Sun shines cle^r, then all are fled,
Whilst we like Cattle in a Parch'd-up Mead,
Condemned to one poor Barren spot of Ground,
Run to next Covert, where cool Draughts are found;
There chew the Cud our Audience turned away,
And drink to better Fortune the next day.
This your hard usage often has forced us to;
You will not sure such Rigor always show;
Our Second Part needs must indulge your Taste,
It Is the Rebels Fall, much shorter too than the Last.
Let a regard to both, your Humor sway,
Let some be for the Park, some for the Play.
As for you Bowling Sparks can you find here
No other sport as good this time ^'th' Year,
Is Side-Box quite forgot, and the Masqu'd Dear?
Nay then we must despair we shall prevail,
All Hopes are gone, when Wit and Wom^n fail*
DRAMATIS PERSONA.
DON Rodrigo Pons de Leon, Viceroy of Naples and Duke of Arcos. Don Tiberio
Prince of Bissignano. Guiseppe Duke de Caivano. Cardinal Fillomarino,
Archbishop of Naples. Duke di Mataloni. Massainello, General of the
Neapolitans. Pedro di Amalfi, His Brother a Ruffian. Pimponio, A Villain and
Parasite, but Witty and Comical, Gentleman Usher to Blowzabella. Cosmo and
Pietro Two Young Lewd Fellows Companions to Massainello. WOMEN. Dona Aurelia,
The Vice-Queen. Dona Beleraiza, Duchess of Mataloni. Dona Felli^ia, Daughter
to the Duke di Caivano and her Niece. Blowzabella, Wife to Massainello. Ursula,
Her Woman.

Suitors, Musicians, Masquers, Singers, Dancers, and Attendants.

The Scene Naples, the Time Four Days.

THE FAMOUS History and Fall OF MASSAINELLO.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Viceroy, Caivano, Cardinal, Mataloni. Vice. STILL does Heaven's Anger reign;
still is poor Naples crushed by the weight of proud Rebellious Power: Nature,
and the whole Face of Things are altered, and seem to yield the sway to Mad
Confusion: Yet in the Hurry of our strange Misfortunes, methinks I feel a spark
of Joy, my Lord, * To Mataloni. to see you safe, and having heard your Story,
at once rejoice and wonder.


Mat. I humbly thank your Highness; and declare amongst the Plunder of the
Harassed Nobles, though I have felt the worst Barbarity, Rebels could act, or
Malice make inveterate; Yet my relieving my dear Belleraiza, though my ^nnatural
Brother lost his Life for it, has clearly wiped off Fortune's Injuries, and made
me once more happy.


Caiv. And to Parallel your Joy, my Lord, let me exert my own: I have a
Daughter dear to me as Health, or the Lifeblood that warms my Aged Heart;
Trained up in good by an Indulgent Mother, and ever since Kind, Virtuous and
Obedient; she by your timely notice Escaped from Outrage, and e're the Horror
of my Houses Burning, was saved with me to bless you for the Deed.


Card. Almighty Powers, what horrid sounds are these! Plunder and Burnings are
the dismal Knels that Toll perpetually! Black Horror, Revels, and Ruin
Triumphs in the Streets of Naples; whilst in the Viceroy's watery downcast
Eyes, we read the baleful Tidings of Distress: But yet, my Lord, we must not
drink Despair; that Draught let me throw by, and dash the Goblet, urged by the
Fiends to hinder future Blessings.


Vice. No, my Good Lord, my Courage is my Antidote against Despair, and keeps
the Poison from me; yet to a Soul less great than mine to see, the strange
Revolves of Fate, the Court's Dishonor, the Ruin of our best Nobility, the
danger of our Starving; all Provisions on pain of Death, being hindered to come
near us; and this comman^ed by a Beggar's Brat; A base Plebeian molded from a
Dunghill! This to a Heart less brave, my Lord, might shock and force the Soul
from her Religious Ward, to prompt a desperate Action.


Card. Therefore, Faith, and it is Twin-sister, Hope, must rule your Reason.


Vice. Therefore it does so; but my Wife, I fear, has other Sentiments; her
noble Spirit, bred from the Princely Race of the Medinae, to be blocked up, and
as it were Imprisoned by the Rabble, breeds a ferment in her Breast, not easy
to be quel^^d.


Mat. She is brave and Royal -- and disdains to sue,
A Soul Divine, and only worthy you. --

Caiv. Though her Confinement must be Irksome to her, being blocked up at Land
-- yet the Sea is open; which poor Advantage though of slight regard is, as I
understand, now her best Comfort; for every Evening in her Rich Felluca,
accompanied by my Daughter, who to please her, sings to her Lute, and Charms
the Neighboring Echoes, between the Castle-Port, and the Wide Ocean, she Rows
to take the Air.


Enter a Servant. Serve. So please your Excellence, the Vice-Queen in have
desires to have Audience.


Enter Aurelia, Belleraiza and Fellicia. Vice. Tell her she is Welcome. -- More
ill News, I fear, has reached her knowledge, for her Cloudy Brow seems to
foretell a Storm. Now Madam -- What Is the Matter?


Aur. Matter of Death, -- Nay, more, Damnation, were it in my power: Oh that as
my just Anger makes my Breath vent out these loud Complaints, it had the power
to blast this Monster with Eternal Plagues, -- this Skreeking Mandrake, this
vile Earth-born Clod, that dares Profanely thus send Saucy Missives to blast
the Eyes, and grieve the Hearts of Princes. Shows a Letter.


Vice. From Massainello?


Aur. He! -- the ill-bred Rebel! Writes in a Style as if he were my Equal,
Advice to me -- that I should speak to you, to you my Lord, as you expect his
Favor, -- his Favor, Oh Gygantick Impudence! would make Hell blush, and every
Fiend wear Crimson* To send him back the Duchess Mataloni!


Mat. Audacious Slave!


Aur. His Ruffian Brother too would see my Neice, -- my dear Fellicia here too
as a Suitor: Oh how a Noble and August Disdain warms every Sinew! -- How the
Active Blood Burns in my Veins, and makes my Heart all flame,
So eager am I to revenge this shame.



Card. Have Patience, Gracious Madam.


Aur. It Is impossible: Such Injuries are past all Moderating: He says, the Duke
there basely stole his Wife, whom he designed to keep there as a Hostage, till
the Articles were Sealed; and if Submission does not atone, and is not made on
the Instant, she too sent back together with my Neice. He ends his Scrowl with
a vainglorious Rant, that he will send Power to ^etch her back by force; and beat
the Castle-walls about our Ears.


Bell. Oh that my Sorrows had but force enough to lay me in my Grave, that I
might rest!


Mat. I hope my Love does wish too, I should be with her there.


Bell. Or that you and I were Villagers, born in some far remote and peaceful
Land, that War's Confusion never did understand; where we instead of Greatness
had been blessed, with darling Comforts from our daily Labor; where Love still
exercised his Charming Power, and sweet Contentment made us wish no m^re; Where
Anxious Cares of State could never return,
But happy Joys succeed each Night and Morn.



Fell. But how shall poor Fellicia hope for Comfort, if from her Father she is
forced away? Oh let me stand the worst of Fortune's Malice, rather than from my
Life's Original, be parted till I Am dead: Besides, to toll me of a Ru^fian's
Love, -- tortures Kneels. my Heart so, I even hate my self for giving him
occasion but to name it. Love, as I Am told is the Soul's choicest Blessing; the
greatest Joy that can reward the Brave; or Beauty joined with Virtue can
expect. A Sacred charming and peculiar Grace; and ever that is forced, which
Merit should enjoy, by Rebel-power, good Heaven let me die.


Ca^v. Thou Living Mirror of thy Mother's Sweetness^ in whom I now behold by
kind reflection, the former Joy that used to warm my Heart, take this Assurance
from a tender Father, -- never to separate thy Duty from me, nor yield thee up
for fear of any Torture that Cruelty can threaten.


Vice. And what say you, my Lord?


Mat. When I consent to send the Panting Heart from out my Bosom, I mean its
dearest Guest, my Belleraiza, -- a Hostage to Rebellious Insolence; may the
cursed Rabble, like a Flock of Vultures, tear me to pieces as a common Prey.


Card. Nor will I ever advise it, -- Villainy is still most slily couched with a
pretense most specious: The Relapse of this uncurb'd Plebeian -- wounds my
Breast, with such a hated sense of his Impiety, that I abhor all Motions he can
make, therefore let us trust in Heaven and our Arms.


Vice. Your Eminence has spoke my Heart; let us fortify, and to his Face send
back his Insolent Message, with a resolved denial; then rely on Heaven's
relief, or bravely sighting die.


Aur. Die! -- it is a Pleasure to my Soul to think on it, so we may die revenged
-- or at least frustrate, the barbarous Plots of base Plebeian Mischief.


Caiv. It Is what shall Crown our Souls with Endless Bliss for a Pain Momentary.


Caiv. Which Infants hardly shrink at.


Aur. Learn of me ye withering Blossoms of distressed Nobility, how to defy
the Ills of Destiny, and worst of Fortune's, Malice. Steel your Hearts with
Honor first; then with Generous Resolution; and let Aurelia nobly guide your
Steps into the Temple of Perpetual Glory, by a brave Deed irksome to our soft
Natures: Yet Portia and Great Sophonisba were our famed Examples, and when
Lawless Power, and Savage fury threatens with Captivity, - when that hour
comes, mark me ye Twinns of Virtue when you behold my Conquered Spirits faint,
with a bright Dagger drenched in my warm Gore, or my Eyes languish with some
Poisonous Draught, which my own hand has nobly ministered. -- Then choose your
fate equal in each degree,
Scorn poor Rebellious Rage, and die like me.
Exit with Bell. and Fell.


Card. Thus when a noble Heart inspired with Honor is filled with the sharp
sense of smarting Wrongs -- thus still it vents its Sorrow, -- I must follow
her. And though I see Grief's Fever rages high, perhaps with care, good Reasons
may abate it.


Vice. Stay, good my Lord, a moment, for I think I see the Noble Bissignano
coming.


Mat. It Is he, my Lord, and in his Cheerful Countenance, I hope I read good
News. Enter Bissignano.


Vice. Pray Heaven it prove so.


Biss. Health to the Viceroy -- and to all the rest, my Gracious Lord, and you
my Noble Kinsmen.


Vice. My good Lord, as well as Wretches who are hourly frighted with Cannons
Battering, or Proscription's Terror, as well as those whom a close Siege has
rendered incapable of getting Necessaries, or as well as those by Hunger almost
pined or gripped by pinching Sorrow, can bid you welcome, we return your
Courtesy. And now desire to know our several Dooms; You are Fate's Minister;
the Tongue of Destiny; -- What Order bring you now? what dreadful Thunder,
since his revolt of Sealing the Articles, and his damned Message to send back
the Duchess; must we leave our half-starv'd Bodies? Hah! what says
th'Leviathan? Who Is to be swallowed next?


Biss. Himself, my Lord, into the deepest Pit of the Infernals, sooner than
such feared harm, should touch your Highness: No, no, my Lord, I bring ye
better News; the Wind is changed, and his Intoxicated Brain relieved by Rest,
which the full Bowls before distempered, he now resumes his Sense, and seems
ashamed of his late breach of Promise to the Cardinal.


Vice. Is It possible! can he relent!


Biss. He does wi^h great Concernment; owns too his late rude Message to the
Vice-Queen; and says, the Duke's Escape with his fair Lady was noble and
well-plotted.


Mat. This looks too sudden, I fear a Snake lurks underneath these Flowers; --
prepared to sting. -- But what concerning the Articles -- Does he intend --


Biss. There lies the best and chiefest of my Embassy, -- his Head grown sober
now, and the hot Fumes of Drinking being abated, with a Look that pictured
Gravity with Awker'd Grace: -- He bid me thus express him: Tell his Excellence,
Don Roderick Pons de Leon, Duke of Arcos, Viceroy of Naples under great King
Philip, that I the General of the Neapolitans -- Tomas -- but vulgarly called
Massainello, after my shame for late Miscarriages, which my Intemperance urged,
do beg his Pardon, -- and will, as I late gave my word, to morrow, meet him in
the Cathedral, there to Seal the Articles of Infranchisement of the People from
Gabels, and all heavy Impositions pursuant to Great Charles the Emperor's
Charter; and that it may last in perpetual memory, a splendid Monument shall be
erected, with an Inscription writ in Golden Characters, This wondrous A^tion
famous to Posterity.


Caiv. B^est Turn of Fortune! now the Air clears again, -- and the Sun begins to
clear our droop^ng Plants by Sorrow numbed and blasted. -- But will this Humor
hold?


Biss. Most certainly, -- his Orders are given out -- Then you my Lord * to the
Cardinal. he spoke of next with mighty Reverence; he styled you -- wise, his
good and Gracious Father: And though he knew your Eminence's Charity so great,
you would Absolve him; yet his fhame would hardly let him beg it.


Mat. This is wonderful! -- But owing all to my Good Lord Cardinal's
management, whose Sacred Wit, and Influencing Reasons, with a Seraphick power
of Spiritual Virtue, have charmed a human Soul into this Clod, and made him
melt before the Beams of Piety.


Card. My Lords, my Heart is full of Joy to find kind Heaven at last has blessed
my happy Labor, -- with such fair hopes of a full Crop hereafter; -- and now I
hold it an especial action that the Vice-Queen be instantly informed of this
great Act of Providence; 'twill calm her. -- Hush, the rough Billows that now
wildly Roll,
And quell the storm that Rages in her Soul.



Vice. It shall be so, I Will instantly go to her, and then prepare for the Great
Deed to Morrow: -- And since the Change of Empire and of States are done by
Heaven's Immutable Decree, and human Power opposes it in vain; No more the
Sacred doom let us withstand;
Reason directs, the Powers above Command.
Exeunt.


SCENE II.
Enter Blowzabella and La Poop, the first in her Nigh^-dress drinking
Chocolate. Blowz. Who Is there, La Poop? -- Where are ye?


L. Poop. A vot Service, Madam -- vill you please to be dress?


Blowz. No, no, wait a little longer -- this is but my first Pot of Chocolate,
I have drank but ^ix of my Ten Dishes yet.


L. Poop. Ah bless your Ladyship -- you have de ver leetell Stomach -- you
soop, soop, soop -- de pauvre quantity de Chocolate in de Morning, but you Eat
noting all de day long, besides dat is considerable. Ma foy you vill never put
your shape in de fashion, if you piddle, piddle -- at dis rate.


Blowz. Shape! -- Odsfish, I Cram my self so every day, that I Am ready to break
my Stays -- I cannot tell -- what thou would have me do more to make my shape
fashionable.


L. Poop. Ah Madam, de downright Trute of de ting is you must wear no Stay at
all: -- It Is below de Woman's of Qualitee, -- I mean dat is marry -- to pinsh --
de Hip or de Belly. -- See dat be no marry, expect de Husband must pinsh a
leetle, -- and reason good. -- But de Wife must let all ting be looses, -- and
show full, plump, -- wid shild, or widout shild, dat is all one, plump, plump,
it is de ver graceful fashion mafoy.


Blowz. Plump, -- nay, if I am taken for one of the Lean ones, the Looker on
sees double, and the Devil made the Spectacles; I Am sure I have not felt any Ribs
I have this Ten years: And I weigh, * Sups her Chocolate. let me see I weigh
just three and fifty Stone, and two Pound.


L. Poop. Aw dat is noting -- dear is one Relation of mine in France, dat is
call Madamoselle La Poope, dat weigh tree hundred Stone: But see Madam here come
de Lady your Sister, -- and your new Gentleman Usher wid her, who come to Comb
your Head; I hear he is born in England -- but is bred in France, -- or else he
be no fit for your Service, Mafoy.


Enter Ursula and Pimpwell with a Combing Cloth. Blowz. Oh Madam Ursula -- how
fares thy Ladiship's Body? Come Prithee sit thee down, -- and take a dish of
Chocolate, whilst I have my Head ordered, by my new Fellow here: the great
Ladies I hear use Men for their Morning Service; and now our Condition is
altered, we must follow the Mode: What we must do great things now.


Ursul. It Is a good handsome Black Fellow *Ursula's Dish is filled by L. Poop.,
and perhaps has no stinking Breath.


Pimp. Which is more than she can say for her self to my knowledge; I found
that out by her whispering me just now. Aside.


Blowz. Well Friend, and Prithee what is thy Name, I have, I think, never asked
thee that yet, did I?


Pimp. Humh -- not above forty times, Madam; but it is natural for Great ^adies
to forget.


Blowz. Ay, it is so. --


Pimp. What Essence will your Ladyship use to day, Iessamine, Tubarose, or
Amber?


Blowz. The dearest, the dearest always: -- But as I was saying, Humh --
Prithee what was it, I asked thee just now: Ha?


Pimp. Oh very well, Madam, that looks mighty great indeed; why you asked me my
Name, and you must know, Madam, that in England I was Christened, Dick Pimpwell,
-- but am Dignified since I came hither with the Title of Signiour Ricardo. I Am
of a Family, Madam, that carried no ordinary Reputation there, if you ever knew
any thing of the English Court, you must have heard of the Pimpwells I Am sure.


Ursul. Yes, yes, we hear frequently both of your Courtiers and Citizens too,
and sometimes have great diversion with 'em.


Pimp. In History, I suppose Madam.


Ursul. No, but in Ballads, -- and I think that is the better way by much.


Pimp. 'Gad she is in the right, for the Histories of our former Kings and
Nobles are better done in Ballads, than in any Chronicle I ever saw yet there.


Blowz. Well, and -- do hear me, -- What humor are your young Town-fellows
of, how do they wear the day out to divert themselves?


Pimp. Why in the Morning they cherish two of their Senses, Madam, Seeing and
Smelling: Seeing by the Court they make to a great Looking-Glass; Smelling by
Covering themselves from Head to Foot with sweet Powder; and then at Night they
Indulge the other three, -- Hearing with the Noise of Fiddles; and Tasting and
Feeling with a Whore and a Bottle.


Ursul. A good merry sort of a Scoundrel, this -- I warrant this Fellow has
been a Player there, or some such thing: -- Well, but I hear they have the name
of Rakehells amongst 'em, and are so horribly given to scandal, that they will
abuse all Womankind, as well those they have to do with, as those they have
not; and rather then not have the pleasure of Tatling, by their Good will
they will say any thing. --


Pimp. Ah -- there I must beg your Pardon, Madam, I can name you one thing that
by their Good Will they never say.


Blowz. What Is that, Prithee?


Pimp. Their -- Prayers, Madam.


Blowz. No -- why I thought they were most horrible Sticklers for Religion.


Pimp. Right, Madam, -- they are horrible ones indeed, and it is as natural to
'em as to Slaves in the Mines to Dig their Ore; and like that too is generally
managed, -- for he that toils and labors most about it Ten to one knows the
least of the matter.


Ursul. And, Ha, ha, ha, well -- as to Generation, and that sort of diversion,
what are -- they are very prone to Coupling, at what Age do they Marry?


Pimp. Why the Males never by their Good Will, -- but as to the Females, by
their Good Will, as soon as they can speak.


Blowz. Ha, ha, ha, ye Rascal, well, and as to your State Affairs, we hear
there are great feuds amongst ye as well as here; though the King has done great
things for 'em, and they say -- is a very brave Man.


Pimp. Ay, he is so, Madam, -- but you must know that we English have some
Affinity with the nature of some Dogs we have there, We never receive a good
Bone but we snap at our Benefactor's Fingers.


Ursul. Ha, ha, why Sister -- this is an Arch Rogue, this Fellow has more about
him than we see.


Pimp. Ah, a great deal more, I assure ye, Madam, -- your Ladyship shall find I
have notable Parts upon occasion.


Blowz. Ha, ha, ha, why Sirrah, you are an Arch Rogue indeed, as she says *
Patting him with her hand.: But do hear; My Fellow, La Poop, told me thou
have been in France too: What did learn there, Prithee, ha?


Pimp. Aw, Madam, there I learnt the most material things in the whole World,
which are, to tie a Muff on with an Air, and to make a huge Back-Perruke for a
great Lord, that shall reach down to his Hams: But above all to use like a
Gentleman the Comb and the Puff, in the Lady's Service; as thus, now Madam
thus, thus * Puffs her Face all over.: This Powder has such virtue, that it
will take away all the Freckles -- and make the Face as Beautiful at Fourscore
as at Five and twenty.


Blowz. Odsfish it has a notable scent with it indeed.


Ursul. And will it take away Freckles, say thou? Well, I Am resolved to try
the Experiment then to Morrow. -- I Will be Pufft all over, for I Have a world of
'em about me.


Blowz. Were thou ever in Holland?


Pimp. Yes, Madam, just long enough to spoil my Stomach.


Ursul. Why don't they dress Meat well?


Pimp. Yes, if you can allow the General Sauce, for there is but one sort there.


Blowz. And what is that, Prithee?


Pimp. Butter, Butter, Madam, -- if you have a cold Jowle of Salmon, and not a
Dish of Melted Butter with it, you affront the Constitution of the Country.


Ursula. But of what Humors are they, Prithee?


Pimp. Why they are greater Lovers of good Bargains than good Breeding; they
sight well when there is occasion; and drink largely whether there is or no: --
In fine, they are the best Skeyters in a great Frost, but the worst Dancing
Masters in Christendom.


Enter Pedro Hastily. Pedro. Come, Hey where is my Sister Blowze? Oh are ye
here! My Brother the General wants ye to give Orders for the Ceremony to Morrow
at the Signing the Articles: Your Massainello has carried it now In Faith; he is
at the Top, and we will keep him there in spite of his Scruples of Conscience; he
would have you likewise invite the Vice-Queen and her Ladies to a Musick-feast.
A Ball I think they call it. -- It Is the Mode amongst Great People. -- Come,
come away, and you shall know more.


Blowz. Odsfish, Brother -- but my Hair is not done up, you see, nor my Face
quite Patched, is it?


Pimp. No, Madam, not half: Besides, -- here is two delicate ones, -- that will
take a great deal of time to place wel^; I brought 'em from France, and call
'em Venus and Adonis: -- The one is for the upper Lip, and the other for the
under, and the witty fancy to have 'em there is -- that they may be perpetually
kissing one another.


Blowz. Well, well, ye witty Rogue, let 'em kiss one another in the next Room
then -- for I must go to my Husband Massainello. -- But do you hear, Sirrah, I Will
prefer ye. -- Stick to me close; do you hear?


Pimp. Zooks, Madam, but here is my Cupid, this must sit Enthroned upon your
Ladiship's Nose, or I Am undone.


Sticks a great Patch on her Nose. Blowz. Ha, ha, ha, -- Well, Odsfish I like
this Fellow strangely, Well Sirrah, -- sti^k close to me, and I Will do your
business; do you hear, -- Hah! times are not as they have been: What, we must do
Great Things now!


Pimp. In this New Lottery I cannot miss a Prize,
When Nobles fall, Valet de Chambers rise. -- Exeunt.

ACT II. The Outer Isle of the Cathedral.
Enter Aurelia, Belleraiza, Fellicia, Mataloni, Caivano, and Attendants. Aur.
WHat? they are coming then.


Mat. Yes, and in Pomp, I hear; the Dunghill-Upstart stress'd in Glittering
Tissue -- with his Sword drawn comes foremost of the Band, and proudly at the
Head of fifty Thousand, even Justles with the Viceroy.


Aur. The Crawling Snake -- warmed by hot Popular Vapors of Applause, now
shows his Sting, and would be thought a Dragon: Oh why permits the avenging
power his Thunder, to cleave the Oaks, and shatter Marble Rocks, yet leaves
this Prodigy to walk abroad safe and unblasted by Etherial fire?


Caiv. Have patience, Madam, and let us mark the Consequence; it is bruited he
will lay down all Command, and when the Articles are Signed to the People,
return to his base Function.


Mat. He Will be Damned first -- there are too many Woolvish Bloodhounds near
him, to urge on mischief, though he had resolved against it -- to let him keep
his Promise.


Bell. It Is most true, for added to his Grovelling sense of Honor he has a
Humor various as the Winds, which now visited with the Gust of Greatness,
blows his hot Brain to such a Blazing flame, his Soul cannot resist the Rash
Emotions, nor do I like this his pretended Coolness, relating to my Escape, but
must believe, were the ^oor Bird once more within his Cage, her warbling Mones
wo^^^ hardly purchase freedom.


Fe^l. Ah were I so confined, -- my Soul's so weak -- I fear 'twould poorly
wait upon my Body. -- Yet were my Fate so cruel to submit me to hazard Bondage
from this Hellish Crew, upon the first approach of that dishonor to quell my
fears, and trembling timorous nature: I hope brave Aunt your Hand would set me
free,
And give my Fame by Death Eternity.



Aurel. My dear Fellicia, my Soul should in^luence thine, and make thee
Valiant: Oh how I scorn our present vile Condition, nor could my swelling heart
contain it self at the receiving late a Sawey Message under the Glozing umbrage
of Civility -- from that ^he-Porpess the Fish-wife Blowzabella, -- who by the
Gentleman forsoo^h of he^ Chamber, sent to Invite me to a Ball to Night; Was
ever ^nsolence like it! Shall Medina's Noble Daughter and Wife to mi^h^y
Rod^rick. Taint her self, by breathing Air with the vile Jakes of N^ples! Oh
how a just disdain in^^am'd my Bosom!


Caiv. Your Excellence must needs ^^ghly res^nt it; and yet the Occasions of
the present times, the Peace of N^ples ^ett^ing in thi^ Juncture, and
Mass^inello by a slight to his Wife, being pi^u'd might have the humor to
revolt, -- urged your great heart, I hear, to c^rb its motions, and condescend
to grant it.


Aur. You Have judged me right, my Lord, I did consent, but with a just Contempt
you may imagine. Trumpets and Voices heard within.


Mat. By this Music the Choir is coming, and the Viceroy near, who comes
through the Inner part of the Cathedral -- where the Monument's Erected. --
Here your Excellence may place your self and view the Ceremony.


The Scene opens, and discovers a Rich Monument, with this Inscription in
Golden Letters, under St. Gennaro's Figure.

The Tyranny of Nobles being repressed: The Gabels being Abolished: The Public
and Private Enemies of our Country being subdued: The Gracious Privileges of
Ferdinand the First, Frederick King of Aragon, and Charles the Emperor being
Confirmed and Renewed: Philip the Fourth being Catholic King, and Don Roderick
Pons de Leon Duke of Arcos Viceroy, by the Wondrous Valor and Conduct of
Thomas Annello de Amalphi alias Massainello the General, the most Faithful
People of Naples, and Liberty being redeemed: This Monument was Erected as a
Memorial of his Victory obtained, and an Emblem of his Fame to all Posterity.

The Priests appear in the Front, then Blowzabella, Ursula and her Party come
from the other side of the Stage, and place themselves over against the
Vice-Queen and her Ladies. Blowzabella comes in strutting ridiculous and
proudly Looking on the Duchess.

Bell. Bless my Eye, the Pageant appears yonder.


Blowzabella Curseys to Aurel. who returns lightly. Aur. What can the Tinsel
Poppet make its Honor too, this is wonderful! -- Again! -- nay then I must
Mimick it. Curseys.


Mat. But see, Madam, yonder comes the Fire-drake.


Here the Choir comes forward Singing; after them the Great Cardinal
Fillomarino Myter'd, bearing a Crosier in his Right Hand, and the Ancient
Charter of Naples in the Left. Then Enter Bissignano and Pedr^ bearing the Arms
of the Emperor Charles the Fifth; then Enter the Viceroy carrying the new
Articles; and Massainello Richly Attired on his Left Hand, with his Sword
drawn; then the Guards and Attendants on both Sides, they walk in Couples round
the Stage; then the Viceroy and Massainello, dividing, go and stand on either
side the Monument; then Pedro Cosmo Pietro and Attendants divide on each side
the Stage; the Priests go backwards Singing into the Body of the Church, only
two Principals, who bring a Cushion and lay before the Cardinal, who Kneels on
it in the middle of the Stage, and speaks to the Statue of St. Gennaro. Card.
Great Saint the Guardian of us all below,
To whom thy Votaries thus humbly bow,
Smile on thy Sons, that with Devotion Pray,
And bless the mighty Deeds are done to day.

Here they repeat this, all joining their Voices in a Chorus: Then the Cardinal
carries up the Charter to Massainello, and the Viceroy Sealing and delivering
him his Articles, Massainello puts up his Sword: Then this Song being in
Recitative in Praise of St. Gennaro and the Peace, is Sung. A SONG in Two
Parts, at the Solemnity of Massainello.
GLory thou Mortal Paradise,
Best Joy of Noble Souls,
That all Delights below the Skies,
Surpasses and Controules.
In Martial Sounds be now Expressed,
And let the Spacious Globe be blessed.
As now our happy Nation,
Sweet Peace her Beauteous Face appears,
Now show your Power ye Tuneful Spheres;
Let Angels Sing and Charm all Ears:
For Wondrous is the Occasion.
Mass. It Is now, our Great Protector St. Gen^aro by my bold ^and has happy
Naples freed, -- and now, my Lord, the heavy Yoke laid by -- that on my Neck I
for the People wore: Thus low I bow to your Authority. -- And as plain
Massainello, (a poor Fisherman) yet in that poorness born to do great Actions,
if I Have the Law offended, or your Excellence, I submit my Body to be broke o'th
Wheel, or any Torture that you please to order: Since I have ended well, this
great Affair,
What else concerns my life's not worth my Care.



Vice. Sir, you have greatly done, -- I wish I could say well, -- yet in one
kind I must confess it is. Your life's secure too -- the King has not
proscribed ye, and I could wish some of these Nobles could as well acquit ye as
I, that give ye what I promised, Pardon.


Cardinal Whis^ers Massainello. Mass. I humbly thank your Exc^llence.


Here the Vice-Queen and Ladies meet with Blowz. and her Company; a dumb
Compl^ment pass^s between 'em. Aur. Come, we will go and see this
Commick-Stuff, -- if for nothing else but to divert the Spleen.


Bell. Nay, if it is possible to Laugh we s^all certainly have occasion.


Fell. Bless us, what a Head she has, and ho^ she jets about and smiles on the
Prince there? Cardin^l whispers Massainello.


Blowz. Madam, will your Highness -- please to go; -- Madam, the Dutchesses, I
must have your Company too, and pray don't be too cogitabund: I suppose, --
your Gra^^ is concerned a little about these Jewels of yours that you (...) me
wear; but come, get out of your dumps, -- Ods^^sh when ^ou and I are better
acquainted, such Tri^^es shall break no square^, -- I have enough besides.


Bell. Oh Madam! I assure ye, my Thoughts were ^therwise employed.


Blowz. Humb -- what upon my Ball -- I warrant, -- why I Will promise ye, ye
shall have curious Sport, your Highne^s shall laugh 'till you burst your self.


Aur. Was there ever such a Monster?


Blowz. Come, pray therefore follow me, I think they told me 'twas Manners to
go before her into my own House, -- humh, well, I see Breeding increases in me
wonderfully, and it is but reasonable: What, ^ must do great things now?


Exeunt Vice-Queen Blowz. and the r^st. Mass. I am Schooled my Lord, -- but
when I see that Beauty, that charming Consort of the Man -- I hate, -- then --
I rev^^^ and wish him dead, nay, damned, -- so I were, -- But no more, shes gone
and now I Am cool again, -- And since I Have given my wo^d to treat 'em fairly,
aid me Dissimulation -- Great Ma^alon^ and my Lord Caivano, to excuse what I
have done in right oth' People, against your States and You, looks like
Dissembling, -- and to beg pardon, Fear: Yet I am sorry, sorry that you
mistaking did such Wrongs, and that I e're had Cause ^o to revenge 'em.


Mat. When of the Cause you are ^he only Judge, Sir, the rash Effects you
cannot wonder at.


Caiv. Un-bridled Power seldom makes use of Reason, it is blind, and all its
Actions are Precipitate, and in such Cases when the Mischief^s done, it is
little Satisfaction to be Sorry.


Mass. Nay, since y' are so sullen Lords, I Will change the Notion, I Am sorry
now that I have used such Courtesy.


Mat. Wrongs have wide Mouths Sir.


Vice. Patience good my Lord.


Card. In this present Juncture you know not what you do.


Mat. I beg your Pardon, -- and will withdraw for fear of farther Arguments,
but though I Am now crushed by that Lernean Hidra, an Hour may come, -- when his
Hearts-blood shall pay for it.


Caiv. I Am gone my Lord, Heaven prosper your Intentions.


Ex. Mat. and Caiv. Mass. Furies and Fire, were not those two the Rankest of
all the Peoples Enemies, -- Farmers oth' Gabells, bloated and gorged with their
abhorred Oppressions till I rose up to quell it; Death, not burn 'em,
Gigantick, -- Impudence, and how dares Mataloni, that lives but by my Leave?


Card. Pray Calm your Passion; it is Infirmity and want of Temper in the
Choleric Duke that thus misguides his Reason: And now Son, since your Designs
have gained a happy Period, I do conjure you by my sacred Office, to keep your
Promise and lay down your Arms, so shall you gain a deathless Reputation, and
future Saints shall Consecrate your Story.


Pedro. Hah, what says the canting Cardinal? Lets hear a little.


Vice. You shall have such Provision in retirement as your own Heart can wish
--


Mass. I expect none, but am resolved, thou best of all the Priesthood, to
follow thy Direction and Disband, -- the Fortune I desire, is only this, my
^ate Fish-tackling -- Rod and Hook and Line, in lieu of which I here give up my
Sword.


Cosmo. O Lord, O Lord, we are utterly un-done if this hold.


Pedro. Sure he is distracted! Why Brother de'e know what you say?


M^ss. Most certainly, and what I mean too Brother.


Card. Remove, cast the Mist from thy dull Eyes, Friend, once see clearly.


Pedro. Nay, if y' are thereabouts -- I Have a Trick left to fetch him about yet:
A Bottle Cosmo, a Bottle with something I Will i^^use in it will do his Business
I Am sure; come, we'el prepare for it instantly, -- and snap him as he comes
out. E. Pedro and Cosmo.


Mass. That dreadful Sword inured to Blood and Slaughter, that when I shook it
made all Naples quake, Naples and her six hundred Thousand Souls shake like an
O^^er, -- rest in Peace for ever; and with my Power Farewell too these
Trappings: Off ye vain Trifles, -- off ye gaudy Throws away Hat and Peruke.
nothings, let me appear as Man was first Created, before fantastic Forms
debauched his Reason, and the Bodies clothing vitiated the Soul; off, off, I
say.


Vice. Nay, now your Zeal's too Eager, let me entreat your Patience at this
time.


Card. It Is decent, there are many Eyes upon ye that may mistake this forward
Zeal for Frenzy.


Mass. I Am obedient, yet I would do something to show I bid my Farewell to
Dignity freely and with some warmth, -- To morrow Noon shall see it all
performed.


Card. My Blessing on thee.


Vice. My perpetual Favor.


Mass. Thus shall my Fame resound in future Story.
And Bab^s un-born sing Massainello's Glory. Exeunt.

SCENE II.
A Banquet, and Aurelia, Belleraiza, Fellicia, Blowzabella, Ursula, Bissignano,
Cosmo, Pedro and others, Pimpwell and La Poope waiting, the rest all seated,
Blowzabella rises. Blowz. Ricardo.


Pimp. Madam.


Blowz. Did you bid the Wench take Care that she provided Sugar and Cinnamon
enough for the Pancakes -- and that she should fry 'em in Oil instead of Butter?


Pimp. Yes Madam, and that it should be the Sugar of Eight-pence the Pound,
that your Ladyship reserves for high Holy Days, and the best Company.


Blowz. It Is well Ricky, it is very well done: Mind your Business de'e hear and
stick close to me, and I Will speak to my Husband to get ye the Government you
spoke to me about, -- Well, and did you order the Leg of Pork and Potato's to
be sent her Highnesses Gentlemen, for a second Course?


Pimp. Yes Madam, and that the Ten-shilling Beer should be Tap'd for 'em and
given about in Sack-glasses, that it might look the Genteeler.


Blowz. That Is well again, mighty well in troth Ricky: -- And are the Morris,
Ropedancers and Tumblers all ready for the Ball, ha!


Pimp. All, all, Madam, the Fiddlers too, and the the other Fellow says, he can
Bate his Bulls and Bears, and if you please the Tiger at a Minute's warning.


Blowz. Can he? Well, Odsfish I love that Sport at my Heart: Besides 'twill
draw all the Great Statesmen here, -- they will neglect the carrying on their
great Cause to Day, to see that I Am sure, -- but harken, a word in thy Ear.
Whispers.


Aur. Was there ever such a Supper! The very sight of that huge Conger-Eel
there makes me sick.


Biss. It Is Alamode de Fish-wife, Madam, -- Ha, ha, ha, your Highness sees she
treats in her own fashion.


Bell. The Musical Entertainment, I warrant will be a Curiosity.


Fell. Methinks her Gentleman Usher there, who is so familiar with her, should
lead her up a Dance.


Blowz. Now will I whisper with this young Fellow to try if I can make the
Prince Jealous, -- for I Am told, nothing increases Love like Jealousy. -- Well
Ricky, and as to this Government thou were speaking of, -- must I speak for
thee, have a mind to be a Don, Ricky?


Pimp. Yes, indeed Madam, to speak the Truth, I Have had a huge mind to be a Don
-- a great while.


Blowz. Well, say no more, thou shall be a Don -- the General shall do it out
of hand: -- What, there must be a Patent for it I suppose, and thou know his
way of doing that.


Pimp. Yes, Madam, a Tweak by the Ear, it seems, is his Order of Counsel, and a
Kick of the Breech, his way of passing a Patent.


Blowz. Right, thou have it, -- therefore stick close to me, do you hear, and it
shall be done out of hand, -- I Will have thee kicked on the first opportunity.


Pimp. Ah thank your good Ladyship. -- A Don, Oh how I Will strutt!


Biss. My Hostess's mannerly way of leaving the Company all this while, is
somewhat Novel too, Madam.


Aur. She designs to treat us with Variety; Oh now we shall have her again.


Blowz. So -- does your Highness eat; Odsfish you have a very Pidling Stomach
-- why that Codshead will be cold there, -- Ah you would have done b^tter by half,
Madam, if you had taken a Whett as I did before hand.


Aur. A Whett, what is that I beseech ye?


Blowz. Why a good Brimmer of sharpning Liquor to prepare your Stomach, -- and
by your Eating so little I find yours to be very cold, -- Will your Highness
accept of a Beer-glass of Nan^s?


Aur. Nants, -- well I am horrible unskilled in this new Dialect of yours, and
so ignorant that I must desire to know what that is too.


Blowz. Odsfish -- not know what Nants is -- a Lady of your Breeding, and
ignorant of heavenly Brandy! Odsfish then Miracles are not ceased.


Biss. Ah, this is not a Lady of your strain, Madam, this is the Vice-Queen.


Blowz. Why if she were an Empress, my Lord, she might know and taste a Cup of
good Nants, I hope, and her Title shrink never a Jot the more in the wetting,
neither, -- But come let us turn the Discourse to hear the Music, and see the
Ball, your Highness shall see how you like our way. -- Come begin there.


Here follows a Comical Entertainment of Mimicking Dancing at a Ball with
Clowns, Morrice-dancers and Tumblers mixed, and several Humourous Songs and
Dialogues, which Ended, Aurelia, Bissignano, and Ladies rise. A Dialogue
between a Town-Sharper and his Hostess.
Sharp. WHilst wretched Fools sneak up and down,
Play hide and seek about the Town;
Deprest by Debts, and Fortunes frown,
By Duns too kept in awe:
Whenever my Occasions call,
And amongst my Cre-di-tors I fall,
Ive one fine Song that Pays 'em all;
Fa la, -- la.

Host. Good morrow Sir, I Am glad to see
Your Humor is so brisk and free,
I hope the better it is for me.
If you your Purse will draw:
Y've been two Years at Bed and Board,
And I, Lord help me, took your Word,
But now must have what here is Scor'd,
For all your Fa, la la -- la.

Sharp. My Purse, sweet Hostess, is but lank,
But I have something else in bank;
And you at home I Will kindly thank,
With charming sweet Sol fa.
We Will, sit and Chaunt from Morn to Noon,
No Nightingal in May or June;
Did ever Sing so fine a Tune,
As fa, la, la, la, la, la, etc.

Host. You take me for an Idiot sure,
Will this fine Tune my debt secure;
Or pay my Baker or my Brewer,
Or keep me from the Law,
To buy your Shirts there is Money lent,
Besides in Meat and Drink more spent;
And can you think I pay my Rent,
With fa, la, la, la, la, la, etc.

Sharp. I Will teach thee such a pretty Song
Shall please both Rich, Poor, Old, and Young;
Get thee a Husband Stout and Strong,
Some Country Rich Iack-Daw;
Nay more I Will bring to quit my Scores,
A crew of Toping Sons of Whores;
Shall Drink all Night and Charm the Hours,
With fa, la, la, la, la, la, etc.

Host. Ye cunning Rogue this wheedling Talk,
You fancy will rub out my Chalk;
But I your sly design will balk,
When you to Iayl I draw;
Your boasted Song's a foolish thing,
For do but you the Money bring,
You Will find I can already sing,
Fa, la, la, la, la, la, etc.

Sharp. Well since Dame Fortune is my Foe,
And that I must to Prison go,
Let Us have a Neat Frisk or so,
And then Rub on the Law.

Host. Well since you're on a merry Pin,
And make so slight the Counter-Gin,
I Will do it, and let the Tune begin
With Fa, la, la, etc.

Sharp. Has not my Dance ill Humor charmed?


Ho. I must confess my Blood is warmed.
And heart I hope by love alarmed.

Sharp. To laugh, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Host. You think you have caught me, now I smil^,


Sharp. No that I Will do at Night dear child.


Host. Well I Will the Bailiffs stop a while
To try your Fa la, etc.

Enter a Chimney-Sweeper's Boy and Sings. Boy. SWeep, sweep, swe^p,
My Lord and Madam sleep,
Whilst I in the Chimney creep,
And sweep, sweep, sweep.
He nimbly clumb up to the top,
Without a Ladder or a Rope,
And sweep, sweep, sweep,
Who calls the Chimney-sweep?

Enter a Cook-maid with a Ladle Yawning. Cook. Heigh ho, Heigh ho, Heigh ho,
Ye bawling Bratt what is here to do?
With this your Sooty Devils trad^,
If with this squalling noise you make,
My Lord and Lady chance to wake,
I vow I^ll break your head.

Boy. Oh! Sicely, why so full of wrath?
You know I only mean,
To sweep the Chimney clean,
Lest Soot should fall and spoil the Broth.

Cook. You Youngsters have another way to deal,
Pretend to sweep, but come indeed to steal.

Boy. Nay now my Honors touched and soon,
I Will make you sing another Tune.

Cook. Come, Sirrah, come I Have lately lost a spoon.


Boy. Can no one be the thief but I?
Ye've found me still an honest Boy;
You know I Have kept your counsel too,
And never hinted farther,
What in the Kitchen Larder,
I once saw you and John the Coachman do?

Cook. Ye little Rogue, how did you dare,
To peep on such a grand affair?

Boy. I saw it and will tell it too,
The Garters you had on were blue;
I^ll publish every thing was done,
Because you tax me with your Spoon.

Cook. I did but jest, come let us be friends,
I^ll fetch thee what shall make amends.

Exit Cook Boy. Sweep, sweep, sweep,
I saw the Coachman creep.
Into the Stable dark and deep,
When I by chance did peep.

Enter Cookmaid with a great Piece of Bread and Butter. Cook. No more of that
upon your life,
We are contracted Man and Wife;
And what you then did chance to see,
Was all in'th way of honesty:
We Have given our Words and both shook hands,
And that is as firm as Marriage bands.

Boy. Get me my Breakfast to my wish,
With no more Spoons thrown in my Dish;
Again upon a Truss of Hay,
You both may in the Stable play;
And I that peep, and sweep and peep,
And sweep, and peep, will nothing say.

Cook. I^ll feed thee till I cloy,
My pretty, pretty Boy;
Thou shall thy Breakfast have each morn.

Boy. And you all night shall have your joy.

Chorus. Thou shall, etc.


Well, what thinks your Highness, is not this Novel as you call it?

Aur. It Is so Extraordinary that I want words to praise it, and therefore
intend to retire and make that the Product of a second thought: Come, my Lord.


Bell. Had the Times been settled, I could have laughed at the Extravagance of
it well enough.


^ell. And -- I -- it is well enough to see once.


Exeunt Biss. Vice-Queen and Ladies. Enter a Servant, whispers Blowzabella.
Blowz. Lights -- there -- for her Highness. -- The General speak with me in the
Morning, say thou; Well, tell him I Will come. -- Now Ricky, stick close to
me, thou shall go too: And if I raise thee to a Prince's fellow,
Thy Hat thrown up cry Viva Blowzabella.



ACT III.
SCEN. I.
Enter Massainello in his Fisherman's Habit, and Pimpwell dressed in the same
manner, the first bearing a Rod and Fishing-Basket. Mass. MY Wife so angry,
say thou?


Pimp. Angry, Oh that ever I was born, -- Why do you think, Sir, she can be
pleased? You may Metamorphose me i^to w^^t shape you think fit, you may flea me
as you do one of your Eels, -- and then ins^^ad of the Robe of a Lord, put the
Shell of a Lobster upon me -- as your Fishiness shall see good to determine, --
but to th^nk that the high spirited Blowzabella, -- will shrink from a Crab to
a Craw-fish, and leave a silken Gown with a Gold Galloon for a Grogram Jacket
with a Copper Edging, is but vain Imagination -- I can tell ye but that, Sir.


Mass. My Brother then I hear too grumbles at it, -- But when I give my
reasons, I don't doubt. --


Pimp. Oh bless me! Reasons! -- Reasons to lay by a Noble Habit which made ye
fit to accompany Kings and Princes -- and put on a damned dirty Doublet here,
-- which makes you and my self too, woe be the time, look as if we were fit for
nothing but a Dog-Kennel. -- Zooks do but look upon your self a little, Sir, --
do but view your Person round -- Ods Sammon and Eels, and Thornback! -- Is this
the Mighty Man, I saw yesterday -- Is this Massain^llo?


Mass. Well, well, this Deed will settle my Renown for ever, and I have
consulted my Reason about it.


Pimp. Reason again, -- Reason, to lay by a Glittering Sword that made ye look
like a General, to take up a confounded Switch the^e to make just the figure of
a sneaking Gudgeon-catcher in a Lands-chap, to leave the Command of all the
Coffers in Naple's Gold, Silver, Jewels, and the Devils and all -- to plunder a
little tyny dribling Brook for a few Roches and Dace -- Gads-diggers if this be
Reason! --


Mass. Well, well, no more of your Disputes, Sir.


Pimp. Mum -- I have done -- but there is his Brother, and some of his Mettled
Comerades drinking in the n^xt room, that will tell him a piece of their minds
presently. -- Oh here he comes, and the hotheaded Cosmo with him -- if they
can get but to ^luster him with a Brimmer or two, as they have prepared it, --
the Cause is our own still. -- Apart.


Enter Pedro and Cosmo. Mass. So Brother* -- still with your sluttering
Trinkets on? What you dislike my resolution of laying down I hear.


Ped. And reason good, -- what Spirit of sloth has seized on ye the sudden, to
ruin your self and us, and all ^ur hopes?


Cosm. It Is that Priest's doings, that same long tongued Cardinal, that
Reverend Hypocrite, has debauched the General.


Mass. Cousin, you have a Privilege, else I ^us^ tell ye, I should not bear
this Language.


Cosm. Not from a Friend whose Heart as well (...) acts but ^o serve ye, --
Come, come, you must, (...) ye, you are imposed upon, flattered, betrayed, the
Cardinal with Inveterate Mataloni, -- and old Caivano -- brood in hourly
Counsels how to destroy ye.


Mass. Ha, that again. --


Ped. He says the Cardinal with your Enemies Plot to destroy ye, which, they are
to execute that very hour you cease Command; there is one revolted from 'em
within, that was their Servant, who ha^ confessed it all; besides, you might
note if you remember well, at our last meeting some weighty thing hung on 'em,
-- by their rough looks, and surly answers -- to ye.


Mass. They were indeed more dogged than was usual.


Cosm. 'Twas from their hopes to snap ye unguarded and unfriended, and if you
will deliver up your Throat. --


Mass. No, Cousin, not so neither.


Ped. If you will from the Commander of all Naples -- Its power too in your
hands, -- accept their Charity, and stand to the courtesy of Mataloni.


Cosm. Your known vowed Enemy -- who burns with Expectation of your disbanding,
that he then may cope ye, -- when I your faithful Kinsman and your Friend --
can baulk his Plots, and put it in your power so to revenge your self -- you
have forgot the Duchess.


Mass. Forgot her, the Taper was newly extinct indeed, but yet thy Breath
revives it.


Pimp. This is my Province, now I Will put in a word: The Duchess, Sir, sweet as
a full blown Rose in Summer Mornings, -- ever gentle Breezes had blown off the
Pearls, the Dew had sprinkled on it; then a Skin, smooth, soft, and whiter than
the Purest Ermine, and such a shape so charming and provoking -- 'twould make a
God of him that did enjoy her.


Mass. Prithee no more, she is gone.


Cosm. Gone, no, Sir, not from my reach -- I know her haunts, and how to snap
her hourly; nay the whole Covey of them, I Have marked my Game, and they are mine
at will. --


Ped. Such a revenge now on Mataloni's Treachery were worth the General's
notice. --


Mass. Oh how my Blood boyls with Revenge and Love.


Cosm. Give me your hand, -- and now believe I honor ye, -- I know you love
the Duchess too, and ye shall have her, -- revoke your Orders for laying down
Arms till things are settled more, -- and if within this hour I bring ye not the
Duchess, and her Neice to Court your favor, -- hold me a Rogue and Liar. --


Mass. Thou amazest me!


Pimp. Oh here is the Female Teizer* Come, now 'twill work rarely.


Enter Blowzabella Weeping, and La Poope: Another carrying her Fine Gown and
Head. Blowz. Do You hear, you French Kickshaw, Diable La Poope, don't tell me of
his Order, to have me stripped; but carry back those dirty things again, or my
Fist shall pound thee into Powder, -- What Maggot's in your Head now, in the
name of Beelzebub, to dub me to be a Lady, and think to undub me again at a
Minutes warning? Oh I could cry my Eyes out to think * Sobs and Cries., to think
* Sobs and Cries., that ever I should have a Husband that should be such a Fool!
-- Huswife, away with the Rags, I say, or I will so Mawl your French Carcass.
Throws the Clothes at her Head.


L. Poop. Hey day! wa^ a Deevil is de matra! He command one ting, and see
command on oder ting! -- de Deevil take them both. Exit.


Enter Ursula. Pimp. Here comes another of the Litter, the Kennel is rouzed
rarely.


Ursul. Why sure this News is not true that I hear: Odslidikins, what do I see,
what is he got into his sneaking, louzy, nasty Fisherman's Garb again! -- Why
Brother, -- Brother, odd I Am ashamed to call him so now, hearkee, do you ever
think. --


Blowz. Sir, can you ever think. Both Bawl loudly.


Mass. Buz -- I shall be worried.


Ped. Come, come, no more Spouse, he will consider.


Cosm. Come, Cousin, pray step in with us and take a Glass or two, amongst some
Friends of ours there, you will find the Servant of the Dukes, hear but his
Story, no doubt you will be satisfied.


Mass. Well, I will hear him, but sure it cannot be true.


Cosm. As true as you shall have the Duchess here her self within this hour
perhaps -- the Duke too -- will you believe me then?


Mass. Oh Jove for her I Would do or believe any thing.


Exit with Blowzabella and Ursula* Pedro. So he is wrought rarely, -- three or
four full Brimmers, I know will fluster him, so he will quickly forget all his
past Promises: But will this Fellow that we have hir^d, stand fast and swear
without a Blush?


Cosm. A Blush! Prithee, he was bred a Lawyer, he knows not what it is: Go, go,
away to the Company, -- and be sure you drink him to a pitch; this is my time
to make a Rape on the others. -- Hah -- from this Window I can see the Garden,
where every day they take their Evenings Walks, -- and see by Heaven they are
yonder, the Vice-Queen too, -- this is a Prize indeed, and I that always loved
with Ambition, will push my Fortune now, -- Are the Soldiers ready?


Pedro. All Armed at the Castle-Gate.


Cosm. Farewell, -- wish me good Luck then. Exit. Cosmo.


Pedro. That I will for my own sake, -- how have I fired this wild hotheaded
Fool, to ^eize the Vice-Queen, and bring me her Neice, -- that ^weet and tender
Bud of Blooming Beauty, Must by my heat be made full blown to night,
My beating Pulse tells me I Am near delight.
Exit.


SCENE II.
Enter Aurelia, Belleraiza, Fellicia, Mataloni, and Caivano. Aurel. This
Pleasant Walk so near the Rebels Garrison; curse on the Coward Fates, we durst
not use, till late, the Truce was made, which when I think on, though the Place
be happy, and the Sweets of Nature abound here in their Pride, Clear Fountains,
Flowers of Excellent Natures in Arbors twined, and Sun de^ying Coverts, though
all that can delight the sense dwell here, yet that disgrace makes it
ungrateful to me.


Mat. The Ills of Fate, Madam, are no Disgraces, but trials of the virtue of
Great Souls; had sam'd Aurelia never opposed the Darts of Traiterous Fortune,
her Renown had lessened, Her life's swift Sands had then unnoted run,
Whose Glory now shines brighter than the Sun.



Bell. Great Souls that so are tried, ought to get Fame, for sure they feel
Fate's worst Serenity; for what can be more sharp than for Nobility --
untainted Honor, and unconquered Courage, to stoop perforce to gross Plebeian
humor, and yield to their Commands whom they despise?


Aur. That would I never do whilst I had life, no with these Hands I would tear
out this Tongue, rather than let it give a vi^e Consent to what my Honor told
me was Ignoble, or should my Eyes give a relenting Glance, and seem by base
fear to betray my Virtue, fired with just Anger I should root 'em thence, and
cast the false Misguiders on the ^loor.


Fell. She talks and thinks to do as she has said,
So I think too were I a Captive made;
At least I tell her that I could death de^ye,
Yet Life's so sweet, I am afraid I lie. Aside.

Aur. Did my Lord tell you he would meet us here?


Caiv. Madam, he did, as soon as the Affairs were finished at the Council: They
expect this Evening a Resignation under Hand and Seal, of Massainello's Power,
and a ^ull Order for the Disbanding of the Rabble.


Aur. I fear he trusts too much, would he were come. In the mean tim^, my dear
Fellicia, let us see that Sarabrand I love so well.


They Dance here: Then Enter Rushing in Cosmo, Pedro, and Soldiers: Mataloni,
and Caivano, make some Resistance, but are overpowered and taken with
Belleraiza and Fellicia. Mat. What Friends are you that in the time of Truce
dare violate the late Order by this Outrage?


Pedro. Such, Sir, as have so little sense of Order, that we are never pleased
more than to break it. -- Come my young Rose you must prepare for the Limbeck.
To Fellicia.


Cosm. And you Majestic Beauty -- for a Love so mingled with Ambition, your
own Soul has not a greater sense on it.


Aur. What mean the Villains -- Oh -- that a Thunderbolt. --


Cosm. Oh that a Thunderbolt --
Would fall and clear the Black and Cloudy Air,
Then we should see the Weather would be fair.

Fell. Oh, though you kill me, do not hurt my Father, -- he is old and weak, pray
pull him not so hard.


Pedro. For your sake, pretty one, we will use him Civilly. -- Come, come, Old
Sir, there is no resisting. To Caivano.


Caiv. Not one Blow to revenge me!


Cosm. Bear off the Ladies down to the Felluca, and bid the Rowers bring it to
the Shore.


Aur. Away ye Slaves, off ye vile Clods of Earth: Hah, dare ye touch me? Then
Aid ye Powers above, -- send down your darting ^lames ye Elements, blast these
vile Wretches with your quickest fires: Let fiercest Vengeance Ravishers pursue;
Burn 'em, Oh Burn 'em, though you Burn me too.



They are forced off. Enter Viceroy and Cardinal. Vice. The E^choing sound that
wasted through the Trees to me seemed like the Cry of Women.


Card. I could not hear distinctly, but must ^onder, the Ladie^ are not here,
-- this is the place. Page cre^p^ out of a Bush.


Page. Oh my Lord, I have the saddest News to te^l your Highness, that ever
Tongue yet uttered: -- The Vice-Queen and the Ladies, accompanied with the
Dukes Mataloni and Caiv^^o, as they were walking here to take the Air, were
seized on by a Rout of Ruffians; and notwithstanding all Resistance, and the
Cries the Ladies made, no Guards o^ yours being never, are ^or^'d away by
Water. Vi^^roy hangs down his Head.


Card. Did thou know any of 'em?


Page. Not by their Faces: But know they came from the Mobb-General's Quarter,
-- their Number, Looks, and Actions so frighted me, I crept into a Bush to hide
me from 'em.


Vice. Ye Powers that Govern Human Fates below -- end my cursed days, this is
too much to bear.


Card. I have not words enough to comfort him, my Reason's at a loss with this
distress, and all Philosophy would work in vain.


Vice. Are all the Stars our foes! Oh cruel Fate, are all thy Darts devoted to
Rebellion! -- And thou the Genius of the wronged Nobility, that for a Series of
Revolving years, did Guard the Honor of our Ancestors, -- where art thou
now! Oh why do thou desert us?


Card. But above all, the Guardian of our Naples, -- Divine Genaro, our August
Protector, -- from thy bright Palace built on Plains of Light, accompanied with
dazzling Seraphims, and Heaven-born Angels, who sing Hymns of Joy in Visionary
Dreams, to sleeping Mortals, with Mediating Grace, gain Mercy for us, and turn
these dire Afflictions into Comfort.


Here the Clouds open, and an Apparition of St. Genaro is seen, with his Sword
drawn: He Sings this Song of Comfort, and then disappears. The SONG.
WEep no more, no longer sigh and groan,
All Heaven's angry Darts are thrown.
A Sacred Council late was held Above,
Blessed with the Presence of Almighty Jove;
Where Pardons Sealed, Peace does your Ioys Restore,
And dire Rebellions now shall Rage no more.
See how the Clouds give way,
And Dazzling Atoms Play,
In Consorts Shining Day:
To drive your Cares away.
The great Disposer of all Things,
To Pardon does Incline:
And now to form Disorders brings,
Who late made Peasants tread on Kings,
To show his Power Divine.
Vice. Blessed Apparition, saw ye ought, my Lord?


Card. Most certainly, through opening Clouds appeared the Glorious Saint with
Visage full of Joy, -- as a blessed Omen of our future comfort; methought the
Spheres too joined in Sacred Harmony, and a Celestial Voice with Charming
power, piercing my Ears, made all my Senses happy. -- A Sword drawn too!


Vice. There was, I saw it clearly, -- which seems to instruct us to use ours
once more, and trust no longer to the fluttering humor, the vain Proposals, or
unminded Promises of this vile whimsical and perjured Rebel.


Card. It must be so, therefore proceed, my Lord. -- And with unwearied Zeal I
still will serve ye, -- for since this last, this Brutal violence too well
assures us of his Breach of Vows, and that the Witchcraft of his dazzling Power,
too far Inchants him to lay down in quiet: Let us resolve to make a Push for
all; -- I lately sought, it is true, to reconcile, -- the unnatural Jars,
believing what was done by this bold Fellow was to Ease the People, -- who were
oppressed; and that he would disband, as he once swore -- when that was done; but
now this Villainy has opened my Eyes to see, -- it is a Rebellious Itch to quell
the Nobles, and set up his base Ignominious self, as Viceroy, and turn us to a
hated Commonwealth.


Vice. It Is so, my Lord, it is plain, that is his Ambition.


Card. It shall be crushed -- like his vile self to earth, never to rise again;
-- Now you shall see the different Fate between th'Inspir'd Nobles, and the
Grovelling Vulgar, and the base mettle of this new Coined upstart, the Guilding
worn away of his Hypocrisy: Arm then my Lord, and so let all the Court, who
with this Vision of the blessed Gennaro, and my own Reasons, I Will so Influence,
Honor in Naples shall exert its Grandeur, and the Rabble once more know their
Slavish distance.


Vice. Oh how thy Sacred Words inflame my Courage, thou precious Gem, amongst a
Crowd of Pebbles, best of thy Function, let me but revenge. --


Card. Revenge, why that shall be the dear twin-word; -- Joined with fair
Justice, to begin the work; -- be but your Highness patient, and bear your
Losses, as becomes your Place, let my Prophetic Brain give you this Comfort:
The hour comes on when the vile Herd shall Groan
Beneath the wonted Yoke, and dread the Nobles Frown.



Exeunt. SCENE III.
Enter Massainello Fluster'd, Dressed again in his Rich Clothes, Pedro half
Drunk too, and Pimpwell Combing his Perruke, Pedro with a Sword in his Hand.
Pedro. Now, Brother, you show like your self.


Pimp. Show* -- Oh happy hour, -- show, S'bud he looks like Alexander the
Great, -- I mean like Pompey, -- I mean like Julius Caesar, -- I mean like
Hannibal, -- I mean, I mean, like himself, -- and that is a thousand times
better than any of 'em; -- Oh rare, rare Sight! 'od I could even hang my self
for Joy.


Mass. I Will teach 'em how to Plot: Give me my Hat and Feather.


Pimp. There, there, my Lord, there is the purest Pulvillio in it, and the most
exquisite Essence of Amber, -- 'twill make the Women follow ye in Shoals.


Pedro. And this shall make the Mataloni Faction, -- and the Caivano's shake *
Gives him a Sword., whilst all the rest of the Court study new ways of Poor
Submissions.


Mass. Oh thou bright Raiser of my Towering Glory, thou have been wanting to my
hand too long; thou that were wont to hew my way to Greatness, and through
opposing Crowds, make Lanes before me, how shall I make amends, and flesh thee
first?


Pedro. Two Kinsmen to the Viceroy were this Morning taken dispersing Libels,
-- and Encouraging the Spaniards to a Mutiny.


Mass. Let 'em be brought this Evening to the Marketplace, and there on them
I Will try the Temper of my Weapon, -- and take their Heads off with this Blade
my self.


Pimp. It shall be done, my Lord: -- Odzookers, he has it, now the Medaera
works.


Pedro. How now, what is this! -- what my dear Cosmo! -- So soon returned! --
Shout Within.


Enter Cosmo. Mass. Well, what success, my brave Adventurer?


Cosm. What I could wi^h: I have 'em all in the Net, Sir, the Dukes, the
Ladies, and the haughty Vice-Queen to boot; and now I hope you will think your
Kinsman loves ye: -- You may seize the Duchess, now Sir, she is your Quary.


M^ss. Thou Soul of my Contentment, best of Kinsmen * Embraces Him.: Oh how I
burn within me, -- my Brain-pan Glows, and my Heart's all on fire. -- Hot,
Soultry, soultry.


Pedro. And we will take care to keep ye so. -- The Wine has played its part, I
see. Aside.


Pimp. There never was any good to be done with drinking Small-beer, -- but now
you see strong stout Medaera can do Wonders: -- Odshertslikins t'has turned him
inside out, and made quite another Man of him.


Mass. Come, Cousin, shall we not see your Prize?


Cosm. Bring in the Prisoners there.


Enter Pedro bringing Vice-Queen, Mataloni, Caivano, Belleraiza and Fellicia,
-- Guards. Mass. You may remember, when I met you last, I showed some taste of
Courtesy, -- now proud Dons -- should you both Grovel at my Feet, and beg
for it, I would with scorn refuse and spurn ye from me.


Caiv. Spurn your Companions, base and perjured Monster.-


Mat. Thy sordid Villainy cannot touch our Souls, -- those are above an abject
Rebel's reach.


Mass. Abject, thou wretched Piece of fluttering Folly, thou gay
Court-Butterfly, that I can squeeze to nothing with my Fingers; thou art
abject, for what is that but to be still subservient to a Superior Power,
Slave to the Will of him that Commands, and such art thou to me.


Mat. No, thou art Slave to me, for I contemn thee; -- my Soul disdains to
breath its Vital Air, where thy Infection comes, and scorns to answer, or
change a word more, to save my Life.


Mass. Be sullen then, I Will Parley with your -- Wife, Sir, -- Madam, your
Husband's Choler as it is vain, so it is To Bell. ridiculous; but you, I hope,
know how to reconcile;

I have few words, but you may Guess my meaning. Kisses her Hand.


Bell. 'Tho I had rather die, yet for some Reasons I must permit him.


Mat. Furies and Fire, must I live and see this!


Aur. She stands so coldly, and not spit in's Face.


Mass. Oh, Madam, I have heard of your Great Spirit, -- and mean to Conjure it.
A word with you anon. For the present, Duke, know you may thank your Lady, for
what no Power on Earth but this her Courtesy -- could ever have gained, which
is a License from me -- to take your Leave of her. -- Go, Captain, bear 'em
both to Prison, and when I send this Ring -- bring me the Lady.


Cosm. It Is done, my Lord. Exit Cosm. with Matal. and Bell.


Pimp. Ay, ay, it is done, my Lord, -- any thing in the world, Egad, now things
go so rarely.


Mass. Let that Old Signiour be confined particularly: -- I hear he is good at
Plotting.


Fell. Ah let me go with my Father, I beseech ye: -- Look in my Face, believe I
am no Plotter, -- I know not what is wrong, much less can do it.


Pedro. So much the better, you can do something else that is as sitting for
ye, you are my Charge, -- you shall not want your Father.


Pimp. Ah happy Miss, the Major will take a great deal of Care of ye, therefore
don't -- be a Child, don't cry, the Major will take a huge deal of Care of ye.
Pedro Carries Her out.


Fell. Oh Father, Aunt, Oh Heaven help, help, help. Ped. carries her out.


Caiv. This Blow must reach my heart; Fate thou have done thy worst. Exit
Caivano.


Pimp. Come, come, old Gentleman, I Will see you fast enough, -- now will there
come fifty Ducats at least for a good Lodging; rare, rare times, rare.


Aur. Death and Confusion! Can the Sun yet shine, -- such Villainies as these,
methinks, should darken it, blot out all Nature, and return -- old Chaos --
into its Primitive nothing. -- Oh may all Curses. -- Mass. and Aur. walk
Angerly up and down the Stage.


Mass. Curse on, curse on, a Woman when she Curses, makes still a Blessing
follow.


Aur. Why am I left, thou Devil?


Mass. For the Devil! -- for I intend ^hou shall Blaspheme so much that he
shall fetch thee Headlong.


Aur. What! and thou stand by, thy Goary Paws reeking in Blood of Nobles. Is
there a Morsel through all the Shambles of Damned Reprobates, so proper for his
Diet as thy self, thou that from Infancy were Hell's half-blood, and since
still Trained 'amongst the Infernal Brood? To Beelzebub himself of Kin so near,
Thou Wilt hardly change thy Nature, w^^n you are there.



Mass. I choose an ill one because early taugh^
A Man's good Nature makes -- a Woman naught:
Copying their Mischiefs, I my own pursue,
And the nearer to a Devil, the nearer you.

Aur. Thou art as near it as the thing will bear:
Search Hell, a Rebel is the greatest there.
But thus to play the Dilatory Fiend, to Teaze me all this while with thy cursed
Figure, and not bring forth the Rack, the Wheel, the Torture, Poison or Sword,
to ease me from thy self, the worst and most infective Plague of all, is the
cursed Quintessence of Cruelty, and I grow Mad with my Despair.


Mass. It Is reasonab^e; I am Mad too, and so are all my People; the Times are
Mad, we should be in the fashion: But now I think on it, I will ask a Question,
and if your Rage can stop, answer me: Were I your Prisoner as you now are mine,
How would you use me?


Aur. I must answer, calmly.


Mass. As your fierce Nature will permit.


Aur. Thus then, as calmly as the Seas wild Surges Speaks Raging. Roar, when
Stormy Winds oppose 'em, I would kill thee: To ask a Woman choking for
Revenge, how she would use her most Inveterate Enemy! -- Impertinent Fool, why
I would kill thy Soul, if I could reach it too; but for thy Body, it should be
burnt with Pincers, thy Heart cut out, and after torn in Pieces with Wild
Horses, till there was not the bigness of a Finger to show the Pattern of a
Horrid Villain: But trod and mash'd over all the odious frame, --
And Pounded to the Dunghill whence it came.
There Is calmly for ye. -- Now what is my Doom?


Mass. Your Liberty: -- What neither Fawning, Prayers nor Tears could purchase;
this frank Confession has obtained, -- you are free; Conduct her through the
Guards to the Viceroy's Castle, -- I do it to show ye, I fear Threats so little,
that I dare all your Power to defeat me; and now resolve I will maintain my
own, because I think it becomes me.


Aur. So, Sir, -- and though I have my Life on these conditions, yet I will take
it to contrive thy Ruin; which like a Sybil I do Prophecy shall be performed
as late I ^ention'd it.


Mass. If our Blessed Stars kind Influence afford.
I Will Court no Stars or Planets, -- but my Sword.

Exeunt Severally. ACT IV.
SCEN. I.
Mataloni and Belleraiza, in Prison. Bell. ONE Minute more, and then the Fatal
Message Tolls our sad Separation. Sure two Hearts fast joined by Love, and
framed for one another, never felt a weighty violence like ours. Indifference
gains its point and has its ease; the Days and Nights are worn away in
Pleasures; but to be passionate in Love is deadly; Dire Fate resolves, grown
envious of our Bliss, to rob us of the Paradise of each other.


Mat. Yet this were nothing could we die together; could our winged Spirits
like two friendly Turtles fly to the Mansions of the Blessed above, and there
together coo our Mutual Love: -- Who would not leave this Tottering Tenement,
this Hovel Life with Joy, -- to change so Richly?


Bell. Nay, we must die together, my dear Lord; our Lives are one, and when
yours ceases Action, you may assure your self mine is no more.


Mat. But I alas! am doomed to Death more cruel than what Tormenters give the
common way, to leave thee here to bear their Barbarous Usage; leave the dear
Beauty which once blessed my Life with Raptures of true Pleasure, to be sullied,
Grasped and profaned by Insolent Brutality; and though I know thy Virtue never
will yield, it is double death to think on thy distress.


Bell. Yield, no, no, I hope my Dearest is confirmed in that; nor had I
suffered late that nauseous Rebel to touch my Hand, but for your sake, my Lord:
I knew my Face had charmed his Brutal Soul, and that by softening his
Barbarity, I could get means thus to enjoy your Company, which else had been
impossible.


Mat. I know it, and thank thee for this Blessing Embraces Her. it procured me:
Besides, I Have had more favor from the Monster; -- a Servant of my own allotted
me to do my pr^vate business, and such a business; -- I Have employed him in, Oh
Belleraiza!


Bell. Speak out, my Lord; in Belleraiza's Bosom all Secrets are secure.


Mat. Can thou endure the odious Infamy, that I should turn base Pander?


Bell. I hate a Pander.


Mat. That, that is the meaning of this Upstart's kindness, believing I Will
promote his Bestial Love to my dear Belleraiza.


Bell. Horrid Wretch! cursed Hell-hound!


Mat. Now if I find the means, though it be by death to free us both from this
Extreme of Misery', will my sweet Love consent?


Bell. With better will, than ever miserable condemned Captive, accepted
freedom. Enter Servant with Dagger.


Mat. See, the trial comes.
So, have thou succeeded well?

Serve. I have, my Lord, -- though with some little hazard of my Life, being
searched by the Out-guards, -- but naming the Duchess, they discharged me
presently, -- and there is the effects of your Commands.


Mat. It Is well done, -- withdraw a while: -- Exit Servant. See here my Love,
this was the business meant, to buy this Dagger: Can thou not guess the use
on it?


Bell. I do, and thus make bare my Breast to meet it; let that dear hand but
strike, I shall find ^eaven before my Soul be ready.


Mat. It must be so, ^o leave thee here with Ruffians, -- will to Eternity
disturb my rest, -- for I must die thou know; then if thou love me,
thou wilt love this kind though cruel Resolution, first to kill thee, and
afterward my self.


Bell. I do, and on thy Lips bless thee for ever.


Mat. Oh my Soul's happiness! They Embrace.


Ent^r Cosmo with a Ring. Cosmo. My Heart's so full of hopes to enjoy A^relia,
and sat my strong desires with Princely Beauty, that I am tardy in my O^fice to
bring the Duchess to the General. Here is his Ring, by which his Pleasure's
known in all Affairs in Love as well as Power, -- this is the fatal Circle that
must part the Married Lovers, -- and yonder see they are, Close Billing like
two harmless Turtle Doves,
Unweary still of their Connubial Loves.



Mat. We are disturbed; see yonder Glares the Meteor -- that now portends our
Ruin.


Bell. One moment longer, and we had both been happy.


Cosm. Madam, you know my Messag^ by this Ring, -- the General expects ye, pray
make have, for I have Business of my own so urgent, I can wait no delays.


Mat. Men in great Places must be full of Business; am not I sent for?


Cosm. No, no, my Lord, you are fixed in the wrong Station, the Wheel is turned,
you are not now at Court.


Mat. And yet my Wife's sent for to Privy Council! What, what is her Business
there?


Cosm. Why, with plain dealing, if you needs must know, her Business there is
to make you a Cuckold.


Mat. I have a Message first to send.


Cosm. What Is that?


Mat. You, to the Devil, Sir. Stabs Him.


Cosm. Oh I am Damned. Dies.


Mat. Start not, my Love, nor let thy Cheeks grow pale, but adore Providence
for this happy Accident, that marks us out instead of Fate our Freedom; -- here
is the Ring that guides us through the Labyrinth, by whose Despotick Power we
pass the Guards, and then instead of Death live ever happy.


Bell. Now I shall think there is a Joy for Love^s uncommon from the rest in
sweet Elysium; This bliss unlooked for seems like Heaven's care,
Which only those that love like us could share.



Mat. But first I must disguise me in his Habit: What, ho, Lorenzo!


Serve. What Service, my good Lord? Enter Lorenzo.


Mat. Drag in that Body, -- and help me in a Business that i^ necessary.


Serve. With all my heart, -- Oh are ye h^re Don Dogsface? Yo^ were a Rogue in
Office, I am glad you are paid your wages.


Drags Him in* Mat. Happy Success thus! may we always prove.


Bell. Blessed be this day when Fortune favored Love. Exeunt.


SCENE II.
Enter Pedro and Fellicia. Pedro. Come, come, no more Evasions, no more Woman's
Tricks, I thought you were too young for 'em; but to the Point, will you Love
me without more stir or Preambles?


Fell. Good, Sir, have pity on me. Weeps.


Pedro. Pity, why I have Love for thee, I tell thee, -- that is, I think it is
Love, I Am sure I Have a mind to thee, -- therefore no more of these dissembling
Tears -- but buckle too without more trouble: Come, will you comply, I say?


Fell. Alas, to what, Sir?


Pedro. Humh -- there is Womankind again now, -- they always love to hear it
named before they venture, -- why to my will: -- Come, come, you are not too
young to understand the manner.


Fell. Indeed I am, Sir, Oh -- pray don't look so cruelly upon me, I will do
any thing I can to please ye, but for my Love, my good, my poor Old Father had
it all, I never Loved ought besides. Weeps.


Pedro. Nay look, if ye practice your Tricks upon me, I must begin the rough
Game; I Have no fine words, not I, mine is a downright meaning, and with Love, or
without, I must be satisfied that is in short.


F^ll. How, Sir, which -- way? Oh do not burn me with your fiery Eyes.


Pedro. Again -- which way? Gad I must speak it broad, -- she has an Itch to
hear it on my Life.


Fell. I Will sing a Pretty Song to please ye, Sir, -- 'twas made upon a poor
unhappy Maid, forced in a Wood by a rude Barbarous Russian, and Robbed and
Ravished, -- I know not what that is, but she was sadly ^s'd.


Pedro. What has she made a Song upon her self beforehand? She Sings. HE led
her by the Milk white hand into a Covert shady,
He swore he would give her House and Land* and she should be a Lady.
Her Cheeks were spread with Crimson red; at last he made her squeak'out.
The naughty man a Trick began that Im ashamed to speak out.


Quaint and fine in faith, what a pretty little warbling Pipe the Gypsy has --
Oh -- how I long to spoil it, -- Come, come, my little Canary Bird, Music is
most proper at Meals, I must fall too now.


Fell. Oh some kind Angel now look down and save me: Oh but you ha'nt heard me
sing a merry Song yet, I have of the Devil and a Friar, how they were playing a
Game at Cross Bunns, and how the Friar Cheated him. Sings again. THE Devil he
pulled off his Iacket of flame,
The Friar he pulled off his Cowle,
The Devil took him for a Dunce of the Game,
The Friar took him for a Fool:
He piqu'd, and repiqu'd him so often,
That at last he swore by the Jolly fat Nuns,
If Cards came no better than those that are past,
Oh! Oh! I shall lose all my Bunns.



Pedro. Ha, ha, ha, -- how the young Cockatrice -- tickles me with her shrill
Note, -- But come prithee, now let me strike up my fit of mirth.


Fell. Y've never a Fiddle, Sir.


Pedro. Oh then I Will make use of yours.


Fell. Sweet, dear kind Sir, -- A poor unhappy Girl! besides I Am ugly too.


Pedro. Ye lie, ye Baggage, ye lie, you are handsome enough in Conscience. Seizes.


Fell. Oh that the Earth would swallow me. Weeps.


Pedro within. Major where are ye?


Fell. Oh blessed sound!


Pedro. Ah Plague of all delays, -- 'twas the Captains voice sure, -- Hah, he is
coming, -- go get ye in ye little Hypocrite, and prepare your self, do you hear,
I Will be with ye presently. -- Now Captain -- What News -- Shuts in Fellicia.


Enter Pedro. Pedro. News that distracts us all: The General's mad yonder, the
Duke of Mataloni has killed Cosmo, and with the Ring freed both himself and the
Duchess, -- he is coming hither with the Prince of Bissignano, but in so
strange a humor.


Pedro. All the better, get our Friends ready Captain, against he cools, to
drink him up again, and be sure contrive to keep him from sleep: I have a little
Business now, but at night I Will second ye.


Pedro. I Will not fail my part, he has not had a Nap this four days, nor shall not
if Business can hinder. Exeunt severally.


Enter Massainello in a Rage with Bissignano and Guards. Mass. Let twenty
Cannons fire against the Castle: -- Down with the Houses in Toledo-Street, I
will not leave a Don a Hole to Nest in: And in Revenge of Mataloni's Subtlety,
and Cosmo's Death, -- Kill all ye take of them; Burn, Ravish, Plunder. -- I
choke with Rage, and cannot vent my Gall,
Till there is a Desolation of 'em all.



Biss. This is stark Frenzy, Sir, for Honor's sake -- think, ever ye Act this
Outrage; -- Has the Duke done more than is natural? And since you have forgot
and broke your Promise, in other things relating to the State, had he been wise
to trust you with his Wife?


Mass. Peace, Babbling Fool, Hell take thee quick for naming her.


S^rikes Him. Biss. Then Life's my s^orn, I Will die this moment.


Offers to Draw, Guards withhold it. Mass. That thou shall not neither: -- Away
with him then, give him Liberty, I Will take down his proud heart without
consining.


Biss. And if it ever forgives thee, curse me Heaven.


Exit Bissignano Guarded. Re-enter Pietro. Mass. Thy Looks are cheerful, what
good News?


Piet. Rare, rare, Sir, the Party you sent after the Duke and's Wife o'retook
'em, but he being disguised in Cosmo's habit, his Fact not known, was by the
Guards -- neglected, but she is forced from him and brought back to Prison.


Mass. Ah -- had the half kind ^ates -- but caught him too, my wishes had been
full: -- But come, however I have his better part, and that shall serve to cool
my fla^e a little: Come hither Friend; what, thou art but a Captain?


Piet. No more, my Lord.


Mass. Give me thy No^e, March out and be a Colonel.


Pulls Him by the Nose and Cuffs Him. Piet. I am your Lordship's ever. Exit
Pietro.


Mass. Oh Power, methinks I feel thee still more Charming, and my Revenge on
Mataloni s^ems, -- now not so -- hopeless: -- Death, I never name him, but the
word chills my Veins; An Ominou^ Blast, methinks, shrivels my Nerves, -- and
makes my Blood clodd and grow cold as if the word were fatal, -- Pish, -- it is
mere fancy, think on the Prisoner, she shall atone; -- Now Hat^ and Love are
equal.


Enter Pimpwell. Pimp. I hear he is in pretty good Humor now, and therefore
will venture upon him: -- Yonder Is the Duchess, my good Lord, -- we have got
her again; -- why what a perverse thing it is, -- Odd your Lordship even used her
too civilly; if you would have taken my Advice, you should have Pinnion'd her,
Cramped her, bound ^er to her Good Behavior: A proud Minx to slight such an
Honor.


Mass. You Are in the right; how do thou honest Fellow?


Pimp. Ah -- mighty well, and like your Honor* and especially when I see you
smile and look cheerfully: -- And I can tell ye something will make ye more
merry, -- we have set this Vagabond Duke too, -- we will have him if he be above
Ground.


Mass. I ever found thee diligent: -- What Paper have tha^ there?


Pimp. Phugh, a Letter from my Good Lady to your Honor; she is pleased to
overvalue my small Parts and please ye. Now for my Government, -- and Oh the
Stars, Planets, Comets, Meteors, Fiery Flapdragons, and Will-o'th-Wisps stand
by me now, or may ye never more furnish an Almanac. --


Mass. Ha, ha, -- why Blowze speaks kindly of thee here.


Pimp. Ah -- Bless her good Honor -- and forgive me one thing I had like to
have forgot, my Lord, -- I h^ar the People certainly design to vote your Honor
-- for Viceroy. --


Mass. Do You they, that is well, she writes in thy behalf here for the Government
of Aversi, -- it is thine, there, there, Kicks Him. A Patent for thee, go and
Govern.


Pimp. Ah thank your good Lordship, from my Soul, and happy be the To^ that
kicks me to the Government, to which in State I go. Exit.


Mass. Thus like Immortal, Jove thus uncontrould, shall gr^^^ Massainello act
his Pleasure, whilst Trembling Nations stand amazed to view him. Is there a
higher Spoke in Fortune's Wheel, th^^ where I stand? -- No, but methinks with
the Prodigious height^ my Head grows dizzy. Stay, to morrow I Am a Viceroy, next
a King* then wherefore shines that Sun so far above me; or how dares yonder
Moon and Stars by Night pretend to Ape my Glory? Oh my hot Brain, is there a
thing in Nature that is cold? -- A re^l Substance that bears the name -- of
Ice? sure it is all Fiction, the Globe's composed of Fire, the Element's all
Flame; and mine is more fierce than all, and more consuming: I from my Bosom
breath a Hotter Hell,
Than P^aeton on A^rick when he fell.
Exit.


SCEN. III.
Enter Viceroy, Mataloni and Aurelia. Vice. You have no Leisure now for Grief,
my Lord, Revenge must ^ill your Bosom, thoughts of that, -- cha^m and possess
your Senses, it is your D^eds and not your Sorrows now must do you Justice.


Mat. Oh let Fate once afford me but the means, but one, one, lucky minute, --
I Will forgive all my past miseries.


Vice. Let us not despair, -- the Pious Cardinal has made a Progress beyond our
Expectation.


Aur. He Is too old, too dull, and loses time in grave Advising: Our way should
be some deep stroke at a heat, some Stratagem to sink 'em at a Blow, without
depending on Consideration, some Mine to mount 'em up, some Gulf to drown 'em,
or with a wish could we obtain the Lightning Celestial, Blazes of Ethereal
Fire; or Bribe the Thunder Rolling in the Clouds to break just over their
Heads, and mash 'em all; that were a joyful Sight.


Vice. But these are Things impossible.


Aur. Oh that my Power were half so active as my vigorous Will, -- that this
vast Weed, this monstrous spreading Mushrome, that insolently gave me Life and
Freedom, both from his hands, so much to my dishonor, might feel my Fury in
its noble nature; at least that he might see my Glorious Anger, and my just
detestation of my self, for being cursed so far, so poorly fated to take 'em as
his Courtesy.


Mat. It Is still the nature of Mechanic Villains, to make by insolent action
an Affront, -- what they design a Kindness: I warrant he looked stately.


Aur. Like the World's Emperor, -- as if we all were closed up in a Bubble,
which he could puff to nothing: Oh I am Mad, mad, and could tear my hated self
to pieces; Curse my unhappy Stars, and make a Contract even with the Prince of
the Infernal Mansions, -- so I might perfect my Revenge.


Vice. Calmer, calmer, you torment your self too much.


Aur. Oh talk not of Calmness, I Have a Storm within me, and it must blow before
the Rain will follow, -- Weeps. -- Hah, can I be so base, so meanly spirited to
shed a Tear too, a foolish Drop, -- it is gone, -- and with it all my Womanly
soft temper, -- for when I think upon your Belleraiza, and the Distress of my
dear, dear F^llicia, -- both now Confined amongst these worst of Devils, Fury
unqu^nchable my Breast does burn,
I change my Nature, and a Dragon turn.
Exit.


Vice. I cannot blame her ^or unbridled Passion: Because her grief is weighty;
a sense of Honor too severely great, but you, my Lord, I fear, by her last
words are struck afresh.


Mat. It Is true, the name of Belleraiza shot me, shot me to the Heart, but I
have pulled the Dart out, and will be whole again, -- What Is to be done, my Lord?


Vice. Immediate Diligence to aggravate the People, whom the Cardinal, -- who
by his virtue always gained their Love, possesses now with Massainello's
Madness, upon which Thousands have ^ate ^^volted from him, -- being daily
abused, some ki^l^d, some wounded, as his Humor plea^es, -- and on the least
Encouragement we are told, will turn against him.


Mat. Oh that Joyful hour!


Vice. Here comes his Gracious Eminence.


Mat. And I think the Prince of Bissignano.


Vice. It Is the same, his coming must produce something of moment.


Enter Cardinal and Bissignano. Card. Health to your Highness.


Biss. Long and many years happy and flourishing.


Vice. This from you, my Lord, the General's Moderator, is somewhat strange.


Biss. True, I was Moderator, but not Sycophant; but now believe, my Lord, I am
his Fate, -- he is now stark Frantic, all his Actions show it, worrys the
Nobles that don't Bow and Cringe, and do him Rever^nce as he passes by, as a
Wolf does a Flock of harmless Sheep; -- Kills, Tortures his own Friends, and
plays the Devil, even with those very Rogues that set him up.


Card. And that those Crush him is most natural.


Biss. Besides, a Barbarous Action done last Night, too bad to be related --
Innocent Fellicia your sweet Neice, my Lord, savagely Ravished by his Villain
Brother; at which sad News her Father, Old Caivano, -- being close Imprisoned
too, since died with Grief.


Mat. Accursed Dog, Oh, my thoughts murder me! Oh Belleraiza!


Biss. Nothing of her is Noised, hope well, my Lord.


Card. And prudently let us manage: Has your Highness spread all those Papers
round about the City, importing from the King a General Pardon to all the
People that lay down their Arms.


Vice. Most carefully, -- and find it has the same Effects I wish, for Numbers
have observed it, and Deserted.


Biss. Most c^rtainly they have, -- on which occasion the Tyrant-Rebel, though
he is always fluster'd, has yet a Pang of Fear, and keeps up close, -- doubles
even his Guards, and shows an Apprehension of what I hope will happen.


Mat. How shall I come to unkennel this Damned ^ox, this Bloody, this most
Hellish --


Biss. Fortune; my Lord, shows ye the way, by me; it is my luck, for now I Will
call it so, to have an Interest in his Night's Con^ident, his Blowzabella, --
she, if she holds her Humor as 'twas lately, -- will scarce deny me any asked
for favor; nor will she balk at this, if I request it, to give me the
opportunity to see him privately.


Vice. It looks with a good face, proceed my Lord.


Biss. It Is the easier to be done, -- because the breach about the Blow, the
Villain lately gave me is supposed reconciled, which if ^ e'^e forgive, may
this right hand refuse to do me reason: My Dri^t is unsuspected, and being
done, when I have molded her, you shall have notice.


Mat. Oh that the Wings of Time moved faster! Now I am impatient till the
Minute comes.


Biss. Yet too much have, my Lord, may ruin all: Let us meet once more here,
and then consult about some methods to be used.


Card. It Is reasonable, -- whilst I assist at the Cathedral, and there by
subtl^ means disperse more Papers, and fix the People in their hopes of Pardon.


Vice. Six Troops of Spanish Horse, -- shall all be ready against the Signal's
given for our meeting, which I could wish were suddenly.


Biss. To morrow, e're the Rosy Guide has ushered in the Sun; in the mean time
let all be hushed as Death, -- it is Freedom that is at stake, then let us be close
and cautious. Silent as Infants in soft Dreams appear;
Or Lovers -- when they know -- that Spies are near.
Exeunt.


ACT V.
SCEN. I.
Enter Bissignano, Blowzabella, Pimpwell, and La Poop. Blowz. LA Poop, Go tell
the Ladies that are come to visit me, I suppose to beg something, -- that I Will
not be seen to day; tell I Am troubled with Vapors, and keep my Chamber.


L. Poop. I ^all, Madam, I have always one Lie ready for your Ladyship ven ever
you have de occasion, -- vor me know ver well de Lie be as proper vor de File
de Chamber, as de old Gown of her Lady ven she leave off. Exit La Poop.


Blow. Well, my Lord, and as you were saying, give me your hand; nay, nay, you
might have spared that, -- Kiss^s i^. for I have been so busy setting in order
some new Jewels to wear, that Ods^ish I forgot to wash 'em to day.


Biss. Ay or this Week either, on my Conscience: Well, if my Guts don't come up
now, I Am happy.


Pimp. Hum, this long Chin'd Don is very familiar, methinks, but if this hold,
I shall make bold to let him know there are some Governors his Equals, to be
first served; -- Gad my quality shall be known now. I have it: What, we must do
great things now.


Blowz. Ay, ay, you say enough of my Beauty, and my good shape, now you are in
the sit; but I have had but slender Proofs from a Person as I thought of your
Ability.


Biss. Hum, what a Devil shall I say now, for the truth is I have always shunned
her as a Hare does a Hound, when she hears the Horn near her. Aside. Oh, Madam,
Business, business, it is that has always occasioned my misfortune.


Pimp. I beseech ye, Madam, let him mind his -- hem -- hem, and let others --
that are more diligent -- and men of quality too mind yours.


Biss. So, thank my Stars, -- I have a Rival now, -- of a Valet de Chamber.


Blowz. Time was my Lord, when that face of yours could do something with me,
-- but you Courtiers are so dull in matters of moment, that a Woman of spirit
grows weary of ye presently. -- My Lord, prithee come hither and put this Patch
on right. To Pimp.


Pimp. Humph, humph, poor Prince how he looks now? Aside. Pray Madam, dispatch
his Business, and send him away, I have a word or two to speak to you in private.


Blowz. And what Private Business -- have thou with me, ha, -- Go, you are a
Rogue; -- You are so uppish now y're a Man of Quality.


Biss. Ay, it is even so, I find I Am a mere Castaway, -- but I must Collogue
till I get my Ends of her however.


Blowz. Well, my Lord, and what other Business have you with me, besides your
Address? what, you would speak with the General?


Biss. Yes, Madam, and about earnest Business concerns him.


Pimp. Lend him your Key, Madam, dont't go your self t^ introduce him; it is
below ye: Besides, you know he will be every minute troubling ye, for he is
employed continually.


Blowz. It Is true, therefore I Will put that trouble off my hands* There, my
Lord, that Key admits ye to him; and now do you hear, you may negotiate your own
public Business -- without troubling mine in private.


Pimp. Ay, do you hear, my Lord, you understand without troubling ours in private.


Biss. Blessed Accident, Fortune has thrown that into my hands unexpected, that
else I should have half-damn'd my Soul with Lying and Flattery to get from her,
Aside. I hear, Madam, the General's busy now with some Friends, an hour hence
will be time enough for me.


Blowz. Oh, when you please: -- Your Servant, my Lord.


Pimp. Your Servant, good my Lord; -- there, there is the Door, my Lord.


Biss. Insolent Rogue, he sees not yet the Fiend that is hovering over him Aside.


Blowz. The General is busy, -- it is true, that is, he is Drinking: A Daily
Affair that my Brother Pedro always employs Exit Bissig. him in: he says
politickly, but I Am sure it is an insufferable Plague to me, for he is now and
then stark mad, -- runs up and down without his Hat, and but one Stockin on,
stares like a Fury, and never comes to visit me, but after three or four words
we fall to Cuffs; -- here lies his Perruke, and there my Head-dress; but
Odsfish I Will be revenged of him. -- Come, my Lord, let us go in, Come. Pats Him.


Pimp. My Lord, -- my Lord -- how purely -- it sounds, and what a figure I
shall make, when for Air or so, -- I whip over again into my own Country
England. Zooks how my Title will rattle there! -- Here Is Don Ricardo arrived,
they cry presently: Then to the Park I scowre, then to the Playhouse, then the
Side-box, then behind the Scenes, and then prattle with the little pretty Tuzzy
Muzzy, winking, Pinking Rogues; Ah Le Plasire charmant, dear Madam, I beg your
Pardon. -- Gad I was so wrapped with my new Fortune, -- that I had almost forgot
your Ladyship.


Blow. Had ye so: Come Sirrah, come your ways in and take a Dram of my Bottle,
-- I Will give ye something shall rub up your remembrance presently; Come Ricky
-- come Sirrah.


Pimp. March on Don, march on, Oh happy, happy Rogue! What, we must do great
things now. Exeunt.


SCENE II.
Enter Viceroy and Cardinal. Vice. Blessed News! The Face of things wears; sudden
Change, revolting Crowds throng hourly to the Castle, -- and beg for Pardon,
promising to turn and serve with, -- The Rebell's humour's now so monstrous
grown, that he spares none, murders his Friends and Kinsmen, Racks and breaks
of the Wheel for every Trifle, not heeding Sex nor Age, Desert nor Quality.


Card. His Madness, we may well believe will last too, he has not slept this
Week.


Vice. And every day they drink him to a height.


Card. That works for us, -- and makes him do such mischiefs that now the
People Generally hate him; the Vice-Queen's Prayer is heard, for that she may
be thoroughly satisfied with sweet Revenge, which I confess my best Divinity
cannot in this Juncture dissallow; -- we only want the generous performance of
Bissignano's -- Promise, -- and Mataloni's Valor to effect it, and then
Revenge is sure.


Enter Mataloni Leading Fellicia, her Hair disheveled, and Mouth Bloody, as
Ravished. Vice. But who comes yonder, Oh my Tortured Soul! -- Who is it? I see
my dear, my sweet Fellicia.


Mat. Had ever Beauty so severe a Blast, or tender Innocence so hard a Fate!
The Ravisher it seems Mad with his Guilt, and fearing 'twould exasperate the
People soon, -- as the Barbarous Action was performed, close covered with a
Veil conveyed her hither.


Fell. Bury me quick, Oh do not look upon me, but pity and revenge, Oh if a
wretched ruined Virgin's Prayer can touch your Hearts, pity me and revenge.
Exit.


Card. My Heart is wounded, and my Reason fails me, -- why such things are, I
must not dare not ask, -- the Mystery of Religion, curbs my thoughts, -- and
there is nothing left me but to wonder: Why Innocence to such distress can fall,
None ever can know but only who knows all.



Enter Bissignano with a Key. Vice. Welcome, most Noble Lord, -- good Luck I
hope has blessed us in your coming.


Biss. Good, as it is possible, -- here is the fatal Key that opens Hell, where
all the Fiends sit in Triumphant Revels, amongst their Brimming Bowls, fearless
of Danger. -- Now let us plunge 'em to the inmost Cavern, -- where Sulphurous
Caldrons boil, with hottest fury -- I sent a Message to the Vice-Queen lately
-- to get the Blowze the Fish-wife out of the way by inviting her to Music, --
or a Banquet; and she resolves on it; this being done, our way is clear, our
Hearts and Hands are ready to crush this ^dious Mons^er.


Mat. Lead, Brave Prince.


Biss. And yet it is, below our selves, methinks, to taint our Hands with his
vile Blood -- our Slaves shall do the Drudgery.


Mat. I Will be there however, -- lest some damned Accident


Vice. Should Intervene and stop the wished Affair.


Card. And I Will go beg, -- your good Success by Prayer. Ex^^nt.


SCEN. III.
Discovers Massainello just risen from Table, where Pedro, Pietro and others
were Drinking. Mass. She has defied my Love, and dares my Cruelty; Is
Massainello to be dared, -- no, -- Woman, thou soon shall find the Thunderbolts
of Jove, and all the fierce Artillery of Heaven -- too weak to balk my Power,
-- Yet she Smiles, and when I talk of Rape -- or Death with Torment, points to
the Sky as if from thence she hoped fresh Succors to relieve her.


Pedr. Harkee, -- don't mind him, he is got now into one of his moody Fits: --
Come, come, drink about.


Piet. He has sent for the Duchess, -- and I suppose will be somewhat rough
with her Grace, if she keeps her old Humor; -- Ten to one but we shall see
some Scratching, Mewing and Caterwawling between 'em.


Mass. Caesar Lubrano, Tursis and Zavalio, three mighty Dons that proudly
looked upon me as I thought with Contempt, shall die to Night, their Houses
Burnt and Plundered; -- nor stop I here, but all their Heads and Hands from
Bodies chopped, and then Nailed upon Crosses, -- shall stand to adorn the
Entrance of my Palace; and had I but that Devil Mataloni, -- but here is one
half of him, the Fiend split in two, this part is Woman.


Guards bring in Belleraiza. Bell. Well, Sir, what Torture next? you flag and
cool, my Courage can endure a thousand worse, than these I feel of Darkness and
of Solitude, -- my Humor too is fixed just as it was, for know I hate ye still.


Mass. And I thee now, so rankly, I could wish thou were a Man, that being of
the stronger Constitution, thou might feel pain the more.


Pedro. So she has netled him already, -- there is no moulding her to any thing
by fair means, -- she is obstinate still, -- what a Devil is this Virtue, I
wonder that Women stickle so about, -- They can sell it for nothing, I never
heard it was worth a Groat.


Pietro. Ah -- the General never went the right way to work with her; if any
Woman denies me impertinen^ly, it is but knocking her down, and there is an end
of the matter.


Bell. Will you not prove the force then of your hatred? Order the Rack or
Wheel, or any thing, so you dismiss me.


Mass. Poor Obstinate, -- art thou so fond of Pain?


Bell. Pain -- will be pleasure, so I save my Honor.


Mass. Your Honor! Since then -- you are of that so tender -- I thank ye, you
have shown the way to plague ye, -- I am not ignorant, a Woman's Will can when
its stubborn de^ie death and horror, -- if that Fantastic whimsie be secure,
-- and I have found one of this sort are you: Your Honor safe, you all my
Power defy,
Then first I Will kill your Honor e're you die.
For to divert my self and my Companions thou shall here be stripped stark naked
in our view, each charming Limb which Fool's mistake for Beauty, -- exposed
even to my Guards to mock and scorn.


Bell. Torment of Torments, what have I heard him say?


Mass. Here, seize on her, and use the haughty Mischief as I command, that we
may view the Beauty's she is so proud of, and judge whither perfection or
defects are most excelling. They seize her.


Pedr. We shall have some fresh Play presently.


Bell. Oh, I have been too rash, -- thus at your Feet -- I beg your pardon, and
repent my words: Burn, tea^ me piecemeal, for provoking ye, invent new
Tortures that were never heard of, -- to glut your Cruelty, and I Will call it
Justice, but let me escape the shame of being exposed.


Mass. Oh does it pinch ye now, -- is -- thin skinned Honor so nice that a mere
sight on it makes ye squeak. -- I say uncloth her, for I now, methinks, expect a
certain pleasure, to behold a Body that Mankind often Damn their Souls for.


Bell. Oh I will never rise but rooted here, -- fix till my life forsakes me.


Mass. Tear off her hold, -- and strip her instantly; and when she is so
disgraced, take off her Head, and send it to her Yoke-mate Mataloni.


Here Enter Bissignano, Mataloni, with a Pistol and Guards. Mat. That shall not
need, -- he comes to fetch the whole, here is Mataloni's self. Seizes her, she
Embraces him.


Bell. Oh, -- Ecstasy!


Mat. Fall on my Soldiers. He fights with the Guards.


Mass. Hah surpised! yet you shall buy me dearly, Despair assist me.


Bissignano Fights with Pedro and Disarms him. Massainello kills three of the
Guards, and strives to get near to Belleraiza, -- Mataloni shoots him with a
Pistol, -- He falls. Mass. Ah -- Coward Fates! had my last minute prosper'd, --
to reach thy Life, my own had fled with joy; but thou have stopped me, Stopped
all my Glory -- in its full carreer,
And sent the Ambitious Soul I know not where.
Dies.


Mat. With thee die all my Fears: Oh my Soul's Joy, -- once more, I see there is
a kind Star for Lovers. Embraces her.


Bell. I cannot speak: Ah let my Eyes express me.


Biss. Secure those Rebels; then with speed let us go to meet the Viceroy and
the Cardinal.


Mat. Let the Spanish Troops be d^awn up near the -- Castle, ready to publish
when the Word is given the Death of this proud Monster.


Sold. They shall, my Lord.


Biss. And now thou Glorious Saint, Protector of our Kingdom, thus we thank
thee.


Mat. Thank thee with Joy for this Propitious Hour,
That frees Glad Naples -- from Rebellious Power. Exeunt.

SCEN. IV.
Enter Aurelia and Ladies. Aur. What is the Pageant come?


1 Lady. So, please your Highness, I saw the Coach stop now at the Gate.


2 Lady. Her Sister too, and the whole Tribe of Fish-wives.


Aur. And is the Mask -- prepared as I gave Order?


1 Lady. Yes, Madam, and the Hangman, Death and the Devil ^oo, with their
proper Ornaments, all ready to wait on her.


2 Lady. Her Mackerel Ladyship, -- I dare affirm was never in her Life so
Entertained.


A^^. Not as she shall be e're I part with her, -- By this time sure the
Destinies have played their fatal Game, and the bold Rebel has in Hell his
payment, as Noble Bissignan^, sent me word, they then had plotted, and the
hour's now past, -- It must be done;th 'uncommon Joy I feel, gives me assurance
his Death will be their sport, -- whilst I divert me with his Mawking here, and
show her Beastly self by a reflection. She comes, ^^d with a Pride I warrant,
proper. -- Who waits there? Set Cha^^ out for her Mightiness -- and her
Retinue, and when the Mask begins, let one stand by her to explain the Figures.


Enter Blowzabella, Pimpwell, Ursula, and Attendants. Blowz. Well, Odsfish,
it is a happy thing to be a Woman of Quality: Had I been a poor Jade now, the
Devil of any Ball, Mask, or what do you call it had been made for me, -- and now
lookee, the Vice-Queen thinks it her duty to show me respect, -- On my word,
this is a great point gained.


Pimp. Ay, Madam, -- I warrant she has some suit or other to your Ladyship; and
faith, Madam, if you ^' take my Counsel, don't be too forward, let her wait a
little, -- it is the Method at Court always.


Blowz. It Is so, Boy, you are in the right. -- Come now, let us hear this Stuff.


The Masque begins. Enter a Fisherman and Fishwife, and Dance. Serve. Now that
your Greatness may understand the Figures, -- you must know that the first is a
Fisherman, and the Dowdy his Wife.


Blowz. Ha, ha, ha, -- Odsfish that is pleasant enough. -- Well, and prithee
what is the other?


Serve. The other is a Monster representing Rebellion.


Pimp. I warrant that is a troublesome Rascal.


Then Enter a Figure dressed like Pimpwell, and a Valet bearing a Robe and a
Gown, Fine Clothes Tawdry. Serve. This is a Rascally Fellow, that is got into
Office, and serves the others in their Villainies, his Name is Pride, -- a Pimp,
a Scoundrel. --


Pimp. Odd, methinks, the Fellow has a pretty kind of an Appearance: Gad I
think he is like me: Come, let us hear him.


Then they Dress the Fisherman and his Wife in the Robe and Gown, who Strutt
about. --

Then Enter three Figures, the one Represe^ting Death, the other a Hangman, the
third the Devil.

Blowz. Oh G^d, what Nauseous Scraggy Rascal's that -- soh -- I abominate the
sight of him.


Pimp. And I the the other, -- methinks he looks lik^ the Hangman.


Serve. Right, Sir, he is one, -- the the other is, Madam, a strange surly
positive morose Fellow, his Name is Death; few of you Ladies like him, he has
not Flesh enough; the other, one that represents Rebellion.


A Solemn Introduction of Instrumental Music, and then this Song is Sung by
Mr. Pate, representing Rebellion.
FRom Burning Caves the dreadful'st part of Hell,
Where Fiends with Flaming Tongues in pain Eternal dwell,
And damned by me on Earth in dismal horror yell;
I come to show these Wretches here,
What they are doomed to bear.
I come to show what Torment must ensue,
What endless Plagues are for Rebellion due*
Appear then each Slave
Of Fate, Hell, and the Grave:
Appear in your Terror, and wound their cursed Eyes
With Sulphur perfumed too ye Furies arise.
1 Fury. Ha, ha, ha, ha, we laugh aloud. Furies and others arise.
We laugh, we laugh aloud,
And of our Fortune still are proud,
When e're to Hell the Rebels crowd.

2 Fury. These to worst Pangs -- Grim Pluto does condemn,
Our heaps of Coals ar^ shovel'd all to them.

3 Fury. And when in Limbo's Freezing Lake,
We in another kind
Damnations Plague expect to find
Proud Rebels still our Places take,
And Grind their G^ashing Teeth and quake.

1 Fury. He may chance to find mercy who quaffs a full Bowl.


2 Fury. And the Whore-master too may make friends for ^is Soul*


3 Fury. But the Rebel unpardoned for ever shall howl.


Chorus of all. He may chance, etc.


Then a Dance; at the End of which Death and the Hangman come and seize on
Pimpwell and Blowzabella, and the Devil on Ursula, and the rest. Exeunt. Pimp.
I warrant that is a troublesome Fellow.


Blowz. Eyh, Eyh, -- What would the Raw-bon'd Rascal have? Oh hideous! Hands,
off Sirrah. Was ever such an Abuse?


Serve. It Is part of the Entertainment, Madam, you must go with him.


Blowz. Go with him, I Will see the Devil have him first.


Ursul. And his Dam, -- the the other here -- Hands off Sirrah; you will grow saucy
presently.


Pimp. And what would you have with me ye Impudent Rascal? Do You see how you
soil my Coat? To the Hangman.


Serve. Oh he has a Halter, Sir, will cure ye of all Fashions presently. In
short, Goody Fishwife, the Villain your Husband's dead, and yours Madam will be
presently, therefore all ye have to console upon is to hang decently by one
another: But first that you may die in your right Stations, kneel there and pay
your Homage.


Blowz. Ah -- Treason, Treason, where are my Guards? --


Pimp. Help, help there, I Am a Lord -- Good People.


Serve. Ye Lie, ye are a Pimp, ye Rogue, they must Guard ye to the Gallows.


Aur. What can your Mightynesses bow so low, you that so late could dash at the
Nobility, and kick your Kennel-dirt up in their Faces; Hah! can you Truckle now
ye Grovelling Slaves, you are in your right Stations, -- low as your Parent-clod.
Then throw their hated Carcasses on Dunghills, drag 'em to death; at last the
hour is come, though long expected, which my indulgent Genius did reserve to
gratify the labor of my Soul for all its Torments during this Rebellion: --
Mean Souls when wronged, mean Satisfaction take. The great can only be with
Blood repaid,
And Death the least Atonement can be made.
Exit Aur.


Enter Viceroy, Mataloni, Cardinal, Bissignano, Aurel^a, and Guards. Mat. Oh
how the Slaves can Truckle, when they find how the Tide runs against 'em!


Vice. My lord Cardinal -- your Eminence was in the Marketplace; How did they
relish my first Proclamation?


Card. Just as all Rabble do in Turns of Times; those that but two days past,
would have stemmed Torre^ts* (...) to the mouth o^ a new mounted Cannon, and
^inger'd eve^ (...) -- Now when they heard his Death, and found the Tide turn,
laid present hold upon your Act of Grace, and were so far from naming him as
General, that they even rent their Throats with this loud cry, Long live the
King, and our most Noble Viceroy.


Biss. Nay more, no sooner had they seen his Body as it lay dead, but with
Impetuous Fury they chopped his Head off first, and next his Hands, and on a Poll
exalted them in view, -- then dragged the Trunk with Horses through the Streets.


Bell. Adored be St. Genaro, and the Powers, that to their former Glory have
restored -- Abandoned Naples, and its Ancient Peace: But letting Gratitude
peculiar move
At once being blessed with Liberty and Love.
Shout within.


Vice. They now even offend me with their Zeal, making the Prospect of my
Palace h^re, their place of Execution! Open that Folding-door, and you may see
the Reward of dire Rebellion.


Here the SCENE Opens and discovers the Trunk of Massainello ^eadless and
Handless, dragged by Horses, his Head and Hands fastened to a Pole, with an
Inscription, and behind these the Bodies of Blowzabella, Pedro and Pietro
Hanging upon Gibbets. Card. A dreadful Sight! Yet bears it a good Moral,
Discovering the vain state of Worldly Greatness;
And what a slippery way he treads that chooses
The Path of vain Ambition, -- wanting Power
To keep the great Resolves to which he swore.
Had Massainello when he Signed the Articles,
Renounced his Sway, and modestly retired,
The Action past so Great, so Beneficial,
Would almost have Atton'd for his Rebellion:
He had deserved a Golden Statue raised
To keep his ^ame to perpetuity;
But his Ambition blinding his weak Eyes,
Turned his h^t Brain, and br^ke the Reins of Reason.
The Mo^al to all Rebels does ^^long,
They may a while, but cannot prosper long.
And ^eaven's use of 'em is thus made known,
First to ^urge others Crimes, and last their own. Ex^un^.

EPILOGUE FOR Miss CAMPIAN.
Dressed in the Fashion that I now appear,
My Spanish Garb, and loose disheveled Hair;
A Gay Town-Spark, one of the Toasting Gang
Just now came to me, and thus made Harangue:
Madam, says he, and straight I found by this,
He thought 'twould Anger me to call me Miss;
Your part of being ravished, Ma'm, says he,
Has stopped my Vitals quite, quite ^^^vish'd me.
Pray let me kiss your Hand; Oh fie, Sir, no:
Nay, Pish, cried I, and put him by just so:
Yet thanked him, that he liked my Part to day.
Burn me, says he, I like you; Damn the Play.
Then muttered something softly in my Ear,
Something of Hundreds settling by the Year.
I colored like a Rose, and trembled too;
For Heaven knows for 'em what I was to do.
But taking heart I angry answered thus:
What mean ye, Sir, do you take me for Miss --
A certain Lady we have lately lost?
And at that word finding he would make more pother,
I started up and said, I Would call my Mother.
At that, says he, and as he spoke it smiled,
Why sure you wont -- you wont be such a Child,
There Is none but Babies let their Mothers know,
I was ashamed that he should think me so.
We love the Childish scandal to prevent,
To be thought fit, although w^ don't consent;
So much confused I left him -- this Relation
I leave for you, Sirs, to make Application.
If you forsake our Plays, and I am slighted,
You see at least I one way may be righted,
Young as I am -- Knight Errant can provide,
That me to Paris will on Cock-horse guide.
FINIS.

