The last New Scotch Song.
^ COuld and Raw the North did blow, Bleak in the Morning Early, all the Trees
were hid with Snow dagled in Winters yearly: As I come riding on the Slow I met
with a Farmers Daughter, with Rosy Cheeks and a bonny Brow, good Faith made me
Mouth to water.

Down I veld my Bonnet low,
Thinking to show my Breeding,
She returned a graceful bow,
A Village far exceeding,
I asked her where she went so soon,
I longed to begin a parley;
She told me to the next Market Town
On purpose to sell her Barley
In this Purse sweet Soul said I
Twenty pounds lie fairly,
Seek no further one to buy,
For Ple take all thy Barley,
Twenty more shall purchase delight,
Thy Person I love so dearly,
If thou wot lig with me this Night
And go home in the Morning early.
If Forty Pounds would buy the Globe,
This thing I would not do Sir,
Or were my Friends as poor as Job
I would not raise them so Sir,
For if this Night you prove my Friend,
We's get a young Kid together,
And you will be gone at the Nine Months end,
And where shall I find a Father.
I told her I had Wedded been
Fourteen Years or longer,
Else I would take her for my Queen
And tie the knot much Stronger,
She bid me then no further come
But manage my Wedlock fairly,
And keep Purse for poor Spouse at home,
For some other should have her Barley.
A CHOICE COLLECTION OF New Songs and Ballads.

THE Words made to several Pleasant Tunes, By Mr. D'urfey.

With the TUNES Transposed for the FLUTE.

LONDON: Printed by William Pearson, next door to the Hare and Feathers, in
Aldersgate Street, for Henry Playford, and Sold by him at his Shop in the
Temple-Change Fleet Street; and at all other Music Shops in Town. 1699. Price
Sixpence.

TO THE Steward in Being, And the rest of the WORTHY SOCIETY Meeting on
Wednesdays, At the St. Alban's Tavern in St. Alban's- street; This first
Collection of New SONGS, made to several Pleasant Tunes, is Dedicated by,

Gentlemen, Your most Obliged and Humble Servant, T. D'urfey.

The Franck Lover, a New SONG.
^ DEarest believe without a Re -- servation, what neither Time nor Fate shall
ever control; be you but kind and constant to your Passion, no stormy chance
shall ever disturb my Soul: Jealousy, the bane to Lovers pleasures, far from
our Hearts for e -- ver we'll remove, my full Joy, what mortal then can
measure, happy in my charming Mu -- si -- do -- ra's love.

II.
When with a Friend abroad I take a Bottle,
Over your Tea regale with who you can;
Or if you find me with a Vizard Prattle,
Do you the same with any other Man:
For Chloe's Face when Ogling I show Passion,
It Is all but seign'd, I can never inconstant be;
And when at large I tope the red Potation,
'Twill but more Inflame my Heart with Love of thee.
Gillian of Croyden, a New BALLAD:
The Words made to the Tune of a Country Dance, called Mall Peatly.
^ ONe Ho -- li -- day last Summer, from four to se -- ven by Croy -- den
Chimes; three Lasses Toping Rummers, were set a prating of the Times, a Wife
called Joan of the Mill; a Maid they called Bon -- ney brown Nell, a Widow mine
Hostess, Gillian of Croy-den, Gillian of Croyden, Gillian, Young Gillian, Iol
-- ly Gillian of Croyden, take off your Glass, cried Gillian of Croyden, a
Health to our Ma -- ster Will.

Ah! Joan cried the Maiden,
This Peace will bring in Milled Money store,
We now sha'n't miss of Trading;
And Sweet-hearts will come on thick, ye whore.
No more will they Fight and Kill,
But with us good Liquour, will swill:
These will be Rare Times cried Gillian of Croyden, Gillian of Croyden,
Gillian, young Gillian, Plump Gillian of Croyden,
Take off your Glass cried Gillian of Croyden,
A Bumper to Master Will.
III.
We Have now right understanding,
Hans Dick, and Monsieur shake Hands in the streets;
Dragoons too are Disbanding,
Gadzookes then Nelly let us watch our Sheets,
For a Redcoat you know that has will,
Can Plunder and Pilfer with Skill,
I Will look to my Smocks cried Gillian of Croyden,
Gillian of Croyden, Gillian, bold Gillian, Wary Gillian of Croyden,
Take off your Glass cried Gillian of Croyden,
A Health to our Master Will.
IV.
Nel, then with Arms a Kembo,
Cried News from Sea not so well does come;
For want of Captain Bembo,
The Chink and Poynti are safe got home:
Though he could not help that ill,
The fault lies in some body still,
Would that Rogue were hanged cried Gillian of Croyden,
Gillian of Croyden, Gillian, plump Gillian, Loyal Gillian, of, etc.
V.
Strange Lords will now come over,
And all our Bells will Ring out for Joy;
The Czar of Muscovor,
Who is, Lord bless him, some ten foot high:
I Will see him what ever comes o'th Mill,
Would our Lads were like him cried Nell,
Great pity they ant cried Gillian of Croyden, Gillian of croyden,
Gillian, young Gillian, Tall Gillian of Croyden,
Nevertheless cried Gillian of Croyden,
A Bumper to Master Will.
VI.
Strange News the Jacks of the City,
Have got cried Joan, but we mind no tales;
That our good King through wonderful pity,
Will give his Crown to the Prince of Wales,
That Peace may the stronger be still,
And that they may no longer Rebel.
Pish! pox it is a Jest cried Gillian of Croyden, Gillian of Croyden,
Gillian, bold Gillian, Witty Gillian, Gillian of Croyden,
Take off your Glass cried Gillian of Croyden,
A Health to our Master Will.
VII.
So long top'd these Lasses,
Till Tables, Chairs, and Stools went round;
Strong Wine and thumping Glasses,
In three short hours their Senses drowned:
Then home to her Grannum reeled Nell,
And Joan no more Brimmers could fill,
And off from her Chair dropped Gillian of Croyden, Gillian of Croyden,
Gillian, plump Gillian, Drunk Gillian of Croyden,
Here Is the last Drop cried Gillian of Croyden,
A Bumper to Master Will.
The National Quarrel; a New BALLAD:
The Words made to the Tune of Lilly burlero.
^ SHone a Welsh, Runt, and Hans a Dutch Boor, as they one Evening for Air did
enploy; found Tague and Sawney just walking be -- fore, a bon -- ny Scotch loon
and an I -- rish dear Joy: They all four never saw a Win -- mill, nor had they
heard of a -- ny such Name, but as they were walking, and merre -- ly talking
it happed'd by chance to a Win -- mill they came.

The Chorus goes to the last Part of the Tune.
CHO.
Hoy down derry hoa dowon derry,
Mirth is better than Sorrow by half;
Listen to my Ditty, it is merry, it is Witty;
And if you an't Sullen 'twill make ye laugh.
Bread cried Sawney what do ye caw that, Pointing to the Winmill.

To tell its good Name I am at a loss.
Tegue then readily answered the Scot,
By Chreesht, my dear Joy, it is St. Patrick's Cross.
Woons cried Sawney you are mistaken,
For it is St. Andrew's Cross that I swear;
For there is his Bonnet, and Plad lying on it,
The Muckle good Saint did at Edinborough wear.
Cho.
Sawney, Sawney, weel said Sawney,
This Affair Sawney's notably hit,
Let aw discover that pass the Tweed over,
If Scotland ever bred so bonny a Wit.
III.
Hans with a Belch gave vent in his turn,
Mimicks Dutch.
Jck fall now spraeken den vaght it dos mean;
et ben ods Sacrament a grought Dutch Churne,
And they are now making the Butter within:
This device so tickled his fancy,
He swore by the States he would go in for some;
And sell his blew Jerkin, but he would have a firkin,
To carry his Wife and his family home.
Cho.
Hogan, Hogan, Mogan, Mogan,
Sooterkin Hogan Herring Vandunck,
For as it happened the Miller with his Cap on
He thought a fat Froe, a white Dairy Punk.
IV.
Hot pated Shone cried splut and looked pig,
You fools was alter your minds when hur speaks;
St. Taffy cawd this her crete Whirligig,
And made it to scare away Crows from her Leeks:
Proof to show, see where they crow,
Then pointed his finger over the hedge,
Where Nettles and Thistles, with Prickles and Bristles,
Grew thick in a field grown over with sedge,
Cho.
Shone ap Shinkin* Rice ap Tavy,
Shentlemen Kindred aw come away,
Tomas ap Morgan swear loud as an Organ,
And pawn all your Honors to what hur does say.
V.
By good St. Patrick Tegue once more replies,
I say it is his Cross for there is his Coat;
I met him in Dublin a buying the Frize,
And good I will swear, it is the same that he bought:
He Is a better Shaint than ever Holland, or, Walsh, or Scotland, can breed,
And by my Showlwasion he was my Relation,
And had for stout Tegue great kindness indeed.
Cho.
Lero, lero, lero, lero,
Lilly Burlero Bullen a-la,
By my Showlwasion he was my Relation,
Chreesht save thy sweet Face St. Patrick Agra.
VI.
Each gave his mind, but neither agreed,
The Welsh man grows hot, and the Irish man huffs;
The bonny bold Scot told the Dutch man he ly'd,
A Word and a blow, and so all went to Cuffs:
Coats were torn, and Heads were broken,
Noses were Mawlt, and thumping went round;
But in a while after were forced to give quarter,
And so went four fools well beaten to town.
Cho.
Coats were torn, etc.
PUSS in a Corner:
A New SONG. The Words made by Mr. Durfey, to a pretty New Tune made by a Man
of Quality.

^ TO Cullies and Bullies of Country and Town,
^ to Wearers and Tearers of Manteau and Gown;
^ all Christian good People,
^ that live round Paul's Steeple,
^ I Will tell you a pleasant Case:
^ Hot headed I Wedded at Age of Threescore,
^ a flanting young Wanton, Eighteen and no more;
^ of Parents I sought her,
^ and Money soon bought her,
^ I well might have had more Grace;
^ For dai -- ly at Table she would pout and she would squabble,
^ and this still was all I got, when ever I asked why,
^ she would cry pish fie,
^ for Gold nor Apparel
^ I never did quarrel,
^ but on -- ly you starve my Cat.
II.
A Pretty young Kitty,
She had that could Purr;
'Twas gamesome and handsome,
And had a rare Furr;
And straight up I took it, and offered to stroke it,
In hopes I should make it kind;
But lowting and powting,
It still was to me,
Though Nature, the Creature,
Designed should be free.
I played with its Whiskers and would have had discourse,
But ah! it was dumb and blind:
When Cloris unquiet, who knew well its diet,
And found that I wanted that,
Cried pray, Run, fetch John,
He Is the Man that can,
When it does need it, best know how to feed it,
Or gad you will starve my Cat.
III.
As Fleet as my Feet
Could convey me I sped;
To Iohnny who many
Times Pussey had fed.
I told him my Errand, he wanted no warrant,
But hasted to show his skill:
He took it to stroke it,
And close in his lap
He laid it to feed it,
And gave it some Pap;
And with such a passion it took the Collation,
Its belly began to fill,
And now within Door is, so merry my Cloris,
She laughs and grows wondrous fat,
And I run for John,
Who Is the Man that can,
Though I Am at distance, give present assistance,
To please her, and feed her Cat.
The LOYAL Scot: or, the King' s New Health.
A New SONG. The Words made to a Pretty Scotch Tune.

^ NOw the ground is hard Froze, and cawd Winter is come, and our Master great
Will -- ly from Holland's got home. Now the Parliament Leards are sat down to
command, I'se gang over the Tweed in -- to

(...) HAMPTON COURT.
A New SONG. The Words made by Mr. D'urfey, to a pretty New Tune made by a
Person of Quality.

^ WHere divine Glo -- ri -- a -- na, her Palace late reared; and the choicest
delights, Art and Nature prepared, on the bank of sweet Thames, gent -- ly
gliding a -- long; the Love -- sick Phi -- lan -- der sat down and thus Sang:
More happy than yet a -- ny place was be -- fore, thou dear blessed re --
semblance of her I a -- door; all Eyes are de -- light -- ed with prospect of
thee, Thou charm'st ev -- 'ry Sense thou charm'st ev -- ry Sense, ah! just so
does she.

II.
As the River's claer Waves Zephyr softly does roll,
So her breath moves the Passions, that flow in my Soul;
As the Trees by the Sun, feel a nourishing joy;
So my Heart is refreshed, by a glance from her Eye:
The Birds pretty Notes, we still hear when she speaks;
And the sweetest of Gardens, still blooms in her Cheeks;
Had I that dear bliss, for no other I Would sue;
Who enjoys this sweet Eve, who enjoys this sweet Eve, has all Paradise too.
The SONG Tunes for the FLUTE.
^ Where Divine Gloriana, Now the ground is hard Froze, and cawd Winter is
come;

Books lately Printed for, and Sold by, Henry Playford at his Shop in the
Temple-Change Fleet Street.
WIt and Mirth: Or, Pills to purge Melancholy, Being a Collection of the best
Old and New Ballads, and Songs, containing near 200, with the Tunes to each.
Price 2 s. 6d. in Calf 3 s. Printed for Henry Playford at his Shop in the
Temple-Change.

Orpheus Britannicus, being the Choicest Songs of one; two and three Voices, by
the late Mr. Henry Purcell in Folio. Price Bound 18 s.

An Introduction to the Skill of Music, the Thirteenth Edition, to which is
Added the whole Art of Composition by the late Mr. Henry Purcell. Price bound 2
s.

The Dancing Master, the 10th. Edition in two Parts, Price Bound 3 s.

Dr. Blow's Choice Collection of Lessons, for the Harpsichord, or Spiunett,
Engraven. Price stitcht 1 s. 6 d.

Mercurius Musious: For January, and February being a Monthly Collection of New
Teaching Songs, with the Tunes Transposed for the Flute at the end of the Book.
Price Sixpence.

Apollos Banquet, being the easiest and best Instructions for young beginners
yet published, containing above a Hundred of the choicest Tunes, for the
Violin; The 7th. Edition. Price 1 s. 6 d.

The Division Violin in 2 Books, being all the best Grounds and Divisions, the
4th. Edition; Price of both 4 s. 6d.

A Sheet of Cotches set by the late Mr. Henry Purcell. Price 3 d.

A Sheet Engraven on Copper, being Directions for the Bass Viol. Price. 6 d.

FINIS.

