THE MARRIAGE-HATER Matched: A COMEDY ACTED at the Theater Royal By THEIR
MAJESTY'S SERVANTS.

Written by THO. D'URFEY, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Bentley, at the Post House in Russel Street in
Covent Garden. 1692.

TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS and Truly NOBLE Prince, JAMES, Duke, Marquess, and Earl of
Ormond in England and Ireland; Earl of Ossory, and Viscount Thurles; Baron of
Arclo; Lord of the Regallities and Liberties of the County of Tiperary; Baron
of Lanthony; Earl of Brecknock; Chancellor of the University of Oxford; one of
the Lords of the Bedchamber to His Sacred Majesty, and Knight of the Most
Noble Order of the Garter.
May it Please Your Grace,
WHEN first my Propitious or Malignant Stars influenced the little Genius I now
pretend to in Poetry, the Encouragement I had from your Noble Grandfather
(whose Extraordinary Judgment in the Beauties of that Art, as well as Generous
Candor in Excusing the Errors of it, rendered him best capable of being a
Patron engaged me to Launch my ill ballass'd Bark into an Ocean where most of
our Tribe too late find themselves becalmed with uncertain Applause, or else
wracked in the storm of ill-natured Criticism. Yet had that Illustrious Hero's
Commands such an August Prerogative over me, that knowing my Fame sufficiently
Established in his Applause, successful enough I ventured on, 'till his never
to be forgotten loss to all in General, made me too sadly deplore my own in
particular.

How Charming a thing is Dignity, when adorned with the glittering Crown of
Sense, and the humble Robe of Humility: The Great Ormond was blessed with both,
in perfection; and not only a true Judge and Generous Patron of Arts and
Sciences, but modestly familiar with Virtue, though in Rags; never slighting the
poor Scholar for his Threadbare Coat, nor pleased with the vain outside of an
Embroidered Fopp, whose inside he knew to be unfurnished.

I infer this, as lamenting the ill fortune of Poets, that are not blessed with
a Friendly Party, or a Judicious Patron, whose allowed Understanding, as well
as generous good Nature can defend their Works from Malicious Censurers; the
Time's Vices will bear no Reflection, and let the Play be never so just to the
Rules, if a Rott me Spark finds himself hit, or Madam La Pupsey takes the hint
that her dear Lap-Dog is exposed, the Labor it self is like to be the Poet's
only Reward: Modest Reproof is taken for absurd Abuse, and honest Satyr for
Dogmatick Slander.

And though Horace, reflecting upon such as are blind to their own Vices in his
time, had Courage enough to dare to tell'em, Stultus, and Improbus, hic Amor
est dignusque notari. Yet had he lived in this Age, and in some Satirical Piece
had dared to Expose a Maenius, etc. without a Maecenas to Protect it, his Merit
though never so Extraordinary, or Fancy or Style were it never so pure, would all
be too weak to defend it against the Critical Party, that found themselves
Concerned.

This, I must humbly inform your Grace, I mean as to the General state of
Satirical Poets, without any reflection upon my own; the ensuing Scenes being
designed for diversion, and more proper to oblige an Audience to smile than
frown; and though some perhaps, being affected with ill Humors, might pick out
something to dislike, they generously agreed to encourage my Profit; and those
that found themselves pleased, I thank my Stars, still far exceeded the others
in number.

Having at last so well acquitted it self on the Stage (though the thronging,
imperfect Action, and worse than all, the faulty length, which I will never be
guilty of again, rendered it little Diversion the first day) I confess, I could
not stifle my Ambition of defiring this honor of your Graces Patronage, and as
I have already always found a true Maecenas in your Illustrious Family: You, by
a free and easy grant of so great a favor, an endearing sweetness in
Behavior, and graceful Condescension, have so added to my heap of Obligations,
that I am dis^bled by ^xcess to instruct my Pen my heart's grateful Sentiments.

All Praise is too low, when it approaches to your Graces Character; to say you
are adorned with the Graceful Humility, Eternal Honor, and Wisdom of your
admired Grandfather; the Merit, Loyalty, and unequaled Bravery of your Martial
Father, whose Loss our Bleeding Country has never yet recovered, i Praise
indeed, but scarce aspiring to your Desert; your Glorious Campaign with his
Sacred Majesty, and all your other Actions, during this Reign, sufficiently
sounding your Applause, and engaging every true Englishman, not only to Love,
but Admire; amongst the Crowd of which, I think it my greatest Honor to be
Ranked, esteeming no good Fortune greater than to be allowed,

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most Humble, Devoted, and Obedient Servant, T.
D'URFEY.

A LETTER TO Mr. D'URFEY, Occasioned by his PLAY Called the Marriage-Hater
Matched.
Dear Friend,
I AM sensible the World will esteem a Friend too Partial a Judge of the
performance of a Friend, yet since I am satisfied that I can divest my self of
all prejudice against the Writings of even an Enemy, and allow him that praise
which Justice requires; I think I may with the greater assurance say, that I
will give no more favorable Censure on this Play of yours, than the severest
Critic ought, if he but regulate himself according to the merits of the Cause,
and will let Reason, and the Rules of Art weigh more with him, than the
inconsiderate Railings of some of your Enemies, or the ungenerous malice of
others; who, because they have attempted the Province of Comedy with less
success, think to regain their Credit by Damning every one that has the Art of
Pleasing beyond them; and since they cannot arrive to the Excellence of the Old
way of Writing, would advance a new one of their own production, adapted to
their undesigning Genius.

But that which is the most strange is, that some of our Critics, like
Juglers, stare us in the face, and Palm upon us their own Fancy for the Opinion
and Practices of the Ancients, and persuade us that a Bundle of Dialogues was
all that was ever required to the framing a good Play; and that Terence had no
other Excellence but the neatness of Phrase. Either they never read that Poet
themselves, or suppose no body else did; otherwise I cannot imagine how they
can maintain so gross a falsity, which may so easily be contradicted, by a
^^ort view of the Plots of his Comedies: I will begin with his first, called
^^dria.

Pamphilus the Son of Simo, debauches Glyceriam the supposed Sister of Chrysis
( a Native of the Island of Andros) she proves with Child, and he infinitely
enamored of her, promises her Marriage, with a full Resolution to be as good
as his word; but Chremes won with the good Character and Parts of Pamphilus,
proposes his Daughter Phileumena, for his Wife to Simo; the Old Men agree, and
settle the Preliminaries* the Wedding day approaches, but the death of Chrysis
the supposed S^^ter of Glycerium intervenes; Pamphilus, Simo, and others being
at the Funeral, Glycerium distracted with grief, had flung her self in the
Burning-Pile, had no^ her Lover Pamphilus run to her rescue; but he with such
ardour embraced and comforted her, that the Old Gentleman his Father, and the
rest of the Spectators had shrewd suspicions tha^ ^his care of her proceeded
from ill disguised Love; Chremes with a great deal of indignation breaks off
the Match; but Simo, willing to find out the truth of the matter, conceals it
from his Son, assuring him he must prepare to be immediately Married. Pamphilus
is at a great loss what to do, 'till his Servant Davus persuades him to
dissemble a seeming readiness to comply with his Father's will; but this Policy
of Davus had like to have spoiled all, for on his Sons Compliance, Simo soon
pacifies Chremes, and so set the Wedding on foot again, which Pamphilus finding
no way to obstruct, Davus takes care to have the Child of Glycerium by
Pamphilus exposed to the view and knowledge of Chremes; who, upon that, once
more in a great fury breaks off the match; but after a great deal of
disturbance, all settles in quiet, to the content of all Parties. For Crito the
next ^kin to Chrysis, arrives at Athens, to take Possession of her Goods as her
lawful Heir, and discovers Glycerium to be Pasibula, the Daughter of Chremes,
who overjoyed at the discovery, gives her to Pamphilus for Wife, and Philumena
to Charinus, who had long been in love with her, and who makes another Person
in the Play*

To have given a larger Argument of this Comedy, would have been too tedious,
since here is enough to ^atisfie any one that Terence had something else in his
eye, besides the purity of his Language; otherwise Horace had with small reason
given him, in his first Epistle of his second Book to Augustus, the distinctive
Character, that his excellence lay in his Art.

Plautus ad exemplar siculi properare Epicharmi,
Vincere Caecilius gravitate Terentius Art.
I may spare the pains of taking notice of his Eunuch, or Adelphi, since the
Town has seen them both, under the names of Bellamira, and the Squire of
Alsatia. In his Heautontimorumenos, the several Designs of Chremes on
Menedemus, and Syrus on both; the Discovery of Antiphila to be the Daughter of
Chremes, and Sostrata, the Plot and Contrivance of Syrus to get the Money for
Bacchis, and the disappointment of all these Designs, just when almost brought
to perfection, will show, that none that ever read him could in justice say he
had no Plot or Intrigue in his Plays: Nay, his Hecyra, which is said to have
met with but little applause, and is doubted by some as spurious, is not
without a good Plot, and several turns. But i^ would be superfluous to run
through all particulars of this, and the other of Phormio, since by what is
already said, there is nothing so evident, as that Terence took care of Plot as
well as words, and was not less skilled in the Protasis, Epistatis, Catastasis,
and Catastrophe, than in the Dialogue, or Discourse.

But were it true, that Terence wanted this perfection, as they would have it
yet I can see no reason but that this Excellence should be valued; for the end
of Comedy, being for Pleasure, as well as Instruction; that certainly which
contributes most to the first, without prejudice to the latter, must be
acknowledged an accomplishment not to be slighted. For the several neat turns
of a Play keep the minds of the Auditory employed with expectation, hope, and
desire, which all end in satisfaction, at the conclusion or unravelling of the
Plot. But let the Moral or Instructive part be never so well writ, the Language
never so fine, yet if the Action goes on without any Plot to divert us, we see
through all at first sight, and grow weary before the Play is half done, for it
gratifies none of our Passions, without which there can be no pleasure.

By what has been said, will appear that you, Sir, keep up to the noble
Standard of the Ancients, and though it be one of the greatest and most di^^icult
parts of the hard task of a Comic Poet, yet you have always been very
fortunate in it, especially in this last Comedy of yours, called the
Marriage-Hater Matched. I must needs say I think is your best, and far beyond
that of the Boarding School; the turns are so surprising, and natural, that I
may say without flattery, it is not in the power of any Person to outdo them.
The wit of Sir Philip and the Widow, like sprightly Blood in youthful Veins,
runs through the whole Play, giving it a Noble and vigorous Life; you have
farther observed that decorum of Poetic Justice, in making Sir Philip be
caught in his own Plot, to deceive another, and marry her, who had so well
merited him, as Ph^be, alias Lov^^e^^, who made a very pretty Figure on the
Stage. Such a variety of Humors and Characters I have seldom seen in one Play;
and those so truly drawn, that they all look like principal Parts; and that
which is more, they are all New, and so worthy observation: that indeed I
admire the humor of Madam La Pupsey has been so long neglected, since grown to
so general a custom, that the Lap Dog takes up all the thoughts of the fair
Sex, whilst the faithful Lover sighs in vain, and at a distance unregarded.
This was an usurpation on our Prerogative, and had been born too long. The
humor of Van Grin is new, and not so unpleasant, but that it deserves to be
more taken notice of, being very material to set off the rest.

Then the Skittishness of Mrs. Margery, and the ^reakishness of Berenice, are
faults too general not to be exposed; besides, who is there so wedded to
Melancholy, like the Son of the Emperor Philip ^he First, but must give way to
Laughter, to see the pleasant Humor of Bias, and the extraordinary diversion
of Solon.

I am sensible that Callow was so like the Life, that the Rot me Sparks openly
declared their dissatisfaction at the Satyr: but it is a sign it hit them, when
they complain of the wound. It Is a base and ill-natured, as well as ignorant
Age of Chriticism, when the Virtues of a Play shall be Arraigned as Defects;
for if these Gentlemen understood either the Original, or end of Comedy, they
would never quarrel with the Satyr of it, since from its beginning 'twas
designed to correct Vice, and Folly, by exposing them.

Little had the Poetic harmony of Orpheus contributed to the benefit of
Mankind, by calling the Humane Salvages from their rude way of living, to
Society, if Comedy had no^ come in to reform those abuses which grew from
Conversation; Necessity indeed was its Mother, for the Follies and Vices of the
City as well as the Country, grew beyond all other Redress, which made the
Country People (to whom we owe too the Beucolic Poetry) when they Celebrated
their Festivals to Apollo Nomius, for the preservation of the Fruits and
Products of the Earth, in songs and Madrigals recriminate on those that had
abused them: From this beginning, they made another step, and in the night time
they frequently entered the City, and exposed such of the more Opulent and
Remarkable Citizens, as by their Vanities or Oppressions had rendered
themselves j^stly odious; here they proceeded to a particular ennumeration of
the wrongs they had received, and the ills which they had suffered under. The
Magistrates and Government observing that this Course was more Powerful than
the Laws for the restraining of Vice, and that the fear of the loss of their
Reputation, kept those from ill, that could perhaps evade the Penalties of the
Laws by Money, or Favor; granted a formal License for the performing this in
the day time in Verse, from thence Comedy immediately derives it self, which at
first, like our Lam^oons, feared not to mention the very names of those it
would expose. Cratinus was the first that divided into distinct Parts, or Acts;
and Aristop^anes brought it to a more Regular and Complete Form; the liberty
and bold assuran^e of this first state of Comedy, Horace in his Fourth Satyr of
his First Book, shows us in these Five Verses.

Eupolis, atque Cratinus, Aristophanesque Poetae
Atque alli quorum Comaedia Pri^^^ virorum est,
Si quis erat dignus describi, quod Malus aut fur
Quod Maechus foret, aut Sicarius, aut alioqui
Famosus, multa cum liberate notabatur.
But the Thirty Tyrants of Athens being themselves so guilty of all manner of
Vices, thought they could not better secure themselves in the practice of them,
than to gain a Liberty for others to come in for their share, that by the
multitud^ of Offenders, they might be the less observed; but they knew no way
to effect their desire, but by taking away this Liberty of Comedy, which kept
the Citizens in awe, and within the bounds of Justice; wherefore they
established a Law, that any one that should find himself exposed on the Stage,
might sue for Satisfaction. This pleased the Wealthy ones so well, that after
Expulsion of these Usurpers, Athens preferred this Sanction which so much
indulged their Inclinations; so that from this time the Chorus was left off in
Comedies, for in them chiefly was names of particular Persons, with their
Crimes recited. Horace seems to approve of this Alteration, in these words,

Successit vetus his Comaedia non sine multa
Laud, sed in vitium libertas excidit, and vim
Dignam lege regi; lex est accepta Chorusque
Turpiter oblicuit, sublato fure nocendi.
But still the Business of Comedy was to expose the general Vices and Follies
of the Age, under feigned Names: So that to eccept against your Play, for the
Satyr of it only, shows your Enemies are wretchedly put to it to find a real
fault in it, when they condemn that which is an Excellence, without which, the
Poet gains but half his point, losing the Utile, which i^ an essential part of
his Design and Duty.

But if you could meet with generous Enemies, they would forgive those Errors
their quicker sight might dis^over, for the Beauties and delightful
Entertainment of the Lyric part, the Songs I mean, in which I think there is
none will (I am sure none ought to) dispute your Title to the Pre-eminence.

If there be any fault in this Play, it is that which few are guilty of; that
is, there are too many good Characters, too full of Humor, a very pardonable
failing, which only proceeds from Vari^ty, the life of Pleasure and Wit, though
that gave it the disadvantage of seeming too long the first days Acting, though
the Stage's being thronged with Spectators, did not a little contribute to the
imperfect Acting of it, which accidental Misfortunes concurring with the
Endeavors of an opposite Faction, must needs have damned it, had it not by the
Force and Vigor of its own Worth, raised it self the second day with the
general Applause of all that saw it. Horace thinks it a sufficient proof of a
good Poem, if it will bear a second view; Haec placuit semel, haec bis repetita
placebit.
But the Marriage-hater went further, and in spite of all the disadvantages i^
labored under of Action and Aud^ence, pleased on, after several times
Repetition, and will as long as Wit, Humor, and Plot shall be esteemed as
necessary Materials to compose a good Play. Which have given me so great a
Satisfaction both in the Reading and Seeing, that I must beg you, to give me
leave, to attest it to the World,

Who am, Your Friend, and Humblest Servant, CHARLES GILDON.

THE NAMES and CHARACTERS.
L. Brainless. A Pert, Noisy, Impertinent Boy, always thrusting himself into
the Ladies Company, and received for his Treats, and the Diversion his Folly
gives; a great Admirer of La Pupsey, and Jealous of her Lapdog: Acted by Mr.
Bowman. Sir Pilip Freewit. A wild witty Gent. of the Town, who being Jilted by
Lady Subtle, whom he once Loved, professes himself a Marriage Hater: Acted by
Mr. Monfort. Sir Lawr. Limber. A peevish, old-fashioned Courtier, ridiculously
Indulgent and Fond of the two Fools his Sons: Acted by Mr. Sandford. Capt.
Darewell. An honest blunt Sea Captain, true to his Country's Interest, and the
Government: Acted by Mr. Hodson. Mine. Here Van Grin. A Clownish fat Flanderkin,
always laughing at what he says himself, and believing it a Jest, though never
such Nonsense: Acted by Mr. Leigh. Bias. Eldest Son to Sir Lawrence, a blunt
rude Booby, saucy with Women; and though despised by 'em, very opinionated of his
own Merit: Acted by Mr. Bright. Solon. Youngest Son to Sir Lawrence, a dull
softly Fool, till vexed, but then robustly stout and fearless of Danger: Acted
by Mr. Doggett. Callow. A Raskally Lieutenant, disaffected to the Government,
though he has taken a Commission to serve it; a fellow of no Principles, and
always ending every Paragraph of his Discourse with an Oath or a Curse: Acted
by Mr. Bow^n. Mac Buffle. -- An ignorant Irishman, Servant to Sir Philip: Acted
by Mr. Trefuse. Thummum. -- A Toping Parson, Brother to Mac Buffle; by Mr.
Smeaton. Splutter. A Cunning Tricking Lawyer, a Creature of Lady Subtles. --
Acted by Mr. Colly.


WOMEN
Lady Subtle. A Proud, high Spirited Widow, who thinking her self affronted by
Sir Philip, by his Intrigue with Phaebe, though she had engaged to Marry him,
breaks off all, and takes another: Acted by Mrs. Barry. Lady Bumfiddle. A
Prating, Matchmaking, Eating, Impertinent Creature, visiting every one for the
sake of a good Dinner, and always teizing 'em with fulsome Stories of the
Intrigues about the Town: Acted by Mrs. Cory. Phaebe, ali. Lovewell. A pretty
Innocent, well-natur'd Creature, who being in Love with Sir Philip, and
debauched by him upon his promise of Marriage, puts her self into Bo(...)these,
and manages his business against the Window, underhand: acted by Mrs.
Bracegirdle. Berenice. A witty Sister to Lady Subtle, a Brisk, Humorous,
Freakish Creature, who though She is in Love with Captain Darewell, is always
teizing and playing tricks with him to know his Temper: Acted by Mrs. Lassells.
La Pupsey. An Impertinent Creature, always stuffing her Discourse with hard
words, and perpetually kissiing and talking to her Lapdog: Acted by Mrs.
Butler. Margery. Daughter to Sir Lawrence, a Lisping, Raw, Ignorant, Skittish
Creature, Modest before Company, but otherwise awkerdly Confident: Acted by
Mrs. Lawson. Comode. -- Woman to Berenice. Primwell. -- Woman to Lady Subtle.
Singers, Masquers, Drawers, Footmen, and Attendants.


SCENE, The Park near Kensington. The Space, Thirty Hours.

ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter Sir Philip and Lovewell. Sir Phil. GOod Morrow to my sweet Contriver,
thou dear Lifeblood of my Design, how goes our Business forward?


Love. Why just like that of a needy Client, who has a knotty Cause and no Fee
to give, the Stars we used to brag of, Sir Philip, have failed us in this
Juncture, damnably.


Sir Phil. Black Clouds, and Fogs of rank envenomed Fenns, eclipse 'em for it, I
say, but prithee, my little Engine^r, how have they failed? hah, what has this
Devil of a Widow over-reached us again, are the Writings come from Hambourgh?


Love. Most certainly, and by another Hand than we expected.


Sir Phil. Another Hand, who, prithee?


Love. Why, by what I could discover by the glimpse I had of him, and by
listening in the next Room, I find him to be a Man of more Bulk than Brain; in
short, a Swagbelly'd Flanderkin, a Nephew to our old Knight, Sir Lawrance, in
Quality of Fortune recompensed with Fifteen hundred a Year, but in the Quality
of Brain and Sense, nothing; a very Devil of a Lover, as indeed all that Nation
are; and yet I find, for all that, the Blockhead comes hither a wooing.


Sir. Phil* And so this Blockhead, with a Pox to him, has frustrated all ou^
Wit, hah.


Love. It seems so, for the Widow has been so alarmed with the loss of the
Three thousand pounds worth of Jewels, which you by my Industry have lately got
from her; that she has cunningly prevented our Design upon the Writings, and so
underhand, ordered this Nephew, who you must know, has a design upon her
Person, to secure 'em from you, and bring 'em over, he happening to lodge in
the very House where her Husband, Sir Solomon died.


Sir Phil. It Is always so; put a Trick upon any Widow, that does not return it
e're a Twelvemonth ends, and you may conclude the Devil's grown weary with
Obliging her Tribe, quite tired with the crow'd of their Intolerable
Mischiefs. Prithee what is to be done? -- God's Death, must I lose an Estate of
Seventy thousand Ducats so ridiculously?


Love. Was your deceased Friend real to ye? are you sure there is no flaw in the
Will? Pray tell me the story once more; I ought to have that repeated once a
day, to refresh my Brain for the more subtle contriving.


Sir Phil. With all my Heart, to begin then, as I told thee before, Sir Solomon
Subtle being my Bosom intimate and entire Friend, going, about two Years since,
with me, to visit this beautiful Devil, my then Mistress, fell so desperately
in Love with her, that his strange disquiets were every day more and more
visible to me; I knew his Generosity and Love to me, made him disguise it as
well as he could, but falling sick, at last was forced to own it; you may guess
how I was puzzled in the business, much to my love was due, and much to my
Friend, till at last, resolved to help him as much as in reason I could, I
urged to him this friendly Proposal, that he should have a Months time fairly
to solicit her, at the end of which, he that she chose should marry her, whilst
the unfortunate, refused, disposed himself to Travel; he as he had great
reason, giving me a world of Thanks, consents, and fits himself against the
time of trial.


Love. This was a strange proof of Friendship, I confess.


Sir Phil. 'Twas so, and done merely to save his Life, that when refused,
Travel might ease his Sorrows, for I confess I thought my self secure, but see
the Mischief of a Woman's Nature; my Friend, that but a Month's short space had
wooed her, succeeds when I least thought, by her free choice, and I who best
deserved, disgraced and slighted.


Love. This was Levity indeed, and you may rail with Reason. --


Sir Phil. My Friend, Sir Solomon, upon this, according to Agreement, Marries
her, and has in Portion Seventy thousand Ducats, and afterward in return of
the generous Friendship I had shown him, publicly declared, That, dying
without Issue if I survived, he would by Will bequeath his Wife and all her
Fortune to me.


Love. A pretty kind of Legacy.


Sir Phil. He being of a weakly Constitution, in short time after dies a^
Hambourgh, as he was taking possession of another Estate just left him by an
Uncle there, for she, a young, fresh, buxom, active, Bona Roba, had so outdone
him in the business Conjugal, that the Soul unable to supply the Body, forced
it self out, to seek for rest elsewhere.


Love. Oh, pray let that Business alone, and come to your own.


Sir Phil. In short then, the Will was made as he had promised, and I named
joint Executor with her, as I was credibly informed by a true Friend, that
since unluckily was killed at Sea, who reported too, that I was left Heir to
the other Estate given by his Uncle, so that I being Ignorant of any Witness,
and without possession of the Deeds, could never right my self.


Love. But, pray what cause have you e're given the Widow to make her so
Inveterate?


Sir Phil. Why, I guess the main and chiefest Cause is thy self, thou know
dear Phaebe.


Love. Lovewell, if you please in this Habit, Sir.


Sir Phil. Dear Lovewell, then, that ever since the Widows Jilting me, I Have had
a strange Antipathy to Marriage, which (not my want of Love) has been the cause
of my not doing thee the common Justice, in recompensing that dear Virgin
Treasure, thou gav'st up to my Arms.


Love. If I should talk to ye of my little Boy, now, 'twould set me a crying,
and you would but laugh at me.


Sir Phil. Well, let him alone then to his Rattle and Bells, and observe me;
this Venial Ship of mine, the Widow, has been told of, and her proud Spirit
finding my aversion to wear my Friend's old Boots, I mean, her self, resolves
to balk me of my Executorship, and keep the Writings close, though the late
^^wels were by thy Wit unknown to her surpised.


Love. I think that was sub^ly enough managed, to snap the Messenger with the
Casket, just within sight of the Lodging, and wheedle him to yours.


Sir Phil. 'Twas a Masterpiece -- and if thou can but get the Writings too.
--


Love. You see I have played my part well too, to get my self in this habit,
into the Family, and Sir Lawrance's favor, with pretending to be a Relation of
her you had debauched, who was his Kinswoman, this looks with a lucky face:
What say ye, will you be good and marry me, if I get what you desire?


Sir Phil. Can thou doubt it? why then we shall have enough to make us,
easy, Child.


Love. Why then smile Fate, whilst I my wit pursue,
For such a Fortune, such a Husband too,
What will not a Maid in my Condition do? Exit.

Sir Phil. Right, but we must have two words to the bargain for all that,
Child: It Is a good natured loving Tit, and of my Conscience, the wittiest
Baggage that ever told a lie t'excuse her Lover; her Father was an honest
Country Parson, the Offspring of which Sect, by the way I Have observed, seldom
or never fails to be good ones; and he had so cloyed her with musty Morals and
lukewarm scraps from the old Patriarchs, a Diet so disagreeable to a young
Wenches Constitution, that she, like a Gudgeon, snapt at my first Bait; nor was
there need of a Hook, the Creature was so greedy: Well, if she does trick this
Widow, and get the Writings, she will deserve extremely well of me; but
Marriage is such an unreasonable reward for an Estate, that it is like giving a
Man means to purchase variety of Delicates, and at the same time, obliging him
to chaw upon one Rump of Beef all his life time.


Enter Darewell. Darew. What, Sir Philip, my eyes dazzle sure, it is impossible!


Sir Phil. Hoh! my noble Man of War! welcome on Shore. But why impossible,
Friend? what wonders do thou find*


Darew. Thee in this place, the Park, so near the Air of Kensington, and yonder
place of Terror the Widow's Lodgings.


Sir Phil. Oh, Sir, your Widow, like a Ship just returned from a Sea sight, can
do little or no hurt upon a second Attack, she has spent all her Artillery upon
the first Engagement.


Darew. She rails at thee most dreadfully, and blushes through her Mourning
when thou art but named, as the Sun does through a Cloud when a Summer Shower
is falling.


Sir Phil. Her Mourning? why has the Snake then batten'd in the skin of her
Hypocrisy so long? and does the demure Peak oppress the Forehead still? the
Devil's in her; why this is quite contrary to a Widows Policy. she should have
new washed and furbish'd up the Premises long before this for a new Comer; when
the Bill stands too long upon the door, it is sign the Tenement's not worth
Letting*


Darw. Ha, ha, ha, I have heard of your Whoring too, Sir, she has told us all
within yonder.


Sir Phil. Ay, and would have told thee of her Husband's Cuckoldom too, as
well, if she had not a design to draw another into the noose.


Darw. No, a Pox on it, this is malice, all the World allow her to be virtuous.


Sir Phil. They allow her to be proud indeed, and consequently ill natured, and
reserved, Virtue is a rank Chea^ in most of the Sex, when once a Woman's Pride
promotes her Chastity, her Virtue is the greatest Vice she has.


Enter Callow with a Letter* Darew. How now, Lieutenant, has to got an answer?


Callow. Yes, Sir, and a pleasant Story to tell you that belongs to it.


Darew. Speak softly; another time for that, yonder is your Uncle.


Callow. Sir Philip, your most humble Servant. Darewell reads.


Sir Phil. So Cozen, I see you're equipped well, your Commission like your
Scarf too sits close to ye, your Sword too of good dimension, but I am told your
heart is loose in the hilts, and though you wear the King's name in your Pocket,
you herd with those that hate his Government.


Callow. Who I, Uncle? he is the Son of a Whore that told ye so, let me but know
him, and rot me, I Will make him eat the Sword you speak of; nay, not only the
Sword, but the Hilt, the Knot, the Scabberd, the Chape, the Belt, and the
Buckles, Broil me.


Sir Phil. And why that Rakehelly Cant of Rot me, Burn me, Broil me? Art thou
afraid thou shall not dye and be damned soon enough!


Callow. Custom, faith Uncle, Custom, besides I think Rot me, Sink me, Burn me,
Broil me, etc. are as pretty Tags to a Soldiers disco^rse, tha^ would be
thought a brave Fellow, as odsniggs and sincerely are for a Citizen that
intends to cheat under the notion of the Pious; this is my opinion, Rot -- O
Lord, 'twas comi^g again.


Sir Phil. No, it is the Scoundrel Company you keep, such as the young ^op Lord
Brainless, then they say you are always stewing at my fat Lady Bumfiddle's, and
so great an Admirer of that eternal Mill-clapper, Mrs. La Pupsey, that you pay
Homage to her very Lap-dog.


Callow. Never rallied her but once in my life, sink me -- 'twas a coming
again; it is true, I Have an honor for my Lady Bumfiddle, because --


Sir Phil. Because she is the best Procurer in Town; hush, not a word, lest the
Captain hear us, but look to it, for though as my Kinsman, I would not willingly
see thee hanged.


Callow. I humbly thank ye, Uncle.


Sir Phil. Yet, Sir, I Would cut your Throat, to save your Credit.


Callow. Would ye so, Sir, I should not thank ye very much for that tho, Rot
me, -- O Lord, there 'twas out.


Sir Phil. Well, my dear Captain, I can find by the fold of that Paper, the
Shore is like to engage thee some time here, and therefore thou have the more
leisure to tell me, what News abroad, how stands our Public Affairs, bravely,
hah?


Darew. As heart can wish, friend, the Turk will get no more ground in Hungary,
the French King no more in Flanders, the Sweed will get nothing by his
Neutrality, the Irish and Scotch make no more Rebellion; the English Fleet will
no more stand out in Action, nor the French Victual themselves again with our
Mutton.


Sir Phil. Spoke like a true English heart of Oak, gad I see success in thy
very look, I Am sure we shall beat 'em, but who are these coming down the walk
yonder?


Darew. One of 'em is Sir Lawrance Limber, I Am sure I know the Old Scoundrel by
his Chollerick motion.


Callow. And 'tother his Nephew, newly come from Hambourgh, his Name they tell
me is Mine here van Grinn, and ro^ me, it is very well applied, for he does
nothing but grin and make faces all the while he is talking, they say he is Son
to a Great Senator there, but he is a Blockhead for all that, sink me.


Sir Phil. I must play the Bucket with him, and vanish when he appears, there is
reason for it -- Adieu, Friend, thou shall know more another time. Exit Sir Phil.


Enter Sir Lawrance, and Van Grinn. Van Grinn. And so Uncle, as I was telling
ye, ha, ha, ha, ha -- it is a very good jest faith, the Widow, the Widow, ha,
ha, ha, pray mind me Uncle, after I had showed her the Writings, which she had
such a plag^y mind you must know to keep from this Sir Philip, what does she
do, ha, ha, ha, ha, it is a very good jest faith, what does she do Uncle, but
brings me down into the Parlor.


Sir Lawr. Well, what then -- where is the jest of that? Peevishly.


Van Grinn. Why I Will tell ye, ha, ha, ha, if you will have but patience, it is a
very good jest faith, taking me there into a Corner, after I had brushed her
over the Lips with a Flemish buss or so, ha, ha, ha -- Sir, says she, with a
low Courtesy, you are welcome to England, do you mind me Uncle, ha, ha, ha, it is a
very good jest faith.


Sir Lawr. 'Oons let us hear it, it is very long a coming, prithee let us hear
this jest.


Van Grinn. Why presently, Lord what hast^ you're in, 'dsfish do you think a jest
like an Old Man's Marriage, is done without Consideration; ha, ha, ha, there I
was with the Old Scoundrel sharp, faith and troth?


Sir Lawr. Oh Pox, nay if you expect I Will stay fo^'t 'till the Sun sets, good
buy to ye, your Servant Captain Darewell.


Darew. Sir Lawrance I am yours.


Van Grinn. Why here it is then, come the Captain shall hear too, ha, ha, ha,
ha, it is a very good one faith, I must desire ye, Sir, says she, to convey the
Writings, do you mind me Uncle, to Mr. Splutters my Husband's Councellor, to
supervise them, ha, ha, ha, for says she (mind me) Uncle you that were employed
by my Husband, are most fit to be entrusted by me your humble Servant.


Sir Lawr. A Plague, and what of all this, the jest, the jest Man!


Van Grinn. The jest, why I Have a design to marry her, ye Old Skellum, (Old
Gent. I mean) and to save me the trouble of Courting, she meets me half way,
and, though a Widow, trusts me with her Writings, ha, ha, h^, ha, is not that a
plaguey sign, faith and troth?


Sir Lawr. Not of a jest, by the Parliament, though I have been waiting an hour
for it.


Van Grinn. Of her Love, man, there is the jest, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Sir Lawr. Ah! the Low-Co^n^ry Fogs cho^k thee for a dull Rogue, love thee,
hark'e -- she neither loves thee one jot, nor is there any jest in it at all, by
the Parliament.


Van Grinn. No jest, that is a good one faith, ha, ha, ha, wha^ say you Captain,
no jest?


Darew. I am expecting, Sir, I have set my face this half hour.


Van Grinn. Expecting, the jest is flown to Per^assus top by this time, ha, ha,
ha, pray Sir, what is your Opinion? To Callow.


Callow. I have not seen the glimps of a Jest to day, Rot me.


Sir Lawr. Unless grinning, gaping, and making of Sarrazen-faces be a jest,
Captain will you believe m^, I swear by the Parliament, you know my Oath when
I Am serious, bu^ that I knew his Father who was my Brother, I should believe
that his Mother was intimate with some Baboon, and he were the effect of her
unnatural Conception.


Darew. A merry Man, Sir Lawrance, I see he is always in humor.


Sir Law. Merry, a pox on him, he is not merry neither; it is true, one would
think that when a Man laughs he should be merry, bu^ it is otherwise with him,
for this Fool shall grin at any thing, and as much when he is Cudgel'd, as when
he is Complemented -- the least ^rifle will do it, as for Example now. Pulls
off his Peruke, puts on Spectacles, and shakes his head.


Van Grinn. Ha, ha, ha, ha -- very good jest I faith, Captain, look upon my
Uncle's bald pate there, and the Spectacles, ah poor Nuncle, halloo, halloo,
halloo, there went the Hair away, ha, ha, ha.


Darew. Ah the Devil take thee, what a damned pun the Rogue has found out!


C^llow. ^^oy ^^me, the Old fellow looks very Commically, but I will not laugh,
because he has a Rich young fool to his Daughter, that I Have a Design upon.


Van Gri^, Ha, ha, ha, ha. Gives him a Patt.


Sir Law. Do You see Captain, a senceless Rogue, do you mind him, an ignorant
Puppy, to stand grinning all this while at the Honorable Emblem of Age and
Experience -- and to dare to be saucy with me too, I Have no more patience, I Will
Cudgel him. Darewell interposes.

Captain stand by a little, and you shall see me break three of his Ribs, I Will
do it, by the Parliament, I Am serious.


Darew. Oh, you must not strike here, Sir Lawrance, it is too near the Court,
and will look like ill manners.


Sir Law. 'Od^so, you are in the right, troth Captain, I have been a Courtier
this Fifty years, and never waged my Finger out of order yet, but I Will manage
you another way, friend -- You get a Widow with that Flanderkin Owl's Phiz? No
fool, my two Sons come to Town to day from Shrewsbury, Bias and Solon, Bias can
tickle up a Widow as she ough^, he shall have her I Am resolved on it, by the
Parliament he shall, I Am serious.


Darew. Now by this Oath of his can'^ I perceive whether this Old Sarab be for
Monarchy, or the Commonwealth.


Callow. Oh ^^o^l him, for Monarchy without doubt, you heard him say he has
been an Old Courtier.


Darew. That I had forgot, indeed.


Van Grinn. Ha, ha, ha -- So Uncle, you say your Son Bias shall carry the
Widow, a very good jest says, but that is as she and I shall agree Uncle; the
Widow has already some feeling knowledge of my part, she has Uncle, ha, ha, ha,
good again, she knows what is what Uncle -- the difference between ^ strong
portly able Fellow sit for Service, ha, ha, ha, and a weakly Consumptive Puny
(...), ^^e for nothing but to make Sauce of, ha, ha, ha, ha; so that if Bias is
not for her turn Uncle, I hope another may that is better liked, though Bias were
as wise a^ his Namesak^, the Philosoph^r of -- ha, ha, ha, ha.


Sir Law. ^^ye s^^ Captain, (...), on my Conscience the Rogue will grin if he
was at the Resurrection.


Enter ^word. (...) O^ no, the ^atigue of Doomsday will make him serious, I
warrant ye.


Sir Law. How now Lovewell, who would you speak with?


Love. Sir I come to tell ye that the two young Gentlemen your Sons are
arrived, and being informed by me that you were walked into the Park, are
coming yonder to meet ye.


Sir Law. Are they come, that is well, now Captain pray observe my Son Solon, my
Son Bias is the Elder, it is true, a pretty brisk Blade, but my Son Solon has a
head ^it or a Statesman, sollid, sollid, Solon's a prodigious Fellow.


Darew. There Is some wonderful virtue in this Solon sure.


Callow. I Will hold any Man a Dutch Ducket he is a Coxcomb, sink me.


Sir Law. Now Buffle look to your self, here is one coming will quickly put your
Nose out of joint with the Widow I warrant ye. To Van Grinn*


Van Grinn. What, while she trusts me with her Writings, that is a very good
jest faith, ha, ha, ha.


Love. Trust him with the Writings, that is well, this was a lucky discovery,
and I Will manage it accordingly, you shall have more Waiters than you expect,
my jolly Flanderkin. Aside.

But no more of this at present, here comes the other brace of Boobies.


[ Enter Solon, and Bias with a Patch on's face, they ask Blessing.] Sir Law.
Bless ye, bless ye, y' are welcome to Town, but what is the matter Son Bias?
What ailes your Face?


Darew. Has the Gentleman bin in some Quarrel?


Bias. That Is no matter, let it be as it will, some body shall find he has more
than no body to deal with, my Brother Solon, can tell you more, a Jest is but a
Jest, and every Body is free in the King's Highway, and if I did kiss her,
'twas no more than she deserved, and every Gentleman might do, my Brother Solon
can tell you more.


Van Grin. A very good Jest faith; see how Solon looks, ha, ha, ha. Dam him, I
knew he must be a Coxcomb.


Sir Law. What have you been in a Scuffle, since you came to Town, how came
your Brother's head broke Solon?


Solon. Why, truly Father, my Brother Bias was, as one may say, somewhat saucy
with a Centry that belonged to that great House yonder.


Sir Law. 'Slife the Court, my heart trembles within me, well, go on, ha, ha,
ha, ha.


Solon. There came by a young Woman, you must know, with a Basket of
Straw-berries, a fringed laced cocking, topping, rowzy, frowzy young Woman, as
a Man may say, and as I told you before, with a Basket of Straw-berries.


Van Grin. Ha, ha, ha, -- I Will put in and interrupt him, so Cousin Solon, and
what then -- a very good Jest faith, as a Man may say, Solon, why, if ye are my
Cousin, that may be, but I did not indeed tell my Tale to you, I Am talking to
my Father, as a Man may say.


Bias. You need not be so curious In the matter, let things go as they will,
it is but a head broke, and I Have had as much at Cudgels a hundred times before
now, why, what a-do's here, my Brother Solon can tell you more.


Darew. 'Sdeath, these brace of Fools, are more nauseous than 'tother, I Am
sick of 'em already.


Sir Law. Heart and Lungs, why do not go on Solon, I Am afraid Captain, the
rash Boy, has affronted some Quality or other about the Court, which, by the
Parliament, I would not he should for a thousand Pound, I Am serious.


Solon. In short, then my Brother Bias would have gone into that great House
with his Boots on, at which the Centry stops him, at which the young Woman
laughs, de'e laugh, says Bias, I Will buss ye ^or that ^ ^ackins.


Sir Law. Mettle to the back, Captain, just so was I my self, in my young days,
just so in troth.


Solon. So Bias buss'd her whether she would or no, and I vow and swear, I had
a huge mind to be at her my self, for 'twas a curious ^ine Woman, and had the
softest, whitest Neck, as a Man may say.


Van ^rin. Why, well said Solon, gramercy Solon, Solon's a plaguey Dog at a
Wench, I warrant him, ha, ha.


Bias. Nay, she need not have squauld and squeak'd at that rate, as if she had
been Ravished, 'twas no such strange matter to her, for I heard 'twas but a
Chambermaid, after all.


Sir Law. Gad I Am glad of that however, as I hope to be saved, Captain, I was
afraid it might have bin one of the Maids of Honor, and th^n my Son had bin
ruined for ever, he had, by the Parliament, now I Am serious.


Callow. This Sottish old Fellow, is as great a Dunce as his Sons, Rot me.


Sir Law. And so in short, Bias ru^^led the Woman, and the Century broke his
head for it.


Solon. You have hit it in troth, Father, as a man may say.


Van Grin. The Centry hit it, you mean, Solon, a very good jest again, faith
there are your wits, Nuncle, ha, ha, ha, ha. Aside to him.


Sir Law. Now is that grinning Dog in his Kingdom.


Re-enter Lovewell. Love. Sir, if you are not too busy, I should deliver a
Message to you.


Van Grin. From whom, Sweetheart?


Love. The Widow, Sir. Exit Lovewell.


Van Grin. ^he Widow, hush, I Will follow thee immediately; she has some new
fondness to show me, I Will be ha^g'd else, ha, ha, ha, ha, a very good jest
faith -- Good buoy N^ncle, my Nose will be dam^ably bored, I see, my Cousin
Bias must carry the Widow, and Solon has a Head ^it for a Statesman, -- ha, ha,
ha, ha, Sollid, sollid.


Sir Law. Ah, would thou were hanged that thou -- Exit Van Grin.
Might grin to some purpose, by the Parliament.

Solon 'Od, if I had thought he mocked me, I would have had a pluck with him, I
tell him, that there should have been more marks in his Fate than his Nose, I
tell him but so.


Bias. My Brother Solon and I would have shown him some of Shrewsbury play,
in faith, for all my Head's broke.


Sir Law. Well, not too much of that, good Bias, no^ to no more of your Court
Saluta^ions, do you hear, -- is no sign of good Breeding, this is only hear of
Blood, Captain, the working of the Annimal Spirits; Youth, Youth, the Boys have
known no Sorrow.


Darew. No Faith, nor Joy neither, their Dolts are too Insensible; 'dsdeath,
what a blind old Sot is this!


Sir Law. 'Troth, Captain, I Have a great Care upon me, to know how to dispose of
these Boys; this Bias is a Lewd, Misch^evous, Yo^^g Dog, I design him for an
Office.


Callow. Sot, Rascal, Damn him, what does the Fellow mean?


Sir Lawr. The Other there shall be a Lawyer, because of his instructing Face*
h^'ll be a Prodigious Fellow, for look ye, Captain, if you mind it, his face
will become a Sergeants Quoif extremely, he will certainly be a prodigious Fellow.


Darew. A prodigious Fellow, indeed -- Oh the insufferable blindness of a dull
Father.


Sir Lawr. And as for Wives, I have 'em ready for 'em, my Son Bias shall have
the Widow, and my Son Solon her Sister, both swinging Fortunes, by the
Parliament.


Darew. 'Ds'death, what says he, her Sister -- my Mistress, by this light.


Sir Lawr. They Are now at home with my Sister Bu^fiddle: I Will go watch her
coming out, ^or I Am resolved to propose it to night; and so my noble Captain,
Farewell.


Darew. Hold, hold, Sir Lawren^^, a word with ye first.


Sir Lawr. Not for a thousand Pound, Sir, it comes into my head that this is
the lucky minute. Come Bias, farewell Captain, come along Solon, come.


Exeunt Sir Lawrence, and Son^. Callow. Well, if ever I had so much patience
since I was born, boil me; why there are not four such Fools again within the
four Seas; sink me, and I hope the Daughter is as bad.


Darew. I Am glad the old Coxcomb has told me his design upon the Widow's
Sister, I Will prevent his Sons folly there, I Will warrant him; this Letter from
her I hope is more favorable than the rest, how came thou to get it, she was
in a very good humor sure?


Callow. Why, my Intimacy in the Family made her Employ me, I believe; besides
knowing that I was coming to ye; but as to her humor, she is no Changeling,
'twas just at the old rate.


Darew. What ^reakish, ^reakish! come, before I read her Billet-doux, prithee
tell me, what did she say of me?


Callow. Why she said you were an Ass, -- Devil take me.


Darew. I thank her: well, go on.


Callow. She says she believes ye to be one of those fresh water Captains, tha^
was so purposely blind that you would not see the French Fleet, when they were
out, for fear of fighting, but still laid excuse upon a great Fog.


Darew. Admirable! ha, ha, ha --


Callow. She says she will never believe ye Valiant, till you get a wooden Leg,
nor can ever love ye, till you do one thing for her.


Darew. What Is that, prithee?


Callow. Hang your self: Ro^ me, I thought she was mad: the rest of he^ pretty
humor you will find in the Letter.


Darew. And without doubt, as good a Comedy as this is a Prologue: Well, I Will
go and rea^ i^ at my better leisure, and afterward visit and teaze her as I
see occasion.

Mild ea^^e Love should never be abused,
But you^ mad Mistress must be madly used. Exeun^.

ACT. II
SCENE I.
[ Enter Lady Subtle dressed in Mourning, Berenice and Comode.] L. Subtle. IS
my Lady gone, Sister?


Beren. Gone, what before she has her Mornings draught, before ^ert hirst is
quenched with one quart Glass, and the quick motion of her tongue ^as dried her
up for another; gone, said ye! no, no, she must have two Bumpers more, and a
Dinner before she goes, I Will secure ye.


Comode. She Is below in the Parlour, Madam, teaching Sir Lawrances Daughter to
keep out her Toes, and some new Rules of Behavior.


L. Subtle. Fogh, that is a nauseous Creature too, and indeed ^it to learn of no
body but her, for she has too little tongue, and the the other too much; she
lisps and slobbers ou^ her words like a perfect Changeling, and the the other,
with a voice like a Trump-Marine, is ever bawling in your ears, and running
over all ^he Intreagues of Town and Country, without ^ver breathing between.


Beren. She Is Tutoring the two Sons I believe too, I hear they are come.


Comode. Yes, to your Sorrows -- you will be thronged with Suitors now.


L. Subtle. If either of 'em speaks of Love to me, I Will break his head, I hate
both them, and all Mankind.


Beren. Sir Philip too, Sister, come don't lie.


L. Subtle. Would thou were hanged for naming him, that Villain above all the
rest has the ascendant, and with my late poor sneaking fool that is dead, still
Plotted to affront me, but I Will throw off this nauseous Black to morrow; shake
off the Widow, and appear my self gay, ^rolicksome, I Am sure I Have Youth enough,
and Beauty, or my Glass deceives me; what a shame it is that Custom should make
us such Hypocrites to wear this filthy Dress, as a respect to a dull lazy d^one
of a Husband w^ wish would break his neck the next day after our Marriage.


Berenice. Why well said, Widow, but is this Consquent to that wringing of
hands, that storm of sighs, and blood of tears that came from you when first
you heard the News of the good Man's departure to his long home; are these two
humour^ suitable?


L. Subtle. Those tears were suitable to that time, Fool; tears are as natural
then, as a s^ile is to a Lover when we receive a Present, or Flattery to a
great Statesman, from one that designs to beg a Place of him.


Beren. And they were shed I Will say that for 'em in abundance, sorrow came
^lowing down in purling streams, and Crystal Rivulets, as the Poets have it,
and the Handkerchief was so wet -- *


L. Subtle. Reason good, Changling, I had an Union tied up in the Corner on'^.


Comode. Does your Ladyship never intend to think more of Sir Philip then, I Have
heard you say you did love him once?


L. Subtle. Ay, and hate him the more for it now, intolerable wretch, in the
midst of his Intrigue with me I discovered the Villain had another that was
with Child by him, upon which in a mad ^it I married this dull Sir Solomon, who
was just dying for me; yet good nature returning afterward to this ungrateful
Freewit, I wa^ contented my Fortune should be settled upon him after the Fool
my Husband's death, provided he behaved himself well to me; but ^'th' contrary,
he insolently disdains it, professes himself a Marriage-Hater, and poorly
imagines his Wit shall get the Writings and Esta^e in spite of me, but I think
I have balk'd him now, for I Have just now sen^ 'em by Sir Lawrence's Nephew to
my Husband's Council here in Town, who is my Creature, to ^ind a ^law in 'em.


Beren* What, right or wrong, that is a rare Councellor indeed --


L. Su^tle. Oh prithee mind tying thy stockings up straight, and leave me to
the management of my own affair; a Widow knows as well what to do with her
Writings, after her Husband's death, as thou do with a troublesome Maidenhead
before thou art Married; and prithee, now I think on it, what is become of thy
Sea-Lover, the Captain, hah, have thou sunk him yet?


Beren. No, he lies at Anchor still, and expects daily when he shall grapple
me, but I cannot leave my old freakish humor for the heart of me, I use him
like a dog sometimes, I cannot help it, faith it is in my Nature.


Comode. She makes a mere Fool of him, soft, kind, and easy -- as if she would
invite him to Bed to her this minute, and the next cocks up her nose, frowns,
calls him names, and will no more know him, than a new made Judge will a
Coun^ry Attorney, that has ^ormerly treated him at the Nine-pence Ordinary.


Beren. A Man looks so like a Fool when he makes Love -- that I cannot for my
Soul keep in one humor, and ye^ I like the honest blunt Dog well enough* if I
would let one of the two-leg'd Bears rub their brisles upon my face, i^ should
rather be him, than a Milksop ^lashy Beau a^ any time.


L. Subtle. Oh here is my Lady and the young Dowdy, now if there be any
Intrigues or Matches stirring about the Town, we shall have 'em, I Am sure --
Sits down at the Toilet.


Enter Lady Bum^iddle, and Margery. L. Bum. Widow, I heartily beg thy pardon
for being so long from thee, I have been tormenting my self this hour below in
the Parlour, with this awkward fool my Niece here, hark thee in thy ^ar. Sits
down. I labor in vain, as I Am a Protestant, I shall never bring her to any
thing, I have been swinging her this half hour in an Iron swing below, to make
the Changling hold up her head.


L. Subtle. She Is very slippant with my Sister yonder, you see.


L. Bum. ^lippant, Lord help her, as I Am a Protestant, Child she cannot speak
one word of sense in a forenoon; ^lippant, shame on her, she makes me
distracted; she can make shift it is true to ask for her Porridge or Watergruel
in a morning, but if a Man do but speak to her, or touch her, then she is
presently at her -- Let me alone, will ye? pish, what aileth the Man? fough,
cannot ye be quiet? Aunt, Aunt, the Man squeeseth me, and the like; and then
makes more ugly faces than a Monky that has burnt his mouth with hot Chestnuts;
and yet the senceless Jade is turned of Eighteen too, M^micks Margery in
Lisping, and Actions.

An Age when, to my knowledge,

If she have not her Womanly apprehensions about her she, will never have 'em,
as I Am a Protestant.


L. Subtle. She has a very good Tutor of your Ladyship, I wonder she does not
Learn.


L. Bum. Learn, why the thing has no Soul in it, Child, you may sooner teach an
Irish Man the Art of Poetry, as I Am a Protestant. To Berenice. So my little
Quintesence of Conversation, -- what, you are diverting your spleen upon my
Niece there?


Beren. Quite contrary, Madam, for we have been railing at your Ladyship; she
says, last night at play, you would make her let a Gentleman tie on her Garter,
though she always wears'em above her Knee.


L. Bum. 'Dslife, we were all at Questions and Commands, and he must tie on the
Garter if the King Commands, though 'twere above her Waste, it is the Authority of
the Play, and the Changeling knows it well enough.


L. Subt. I find my Lady has been very obedient in her young days.


Marg. Well, well, I will not let him though, I will not, and I care not a farthing
whether ever I play again or no, for if ever he comes to touth my Legs, I Will
give him a good dowth of the Chops, let the King ^^y what he will, he shall not
touth my Legs.


L. Bum. Thant touth your Legs, -- ah M^ukin, thy Husband that is to be, is
like to have a fine time with thee, but indeed 'twould be no great satisfaction
to him, for they are both Crooked. --


Beren. Hark'e, tell her, her own are the wrong end upward, she has had neither
Ancle nor Calf this seven Years.


Marg. O Lord, I Have a good mind I vow and thwear, but that I Am afraid she will
plague me with some thmutty Jest or other, for she has 'em at her Fingers
ends, and, I vow, makes me blush sometimes twenty times a day.


L. Bum. What, she is grumbling at me, I warrant, senceless Brute, because I
endeavor to inform her Stupidity, and make her fit.


Beren. For the Conversation of the Beaux Esprits, Madam. --


L. Bum. For the Business of this World, Child, she should not be afraid of a
Man if I had the ordering her; 'dslife, when I was of her years, no Man durst
put a thing to me, but snap I had him in a moment; I came upon him Sowse, with
twenty Jests one after another, and afterward made him look so like a Fool.


L. Subt. Your Ladyships Wit was equal to your bulk, Madam, and it is no wonder
the Men were worsted, for a great Fellow durst no more st^nd the severity of
your Jest than, a little Fellow your Fist, for the one was sure to be
outrallied, and the the other to be knocked down.


L. Bum. Nature indeed took care not to stint me in my Dimensions; nor was I
backwards in letting the Men know her benefits, as this Fool is here.


Marg. Well, well, I care not, the Men thant touth me, I Am retholv'd, I cannot
abide 'em; I Will let never a Man in England touth me, but Mr. Thummim our
Parthon.


L. Bum The Parson, do you hear her, Madam, for all her Skittishness, this Coy
Quenn shall sit upon the Parsons Lap two hours together, and you know some of
those are plaguey Fellows, for all their demure looks, if she were my Daughter,
I had as lieve trust her with a Dragoon as a Parson, as I Am a Protestant.


Marg. Pugh, they what you will, I love him for all that, for he teaches me
Quethions and Responthes, and when I was a little Girl he taught me Morning and
Night my Catechize, like a good Man as he is.


Beren. Ay Child, and now thou art a great Girl, he will teach thee the
Matrimony, if thou will, I warrant him, the good Man will not give over his
Devotion, if he finds thou art worth any thing.


L. Bum. Come, prithee let us leave her to her Chalk and Oatmeal, Exit Margery.
for that all these skittish things come to, with Lips as green as a Leek, and a
Face as if it were cut out of a Turnip; and let us talk of things more solid:
Prithee, Widow, what have got for Dinner? hah.


L. Subt. Pigeons, I think, my Lady, and something else.


Beren. Oh, now she is got into her Kingdom, to hear her talk all this while,
and nothing of Eating, Drinking, nor Intreague, has me wonder. Aside.


L. Bum. Pigeons, Pox, that is pidling, melancholy stuff; have any Venison,
Child?


L. Subt. Venison, Madam, yes, I believe there is.


L. Bum. Prithee, what piece, do know, a Haunch? ha* --


L. Subt. I swear, Madam, I cannot tell that, I Will send to my Cook and know, if
you please; Comode, go to the Cook, and ask him.


L. Bum. Do, dear Mrs. Comode, ^only for a fancy; for you must know, I dreamt
of a Haunch last Night, and Mrs. Comode, with your Ladies leave, ^ill my Glass
that I used to drink her Ladiship's health in, and bring it with ye.


Beren. So, now will she get half drunk, and then if we escape being deaf, we
are happy.


L. Bum* Widow, I Have got a Husband for thee, Child, I have been Contriving* --


L. Subt. Oh, Madam, I beg your Ladyships pardon, I Will not marry.


L. Bum. Nay, it is neither to Sir Lawrence's Nephew nor his Son, though I know he
has a design upon thee for the last, but a Young, Brisk, Rich, Active,
Handsome, -- 'odsli^e, and what is better than all, a Fool too, a rare Boy for a
Widow.


Beren. I warrant your Ladyship knows all the Matches have been made this
twenty Years.


L. Bum. Within three, I think, Child -- why* I make most of 'em my self, I get
five hundred pound a Year by it; nay, whether they marry or no, if I can but
get 'em together, it is the same thing.


Beren. Truly then a Bawd and your Ladyship are not much unlike the same thing,
in my Opinion. Aside.


L. Bum. I have observed, Widow, that no Intrigue that I have not had a hand
in, has prospered lately; My poor Lord Spindle, I hear, made an Effort last
week upon Mis Gamboll, an Heiress at Greenwich, but I not being in the Plot, my
Lord lost her: Then Sir John Limber, a great Sportsman of the North, would fain
have shot the Widow Wagbum ^lying, but he gave false Fire without me* my
Brother here, too, for I Am no respecter of Persons, intends to fix his Son Bias
upon thee, Widow, and his darling Solon upon Mrs. Berenice there, but not
consulting me, it shall not do, as I Am a Protestant.


L. Subt* Why then I find your Ladyship has a right and title to dispose of me,
whether I will or no.


L. Bum. Most certainly, Child.


Berem. Pray, Madam, will your Ladyship give me leave to blow my Nose, for I
find I have nothing at my own command?


L. Bum. Oh, that you may, witty Mrs. Berenice, freely: Thank'e, good Mrs.
Comade, -- Enter Comode with a great Glass ^ull. well, I Will take a time to do
some good turn for thee too, e're long, I will, as I Am a Protestant; I Have an
old Gentleman Usher in my Eye for thee. --


Comode. Thank your Ladyship; it is a Haunch, Madam, and Colliflowers.


L. Bum. It is, tha^'s well; here, Widow, here is a health to thy merry Thought.
Drinks.


L. Subt. What does she mean?


Beren. To be drunk, if she swallows all that, or the Devil's in her.


L. Bum. Deliver me, what is this? -- Egad, [ makes Fac^s and spits] Mrs.
Comode, prithee what have thou given me here? -- Egad. --


Comode. Lambeth-Ale, Madam.


L. Bum. Lambeth-Ale, what a plague came into thy Head to give me Lamb^th-Ale?


Comode. It Is fresh and good, Madam.


L. Bum. To give one the Gripes, -- Egad, fresh and good, said she; Puddle for
Frogs, as I Am a Protestant, -- go prithee, fill it me with Sherry, Sugar and
Nutmeg, according to the ancient, laudable Custom, Fool.


L. Subt. Ha, ha, ha, this Lambeth-Ale has mortified her strangely; go get my
Lady some Sherry, you know what she drinks well enough.


Beren. If you are given to mistakes thus, Mrs. Comode, you may whistle for
your Gentleman-Ushe^, I Will tell ye that.


L. Bum. Prithee stand out of the way, and with my Ladies leave, I Will go and
order it my self.


L. Subt. This Baggage has ^inder'd us of all our News. Ex. L. Bumfiddle.


Beren. Oh, no, when she has drunk her Bumper we shall have it with Interest,
and Sister, I see you are like to have more Guests, for there is two Chairs just
now come in.


Comode. One of 'em carries my young Lord Brainless, I Am sure, for I saw his
Page.


Beren. Egad, I shall eat no Dinner then: Prithee Sister, why do let that
lewd, nauseous, silly Boy visit thee, it is as bad as a Lampoon to be in's
Company?


L. Subt. 'Dslife, there is no avoiding him, he will visit every body, nor is
ev^ry House su^ficient, but like a Fly he will be buzing in every Corner on it.


Beren. Just as he uses the Playhouse, from the Box, whip he is in the Pit,
from the Pit, hop he is in the Gallery, from thence, hey pass b^tween the
Scenes, in a moment, where I have seen him spoil many a Comedy, by baulking the
Actors entrance, for when I have eagerly expected some Buffoon to diver^, the
first nauseous appearance has been my Lord.


Comode. Oh, now I see who is in the the other Chair, it is Mrs. La Pupsey, Madam.


L. Subt. And her Lapdog then, I Am sure, why we shall have ra^e Diversion, we
need see no Play to day, the best Comedy will be acted here, however I Will avoid
her as long as I can; but methinks, Sister, it is ^it you should go and
entertain my Lord.


Beren. Not I* I Will have none of your Lords, especially such as he is; your
Lord is a Leaden Shilling to me, as the Plain-Dealer says. -- Exeunt.


Enter Lord Brainless, and La P^psey, with her Lapdog, Page waiting. L. Brain.
Hey, where are all my Ladies People, here? the Family, methinks, are s^rangely
careless, -- this would be a mortal Crime in France now, we never vi^it there,
but you ^ind a Footman at the bottom of every pair of Stairs, and a Page in
every Room.


L. Pupsey. Your Lordship is the Original of all good breeding, your bell ay^ is
incomparable, and your Address has something in it so soveraignly graceful,
that it surprises extremely; the Cadance of your speech too is soft and
symphonical, but above all, your Lordship's dress is always so a Droite Novelle
and a propos, that as you are the delight of the Beau Monde, you are certainly
the envy of the Beaux Esprits: I have found his French vein, and will
accordingly humor it. Aside.


L. Brain. A pr^ty Creature this, but so horribly fortified with the shell of
her Complements, that like a Tortise there is no attacking her before nor
behind, the Devil take me -- Apart.


L. Pupsey. I vow I Am pleased extravagantly with your Lordships particularity
in your Stockings to day.


L. Brain. Gad, Madam, I must needs own I would not give threepence for Humane
Life, but for the honor of being ^steemed by the Fair Sex, for -- something or
other pretty Mrs. Berenice, yesterday, upon my asking her what Stockings she
thought became my Leg best, told me buff-colour, or yellow -- implying
Jealousy; adding withal this pleasant Conceit, that my Legs would seem as
jealous of their Performance, being to make their Conge to the Merit and Beauty
of my Mistress, which, faith, was well enough said; I think.


L. Pup. nay we of the Cabal do allow that Berenice has some wit.


L. Brain. Afterward I asked your Opinion, you know, Madam; and you told me a
Pink, upon which, faith, in pursuance of the French Gallantry, I ^esolve to
honor your judgments, and wear both.


La. Pupsey. Your Lordship's most humble Servant. Courtesies.
He Is very obsequious of late, I hope he will marry me. Aside.

L. Brain. All I fear is the young Fellows of the Town will get into the
fashion too soon; for I Am sure it will take prodigiously, it is very particular
and new.


La. Pupsey. It Is agreeable with the rest, my Lord, I wish my Lady were here to
join with me in applause, I Will go find her out.


L. Brain. By no means, Madam. Sirrah, you Monkey -- what a plague are you
asleep; go and inform my Lady, or rather, Madam, since it is to serve you --
I Will go my self -- Exit Brain. and Page.


L. Pupsey. His Sense is not the most genuine I have met with, therefore
there is the more hopes I may get him; come my Jewel, come Sits down, speaks to,
and kisses her Lap-Dog. and sit down with thy Mistress, and love her, and kiss
her, and tell her some pretty Stories; so, so, so, that is my sweet Creature,
that is my Soul, my Joy, my Life, kiss Dony, kiss thy ^own Mistress again D^ny,
and so I will, says he, and kiss her, and kiss her ag^n, says he; what do you
think I Am like my Lord, to spend my time in that and Complement, when I may
ki^s, and kiss, and kiss again a young Lady, says he: Nay, nay, ^ye Dony, ^ye,
now you don't kiss ^air, now you lick me Dony, you do, you dear Jewel you. What
then, says he, what if I did, it is no more then I used to do, and no more than
you like neither, says he? ye lie Sirrah, ye lie, ye dear Creature you, and get
ye gone from me.


Enter L. Brainless. L. Brain. Ah! Jesus, Madam, there is all the world within
with my Lady; there is the Old Knight Sir Lawrence, the Dowdy his Daughter; then
there is my fat Lady Bumfiddle, and the two nauseous unlick'd Cubs the Sons,
that gave me the Vapors at the very sight of 'em, they are all coming, how
shall we divert our selves?


L. Pupsey. I hope they had sense enough to distinguish your Quality, my Lord?


L. Brain. I think they had manners enough to call me, my Lord, indeed, but my
dress was no more regarded, than if I had wore a Cloak; they took no more
notice of my Stockins, than if a fool had wore 'em, the Devil take me.


La Pups^y. The Spirit of dullness had possessed 'em sure; hah, what think
thou, Jewel? thou would have treated my Lord better, I Am sure: Yes, says he,
that I would, I know a Man of Quality when I see him, says he, yes that he
does, that is my Dony, that is my life, umph Mistress loves thee at her none
heart root. Kisses the Dog.


L. Brain. A delicate Dog indeed* Madam; come hither, pretty Creature: Pray
what is his name?


La Pupsey. Adonis, my Lord, -- Oh fie, fie, Dony, where are your manners, what
be rude to my Lord; go, go, kiss him, and love him, and tell him a pretty
Story, and ask his Lordship how he does, and when he kissed his Mistress last,
do you hear Dony, that is my Jewel.


L. Brain. This is as extravagant a language as her other, I Will try to imitate
her -- And if you can ask Questions, you can answer, Dony, who is your
Bedfellow, Dony? where did you lie last night, you happy Creature you? with my
pretty Mistress, says he, between her white soft melting -- Arms, says he,
where many an honest Gentleman would be glad to have been, says he: Well, Dony,
but what Moles has your Mistress, Dony, h^h? you dear Creature?


La Pupsey. Pish, I will not tell ye, says he: O fie, my Lord, you shall have him
no longer, you teach the Dog paw things, and you cannot imagine what an
apprehension the dear Creature has -- I vow, I believe it is not impossible to
teach him French, for I was saying to him the other day, En ^assant, Monsi^ur le
Chien, je suis vosre tres humble Servant, and I vow, to my thinking, turning
about with a French Grimace, Mademoiselle dit il, je suis vot Servitur^,
plainer than any Gascoign can speak it by far.


L. Brain. Miraculous! And in the right French tone too, Madam?


La Pupsey. Tone! nay, my Lord, never a Dog in Christ^ndom hits a note like
him, he sings a Minuet after me perfectly, I Will try if he be in humor. Sing,
Dony, come sing my Soul, my Life, -- come -- Thol, Lol, Lol, Pinches the Dog,
and he howls.

That Is my none comfort, come then, sing then, Dearest.

Indeed, my Love, says he, I do the best I can, umph, umph, umph, sweet
Creature, -- your Lordship might observe the note was in alt, though a little out
of Tune, and hoarse -- the poor Rogue has got a desperate cold.


L. Brain. As all good Singers generally have, Madam.


La Pupsey. Right, my Lord, you should have heard it else in perfection, he
does not aim to a Quirester yet, but he sings much better than the Clerk of any
Parish.


L. Brain. To six my self more in your good grace, Madam, and knowing how
tender your esteem was for him, I have caused some words of mine to be set on
that purpose, where I envy his happiness, and wish my self in his condition,
for to be so carressed by you, must be the extremity of happiness, that is most
certain: but sirst, if you please, I Will treat you with an Italian Air.


La Pupsey. I vow your Lordship honors us both extremely, but him in a more
particular manner, but I beseech your Lordship add another to us, and let us
hear it. An Italian Song.


L. Brain. With all my Soul, Madam, umph, thol, lol, lol; ah pox of ill luck,
here is the deluge breaking in upon us, '^is impossible whilst they are here to
do justice to any Music*


Enter Sir Lawrence, L. Subtle, Berenice, Darewell, Bias, and Solon. Sir Law.
Speak to her Bias, and Solon, don't be afraid, I Will stand by ye; what my Estate
may encourage ye s^re to speak to as good as they; push on I say, brisk, brisk,
you must always push briskly to a Widow, she will not care a fig for ye else; to
her Boy, to her Bias -- and Solon, a plague what art thou a doing, thou look
as if thou were rather going to hang thy self, than make Love -- why to her
Sirrah -- to he^ I say, let us hear a little wit.


L. Subtle. Well, Sir, what News?


Bias. News, Gad sooks, I never read any News, Madam, I founder like a Spavin'd
Mare when I r^ad a Gazet; but I can tell ye this, that I love ye damnably; and
if you would do as much for me, as the Song says, you should be my Delight,
both by Day, and by Night.


Beren. Well, Sir, and what say you?


Solon. I cannot say much, but I Have a great mind to be married, as a Man may
say, and methinks, and you have the purest Neck and Bubbies that ever I saw, as
I hope to be saved, hey, ho, I wonder what a Clock it is?


Sir Lawr. What a Clock it is, 'oons what a question's there, I believe the
Boy's bewitched, methinks he has no wit at all now, Captain.


Darewell. No, nor luck neither, Sir, he shall cross the Old Proverb for once,
shall I beg a word or two, Madam.


Berenice. About what, the Deck, Fore-Castle, and Gun-Room; oh, I Am not at
leisure now, good Captain.


Darew. The Devil's in her, what new freak is this now --


Beren. Come, Sister, here is a New Song my Master taught me this Morning; my
Lord you have Skill, pray tell me how you like these Notes -- umph, umph --


L. Pupsey. Peace my Jewel, peace Dearest. The Dog howls.

Dony humbly begs your pardon, Madam; but when any one begins to Tune, it is his
way, and he has so great a passion for Music, he cannot forbear.


L. Brain. Here Is no notice of my Stockings yet, a pox take 'em.


SONG.
HOw vile are the Sordid Intreagues of the Town,
Cheating and Lying perpetually sway;
From Bully and Punk, to the Politic Gown,
With Plotting and Sotting, they waste the day:
All our Discourse is of Foreign A^fairs,
The French and the Wars
Is always the Cry,
Marriage alas is declining,
Nay though a Poor Virgin lie Pining,
Ah curse of this jarring, what luck have I?
II.
I thought a young Trader by Ogling Charms,
Into my Conjugal Fetters to bring,
I planted my Snare too for one that loved Arms,
But found his Design was another thing:
From the Court Province, down to the dull Citts,
Both Cullies, and Wits of Marriage are shye,
Great are the Sins of the Nation,
Ah shame on the wretched Occasion,
Ah Curse of the Monsieur, what Luck have I?
L. Subtle. A pretty air, I like the Song too better than those I usually hear,
because there is no whining Love in it; a Latin Sermon, and a Love-Song
influence me equally; the one touches my heart no more, than the other my
apprehension.


L. Pupsey. A Latin Sermon, pray, Madam, don't speak irreverently of that, I
never miss the Chapel when Bishop what do you call him Preaches; for the very
sake of hearing 'em -- that man has really the most Elegant way of
Sermocination, and his words so plain, without needing a Periphrasis, that
Madam, I could tell you such a Story --


Sir Law. Oh prithee Mrs. what do you call, no Stories now, but let us have a
little more Music, I say.


L. Pupsey. Ridiculous absurdity; come, my Lord, my Lady Bumfiddle's within,
we'll have the Story there.


L. Brain. Age forgets becoming Complaisance, Madam, you must excuse him -- hey
Page, where is my blockhead now? Exeunt L. Br. and La. Pups.


Beren. Upon your shoulders, if I may give my Opinion. Aside.


L. Su^^^^* This was barbarous in the Old Knight.


Beren. Ay, to hinder her in the very Convulsion fit of her harangue, she will
choke with it, but see, the nuisance is not thoroughly cleared, here is the Lovers
remaining yet.


L. Subtle. I have seen variety of Fools, but never two so very ridiculous
before, and yet is that Old Fellow as fond of 'em, as if they were as wife as
their Namesakes of old -- Strange stupidity of Humane Nature; the Beasts of the
Field, and Birds of the Air, that chance to produce monstrous Births will soon
loath and desert 'em; but a dull Father shall indulge and dote upon a couple of
Changlings, though the shame of Creation, and that were given him as a punishment
for some horrible Sin.


Darew. He Is laboring for something, Madam, I see the pangs are very strong
upon him.


L. Subtle. I know he would fain bluster something to me now, but makes more.
Grimaces about it, than one that has a real stuttering imperfection if he were
compelled to read a Welsh Bible, I Will have pity, and relieve him sor once: A
pretty Suit that you have on, Sir.


Bias. Yes, Madam, I beg your pardon, I think I Have a pretty good Tailor, I have not paid him his Bill though, but the Cloth cost twenty Shillings a yard; my
Gloves cost a Guinea, and my Hat three Pounds; I beg your Pardon, Madam.
Darewell follows Berenice, who still avoids him.


L. Subtle. I think I Have the most harmless Lover that ever was, he is asking me
pardon at every word he says; he broke both his shins over a great form in the
Hall just now, and asked me pardon for it, as if he had broke mine.


Darew. Are you then resolved to affront me -- To Berenice.


Beren. Pish, Lord, you are so troublesome; now does his tongue itch to speak to
me about the Letter; but I must play another freak with him if I were to be
hanged.


Sir Law. Oh, Bias is at her, I see; the young dog will succeed, on my
Conscience -- your right Widows love an impudent young Fellow, and the Rogue's
as lewd as her heart can wish; but methinks Solon lags behind all this while:
To her, Solon, at her again, Sirrah -- Why see if he stirs now -- it is so -- the
boy's bewitched -- by the Parliament he is, I Am serious --


Beren. You like the Song then, you say, Sir Lawrence.


Sir Law. Very well in troth, Madam, 'gadso, well remembered, faith, I Will make
Solon sing a Song to her, that she may see he has variety of parts -- Madam, my
Son Solon too admires your voice so much, that he resolves to return his thanks
in the same kind; come, begin Solon -- now is your time Sirrah, now Solon.


Solon. I can sing none, but one about hunting; I learned it of Nick Stitch the
Cobbler in Shrewsbury; a very merry Fellow I Will say it, and had the purest
roaring voice, 'twas louder than any Pack of Dogs in the Country; but for my
part, I could never come up to him, as a Man may say.


Sir Law. 'Sbud no more prating, but Sing, as a Man may say; thou art as hard
to be got to it, as a good Singer indeed, come start fair, three hems, and away.


Solon hems, and then sings a Song. Solon's SONG.
I.
TAntivee, tivee, tivee, tivee, high and low,
Hark, hark, how the merry merry Horn does blow
As through the Lanes and the Meadows we go;
As Puss has run over the Down:
When Ringwood, and Rockwood, and Jowler, and Spring,
And Thunder and Wonder made all the Woods ring,
And Horsemen, and Footmen, hey ding, a ding, ding,
Who envies the Splendour and State of a Crown.
II.
Then follow, follow, follow, follow, Jolly Boys,
Keep in with the Beagles now whilst the Scent lies,
The fiery-fac'd God is just ready to rise;
Whose Beams all our Pleasure Cotrouls,
Whilst over the Mountains and Valleys we roll,
And Watt's fatal knell in each hollow we Toll,
And in the next Cottage top off a brown Bowl,
What Pleasure like Hunting can cherish the Soul.
Sir Lawr. By the Parliament, very well Sung, I Am serious, what say you, Madam?


L. Subtle. Old Doting Fool.


Beren. Oh! Solon has performed to a Miracle, Sir.


Enter Callow, and Margery. Darew. Oh here is Callow, and come I hope to call
'em hence, and then I Am resolved to attack her for all her dodging Aside.


Margery. What ail'th' the man? Let me alone, will ye -- pish, be quiet, do I
meddle with you now, -- O Lord.


Callow. She Is skittish here, but she stood tame enough when we were alone
within, burn me.


Margery. Madam, the m^at has thood upon the Thable above thith quarter of
hour; my Aunt Bumfiddle freth, becauth the Porrith i^h cold; the has ea^ two
whole Rowlth of Bread already, and vowth if you don't come presently, the will
fall too without ye -- Oh Lord, the man's mad I think.


L. Subtle. Oh we'll assuage my Lady's anger with another Bumper, come Captain.


Sir Law. Lead 'em in Boys, quick, quick -- pox of this Captain, what makes he
so ready at her? Solon goes to take Berenice, and Darewell gets her hand first.


Solon. Well, well, though he has snap'd ye before me, you have my good will, as
a man may say. Exeunt all but Darewell and Berenice.


Berenice. Well, Captain, you are in your Road still, you will board, I see,
any thing you take to be a Prize.


Darewell. There is no other dealing with you but violence, you use my heart
worse than a Pirate would an utter Enemy, and put more chains than a Christian
Slave has in the Turkish Bilboes -- what did you mean by this Letter? why do you
use me thus barbarously?


Beren. I have sworn not to a^gue the case with you, but go to that Window and
call my Woman, she shall tell ye all in three words, whilst I sit down here
with a heavy heart and rest my self.


Darew. Your Woman tell me?


Beren. Ay, ay, my heart's too full -- call Pimpwell there.


Darew. Mrs. Pimpwell, Mrs. Pimpwell.


Beren. Louder, louder. He turns his back to call, she rises and runs out.


Darew. Why Mrs. Pimpwell, where the Devil are ye? a Plague on her, she is got
into the Pantry, I warrant, with the Butler, or somewhere or other -- how now
-- what gone, this is another of her damned freaks by Heaven! oh, the
insupportable plagues a Man must run through that is debauched by that hellish
vice called Love; and of a Woman too, who of all the Creation least deserves
it, love your Horse, the Creature shall serve ye faithfully, and sometimes when
you are drunk (and consequently not well in your senses) shall carry ye home to
your house in safety; love your Dog, he shall guard your House from Thieves,
and gratefully return it a hundred ways; but love a Woman, she shall like the
first, hourly sting you with her Serpent subtilty, and for one minute's joy,
give ye a thousand vexations; Well, she is a Fortune, that is some amends, and if
I can but marry her, which by way of Revenge I hope I shall, I Will make her mind
her business between Decks, she shall lower her Topsail, I warrant her. Exit.


SCENE II.
Enter Sir Philip dressed like a Lawyer, and Lovewell. Sir Phil. This, my dear
Lovewell, is a rare contrivance, and I think the dress exact, but art thou sure
the Fool will come and bring the Writings.


Love. Most certainly, I heard the Widow give him private Orders this Morning,
thinking it more sense to trust him, being a Lover and a Stranger to you, than
any relation or Friend whatsoever; I heard her tell him too, where the
Councellours's Chamber was, and what hour she would have him go, nay I have
watched and stuck as close to 'em as their skins, in faith.


Sir Phil. Ha, ha, ha, it is excellent; but how if this damned Lawyer should be
found?


Love. Oh, I have prevented that, for I immediately contrived a Letter as from
a certain great Lady at Kensington, who being very sick, and having heard of
his Honesty and Reputation, desired him to come and make her Will, the Lawyer
surprised, immediately hurrys away, upon which I presently hired a Fellow to
stand at the stair foot, and describing the Fool with the Writings* ordered him
to be sent to this Tavern to you, ha, ha, ha, is not this well managed?


Sir Phil. A Miracle, faith, my Dear, dear witty she Machiavil, how shall I
make thee amends?


Love. You know how, Sir, and when I have given ye a Fortune, I shall then
presume to make my claim -- how now?


Enter a Drawer. Drawer. There Is a Gentleman below in a Coach asks for
Councellor Splutter.


Love. Oh, tha^'s well, prithe^ send him up, it is he, I knew Exit Drawer. he
would be punctual -- here, here, take these Papers and be doing, you a Lawyer
and without Papers in your hand, sit down, and put a face of business as if you
staid for some body; quick, quick, I must vanish -- but when you have got 'em,
remember. Exit.


Enter Van Grinn. Van Grinn. Are you Counselor Splutter, pray Sir?


Sir Phil. My name is Splutter, Sir, which said 40 Acres lying and being --


Reads. Van Grinn. And I warrant can splutter like a Devil to^, if thou art
well greased ha, ha, ha, ha, very good jest faith, he has a rare plodding dull
face -- I warrant him, a good Lawyer, ha, ha, ha, well, I Have a little business
with ye, Sir, if you're at leisure.


Sir Phil. Please to si^ down, Sir? my Service to ye -- Drinks.


Van Grinn. With all my heart, Sir, ha, ha, ha, gad I like him better and
better, he is a good honest toping drunken Toad too -- this is a fellow fit for
business --


Sir Phi^. Now, Sir, your pleasure. Folds up the Writings.


Van Grinn. Why then, Sir, my pleasure is -- to drink first, ha, ha, ha, a very
good jest, faith.


Sir Phil. Oh, Sir, good reason --


Van Grinn. You Will excuse me, Mr. A -- ha, ha, ha, -- I Have a light heart, but
come to the business, you knew Sir Solomon Subtle I suppose?


Sir Phil. Very well, Sir, alas poor Gentleman, he died lately at Hanib^rgh,
his Lady is my Client and intimate Friend, I expect ^very day the Writings of
his Estate to be sent me.


Van Grinn. Let me kiss thee then, my dear limb of the Law, whilst I inform
thee that here they are in this Box, ha, ha, ha, ha, -- and so here is to thee
again.


Sir Phil. 'Dslife, come so soon, this will be rare news to Sir Philip Freewit,
for as ^ hear, he is the chief Executor, he expects to have most of the Money,
but yet if my Lady pleases --


Van Grinn. She does please, my dear dagled Gown, ha, ha, ha, a very good jest
again, faith, if thou can but find a flaw in the Will, five hundred Pounds
a^e thine, my dear Wax squeezer.


Sir Phil. Oh, there shall be a ^law, let her never doubt, Sir, we Lawyers like
Tinkers, if we find no crack, can make one.


Van Grinn. Ha, ha, ha, ha, why that is very well said too, faith and troth --
gad I Will kiss thee again for that, and beg thy pardon heartily for doubting thy
abilities; a plump cheek'd Rogue -- gad he puts me strangely in mind of a
little plump dutch Strumpet of my acquaintance, ha, ha, ha, well but hark thee,
my dear Law-driver, do thou know me, hah?


Sir Phil. No faith, Sir, but I suppose you're a man of Quality?


Van Grinn. I Have 1500 a year, that is Quality enough, faith and troth, my father
was but a Slop-seller, but if he had lived, he had been a Senator for all that,
so that I Have resolved to strike up to this Widow with a whew in faith, ha, ha,
ha, -- And hark thee, hark thee, dear Cook upon Littleton, shall we chouse this
silly Knight, hah?


Sir Phil. I Will rout him utterly, Sir, I Will not give him a Groat for his
Executorship; if I do not show him a Law trick that shall make him stare again,
I Will give you leave to vouch this Miracle of us, that a Lawyer refused to get
Five hundred pounds through a squeamish fit of his Conscience.


Van Grin. Troth that would be a Miracle indeed, ha, ha, ha, here is a Bumper to
thee, prithee why do thou not laugh; gad, I could laugh methinks till I was
as fat as my Lord, my Lord, as my Lord, I say, prithee be merry; what do you
Lawyers never laugh?


Sir Phil. Never, Sir, when we intend to cheat any Body, that is our Rule.


Van Grin. Ha, ha, ha, -- a very good Jest, again, faith; -- I'gad, thour't an
admirable Person, and there are the Writings for thee -- and another kiss into
the bargain, Faith; -- gad there is another leer so like my Dutch Strumpe^
again, the Rogue begins to inflame me.


Sir Phil. Well, Sir, I Will take care of 'em.


Van Grin. Will thou, -- gad I hope to see thee a Judge, thou have a notable
rising Face, and the credit of this business will bring thee into plaguie
Practice? Com^, prithee let us drink and laugh, ha, ha, ha, -- prithee laugh now.


Sir Phil. With all my Heart, faith I Have a merry fit comes upon me just on the
sudden; -- I Will kiss you now, Sir, Kisses him.


Van Grin. Ha, ha, ha, ha, a very good Jest, faith, ah my deer little plump
Dutch Whore, ha, ha, ha.


Sir Phil. Ha, ha, ha, ha, my d^ar Fat Flanderkin, -- Fool. -- Aside.


Van Grin. Ha, ha, ha, ha, Well, next the Widow, Hug and kiss each other. I
love thee better than any one in England, faith, I Will be hanged if thou have
thy fellow in all the Inns of Cour^, ha, ha, ha.


Sir Phil. Nor you in all Flanders, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Van Grin. My dear, dear, Bill and Answer, here is a Bumper to thee; Breaks the
Glass. Pox of the Glass; come let us take another Room, for I Am resolved to tope
the other Bottle with thee, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Sir Phil. March on Pompey, I Will follow, ha, ha, ha.
Here they both stand and laugh at one another, then Exit Van Gri^* So, here
they are, and here the great feat is done,
Easily now the Widow may be won*
For what is a Widow when her Fortune's gone?

ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter L. Subtle, Berenice, and Van Grin. L. Sub^* OH, undone, lost, ruined,
beyond all possibility of a Recovery, I find now by his s^nseless Description,
that this Devil Freewit, has put a Trick upon him, and got the Writings in
spite of m^.


Beren. It Is even so, the Knight it seems owned it just now in a Bravado to the
Lieutenant, with a design to have it told you again. -- Min here Flanderkin
there, has been over-reached by a mere Lawyer's Gown, the very shadow of
Knowledge has done his business.


Van Grin. Ha, ha, now can I hardly forbear laughing, for all I have d^ne such
a Mischief; -- Why, who the Devil could imagine, that an honest Toping,
Laughing Fellow as he seemed to be, should prove a false Brother, 'gad I took
him to be as errant a Lawyer as ever took Fee on both sides, or eat a Mutton
Commons in the Temple: -- Mutton Commons, ha, ha, ha, a very good Jest,
In Faith, I cannot forbear for the Soul of me.


L. Subt. Sot, Monster, Fool; oh, where were my Brains too, that I could
imagine one of that Nation guilty of the least Discretion: Thou stupid Dol^,
with less Sense in thee than a crawling Insect in your Muddy Fens, a Flesh-fly
in the depth of Winter, or a Mite in a Holland Cheese.


Van Grin. 'Gad I cannot forbear laughing for all that, ha, ha, ha.


L. Subt. Bring me a Glass of Water, my Heart's so full of Rage, it has ^urnt
me up to a Cinder.


Beren. This Fellow is certainly the species of a Baboon, and I warrant has a
Tail under his Clothes; I Would give a Guinny to have him searched.


L. Subt. A Baboon, 'dslight, thou have named the Prince of Brutes to him; this
thing is one of Nature's foul-false Births, the Eye of Providence slept when he
was born, and his dull Mother at his vile Conception, had nothing in her Mind
but drivelling Idiots, dull Asses with long Ears, unthinking Swine, with all
the other Soul-less, Lumpish Animals, the very Scum and Dross of the Creation.


Van Grin. The Widow Railes, like a Devil to day, ha, ha, ha, ha.


L. Sub^. But to what purpose do I wast my Lungs, and call him Fool that ^m a
worse my self, the veriest, veriest Idiot of the two, -- a Widow, 'dsdeath, and
let a Man out-wit me; ridiculous to Nature, nay, g^t my Writings too, the very
Soul and Lifeblood of a Widow; -- Oh, I could tear my Flesh, burn, stab, or
poison, do any Mischief, and to any Creature, but to a Man much more with
fiercer Vigor, and could I get the Heart of this damned Freewit, methinks I
could with greater pleasure tear it, and with more Joy could feed or my
Revenge, than Teeming Women on the longed for Fruit, their Souls des^t
t'indulge their unborn Infants.


Enter Bias. Bias. So I see she is here, and pox on it, now I'^ put up bri^kly.


Beren. This Fool comes in a rare time, he is like to be well used.


Bias. Madam, I suppose you are not ignorant what I saunter about here for; My
Father, I suppose, has told you what I would be at; and now I Am come my self in
person, and I protest left the best Game at All Fours just now when I was
within one of up, that ever I had in my life, -- because my Father told me, you
were at leisure, and this was the what do you call it, the Cricketty Minute, a
Minute when they say a Woman can deny a Man nothing; besides, I love Cricket
hugely, Madam, and if you please to throw your Heart toward me.


L. Subt. No, but I will throw a thing more proper, I will throw this at your
Head, Buffoon; hark'e, Puppy, get thee out of my sight, and quickly, or by all
that is good, I Will beat thee. Throws a Cushion at his Head.


Van Grin. Ha, ha, ha, ha* --


Bias. I beg your Pardon, Madam, -- what a Plague did my Father make a Fool of
me for, this is none of the Cricketty Minute.


Enter Comode with W^ter. L. Subt. Confusion seize all Fools; oh I Am all in
Flame. -- Drinks.


Beren. Here com^s the other Booby, this will make her Mad.


Enter Solon. Solon. Madam, because I Am young Man, and a little awker'd in
matters of Love, as a Man may say; and my Mistress there, too, being a little
Cruel, and Hard-hearted, my Father sent me to desire your Ladyship to speak a
good word for me, because I cannot do it for my self, as a Man may say; but for
all that, as I hope to be saved, I Am up to the Ears in --


L. Subt. Water, ye Blockhead, ye Owl. Throws the Water in's Face.


Solon. O Lord, Murder, Murder, I Am drowned.


Beren. Alas, poor Solon, has she cooled thy Passion?


Van Grin. Ha, ha, ha, he shall be called Solon the Wise no more, but Solomon
the Wise, now the Widow has new Christened him, -- ha, ha, ha, a very good
Jest, Faith.


L. Subt. There Is something for you too. -- Throws the Glass at him. Oh, you
need not have stooped, Sir, it could never have hurt your Scull; -- A Bullet
cannot do it, to my knowledge.

What a mischievous thing it is, when it is angry, ha, ha, ha* --


Solon. The Devil take making of Love if this be the fruits on it, to spoil
one's Crevat and ones Clothes, this is downright Malice, as a Man man say.


L. Subt. Sirrah, speak one syllable more of Love here, and I Will make my
Footmen souse thee over Head and Ears in the Horse-pond.


Bias. This is none of Solon's Cricketty Minut^s neither, I ^i^d.


Enter Sir Lawrence Limber. Sir Law. I hope my Sons, Madam, have made their
Merits so well known now, and their Interest with ye, is so great, that when my
Gray Hairs shall fall to the ground. --


L. Subt. As they shall presently, ye old Dotard. P^lls off his Peruke.


Beren. The Devil's in her now, there is no hindering her.


L. Subt. 'Dslife, get thee gone and take thy Cubs from my sight, or I will use
ye all so like Fools.


Van Grin. Look, look, she has discovered my poor Uncle's Bald pate again, too,
the Devil's in the Widow to day, ha, ha, ha.


Sir Law. How Is this, my Son Bias confounded, my Son Solon in disorder, and my
self unseemly treated? What do you mean by this, Madam? I never was so affronted
in my life, never since I was born, by the Parliament, now I Am serious.


Solon, Mean, I care not what she means, not I, I Am sure she used me scurvily,
and I Will bear it no longer; zookers, my Blood rises at her damnably, -- I Will
lay her Toppings in the Dust, come on it what will; she may be as bald as you,
for ought I know, Father when her Toppings are off; Let me come to her, 'zooks,
now my Blood's up, I Have as devilish a Spirit as she, as a Man may say.


Bias. No, prithee Brother Solon let her alone for this time; hark'e in thy
Ear, when I Have Married her, I Will revenge thee, and beat her my self.


Exit Lady Subtle. Beren. You had better all take good Advice, and be gone; you
have heard, I suppose, the reason of her Anger, Sir Philip has cho^s'd her of
her Writings to day, and in the Humor she is in, it is ten to one but she does
ye some mischief or other.


Sir Law. The Writing's gone, and seventy thousand Ducats, -- Come away, Bias,
thou shall not have her now if she would have thee.


Enter Lady Subtle with a Pistol. L. Subt. Where are these Triumvirate of Fools
now? You Bully Sneak, with your Brother Coddle-scul, and old Father stupid
here, get you off my Ground, or I will use you so like Crows, Magpies and
Jackdaws, I will do more than ever Providence did for ye, -- I will put
something into your Heads, something of weight, Puppies, not a word more, march
[Pushes them all out, then turns to Van Grin.] And now Mine Here Van Grin, --
laugh, come laugh now; -- Where Is your Jest, now, hah! thou base, thou sordid
cause of my Misfortunes, come give me a Jest for it, laugh, I say.


Van Grin. Sacrament, who can jest with a Pistol-Bullet, I could not laugh,
Madam, if you would give me a Thousand pounds, Faith and Troth.


L. Subt. Out of my sight, thou Insect, Pushes him out, and throws the Pistol
on the Table.
Oh, I shall grow Mad.

Beren. Nay then, such Instruments as these, are not very convenient.


Berenice takes up the Pistol. L. Subt. Mad, Mad, raving Mad.


Enter Sir Philip. Sir Phil. And I so near ye, Madam, to claim your Griefs, and
reconcile your Cares.


L. Subt. Is there an Impudence on this side Hell like this? I Will give y'a
Welcome, Sir. Goes to take the Pistol.


Beren. Nay, not this way, Sister, I must hinder such rough Proceedings, and
leave ye to make your party good with him what other way you please, draw his
Sword I Am sure he will not; and a Man carries no other weapons about him that can
hurt a Widow, that I know of. Exit Berenice.


Sir Phil. What in a fury, Widow, nay then thou art not fit for the good tha^ I
intend thee; I confess I had not the Confidence to visi^ thee, without the
Encouragement of Clarret, but three Bottles of excellen^ Bourdeux, -- in this
Pagan time where there is such an Inundation of Sloe, Sider and Cherry, has
made my Tongue so Elegant, and brought my Heart into so Amorous a Condition,
that methinks I could even make Love to thee, for to say truth, thou look
damnably provoking to day.


L. S^bt. '(...) in vain to abuse him, therefore 'twill be Policy in me to
dissemble; down swelling Heart, and Frowns convert to Smiles, and thou great
Power that gav'st a Woman Cunning, let him not know the R^ncor of my Heart, but
sur^eit with the flattery of my Tongue. Aside.


Sir Phil. Sollid and thoughtful; nay, now I view your Eyes better, that
downcast glance seems to discover Care; you have had no late loss, I hope,
Madam, your Husband I count none, nor you neither, to my knowledge.


L. Subt. How poor a Vice it is in a Man of Sense t'insult over Women's Weakness!


Sir Phil. How damned a one, it is in a haughty Widow to think her Sense excels
all Humane kind!


L. Subt. Well, well, you have outwitted me.


Sir Phil. Miracle in Nature, outwitted thee, why is it possib^e? and can
thou own it too? nay then, I Will have it Chronicl'd, that she that in defiance
of mankind, armed with sharp Wit, and shielded with true Pride, that never
spared a Man in her Abuses, nor failed to ^ilt him if she knew he loved her,
should in the bloom of her flourishing Glory, yield up her Laurels to
Triumphant me.


L. Subt. Why do ye call me proud? were not my Actions natural? was it fit for
me to offer you my Fortune, that thought my Person not worth treating for? What
Woman of my Youth, nay, without Ostentation, not common Beauty too, nor least
in Wealth, could bear a slight so poor; for though my Husband gave ye up my
Fortune, there was Consignment too, of another Blessing to accompany the Money:
But you turn Marriage-hater, and your neglect calls me old, withered, ugly;
blame me not then for striving, though Successless, to dash your Pride, as you to
humble mine.


Sir Phil. Ah, Widow, Widow, though I find your subtle Devil has pared his Claws,
-- I am not now in humor to be tickled: Why did you jilt me, and receive
another? answer that.


L. Subt. Why did you wrong me, and get another with Child before my Face?
answer me that.


Sir Phil. Wrong you, why the Devil's in these Widows, they will Ingross all a Man
has, before he has 'em, as well as after; wrong you! what because I had a mind
to use a Sample of the Grain before the heap was to be delivered in the Market;
must you call this a wrong?


L. Subt. A Mortal one; and if you are Generous, you will right me now.


Sir Phil. With all my Heart, and as I Am now free, and at liberty, I best can
do thee Justice; which, should I marry thee, were most impossible; I need not
tell ye why, -- you know the reason. -- Come, let us retire.


L. Subt. Go, you are a Devil.


Sir Phil. You are but a Widow yet; all in good time, that Title may be altered
too*


L. Subt. Why dos't thou rail at Marriage so, thou Monster?


Sir Phil. Because I hate it, Child, that is all the Reason.


L. Subt. Abhorred Impiety, to hate a Sacred Ordination, allowed by the most
Knowing of all Ages.


Sir Phil. A gross mistake, 'twas first devi^'d for Interest by Sapless
Dotards, formed a Law, that their dull Firstborn Blockheads might inherit; the
generative Faculty should b^ free, the Spirit's palled when it is confined to
Duty, Restive and stupid, and the Product's answerable; of Old the Worthles
never came by Mar^iage, the Bravest and the Wis^st were all Bastards; besides,
from marrying a Wd^^ w, Heaven defend me.


L. Subtle. A Widow, Sir, why what is a Widow?


Sir Phil. Why, a mere Fripperer, or Broker's Shop, that is fain to sell her
Wares at second hand* yet toils to pass 'em off to Fools for new; one that is so
very knowing, that she would baulk a Youngster, and in Love's business give such
violent Instructions, 'twould break the heart of a young Fool to follow; no, if
I do forego my happy freedom, which, 'till I dote, I think never shall; the
Grape shall first be pressed by my own hand, I Will never take the squeezings of
another, I Will have a Maid, that is certain.


L. Subtle. A Maid, thou Coxcomb, I Am ashamed of thee, do thou pretend to be
a man of sense, Learned in the Mathematics of Intreague, and choose an
ignorant raw awkward Maid before a Skilful Widow, oh stupidity! Go to the
Garden, take green Gennitings, and set thy teeth an edge thou codled Coxcomb;
or shall I fetch thee some green Goosberries, and send a Maid to keep thee
Company; a whitely thing just weaned from Jointed Baby, that opens mouth to
eat, but can say nothing; such trash as this is the best fruit for Fools; a
Widow, like the blushing velve^ Peach, by Summer ripened, to indulge the taste,
is a Regalia for a Man; Maids, green crude stuff, and only fit for Boys.


Sir Phil. It Is very fine, a Lady of your Beauty and your Fortune, oh how this
witty Railery becomes, well then, Boy as I am, I Will show one manly sign, I Will
manage the Writings wisely, that I Am resolved on. Enter Berenice.


Beren. Sir Philip I Am sure can do nothing, but like a man of Honor.


Sir Phil. Oh, cry ye mercy, Madam, and Sense too, I hope, therefore thus
humbly take my leave.


Beren. Nay, but pray stay a little, Sir.


Sir Phil. Not for the World, Madam, the Widow has so mauled me already with
her great Cannon, that should I stay to engage with your small shot, I should
have more holes in me, then a Dutch Man of War had in the last Engagement; and
therefore, to bring my Simile a little nearer home, like a Cock that is
over-match'd, I intend to shrink from the Pit before my eyes are peck'd out.


Beren. Your eyes, why what do you take us for, Sir?


Sir Phil. Two of the greatest Rarities of your kind; two that shall rally a
Man to death in an hours time, without putting your self out of breath for it.
Runs out.


Beren. This is one of the oddest humors! what, I warrant you have been severe
with him?


L. Subtle. No, hang him, I broke out only a little at last, when he was
preferring a Maid before me; I smothered my rage 'till then, though I confess
with as much pain as if I had had a sit of the stone, for he gave me not a word
of satisfaction about the Writings -- he designs to starve me, I Am confident,
if the Law don't relieve me.


Beren. Nay, nay, no starving Sister, you have yet a hundred pound a year to
live on.


L. Subtle. What Is that? I must put down my Coach, Child, is not that starving
a Widow?


Beren. Next door to it, I confess, as the humor of the Times are.


L. Subtle. Ah! I had rather be without meat and drink a thousand times. Well,
sure this Devil will not possess him always, one happy minute must be mine at
last, which to be sure of, what would ^ not attempt* what to obtain her Ends*
would not a Woman do?

Would Fortune once my working Brain inspire,
I Would plunge through deepest Sea, or fiercest Fire,
Hazard my Life, nay Soul, to compass my desire. Exit.

Beren. Nay, on my Conscience, if there is a way left, thou will conjure, but
thou will have it, that I Will say for thee. W^ll, what News now? Enter Comode.


Comode. My Lady Bumfiddle sends ye word that my Lord Brainless gives the
Music at her Lodgings this Afternoon, before they go to the Park, and desires
your Company.


Beren. Well, I Will go, because I know I shall meet my Tarpawlin there, whom I
have made so angry, that I believe he could beat me with as good a will, as a
Saylor that disobeyed his Orders; it is all one, I am resolved to try him
thoroughly, before I come under his hatches, there will be hours enough to beg
his pardon, if ever I give him an advantage over me.

The time of Wooing is a Woman's own,
But when she is Married once, her time is gone. Exit.

SCENE II. Bumfiddle's Lodgings.
Enter Callow and Margery, at several Doors. Callow. Ah! dear Creature, how
much am I obliged to Fortune for this lucky minute, that gives me the blessing
of meeting her alone, whom I love beyond all the Universe, sink me!


Margery. You love me, yeth I warrant ye, for what pray?


Callow. For thy self, my Dear, thy Innocence and Beauty has so charmed my
heart: her Money I mean; that I never am a^ rest, my Soul, but when I am with
thee. Aside.


Marg. Oh Lord, well then, donth queeth my hand tho.


Callow. Oh! every part of thee is so Charming to me, that burn me, it is
impossible for me to subsist without thee. The Philly can stand still, I see,
when she is without Company. Aside.


Marg. Why, what do you mean to do? you will not Ravish me, will ye?


Callow. I believe she puts me in mind on it on purpose, Rot me, Aside. Ravish
thee, no, no, only a kiss from thy pretty Lips, or so, my Dear sweet
Hony-suckle; nay, nay, no frowning now, nor drawing back, for I must do it,
therefore -- Kisses her.


Marger. What do you make all this bustle for, why don't ye then?


Enter Darewell. Darew. Oh, Lieutenant, you are a happy Man, I see.


Marger. Oh Lord, the Captain, what shall I do now? Spets, and speaks as in a
rage to Callow. Pugh, pugh, well, as I hope to be thav'd I Will tell my Father,
and my Aunt, tho I will, that I can never live in quiet for ye; that you are
every day teithing, and by your good will would be kithing me every minute;
when you know I hate ye ath I hate the Devil, and with you were hanged upon our
Mulberry-Tree in the Garden, with all my heart; like a thilly ugly, nathly,
pimping, cowardly, tholdierly, rathcally, puppily Fellow ath ye are, to dare to
affront me so. Exit. Margery.


Darew. 'Dslife, what is the meaning of all this rage? she stood ^ame enough to
my thinking, when I came in.


Callow. Ay, and would again, if we were alone; '^is the nature of this sort ^f
Cattle to be skittish, and Rail before Company, but they will stand as still in a
Corner, as a Town Whore (got with Child by some poor Bully) will to a Rich
Country Squire, that she intends shall father it: I must after her, for I like
her Six Thousand Pounds better than my Commission, faith, Captain. Exit. Callow.


Darew. Faith I believe thee, as do a great many more of thy Effeminate sort --
But stay, where is my jolly Lady all this while, and the Company? sure I have not
mistook her time; oh! are you there, Madam? Enter Berenice.


Darew. Nay, you shall hear me now, and I must rail at ye, or my heart will
break; call ye ungrateful, proud, false, and unnatural, not only to abuse an
honest Fellow that loves ye, but glory and persist in it -- Heaven, what could
you mean by this Letter, this abhorred Invective? In a soft tone.


Beren. This Letter has stuck in his throat worse than a Ship-bisket.


Darew. Well, what amends for this? What satisfaction? she seems good natured
now, and sorry for what is past, this may be the Critical minute. Aside.


Beren. I am more sorry, Sir, then you can desire, and if you would please, to name
your satisfaction.


Darew. This is as I could wish, I see t'has touched her nearly. Aside.


Beren. I beg your pardon, Sir, with all my heart, and what else you you will
honorably Command.


Darew. only your Love, dear Madam, that is the Prize I value beyond Empire.


Beren. It Is yours from this hour, Sir.


Darew. My Soul, Life, Heart, Blood -- Ah Pox of these Intruders, just in the
nick too, when I should have clench'd the Nail I have been so long a driving --
ah! it is impossible to proceed, now they come like a deluge.


Enter L. Bumfiddle, L. Hockley, Mrs. Bandy, and Mrs. La Pupsey, with her
Lap-Dog* L. Bum. Boy, bid 'em make ready the Tea, and set the Dishes in order:
My Dear, your humble Servant, how do you good Captain, what so close together,
nay, then there is something more in the wind; I must know, you will never thrive
in it else, Captain; hark'e, a word in your ^ar.


Darew. So, now shall I be tossed by the tempest of her tongue, worse than ever
I was by a storm in the Bay of Biscay. L. Bum. whispers Darewell.


L. Hock* I vow Mrs. La Pupsey, I never look upon your fine Dog, bu^ it sets me
almost a crying; I had the finest Bolognia Shock was drowned the other day, that,
of my Soul* ever lay in Lap; I carried him to the Park every night with me, the
Creature had so swe^t a breath, that I vow I mis^ it strangely.


Bandy. It Is a delicate prit^y Rogue ind^ed, now my Mother is so cross, she will
let me have nothing to play with; I did but desire the other day to buy a little
Monkey for my Chamber, and flying out into a passion, she swore a great huge
Oath, I had as lieve thou should have a Man there.


La. Pup. Go Dony, go to my Lady, and kiss her, and l^ve her, that is my sweet
Creature.


L. Hock* Come, dear Jewel, come. -- Take the Do^.


La Pup. Did you ever se^ a thing so modest, and so shy in your life, Madam,
here is no Courting him to a Wise; I have been this ^hree Months making a Match
for him, and could never get him in humor.


L. Hock Fy^, that is a mighty fault, indeed.


La. Pup* Th^n* M^da^, of all Creatures Heterog^neal, he is the most --
Cleanly, -- no Ma^ge, ^or ever Impe^iginous in the least; -- then he is a
Miracle for his distinction in Philanthropy, he has a^ en^ire love for our
Party; he knows my Humor to a Hair; he will not come near the Tarpawlin Captain,
yo^der, because he is a Williamite, it is a wonder to tell ye, but the Creature
has a strange ave^sion for this Government.


L. Hock Alas, all the Ingeniou^ part of the Nation have so, Madam.


Bandy. W^ll, l'vads I will have a Dog then, let my Mother say what she will;
-- I believe it teaches her to talk so, for I never hea^d such fine words in my
life. Aside.


Darew. Faith, Madam, all that I can find by your long whispering, is, that you
have a mind to dine with me to morrow.


L. Bu^. Why, what a blunt Ass art thou* -- to tell me of Dining with thee;
Dine with thy Mistres^, Fool, and let m^ b^ by to put in a word for thee, if
thou'^t wise; -- depend upon me, I know he^ Humor to a Scruple, and if thou
take my Council, thou shall have her: -- Do I talk of Dinners now? -- it is
true, a good fat Haunch of Venison, boiled with Colli^lowers, would do well to
piddle over: -- Eating together begets Love: 'Twas my Husband'^ Venison more
than himself, that first won my Heart, as I Am a Protestant.


Dar^w. W^ll then, Madam, since you will be concerned in my Affair, be sure
you are Industrious.


L. Bum. Keep up thy Inter^st with me, thou shall have her, Boy.


Enter L. Brainless, Singers, Music, and Dancers. L Brain. Oh, Madam, your
Ladyships most humble Servant, yours, yours, dear Ladies, and your most
obedient Slave, dear, sweet, pretty Dony; gad I beg your Pardons, all, for
being thus tardy; oh, how does my dear Captain too? why this is a piece of a
Miracl^ to find thee ashore, and especially amongst the Ladies, where Music
is going forward, for I know thou hate all these Effeminate Instruments,
hark'e, shall I send to the Tower, and borrow two or three pieces of Canon to
entertain the^, ha, ha, ha.


Darew. Coxcomb. -- Aside.


B^ren. Would they would haste and begin; that grim furly look of the Captains,
will put us all out of Humor, else; what a Face is there, with a grim^ce as
sower as if the Surgeon were just putting him on a Wooden-Leg*


Darew. The Devil it is, -- well, I hope you like it; however, Madam. --


Beren. I like it, I like the Face upon that Fiddle there, better by half; I
like it, -- ha, ha, ha, ha.


Darew Bu^, Madam, Madam.


Beren. Oh, none of your Culverin Shot here, good Captain, you had better use
it against the French at Sea.


Darew. Damn her, she is got into one of her old freaks again.


L. Bum. Words of course, words of course, Fool, apply thy self to me; I tell
thee, I Will do thy business; hark in thy ear, get the Venison ready.


La. Pup. Why, sure the Gentleman cannot be so desipient, to take any thing ill
that a Lady says; Railery from a Woman, though never so sev^re, should be
supported by every man of Sense with generous Equanimity.


Darew. Oh, good Madam, be pleased to Cramp your Dog there, with your hard
Phrases, and let him lick you an answer, how you please; or go and puzzle my
Lord there, any one but me I bes^^eh ye.


L. Pup. Lick me an Answer, come Sir, I must tell ye, your Discourse ha^ no
Concatination in it, it is all blunt and disjoyn^ed, and, as my Lord says, your
Soul is very unmusical, that I believe you never knew a Diaphony from a
Diapason.


Darew. Nay, nay, I Will not b^ tongue-worried now, I Have a remedy ^ort. -- Exit.


Bandy. Well, I swear I could live and dye with this La Pupsey, if it were
only to hear her talk.


L. Hock She excels me, I think in the Cassicks, but I was always accounted
much the best Natural Philosopher.


L. Brain. Come, Madam, now I will present you with my own Composition, which I
lately told ye of, wherein I envy the joys of that happy Creature, your Dog,
and passionately bemoan my own Infidelity; I was extremely Melancholy when I
writ it.


La Pup. Where Is your bow down to the ground, Dony? Your Lordships most humble
Servant, says he. Enter Boy with Tea.


L. Bum. My Lady Hockly, wilt have any Tea? Mrs Berenice, prithee come and sit
by me.


Beren. It Is for my Instruction, I know, Madam, -- now has she some smutty Joke
or other to whisper me: They sit down all.

Ay* -- it is as I said. L. Bum. whispe^*


La. Pup. Come, my Lord, now your own, I beseech ye, I know it must be
extraordinary.


L. Brain. With all my Heart; you must know Ladies, I call it Celadon's
Complaint against Monsieur Le Chien; it is writ like a Man of Quality, when the
next new Play comes out: I intend to give it the Poet, to show 'em the right
way of making a Song: Hem, hem, --


The SONG of Monsieur Le Chien.
GReat Jove once made Love like ^ Bull;
With Li^da a Swan was in vogue,
And to persevere in that Rule,
He now does descend like a Dog;
For when I to Silvia would speak,
Or on her Breast sigh what I mean;
My Heart strings are ready to break,
For there I find Monsi^ur Le Chien.
2. For Knowledge in Modish Intreagues,
Or managing well an Amor,
I defy any one with two Legs,
But here I am Rivaled by sour:
Distracted all night with my wrongs,
I cry, Cruel Gods, -- what do you mean,
That what to my Merit belongs
You bestow upon Monsieur Le Chien.
3 For Feature or Niceness in Dress,
Compare with him surely I can;
Nor vainly my self should express,
To say I am much more a Man;
To the Government firm too, as he,
(The former I cunningly mean)
And if he Religious can be,
I Am as much sure as Monsieur Le Chien.
4 But what need I publish my part^,
Or idly my Passion relate;
Since Fancy that Captivates Hearts
Resolves not to alter my Fate:
I may Sing, Caper, Ogle, and Speak,
And make a long Court ausi bien,
And yet with one passionate ^ick
I Am out-rival'd by Monsieur Le Chien.
L. Bum. Very pretty truly, my Lord.


L^. Pup. Pretty, it is incomparable, I swear, your bow to my Lord down to the
ground again, Dony. She bows, the Dog of Lord bows too.


L. Brain. N^, Faith, there is no great matter in 'em, though the Conceit, truly
I think is new; but now, Madam, in pursuance of French G^llantry, I hope to
have the honor to see the particular entertainment you promised. Goes and
talks to La P^psey.


Beren. Strike up Music. A S^otch Song and Dance here.


L. Bum. Ah* sweet Mrs. La Pupsey, what would I give to do as much; here,
prithee take some Tea, it is good now you are hot.


La Pup. Tea, Madam, it is burnt Brandy.


L. Bum Why, that is all the Tea in Fashion, now, Fool.


L. Brain. ^om^, let us go to Bright^bridge Garden to Cool; Ladies, I Will retire
and dress, and wait on ye there instantly; there will be all the World this
fine Evening.


(...). It Is very true, as I Am a Protestant: come then, my dears, let us go?


(...)* Come, Dony, abroad, abroad, Dony kiss me, ye dear Jewel, -- kiss, kiss.
Exeun^.


SCENE III. Enter Sir Philip and Lovewel.
Sings. Did you not promise me, etc.


Love. (...) ye revoke your Promise then, can ye be so ungrateful?


Sir Phil Prithee, my dear, no more, that I will always love thee, thou may
assure thy self.


(...) love me, and keep me like a Slave dishonored thus, it is most
impossible, no, if you would h^^e me bel^eve you have the least Comp^ssion for me:
perform your Promise, and take me for your Wi^e.


Sir Phil. My Wife, then I should never love thee more.


Love. Have I not purchased ye with Toil and Study, paid with my Labor and
Industrious Wit, a Ransom for repeal of my Dishonor, nay, brought ye a Fortune
too beyond your hopes, the best Inducement to a Marr^age st^te, and de'ye
^orget me? fie, Sir, indeed* you must not, you know you are mine by bargain.


Sir Phil. And will perform it to th^e the best way, by a fr^e, vigorous and
active love, nay, if I fail thee, Child, then I were ungrateful indeed.


Love. You never can perform, unless you marry me.


Sir Phil. Oh, I warrant ^hee, Child, I warrant thee.


Love. You know I love ye much beyond my life; you know what is due to a Vow of
Honour^ and though my tender years, and too fond Heart, charmed by your Merit,
and your graceful Person, was won too soon at first: I could not doubt your
Vows, and was as innocent of doing wrong, as fearless of receiving it from you.


Sir Phil. 'D^heart, with naming Marriage, g^d thou have also made me keck
already: oh, I should make a damned confounded Husband; I am like those that
cannot sleep with Doors and Windows shut, if I want Air I suffocate: besides,
is it not better to come to thee, wanton and bri^k, and aerie as a Bird, to hop
into the Bosom, Sing and Bill, then fly away, soon after come again, pruning my
self in welcome Liberty, than be confined to moulter in a Cage, and batten in
the Excrement of Marriage?


Love. Does this Consideration Countervail my being a Whore, and my dear Boy a
Bastard. --


Sir Phil. A Bastard, why he is the more like to be a Hero, I hope; I was a
Bastard my self.


Love. No, you design, I see, to break my Heart: ah barbarou^ Man, how can you
be so Cruel? have I not always been most faithful to ye? can there be any
Virtue in a Wife, which I Would not hourly practice to oblige ye? nay, do me but
this Justice, you shall find, I Will be the dearest h^mblest of your Creatures:
Say, think, do what you please, I Will be obedient, never repine or grumble at
your Actions, nor say you wrong me, though you give cause; never expect the
Pleasures that Wives covet, to gad abroad, and Riot in rich Clothes, but sit at
home all day like a House-Dove, and if I have you there be glad and merry, if
not, with throbbing Heart be still and Patient -- my Eyes shall watch, which if
some drops should fill I Will dry 'em up just as I hear you coming, and meet my
Love still with a face of Joy.


Sir Phil. Pretty Rogue, prithee no more of this sad stuff, -- thou made me
sick just now with talking, and now thou make me melancholy.


Love. Upon my Knees I beg.


Sir Phil. Oh fie, this carrying the humor on so far, will make me Angry, you
know my Humor, and it is unalterable, -- I Will provide for ye well, and you in
reason should desire no more; and now our busines^ is done, -- you shall come
away from Sir Lawrence to morrow, -- but not a word more of this stuff, as you
tender my Displeasure. -- Marry, in the Devils name, 'd^death I Am all over in a
cold Sweat at the thought on it. Exit Sir Phil.


Love. Base and perfidious, have thou then deciv'd me, is there no truth nor
honor in the Sex, no Balmy Cure for betrayed Innocence too fondly trusting in
deceitful Man? -- Ah, no, I find there is not, let Cunning then, the Woman's
never sailing Art assist me; once more I Will set my fruitful Brains to work, --
fawn, wheedle, lie, and seem to be pleased, as is if he really had kept his
Promise: hah, it is hatching here al^eady, and I hope 'twill prosper, to redress
such a wrong every just Power will Aid me:

The very Indian Heathens hate this Ill,
They never promise more than they fulfill:
If any Virgin does her Humor trust
Her Tawny Lover, though he is rude is just:
But our worse Heathens here conspire our Ruin,
And make a jest of a poor Maid's undoing. Exit.

ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Enter Sir Lawrence, Solon and Bias. Sir Lawr. FOR an old Courtier that has
lived in four Kings Reigns, seen three Crowned, and had a strong hand in the
late Revolution, who, though he has got nothing, has spent an Estate amongst 'em,
and that is goo^ sign one of a Courtier, to find in his latter days such a
dearth of good Manners, as to see himself affronted, and his Progeny baffled,
by a clest Canibal, a Woman; it has not only given me the Spleen, but methinks
I have upon me, the Gout, the Stone, the Sciatica, and all the Distempers
incident to Human frailty, through mere vexation by the Parlia^ent.


Bias. Well, let it be as it will, I Will be a Man or a Mouse I Am resolved on it,
I will have a Wife somewhere or other, now my mind is set on it, let the Widow
be as Musty as she pleases -- what, any Man that will Marry need not want a
Wife in London sure.


Sir Lawr. No Boy, I Have another in my Eye for thee, I look upon this senceless
haughty Minx that abused us, as upon a thing of nothing, and now she is baffled
of her Writings, a thing that has nothing, nor shall deserve our further
trouble* for a Widow without Money, is like a Purse without it, when once she
is empty she in not worth wearing.


Solon. True, Father, or like a Nut that is Maggot-eaten, when this Kernel's
gone once, the Shell is not worth cracking, as a Man may say.


Sir Lawr. By the Parliament, and that is well said, Solon, I see this Boy has
his Wit by sits and girds, as Women have their good Humors -- gad, one of the
old Patriarch^ could not have spoke a wiser thing than that now.


Bias. There Is another Widow that I know of, that I believe has a Months mind
to me, and I Will go and strike her up ere long; 'y^aith I Will make but few words
with her, not I; if they wont when they may, they may let it alone for Bias, --
it is the Widow Hockley I mean, I believe you know her, old Gentleman.


Ent^r Pimpwell, Bias. How now, -- What would this Woman have, it is all one,
I Will have a smack at her, says, I Will give her a touch to remember me by* Goes
and kisses her rudely.


Pimp. Rude ill-bred Fellow.


Sir Law. Ha, ha -- Did you ever see such a Mettled Rogue, this is so like me
in my young days, I have done as much to my Mo^hers Dairy-Maid many a time in
the Corn-^ield at home.


Bias. Nay, never frown nor call names for the matter, here are Lads of mettl^,
I can tell ye but that.


Pimp. Prithee Fool be quiet, I have nothing to say to thee, my business is to
this Gentleman. Goes t^ Solon, ^e shrin^s back.


Solon. Me ^orsooth, why I don't know ye not I, as a Man may say.


Bias. Give her a smack, Solon, don't let her prate, give her a smack, I did
Boy.


Pi^p* Sir, though I Am a stranger to ye, I suppose you know my Mistress, Madam
(...).


Sir Law. Humph, Berenice.


Pimp Who knowing ye to be in the Garden, sends word by me, that she desires to
be happy in your good company.


Bias. Smack her, I say, Solon. Come, I Will show thee the way. Goes toward her.


Sir Lawr. 'Dsheart, let her alone, Sirrah. Madam, your most humble Servant --
my Son shall wait upon her Ladyship instantly, and I beg your pardon heartily
for t others rudeness, for to say the truth, he is drunk, Madam, -- I had no way
but that to bring the Dog off. aside.


Pimp. I Am satisfied, Sir, -- come, Sir, Will ye go?


Solon. Ay with all my heart. Really Madam, I Am overjoyed, as a Man may say.


Bias. Gadzooks, why this Solon's a lucky Dog now.


Sir Lawr. Lucky, ay: -- you had like to have made fine work, sie upon it:
in troth Bias, you must not be so rampant, you might have spoiled your Brother's
Fortune by it, by the Parliament you might, now I Am serious, -- but go, do you
hear, Comb your Peruke, and spruce your self up, the new Widow will be here
presen^ly, she is to come with my Sister Bumfiddle -- go go you will find me
hereabouts. Exit Bias.

Sir Lawrene solus. Ah, many a nights rest do these two Boys hinder me of,
they are two ingenious Youths truly, at least, if I may be Judge, especially
Solon, wherein I di^^et from other Fathers, who generally are ^ondest of the
eldest Blockhead; now I am of the youngest: I have a Daughter too, but I think
she is secure enough from the Town-Fellows, for I have neither let her Write nor
Read, because she shall not understand Love Letters: humph, by the Parliament,
here she comes, and that same Rake*helly Lieutenant with her, Enter Callow and
Margery. if this skittish lisping Jade should turn Whore now, before she can
read her Horn book -- the Devil must be very strong in her. I Will stand aside
and observe.


C^llow To affront and abuse your humble Servant so, my dear pretty Creature,
without any reason, I swear it went to my Heart.


Marg. Why, What would you have me do when the Folks thee us, I Am tho ashamed
before company, I cannot tell what to do, besides, if my Father should but know.


Sir Lawr. Which, the Devils in him if he should, being so far out of the way
--


aside. Marg. He would never let me go abroad again, for he hates I thould talk
to a Man for fear I thould Marry, and oblige him to pay me a Porthion.


Sir Lawr. Does he so, Oatmeal Face, I shall talk with you presently. aside.


Callow. Thy Father, ah prithee don't name him, Child, as long as I have thee
of my side, the old Fellow's but aCipher, besides, I out-wit him always, I lead
him by the Nose whenever I see him, Rot me.


Sir Lawr. Very good, there is an impudent Rogue too, he has an ignorant raw
skittish Head, with a Flairing Comode on, and he is an Addle Blockheaded B^lly,
with a ^luttering Scarf on, they are a mighty ^ine Couple indeed.


Marg* Nay, pish -- now you squeeth me too hard again, lord you make such a
Bu^^le always, and do tho Ru^^le and tumble ones Head with kithing one.


Callow. A thousand Pardons my dear Rogue* that is well put in my Head faith.


Kisses her. Sir Lawr. Oh rare, rare doings! She cannot speak at home, nor will not
let a Man touch her when she is before me; but the Queen can bill like a
Pidgeon, I see, now. aside.


Marger. O my Conscience, for ought I thee you intend to marry me.


Callow. Marry thee; Ay, what else my dear Rogue.


Marg. O Lord, I shall never endure it, I shall cry my self to death.


Sir Lawr. O hang ye -- aside.


Callow. What a plague does she mean? I believe she has a mind to have a touch
beforehand, Sink me.


Marg. Besides, my Father will kill me.


Callow. He, an Old Grizzle, -- 'Dslife I Would banter him to death in half an
hours time; and if he should but touch thee, I would give him a sillup with my
two Fingers, that should knock him as ^lat as a Battle-Ax* Burn me.


Sir Lawr. Why then Sirrah, there is a ^illup to provoke ye -- Come Draw, Bully,
Draw -- I will cut your Throat else, by the Parliament I will, I can Swear as
well as you, Dogbolt.


Callow. 'Dsheart, Sir Lawrence here; what shall I do now?


Marg. My Father! Now the Devil take all ill Luck -- I mutht take his part --
Do, do, Father -- Beat him, thwinge him, break his Bones, cut his Throat, for I
can never be quiet for him, like a deboath'd, drunken, doltish, dunderheaded,
detheitful, damned, devilish Dog, as he is, to t^ith me ^ho.


Callow. So, so; She Is in the old style again -- I shall be worried between 'em
if my Legs don't befriend me -- Runs out.


Sir Lawr. A Cowardly Rascal; what is he gone? -- Here Is a fine Scarse-Officer
for ye, -- if they should chance to be all such, we should beat the French
finely; we should have a special Army by the Parliament.


Marg. I believe, Sir, I have forwarned the Fellow above a Thouthand times tho
I have.


Sir Lawr. Oh, very likely; that made you cry, O Lord you make thutch a Buthle,
and do tho Ru^^le ones head with kithing one, -- Hah, you lithping Queen you:
-- But I Will manage you I Will warrant you. -- Come Hussy, ^ome along with me.
Exeunt.


Enter Sir Philip, Darewell, and Van Grin. Van Grin. You never saw such a
Fellow as I am in your life, Captain, for the more the Widow Railed, the more I
Laughed, ha, ha, ha, till she fetched out the Pistolls, and then she made me as
mute as a Fish says; for you know there was no Jest in that; but till then,
ha, ha, ha, ha, you would have died with Laughing, Jest after Jest, Hit after
Hit, Joke after Joke, souse upon her, as fast as Hops, you never saw such a
fellow in your life, Faith and Troth.


Darew. No the Devil take me not I, nor any one else, I b^lieve.


Sir Phil. I Will discover my self to the Fool, 'twill add to the Jest.


Darew. No, prithee, not yet; let him go on a little further.


Van Grin. But the Devilish Jest of all was, that I should give the Writings,
instead of the confounded Cou^s^llor, to this plaguey Sir Philip, ha, ha, ha,
ha, -- whom I never saw in my Life; but I hear he is the Devil of a Fellow.


Sir Phil The Devil he is, and are you sure you don't know him when you see
him, Min Here Van Blunderpa^e.


Van Grin. Ha, ha, ha, ha -- Grin stares at him and Laughs


Sir Phi^. Ha, ha, ha, ha --


Van Grin. It Is so, it is he; Give me thy hand ye Devil you, hark ye you served
me a plaguey trick, ye young Dog, but I cannot be angry with thee for the heart
of me, ha, ha, ha, ha -- Well I Am in haste now, but I must Crack a Bottle with
thee some time or other, for I cannot be angry faith, ha, ha, ha.


Exit Grin. Sir Phil. No, so I ^ind; ha, ha, ha. --


Darew. For fear of being beaten, ha, ha, ha, -- it is such a grinning Puppy;
and here comes another almost as bad; Oh my Lord, what you are hunting the Duck
here, I suppose; Mrs. La Pupsey is in the next. Walk, she is dived just before
ye.


Enter L. Brainless new Dressed. L. Brain. A Pox take my Valet du Chamber, I
should have been here half an hour ago, if the Rascal had Dressed me sooner: --
Prithee, Sir Philip how do like me, you are a Man of Judgment; the Devil
take me if I am not very much out of humor about it.


Sir Phil. Why, what would you have my Lord? here is the Brandenburgh's Cut to a
Hair, I see. The Walks begin to sill, here is Leviathan coming, and the rest of
the fry, I shall be swallowed if I stay, farewell: I Will go and sit an hour with
my little dear at home, and keep my word with her like a Man of Honor. Exit.


Darew. I had a Command from my Lady of the Lake too, to attend, she is
somewhere in the Garden and I must follow her, though the dear damned Devil
abuses me perpetually: 'Slise here she is -- hah --

Looks angerly on Solon. Enter Berenice, Solon, and La Pupsey. ^irrah, let go
her hand, or I Will cut your Ears off before her Face.


Solon. I will not, no, though you could Roar as loud as a Cannon, a^ a man may say.


Darew. Why then I Will try if this can make ye, Rascal. offers to Draw.


Beren. Do, Draw if thou dare, thou Rash, thou Choleric Fool; draw but an
Inch; nay, do but look as if thou would, by all the Saints above, I Will
discard thee for ever.


Darew. Death, Hell, and Furies! you make me a mere Changeling.


Beren. Why, then I make you what you are; and suppose you are Commanded to Act
an Ass a little, will you refuse it to oblige your Mistress.


Darew. To Rank me with such a thing as that, a Dolt, a Fool.


Solon. Fool in your Face, Sir. Gadzookers, Madam, stand by and see fair play;
you shall see me give the Captain a Salt-Eel: 'Slid I Will not be baffled by
never a Water Rat of 'em all, for now my blood's up I Will cut and slash, or go
to Loggerheads with him if he dares.


La Pups. Ha, ha, ha, This Fool will make rare sport; I Will improve it.


B^ren. Do You hear, on my Conscience he will beat thee.


Darew. Oh Women, Women! what were Men born to suffer.


Beren. To call a Gentleman Fool, a Man of his rare Qualifications; you shall
see a spice of his parts, come Dance, Sir, -- She Sings, he Dances awkwardly.
Dance any thing Extempore. -- There Is a Lover for ye: So, now break a ^est,
quick, quick, break a Jest.


Solon* A Jest; why I say the Captain will never take a French Prize at Sea;
because he is so ill at taking an English one ashore* there is a Jest for ye.


Darew. Sordid Puppy.


Beren. There Is a Jest Extempore; that is more than the greatest Wit in Town can
do, by this Light, Captain.


Darew. Oons, do you call that a Jest.


La Pups. A Jest, Ay; and a good one too: Come now, Sir, as your last Trial,
Sing the Dialogue with me, that I showed you in the Arbor just now -- Observe
Captain. -- Here they both Sing. A DIALOGUE between Solon and Berenice.
Beren. DAmon, if I should receive your Addresses;
What would you do to deserve my Embraces?

Solon. If my dear Silvia would favor my Passion;
I would in faithful Love, Excel the Nation.

Beren. I am Rich, Fair, and Young, Charming my Face is;
What merit can you boast to gain such Graces?

Solon. I can Sing, Dance, Run, Leap, Wrestle, and Tumble;
And all the Day and Night be your most humble.

Beren. Can you be patient, and Jealousy smother,
If you should Chance to see me Kiss another.

Solon. I Am in good Nature all others exceeding;
And well acquainted too with your Town breeding.

Beren. Or if before my Time you find me swelling;
Would you not grumble, nor think of Rebelling?

Solon. I front my betters have learnt those Expedients;
And can by City Rule practice Obedience.

Beren. Or if in Riot, Rich Cloths, or at Play still,
I lavish Thousands, yet would you Obey still?

Solon. In living great you would add to my Fame too:
There Is scarce a London Wife but does the same too.

Beren. Take, Take my hand then, and straight let us effect it;
Thou art the very Fool I Have long Expected.

Solon. Let Fortune frown I can never miscarry,
For just such Fools as I are all that Marry.





Beren. Very good; What think you now, Sir? Is this accomplished person a Fool?
When will you do as much Captain?


Darew. Well I Am fated to be the Fool my self; what would you have me say.


Beren. Then live and learn, I mean more manners, Sir, than to question my
behavior; do that when you have power over me: Come, Sir.


Darew. 'Dsdeath, you will not walk alone with him.


Beren. Not alone with him; who told you so? Come worthy Sir.


Solon. Gadzooks this is the Cricketty Minute, as my Brother Bias calls it:
Lord how the Captain looks! as a Man may say. Exeunt.


Darew. Go and be damned; I Will plague my self no more; but only this, I Will beat
that Fellow, present her with his Nose, and never see her after.


Exit Darewell. SCENE II.
Enter L. Subtle. Lovewel. L. Subtle. Then dear Sir, or dear Madam, for I yet
scarce know what to call ye, I am so transported with what you have told me,
Will you promise to be true to me?


Lovew. As your own Heart, Madam, you see before ye, a poor un^ortunate Woman,
abused beyond ^ufferance, by that worst of Monsters Sir Philip, the just Sense
of which has raised my Spleen so high, that I will crack my Brain but be
revenged, therefore once more assure your self, that as for his sake my Wit has
used you ill, so for yours and my own, it shall make ample satisfaction.


L. Subtle. Get but the Writings back -- I Will wear ^hee here, here next my
Heart, where thou shall grow for ever.


Lovew. I Will do it or dye -- Have you seen Counselor Splutter since we
conferred last night together, he should have been here this Minute.


L. Subtle. No, but have Fee'd him largely, not for his own, but to take thy
Advice.


Lovew. And he has done it faithfully, he has contrived the rarest new Deed
about the Estate of Sir Solomon's Uncle, that died at Hamburgh, that our witty
Knight will be so puzzled about it, for I know his covetous Humor, and have
accordingly fitted him; oh, here he comes, so Sir, you have dispatched I see.


Enter Splutter with a Deed. Splut. Ah Sir, you could not doubt that, when I
was to serve so good a Client as my Lady, here is that will puzzle the Spark, or
the Devil's in'^, but if this trick should fail, we have still another Game to
play with him, for then I Will advise my Lady to go on with her Writ of Cozenage,
'gad there we'll trounce him.


Lovew. No, prithee since Wit has begun, let Wit end it, and do thou but play
thy part in bantring, as well as I have ^one in flattering and fawning on him,
it is impossible but we should succeed.


L. Subtle. Does he swallow that Pill finely?


Lovew. As I could wish, and now I don't touch upon Marriage, the lewd wretch
is as kind to me, as he should really have been, had he done me Justice, whilst
I degenerated by my wrongs, lie in his Arms and Plot like a true Jilt, and
whilst he kisses me, vow dire revenge, -- Hark, the Garden Bell rings, it is he,
all away to your Post, and Lawyer -- mind but your Cue, never doubt the happy
Issue, when I have finished the work this shall be the sign. whistles. Exeunt.


L. Subtle. And if there be a happy Star for Widows, shine clear now I beseech
thee. Exit.


Enter Sir Philip. Sir Phil. How does my Blessing, what alone and melancholy,
well, a pox take all Business I say, I had been with thee an hour sooner, but
that the House of Commons sat so late, that


Lovew. That you could not mind your Mistress, for minding the weighty Affairs
of S^ate, hah -- If I had not helped him out, that Lie would have made him
black in the Face aside.


Sir Phil. Right Child, well but prithee, How go Affairs with the Widow, hah,
and the old Musty Knight, have thou taken thy leave?


Lovew. Speak softly, Sir, I have a Secret to tell ye.


Sir Phil. A Secret, prithee what is it, out with it;


Lovew, Come a little further from that Door there.


Sir Phil. That Door, Why what is the matter?


Lovew. Hush, softly I tell ye, hark in your Ear, Counselor Splutter's in the
next Room.


Sir Phil. Counselor Splutter, how so, nay your Footman can tell ye that he
showed him up, for my part I absconded, it was not sit for me to be seen.


Sir Phil. But prithee can tell nothing of the business?


Lovew. Why, by what I overheard, the Widow and he have had a difference about
the Deed of the other Estate of Sir Solomon's Uncle at Hamburgh, which is in
his possession, in which it seems you have likewise a considerable share, and
the stingy Widow not giving a good Fee, I suppose he is come over to your side,
-- so that you are like to wallow in good Fortune now --


Sir Phil. Dear dear lucky Rogue -- it is thou art the cause of all, and I will
so reward thee -- well, I Will go to him --


Lovew. Patience a little, Sir, there may be a trick in it, and he may chance to
be a false Brother, and design to overreach ye, now I have it in my Head, Sir.


Sir Phil. What, what, dear Rogue?


Lovew. As for your good, Sir, I am still contriving. Fawning on him.


Sir Phil. Sweet, charming, precious, prithee go on.


Lovew. That if this Lawyer should prove a knave, which you know is no miracle.


Sir Phil. No no, a Miracle, no no.


Lovew. And you two should differ about Proposals, being possessed of the Deed,
having power to wrong ye; to prevent all, I have contrived that you should lock
me into the Closset here, then bring him in to discourse the business over, so
that I hearing every word between ye, may be a good Evidence in case of Knavery:


Sir Phil. I gad, you are in the right Child, why, thy Wit increases every
Minute, it keeps no bounds, why this is the prettiest project to out-trick a
Lawyer, here, get in quickly my dear, pretty Angel, faith thou take too much
care.


Lovew. All for you sake, Sir. Clapping his Cheek^


Si^ Phil. I know it, and will be grateful to thee my Delight, my Jewel --
there is no Service under Heaven that I would not do to oblige my Dear, Dear,
Witty, Sweet, Kind, Lucky.


Lovew. Will you Marry me, Sir?


Sir Phil. Aw, -- go go, prithee get into the Closset Child, I Am afraid the
Man of Law will bolt in upon us, and then our Plot's spoiled.


Lovew. Do You keck still; I Will make ye glad to do it ere I have done with ye.


Sir Phil. So now, I Am recovered from my Fit again; He locks her into the
Closset. that plaguey word comes always upon me, like an Eastern Wind, it blasts
all my Joys in a moment, -- now to my Lawyer, I hope there is another Estate
coming, I shall not want a Witness, and I Am resolved I Will make him bawl loud
enough.


Exit. Re-enter Lovewell, with the Box of Writings, and Casket of Jewels.
Lovewell. I have 'em once more, and to Sacred Fate, thus low I bow, with thanks
for the Success: The Jewels too Man's glittering Opens the Casket damnation.

Now Marriage-Hater, though I still must be,
Unhappy in my wronged Virginity;
I Will keep thee poor, thus I Am revenged of thee, Whistles and Exit.
I Will never pay thee for my Infamy.

Enter Sir Philip, and Splutter with a Parchment. Sir Phil. Come Sir, here is a
better light, pray speak out; I Would not give three half pence a Motion from this
Lawyer, he would not be heard two foot off in Westminster hall. aside.


Splutter. She Is gone, I heard the Sign, -- aside.

Why truly, Sir, my Lungs are none o'th best -- Ugh, Ugh -- Coughs. but I Will
read as well as I can, Sir, -- and if you are the Heir at Law to this Estate --


Sir Phil. Come, prithee begin; you are a plaguey while about it; -- Come, this
Indenture.


Splutter. This Indenture made the Fifteen Day of August, Anno. Dom. 1690.


Sir Philip. So, now he Mouths it like a right Lawyer; the Devil's in it if she
does not hear him now -- aside.


Splutter. In the Third Year of the Reign -- but hark ye; before I go any
further let us see the Will, to know whether your Name is Right here, I Will not
read a Word more till I see that, you may be the wrong Person for ought I know.


Sir Phil. Pox of his dilatory Impertinence; now must I go fetch the Writings
out of my Closet. -- How now, the Door open, -- sure this Lawyer could not blow
a Door open with his Bawling; -- No, no, it maybe I slipped the Lock; I hope
all is well within. Exit.


Splutter. I, much good may't do ye with the Nest, the Birds are flown to my
knowledge, and I Will after 'em; there is a Lawyers trick for ye. Exit.


Re-enter L. Subtle and Lovewell: L. Subtle. Have got 'em?


Love. Fast, fast, Madam; I Have secured 'em for ye, where they shall never reach
his Clutches more.


L. Subtle. Oh thou dear life of all my Joys to come; what shall I do to show
my Gratitude. -- Embracing her.


Enter Sir Philip. Sir Phil. Robbed, Cheated, Tricked, Undone, by Heaven, not
only the Writings gone, but Jewels ^oo, -- A plague of this Lawyer, and the
Female Devil that set him at Work, where are they now -- hah --


Sees L. Subtle and Lovewell Embracing. L. Subtle. My Dear, Witty, Obliging --
Kisses her.


Sir Phil. The Widow here, nay then it is past Redemption; my Damnation is
preparing and here are my Tormentors ready: Ah Fool, Fool, dull thoughtless
Idiot.


L. Subtle. Now for my Game with him; I Will try what Wit he has, now Fortu^^
turns the Scale -- Most Noble Sir, Charmed with your Person, routed by your
Wit; My Heart new Modeled, and my Pride laid low, I Am contrary to Custom come
to Woo ye; and though a Widow, a mere Brokers-shop, that as you say put off
Stale Wares for New, must beg ye to take up with an Old Suit, and Marry me
whilst I am worth the wearing.


Sir Phil. Oh! -- Groans.


Lovew. Or if you think a broken Virgin Better, that is as good a Maid as you
have left her, and can make shift to Dine on a poor Joint, that* you have mad^
your Breakfast on before, Here I stand by you ready Cooked and Dressed, to be
Cut up, Sir, by the Knife of Matrimony.


Sir Phil. So, there is two Broad Arrows gone through my short Ribs already --
such another Attack and I Am gone.


L. Subtle. Though you are possessed of Seventy thousand Ducats, a mighty Sum in
Jewels too, yet, Sir, in Charity you know --


Lovew. Though loaded with your new Estate, in Hamburgh too, Sir, you should not
slight poor me.


Sir Phil. Ah Plague upon ye.


L. Subtle. A young brisk Widow, is no Purgatory, Sir.


Lovew. No, Sir, nor is the Property much altered in Virgins of my sort.


Sir Phil. Ah, the Devil take your sorts -- there is no remedy, I shall be
worried.


L. Subtle. Fie, fie, Sir, it is a shame to let us Court ye so, come, faith, say
the word, shall we draw Cuts.


Lovew. A short and a Long, Come, Sir, here is a slip of Parchment that tied the
Box of Writings, this will do rarely. Takes up a slip of Parchment from the
ground.


Sir Phil. Ah stinging Devil.


L. Subtle. Ha, ha, ha, -- he will fall to my Lot, on my Conscience.


Lovew Nay, that is Injustice, he should rather fall to mine to make amends for
old scores, -- What say ye, Sir?


Sir Phil. Why, I say, that if ye don't both get ye instantly out of the Roo^,
I shall beat ye.


L. Subtle. Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Lovew. Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Sir Phil. A Plague on your Merriment, would the Devil had these Lodgings for
being so near the Street, I Would try else if you would make another sort of noise.


Lovew. That Lewdness has undone thee, impious Wretch, the scrowl of thy
Offenses are full numbered, and punishment pursues thy Guilt apace, can thou
look on me and not blush to death to see the Innocence, thy Vice has ruined;
for though by Perjuries and Oaths betrayed, I swear I was so innocent of Ill, I
thought all Love like mine, was Honorable.


Sir Phil. Will thou make me forget my sel^, Will thou not be gone, thou Witch
thou Devil? -- Consound 'em, What shall I do with 'em.


L. Subtle. Now Sir, pursue your Marriage-hating Humor, Men of great Fortunes
may do what they please, -- Fool, thou shall be my Days and Nights diversion,
I Will never eat but the Theme of all the Jests, shall be Sir Philip's Wit, Sir
Philip's Humor, and when I go to Bed, my very Woman -- viewing the Jewels,
shall even burst with Laughing, and cry out, Oh silly, silly, silly
Marriage-hater.


Lovew. And when I come to the sport --


Sir Phil. Why then a Legion comes, a thousand thousand, 'dsdeath, I shall draw
upon 'em, if I stay, I Have no patience lest. Runs and locks himself into the
Closs^t.


Lovew. Nay, I have not done with ye yet, Sir. Goes and Drums at his Do^r.


L. Subtle. There Is a Widow's Call to Marriage too, Sir, I know you love it
dearly.

Drums. Oh wretched Tribe, that dare that Law dispute;
Which does their Race distinguish from the Brute:
Lust was a Chaos, till the Great Creator,
Confined to bounds, the Wilds of Human Nature;
But this foul Beast as if of Bounds ashamed.
Defying Marriage, chooses to be Damned. Exeunt.

ACT V.
SCENE I.
Enter Lovewel. SUre there never was so ^ond a fool as I, now the heat of my
passion is over, I cannot for the heart of me forbear coming back to make him
another Proposal, he has used me barbarously, but then he has used me kindly
too by sits, but then again, the wrong he did me in getting me with Child, is
insufferable, -- ay, but then again, 'twas with my own consent, but then 'twas
monstrous in him to refuse to make me amends, ay, but how do I know but this
last kindness may Convert him, -- it is no imprudence to try him once more,
Heaven may have changed his Mind. Sir, Sir, -- a word we. -- Knocks softly.

Enter Sir Philip. Sir Phil. How now, How dare thou come back to abuse me,
thou Sorceress, thou Thief, thou damned confounded plaguey Creature?


Lovew. Alas dear Sir, why do ye wrong me so?


Sir Phil. Dear Sir, -- ah pox upon thee, dare thou mock me?


Lovew. Not I upon my Soul, Sir.


Sir Phil. Or do thou come back for my Clothes and Money, thou have not
robbed me enough, have thou, thou Sybil. -- Where are the Writings and the
Jewels, Gipsey hah?


Lovew. Pray be not angry, Sir, I have 'em safe.


Sir Phil. Hah, Have thou 'em, -- have a care of Lying.


Lovew. By all that is good I have, Sir, the Widow has not touched 'em yet.


Sir Phil. How Is this, -- What a plague, this little Witch did not take 'em. by
the way of frolic only, sure, 'dsdeath unriddle this quickly, I Am impatient.


Lovew. You shall have 'em again, Sir.


Sir Phil. Hah, What say thou?


Lovew. You shall have 'em again. --


Sir Phil. Shall I, -- Where, When, How? 'dsdeath don't tri^le with me.


^^vew. From* me, Sir, from this Hand, this liberal Hand that gave away my
Heart, shall give what you desire.


Sir Phil. Then I Will believe thou love me.


Lovew. But you must Marry, Sir.


Sir Phil. Ugh, ugh, ^gh. -- Coughs and Spits.


Lovew. And that before hand too, else I am off the Bargain.


Sir Phil. Art thou resolv'dd to Murder me?


Lovew. Murder ye, sie, 'twill be a Health perpetual, all your life past has
been perpetual hurry, lavish and wild, it is time, Sir, now to settle.


Sir Phil. Settle, and Marry, So; there is, I remember, a third convenience
be^ongs to it too.


Lovew. You Will find your best Convenience is to do it Sir, take me, and take
all; yet, -- if not, Adieu to ye, I shall make shift to save a Fortune out on it*


Sir Phil. Let me consider, and ere I give my resolution fully, sum up the
Catalogue of Marriage Evils.


Lovew. Do, Sir, whilst I opposing answer with its Blessings.


Sir Phil. Imprimis, to Marry ones Stale Mistress, ridiculous! --


Lovew. Not when your Fortune's sunk, and she brings ye Thirty thousand pounds
to build it up again.


Sir Phil. Secondly, to feed still upon the same Dish, Morn after Morn, Night
after Night. -- Egud, -- Kecks.


Lovew. Wholesome, wholesome, it is the variety of Kickshaws that b^eed so many
Diseases.


Sir Phil. Thirdly, to be Forty times called Whoremaster, is not half so
Igneminous as one Cuckold, -- oh --


Lovew. Nor is the plague of Cuckoldom half so Nauseous as that one Disease
that attends the unfortunate Whoremaster.


Sir Phil. Fourthly, to live like a Dog with a Bottle tied fast to his Ta^l, or
an Ape with a great Clog on; Oh Intolerable!


Lovew. Which you would never have done, if like an Ape you were not
Mischievous, or did not like an unlucky Curr run after other Men's Sheep.


Sir Phil. Then to have a useless Wife Puking -- Ugh -- an Impertinent Nurse a
Snoring pugh -- And a little squab Brat a Bawling, -- Ugh, ugh, ugh, -- Oh the
Devil, I shall fetch my Lungs up, I shall never endure it. Coughs.


Lovew. Why then, Adieu, I Will never ask ye more, I am resolved on it.


Sir Phil. Stay -- A lucky thought comes to me on the sudden, which if it take
Effect, secures me yet -- aside. Come hither again, where did you leave the
Widow.


Lovew. At the Streets end, with promise to come and deliver all up to her this
Evening; and since you persevere thus in Injustice, I am resolved I Will do it, --
She Is so overjoyed that she Intends to have the Music and a Masquerade at her
Lodging to Night; she will be grateful to me though you wont.


Sir Phil. Come hither, thou have won me, I will do it.


L^vew. What? Marry me.


Sir Phil. Pox, prithee name it by some other word, a Thunderbolt is not so
dreadful the plaguey Black Coat, shall do the plaguey business, if that is
sufficient.


Lovew. It Is all I wish; oh, how my Heart beats for Joy, this is the happiest
Moment I ever saw, --


Sir Phil. I Will get a Parson and in an hour be with ye; till when, adieu: Ah
little did I ever think to be Fooled thus.


Lovew. Nor I to be so happy. -- Exit Lovewell.


Sir Phil. Of what an odd kind of Composition is the Nature of Man: -- If
Consideration now could take place in me, I have no reason to deny doing
Justice, to this pretty Creature, that is so kind, and can do me so much good,
but on my Conscience, my only cause of hating a Wife, is, because it is
convenient for me; and Marriage in those of my humor, is just like Devotion,
Loved and Practiced the less, because it is Enjoined us; besides, being
outwitted by this little Devil has so nettled me, that I cannot forbear
putting one Trick more upon her, though it is unreasonable: Let me see, she will
be Married before she refunds, -- Very good; why she shall, -- and I think I
have a Valet de Chamber can perform the Office as well as any Priest in
Christendom; it is true, he is an Irishman, but a little sense will serve to do
such a business. -- Hey -- Mack-Buffle.


Enter Buffle. Buffle. Thy will, an't please thee.


Sir Phil. Buffle, since this four or five days that thou have been with me, I
have received so good an Opinion of thy Wit, that I have now a project to
Employ thee in.


Buffle. I shall take Care of it to the besht of me Ability, if thou will be
plain with me in the matter.


Sir Phil. Why Mack, I must be Married, and I would have thee do the Office for
me: Can thou read the Service, and Act a Parson rarely, hah?


Buffle. Ee warrant thee, for ee have a Brother that is in Order, and ee have
seen him do it so often, that ee cannot mistake.


Sir Phil. That Is well said, I Will fit thee with a Habit presently, and then do
it but Cunningly and be the glory of thy Country.


Buffle. I warrant thee, I warrant thee, my Father Teg was a cunning Scab
before me. -- Exeunt.


SCENE II.
Enter Lovewell. Lovew. Though to oblige my self I must put this new Trick upon
the Widow, yet I cannot in Conscience but contrive something to do her a
kindness, and therefore resolve to manage the Old Knight's Nephew, the
Flanderkin, till he is fit for my purpose, one Minute will do it, and then away
brisk to my own Sir Philip; Hark, I think I hear him already. Noise within.


Van Grin. within. Ha, ha, ha, ha, --


Lovew. Ay it is he, and I believe laughing at his shadow for want of a better
Subject, --

Enter Van Grin. Limping. Oh Sir, you're come very opportunely -- Pray what
is it provokes your Mirth so.


Van Grin. Why the oddest Jest that ever I knew in my Life, Faith and Troth,
Ha, ha, ha, ha, -- for upon the report of the Widows late good success you must
know, I was making fresh Love to her, and running after her down a pair of
Stairs, where the plaguey Jade her Maid, Ha, ha, ha, -- had thrown a hand^ul of
Pease just before; what does me I, but tumble down from Top to bottom Faith and
Troth -- Ha, ha, ha, Gad I believe I Have broke two of my Ribs -- besides,
spraining my Leg, Ha, ha, ha, ha, -- did you ever know such a ^est. Sits down.


Lovew. No, by my Soul, never such a kind of J^st in my life.


Van Grin. My Head too, -- I Have a knob in that as big as a Turkey Egg, Ha, ha,
ha, -- She told me before a Cannon shot would not break it, and now I find her
words true Faith and Troth.


Lovew. Oh Sir, it is a great sign of Love, when she begins to play Frolicks
with ye.


Van Grin. Why faith, I think so, though she has been plaguey cross to me of
late too; but, if I thought this was her way of making Love, Gad I Would go a^^
present her the use of my Legs and Arms, and let her sprain and break 'em as
she pleased, let her but give me leave to Joke, and all the rest of my Members
are at her Service, faith and troth, ha, ha, ha, ha, a very good Jest faith.


Lovew. And truly, Sir, Yours is the most sensible sort of Love of any I ever
heard of; for a^ a famous Author has it,

He that Hangs, or beats out's Brains,
The Devil's in him if he feigns.

Van Grin. Why it is very true; and that is very pretty, -- and so art thou too,
ye little brisk smug-fac'd Rogue, ha, ha, ha, -- Oh my Ribs, my Side, my Legs,
-- ha, ha, ha, -- a plaguey Jade, that was such a Jest to throw Pease upon the
Stairs.


Lovew. Ah Sir, thereby hangs a story that would make your Ribs soon well
again, if you knew all. --


Van Grin. Say thou so* prithee what is it? my dear Mercury.


Lovew. Nay, I think in Justice I ought to inform ye; therefore know Sir, the
Widow loves ye, and this Masquerade is I believe made chiefly for your sake.


Van Grin. Ha, ha, ha, -- No, no, ye Jest, ye Jest.


Lovew. Hush, lay your Finger upon your Mouth, -- here comes Company; and if
your Legs will give ye leave follow me, I Will tell ye more. Exit.


Van Grin. 'Dsheart, if my Legs were off I Would follow thee upon this account.


Exit Limping after her. Enter Bumsiddle and Darewell Darew. 'Dsdeath she has
abused me beyond humane patience.


L. Bum. Oh you must never mind that, Captain; it is the way of some Women; You
a Man of War, and leave-off the Fight for a Chance shot or two, I Am ashamed
on it, -- When shall we sup together again, the last Venison was very good as
I Am a Protestant.


Darew. 'Twas a sign so by your Eating indeed. -- aside.

Oh, when you pleas^, Madam, -- but hark ye, when is my Marriage to be.


L. Bum. Why thou shall have her to Night, -- are the Hundred Guineas ready?


Darew. All ready to Chink into your hand, Madam, if that were but done once.


L. Bum. Thou shall have her to Night then, I tell thee, she sent to thee to
get a Parson ready, did not she.


Darew. Why yes, and I have one yonder; but the Devil take me if I am not
afraid she will have some damned freak or other in her head, and plague me again;
see yonder she comes, and that Fool Solon with her, whom I have not yet beaten;
but if he scapes when next I meet him, I Will give him leave to Rival me indeed.


Enter Berenice, Solon, and Pimpwell. Beren. Yonder he is, and I must teize him
once more, though I lose him by it, -- give me your hand, Sir, why do you loyter so,
-- You know I hate to have ye out of my sight; and yet you are still so
backward.


Darew. Fond, by this light, and blames him for his Loitering.


L. Bum. She is not bewitched sure, is she.


Solon. O Lord! I vow and swear, Madam, I could outrun the swift win^'d Racers
of the Sky, as the Book says, to keep you Company, well, I vow th^t's a curious
thought, as a Man may say.


Darew. I shall have no patience, -- Come Madam, what do you mean? the Man of God
stays yonder according to your Order.


Beren. Oh, thank ye good Captain; I had forgot I vow.


L. Bum. Oh, she is coming to her self again, I see.


Beren. Sir you are extremely obliged to the Captain here, for his good will,
fearing that I should keep your passion off too long, he has provided here a
Chaplain for ye -- Come, Sir, I Am ready. To Solon.


Darew. Death and Furies! a Chaplain for him.


Solon. I Vow and Swear he is the Civillest person that ever I met in my Life,
as a Man may say.


Darew. Nay then, Rage shall take place; Scoundrel avaunt, and do you hear,
Madam, do me Justice instantly, and come and let the Parson do his Duty, or may
I live branded with the name of Villain, if here I throw not off all rules of
Decency, Manners, Respect, an^ Duty for your person, and carve out instantly my
worst Revenge in the Hearts blood of that ridiculous Monster.


Beren. Why come then; Lord! what need you be in such a passion? If I must be
yours, I must be yours, -- and there is an end on it: -- God buy Solon, you see
there is no help sor't, -- Betty stay here, and ba^ter him as I instructed thee,
-- aside to Pimpwell. Exeunt.


L. Bum. I was plaguily afraid the freakish Jipsey would have made me lose my
hundred Guineas.


Sol^n. A plague on it, what doings are here? Now foreward then backward; then
this way, and then the other way; now Chuck under the Chin, and next minute spet
in ones Face; why this is the very Devil, as a Man may say.


Pimp. Oh, Sir, don't trouble your self* this is only a trick upon the Captain;
go presently and dress your self for the Masquerade, and then rely upon me;
I Will give ye an account of her Habit, and you shall steal her off and Marry her
in spite of him.


Solon. Why then, I vow and swear, that will be mighty neatly contrived; and I
shall have something in the bottom of my Pocket for thee too, Sweetheart, --
and if I can but steal her away as thou say, I care not if I go to
Loggerheads with the blustering Captain every hour of the Day, as a Man may say.


SCENE. III.
Enter Sir Lawrence and Bias in Masquerade; Sir Lawrence dressed like an Old
Woman. Sir Law. If I am not ashamed of my self; there is no Wisdom in Age and
Experience; for an Old Man as I am, whose dress should be grave and decent, and
whose Actions should be consequent to his Gravity, to come a Masquerading,
Equipt thus egregiously: ah it is Foppish and Vile: -- But then again, it is
true, I Am a Courtier, and the Fop is the less seen in me.


Bias. For my part I never trouble my head about that, I Am no more a Fop now
than I used to be.


Sir Law. Ah Boy, it is for thy sake that I Expose my self thus; the Widow has
received her Fortune again, I hear, and therefore we must turn the humor. Well
Boy! but what Answer did she make thee this Morning.


Bias. Gad she was in the rarest humor that ever I saw her in my Life, faith;
she has appointed the hour, told me her Disguise, and I Am to steal her away to
night n Masquerade.


Sir Lawr. Why, Blessing on her Heart, -- and my Opinion of her is mightily
changed since yesterday -- go go away Boy and watch her Motions -- my Son. --
Exit Bias. Solon will be provided for to night too, why, here will be such an
hour of Coupling, gad, I believe the Stars themselves will be all in
Conjunction, and I Am glad on it at my heart faith, -- how now, who comes here --
oh, I see the Humor holds general, there are more Fools abroad than my self.


Enter Callow and Margery in Masquerade. Callow. So, My Dear, uow you are mine
by Law, the Parson has done his part -- and I think I Have done mine a little, --
and faith to get up the Chimney to come out to me, was a very odd contrivance,
that is the Truth.


Marger. What do you think a Maid of my Age cannot contrive to come out to her
Man, when she has a mind to be Married, I Would have broke thown the Wall but I Would
have come to thee; if thwere only to spite my Father, I Will tea^h him to lock me
up.


Sir Lawr. That lisping Fool puts me in mind of my Peggy, that I have locked up
at home. --


Callow. Ay ay, now I have thee fast, let the old Heteroclite fret himself into
a Consumption, if he will, -- but see, here is some of the Masquers come already.


Marg. Oh Lord, that is an old Woman, I Will go speak to her, -- How ^ow Grannum
-- What make you here, hah?


Sir Lawr. I come a fooling as you do* What have you stole out from your
Father's house, through the Chimney, say ye?


Marg. Yeth that I have, and have Married without hith leave, becauth I sound
my self capable.


Sir Lawr. Indeed, -- What! and you are the happy Bridegroom, are ye Friend?


Callow. Instead of a better, Grannum, you will get little or nothing by us
this time, we can bring our selves together without ye, we shall have no
ocasion for a Bawd, Rot me.


Sir Lawr. This must be the Rakehelly Lieutenant, I know him bp his Rot me.


Callow. But if you have a mind to try, how you can move your old Bones, and
will Dance at our Wedding, you must come away quickly, for we are just going to
begi^.


Marg. Ay ay, old Drybouth -- we are Jutht going to begin, ha ha ha Exeunt.


Sir Lawr. She has got my young Jades Tone exactly, by the Parliament I don't
know what to think on it -- if these young Queans can climb up Chimnies to get
to their Fellows, what a plague signifies Locks to our doors, -- I Will go afer
'em and be resolv^d, for my Heart misgives me damnably. -- Exit.


Enter L. Subtle, Sir Philip, and Lovewell in Masquerade. L. Subtle. Base
^aithless wretch, have thou deceived me then.


L. Lovew. It Is in vain to rail, Madam, Sir Philip has done me right, and you
must excuse me for frustrating your hopes upon so good an occasion; if we have
wronged ye, you know the Law is open.


Sir Phil. Ha ha ha -- Here they are faith, -- here is the glittering Damnation
-- come into my Clutches again Widow. Shows the Jewels.


L. Subtle. And I hope she will make thee pay for 'em, -- and since merely to
abuse me thou have Married -- for still I know thou hate it; May Discord,
Jealousy, hated Barrenness, with all the Curses of the Marriage-State, be thy
perpetual Plague.


Sir Phil. Ay so it shall when I come into it, -- aside.
thi^ Crochet will do well upon my Hat, Widow, --

L. Sub^le. Out of my sight, or I shall Stab ye both.


Sir Phil. Oh, nay, if you are so desperate, farewell to ye, -- come Lovewell,
let us go and peruse our Writings. Exit.


Lovew. Fie, fie, this Rage is ridiculous -- what is done, is done, and though I
cannot wrong my sel^, nor part with my dear Philip, nor his Fortune, yet if
you will follow my Advice, Madam, and Marry, I Will help ye to a Fool and Fifteen
hundred a year, if that will make amends, nay, never boggle at it. -- Keep up
good Humor, let the Dance begin, and ere an hour is ended, he is your own.


L. Subtle. Thou art a very Devil, and thou can do any thing, there is no
remedy, I see I must take what thou will give me, lead on. Exeunt.


Enter Darewell. Darew. So, with much ado, she is mine at last, though I was
damnably afraid at first, all the time the Service was saying, that she would
have played some freak or other with the Parson, -- but, as it happens, she was
more tame than I expected -- well, Heaven send me good luck -- I Am sure I Have
took pains enough about her.


Enter L. Brainless. L. Brain. Who Is that, Darewell?


Darew. The same, my Lord, What is not the Dance begun yet?


L. Brain. Begun, what, without me, Fool, -- they may as well begin without the
Fiddles* I have kept 'em a little too long, it is true, but what do think I Have
been employed about?


Darew. Nay, some mighty Affair, without doubt.


L. Brain. The greatest in the World, the Devil take me, -- thou art my Friend,
I dare trust thee, hark in thy Ear, -- I Am just now Married.


Darew. Married, my Lord, why hark in your Ear then, So am I, this shall be
called the Marriage Masquerade, for I know of two Couple more, but to whom good
my Lord.


L. Brain. Why* to dear Pupsey -- I have been horribly in love with her a great
while, thou know'^t she is an extreme witty person, and they say, a great
Fortune.


Darew. She has been a High Flyer indeed my Lord, and to my knowledge, kept
company with Crowned Heads, but not worth a Groat, by Heaven. aside.


L. Brain. She Is yonder amongst the Masquers, come Tarr, I believe you are but
a wooden Dancer, -- Observe me and it may do thee a kindness.


Music strikes. Enter Sir Philip, Sir Lawrence, Callow, L. Bum. Lovewell,
B^renice, Solon, Bias, Margery, Comode, Pimpwell, ^andy, La Pupsey, L. Hockley
in Masquerade; Pupsey carries her Lap-dog in Masquerade too. SONG in Two Parts.
AS soon as the Chaos was turned into Form,
And the first Race of Men knew a good from a harm,
They quickly did join,
In a Knowledge Divine,
That the chiefest of Blessings were Women and Wine;
Since when by example Improving Delights,
Wine Governs our Days, Love and Beauty our Nights.
Then Love on and Drink,
It Is a Folly to think
Of a Mystery out of our reaches*
Be Moral in Thought
To be Merry's no Fault,
Tho an Elder the contrary Preaches.
For never, my Friends, was an Age of more Vice,
Than when Knaves would seem Pious, and Fools would seem Wise.
La Pup. Well, I swear your Lordship Dances like a little God.


L. Brain. And thou like a Goddess, my dear charming Heavenly -- ah Pox,
there is no body else here can move a Leg, -- yet says the Masquerade is
extravagant enough, -- here is no body but Darewell, that I can guess at in the
whole company -- ha ha ha, I wonder who that bulky thing is.


La Pupsey. That must be my Lady Bumfiddle by her Obessity.


L. Brain. Her Obessity, What a Plague's that? -- her Belly, -- I see I must
pick up my old scraps of Learning again, my Spouse will overrun me else most
damnably, but my Dear, prithee where is Monsieur Le Chien.


La Pupsey. Oh my dear Dony, I had almost forgot him, I beg your Patience my
Lord -- I Will fetch him, and wait on ye again immediately -- Exit.


Lovew. to Sir Phil.] So, by this time, Hymen has been Sacrificed to
sufficiently, no less than ^ix Couple have lovingly paid their Devotion to his
Altar, I Am sure.


Sir Phil. Six Couple, why their offspring well begot, in Twenty years time,
may be enough to Man a Fleet -- poor fool, there wants one Couple of the Six
tho -- to my knowledge -- aside.


L. Bum. The Devil take these Prolix doings, I begin to be very hungry.


B^ren. That Is my Lady Bumfiddle, I wonder what she does for her Bumper all
this while.


Darew. She has been putting me in mind of Supper three times within this half
Hour.


Beren. If you were to ch^se -- what you liked, which would you have of all
these?


L. Bum. There Is nothing worth having here, but there is a Westphali^ Ham and
Pigeons in the next room, I Would choose that if I might.


L. Hock. This is somewhat rude La Pupsey, to your Betters, I must tell y^u
that. Lady Pupsey justless Lady Hockley.


L. Pupsey, my Betters, poor Creature, prithee my Lord tell her who I a^,
whilst I walk by and smile.


L. Brain. Madam, your Fault springs from your Ignorance, but hence^orth
remember this Lady is my Wife, Dammy.


L. Hock. Why then, with my Lady's pardon, -- I hope she will thank me, at lea^t,
for all the old Gowns I Have given her -- for tho she be your Wife now my Lord,
she was lately Retainer to our Caball, and formerly a Player. --


L. Pupsey. The Devil was in me to provoke her, all will out now I see, there is
^o remedy. -- aside.


L. Brain. A Player, ha ha ha, why now you Rave, Madam, -- Darewell, thou can
witness the contrary of that, thou toldst me her Breeding was such, that she
has been familiar with Kings and Queens.


Darew* Ay my Lord in the Playhouse, I told ye she was a High Flyer too, that
is, I have seen her upon a Machine in the Tempest.


L. Brain. In the Tempest, why then I suppose I may seek her fortune in the
enchanted Island, what a plague you have tricked me then Fubbs, have ye?


L. Pupsey. Tricked ye my Lord, that is a phrase I confess I understand not yet,
but if you design to be Acid, I can have patience tho you are never so
Acrilogical, it is all one to me, it is the same thing in the Greek* Enter Van
Grinn.


L. Brain. Greek, the Devil* take all Learning, I say, 'dsdeath are these the
joys of Marriage?


Van Grin. The Joys of Marriage, ha ha ha ha, a very good Jest, faith; I have
most share in that, I Am sure. Where is this Sir Philip, now let him produce
himself, that I may laugh at him immoderately, ha ha ha ha, for I have Married
the Widow and wiped his Nose, Faith and Troth, ha ha ha.


Sir Phil. Thou have got indeed the Shell of the Widow, but her Kernel, the
Writings and Jewels are under Lock and Key in my ^ustody, ha ha ha ha.


Van Grin. He Is downright Mad, Faith and Troth, -- thou the Jewels, speak
Spouse, and consute the silly Knight --


L. Subtle. Why, the Truth is, Sir, he has got the Writings and Jewels again;
but now I have got you with an Estate, Sir, we'll swinge him off a^ Law.


Van Grin. Law! -- nay, if you talk of Law already, I Have caught a Tartar ^aith
and Troth.


Sir Lawr. Sure my Eyes don't dazzle* What can be the meaning of this?


Bias. What a Plague, is the Widow split in two then? for I have one half of
her here.


Comode. Not half a Widow, but a whole Maid at your Service, Sir. --


Lovew. Oh! Mrs. Comode, I wish ye much Joy. --


Sir Lawr. Why, this is Witchcraft, by the Parliament, now I Am serious.


Bias. What a pox have I got, the Widows Bed-warmer, and instead of 70000
Ducats, the lawful Inheritrix to 7 pair o^ worn-out Laced Shoes, and a Dozen
of old Combs; go Troop Troop, my Brother Solon will laugh me to death, -- he
has got a ^ine Lady and a Fortune. Pushes Comode away.


Darew, Not the Lady you mean I can assure ye Sir, as this can witness, I have
laid her aboard my self. -- Discovers Berenice.


Solon. Why then, as I hope to be saved, I cannot tell what to make of all this,
I was to take her away in this disguise, and now he has got her, and if I have not
Married her, I Will take my Oath on it I Have Married the Devil in her shape, as a
Man may say.


Pimpw. You have Married one, Sir, that has had a tender care for your Person a
long time, I assure ye -- Discovers her self.


Sir Phil. Ha ha ha -- Here Is Matrimony like Grapes in Clusters, Faith -- I Am
glad I Have 'scap'd squeezing. aside.


Beren. Oh Betty, I wish thee good luck, take care and make a good Wife, do you
hear?


Solon. You have neither good Bubbies nor a good Face, -- therefore Troop
Troop, as my Brother Bias says. Pushes Pimpwel away.


Comode. Well Sir, the Law will give us Allie Money, and that is all we care for
--


Sir Lawr. My two Sons Married to two Chamber-maids -- and by a Trick, -- nay
then, there seldom comes two Mischiefs but there is a Third, -- by your leave
Mistress -- I believe you and I have some intimacy -- Vnmasques Margery.


Marg. Well well, what care I, heerth my Huthband -- And you are an old fribling,
fulsome, foolish, feeble, fumbling fornicating Fellow, for all y're my Father,
to lock up me, tho ye are.


Sir Lawr. Ay, i knew 'twas she -- here is your coy, skittish Queen for ye, --
they are all so, they Sneak and Prim in public, as if Butter would not melt in
their Mouths, but they are very Devils in a corner.


Callow. Well well, Sir, pay her her Six thousand pounds -- and then Rail as
much as you think good, Rot me.


Sir Lawr. Do You hear Friend, you know you are a Coward, and I know you are
Cashiered, and therefore if you get one ^arthing of her Fortune, why then --
Rot me.


Sir Phil. He Is in the right Callow* your business is done at Court, I told ye
what would come of your herding with the Factious Party.


Darew. Why now, one may walk Horses, and the other may Spin, a very hopeful
Match indeed.


L. Bum. There never comes better luck when the Blockheads don't Consult me, I
have always observed it as I Am a Protestant.


Callow. It Is very hard they should pick out only me, there are more Officers
in the Regiment, and some, that to my Knowledge, how fair soever they carry it,
are as Factious as my self, Burn me.


Lovew. And by degrees will be all gleaned out I hope, -- A R^t in an Army is a
dangerous thing -- but Sir Lawrence, Have your new Affairs entirely taken up
your Memory, that you forget your Servant Lovewell. --


Sir Law. Lovewell, I Am amazed, why thou look like a very Woman.


Lovew. And as very a Woman I am, old Knight, as ever you knew in your life,
that has, to right former Injuries, and help the Marriage-hater here to a good
Wife, that may be the occasion of his Salvation hereafter, lived thus long in
disguise in your Family, and instead of Brother to your Friends Daughter
Phaebe, that was debauched, you here behold the very Phaebe her self, Sir.


Sir Law. H^ day! why this is an hour of Wonders.


L. Bum. The Marriage-Hater Caught at last, ha, ha, ha.


L. Hock. The Marriage-Hater Caught at last, ha, ha, ha.


Sir. Phil. Hold, hold, good Ladies, -- pray let me Explain my self a little,
lest your Extravagant Mirth should not hold out well to the end; it is true my
Dear, as thou say, I am Married.


Lov^. Ay, Child, I know it; and thou have made me the happiest Creature
breathing.


Sir Phil. With all my Heart; would I could marry fifty a day at the same rate,
for such a Fortune, -- Buffle, come Sirrah, off with your Disguise; Look ye,
Child, -- resolving not to let any Female Wit ever have the better of me* I
have over-reached thee with another trick, faith, and a^ Married by my Valet de
Chamber; so that, instead of dull, drowzy Wedlock, I am just in the Predicament
as I was before, ha, ha, ha, ha, -- Turns back on the sudden, and finds Thum.
instead of Buffle.

How now! What a Devil art thou. --


Thum. A Mini^ter of the Word* and shall please thee.


Sir Phil. A Minister; what a plague have I to do with a Minister? -- where is
Buffle?


Thum. He is at the Door there; he did desire me to do for thee this good
office.


Sir Phil. Peace Hell-hound, Screech-Owl, Black-Coat, Slave, -- by the Fu^ies
I Am caught in my own Snare. -- aside. Enter Buffle.

How now, Rogue; what mistake is this?


Buffle. I desire thou will not be angry, I have done all for thy good indeed.


Sir Phil. Ah sordid Villain, I Will Murder thee -- Pulls Buffle by the Ears and
Cuf^s him.


Darew. Oh, prithee, Sir Philip, -- no Passion now; let us hear what the Fellow
says.


Buffle. Why, what is there occasion for all this broken Face now; have ee not
done all things for the besht, indeed; -- thou did deseer me to learn the way
of the Marriage, for thee; and by Chr^esht ee did learn and learn, and ee did
forget again indeed; -- and then for fear that I should mistake ee did desee^
my Brother, who is in Orders, and whose Trade it is -- instead of my shelf, to
do it well for thee; and vare is the harm of this.


Sir Phil. Hell and the Devil! Oh Ignorant Dog; that I could but get at that
Nose of thine.


Love. Go, go, get ye both gone; and here is twenty Guineas to Cure your Face,
Friend; away I say, -- Exeunt Buffle and Thummim.

'Slife how near had I been lost again; this is the luckiest turn that ever
happened.


L. Brain. Faith, Freewit, you are snapt too, -- you are in our Row now, in
spite on thee, I Am glad he has married his Wench, that he may not laugh at me
for my bargain there, -- for the Devil take me, if I don't begin to be ashamed
of her already. aside.


Sir Law. Well, ^or my part, since Chance must rul^ the Roast in spite of all
Endeavors, I Will be a fond doting Fool no longer, -- Let my Son Bias be Pox'd
if he pleases; my hopeful Son Solon hang himself in his hopeful Wifes Garters,
and let my Daughter turn Doll Common to the Army: -- I Will please my self as
long as I can by the Parliament; keep a good Table to get me Reputation; drink
the King's Health to show my Loyalty* keep a good Horse in my Stable, and a
hand^ome Wench for my Housekeeper, and there is the res^^^tion of an old
Courtier; now I Am serious in good Earnest.


Bi^s. Say ye so old Dew-beater; why then I Will do like all those Sons whose
Fathers are^ as you have been, -- Spend all I can in your Life time; Drink
Bumpers to your good passage, when I hear you are dying; and forget ye before
ye are buried.


Solon. I Am sure it is you have been the occasion of my miscarriage; for you
would have me Marry, though I was no more fit for a Wife, ^han a Cow is for a
Saddle, as a Man may say.


Beren. Come Sister, what grown dull with your new Fortune? You may be glad it
happens so well; Come, come, be merry for shame, and Cheer up your Husband
there, I swear he is down in the Mouth*


L. Subtle. And will be worse down, I believe, before I Have done with him. --
Why, it seems he had the Impudence to expect a Fortune with me; it is a Proverb
indeed; that often by Chance, Fools may have Fortune; -- but that a Widow ever
gave a Fortune to a Fool, is a President yet to make, at least till she was
come to her time of dotage: -- Come, come, Laugh, Sir, Laugh.


Van Grin. This is the only thing in the World that I cannot Laugh at, Faith and
Troth; First, to Marry one that cares not if I were hanged; and then to be
frustrated of her Fortune, which is the only thing a Widow is good for; one too
that has the Impudence to ^^ll me Fool the first minute of our Marriage, and
without doubt will make me a Cuckold the next; t'has quite balk'd me; I could
not Laugh if I might get a thousand pounds by it, -- I could rather weep, faith
and troth, -- makes Grimaces as ready to weep.


Darew. Ha, ha, ha, ha, -- a pox on it you must strive against Melancholy, Man,
-- it is the worst disease for a f^llow of thy Kidney in the World; besides to
begin with it, upon thy Wedding Day, it is ominous; for my part I have been
venturing too here, but am resolved to be merry, come what will on it.


Beren. You shall have no cause to be otherwise, Sir, all my freaks are now
ended, they were only to try your humor, Sir, and have all made their Exit
with my change of Condition; I am now as tractable a plain dull silly
House-dove, as if I had been in twenty Sea-sights with ye, or had come under
your Lee, for as many Years.


L. Brain. Well! what fortune I shall get by my Marriage, I find is a Riddle,
but I am sure to have Rhetoric in abundance, -- if slorid words could be sum'd
into pounds, I were certain of Ten thousand of 'em in an hours time: -- I hope
Madam, I may take place of Monsieur L'Chien ^oo; it is time for our Rivalship to
end now.


La Pupsey. Yes, my Lord, says he, I shall be proud to yield to your Lordship
in any thing says he, yet I have had many a sweet Night with my dear says he,
Ay my dear Life's-blood so thou have. -- Well! my Lord may be as angry as he
pleases -- but if I Have a hundred Children by him, I shall never love one of 'em
half so well. -- apart.


L. Bum. Why, what a glut of Weddings are here, -- and but one Supper to 'em
all, this is pitiful Management, as I Am a Protestant.


L. Hock. I vow, I could wish, methinks, the Frolic had gone thorough* my
Niece and I here, are the only uncoupled in the whole Company.


B^ndy. Which was neither of our faults, Aunt, I Am sure.


Darew. Come, ^^r Philip; Fate is Inevitable, and it is in vain to resist its
decree, for my part I Will wear my Yoke, if it chance to be a Yoke, with all the
Patience imaginable; -- and when the Marriage Courtship is a little over, to
Sea again, and Court the Foe in Thunder, -- Our Fleet is Royal, Hearts I hope
are found too;

And let our Loyal Union, be well framed;
If ever then we are baffled, I Will be damned.

Lovew. And now, Sir, passion being a little over, I hope you will own what I
have done was just; and since to help the failures of my Wit, a special Act of
Providence befriended me, be pleased to look on me with Eyes of Pity,

For you might have, Sir, to Indulge your life,
A new^r Bride, but not a better Wife.

Sir Phil. Give me thy hand, -- I am Convinced this moment, that Marriages the
Bliss or Plagues of Life, are as thou say, all the Effects of Providence;
and to begin the Reverend Estate Soberly, -- first I will Execute Justic^*
Therefore, as to you, Madam, -- To L. Subtle. what of Sir Solomon's Estate
appears your due, shall justly be surrendered. -- My Spouse, and I shall have
enough to Eat with, and cooly enjoy our selves like old Acquaintance, that long
have fed on the Baked meat of Matrimony: And since the Stars, with their
propitious Influences, in spite of my Opinionated Wit, have used me like a
Vermin in a Trap,

Patient, I Will Relish pleasure dearly bought,
And Chaw on the same Cheese, with which I Am caught.

Exeunt Omnes. EPILOGUE.
Spoken by La Pupsey, with her Lap-dog in Masquerade. TWo Heads they say are
best, I and the Dog
Ioyn therefore, to perform the Epilogue:
And first, before we excuse what the Poet Writ,
Your humble Conge, Dony, to the Pit. Bows the Dog.
Gallants, says he, I must presume to Crave
The Privilege that all Young Actors have;
Who tho they often blunder to a Crime,
Are certain of your pardon the first time.
And though I want the Management of Tongue,
And have said little, yet you know I Have Sung.
Ay, so thou have my dear Felicity: Kisses him.
So much for Dony, now the rest for me.
I Swear, I quake to think, though not intended,
How many here may chance to be offended;
Who often when their Lovers cannot succeed,
Smuggle a Creature of my Dony's breed.
For as a Babe of Seven,
To imitate the Married Couples Brood,
Will play with their resemblance made in Wood,
So Infants of Eighteen that want success,
To Catch the greater Donys play with less.
This amongst others, Gallants, to your view,
We now present ye all as humors new;
Without the least r^flection or Abuse:
And if you now Impartial Candor use,
Then to your Service we shall still apply
Your most Obsequious Humble Dog and I.
FINIS.
PROLOGUE. Mr. Monford Enters, meets Mrs. Bracegirdle dressed in Boy's Clothes,
who seeing her, Endeavors to go back, but he taking hold of her, Speaks:
Monf. NAY, Madam, there is no turning back alone;
Now you are Entered, faith you must go on;
And speak the Prologue, you for those are Famed,
And the Play's beginning.

Brace. Would the Play were Damned:
I shall never wish the Poet good Success;
For putting me into this nauseous Dress;
A Dress, which of all other things I hate;

Monf. That Is very strange, faith, since thy L^gs are straight;
For if thou had a thousand Lovers here,
That very Garb, as thou do now appear
Takes more than any Manto we can buy,
Or Wir'd Comode, though Cocked Three Stories high,

Brace. I hate this Coat, this Masculine Hat too here,
These Breeches, and the other things I wear.

Monf. Not all things, Madam, now you are too severe
When the Disguise, no lewdness does expose:
Breeches, as Modestly themselves disclose,
As Petticoat that reaches to your Toes.

Brace. Let all loose Dresses to loose Minds belong,
Men, nor their Garbs did ever my Credit wrong.

Monf. That Is much faith having known the Stage so long.
Well, we'll allow your Modesty is Famed,
Come now, -- the Prologue*

Brace. Lord, I Am so ashamed.


Monf. A Player, and ashamed, that may be true.


Brace. You think sure I Am as impud^nt as you.


Monf. No Child; you would not do then as you do;
You would not lose a Fortune for a Toy,
Nor frown nor blush whenever you Act a Boy;
Or speak a Prologue, which you must do now,
And to assist you see, I Will make your Bow. Bows to the Audience.

Brace. Well Gentlemen, since then do what I can,
Spite of my self, I must appear a Man;
Pray let me beg ye* not to like me less
Than when you see me in my Maiden Dress;
And free from ^^^rous Censure this one day
For my sake spare the Poet and the Play.
For to speak Truth in its encouragement,
There is a Plot, and some good Humor in it:
The Ladies too must needs approve the Matter,
Because be punishes the Marriage-hater.
And if you bring go^d Humor, you shall laugh,

Monf. Why, that is well said my Dear, and so let us off. Excunt.


A Scotch Song in the Third Act.
I.
BOnny Lad, prithee lay thy Pipe down;
Though blithe are thy Notes they have now no power:
Whilst my Joy my dear Peggy is gone,
And Wedded quite fro me will Love no more.
My good Friends that do ken my grief,
With Songs and Stories, a Cure would find:
But alas, they can bring no relief,
For Peggy still runs in my mind.
II.
When I Visit the Park or the Play,
They aw without Peggy a Desert seem;
She Is before my Eyes aw the Day,
And aw the long Night too, she haunts my Dream.
Sometime fancying a Heaven of Charms,
I wake, and Robbed of my dear delight,
Find she Ligs in another Arms:
Ah then it is she kills me outright.
III.
Take my Counsel aw you that love well;
Bestow Love and Wit on a Girl of Sense:
No such Blessing to Peggy befell,
'Twas Ignorance caused her absurd offense.
She could pray with an humble face;
And look as she never false could be:
But had she owned either Wit or Grace,
She never had Wedded fro me.

