THE VISIONS OF THE SOUL, Before it comes into the BODY. In Several DIALOGUES.

Written by a MEMBER OF THE Athenian Society.

There 's an innumerable Company of Pre-existent Souls; those that transgress,
are sent down into Bodies, so as being purified by such Discipline, they may
return again to their own Places. Pythagoras.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven in the Poultrey, 1692.

The PREFACE to the Reader.
THE Occasion of this following Treatise, was the extravagant Doctrine of
Pre-existence; which of lay has been so warmly managed, that it wants but a
l^ttle more to be made a 13th. Article in the Creed of some persons. I have
pursued the humor, but yet as Comoedians do, when they dress up an Ape, to
make it appear more ridiculous: The Ingenious will discern it at first sight.

To such as enquire the real Design of this Publication, I answer, the graver
Conferences carry their meaning in their Frontispiece; and the more jocose are
not without their most solid Morals; which perhaps may be more taking to some
Readers, than if they had appeared in a common Dress.

In the whole Discourse I have advanced many things wholly new and unblown
upon, more especially in the 14 th. Dialogue, where the Nature, Conceptions,
and Actions of unbody'd Spirits are distinctly treated of. If I am asked for my
Authorities, I answer, What appears reasonable, wants no other Recommendation
than being so; and as to what appears over strange, Let the Reader consider,
that Philosophy had never been improved had it not been for new Opinions; which
afterward were rectified by abler Pens, and so the first Notions were lost and
nameless, under new Superstructures; but such a Fate is too agreeable for my
Judgment to repine at, or my Vanity to hope for.

Perhaps I have more reason to beg pardon of my Brethren, the Members of the
Athenian Society, than of the World, in that I have only ^^^tion'd the Subject
to them, without taking the^^ advice in the Composure; but my Impatient
Bookseller, alleging the nearness of the Term, occasioned the hurrying it
into the Press; some of our Members being just now gone out of Town, and some
retired at present to their Estates in the Country.

However, to make amends for any thing of Errors which have happened by haste,
and want of review, (which are many) I think fit to promise the World Two more
Pieces, which shall have the inspection of the whole Society. -- As this only
pretends to Uisions of the Soul, before it comes into the Body; so the other
two will treat of the Sentiments of the Soul when in the Body, viz. in Infancy,
Dreams, Trances, Dotage. etc. and the manner of its Existence in a separate
state, till it is joined again to the Body.

The First Treatise is Matter of Ridicule, and a Dream; (see the last
Dialogue.) The Two following will bear more grave Discourses, being certain
Truths; and perhaps the deepest Mysteries that Revelation or Natural Philosophy
can treat of; and we hope they may be so managed as not to be a little welcome
to the world, both as to removing many false Notions, and advancing something
new.

One thing more I have to offer, that wherever the Reader meets with such
Terms as Time, Place, or Matter attributed (...) Spirits, he take 'em not
according to the common acceptance, but as something that bears such
proportion to Spirits, as Time, Place and Matter do to Bodies.

I have done, and doubt not but to meet with both Applauses and Hissing, and in
both Parties, from such as think themselves sufficient Judges: But I beg their
Pardon, if I Am con^ern'd at neither; being resolved to continue as secret and
invisible as the B^i^gs of Pre existent Spirits.

The Contents of the Several DIALOGUES.
A Prefatory Dialogue between the Secretary of Fate and the Author's Soul. 1.
Between the Spirits of a Poet and a Drunkard. 2. Between the Spirits of a
Jacobite and a Williamite, about the Royal Congress. 3. Between the Spirits of
a Bastard and a Necromancer. 4. Between the Militia of Rational Souls. 5.
Between the Two Orders, Rational and Vegitable. 6. Between Mercury, a
Pre-existent Spirit, a Dead Man, Charon, and Hobbs. 7. Between Two Spirits upon
the Ramble, and the Spirit of an Usurer that had strangled himself, and walked
in a Churchyard, about his own Tomb. 8. Between Two Spirits, the Order of
Vegitable Souls, and Cupid. 9. Between an Astrologer and a Mountebank. 10.
Between Two Spirits, about the Retrogradation of the Dragon's-Head and Tail.
11. Between a Spirit and his Friend, lately Imbody'd in an Infant. 12. Between
the whole Order of Rational Souls, and Two Intelligencers from the other World.
13. Between the Spirits of an Emperor and a Beggar. 14. Between Two Spirits
that made a Contract to keep a Correspondence, whoever came to be Embodied
first. 15. Betwixt Two Spirits, about the Music of the Spheres. 16. Between
The Spirits of a poor Doctor and his Friend, and a modern Philosopher, alias
Sharper, 17. Between Two Spirits on the Ramble, and a Flight of Witches, with
their Guides 18. Between Two Spirits that are to be Mayor and Mayoress of a
certain Corporation: when they come into their Bodies. 19. Between the Parcae,
(viz. Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos,) and a Bookseller. 20. Between a
Transmigrated Soul, and an Unbodied Spirit. 21. Between the whole Consistory of
Spirits, examining a Heretic Soul, about some new Doctrines held forth in
opposition to the common received Opinions of the Aetherial Fraternity. 22.
Between the whole Consistory of Spirits, being a Discovery of Vulgar Errors,
received by that supposed Heretic Spirit yet a Prisoner. 23. Between the
Spirit of one that is to be a Member of the ATHFNIAN SOCIETY, a Correspondent,
and of some that are to be Querists. 24. Between the Spirits of a General, a
Midwife, and an Executioner. 25. Between the Spirits of Two Projectors. 26.
Between Two Traveling Spirits. 27. Between the Spirit that is to be last
Embodied, and the Spirit that is to be first reunited to its Body at the Day
of Judgment. 28. Betwixt Two Spirits, one that pretends to dedeny
Pre-existence, and the other, to prove it.
PROPOSALS For Printing a Book, Entitled, The young Students LIBRARY;
Containing Extracts and Abridgments of all the most Valuable Books Printed
either in England, or in the Foreign Iournals, from the Year 65, to this
present Time. -- To which will be added an Introduction to the Use of Books, in
A New Essay upon all sorts of Learning: Written by the Athenian Society. The
Proposals are as follows.
I. THat this Volume will contain (as is supposed) about One Hundred and Twenty
Sheets, Printed in a very fair Letter, and of the same size with our several
Mercuries and Supplements, that it may bind up with them, or be sold single to
those who desire it. II. The Subscribers to give 10 s. for each Book in Quires,
whereof 5 s. to be paid at the Time of Subscription, and 5 s. at the Delivery
of the Book; which, considering the excessive Dearness of Paper, and Charge of
procuring the Foreign Iournals, is not dear. III. To encourage all Persons that
shall concontribute to the procuring of Subscriptions, he or they that shall
procure Subscriptions for 6 Books, shall not only have a 7 th. gratis, (which
will reduce it to about 8 s. 7 d. per Book,) but shall also have given 'em in
the New Essay upon Learning, and an Emblem of the whole Athenian Society, Drawn
in a Folio P^ate. IV. That for a farther Encouragement to all Subscribers (and
to render our Undertaking the more complete,) there shall also be a large
Alphabetical Table given in to all those that subscribe; which shall comprehend
the Contents of this Volume, and of all the Athenian Mercuries and Supplements
Printed in the Year 1691. V. All who intend to assist in the Advancement of
this Useful Work, are desired to send in their Subscriptions and Money with all
speed unto the Person hereunder named, where Receipts will be given them: And
if they arise to any Competent Number, the Book shall be finished by next
Lady Day, (that so it may be added as an Appendix to the Athenian Mercury for
the Year 91, and be bound up with it, we designing an Appendix at the End of
every Year, that shall comprehend all Books wanting in our several
Supplements,) or otherwise, the Design must be let fall by the Undertaker. VI.
If any Obstruction for want of sufficient Subscriptions, or otherwise, should
happen to hinder the Printing of this Work, the Money so received, shall be
paid back upon giving up the Receipts. The Undertaker is John Dunton, at the
Raven in the Poultrey, where Proposals are to be had, and of most Booksellers
in London, and in the Country.
A Prefatory Dialogue BETWEEN The Secretary of Fate and the Author's Soul.
Author's Soul. PRay look over the Minutes of the Parcae, and amongst those
Eternal Volumes, see, when I am fated to commence Temporality.


Secret. Fate, In June, Anno Dominl, 1664. according to Humane Computation, in
that part of the Globe which you are designed for.


A. S. Well, and what Fortune, what Post has the Lottery of Fate assigned me?
What Entertainment am I to expect in a new, Material Mansion?


S. F. Your Curiosity seems to argue a Desire of fixing there; but you will be of
another Mind when I tell you, that Incorporation is a Penalty inflicted upon
Souls for their Extravagances in this World: That the Body is a Prison, a Clog,
the most officious Enemy you can meet with in betraying you to false
Perceptions, and irregular Conclusions. In short, you will find no agreeable
Object, but at such times as you withdraw, and converse with Beings as simply
immaterial as yourself. Now you are an unconfined Agent, a Stranger to those
grosser Terms of Body, Place and Time: As yet you know nothing of Magnitude,
Quantity, or Motion, and those innumerable Errors that result from them, by
false Notions of their Nature. And when you come into the other World, you will
be as great a Stranger to the Nature of Angels, Spirits, and Immaterial Beings,
as now you are of those material ones.


A. S. What surprising Relations are these! Shall I ever forget this
inorganical way of Converse? These immediate Conceptions, without the
Assistance of Sense? This simple Particularity of Perception, without
Composition or Division? In short, this Nature that I carry about me? If so
(dear Minister of Fate) lay down some Rules for me to take along with me,
which, after I am imbodied, may restore this Knowledge to me, and the unhappy
Tribe of Humanity: 'Twill be a great Office of Charity, if possible to be
accomplished. --


S. F. It Is utterly impossible.


A. S. -- Why so?


S. F. Because that a finite Power and an infinite Subject are incompatible.


A. S. How far then is it possible for Humanity to conceive?


S. F. When the Infinite Eternal Mind was pleased to create Matter, Time and
Place, he extended the (...) Empyreum to confine 'em in. Whatever is beyond
this vast Unequal, this spacious (...), is what has been from Eternity: Should I
say really what that is, Mankind could not understand it, because of an
Incongruity (as urged before) betwixt the Power and Subject: I might as well
enjoin 'em to smell with their Eyes, or tune an Instrument by their Taste. But
however, to speak as near as I can to their Capacities, -- Quantity and Place,
beyond the Coelum Empyreum, are swallowed up, as Time is, in Eternity. Before
this Coelum Empyreum and its material Enclosures were created, all was, as now
is, beyond it; and when the last Fire (a part of that material Fabric) shall
burn up all the rest of Matter, and by the Fiat of its awful Creator consume it
self, there shall be no more Matter, Time, or Place, but all return to the
first Eternal Constitution: Not so much as Bodies immortalliz'd shall be
Matter, according to the Definition now made of it; but a new inexpressible
Something, which cannot be translated out of the Language of Spirits, into that
of Men: Matter is not so perfect as Immateriality, Time as Eternity, Place as
Incircumscriptability. -- And whatever Humane Philosophers would be at, I can
exp^rimentally assure 'em, that they come as near an Adequate Conception of
these things -- when they think not at all of them, as they do in their most
Elevated Contemplations. However, not to leave 'em altogether in the dark, a
Collection of what you now do in this pre-existent State will (if delivered
according to their Capacities) not make 'em less ignorant, especially when they
are put in mind of the Method of their own Living before they came into their
Bodies.


A. S. Perhaps they will not believe they ever acted such things, but look upon
all as a Dream or Fiction. -- What think you of Pythagoras his Collections
before he went into his Body? A Copy of such an Original must be authentic
upon your Subscription, and consequently useful to Mankind.


S. F. I must attend the Destinies, who are now Sitting in Council; but when I
return, I Will bring you the Original out of the Registry, which you may
translate as near as the Language of Spirits can be adapted to the Language of
Men.


DIALOGUE I.
Between the Spirits of a Poet, and a Drunkard.
D. WEll met, Brother: Which way is your Flight designed?


P. I have just left the Bosom of Causes, to take a Prospect of the lower
World, to see if there be any Preparation for my Reception there: And yet I Am
much troubled at the Apprehension of being clogged with that uneasy, restless
Lump of Humanity, and the attending Consequences make me very impatient.


D. Why so? What Conjectures have ye?


P. It Is the want of reasonable Conjectures; for by all the Observations I can
make of my Temper, I cannot resolve my self whether I Am a Male, or a Female
Spirit. But why do I thus busy my self about Sexes? Certainly it is ominous,
and argues my Imbodying near at hand: But if after Six Thousand Years
Expectation I should be tied to a Poet, I shall reckon it a Fore-stalling my
Damnation, and had even as good commence Devil, without any more ado, and take
up with one Hell. -- See you not that Wretch in yonder Grove, with his Hat over
his Eyes, scratching his Head, tearing his Nails, and sending his poor
Hackney-Soul about, like a Spaniel Dog, to fetch and carry Similitudes, Rhimes,
Composition, etc. I remember, about Thirty Years since, when he was our
Companion, he would sometimes break off in the midst of a Discourse, without
bidding God b'w'ye, and away to the Brooks, Groves and Fountains; which made me
suspect the nearness of a Poetic Preferment. -- But, hark! -- The Humor of
our late Companion in his new Lodging!

When formless and inanimate I lay,
Sleeping in Chaos with my Fellow-Clay,
Or ever those te^ming Particles had met,
To make this wretched Composition so complete,
Without my Knowledge or Concurrence, thou
Bidst me awake and live. --
Well, and what then? -- Why the Sense is out before the Rhyme: Now 'twou'd be
charitable to assume an Airy Organ, and help him out, viz. -- I know not how.

Poor Wretch! He knows not what to do, unless he un^oes all, and begins again,
which he would as lieve be hanged as attempt, having taken so much pains about it
already. Oh, for Sysiphus's restless Stone, or Belides's leaking Tun! They are
minute and pettite Tasks to his. Not Ixion's Wheel has half the Torture of an
overhasty Period. -- But this is not all: When he has undergone the bitter
Throws and Pains of Rhimeship, then the Darling Offspring of his Brain turns
prostitute to the Abuses of all the World: The Praises of wise Men are so few,
that their Voice is lost in so large a Theater; and the numerous Applauses of
Fools are too loud a Scandal. -- And after all this, Is It not pity the poor
Rogue should take such pains to be damned? For there is not one Poet in Five
Thousand that escapes. It had gone hard with Ouldham himself, if it had not
been for the Penance of his own Satyrs. Say, Fellow-Immateriality: What shall I
do? I can never look down upon a Couple of Lovers, but I Am afraid their Toying
will end in making an Heliconian Prison for me; especially if the Innamorato is
for Balls, Masquerading, and Love-Sonnets.


D. Alas, Brother! I Am all Resentment and Pity. Little do Mortals think what
Plague we are at, about the Lodging and Entertainment we expect at their Hands:
-- But for my part, your Apprehensions of Incorporation are all Charms, and
Sweetness, to the dismal Reception I look for.


P. -- Why, what is the matter with you?


D. -- I can never loave our happier Regions, to visit the lower Elements, but,
before I am aware, I find my self amongst Sea Fowl, hovering over Rivers, Ponds
and Marshes, admiring the Scaly Sholes, and envying the Pastime of those ever
thirsty Revellers. Now, What can this mean, but that I Am ordained to actuate a
Drunkard? And if so, Hell is a Toy to such a Confinement: This Moment would I
plunge into the boundless Depths, to be secured from such a Companion. But why
that rash Thought? Is not Hell also crowded with 'em? And are not its Horrors
doubled by their Confession? Yet, if Hell could be Hell without 'em, 'twou'd be
a happy Place, and nothing in it of the Beast, Antic or Nonsense, but a
rational Complaint of Despair. VVonder not, dear Brother, at my deeper
Reflections, till you have considered yonder Figure at the Old D -- l Tavern.
What think you of their Motions, Converse and Passions? Suppose all their
Discourse were taken in Shorthand, and the weakest Person amongst 'em should
have a View of the whole when he is in a Mood of Thinking: Would not he blush
at such Follies, at such an unaccountable Expense of Time; especially if he
thought an Hour so spent was of equal length with any other Hour in the Line of
Life, and must be equally accounted for? Alas! Who would suppose that Souls,
cloistered up in these sensualizd, unthinking Statues, were ever our
Companions! Come, let us retire toward our peaceful Regions, and not be
VVitnesses of what a Midnight Scene produces. A Poet's Structure! afraid of a
Poetic Mansion! It Is a Paradise, to what I dread. Nor is there any Spirit in
all our Order, that can be afraid of such a Body, but I must meet with it in
this Epitome of all Plagues. A Drunkard can be Poet, Beggar, Cully, Buffoon, or
any thing: So that I am like to meet with the most abject Slavery in Nature.


DIALOGUE II.
Between the Spirits of a Jacobite and a Williamite, about the Royal Congress.
W. UP, ye lazy Dog: Are not ye ashamed to kennel and snore in that Star, till
it smells again of Drowsiness?


I. Who's there? -- Now, are not you a spiteful Spirit, to disturb my Rest,
when you have taken yours? -- You are just crept out of some fixed, idle
Luminary, where you have had no jolting, nor disturbance, and come to perplex
me, who am already Topsieturvy with the swift Motion of my Erratick Mansion,
which moves at least a Hundred Miles a Minute. -- If I am out in my
Computation, it is because I Am scarce awake.


W. Arise, prating, and let us away to the Assignation.


I. -- What Assignation? What do you dream of? Have ye called in at Aquarius,
for a Dram of the Pitcher?


W. No, no: A Royal Congress of all the Princes in Christendom are met
together, and Thousand Thousands of naked Souls are crowding for Commissions,
to inspire the succeeding Generation of that illustrious Convention.


I. Well, I do'nt care, I wait for new Revolutions; but if I did not, I would
not budge one Foot, for I Am sure we cannot all speed; and 'twou'd vex me to the
Heart to put in for a Prince's Offspring, and afterward ride the Wooden Horse
in St. James' Park, or turn Cobbler.


W. Well, I Am loath to spoil the old Tenet in the other World, that All Souls
are equal, and are only diversified by the Dispositions of their Organs; or I Would
proclaim thee a mean; little Soul, scarce fit to animate Plants and Minerals.


I. -- Pray, be gone about your Business: I tell you once more, I Am for a broad
Sword and a Centry-Box at the End of the Canoll: And for your Proclamations,
it is not good I catch ye transgressing upon the Grass, left I take the
Forfeiture, and give you a Strapado or two into the bargain.


W. I believe you are a Iacobite-Soul, or you would not absent from the
Congress.


I. -- Perhaps I am, -- and it may be I shall have a greater Commission than I
tell you of: But this I can assure you, there are many Iacobites that will come
in for Commissions, with private Lewid'ores in their Fobs, in spite of all the
Care and Diligence that can be used to the contrary.


W. -- It Is possible: But what is the Issue of it? -- You see Jove has taken a
particular Care of the British Monarch's Person and Concerns, -- and every
Sessions the Triangular Supporter preaches a late R^epentance to his Enemies.


I. -- I don't value that; that can only discompose the Body which I shall be
tied to, and so I shall be the sooner at liberty again for more Rambles.


W. -- You're mistaken; you will find other Obligations upon your self when you
come to be incorporate, than you now dream of. But turn and take the other Nap,
-- whilst I attend, and know how to be happy, either in my own, or in my
Companion's good Success.


DIALOGUE III.
Between the Spirits of a Bastard and a Necromancer.
B -- PReach Patience to me! -- O Hell and Fury! That I who was the great
Comrade of Alexander, Julius Caesar, Aristotle and Cato Utican's Souls, should
now at length be cloistered up in an Oyster-Wench's Bastard! I saw the
Saracen's-Head Porter and her at work, but I little thought the Teeming Embrio
was designed for me. Alas, from how great Hopes am I fallen! The present Lewis
and his Allye attended me like Lacquies, and if I had not been upon the Ramble
at their first want of Motion, I had certainly had the Refusal of those
Commissions; but now I must away, and into such a Body too, as humble Irus
(were he now alive) would scorn the base Alliance, Now must I drudge about with
Dandry-Comb^, and Small Coal-Betty, or else move a Thoughtless Lump, from Door
to Door, and often meet, instead of Bread, the threatening Charity of Bridewell.
Add yet to this, Kib'd Heels, a Snotty Nose, and part of Egypt's Plagues. -- Ah
Constantine, when only thou and I were Candidates for the Roman Scepter, I
little thought of such an homely Cottage. -- O Rage, VVretchedness!


N. -- Who's this that talks of Rage and VVretchedness, without comparing his
with my hard Fate? A base born Embrio to enliven? It Is a happy Residence to
mine! If Fate would but give me my Choice, I Would hug the Brat; nay, I Would give my
Hopes of future Happiness to boot, and think it an easy, cheap Damnation to
what I must of force endure.


B. -- How! -- Now my Impatience cools, and grows milder, to think that the
Destinies have not left me the only Stigmatized Infortune. But how, in what
great Instance am I thus outdone?


N. A young Ignatian just formed, when several of us pricking in the Lottery of
Fate, he fell to my Share; whereupon I read in those Brazen Volumes and found
that he will be a Necromancer: Alas, how shall I be treated from those
Officio^s Imps of Darkness, (the Assisters of that Black Art,) which I have so
often chased out of these purer Regions, when they have been upon their hasty
Errands? -- Or what can I expect from our own Society, when I my self shall
hereafter come upon the same Account, mounted upon a drudging Fallen Angel,
being tied to too great a Lump of Clay to soar aloft, as now I Am used to do,
now I Am a pure Agent, unconstrained and free, obliged to truckle to no Humane
Laws? But, alas! my Freedom is about to sink, Incorporation beckens me, (a Law
severer than all the Ten to Mankind. -- The first Choice I now expect, is to
commence Junior Devil, and wear the Impostor's Badge. I sell my self, to buy
Preferment in that holy Tribe. But, O the foppish Rules that I must use, to
cheat my self and others! Such Words repeat, and such Characters draw; such
antic Postures use, and such Familiars entertain: And then the Consequence of
all this is only to please this Sense, or gratify that Malice; when all is a
most egregious Cheat and Fiction, only the Ensurance of Damnation is real. I
remember Dr. Faustus's Spirit said as much to me, and boasted how he would fool the
Devil: But when he came to be enclosed in Flesh, he straight unactive grew,
dull, and incapable to think, project, or judge of what he undertook; and when
he dared to play about the fiery Ditch, he fell, and sunk for ever.


B. -- Alas, hard Fate! -- Well, since we must away, where is this Jesuit to
live? -- Say, -- that when our Bodies are asleep, we may meet, converse, and
pity one another's Hardships.


N. -- Within Ten Miles of London. -- He that can play at Legerdemain with
Hell, can easily Bilk an Act of Parliament.


B. -- True: -- I shall find you out.


DIALOGUE IV.
Between the Militia of Rational Souls.
Capt. WEll, Gentlemen, the Quarrel increases betwixt the Souls of our Order,
and those of the Vegitable; I cannot yet tell what will be the Event, but I
think it Wisdom to discipline our selves in the Art of War, which we have
almost lost, it is so long since the Skirmish of Michael and his Angels, with
the Devil and his. I was but Lieutenant then, and brought up the File next the
lowest Rank of Angels, but we quickly did the Business when we came to engage;
and I doubt not but we shall have the same Success against these turbulent
Vegitable Spirits, if they do proceed to muster.


Lieut. 1. But, pray Captain, what Remarks did the Astrologers and Virtuosi of
the little, heavy Globe, called Earth, make on the Action?


Capt. Why, truly, (as one of our Order, that held Correspondence with 'em,
told us,) they retired to their Closets, and were ready to crack their Brains;
all the Pious went to Prayers, and not one amongst that Race, but were almost
distracted. The Roaring of our Vehicles they called Thunder; our Balls they
called Thunderbolts; and our Priming with the Antiperistasis of Snow and
Spiritous Sulphur, that they called Lightning; and all this to such a Miracle,
that 'twas put in their Chronicles. But another remarkable Passage was this;
the Elements cleared up, and Men ventured out of their Houses again, to view
the Heavens, when we had just routed the Rebels, and were in pursuit of 'em,
leaping from Star to Star; which made the gazing World below us think 'twas a
Shooting of Stars. -- But to the Business in hand: Is our whole Number here?


Lieut. -- Yes, Captain.


Capt. Very well. -- Silence there. --

To the Right, To the Right, To the Right: As ye were.

To the Left, To the Left about: As ye were.


Lieut. -- You make too great a Noise, the World below us will be alarmed
again, and expect a Charge upon their Heads.


Capt. -- Who's there, that Catechises me? Set him upon Charles's Wain, with
two Dozen of Thunderbolts at his Heels, and to abide the first Charge of our
Infantry for his Sawciness. So, very well: -- Mind that third File. -- Keep in
Order, or you shall ride with your Companion. -- Silence there behind. --
Exhale new Vapors. Condense new Clouds. Shape your Clouds into Vehicles.
Prepare your Balls and Hailstones. Prime with Snow. Ram down. Advance.
Present. Charge.



Lieut. -- Oh, dear Captain, How am I pelted! See how the Region is scowr'd
behind me for Three Hundred and Fifty Leagues together: Then what must I
suffer, that am so near your roaring Muzzles.


Capt. -- Enough: Let him down. -- But who is yonder, that makes such haste
toward us?


Messenger. -- O Captain, Sad News! Your last Charge has overthrown three of
the Planets Houses, and ruined all their Aspects, Conjunctions, Oppositions,
etc. that they will never be habitable again: So that all the Astrologick Souls
are up in Conspiracy, and swear a Revenge for spoiling their Trade.


Capt. How? How Is that?


Messenger. Aries, Taurus and Gemini are no more, and the Astrologers are up in
Arms.


Capt. Astrologers dare neither plot nor fight, unless they consult the Stars.
-- Now, if the Planets Houses are broke down, the Art is buried in the same
Ruins: So that there is no danger of any thing but Noise, or Revolt to the
Vegitable Souls. -- Well, Lieutenant, for the future you will learn to be more
modest: -- See that you take a List of Names, and call a Rendesvouz for
Exercise once a Week, and remember to fill up the Places of such Souls as are
sent into the other World: You need not trouble your self about your Charge, it
will last but till 1697. It Is said the Milennium begins then.


DIALOGUE V.
Between the two Orders, Rational and Vegitable.
Prolocut^r, W^ll, Gentlemen, since we are all equal by Creation, and
Inequality is only contingent by Actuation in different Organs, my Opinion is
this, (though I Am willing to submit to the Judgment of this honorable
Consistory) that a ^o^^tention about Superiority may, by a solemn Decree, be
enacted Criminal, and a severe Penalty enjoined; or else, that the two Orders
of Spirits may choose their several Champions for a friendly Dispute, and cast
Lots who shall begin, that we may never hereafter be troubled to compose our
continued Aetherial Wranglings.


Both Orders, -- A Friendly Dispute, decisive by Plurality of Voices, is the
best Method.


Prol^cutor, -- Choose your Champions then. Is It done?


Both Orders, Yes; and the first Lot ^alls upon the Vegitable.


The Plea of Uegitable Souls for a Superiority ^ver the Rational Souls.
Vegit. -- I cannot but think my self extremely happy, (Most Reverend Judges)
in that I have this Opportunity, on the Behalf of our O^der, (whether designed
for Trees, Herbs or Minerals,) to make my Public Defense against that
imperious Order of Rational Souls, who daily subject us to their Abuses, and
anticipate the Tyranny which their Brethren, now incorporate in the Lower
World, usurp over us.

But, not to tire your Patience with remote Circumstances, I shall only apply
my self to what is materially pertinent to the Business in hand, not doubting to
prove, but that we ought to be equal, at least, if not preferred upon all
Accounts that have ever yet been judged sufficient for a Distinction of
Priority in other Cases.

And First, An Apple Tree is an Existent in Nature, as well as Man, and much
more observant of her Laws; is never drunk nor gluttonous, invades not the
Right of its Neighbors, never lies, circumvents or quarrels, never cries nor
laughs at Appearances of things, never* fools nor cheats it self, not is proud
of its own Shame: But all this, and greater Irregularities than these, are
committed by Mankind, against the juster Laws of Nature. Now the Consequence is
plain, that Mankind being greater Aggressors upon the Privileges of Nature than
we, we must be dearer to Nature than they; and we doubt not but the Preference
was designed us, only they got the start by some Trick and Circumvention, and
would now endeavor to perpetuate their Usurpations by Custom. Thus far to our
purer Innocence, and exacter Observance of Nature's Laws; which is our first
Argument for Preference.

Next, To the Excellency of our Existence after Incorporation; in which, Nature
shows a particular Care of us, by assuming us into her immediate Midwifery;
but, as if she were afraid to be accessory to the monstrous Procreations of
Man, leaves him to the Caprices and Whimseys of his own Lust, to beget, or not
beget, as he pleases. And when he is begot, what Image bears he? Perhaps he will
tell ye, the Image of the God of Nature. But we beg his Pardon there, and shall
take the Freedom to tell him, that his Vices have effaced that; and now,
instead of his polluted Body, Legs, Arms, Feet, etc. we can show an innocent
Trunk, Root, Branches, Fruit, etc. And as to his Immortality, we are not yet
behind him; for we cannot be annihilated, but are always somewhere, or in some
thing. Nay, the last Fire it self shall beget in us (as well as in him) a more
glorious Change, and not destroy us. But as to our Converse, or Knowledge in
the Laws and Constitutions of Nature, he is far our linferior; and he might
quickly discern it, if he would but use the same Measures for Trial, as he does
with his Neighbors; who, if they can do well, he concludes they can say well.
But when do we act irregularly? Are we not always just, temperate? etc. In
Minerals, the Whispering and Embracements of the Load stone and Iron might
convince proud Humanity of our Knowledge; As also the Love between the Stone
Pantarbe and Gold is as noble as that single Instance of a Pylades and Orestes.
Amongst Trees and Plants, the Friendship between the Olive and Myrtle, the
Nature of Sensible Plants, (as your Pride condesc^nds to call 'em,) which
shrink at the sacrilegious Hands of Humanity; the Plant which ye call the
Indian Lamb; the dropped Leaves of some Trees, which run away from you, and
many more such Instances, might satisfy you of some hidden Worth and Knowledge
in us, which ye pass over because ye cannot conceive the Prof^ndity of it, by
reason of the weakness of your Organs, and Defectibility of Judgment: And yet,
notwithstanding all this, you shall have an ungrateful, proud Man come into an
Orchard, on the Back^side of a House he calls his own, (Fool that he is, to be
so mistaken in Loans and Usurpations,) and with a threatening Ax how down some
poor, helpless Tree, not considering all the time, that could he understand the
Vict^m Vegitable's Dialect, he might hear himself thus (...): -- Ungrateful
Man! Where is my (...)? What have I done, thus to be wounded, and (...) my
happy Society, into the revenging F^re? Is it because I yielded my Fruit
Without a Grudge, and paid the Annual Rent of Nature without Acquittance?
Because I kept the stormy Winds from ^ff thy House, (...) my hospitable
Branches for hy (...) him, if he had sense and reason enough to do it. Thus
much for the Excellency of our Nature when incorporate: and which we might urge
as an Argument of Pre^erence.

But after all, we'll relinquish the Advantages of what has been said, on
purpose (if possible) to gratify that Monster Humanity. and only insist upon
the ensuing Topic, which has nothing in it of Accusation, Censure, or Pride,
viz. It Is generally believed all Souls are equal in Entity; whereupon it
follows, that we are not yet drained into the Posteriors of Immateriality,
having not yet suffered any Change, or been included in Matter or Form; so that
whatever Indignities have hitherto been cast upon us, it has been out of a
Supposition of Degeneration by mingling with improper Organs in the lower
world: Now either we are compelled to it or not; the last ye are sensible is
not our choice, and the first there is no resisting; and if so, we ought not to
be despised for what we cannot avoid; for we being commanded into Organs that
are only fit for Vegitati^n, do Vegitate, and the Rational finding a convenient
Organ for Ratiocination, does ratiocinate. Whereas if the Rational had been
cloistered in the Organs of Vegetables, or the Vegitable had been sent into the
Organs of Rationals, we had changed our Offices, and commenced alternate
Beings: Where is the difference then, or what reason is there for Rationals to
pretend Priority overus? None at all; No more than when Three Novice-Dicers
should cast 8, 1^, or 12, and he that throws most, should brag of his Nobility,
for being a greater Debtor to Fortune than the others: Thus our degrees of
Existence in the other world, will be owing not to our proper Choice, but a
Despotick Impulse and Disposal of ^ate; so that we shall actuate there like
exiled Kings, who are not less of the Blood Royal, for Suffering or Confinement.


The Defense of the Rational Order of Souls, against the Plea of the Uegitable
Order.
Ratiional. -- Our Vegitable Orator (most judicious Auditory) has been pleased
to offer to relinquish the Advantages of the former part of his Harangue, when
he found he had spent his Stock of Calumny, to raise a prejudice in your
Unbiased Judgments against the Dignity of our Order, and afterward, under
pretense of Accommodation, being sensible of the weakness of his Cause, would
insinuate one Topic void of Accusation, Censure, or Pride, (as he calls it,)
we might add, or Reason.) But as we are not against any Overtures of Peace that
shall be decreed by this Worthy Assembly; so we shall endeavor to show a deep
resentment of any dishonouble Terms to attain it.

Wherefore we restore our Antagonist all the Advantages he can make of the
former part of his Discourse; which we shall discuss particularly.

And first, We never treated these Vegitables as Non-Existences in Nature, nor
have they proved one Act of Tyranny which we have exercised over 'em. And why
they should boast of their not being, drunk, injurious, lying, quarrelling,
circumventing, etc. is very ridiculous; since their Organs incapacitate them
from such Functions. Suppose it were criminal to fly, should a Rock boast of
its Virtue in refraining? Not, unless Nature had given it Wings, Power and
Pleasure to fly: And they will come off no better in accusing us of ^quarrelling,
injustice, etc. It shows the great variety of Functions we are capable of.
Besides, in doing so, we pursue an appearance of some Good, (for we cannot will
Evil as Evil,) and in doing so, we act naturally; so that at the same time as
they accuse us of quarrelling^ etc. they accuse themselves of blooming,
fructifying* etc. which is natural to them. As for that observation* of Natures
assuming them into her immediate Midwifry and Care, and leaving us to our own
pleasure in Generation, it is an argument of our prehemenence; for Nature deals
with them as Parents do with Children and Fools; they must be fed, kept out of
Fire and Water, and Provision made for 'em; but we being above such little
usages, are able to procreate without compulsion, and are accordingly left to
our selves; Nature always employing most of her Care where her works are most
weak and imperfect.

As to the defacing our first image by our Vices, we have already answered it
above; in showing how ridiculous and foreign it is to urge a Case out of their
own Classis, although if they were capable to understand it, we could tell 'em of
a remedy for our restoration. But what a wretched Argument they bring to make
their Duration equal to our Immortality, upon supposition of Non-annihilation;
for though we grant 'em to be always somewhere or in something after a specific
dissolution by Motion, (or Fire, which is the same,) yet they come to be
nameless, -- indistinguishable, and as hard to find out, as when they lay in
the bo^om of their Cha^s or first Matter, and it is as good to be nothing, as an
undefinable Separation of unknown Particles. But we put off our Nature to
receive it again more (...) than before.

The next Argument insisted on, was, Their excellency of Converse, and
Knowledge of the Laws and Constitutions of Nature; which is all Aenigma and
Riddle to our Order, nor can we suppose it, for all those Instances that they
have brought to confirm it, without violence to Reason; but however, since we
will not be behind ^em in Civility, for quietness sake, we'll (...) an unknown
Dialect and Converse, and see what will come out then.

The (...) of your Language, be it what it will, is not to be excused from
Li^s, Slanders, Heresy, etc, For no doubt, but when a Learned Tree amongst ye,
holds forth the Doctrine of Fructification, etc. you shall have its next
Neighbor with secret subterranean Fibers, f^lloniously sucking away the Sap
and Life of its Teacher; and the more audacious Wood-bine, not as^am'd of a
public Rape upon every Plant it meets with, and since ye your selves agree
that Words and Actions are Sympathetick, what Equivocations, private Cabals and
Plots ye have together, when ye see an hopeful Embryo-Plant, without giving any
affront, environed round, and strangled to death with an Ambush of malicious
Thorns and Briars: And since ye give us two or three Instances of the Sympathy
(which ye call Converse) between Plants and Minerals, ye must give us the
Liberty to observe, that it is but them Instances, and a few more that are to be
found in your whose Economy, but that generally you are so suspicious, and
afraid of one another Tricks, and Circumventions, that ye keep no
Correspondence at all. As to a man's Tyranny over his Apple Tree, in cutting it
down when he pleases, the Imputation is lost, if we prove he has a right to do
it, as we shall by and by, when we come to consider your last unanswerable
T^pick: In the mean time, the fine Harangue you make the falling Tree to speak,
is very different from the custom of other Trees, who in such a moment are
rather studying revenge, than any thing else; as may be seen by their often
falling upon, and killing the person that cuts 'em, down; nay, we could give
you some Instances where your Revenge has been so unjust, as to destroy the
Horses and Oxen, that only stood by to draw ye away, and that only in obedience
to their Master's Command.

And now to the last Topic; the only Pillar upon which ye boldly offered to
lay the Structure of your whole Plea, in which you urge, That there is no reason
of pre-eminence where the choice is not our own, but ^he despotick Impulse or
Disposal of Fate; bringing the Instances of Dicers, and the Nobility of an
Exiled King; to which, we answer, That Dignity is Dignity, whether acquired or
conferred, to use your own Instance: Suppose A. B. C. equally skilful, throw,
who should throw most for a certain Preferment, and C. accidentally, or by a
secret Order of Fate, casts 12, when A. cast only 8, and B. 10, is not C. upon
his Investiture into his Office, more honorable than A. and B. especially when
they come bare-headed to petition such or such a Favor from him, they are mad
if they don't believe it, and he deserves himself to be turned out of his
Office that under-values it, so far as not to execute it, and keep up its
Privileges. To the last Instance, we answer, That Fate is not accountable to
Persons, whether it prefers or debases 'em; but it expects in both conditions
they make the best of its disposals: and thus we conclude, not at all doubting
the favorable Suffrage of this Convention, to confirm our Privileges and
Dignity above the Order of Vegitables.


Major Part. -- The Rational, the Rational Order.


Prolocutor. -- Well Gentlemen, withdraw, there shall be an effectual Care for
a Regulation of what is amiss; and as near as may be, to a general Satisfaction,
and so depart in Peace.


DIALOGUE VI.
Between Mercury, a Pre-existent Spirit, a Dead Man, Charon, and Hobbs.
Mercury -- STand back there, I Am in great haste; a poor Wretch that lies
struggling under the pangs of Separation, cannot be loosed till I hand him to
Charon's Ferry.


Spirit -- Pray good Mercury, hold a little, I have one request to beg of you.


Merc. -- Speak -- Speak quickly, What is it?


Sp. -- Only be my Guardian, and let me wait upon you into the other World,
thence to the Infernal Shades, and so back again.


Merc. -- Indeed your Order has been very civil to me always when I past these
Regions, and though it will be some trouble to me, yet your Request is granted,
-- take hold of that end of my Wand, and keep close behind me.


Sp. -- What strange --


Merc. -- Hush, not a word, we are now at our first Journeys end. -- Ay, that is
the Object; see how Death has fixed his Eyes, and sits triumphant upon his Lips:
So, now I have eased him, his Corpse must be left to be lamented and buried by
his Friends, but he marches with us.


Sp. -- Where is he?


Deadman^ -- Here, What do ye design to do with me?


Merc. -- That last Office I do to all Mankind -- Conduct you to your last
Abode -- Holo Charon, make haste, and take this Fare.


Charon -- What is he? He smells of Parchment, Subpoena's Injunctions, etc.
Was he not toward the Law?


Dead. -- Yes, I have be^n a Barrister.


Chapter -- Mercury, I dare not take him with all that Luggage about him; he will
sink the Wherry. Take away that Forgery -- Very well, and that double Mortgage
-- So, and that Parcel of Replications, Writs of Error, etc. -- Ay, now we are
light enough, we'll be over presently.


Dead. Where am I now?


Merc. -- Amongst your Predecessors; you are welcome to Shore, and so farewell;
Come along Comrade.


Sp* -- Tarry a little, he says something. I would fain know what Thoughts I
shall entertain, when I have left my Body.


Dead. -- Amongst my Predecessors? Then I Will go seek out for Mr. H^bbs, to know
the reason why I am thus cruelly treated, when I followed his Rules, so
exactly. -- Yonder he goes -- Hobbs, Mr. Hobbs.


Hobs -- How I am continually plagued, with my new Proselytes, that lay all
their Damnations at my door? But I believe some on 'em put upon me; I Will
question this new Comers Principles -- Do you know me?


Dead. -- Yes to my Sorrow: -- What think you now of your Doctrine of Fatality?


Hobs -- What Doctrine do ye mean?


Dead. -- That every individual person is fated to all the Actions of his Life;
yea, even the most minute and inconsiderable; as for instance, to get up at
such a time of the Day, to feed himself precisely at such an Hour, and with
such a certain number of bits, to go over the Streets at so many Steps, to
Whore and be Drunk at such a time, to go to Prayers and be Melancholy at such
a time, to dispute against his Principles at such a time: In short, that all
that we think, say, and act, are necessarily predestined, and run as links in
an inevitable Chain of Causes. -- What think ye of the Reasons of this
Hypothesis now? That we are made up of two parts, a Soul, and a Body; and that
when these are conjoined we must live necessarily as long as we do live; and
that so long as we do live, we must necessarily have a mind which has its
perception by the Senses: That as this perception is necessary, so is the
choice that we make by it: As for instance, Something that is good, or at least
appears so to the perception, offers it self, and as such, it is impossible to
refuse it, as a proper Object to the mind, as it is also impossible after
perception, to choose an Evil as such; and thus we are (...) to VVho^ing for
those Arguments which our reason offers, that we should refrain, carry not
along with 'em so great a good to our perception, as those other reasons that
induce us to it, and as a great power necessarily commands a l^sser, so the
will necessarily chooses it as most agreeable to it, and thus I refrain
Whoring, when there appears a greater good to let it alone: Thus I am fated to
make so many steps in walking the length of my Chamber, because to step so far
at a step, appears more agreeable to my Constitution, Fancy, etc. than to step
further or shorter, and therefore as most agreeable, it most inclines my will,
which therefore is necessitated to act accordingly: As to the Body it depends
necessarily upon the Mind, for my Hand cannot move of it self, unless I move
it, and if I move it, it is necessitated to move; and cannot help it; and thus,
Mr. Hobbs, I Am necessitated to be Damned, because the way to it, had more
appearance of good in it, than walking in another way, and therefore I could
not but choose it. Oh! what an Unhappy Wretch was I, that was not fated to
examine this Doctrine by the same Measures that I did all others; truth is only
known by falsehood, and falsehood by truth; black by white, and white by black,
and every thing by its contrary: What a Mysterious Riddle then is this, Which
is both, and all one? viz. Do, or do not do, it is fated. If I would have done a
thing, and examined it is contrary, viz. could not do it, or vice versa, then
there had been fate in the case, otherwise Hobbism, or a new Riddle, whose
Solution had been Ruin in one World, and Damnation in another. What Is the
meaning of Laws, Rewards, and Punishments? For if I act what I must act, Why am
I bid to do so, or forbid to do so? If I rob my Neighbor, Why should a little
superinduced Law take hold of me, and not that great Law of Fatality preserve
me since I act agreeable to it? What injustice can I do when eternal Fate
stands by me, and warrants all my Actions? Fool that I am, was I to live my
Life over again, I would only believe, and warrantably too, that Fate, though
it be like a Law, yet it speaks not in this manner; This Man shall do thus, and
this thing shall befall that Man, but rather thus, whatsoever a Soul chooses,
such and such things shall certainly follow; for it is not the Action, but the
Consequence of the Action, that is Fate. -- If Fate had designed, that if Paris
Ravished Helena, the Grecians should contend with Troy about it: But this was
once in Paris's power to do, or not to do without Compulsion or Necessity. Thus
Apollo foretold Caius, That if he begat a Son, that Son would kill him, which
was conditional and not necessary, thus Plato; If it were not thus, the ill
have a protection for their Vices, and the Good deserve no praise. To which I
might add, That there are certain Moral Instincts, co essenti^l with Humanity,
eternally ^ixt and unchangeable, such as Love, Justice, Religion, etc. not
fitted to a private temper, or a particular Nation, to these instincts we are
all really chained by a Fatality and necessity of Act, more or less,
notwithstanding all our struggles to be rid of 'em, but to speak of Fatalities
in opposition to these, is to charge the great eternal mind with
Contradictions, Divisions, and at last with Nonentity; which now I can too
late think of: Oh that I could, that I could. --


Sp. -- Pray Mercury let us begone from this unhappy Subject of Fatality, and
let us see something new among the Dead, I want to take a view of Alexander,
Caesar, Hercules, Epimenondas, and the other brave Heroes, so much talked of, or
the great Philosopher M^nippus, I know not which to ask for first.


Merc. -- Men^ppus! He was the greatest Man the World ever bred, his life
really Philosophiz'd, whilst others Talked, -- That is he there, you cannot vex
him.


Sp. Lend me your Wand, I Will hit him one dab on's Pate for Trial. --


Merc. No, no, you must be civil to Strangers. -- See that behind him is --
Hercules.


Sp. -- But where is his Club? Methinks he looks so like a silly I'uny, that I
durst venture a foil with him: But where is fair Hellen, and the ugly Thersites?


Merc. -- They stand together there.


Sp. -- Bless me! How the Dead equals all things? I have only one other
Question to ask, and I have done; Pray Mercury, of what Quality or Calling are
those generally, who are dignified for their Virtue.


Merc. -- Ignorant poor Laborers of both Sexes, that have been the greatest
Enemies to their Senses, those Nurses of all Vice.


Sp. -- This will be s^range News for our Aetherial Inhabitants, who are all
gaping to be Lords, Dukes, Princes, and Emperors.


Merc. -- Come, let us be gone, my business is never sleeping.


Sp. -- I cannot press upon you any longer, -- pray lead the way -- Strange!
Where are we got already? -- What fine Countries are yonder? --


Merc. -- Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Bithinia, etc. -- Well, Do you know
where you are now?


Sp. -- In my own Region. Thanks, kind Mercury for this Kindness.


Mer. I am glad I have gratified you. Fare well.


Sp. -- Farewell.


DIALOGUE VII.
Between Two Spirits upon the Ramble, and the Spirit of an Usurer that had
strangled himself, and walked in a Churchyard, about his own Tomb.
1. Sp. -- MEthinks (though I know no reason for it) I tremble to come so near
these Regions of Death and Horror. What should we do here, amongst the Graves
and Tombs of the Deceased? Is it pleasant to view the Triumphs of that
pale-faced Tyrant?


2. Sp. -- No: But if we can find some of our old Acquaintance, hovering over
the Prisons of their Bodies, it may be a Satisfaction to ask some Questions.
There is one that often visits his Tomb, (and Body, which he left too hastily:)
He cannot be long absent, the Clock has struck Twelve. -- Hush, here he comes:
-- Stand still, and put on Invisibility.


Suicide, -- Hail, dear Tomb! the dear Repository of my other Part. -- But why
should I love and pardon the adulterous Lump, which left me, for the Embraces
of Death; and being deaf to all Entreaties and Reasons, violently thrust me out
of Possession. How am I then bewitched, to visit the old, ungrateful Mansion,
and assume an Aerial Resemblance of what I once was! -- Assist me, Fancy: What
Hair had he? -- Right. And what a Face? -- That Is exact. -- Now, for a Body,
Arms, Thighs, Legs and Feet? They are more easy. -- So. -- Now, for Clothes?
-- That Is truly imitated. Now methinks I am A. -- B. -- the very same
throughout: How I hug my self in this Figure! -- There Is nothing wanting now,
but to tell Moneys upon this Gravestone, till the envious Cock proclaims a too
too eager Flux of Time. -- Very well: Now I am seated. -- Perhaps some Fools
may be frightn'd at me.


2. Spirit. -- Why ha'now, old Comrade? What Is the meaning of this wealthy
Posture? Come, will ye give a Bag or two for old Acquaintance sake?


Suicide. -- Why upon this Errand at such an unseasonable Hour? You are come on
purpose to give me a Visit: Are n't ye?


2. Spirit. -- Yes, we are so: And we hope your Entertainment will be suitable
to Visitants; especially, since we expect no more from you, than the Solution
of a few Questions.


Suicide. -- Pray, What are they? I Will oblige ye, if I can.


2. Spirit. -- What Apprehensions have Mankind, when they see this Airy Vehicle
that you assume every Night? Whether is the Spectacle pleasant through the
Novelty of it, or dismal for want of understanding it.


Suicide. Mankind has very different Apprehensions of me: Some, when they see
me, run stark mad immediately. Others come on purpose swearing, all is Delusion,
a Cheat, or an Imposition on the Senses; and when they see us, will not believe
their Eyes; only sometimes we have particular Commissions to undeceive 'em,
with a witness. A Third Sort, a little wiser than both, keep s^ much Presence
of Mind as to see us, and troop off quietly, with their Hair bolting up an end.
But here and there are a very few that have more adequate Conceptions of us,
and neither seek nor flee our Company, knowing that we Souls and Spirits have
no more Power over 'em in Bodies, than we have out; and that whatever Power we
have at any time is only lent us, and also limited, and not to be extended
when and where we please. So that we are really no more in our own Nature and
Power, than what their Fancy makes us. Thus Reason secures some against us; and
Religion a very few, who can master all the little Suggestions of Fear by their
Faith.


2. Spirit. -- Very well. -- Next, Why do ye thus hanker after a rotten,
putrefying Body; choosing that Shape that it once bore, before all others?


Suicide. -- Because I was turned out of doors by violence, without so much as
taking my Leave of it, or its bidding me Farewell. -- And could I quietly brook
such an abrupt, hasty Separation from a Comrade, I had been so intimate with
for near Seventy Years? What though it was deaf to my Counsels and Reasonings,
yet it was my other Part; and as before Incorporation I found my self
imperfect, but half an Entity, now I am so again, and shall be, till I am
reunited to my old Companion. But this is all R^ddle to you, who have ^ot yet
known how Souls act in Bodies, how the Intellect conceives Ideas of Material
Objects by the Senses. Did you but know how the Visive Power conveys the
Similitude of the Thing seen to the Soul, you would wish to be incorporate, though it
were in one single Eye: How much more when you would have all the Senses to
command? When you would have a whole Microcosin to rule in, like a Deity? Now,
after all this, Which of you would not love the Remembrance of such an Union,
and imitate it, till the time of Reunion renders ye a perfect, complete Being
again?


Quest. But what was the Reason of your sudden Separation from the Body?


Answ. The Body being part of my self, I was willing to gratify it as far as I
could, even to a Weakness; which I continued so long, till it grew habitual,
and I lost my Command, fixing my Happiness upon wrong Objects, viz. the little
Concerns of the World; which bearing no Analogy or Proportion to the Greatness
of a Soul, caused an Uneasiness. It Is incongruous to try Sounds by the Taste,
they being the only proper Objects of the Ear. There is no Object for the Soul,
but God; a^ appears by its Rest when fixed on him, and Uneasiness every where
else. And thus I, by the Importunity of my Body, and the Defectibility of just
Perception, expecting Happiness where it was not to be had, grew impatient
under the Disappointment, even to Strangling, to be rid of the Burden.


2. Spirit. -- Alas, unfortunate Brother! We can do no more than pity thee, and
own our Obligations for these Discoveries. -- Farewell.


DIALOGUE VIII.
Between Two Spirits, the Order of Vegitable Souls, and Cupid.
1. Sp. -- WEll, What News, Brother?


2. Sp. -- The strangest Adventure you ever heard of. Cupid having Commission
to distract some body in the other World, as he fled down he missed his Way,
and rambl'd into our Regions; where the Order of Vegitables are pillaging the
little Wag of his Bow and Quiver, and pretend to cure him of his Blindness.


1. Sp. -- Let Us away to see the Humor on it: I believe the arch Knave will put
a Trick upon 'em all, and come off with flying Colors.


Cupid. -- Nay, but, Gentlemen Spirits, pray be civil. -- What Is the meaning of
this?


Vegit. -- The meaning on it is, that since you have found the way into our
Quarters, we have a Mind to hinder your Pranks here; we have no need to be
fooled and plagued, as the Inhabitants are both in Heaven and Earth (if we may
believe the Poets.)


Cupid. -- By me?


Vegit. -- Yes, by you. And what can we expect from one that bewitches his own
Mother with Adenis, Anchises? etc. You know nothing (I Will warrant you) of
Endymion, Hyacinthus, the Adulter^us Net, and a Thousand more such things: Do
you? Nor can Jupiter himself escape you, but down goes his Target and
Thunderbolts, and away to Taw and Push-Pin with Ganynede: Sometimes he is
Metaphoriz'd into Gold, now a Swan, then a Bull* anon a Shepherd, and so on,
according as your Whimseys dictate, whilst the Government of the World lies at
Sixes and Sevens, and he that has the longest Nails and Teeth is the best
Entity. And when your Caprices and Magots are surfeited with Aetherial Amors,
away ye troop to the Earth, where you ^ye a Prince to a Stage Player, and a
Princess to a ^oot-boy, or else plague Equality by Desparation of Enjoyment;
laughing at the poor Wretches, to see 'em covetous of their Misfortunes.
Wherefore we conclude it necessary for our own Peace, and out of pity to our
Neighboring Worlds, to dis-arm you of your Power, and cure that Blindness
which makes you shoot thus at all Adventures.


Cupid. It Is a strange thing (Gentlemen Souls) why I, having a Bow and Quiver,
(as if no Body else used neither,) must upon necessity be the God of Love, and
sentenced so to be by those who confess they never saw me before. A great
Rashness, certainly, for the Wisdom of your Order, to be guilty of! But, to put
you out of all doubt, assure your selves, I am a Spirit, as ye are; only with
this disference, I have suffered a Dissolution from a Body, and ye are yet
unbodied. Time was, I actuated that famous Scythian, Pomaxathres, that slew the
great Roman, Marcus Crassus; and was accounted the best Archer that Scythia
ever boasted of. Now, hearing that one Sagittarius, a Resident of these
Regions, was famed in that Art, I came on purpose to create a Correspondence,
and try the Skill of the Heavenly Archer.


Vegit. -- Well, is this be so, and you are that Pomaxathres, we beg your
Pardon for our Error, and think our selves happy in the Mistake. --
Sagit^ari^s sur passes in this Art, never making his Butts less than ten
Degrees distant. -- Do ye see that Milky Way there, so much talked on by the
Poets? His Shafts have scoured that Road by their frequent Motion, and have
kept that part of the Sky clear from dark Matter, and Excrements of Stars;
which is the reason of its Albitude: But the Lower World, like Fools, not
knowing so much, do fancy it to be the Way for the Souls of the Blessed to
mount to Paradise. -- Come, let us be gone; we'll quickly introduce ye into
Sagitarius's Acquaintance.


Cupid. -- I long to meet the Artist, that we might give you some Divertisement
by our Skill. -- But, pray, which is the Way to the Lower World?


Vegit. -- You must leave Venus on the Left, and so to 19 Degrees, 30 Minutes
of Capricorn; afterward the Coast is clear, and divided into Right Lines to
all parts of the Globe.


Cup. -- Farewell, Gentlemen; I Am in haste now, I Will call again some other time.


Vegit. -- And is the Impostor gone? Certainly he was Cupid. Why were we so
bewitched as to believe him? Could we think the God of Love could speak Truth,
when all his Subjects are given to Lying.


DIALOGUE IX.
Between an Astrologer and a Mountebank.
Mount. -- WHich way with your Circumferences, Compasses, Figures: etc. Ha!
What Project's on foot now?


Astr. -- To survey the Stars, and take a Note on the Influences written on
their Foreheads.


Mount. -- Why so?


Astr. -- I Am sure I shall be an Astrologer, and it is good to make Collections
against I have need of 'em: I have a strong Fancy that I shall be the Prophet
of Europe. If I Would been imbody'd but Twenty or Thirty Years since, I had been
the Second Lilly, or, at least, his Successor. -- But if, after all, I should
forget what I now do in this Pre existent State, I shall be hardly put to it,
about the Fate of Great People, the Change of Wind and Weather, Sweet-hearts,
Losses, Travels, Life, Death, and every thing else, unless you will keep
Correspondence with me.


Mount. -- Ay indeed, such a Correspondence would make you famous; but I Have
just received a Commission to take Possession of an Embryo, fated for a
Mountebank: So that I can serve you in nothing, but by giving you Information
of the Death of those he designs to kill.


Astr. -- That will be something: But what shall I do for the rest?


Mount. -- As the rest of your Neighbors do: Guess at what is most probable.


Astr. -- Then I shall be mistaken sometimes.


Mount. -- It Is your Interest you should, or you would be Arraigned for a Wizard.


Astr. -- It Is hard such an exquisite Skill and Death should be Rivals. But is
there no way else to escape the Faggot, and be famous?


Mount. -- Yes, as Licensed Way, as we have to kill People.


Astr. Pray, what is that?


Mount. -- Bring other Persons into a Confederacy with you, who design, near
such a Time, to Plot, Fight, Marry, Sail, Masquerade, or any thing else that is
to be done; and then fall on Prophesying: But you must be very confident, and
remember a great many Authors Names, (no matter for their Works,) the pretended
Influences of the Stars, and Examples of the Wonders you have performed, and
other Measures suitable to the blind Side of the Enquirer. And if you can but
Rhyme, like young Lilly over his Pills, your Custom grows as thick as Hops, and
you may lie in Bed and gather 'em.


Astr. -- Now I Am stocked indeed, to (...) three quarters of the Town. But will not
my present Collections also be useful?


Mount. -- Yes, if 'twere possible to remember; but the Clog of Humanity
depresses the Vigor of our Faculties, and makes (...) quite different Beings:
So that what I Have (...) you now, must be repeated in the other World, and that
will be sufficient, with goo^ Management.


Astr. -- I Am satisfied. But what will yo^ do to be as famous as he that came
lately (al^ at one time, I think 'twas) from all the Cour^ in Christendom, into
this part of the Globe ju^^ under us? You know who I mean, the Sta^^ tell
(...); I cannot forbear trying my Faculty.


Mount. -- Right: I was a great Familiar with his Soul, before Adam and Eve
went to Bed together. About 2593 Years since, he was for going into a young
Crispin; and I very hardly dissuaded him, by telling him, his Mistress would be
skilled in Palmestry, and read his Pass into another World through his own
Styrrup-Leather.


Astr. -- A kind Disappointment. But what is this to the Question I asked?


Mount. -- Well, he is a famous Mountebank now, and cures every thing that he
fails not in; and when he misses, he cannot lose his Reputation, for he lest
that behind him in Italy, where it starved to death.


Astr. -- How came he to be so famous then?


Mount. -- Even as you must; by Confederacy, thus, The Liar that he makes use
of, to roar about the Stage, and tie the unthinking Multitude together, having
got a credulous Patient, takes the silly Thing by the Hand, to that Corner of
the Stage where the Curtain hangs, and the listening Doctor behind it; -- and
then he begins to examine what Grievance? Where? How long? and such other like
Questions as are for his purpose. Whereupon the Doctor draws off at a distance,
and the Patient is introduced; to whom he tells every thing, like an Oracle,
without any Questions, receives his Fees, and sets a little longer time (for
such a desperate Cure) than he designs to tarry. And so he deals with the whole
Generation of Adam, to the latter end of the Chapter. -- There are a Thousand
other handy Ways of killing People, and getting their Moneys for it, but it is
not for my Interest to make 'em public, lest the World should be convinced
against I set up, and stone me, amongst the rest of my honest Fellow Travelers.


DIALOGUE X.
Between Two Spirits, about the Retrogradation of the Dragon's Head and Tail.
1. Sp. -- DID you he^^ of the Dragon's Frolic?


2. Sp. -- Not I: I have been upon the Ramble these three Days, I am but just
now arrived in this Region, and am going to tell my Landlord Aquarius, that I
have no design to bilk my Lodging. But, pray, what'is this Frolic you talk of?


1. Sp. -- The Dragon's Tail taking it ill to come always behind, grew very
importunate to lead the Head for one Day; and the Head being tired out with
continual Solicitations, agreed to be led: According the Tail set forward, and
began his Journey; but wanting Eyes. soon mistook his Course, and rambled to
the Borders of his Regions, where he fell down, and light upon Aquarius's
Waterpots; which flew with such a Noise, that the lower World thought it a Clap
of Thunder. Pisces being the next Sign, (and peeping above Water, to learn what
strange Motion that was) cried out to his two Fishes to secure themselves, for
the Leviathan was upon the Scamper for Prey. The Dragon (which he thought to be
the Leviathan) being so bruised with the Fall, began to repent of his
Retrograde Journey; for his Head, by such a Motion, got the Vertigo, and dizzy
Drunkenness, his Body was cut by the Pitchers, besides the Abuses the
unfortunate Traveller light on from the Inhabitants of that Region; who taking
him for a Monster, began to surround him, maulling him with the Beam of Libra,
and the Fragments of the Pitchers, without asking Questions, or taking the
Legal Procedure against him for the supposed Invasion.


2 Sp. This Account is surprising, especially being so near my Lodging.
Methinks this would be very proper for Application, if the Story was told in
the lower world, where Reason is postpon'd to Sense, and the ill Consequences
seldom taken Notice of, till the whole Man is shipwrack'd and lost; -- But what
became of the Dragon?


1 Sp. -- Nature finding her work imperfect, without the re-assumption of the
fallen Wretch into his place, and that the whole Generation of Astrologers
would be at a loss in their Observations, ordered the Dragon to be put into the
one of Libra's Scales, and a Weight into the other, sufficient to mount him up
into his own Region; which was accordingly done; where, being arrived, he set
head foremost, and swore by all the Planets he would never be ruled by his Tail
again. -- The Tail being ashamed of its Miscarriage, hid it self betwixt the
Legs, which is the Reason that the little Stars in it disappeared, when
Archimedes thought to have found 'em at the end of his Telescope.


DIALOGUE XI.
Between a Spirit and his Friend, lately Imbodied in an Infant.
Spir. -- WHat have you forgot your old Companion? or are you asleep as well as
your Body?


Friend. -- Who Is that?


Spi. -- Your late Friend A; -- when we parted, you desired me to pay you a
Visit in your new Lodgings; and you knew I was always punctual at an
Assignation, where Friendship was the Motive: I long to know what Entertainment
you have light on, what Liberties you enjoy, or what Confinements you lie
under, that I may take an Estimate thereby what I have to trust to when my Turn
comes.


Fr. -- To give a Journal of my Entertainment, will be just the same
Satisfaction that a Criminal has when he is no longer perplexed betwixt Hope
and Despair; but is assured he shall be hanged; but you are not denied the
Criminal's Comfort, to wit, Company: But not to detain you from Particulars,
when I parted with you, I immediately shot into the Embryo I told you of, as
swift as a Falling Star, and before I was aware, I was dispersed through the
whole Lump; not a Finger or Toe but I was busy in it, as the hasty Heir is
amongst his Coffers and Leases when his Father's a dying; but as to my first
Motion, I thought 'twas just like a halfdrown'd Fly, when the Sun begins to
shine upon it, which first puts out a Leg, then a Wing, and so by degrees
gathers Motion, till it presumes upon its own strength, and new Adventures; so
I, first a Knee, then an Elbow, then a Heel, and so on, till I grew so
troublesome a Guest, that my Mother cried out for help, to be shut on me; and so
by a Writ of Ejection dispossessed me of my warm Tenement, and turned me out
into the wide world, naked, helpless, and full of Tears: But then began the
Plague of Dependence, and the Date my Misfortunes; for you will find when you
come into a Body, that a Soul does sympathize, and receive an Impression of
Pleasure or Pain, according to the resentment of the Senses, and vice versa,
the Body participates in the Ease or Disturbance of the Soul. I am now but just
six weeks old, and methinks it is longer than the Six Thousand Years of my
Pre-Existence; for I Am horribly bus'd Night and Day. It Is said, The Ape is ^o
very tender of her young ones, that she frequenty hugs them to death; but my
Nurse only mocks me with such a Kindness; for when she has almost strangled me
for want of Breath, she recovers me to strangle me again. And if I Itch or
Smart, am swadled too straight or too loose, am hungry, or over-cramb'd. it is
all one; for I Have no way to declare my grievance, but by sprawling, making a
foul face, or exercising my treble Organs, and that does not avail me neither;
for I Am only looked upon to be peevish, and out of humor whether this Usage
will kill me, or whether I shall weather it out to abide worse, I know not: But
this I know, That if I was to begin my Pre-existent State again, I Would take heed
of such extravagant Rambles as could be att^n'd by no less a Penance than such
an Incorporation.


Sp. -- If you find such Penance for Pre-existent Extravagances, alas what will
become of me, who am in ten times deeper than you; the foot of my Account will
be amazing, when your small Debt has such sever^^ Exactions.


Fr. -- I don't know that, but pray withdraw; here comes the Nurse to beslabber
(...) with Caudle; if she finds the Body without me, and unactive, the House
will be all in (...) uproar, and my new Companion will be lai^ out, and starved
to death; and I dread ^ second Change, remembering the old Pro^ verb, -- Seldom
comes a better.


DIALOGUE XII,
Between the whole Order of Rational Souls, and Two Intelligencers from the
other World.
Order. -- WHat, more Complaints still? Shall we be for ever plagued with
Repetitions of the harsh Reception our Fraternity find below? -- Here, -- Who
are the Friends of the Parties incorporate? Stand forth, and declare your
Grievance.


1 Intell. -- A great Intimate of mine, and a Member of our Order, is
unfortunately tied to a Fiddler, who runs eternal Divisions, to the great Curse
of every Visitant's Ear; never considering, that what delights him, may be a
great Mortification to another. -- One of his Acquaintance the other Day, being
tired with a Whimsey, on Green Sleeves and Pudding-Pyes, (an Air well known to
the Musical Tribe in that Globe,) began to be free with him, telling him what
he thought of his Entertainment; and in Conclusion, broke his Crowd and
Fiddle-stick.


Order. -- Perhaps he might deserve it. But how could the Soul (your Friend)
suffer by that Accident?


1. Intell. -- I asked my Friend this very Question; and he answered, -- That
though by a Habitude of Incorporation he began to love the Body, yet he was so
much afraid of Violence, (being a Party,) that he tried all the Windows of his
Tenement, to make an Escape; but coming to the Ear, he heard the welcome Sound
of Impose less on your Friends, and so farewell. My Friend thinking the Storm
was over, began to love the Ear for the welcome News he heard in it, though indeed
'twas the most frequent part of Residence that my Friend had in the whole
Material Fabric. -- He had not tarried long there, but he was summoned to tune
another Fiddle; but the Chamber Door was first locked, and no Fiddler was at
home for more Visitants: So away they went to work; the Fiddler with his
Fingers, Wry Mouth, and other antic Gestures; and my Friend, according to his
Office of Perception, judged of Measure and Proportions. And having tuned that
also into the usual Concordance, a Mournful Ditty was to be composed, and set,
to bewail the unhappy Abuse of his Wooden Apollo; not considering that the bare
Remembrance of a Disgrace is afflicting to any body, but one that carries his
Soul in his Ears. Now, my Friend being ignorant what Distance lay between b
flat and b sharp, or how much a Lesser Third differed from a Greater Sixth, was
not so able as willing to assist his Comrade in the Composure: Who thereupon
raged, swore, grew distracted, and out of Revenge, has cruelly confined my
Friend to the cold Prison of his Fiddle, where he uses to visit him two or
three times a Night; allowing no better Converse, than the doleful Accents of
Mad Tom o'Bedlam.


Order. -- This Account is Argument dismal enough to add to our Litany, From
Fiddlers, Libera nos, Domine. But who is the second Complainant? What has he to
say?


2. Intell. -- A Race of --


Order. -- Of what?


2. Intell. -- Of -- I dare not mention the ugly Name, for fear it brings a
Distraction amongst us, and the very Malignity of the Sound infect us with the
Fatality of its Heresies. -- But if a general dark Character will satisfy,
it is unwillingly ready.


Order. -- Certainly it cannot be much worse than the Accounts we have already.
Let Us have the full, particular Relation.


2. Intell. -- Well, since ye are so covetous of what ye will repent, take it.
-- A Society of Virtuosoes, in which a Friend of mine has lately commen^'d, and
for which I Am sure he will be damned, has bewitched the other World with
fruitless Discourses, unprofitable Disputes, needless Digressions, of Posse,
Esse, Quiddity, Predicament, and a Thousand such Sounds; by which they have
lost their own Reason, and despoiled their Followers of theirs too. They will
make every thing disputable, so much as the Pre-Existence of Souls: Nay,
they will not believe the Existence of a Deity, if their Antagonist proves it not
by a Syllogism, in Mood and Figure. Two and Three is not Five amongst them,
without a Consequence from just Premises. A certain Heretic Pedant the other
Day maintained a Vacuum, and proselyted a simple Country Gentleman by such
seeming Reasons, as he wanted Sense to confute. -- One of 'em, as I was
informed, was this, -- It would be ridiculous to think, that when a Gnat pushes
back a parcel of Air with its Wings, that parcel drives another before it, and
that another; and so the stirring of the Little Toe of a Flea should raise a
Bunch upon the Back of the Universe. The unthinking Plebeian having long wished
Suicide no Murder, because his Mistresses Unkindness made him weary of his
Life, straightway retired out of the Assembly, and thanked his pitying Genius
for providing a way to cure his Melancholy, viz. by the help of a Vacuum;
resolving to lay the Fault upon Nature in the Day of Judgment, that he was
accidentally in a place, where he could not live any longer, for want of
Breath. Whereupon he immediately made and executed his Last Will and Testament,
and took his Leave of all his Friends. -- And, in order to find out a Vacuum,
he caused all his Blunderbusses, Guns and Muskets to be laid over a Gate,
ready to discharge; and behind 'em, two of his Servants, well mounted, with a
hanging Carpet between 'em, with so much Lead at the bottom as to keep it tight
and perpendicular; and thus, having wished Happiness to his fair Tormenter, he
ordered the Pieces to be fired, and his Servants (to whom he had bequeathed his
Horses for this last Office of Friendship) to set Spurs to their Legacies, and
follow the scowr'd Road, he himself bringing up the Rear, and charging about
for the Vacuum. But after he had almost run himself out of breath in a vain
Pursuit of it, he retired to the Assembly of Virtu^s^^s, which was not yet
broke up, saluting his Teacher by the Name of Madman, and Beggar of Questions.
But the Virtuoso, to maintain his Credit, asserted that the Gentleman might
have found the Vacuum if he had followed close up to the Carpet. Whereupon,
another of the Gentleman's Acquaintance, resenting his Friend's Disgrace,
ordered the same Trial again, resolving to keep up close to the windy Engine,
to prove the Assertion a Falsity; but he, to keep Ground, ran himself out of
breath, and fell down dead: Which Accident upheld the Credit of the Vacuum.

Another would prove, That a small Thread, which was equally twisted, and all
of the same Matter, would sustain a greater weight than a Cable Rope that was
unequally twisted. To prove which, he offered this Reason, That being all of a
strength, it had no place to break first. A little Schoolboy that stood by,
wished his Father had known that Secret before his Ship-wreck. It had been all
one, (replied another of his Form-fellows;) for* the Thread would have broke
close by the Ship, by reason of the Additional Weight of the rest of the
Thread. In like manner, if the Thread hanged in a perpendicular Line, with a
Weight at the End of it, it would break at the Upper End, because the Lower End
would not bear so much Weight as the Upper End, by the Weight of the Thread.
Nay, Suppose the Thread laid upon a Level, and extended beyond its strength;
having no place to break first, it must break in all places at once: For if
Particulars cannot act beyond their Power, Generals cannot; both coming under
one Predicament. Three Quarters of the Auditory could not understand the Boy,
who therefore was whipped for his Sawciness and Interruption. So that that
Orator also sat down with his Credit.

A Third stood up, and, without pretending to prove any thing, drove all the
Auditory out of the little Wit they had left, by asking, Whether there may not
be an Infinity of Worlds, this Globe being not so big as those above? Whether
this World might not be made out of the Ruins of a preceding Old One? Whether
these Globes may not be the Excrements of the Sun? Whether it might not be
better for the next Generation to be taught to go upon All Four, for several
good Reasons that might be given? Whether the Representatives of Nature's
Pudenda were not a more proper Badge of Honor to wear at a Cavalier's Girdle,
than a Sword; since this is a Mark of Death, and that of Life? Whether this
Tuft of Grass (pulling one out of his Pocket) may not be a Man within these
Sixty Years? Whether, if it were possible for one Man to imitate another in all
his Members, Motions and Gestures, that Imitator should not, by Equality of
Organs, be susceptive of the other's Thoughts and Inclination? Whether an
Eternity of Matter is disputable? Whether the Souls of Men are Pre-existent, or
Contemporary with the Body? Whether it is not a great Absurdity to attribute to
a Vacuity that Quality of Yielding to a Body, and that Space which are the
Dependencies of an Extent, which can only agree to a Substance? Whether --


Order. -- Hold: No more Whethering in Virtuocisin. Poor Earth! Alas, What
Entertainment can we expect in thee? We shall be sweetly brought to Bed if
Virtuocism finds encouragement, and propagates till there is no other Trade for
us to take up with. Hasten our Spindles, dear Parcae, whilst there are some
Infidels, and Opposers of these Doctrines.


DIALOGUE XIII.
Between the Spirits of an Emperor and a Beggar.
Beggar. -- IT IS enough for Humanity, that knows no better, to be Noisie
Querulous, and arraign the Justice of Fate, and the wise dispensation of
Providence, who fits not the particular Chain of Causes to the private humor
of this or that Party; but respects the universal Good at once: hence I am
satisfied, the despicable Post assigned me, is wisely disposed, and ought to be
accepted with gratitude, since it is inconsistent with the goodness of the
Divine Being, to make a general Good incompatible with a particular one; whence
it is also plain, that I may be happy in my Station. But was I to choose, and
knew not what Fate had ordained me, I Would be an Emperor at least; How full of
Charms is it to imitate the Divine Original of Beings, to see whole Kingdoms
depend upon me, to be encompassed with eternal Heads of Nakedness; to have the
power of exalting one, and debasing another; of rewarding Virtue, and punishing
Vice; of disposing of Life and Death; in short, to be an Earthly God. Now must
I suffer Affronts and Abuses, without the power of Revenge, to stoop, and
acknowledge my dependence to almost every Being. Alas, what is the meaning of
that Providential Riddle, That Man is the Lord of the world; That Beast, Fish
and Fowl are his, when there is so many Rivals-that the Title is lost, and one
part of Humanity can pretend so little to a propriety in Rule; That the same
Predicament serves for us, and those things we are said to be Lords of? Man
disposes of Man as he does of a Beast, even to exchanging, selling, and
Slavery. Methinks it is unaccountable; since all are out of the same Dust,
stamped with the same Impression, equal in their Nothingness, both a part
ante, and a part post. Nay their very Souls which animate these grosser
Vehicles, are also equal, only acting differently, by a more or less aptitude
of Organs, or inequality of Education.


Emperor. -- Though we Spirits fell not when the Angels did; yet we have
certainly the same defectibility of Judgment; for two things (especially
Opposites) cannot be both best. Call you a Beggar's Condition despicable and
slavish? It Is certainly the happiest Post in the Creation; and were it possible
for Fate to be guilty of a Caprice, and cast Lots once more about the Disposals
of Emperors and Beggars, I Would petition to renew my Chance; possibly I might the
second time alter my Condition, and come out a happy Beggar.


Beggar. -- Why so?


Emperor. -- Becasue there appears to me a greater happiness in an unenvied
Cottage, than in the Noisie Crowds of Flatterers. Little does the Plebeian know
how heavy a Crown weighs; how great the Trust is, and how hard to be managed.
It Is the Court that is full of Treachery, Ambition, Pride, Bribes, and such a
dreadful Catlaogue of Vices, that it is impossible for the best of Men to arrive
to a greater degree of Goodness there, than a Negation of Evil. The Watch must
be kept so strictly, that there is no time to act virtuously. But in the retired
Solitudes of Poverty, one Third of our Temptations are lost, the uneasiness of
the Sense, causes a search after the quiet of the Mind. We have nothing to
resist in Solitude*, but a few straggling Thoughts; nor nothing to seek after,
but to be happy. There we are free from public Calamities: and private
Enemies, unenvied in every thing but Happiness; and it is impossible to steal
that from us, when we have nothing else to do but to keep it: Nay, if we should
communicate it, we lose nothing, but have more by giving. I could reckon up
Augustus, Dioclesian, Maximinian, Vatius, Emped^cles, etc. who laid by their
Scepters for Spades; and could also mention how happy the Change was; but the
remembrance would make my Crown too uneasy, which now I must bear as well as I
can.


Beggar. -- It Is in vain to wish on either side what cannot be avoided. But, say
Brother, will not the Case be strangely altered by our different Stations in the
other World? -- Methinks I see you sometimes royally seated amongst the
Representatives of your Kingdom, sometimes in private Council, turning over the
Cabala, or darker Mysteries of State, but always looked upon as more than
mortal. Methinks I also see my self injured and over-pow'rd by the Mint of
Damnation, and my Addresses to your Highness, by Friends or Petition, in
agitation; Methinks I see my cold reception, the Meanness of my Concerns lost
amongst Matters of greater Moment, and my Importunity for a Dispatch, answered
by the Insolences of a hundred subordinate Officers; one denies me admittance,
another turns me out, and every one looks upon me an impertinent, worthless
Thing, because I left all my Nobility and Attendance behind me among the Stars.


Emperor. -- By this you may in some measure judge of the distracted Cares of a
Crown; how amongst these numerous Complaints, Petitions, etc. it is impossible
to hear and redress all, time will not permit, and Omnipresence is not conferred to
Earthly Scepters, to act every where, and every thing at once: Think^y' it not
afflicting to a Father to see many of his Children struggling under
Unhappinesses, and whilst he relieves some, others perish; and also that he has
many more under the same Circumstances, that he knows not of.


Beggar. -- Enough; let us not think so much on the Evils of Humanity, as to
lose the sense of that little Good of which it is capable; Not to be happy in
some things, because we cannot in every thing, is an unkind Theft to our selves.
Compare the Distractions of other Crowns to yours, whilst I examine whose
Cottage is meaner than mine; and this (with other like Inferences,) will divert
the black Reflections we have made; An earthly Philosopher could say, Nemo
Miser nisi comparatus. Come, let us not learn of the World below us, but give
them Examples. We cannot miss, if we retire to our Region; for there being
nothing but Equality, it is impossible any one should pretend to be more happy
or miserable than another.


DIALOGUE XIV.
Between Two Spirits that made a Contract to keep a Correspondence, whoever
came to be Embodied first.
The Unbodied Spirit. -- CErtainly he can understand now I have assumed this
Body of Air. -- Holo Brother -- I have been calling these two hours to no
purpose Do you hear me now?


Bodyed Spirit. -- Hear ye! Yes; who are ye? And what is your Business?


Unbody'd Sp. -- What, Have you forgot me your old Comrade, and your Contract?
Has this Lump of Humanity spoiled all your Faculties, or are you ungrateful, or
over-proud of your new Lodging?


Body'd Sp. -- I don't know what you mean by Forgetfulness, or Contract.


Unbody'd Sp. -- That Is very strange: I Am certain, This is the Body you were to
animate, and by consequence, ^ou must be the same Individual that agreed with
me to keep a Correspondence, when you came into this Body. I had forgot my
self, and have been all this time speaking to you in the Language of Spirits,
not knowing it was too fine for the Perceptions of an Organized Body.


Body'd Sp. -- By this you would make me believe a Pre-existent State of Souls
before they come into the Body: But if there be such a State, I have wholly
forgot it; only I have some dark Ideas of things when they are mentioned that I
never saw nor heard of before; which probably may proceed from the Cognizance I
took of 'em before I was imbody'd.


Unbody'd Sp. -- That Is no Argument at all; since that Idea gives you neither
the Species, nor the Form of the Thing spoken of, if neither be mentioned; as
for Instance, If I should tell you in general Terms, That at the West End of
the Vatican at Rome, there is a curious Picture; you would presently form an
Idea of it in your Mind; but perhaps it may be a Saint, instead of a Land-skip:
but to pass over that, have you any Idea of the Language of Spirits?


Body'd Sp. -- None but such as is Organical.


Unbody'd Sp. -- By this you may see your Error again; for Spirits speak one
to another, as Man does, when he speaks to God in his Mind. Again, Man's Voice
is limited; I mean, when he speaks, he is not heard but at such a distance; but
when one Spirit speaks, all the Thousand Millions of Spirits, wherever
dispersed throughout the Creation, have a di^stinct perception of such Speech,
if directed to them all at once; or if directed to any one Spirit, be he never
so far off, he only hears; and not one of all those that are betwixt him and
the Speaker; so that it is as ordinary a thing for Spirits to converse one with
another at the most protracted distances, as it is face to face; but this is
only to your Capacity; for there is no such a thing as distance amongst Spirits;
for they are as near one another, when the whole Coelum Empyreum is betwixt
'em, as they are when both together, and yet they are not like God, every where
at once, or omnipresent.


Body'd Sp. -- This is strange Doctrine to Mortals; -- pray' how do Spiris
move? whether locally by a Medium, or in an instant, or in Time, or how?


Unbody'd Sp. -- None of all this -- for what is impartible, is not moveable;
for, according to Humane Philosophy, (which holds in this Case,) any thing that
is moving, whilst it is moving, is partly in termino a quo, and partly in
termino ad quem; which is inconsistent with Impartibility. Nor can a Spirit
move so, as to pass through a Medium: As for Instance, To go from London to
Rome, or Constantinople, without passing over the distance, or places betwixt
'em: Now every thing that passes, passes through a place equal to it self, (as
suppose through Air, Water, etc. the place that the Body is in, is equal to the
Body which fills it.) But the place equal to an Indivisible Spirit, (speaking
ad Humanum Captum) is a Point; and therefore if an Angel or Spirit, by his
Motion, passes through a Medium, he must necessarily pass through or number
many Points in termino ad quem; which is impossible. To speak yet nearer the
Common Apprehension of Mortals, a Man may in his Mind think of France, and then
immediately of Syria, without thinking of Italy, which is the Medium, betwixt
both: And this comes nearest the Motion of Spirits; now whether this Motion is
effected in Time, or in an Instant. (As thus, When God Almighty commissionated
an Angel to go and appear to Manoah, whether in coming from Heaven he might be
a Day, an Hour, or a Minute; or whether he was there in the same unsuccessive
Moment wherein he received the Commission.) To this we answer in respect of
Men, who are tied up to the gross Rules of Time, Place, Matter, etc. There was
a Flux of Time betwixt the Receipt of the Commission, and the Execution of it:
But in respect of the Nature of Angels, the Receipt of their Commission, the
Execution of it, and a Thousand Years after the Execution of it, were all
included in one Unsuccessive Now: The Reason of it is this, If there were a
Time for the Beginning of an Action, and another Time for the Ending of it,
then there would be Succession, and by consequence Partibility; but that is
inconsistent (as above) with the Nature of an Indivisible Being, as an Angel or
a Spirit are.


Body'd Spirit. But supposing Motion, Time, Place, etc. to be attributed to
Angels and Spirits, in respect to Mankind, as really they are: As it may be
said, A Spirit is in such a Place now, and was not two Hours since. Supposing
(I say) such a way of speaking, in reference to Mankind, how is it feasible for
a Spirit, a Witch, etc. to be so, orto go through the Keyhole of a Door?


Unbody'd Spirit. Well, allowing such a Condescension, ad Humanum Captum, yet
it is a vulgar Error. First, As to Witches: They never do it, it is their
Spirits, and they^ (I mean their Bodies and Animal Life) are all the while ^n
an Examinated Trance, wherein the Devil ^oes make use of their Fancy, to inform
them of what passes at a distance in those Aerial Bo^ies that resemble them,
and in which their ^pirits really are: As Mankind want not ma^y Instances of
such Truths. A Spirit's pas^^ng through a Keyhole is absurdly ridiculous; or
since Matter is not determinative on Spi^^ts, it is all one to them to pass
through Gold, ^lass, or the most Continuous Solidities in Na^^re, as to pass
through Air only. So that ^hen a Spirit assumes an Aerial Body, since (...) it
self is Matter, or a Body, and since ^ere cannot be Penetration of Bodies, it
follows, at a Spirit which is to go through Glass, one, etc. leaves the Aerial
Body which it (...), and only passes through the Glass, Stone, etc. in its own
Nature, and assumes a new^ Body of Air on the other side; and here also may be
a Solution of those strange Riddles, (for so they are to some Mortals,) how a
Witch receives the Wound in the same Part, in which the Aerial Representation
of her received it. As for Instance; A Fallen Angel prompts a Witch to afflict
such a Person: She consents; and being under this Angel's power, he makes use
of natural Methods, so as to invert the ordinary Operation of her Animal
Powers, (as above,) that she falls into a Trance, insensible of Burns, Cuts,
etc. Now this wicked Angel having a permissive Possession of her Spirit, forms
a Body of Air for it, organized and fit for Perception, in which it assaults
and afflicts the Person designed: But in all the Instances that Mankind can
bring of such Aerial Representations that have been struck at, whether in
Humane or Brutal Shape, the Persons that struck never felt that they hit any
thing but Air; which is a certain Evidence that 'twas not the true Body of what
it represented. Now, this wicked Angel being present with the Witch's Spirit,
and taking notice where, and what the Wound would have been, had it been a real
Body, amongst other the Occurrences that he represents to the Witch's Fancy, he
insinuates the Wound, and at the same time inflicts it himself upon the real
Part of the Body which was representatively cut or wounded in the Phantasm; the
Witch all the time believing the whole to be a real Truth, and acted personally.


Body'd Spirit. Possibly it is so. But, Pray, is there a Number of Spirits, or
different Species amongst 'em?


Unbody'd Spirit. Humanely speaking, there is Thousands of Thousands; but in the
Language of Spirits there is no such a gross Term as Number; for Number is a
discrete Quantity, caused by a Division of Continuity: But this is inconsistent
with the Nature of Spirits. -- And as to Difference of Species, to which we
might add Equality, or Inequality, they are Terms adapted to Matter; and
therefore amongst Immaterial Beings, it is the most egregious Nonsense that can
be imagined.


Body'd Spirit. What Is the difference betwixt a Spirit's Perception, and ours?


Unbody'd Spirit. A great deal, Men think, by means of the Senses. Suppose the
Eye: First, There must be an Union betwixt the Sight, and the thing seen; for
Vision is not in Act, except the thing seen is after a certain manner in the
thing seeing; and this not by an Assumption of the Substance, but of the
Similitude of the thing seen, into the Eye. Now this Visive Power having
assumed a Similitude of the thing seen into the Eye, the Intellect abstracts
Universals from it; which Act is called the Perception, and according to this
Perception we judge and act. But it is not so with Spirits, they have no
Perception from divisible or sensible Objects; for what by our Senses we know
of Material Objects, that they know from the Ef^luviums of the Deity. As for
Instance, God is the Cause of every Substance, both as to its Matter and Form;
therefore God, according to his Essence, (which is the Cause of all things) is
the Similitude of all things. Hence Angels and Spirits, when they look upon
God, do (as in a Glass) see and know all Material and Immaterial Objects and
Things whatever, when he pleases to communicate a Knowledge: And thus it is
that Departed Souls have Knowledge of things happening in this Life.


Body'd Spirit. What Is the difference betwixt a Spirit's Thoughts and Language,
since you say that their Language is like our Thoughts?


Vnbody'd Spirit. I have already told you, that as Men have their Perceptions
by means of their Senses, so Spirits have theirs from the immediate Emanations
and Ideas of all things which they see originally in God: This is the manner of
their Perception, and the making known this Perception, by directing the Result
of it to one another, as Men do their Minds to themselves, when they speak to
themselves internally, without Lip or Voice. This, I say, is the Language of
Spirits; which is as different from their Perceptions as the Act of Receiving
and Communicating is amongst Men.


Body'd Spirit. Whether do Spirits and Angels love, (...), are angry or
pleased, etc. as Men are.


Unb^dy'd Spirit. Not at all, it is inconsistent with their Nature, these being
Acts adapted to the Powers of the Sensitive Soul: So that when Speech, Love,
Hate, Fear, Courage, Temper^nce, etc. are attributed to Angels or Spirits, it is
an (...), or a Condescension adapted to Humane Dialect. To Love amongst
Spirits, is to wish Good to one another: To rej^yce, is to rest the Will in
some good Habit: Temperance is a Moderation of the Will, according to the Rule
of the Divine Will: Fortitude is a firm and resolute Execution of the Divine
Will: And so of all other Concupiscible Powers.


Body'd Spirit. Whether can several Spirits be in one plac^ at the same time.


Unbody'd Spirit. I have already told you, that Spirits know no such a thing as
Place; it is as incongruous a Term to their Nature, as Time is. So that, what
you call Place, is the same thing to them as no place; and if so, Spirits,
according to that Notion you have of Place, may be Five Millions together in a
Quart^ Bottle, and yet never a one fe there; but it is impossible to make you
understand the munner how, farther than by a dark Similitude. Suppose Five
Millions of Persons should all desire at the same time to be upon the Top of
the m^nument,, (erected in Remembrance of the (...) of the Fire of London:) Now
th^se Five Millions to be there at the (...)), without justling one another for
^oom^* but thus only by Virtual Application of themselves thither. -- I must be
gone, there is a General Ass^gnation of our Order to meet at the Music of the
Spheres, and if my Place be found empty, my Name will be dashed out of the
Catalogue, upon a Supp^sition that ^ am imbody'd.


Body'd Spirit. Well, I acknowledge my Obligations for this Favor: Pray, let
me converse with you as often as you can. It will not be long but I shall put off
this Clog, and change Circumstances with you; and then I Will be as kind in
informing you of such things as you will also forget when you come into a Body.


DIALOGUE XV.
Betwixt Two Spirits, about the Music of the Spheres.
1. Sp. -- I AM weary with that drumming sort of Noise; there is nothing but an
Eternal Din of one Tune, over and over. There Is better Music, ten to one,
every Bartholomew-Fair.


2. Sp. -- Pray, let me ask you one Question: Is there any Music better than
the Original of all Music?


1. Sp. -- No.


2. Sp. -- Very well: Then since these Musical Diastems, and these harmonious
Motions, which proceed from the different Positions and Heighths of the
Planets, and the Correspondent Symmetry of the Heavens, are the first Original
of Music, all other Harmony which the lower World pretends to, are but
Imitations of this great Original. So that those little tickling Fancies of
Ionick, Dorick, Phrygian, and other Measures, are but a different way of Trial
to come the nearest ours; and if Mortality could find out the true Spherical
Music, they would never seek farther, nor alter it for any other, because it is
impossible to desire or choose an Imperfection, when Perfection stands by. But
it is no wonder the World below us think the Music of the Spheres a Fable, when
one of our own Order should undervalue it at such a rate. But perhaps you are
of the same Opinion as Mankind, and these are only Words of Course, because you
have a mind to be upon the Ramble.


1. Sp. Truly, I am not very well satisfied, whether I hear any thing, or no.


2. Sp. Yes, you hear, but without Concern; which makes me believe, that you
belong not to ours, but to the Animal Order, and in that Order you are designed
to animate an Ass, which, amongst all Creatures, never heeds Music. You, and
all Mankind, must grant, that the Planets move, and that Sound necessarily
proceeds from Motion, and that this Sound must either be sweet or harsh: Now,
if a fixed Observation of Numbers moderate the Motion, it effects a Symphonous
Harmony, consonant to such a Motion; but if it be not governed by Measures,
there proceeds an unpleasant Noise. But in this admirable Structure of the
Heavens, there is nothing but settled Rules and Proportions, curious Differences
of Magnitude, Celerity, and Local Distances, which are constantly
circumagitated through the Etherial Orbs; as in the following Figure.



It Is this Systeme that all Musicians imitate; and those that come the nearest
it, have made their Calculations from Arithm^tical Proportions, in which this
last Age has exceeded all former ones, having now laid down Rules to reduce all
Audibles into Visibles, or Visibles into Audibles; that is, can give Directions
for Building a House, agreeable to the Measures of a Musical C^mpo^^re; or can
play the Proportions of any ^ouse now built, upon a Musical Instrument. If
Mankind ^earches a little deeper in the Music^l (...), they will find out a
Device to imi^^^^ our (...) Music by a voluntary Self-Motion, or frame
Instruments that shall play themselves.


1. Sp. Say you so? Indeed, the Novelty of that would cost me many a Ramble.


2. Sp. But why love Music on Earth, more than here?


1. Sp. Because I find by my Heaviness, I am grown so like a Body, that I shall
soon have such a Relation; and you know it is natural for all Beings to be
affected with something like themselves: However, I Will be sure (if I can
remember) to inform the Lower World of the Reasonableness of Spherical Music;
and what Measures they ought to take, to come as near it as possible. In the
mean time, Farewell.


2. Sp. -- Hold: If you design to visit the Lower World, you may be serviceable
to 'em, if you put 'em in mind of using less Physic, and more Music, since it
alters all the Passions of the Mind, and is the readiest way to correct Grief,
Anger, Pity, Love, Fears, Desires, and all other Passions of the Mind: And if
the Mind may be thus regulated, their Physicians need not to be told how great
an Influence it has upon the Body. Another Remark you may add, (if you are like
to find Credit,) that it is only the Music of the Spheres that keeps Angels and
Spirits in a perpetual Health.


DIALOGUE XVI.
Between Two Spirits of a poor Doctor, his Friend, and a modern Philosopher,
alias, Sharper.
Debtor. BAnkrup^y! Oh the dreadful Sound is sufficiently confoundative without
the thing it self; a Dun to my Breakfast every Morning, and to play at Hide all
day long for fear of the Counter-Verm^n; and all this too, (if Fare knows
what is what,) by the Prodigality of a hopeful Son, who, with Cocks, Houses, and
half a dozen Misses, could thrust a dozen such Estates as mine, into the narrow
Compass of a few Bonds, Bills, Mortgages, etc. Oh these unwelcome Lights of
Heaven, how fast they number out Use-Mony-Days! Alas, what an unhappy Spirit am
I! How gladly would I change Conditions with a Vegitable Soul, though it were to
animate an humble Shrub!


Friend. -- How Brother, animate Shrubs, and sleep in such a glorious Star as
this, where you can have no dis^urbance at all; pray lie a little farther, and
take the other Nap, and you will be well.


Debt. -- I cannot sleep for the Serivener, he bites me so; and if by chance I
fall into a Slumber, I dream of the poor Man's Box, and the Quarter-day, or
else that I see my Son on Horseback, riding into Quagmires.


Friend, -- Why do you rave of Son, Quarter-day, etc. and are not yet got into
the other world?


Debt. -- But I Am a going; and my Misfortunes will be such there, as I have
just now told you.


Friend. -- Alas Poor wretch; and don't you know how to prevent all this?
Arise, and follow me; there is a Company of Wits that inhabit the Planet
Mercury, will certainly put you into some way to avoid your Misfortunes; nay,
though they are such are inevitably fated to you.


Debt. -- Alas, my Son's Horses have eaten me into a Consumption, that I can
scarce get up; but however I Will try, since you talk of Remedies; Come, let us be
going.


Friend. -- Holo Mercurial Philosophers, open the Wicket there.


Philoph. -- Who Is that? His Bawling has made my Brain miscarry of a hopeful
Notion. -- However, come in.


Debt. -- I Am sorry for that; I wish I could miscarry of mine too; -- Bur
where is the Philosopher? I cannot see him.


Philosopher. -- Look up, Friend, Do You expect a Wit to lie groveling upon
Thresholds.


Debt. -- Bless me! he is hanged up in a Basket yonder. -- Pray Mr. Philosopher.
why so high?


Philosoph. -- I walk in the Air, and gaze upon the Sun, and if my Intellect
were not thus suspended, I should think as little Thoughts as you do. -- But
what is the occasion of your Visit?


Debt. -- I Am going into the other World where I shall be torn ^n pieces with
Debts and Usury; which to avoid, I would either pa^ in current Money or Words.
The first I shall not be able to raise; and the last I Am not Ma^^er of; therefore
I Am come to ask your Coun^^l about it.


Philosoph. -- There Is no need of the first, if your (...) were double, I Will
teach you presently how to come off. -- Stay a little; -- Ay, that is right, Oh
happy Art! This it is, not to (...) Thoughts to a Threshold; but l^ke a ^ird
^etter'd in a ^^^ing, to allow 'em Liberty to play and (...) in the Air. -- In
the first place, you must (...) the Moon, and keep it under Lock and K^y Thirty
days before your Day of Payment comes.


Debt. Why so?


Philosoph. -- If you pay Use by the Months, and there be no Moon to measure
out these Months, then no Use can be demanded.


Debt. -- I don't know how to effect such a Task; -- I think it is far better to
hang my self before the Day of Payment, and then my Creditors will never
prosecute me.


Philosoph. -- No, no, Rou talk like one that was never hanged up in a Basket;
-- Don't you know the Law provides two days, one for Citation, or Demand of
Payment, and the other for Payment?


Debt. -- Well; and what then?


Philos. -- It Is impossible they should come both at a time; so that one day is
a warning to get ready, and run away the next. But this is not half; you are to
learn the all-convincing Speech beside.


Debt. -- Pray what is that?


Philos. -- You must learn to Banter where you find your Creditor a little
soft: As for instance; When they ask you for Money, fetch 'em out a Talisman,
or any other thing, and ask 'em what it is? -- If they say, they cannot tell;
reply, Do you ask Money, and are so very a Dunce? If they ask you for the
Interest, ask 'em what they mean, or what kind of Creature that is? They Will
answer, It Is an Increase of Money by Months, Days, etc. Ask whether the Sea
grows bigger by an increase of all the Rivers that run into it? If they say,
No; Ask 'em, With what a Conscience they can expect their Money should
increase; and so you may treat 'em all to the End of the Chapter.


Debt. -- I don't know what to say to it, for I believe these Shams will not take,
especially since I have to deal with a Shole of Horse-Leeches, called
Scriveners, Bankers? 'twill pass with Tailers, Ba^bers, and a few Drapers: but
-- I must be going, Farewell Mr. Basketteer.


Philosopher -- Pray as you go along, Remember the poor Prisoners.


DIALOGUE XVII.
Between Two Spirits on the Ramble, and a Flight of Witches, with their Guides.
1. Sp. HEY day! What Is the meaning of this? Yonder Is Materiality flying in the
Air: What can be the Supporter?


2. Sp. Necromancy, perhaps, or Sorcery, or Witchcraft. Come, Shall we put a
Stop to it? I Am sure none of the Creation has any Business there with Tubs,
Caldrons, etc.


1. Sp. There Is a Colt, and a Calf too: Perhaps they are the People of the
World in the Moon, and are going to some Fair.


2. Sp. What! Going to a Fair out of their Globes? No. Come, let us attack 'em;
at the worst it can but be the Devil, and we are as strong as he, and less
innocent.


1. Sp. Right: -- Let Us look big, and speak boldly. -- Stand, there: What
Commission have ye in these Quarters, you -- Tub-man? What! Have ye young ones
with ye? Ye shall not wag an Ace farther, till we know upon what E^rand ye are
posting.


1. Fallen Sp. -- Why, ye Etherial Stragglers: Are we bound to give you an
Account?


1. Sp. Ye must do it, or disoblige your Hags, to defend your selves.


2. Fallen Sp. -- Don't prejudice my Caldron, and I Will tell ye whither I Am
marching with my Tribe.


1. Sp. -- Say then.


2. Fallen Sp. -- Into the French King's Cellar for two or three Hours, to
treat my faithful Servants there, with every thing that is grateful to their
Senes.


1. Sp. -- Very well. And you, Mr. Tubvolant, say which Way bound, -- quickly,
-- or we'll turn your Diddi-Birds out of their Nest; do you lend 'em Wings, if
you can, to bear up their Garbidge.


1. Fall. -- Thus have I seen a laden Pinna^e braved by a meaner empty Vessel.
-- Well, -- I also am upon the same Journey; and if ye will come along with us,
you will see such Entertainment as none of your Order ever saw before.


1. Sp. -- No, -- We must have no Society with Apostates. -- Come, turn out of
your Lodgings, we must have the Tub; mount your Servants upon that Colt.


Witches. We are a Dozen of us already, and therefore too many, unless we must
ride upon the Main, and hang upon the Tail.


1. Sp. -- Yes, yes; any how, according as you can agree; we give no Orders in
that. -- So, that is very well. -- Come, turn out of the Caldron, and bestride
your Calf; he looks as if he wanted to suck you. -- Very well: -- Now,
Lady-Haggs, jog on softly, that ye don't jade your Coursers before your
Journey's End.


2. Fallen Sp. Remember this when you come to be Incorporate: Assure your
selves, we shall be equal with you then.


1. Sp. -- Come, don't prate, for fear ye stumble, and lose a Bunch. -- We know
your Power well enough, that it is limited. No more: -- Troop off, and show your
Shapes.


2. Sp. -- This Plunder will be extremely welcome to Aquarius: You heard of the
Misfortune of his Water Pots being broken the other Day, by the Retrograde
Dragon; Ha! -- will not these serve in their Room as well as may be?


1. Sp. -- If they had been both of a sort, it had been better; this Tub will
be subject to leak. But perhaps Aries can hammer the Caldron into Two with his
Horns, and afterward push it into the shape of the Pitchers: And if so, we'll
make a Bone fire of the Tub, and laugh at the World below, who will shoot it
with their Telescopes, for a prodigious Comet.


2. Sp. -- Right, again. -- But methinks, the Pleasantness of this Enterprise
seems to be abated, by the Concern of getting unperceived into our Lodgings:
Suppose we should be met with by the Watch, 'twill spoil the Humor on it.


1. Sp. -- Pish, never trouble your self about that^ Leave the Management of it
to me.


DIALOGUE XVIII.
Between Two Spirits that are to be Mayor and Mayoress of a certain
Corporation: And when they come into their Bodies.
1. Sp. I Have just now been with the Secretary of Fate, to be resolved about
some Corporal Questions, for I judged my Imbodying near at hand. But 'twas not
that that pushed on my Curiosity so much, as to know why I had such an
unaccountable Inclination to your Company.


2. Sp. And are you resolved now?


1. Sp. Yes: I Am to be Lord Mayor of -- in 1740. and you are to be my Lady
Mayoress.


2. Sp. I the Mayoress? Why sure! Am not I as fit to be my Lord Mayor as you?


1. Sp. I suppose you will always think so, or else you will break the Custom;
but Fate has designed your Mould different from (...): You are to have a Body
of a (...), thin, (...) sort of Clay; and, in short, you^ll be the weaker
Vessel, and therefore designed for other Uses than the Burden of a Sword and
Mace.


2. Sp. What Uses, (my Dear:) Methinks I begin to be in Love, before I know
what it is.


1. Sp. Did you take notice of those three Souls that fled by just now?


2. Sp. Yes: Are they to be our Relations, when we come into the other World?


1. Sp. No nearer than your Son and two Daughters. There were two other Souls
that used to be much in their Company about Twenty Years since, which in a
little time will be your Father and Mother: But I shall spoil the Business, by
reckoning up Genealogies. I Am told, you will be very severe to me.


2. Sp. In what?


1. Sp. Unkind Prudence, and more cruel Custom will bind you to hard Laws, and
teach you this Lesson; Starve your self, to keep your Slave poor.


2. Sp. -- That Is a hard Lesson, indeed: But perhaps it is taught, to avoid
harder.


1. Sp. -- Right: For those that don't stand upon their Guard, are easily
trepanned, and wheedl'd into a Thousand Misfortunes; especially, that great one
of Rash Weddings. But to avoid all this, let you and I finish our Courtship
here.


2. Sp. I Am afraid Pre-existent Contracts will be forgot, or, at least, raise
Jealousies amongst our Rival-School fellows.


1. Sp. Never fear that: Assume one Body of Air, and I Will prepare another, and
then we'll talk it once over again.


2. Sp. But what Dress is A-la-mode?


1. Sp. Ruffs and Commodes will be out of Fashion: But what need you take care
of that? Any Dress is every Dress, if there is no other present to compare it
by. -- Ay, that will do. -- O the Charms of the Petticoat! -- Methinks I Am
already got within the Influence of that Command, Increase and Multiply.


2. Sp. This is a near way of Wooing indeed. Where Is your Billet-Deuxes, your
Vows and Dying? --


1. Sp. Hold, no more of that Nonsensical Cant; it is all but an honest way of
Fornication at a distance.


2. Sp. ^ye upon this Doctrinal Part of Wooing: The World below would think
this a strange Name for their Tendernesses


1. Sp. It Is neither better nor worse; if I love a woman it is no more in other
terms, than I would sleep with her; so that soueezing Hands, grasping Knees,
kissing, hugging etc. are Infant-Offers on both sides at something else; it is
the extremity of these Desires that sheds the Blood of Rivals, prompts to
Suicide, and Tenants Bedlam; -- when perhaps the Party all the while believed
it to be pure Love, innocent Gratitude, harmless Esteem, refined Friendship,
etc. Not considering that true Friendship increase by the multitude of Rivals,
and that no Man was ever angry with his Neighbor for loving his Wife's Soul;
when you come into the other world, you will find no Iilts nor Bullies in Bedlam
for Love, no Affronts taken at the Encomiums of a Woman's Mind, no desperation
for want of an Union of Souls, In short, all Languishments, Sighs, Vows.
Protestations, and all the long Christ-Cross Row of Lovers is nothing else but
the plain So, So, in another Dress. Friendship is another thing, and is too
sacred to be mentioned at the same time as Love; it has no dependence at all on
the Body, farther than that has a relation to the Mind, but Friendship is a
Subject too foreign for monopolizing Lovers, and may be discussed when we have
nothing else to do; therefore in short, what Stomach have you to an honest
Prolification? Am I yours now; or must I tarry till a real Naturalization reads
the same Lesson to you over again in another World?


2 Sp. I Will consider on it; and in the mean time, if I should consent, I hope
you will see me better rigged than the rest of my Neighbors.


1 Sp. Yes, yes, never fear that.


2 Sp. -- Then I Am yours; -- but I will not say, I love you, lest you should tell
me again what Love is.


DIALOGUE XIX.
Between the Parcae, (viz. Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos,) and a Bookseller.
Parcae -- UP Mr. Letter-monger, and prepare for your Body, we are drawing out
the first Thread of your Temporality.


Books^ller. -- What mine? Pray lay that Distaffe by, and take another; do
dear Lady, and let not me be a Prisoner these hundred years, -- I Am afraid of
Incorporation; for even Divinity-Books, are a mere Drug; but perhaps in a
hundred years more, Times may be better: I never entreated before, deny me not
now.


Parcae. -- We'll grant your Request as soon as any Body's else; but the Dice
are cast, and there is no resisting Fate; you must budge whether you will or no:
Come, don't think to wheedle, and persuade us like Customers; you aren't got
behind the Counter yet.


Bookseller. -- I know it very well; -- and since there is no Entreaty that can
prevail I Have done. Now must I stand Centry seven years with my fingers in my
mouth, and bareheaded, the better to receive the Impression of the cunning
Mystery. -- Methinks I have got it already; -- Now for a fine Fetch with that
Author about Supernumeraries, or Printing a greater Number secretly, than I
contracted for; Cannot I handsomely interlope with my Neighbor H -- 's Copy,
it is a very good one, and the Author is at work again. Suppose to get the next
Copy, I go and out-bid for this, now it is too late, and tell the Author he was
Wheedled and Choused out of his Labors. -- I must squeeze that Book binder,
'twill help toward the loss of my late Impression. -- This Copy-Money runs
away with a great deal of my Gains, Cannot I turn Plagiary, and with a handsome
sleight of Hand, put a new Title upon that old Book; or were it not best to turn
Author my self, by pillaging other Men's Works -- Right, that will do, I Will part
with no more Copy-Money these seven years. -- This Collection which I have
already made, would pass, with a good Title Page. -- M -- R -- and I, can
invent some specious one for it. It Is not a Farthing matter whether it is
agreeable to the Subject within treated of: -- But how shall I come off with
those Scandalous Pamphlets, I shall print under the Name of John a Nokes upon
Tower Hill, Grub-street. the Strand, or any where else? Shall I suffer for
another's Pamphletteering, for telling News before it happens, and sometimes
such as always has, is, and will be a Notorious Lie? No I thank ye, so long as
I know how to be in League with the Messenger of the Press, and some body else,
I Will run the hazard. -- Now for a Body! with all the satisfaction imaginable,
for when I come into the other World, possibly I may attain to be as crafty as
my Neighbors, and if so, I Will venture one step further, to get above 'em: I
have only one Request to make, (Dear Mistress of Fate) that you will send but a
few Booksellers, and a great many Authors into the World, for these Threescore
and Ten Years.


DIALOGUE XX.
Betwixt a Transmigrated Soul, and an Unbodied Spirit.
Transmig. Spirit. WELL, how fare our Friends, Brother? I long to be a Member
again of your Society, and to be freed from the strange Alliances I have
contracted.


Unbody'd Spirit. Why, what Relations have you now?


Tr. Sp. My present Relations are a forward Crop of Beans, but what Kindred I
shall meet with the next Harvest, I know not: I came out of a Sprat the last
Year, having finished my Circuition and Change through all the Watery
Inhabitants.


Unbody'd Sp. Pray, what sort of Fish gave you the most troublesome
Entertainment?


Tr. Sp. The Porpus, by far, to be sure every Westerly Wind I was Drunk with
tumbling over, and over, if it had not been for a pitying Collier, who by a
lucky Shot made a hole just big enough to creep out of my Prison, I might have
lain in Salt pickle these forty years longer; but it is all one, for I was
turned out of one Prison, to be Chained in another; for I cannot expect to
cl^nge the Laws of Fate, and have my Transmigrations finished before another
Thousand Years more are expired.


Unb. Sp. Why so?


Tr. Sp. Because I must run through all things Terrestrial, Marine, and
Volatile, before I have finished my Task, and expiated the wickedness of my
Pre-existent State, which expiation always lasts three thousand years; it is an
unalterable Decree, that all Spirits are to be purified by such a Discipline,
only here is the difference; that Spirits are to actuate mostly in those
Creatures that are of the same Dispositions as they were; as for Instance: The
Justice of Fate assigns such as are Angry and Malicious into Serpents, the
Ravenous into Wolves, the Fraudulent into Foxes, and so of the rest; only here
and there is a good Spirit, whose actions being most rational, transmigrates out
of one Man into another, finishing most of the three Thousand years in humane
Bodies, and as for other Creatures, the Fates take care that they speedily die,
that that part of the Transmigration may be quickly over, and reason good for
if by chance they should be unjustly confined beyond the three Thousand Years,
there is no amends to be made, but some preferment amongst the Officers of Fate,
who are always exempt from the Duties of Humanity.


Unb. Sp. Pray give an Instance of some Soul that has animated several Humane
Bodies.


Tr. Sp. I my self was first infused into (...), then passed into Euphorbus,
then into (...), then (...) Pyrrhus, then into Pythagoras; then I left
Humanity, and Transmigrated into an Elephant, and so on through every distinct
Species in the Creation, and now at last I Am got into a Bean.


Unb. Sp. I can get into a Bean too, if I please: But here is the Question; Is
this Bean, my proper Residence, and am I, by a Virtual Contact, confined more
to it, than to any other Being, or Place whatever? I am rather of Opinion, that
all this noise about Transmigration is no more than thus. That such as are of
an equal Temper, Judgment, Inclination, etc. may be said to be unanimous, or
acted by the same Spirit, especially if they live in different Ages. I cannot
conceive it to be any thing else, but, like Care, Motion, Study, etc. of some
dead Person appearing in some living one; and thus you, if you acted
Pythagoras, you were no more Euphorbus, Hermotinus, or Pyrrhus, than as you had
an Inclination to the several Excellencies that appeared in those Persons, and
thus a Transmigration into Fishes, Trees, Plants, etc. is nothing else but a
study of their Nature.


Tr. Sp. You might have added, That it is a Doctrine that has not been received
in the lower World these many Years; and that it is also believed, that 'twas a
politic Juggle to make the Age Virtuous, by suggesting, that if Persons lived
ill Lives, they should suffer such and such dreadful Transmigrations after
Death; but you will find to your Sorrow, when you come to put off your first
Body, that all is matter of Fact, and no Politic Juggle.


Unb. Sp. When it comes to it, I Will believe it, but not before, since
Pythagoras, who is affirmed to be the greatest Patron of this Doctrine, did
also teach, That the Substantive Unity of one Number, is not the Unity of
another, and if so, there is no Transmigration of one Animal into the Life of
another different Animal, but a continuance (as long as there is a Being) under
the Law of its own Nature, and particular Species; Species is not coincident
with Species; and this is also implied by one of Pythagoras's Symbols, viz. We
must not wear the Image of God in a Seal-Ring; that is, as God cannot be
resembled, or included in Corporeal matter, so a Humane Spirit (which is the
Image of God) must not stoop so low as to actuate meaner Nature than the
Rational.


Tr. Sp. Pythagoras held a Correspondence with Spirits, and could not be
mistaken, what Ins^ances you have brought, are none of his, ^imon, Lenophanes,
Cratinus, Aristophon, Her^ippus, and others, have ascribed many things to
Pythagoras, which he never said nor wrote. -- But you will be better satisfied
when you come to make an Experiment your self.


Unb. Sp. It Is no matter whether they are his or no, they are truth, and truth
never clashes with truth, but is always the same: But I suppose you are in a
Dream, instead of, in a Bean, or I would advise you to gape, for here is a
shower of Rain, which will help on with your Germination, and haste your Change
into a Cabbage.


DIALOGUE XXI.
Amongst the whole Consistory of Spirits, Examining a Heretic Soul, about some
new Doctrines held forth in Opposition to the Common received Opinions of the
Aetherial Fraternity.
Consistory. PRoduce the Prisoner, and his Pamphlet; and let us hear what he can
say in proof of his new Doctrines; if we admit of one Innovation here, no
wonder the World below us is all in Flames and Divisions.


Register of Fate. He is ready here, and his Pamphlet too -- Will ye be pleased
that I, or he read.


Consist. No, let him begin, and make his Defense to every particular Article
as he goes along.


Prisoner. I accept the freedom of making my Defense to the Mysterious Truths
that I have discovered, as a very great Favor, and shall without any Preface
begin as follows.

The First Cannon I ^ay down is, That the Sun and Moon are no Planets (as is
vulgarly believed) but the two Eyes of the World, and that which you call
Eclipses, is nothing else but the Worlds winking when it is sleepy.


Consist. How the World sleepy? Prove that.


Pr. You Will allow the World to be Matter, and as soon as it was created, to be
sent of an Errand, and ride Post until this very Minute, without an^
intermission whatever: You will also grant* that the whole is of the same
nature as all its parts, and that motion wears away, and destroys what is
material, unless it have some Reparations, it is impossible always to run, move,
act, etc. I speak of particular parts of Matter, and the same also holds good
concerning the whole. I know the great Objection that you will make, and
therefore will Obviate it, to save your labor, viz. It Is impossible to pretend
to particular Functions in Nature, and at the same time to be asleep. -- To
which, I Answer. -- That the Soul of the World is never sleepy, no more than
the Spirit in Humane Bodies; but you cannot deny it impossible for a Man in's
Sleep, to Walk, Saddle Horses, Mow, Plow, etc. of which, there are Instances
enough; just so the Soul of the World follows on its Task, though its material
frame may be asleep; for if it did not it would break its Commission, by
leaving some part of the World in too long a Darkness; but this is not a
Position entertained only by me, take the Sentiments of the lower World upon
it, some of which call the Eclipses (...), or the Labors of the Moon, some
shot at it to keep it awake, some held up Torches, and sounded Instruments of
Brass to ease it: Whence one of their Poets. Cum frustra resonant era
auxiliaria Lunae. Metam. Lib. 4.

And another. Una laboranti peterit succurrere Lunae. Juven. Sat. 6. All which
considered, perhaps may render the Doctrine as reasonable as it is new.


Consist. -- Well, we shall weigh your Reasons by an^ ^y, what is your next
Thesis.


Pr. Second Canon. That the Constellations in the Heavens, called the
Dragon's-Head and Tail, are nothing else but pieces of a pickled Whale. To
prove which, I have the Man in the Moon to be my Voucher, who is a person of so
great Credit, and Reputation, that Noah made him the Boston of his Ark. His
Relation is this, That one Morning, during the Flood, being very curious to
take his leave of an old Neighbor or two that were got upon a Windmill, to
secure themselves from Drowning as long as they could, the Moon being at Full,
(that is broad awake) and according to her usual Method going to take a Draught
of Sea Water, (which by the way, is the reason why Tides swell, on purpose for
a full Draught) she sucked up a Whale, and the Boston of the Ark at once, with a
bundle of Cable Ropes at his back, but being not used to such Victuals, she
pickled the Fish, and presented it to the Astrologick Souls (who have eat up
all but the Head and Tail,) but kept the Boston to be her Valet de Chamber.


Consist. A very strange Relation, but we shall know whether true or no, when
we have sent a Messenger for the Man in the Moon: In the mean time proceed.


Pr. Third Cannon. That the Moon is drunk once a Mouth; I don't positively
assert this, but am willing to recant if any of you can show me a better reason
why her Face should be so red, when she takes a dose of the great Salt Bowl,
alias the Sea.


Consist. We shall consider of that also -- proceed.


Pr. Fourth Cannon. That the occasion of the Universal Deluge, was the Tears of
the Devil and his Angels, who wept for grief to be routed and cast out of
Heaven: They had two Designs by their Tears, for when they found they could not
get in again, they hanged about the Concave and Battlements thereof, as Flies
do upon the Cieling of Houses, weeping as well to case themselves as to be
revenged of Mankind, so finding themselves to be very many, they wept a
numerous Company of Clouds, which were all that time in falling down upon the
Earth, as is betwixt Adam and Noah; but I Am not so conceited and positive, as
to believe this the reason, if you can give me a better. -- But however I must
beg the liberty to be positive in my next Cannon, viz.


Fifth Cannon. -- That the cause of Winds flying backward and forward, is the
breathing of the World, just as Mankind sucks breath in and out. To prove this
(for I know you expect no less than a Demonstration) I need not say you must
consider, (for you do,) That there can be no Effect without a Cause, no Motion
without a Mover: The Opinions that pass in this, and the lower World too, have
not been enough examined, viz. That the Sun, Moon, and Stars being Monstrous
Bodies, and continually upon the hurry it is supposed, that they moving, drive
the Winds, along with 'em, and that the difference of their Motions, causes
different Winds, or an Agitation of the Air, this, and that way; which is
impossible, because then we should have no Westerly Winds, most of the Erratick
Stars moving Westward, which hinder the Winds from coming that way; besides,
all Southern and Nothern Winds would be unnatural, but we know that they are as
common as Easterly Winds. Nor would the Rarification of Water (as the
Philosophers in the lower World Dream) be enough to supply such great Winds,
and Hurricanes, as sometimes happen, for they only proceed immediately from the
lungs of the World, when it has caught cold, or is disposed to Laugh or
Whistle* which makes the Air fly faster out. I might add here, instead of
putting it into another Cannon. -- That all Earthquakes proceed from the
sighing of the World when it is in a melancholy Humor, for it raising up its
Body (as Man does his Breast when he sighs) and being brittle where it has the
fewest Ribs (I mean Mines, Quarries, etc. as vulgarly called) the Buildings,
and Cities standing in those places, tumble in into's Bowels to secure
themselves from a transport into the World of the Moon. -- Well, Gentlemen, I
hope it is your Silence that gives Consent unto these Truths, and not an
Amazement at their Novelty. In Confidence whereof, I proceed to my

Sixth Cannon, viz. That Stars are the Bubbies of the World, at which all
Astrologers suck, and that all that don't love Astrology were put out to Nurse,
and wein'd with grosser Diet. -- But I beg your Pardon (Gentlemen!) I turned
over a wrong Leaf; this is your own received Principle, therefore no need to
prove it, I meant thus -- That it is as possible for an Ass to drink up the
Moon, as to cure Wounds by Sympathy.


Consist. Ay, indeed now you say something, that is, as much as to say it is
possible for an Ass to suck out one of the Eyes of the World; for so you called
it but just now; but prav before you prove it, prove a possibility that it may
be proved.


Pr. Pray, Gentlemen, let me have fair play, I mean the liberty of a
Philosopher -- If I prove it, I also prove a possibility of proving it: Don't?


Consist. Yes.


Pr. Very well. To proceed then. I am to tell you that my Correspondence from
the other World is very good and creditable, and it is often found there, that
the Man travels in pains of Childbirth, when the Woman her self is Delivered
without pain: That if some sort of Leaves are rubbed (whilst growing) upon a
Corn, VVart, etc. that Corn, or Wart shall die as the Leaf withers away: --
Thus small ideal parts, or fancied Representatives of what is real, have the
same Sympathetick Effect, that a true Cause would have, when you come into the
other World, read Sir Kenelm Digby's Works in this kind. Now those that can
deny an Ass to have no Fancy, deny themselves any: But to be short, and give
you an Instance that is matter of Fact. One of my Correspondents (Ludov. vives)
gave me an account of a certain People that did imprison an Ass for drinking up
the Moon; the manner was thus: -- The Ass being driven to the Water to drink,
the Moon shined very bright, and reflected in the water just where the Ass
drunk; the Ass fancied strongly, pulled hard to draw in the Moon, and it had
the effect accordingly, though some were so silly as to believe the Moon being in
danger, slipped out of sight behind a Cloud. Hereupon the Ass was brought to the
Bar, to receive a Sentence according to his Deserts; and as the Senate were
gravely debating the matter, one starts up, a little wiser perhaps than the
rest, and made the short following Speech. -- Gentlemen, It Is my private
Opinion, (and I hope not unreasonably) that it is no trifling business for our
Town to loose its Moon; and I know but of one way to recover it again, viz. by
giving the Ass a strong Vomit, to weaken his Fancy, for it is that that keeps
the Moon a Prisoner in his Maw. -- No, says another, I think it much better
that the Ass be cut up, and the Moon taken out of him; in short, they handled
the Ass so severely, that he had forgot his Supper, and the Moon stole whole,
and undigested again into its own place against the next Night, but ever after
played at Bo-peep, when she saw the Ass come near the Water. -- Gentleman, it is
all matter of Fact, and as great a truth as my next Position.


Seventh Cannon. That those Devils that were furthest pursued by Michael and
his Angels, viz. as far as the middle Region of the Air, are all Tailors, and
cut out the Clouds into Shapes of Hogs, Trees, Ships, Dromedaries, etc. on
purpose to be talked on and wondered at by the ignorant Country People of the
World below.


To prove which, you may be pleased to remember, the Prince of Wicked Angels
fell by Pride in endeavoring to be like his Maker; and when he was excluded,
and chased out of Heaven, he could not forget the Notion, but would yet be
imitating, and make the Representations of all Creatures in Clouds, and
Condensed Bodies of Air, I might (if there was occasion, to strengthen this
Argument) add, that he has also his Oracles, Miracles, Sacrifices, Priests, in
short above one half of the World his true and faithful Servents, and all this
because the old Notion of Imitation was so deeply rooted in his mind. -- Now it
being proved, that the Prince of fallen Spirits, does act so and so; it
follows, that all the subordinate Mob have an Itch to imitate their Head, it
being a great truth: Regis ad Exemplum totus Componitur Orbis. Subjects will be
imitating their King, and Children their Parents, let 'em act good or bad. By
Tailor, and cutting out Clouds, I mean only Metaphorically a shaping of Clouds,
and I shall think none of you Heretics, if you call 'em Carpenters, or
Statuaries.


Consist. -- Well, and the next.


Pr. That never any Spirit was sent into a Humane Body, to join with it as its
proper half, or as a convenient residence, but as into a Prison for Debt,
purely for Debt; and not (as is pretended) for rambling, or other
Extravagancies.

To prove which, you need only to consult the Records of our Honorable Court
of Equity, and you will find the Decrees generally run thus: That having upon the
humble Suit of the Plantiff A, impartially weighed and considered the Defendant
B's Charge, wherein is proved, that besides bilking his Lodging, he never paid
for the cleansing his Wings, nor whitening his Wand; be it therefore Enacted by
the Prerogative of this Honorable Court of Spirits, That the said B, be
forthwith transported into the other World, and be kept close Prisoner in a
Humane Body for Seventy two Years (or some other Number, proportioned to the
nature of the Debt.) -- And this is farther proved by my Correspondents in the
other World, who tell me, they often get into the Ear to listen if there be any
subject of dissolution, and sometimes mount up into the Eye, and take a view of
the Skies, their old Lodgings; and when the Eye (that is to say, the Wicket
door, or rather the Grate of the Prison) is closed up, it is more terrible to
'em, then Garnishing, or double Irons to a Criminal; and thus much for
Incorpation Penalties.


Eighth Cannon. It Is as easy a thing for Ships to sail in the Clouds of the
Air, as in the Sea, and it is an Invention that will be found out when Mankind
shall discover the way into the World of the Moon.

This Cannon consists of two parts, viz. Hypothetick and Prophetic, to prove
the Hypothesis. -- Clouds are formed in the Air either ordinarily, or
extraordinarily; ordinarily by the Exhalations of thin and moist Vapors, just
as the steam of a boiling Caldron ascends, which meeting together, and justling
in the air, by little and little are condensed into thick Clouds, or airy
Rivers, which by degrees empty themselves again into the Sea, as all other
Rivers do upon the Earth. Extraordinarily, when several Winds meet together (as
it is frequent in some Seas) the equal strife causes a whirling violent
ascension of fighting Particles, which form a Vacuum in the shape of a leaden
Pipe, or Pump as high as the Clouds, but Nature abhorring a Vacuum, fills that
vast Pipe with Water, by way of Suction or drawing up. So that presently there
are formed Clouds of many Millions of Tuns of Water, which can easily enough
bear up a Ship, for water looses not its nature in being less* as is evident by
a Ship swimming as well in Twenty Fathom deep, as Twenty thousand. Nor has it
less power in the Air, than on the Earth; for a Tub of Water upon the top of a
House, will bear up a Hat, Stick, etc. as easily as the Well in the Ground,
from whence that water was taken. But though we have proved, that Ships may
sail in the Air, we shall not promise prosperous Voyages, which brings me to the
Prophetic part of my Cannon, viz. That Mankind shall discover the way into the
World of the Moon, when they find out the way of Sailing in the Air; I could
prove this also, but that it would lessen the Credit of Prophesies, which admit
of no demonstration, but matter of fact: Therefore I shall wave it, not
desiring to be believed, till it be fulfilled.


Consist. That Is reasonable enough, -- What else have you to offer?


Pr. Ninth Cannon. That Saturn is neither Base nor Ten^r, but Counter-Tenor in
the Music of the Spheres.

I have my own reasons for this Negative, and I expect the same liberty that
the Philosophers have in the World below, that is, Not to prove Negatives. Let
all the Musical Souls amongst ye, prove the affirmative, and I Will not only
yield the Cause, but give 'em both my Ears for a demonstration so soon as I
have 'em. But to proceed, if I may speak without offense, or particular
Reflections on this Honorable Consistory, who are now my Judges, I have a
great many more Negatives to offer in opposition to as many received Opinions
amongst you, which ye have taken upon Trust, without examining the
reasonableness of 'em; in which (provided I may be freed from my Confinement,
and the Calumny of it,) I shall oblige all our Fraternity with my farther
Discoveries.


Consist. -- We'll do you justice, and upon performance of your promise, you
shall have your Liberty.


DIALOGUE XXII.
Between the whole Consistory of Spirits, being a discovery of Vulgar Errors,
received in that Society, by the late supposed Heretic Spirit yet a Prisoner.
Prisoner -- THE Goodness of my Cause is to me instead of Questions; therefore
I shall immediately begin to discover the vulgar Errors of our Society. -- The
Condition of my Releasment,


Secretary of Fate. -- Hold a little; here is the Man in the Moon come now;
let us hear what he can say about the Pickled Leviathan; if upon Oath he
confirms not your Testimony already delivered, how shall we believe what you
shall offer hereafter. -- Swear him there, and Administer the Interrogatories
already drawn up to that end.


Notary Public. It Is done -- Imprimis, do you know the Prisoner at the Bar?
Have you ever held Correspondence with him? And if so, how long?


Man in the Moon. Yes, I do know the Prisoner at the Bar, and have held a
particular Correspondence with him, ever since 35 Years before the Flood.


Not. Pub. Item, Was you the Boston of Noah 's Ark? Did the Moon suck a Whale
and you up with a bundle of Cables at your Back, at full Tide in the Universal
Deluge, declare the truth, and nothing but the truth. -- You are upon your Oath.


Man in the Moon. The affirmative of every particular of this second
Interrogatory is truth.


Not. Pub. Item -- Are you now Valet de Chamber to the Moon?


Man in the Moon. -- I am.


Consist. He Is very positive, pray examine about his Humanity, Sustenance, etc.
this looks very suspicious.


Not. Pub. -- Item, Were you a Man, or a Spirit, when you were Boston of the
Ark? If the first, How come you to live so long without putting ^ff the Body?
If the last, was there any more Spirits with you there at the same time.
Remember you are upon your Oath, and therefore speak the whole truth, and
nothing but truth.


Man in the Moon. -- I was then, and yet am of Humane Race, and possibly shall
continue lively and well, till the day of Judgment, by reason of the
agreeableness of that Aethar to my Stomach, I am never Sick, Hungry, Thirsty,
nor Weary; for there is no crude Vapors, or gross matter to turn into Diseases.
Nor is it at all strange, since the lower World tells you of one Epimendies
(Viridiar. Lib. 4. prob. 24.) that slept Seventy Five Years without Meat and
Drink, and of a whole Nation in India, that lives upon pleasing Odors, (Not.
Hist. lib. 7. c. 3.) and of Democritus that was fed diverse days with the smell
of hot Bread (Diog. Laert. lib. 1. cap. 9.) why should it seem strange to you,
that pure Ether should afford such a Nourishment, when your common, gross,
vaporous Air nourishes Vegitables? Onions, and the Sempervive, shoot forth and
germinate, when hanged in the open Air. What think ye of the Birds of Paradise,
that have nothing else to feed upon but Air? Go and ask Rondoletius how it was
possible for his Priest to live forty years upon nothing but Air? Or what he
meant, when he said he was an Eyewitness of one that had lived Ten years
without other Nourishment. From all which it is no wonder that the pure Ether
should have such Effects upon me, as you now see; though if there were occasion
for it, there is all sorts of Diet: but they are given only as Physic to new
Comers into our World in the Moon, as preparatory to a prepetual Abstinence. --
Gentlemen, I hope what I have said is satisfactory; and so I desire the liberty
to withdraw: The Moon is awake, and ready to get up by this time, and if I miss
my Attendance, I may be turned out of my Office.


Consistory. -- Very well; discharge the Witness, and see him safe home in the
Moon again. -- In the mean time, -- do you, Mr. Philosopher, proceed in your
Discoveries; you shall have a very favorable Construction of what you offer.


Prisoner. -- I acknowledge my Obligations, (most judicious Patrons) and shall
impart what I have found out, with as much Humility and Modesty as Truth can
stoop to. --

First then, I shall presume to call this received Opinion a Vulgar Error. That
Taurus has any Horns, or that he feeds of the Schems and Draughts of
Astrologers in the lower World.


Astrol. Sp. -- How Is that? Blasphemy I protest: What will you make a sucking
Calf of one of the great Supporters of the Stars!


Prisoner. -- Pray, Mr. Astrologer, Not so fast, lest you should tire; and then
your Bull (I assure you) cannot carry you, though ye offer every day a Bundle of
Schemes to him. Suppose there is no such a Being in all the Heavens as Taurus,
but only a Nominal Division of the Heavens, what will become of Horns and
Fodder then?


Astrol, Sp. -- He raves certainly. -- Prove what you say.


Prisoner. Nay hold there; what bid a Philosopher prove Negatives! Do you prove
the Affirmative if you can; if not, tell this honorable Court why you believe
it.


Astrol. Sp. -- Let me consider a little. --


Prisoner. -- Come never vex your self to find out what is not; when the Sun
goes through that Part or Division of the Heavens, (or if you will, when that
part of the Heavens moves by the Sun,) it is said to be in Taurus, because it
happens at the time of the Year when the Countryman tills, manures, and plows
his Lands by the help of Oxen or Bulls; likewise when the Sun is in Gemini,
it is said to be so, because of the Pairing and Copulation of most Creatures at
time; and so of the rest of the Signs; which are only Appellations, and no real
Beings. I could tell you, that there is some in the World below us, that know as
much; but this would be too like one of their Proverbs, viz. If you would know
what News at Court, you must enquire in the Country: And this puts me in mind
of another false Opinion among us, viz. That the Devil is a Male Spirit.

This is taken upon Trust too, without examination of his Testicles: if there
be ever a Midwife-Spirit among you, that knew him out at Nurse, or that had any
private Familiarity, or learned it by his own Confession before he fell, stand
forth.


Midwife-Sp. -- I knew him out at Nurse, but was never very curious in that
particular; but he told me himself that he was a Male-Spirit.


Prisoner. He tole ye! If you have no better Evidence than that, it proves
nothing. It Is well known The first Word he spoke was a Lie; and 'twas for lying
that Michael chased him out of Heaven. -- I Am persuaded he is an Hermophradite,
my reasons are these; 'Twas a brave and Masculine sort of Impiety when he
pretended himself to be a God, and gave Oracles, and Prophesi'd; but 'twas a
Feminine sort of wickedness, to be afraid of the Pentangle of Solomon, the
Liver of Tobias his Fish, the sound of Tetragrammaton, the Virtue of Hipericon,
the Root of Baaras: Could any thing but a Foeminine Devil, be Commanded by
Charms, Spells, Conjurations, Lerters, Notes, and Dashes. In short, can the
Devil be any thing else but a Rigil, that is, either Man or Woman, to gratify
the Witches, and VVizards of the world below, Can he be any thing else but an
Hermophrodite, whose Language looks both ways at once, and is either true or
false. Aio te Aeacidem Romanos vincere posse.

No, no, the Case is plain; and I hope this Honorable Convention will order it
to be registered accordingly. And so I shall proceed to take notice of another
Vulgar Error amongst us, viz. That the Soul of the World is not subject to the
Passions of Humane Spirits, or that it is not sometimes Merry, Sad, etc.

I suppose, if I prove the contrary you will look so wishfully upon one another,
that you will have an immediate Confirmation of it by the World's Laughing at
you: It Is a certain truth, and if you will but peep out of the Wickets of your
Stars, and view the Face of the Elements, you will just now see it look with a
pair of Blubbered Eyes, the reason of it is this; Taking a view of the
Creation, it casually fixed one of its Eyes upon the Gallick Territories, and
seeing so much Tyranny, Pride, Extortion, Blasphemies, etc. it could not
refrain from Weeping, the Inhabitants of the World below us, call it Raining,
not believing that the frequent showers of Tears that fall amongst 'em, are a
bewailing their Irregularities; and thus, when it sees some good and virtuous
Actions, it looks with a pleasant Air, and smiles upon 'em, and that they call
Sunshine. The other Night, the World had got the Highcough, which is very
often mistaken for Thunder. -- We are in almost a hundred Mistakes about the
Worlds Common Actions; when it Spits, it is erroneously supposed to be a
Shooting of Stars; when it turns its Head on one side, either in a fit of
Laughter, or by being ashamed at some unhandsome Actions it sees, presently
it is concluded, there is an Eclipse of the Sun; and in this Opinion, the World
below us are deeply rooted: Now since I am not stingy, or partial in
Communicating my Observations, I would have some of you Astrologick Souls (when
you come to have Bodies) to undeceive your Neighbors about that which they
call an Eclipse of the Sun, for it is laid down as a Maxim amongst 'em, That
the Sun being a greater Body than the Moon, can never be totally Eclipsed;
which Error does so much affront the Harmonious Order, and make of the
Universe, that the World, as unable to put up such Indignities, has been in the
Humor sometimes to close both her Eyes at once, and leave Mankind muffled up
in a perpetual Night; for you must believe, that if the Face of the World be
proportioned to its Body, it must be pretty broad, at least some 100000 Miles.
-- So that the Eyes must stand a great distance one from another; nay, the
Inhabitants of the lower World grant as much in effect when they say the Sun is
in an Orb vastly higher than the Moon; now taking their Opinion for granted,
the Sun may be totally Eclipsed according to their own Principles -- as in the
Figure annexed; for when the Face of the world stands side-way to the Earth, so
that the Moon is betwixt the Earth and the Sun, it is plain, the Moon does not
only Eclipse the whole Body of the Sun, but as far about as the Circle B, the
Body of the Sun, although bigger than the Moon, extending no farther than A.



Another Vulgar Error, which I have met with, is this. That there are no more
Worlds habitable by Men, than the Earth, Moon, Sun, and the rest of the
Planets, with a few fixed Stars.

Now this I know, by my own Experience, to be a falsehood, for coming home late
one Night by the Seven Stars, I peeped into the least amongst 'em (which you
know is seldom visible to the lower world) and I saw Thousands of Little Men
and Women going to a Fair, but they were no bigger than Rats; I could not
forbear Philosophizing upon it, and at last I satisfied my self with this
Conclusion, that all Stars were Worlds, and the People in 'em were proportioned
according to the bigness of 'em, and I was confirmed in my Opinion when I
considered that the Inhabitants of the Earth were about two Yards high, that
those in the Moon were as high as the largest Steeples, and that the People in
the Sun would make nothing of stepping Seven Miles at a step in their common
walking, had that an ordinary sucking Flea had a Trunk as big as an Elephant;
now Gentlemen, that you may be satisfied as well as I, that the least Star is
an Habitable World, it is but taking a little more notice of 'em in your
Rambles. --

Another Vulgar Error amongst us is, That there are some new Stars since the
Creation, or at least old ones mended, as that in Cassopeia, that in
Sagitarius, and many others.

For First, (as introductive to what follows) I shall prove that Stars don't
borrow their Light from the Sun, but have their own innate light, as Fish
Scales, Rotten Wood, etc. notwithstanding all the plausible pretenses of
Earthly Philosophers; because, if they borrowed their Light from the Sun, or by
Reflection, they would not always have the same appearance, since the World
moves its face sometimes so, that both its Eyes are hindered from looking upon
such and such Stars, and sometimes by reason of the Interposition of one
anhther; but such and such Stars have always the same Luster, provided the
Clouds don't interpose or hinder the light from making a right Judgment. --
Secondly, They are not matter solid and compact as the Earth is, for it is
evident to every bodies experience* that motion would in time wear 'em away,
but they are only Globulous formations out of the first light, which finished
the Circumrotation of Heaven and Earth, e're the Sun, Moon, or themselves were
created; and if so, Light is not subject to attrition or wearing away, no more
than Darkness, which in some sense is a quality rather than a body: Hence no
Stars grow old, or wear away, and if so, no need either of mending 'em, or
making new ones, for a convenient perfect number was at first created; besides,
if they should be mended, what would have become of their Inhabitants the same
time? or where must they have dwelt till their World had been new Rigged? Those
Stars talked on, in Cassopeia, Sagitarius, etc. were nothing else but Meteors
or Evaporations from the bodies of other Planets, caused by the Sun; and as the
matter whereby they were ^ed ceased, they disappeared; and the truth of all
this is well known by many of our Society, who were at the same time upon the
Ramble in those Quarters. -- The next vulgar Error I observe is this, That in a
few Ages the People in the World below us will teach the Rucks in Madacassar to
fly with 'em into the World in the Moon, and steal some of those Inhabitants to
show 'em at Bartholomew Fair.

By what wild Notion this Opinion came to be propogated I know not, but the
Authors of it do also tell us, that a Ruck is a Bird with wings twelve foot
long, and that they make no more of sooping up a Horse and his Rider* than a
Kite does of a Mouse, so that they can easily carry a Man any whither between
their Pinions, or in their Talons. But though I grant this to be truth, yet the
Voyage is too long to undertake; for according to my last Calculation, the
distance between the Earth and the Moon is one hundred seventy nine Thousand,
seven hundred and twelve Miles; so that supposing it possible for a man and his
winged Courser to fly half a year together, it would be 980 miles a day, (too
violent a motion for breathing) before he could get to the Moon, which would be
a very hard Task without Meat, Drink, or Sleep. And lastly, (for I Will mention
but one more at present) it is an Erroneous Opinion, That a Spirit cannot carry
away the whole Universe at once, if he might be permitted to do it.

If a Spirit can heave a Chair, a Stool, a Man, etc. he can also remove the
World. The reason is, matter is not determinative upon Spirits, first, not as
to place, for if a Spirit cannot be circumscribed, it follows that all Places
are the same to him, and that if a Spirit moves a Chair from its first Station,
he can also move it ten thousand Miles further, all the labor being only
willing such a motion. Nor is it the Quality of matter that can hinder this
motion, all matter being the same to him; we have daily instances of Spirits
passing through Glass, and the most continuous matter as easily as through Air,
which is a more extended Body. Nor is it Quantity that can hinder this motion,
for it is granted that a Spirit can as easily move a man as a flea, and if so,
he can as easily run away with a Star as a man, but this he is not permitted to
do, since such a motion would spoil the harmonious and regular position of the
Heavens: but to prove it possible to remove Sun, Moon, Stars, Earth, Sea, nay,
and the whole Coelum Empyreum at once; I shall offer, -- That a Spirit moves
not matter by application of matter to the thing moving, (as when a man moves
his Hatt off his Head, he moves it with his hand, which is another body) but by
a vertual Contact or Application of the Will, just as a man moves his own Body,
which is only by willing a motion to it; just so when a man moves his hand, he
moves it not by help of the other hand, but by the immediate act of his will.
Now the Spirit in a man is limited by Incorporation, and can move nothing but
only its members, or what it applys its members to; which also being matter are
confined to Proportions in respect of that other matter which they are applied
to, yet an unbodied Spirit being confined to no particular Matter can will a
motion to any matter, which is effective upon matter, as greater Powers command
lesser. Nay, I might yet further offer that a spirit might more all the
Universe at once (I mean the Coelum Empyreum, and all the Globes within it)
without displacing the particular parts; as the Wheels, Weights, etc. of a
Clock, when the whole Clock is moved away at once; for a Clock will follow its
regular motions in Italy as well as in England, so that (Gentlemen Spirits,) if
you have a mind to examine matter of fact, there is no more to do than to make a
trial, only I have this to tell you, that you cannot tell whether you move the
whole or no, because you carry all matter and place with you, so that there
will be left no place behind to measure from, and if so, no distance, and
consequently no motion to be judged of; nor can we who are within the Globe
perceive it, since we shall be always at the same distances, just as a fly
would be in a house if the house were removed. This is all I have to offer at
present, by which I hope I may have not only performed the Conditions of my
Liberty, but deserve a Philosophers body in the other World.

Consistory, Very well, be it Enacted forthwith, that he supply the first
vacancy in the A^henian Society.


DIALOGUE XXIII.
Between the Spirit of one that is to be a Member of the ATHENIAN SOCIETY, a
Correspondent, and of some that are to be Querists.
Athenian Member. -- HOW a Member of the Athenian Society! a privy Counselor
of the Stars? a Resolver of all Questions! very well, -- Have at ye Phisicks
and Metaphisicks, Methinks I long to begin the search, Nature lays open her
hidden stores, the vegitable world courts my Inspection, the Spirits of animate
Beings crowd to be treated on, and the Caelestal bodies stoop to my Embraces,
as Luna did to her Endymion. Though other Spirits tremble at the thoughts of
Incorporation, it is a great part of my happiness to think on it, and I Am
uneasy in nothing but delays of ^^^mencement Pray. Gentlemen Spirits, if ye
have any kind resentment of my expectations, begin and ask me some Questions,
that I may try my faculty.


A Querist. -- Very well, -- I shall be one of your humble Querists in the
other World, and to save us both some labor, pray answer beforehand, whether
the Longitude at Sea can be found out so as to be made practicable; and also
the reason of the flux and reflux of that unquiet Element.


Athe. Mem. -- Yes, it is possible to find out a Practicable Longitude, but I
shall not discover the Method how till I come into the other World, and am secure
of the thousand pounds Legacy, the promised reward; so that I shall entreat
you, and all other my loving Querists, to let me take my own time for resolving
Questions of Interest; but as to the flux and reflux of the Sea, I Will impart
the discovery; -- Know then that the whole mass of the Creation is one great
vegitable Being, and that Water and Air are to it, as sap is to Trees, or as
blood and serum are to animate Bodies; and that the universal Spirit which is
dispersed through every individual Particle of Nature, and more eminently
gathered together in the midst of that vast frame, is the Sun, which being
placed in the Center of the Earth resembles the spirit of man, which is also
more particularly seated in the heart; this premised, I further add, That the
Sun would expire if there were not an Element of Air to oppose and fight with;
which I prove thus, particulars are of the same nature as their Generals, and a
small fire closed up so that it can have no Air to oppose it, immediately grows
unactive and expires. And thus, when a man ceases to breath, the vital heat or
spirit within having nothing to sight with, grows idle, and dies. To which I
shall yet add, as a resolution to the Question, That the strife betwixt the Sun
and the Air thins and subtilizes the Sea, and causes the flux and swelling of
the Tides as a small fire affects the bubling water that is near it; and thus
the strife betwixt the vital heat and the respiring Air in bodies, rarifies and
stirs up the blood to a pulsation, or a diastole and systole, agreeable to the
flux and reflux of the Sea, and as the pulse is easier discerned in the Arms
and other extreme parts, than in the main bulk of the body; So Tides are most
remarkable at the shores. Thus Life is maintained by opposition, and thus all
compounded Existences are preserved by unnatural Wars. One difficulty more is
to be resolved, and I Have done, some Seas have their Titles every two hours,
some every four, and some every six, which periods are caused by the different
humors of the Sea, as some are more terren^ and heavy than other, some more
salt and sulphurous, some more thin and vaporous, and accordingly their
respective qualities increase to such and such a degree before they are proper
subjects for the Sun and Air to work upon, which being destroyed by agitation,
they are so long before they (...) to a proper head again; and this also (...)
with the Crisis, or fits of fevers in humane bodies, which also differ
aecording of the body, the (...) humowr mereases three days, the (...) and so
the rest, before they can come to (...) a degree or Crisis of the distemp^r,
and thus I have considered the resemblance (...) great and little World by way
of answer to this Question. -- And now propose your next.


Querist. -- Here Is the Correspondent come from your Incorporate Brethren the
Athenian Society in the other World, perhaps they may be puzzled by their
Querists, and have therefore desired you and the rest of their Successors
Assistance.


Correspondent. -- Your Imbodied Brethren below greet ye well, wishing ye all
good organized bodies, and patient Querists, and entreat a continuance of
Correspondence. They have by me sent you six Questions, desering you would
communicate your thoughts upon 'em, and if ye will send to them what
difficulties you meet with amongst your Etherial Querists they will impart their
Opinions to you. The following Questions are according to the quality of the
several Members.


Divine. -- Whether the Pope be Antichrist or no?


Mathematician. -- Whether there may be found out a Cannon to measure a
spherical Convoid?


Logician, -- What Is the proper difinition of glorified matter?


Civilian. -- What reasonable answer we can make when we are asked, Why upon
Divorces we take penal Security that the Innocent party marrys not again during
the Divorceds Life, when the forfeiture and payment of such penal security ^ill
not satisfy the Law.


Lawyer. -- Whether Lazarus's Estate belonged to the next Heir or himself after
he rose from the Dead?


Poet. -- Pray assist me with two or three natural Rhimes to Chimney.


Merchant. -- How to find out a way to give Intelligence in six hours, of Ships
at 100 Leagues distance, in order to profitable Ensurances.


Surgeon. -- Whether an Homunculus produced upon the Grounds that Paracelsus
has laid down, would have been animated by Blood, or such white Matter as
Vermin have that are also produced by unnatural heat?

Their Bookseller, and Mr. Smith the Coffee-Man, want also to know whether
there be any Cure for the Athenian Itch.


Member. -- Here Is nothing that is beyond the power of an immediate perception.
Say, all ye Ethereal Querists, have you any doubt to send into the other
World? -- If ye have, propose 'em to our Correspondent, who is just now going
thither.


1 Querist. -- I am afraid I shall be a Poet; direct me by what measures I may
be exempted from the Fate of the Old Proverb; Poets are podr by Lestiny.


2 Querist. -- I have but one to offer. -- How may I attain to an effectual
Form of Courtship? -- But pray, let it be answered in the very next Mercury;
for Lovers are impatient.


3 Querist. -- I have a very scrupulous Conscience. Pray, is it lawful to eat
Black Puddings?


4 Querist. -- I want to know the Reasons why those Questions I sent about six
weeks since are not yet answered: I think my Questions deserve a Thought as
well as any Bodies else.


5 Querist. -- When comes out the next Volume?


6 Querist. -- What curious Translations are designed for the next Supplement?


7 Querist. -- I Am a little ashamed, or I would ask when I shall be Married?
Pray, let me be answered the next Tuesday; which being the first in the Month,
is the Day appointed by the Society for Love-Questions, and the Doubts of
Ladies.


8 Querist. -- Why many Questions are never answered? viz. Iacohitish, Obscene,
Scandalous^ Riddlish, useless, etc? Since every Body would have their own
Thoughts preferred to their Neighbor's, -- let mine come the next.


9 Querist. -- Why they pass over Questions of two or three Months standing,
and take notice of Popular Subjects, Curious Accidents, and such as cannot be
passed over without great prejudice to the Querist; which looks a little
partial. -- I want a speedy Answer,


10 Querist. -- Why the World below is so foolish as to expect one Paper to
please every Body, since the variety of Educations, Constitutions, etc. create
different Judgments, so that what pleases this Person, offends that; and what
offends this, pleases that; Insomuch that it is a true Riddle, To please most,
is the way to offend most; and to offend most, is the way to please most? Let
the next Mercury treat of this Subject, it being a Matter of Consequence.


Correspondent. -- Pray, dismiss me; the Society is set, and I shall lose a
great part of the Conference.


Athenian Member. -- Very well! Remember us to our Embodied Brethren, and tell
'em they shall have their Questions answered, and sent to 'em by their next
Sessions, and we hope they will consider of these sent by our Aetherial
Querists; tell 'em also, that a Continuation of this Correspondence is very
agreeable to us, and shall never be broke off by our neglect. -- One thing more,
-- You must remember to call in at Venus as you go along; there is a Female
Spirit at a great loss in a certain soft Affair; she wants a Resolution of her
Doubts as soon as possible.


DIALOGUE XXIV.
Between the Spirits of a General, a Midwife, and an Executioner.
General. -- I Cannot think my self to be of the same Species as other Spirits
are. -- How? -- the disposal of so many thousand Souls! -- Strange! what a
spacious Manor am I Lord of? What a numerous Crowd of living Tenements are at
my Command? Methinks I see my (...) at the Head of 60000 Men, who act
implicity, without questions: If I command, they fight, march, encamp, or what
I please. Methinks I see my Enemy drawing near, and (...) depends on a single
Breath, whether Thousands fall or none: What signifies a Diadem, or Tyrian
Robes, when the Sword commands them to be laid aside? Alexander was not feared
as Philip's Successor; but as a General, and a Conqueror. Is there any Spirit
that can pretend to such an absolute Power over its fellow creatures as a
General?


Midwife. -- What Despotick Spirit is this that presumes to huff, and encroach
upon my Privileges? A General! It Is a little noise, busy Thing, that is so
far from having an absolute Disposal of its Fellow Creatures: as to have its
dependence purely from me, Is it not in my power to crush the Wretch, and bring
it strangled into the World? And then where is the Disposer of Crowns, the
single Breath, that was to determine the Life and Fate of Thousands? How small
is that Power over others, that is not able to preserve it self? Besides, admit
a General to have a dispensation for an uncommon entrance into the World; how
would he do for proper Subjects of his Power, if he disowned his Obligations to
me? Where would he have his Attendance, if I should deny to assist him by
aiding humane Productions?


General -- How, I depend upon a whining Female Midwifry! If the more hardy,
and Masculine Beings obey me, what can the more helpless, brittle Clay, called
Woman, do? If it is in a Commander's Power to put all to the Sword, by what
Artifice can you plead an Immunity? --


Midwife, -- By that of Gratitude; If Male Spirits are not wholly ignorant of
such a Virtue; for it is a mean recompense to destroy-those by whom we live. --
But to pass over that: The first Refusal of any thing is most noble; and then
you cannot deny but we have our power of disposing of Life and Death before you:
Besides, Life being more noble than Death, we have yet the preference, since we
dispose of that, and you of this:


Executioner. -- What a vain Contest is here about a Pre-eminence that belongs
to neither of you?


Genesis -- What have we here, another Controller of Fate?


Execut. -- Yes, very often of the Fate of Generals and Midwives too.


Genesis -- Oh that I had but a Body, and this Insolent Gibbet Gazer another; that
I might Cane him for his Sauciness.


Execut. -- Not so passionate, g^od General. -- If you know any other Reason
besides your Sword, pray answer -- whether it is not the End of an ^ction that
dignifies it? -- Or, whether Actions in themselves are either good or ill
otherwise than as they receive such denominations from the End which determines
them?


Genesis -- Right; What would you infer from hence, the honor of fixing a
Criminal's Ear-knot, or piling up the expiating Faggot?


Execut. -- No, but that my Office being the Execution of just and prudent
Laws, is far more honorable than the murdering Ambition of Generals, or the
Midwifry of vicious Humanity. The most just Wars that happen, are never without
the injustice of destroying some Persons, that have no other fault but
prejudiced Judgments; and Midwifry is so blind an Action, as to make no
difference betwixt the Legitimate and Illegitimate, betwixt Fathers of
Countries and Tyrants; betwixt the Prince and Beggar. -- But in a due
Administration of just Laws; there is an immediate distinction betwixt Merit and
Demerit, Virtue and Vice: In short, it is so absolutely necessary, that neither
the Body Politic, nor private Persons can be safe and happy without it; and
therefore nobly great, and meritorious, as a Preserver of Nobility amongst
other Conditions.


Genesis -- I never decide Disputes any other way than by my Sword; therefore if
you persist in these Heresies, prepare to end the Argument by force. --


Execut. -- I never fence, nor resist till I tie up my Adversary; if you will
tarry till then, I Am sure I shall convince you. --


Midwife. -- Dispute and quarrel as long as ye please, I shall not yield the
pre-eminence to either of you; -- Besides, it is unjust, (since we are all
Proselytes to our own Conclusions,) to give Judgment decisive upon our own
Cases. -- If you think it convenient, we'll refer the Dispute to the
Arbitration of the Athenian Mercury, who will do us all Justice.


Execut. -- Agreed.


Genesis -- March then; but, I will lead up the File thither.


DIALOGUE XXV.
Between the Spirits of Two Projectors.
1 Spirit. -- HOW! A well fledged Cully, just come to Town, and brought along
with him an unbawk'd Fancy, a strong Faith, and a deep Purse! Very well, --
It Is no common Catch, -- a handsome plausible Harangue; and he is mine; But
yonder is one of my Comrades. -- Holo Brother Projector, What Prospect have you
of your Discoveries in the lower World; Are they like to succeed or not? -- I Am
upon the wings of an imaginative Faculty; and am fancying my self in pursuit of
the Game.


2 Sp. -- First let me see how I shall come off in what I Am now upon.


1 Sp. -- Why have you not yet effected your Promise of recruiting the
exhausted stores of Nature about Thunder and Lightning?


2 Sp. -- What do you mean?


1 Sp. -- When Nature was commanded to muster up all her Sulphury Stores, and
Vengeance called for their disposal on the Cities of Sodom and Gomorah, 'twas
you (if I mistake not) that offered to raise a new Supply without a Bankrupcy
of any of the four Elements.


2 Sp. -- That I have done long since; but the great business in hand is --


1 Sp. -- Is what? I Will warrant you it is some Intriegue that you are for
managing when you come into the Body: Come we'll suppose our selves already
there; -- What would you be at?


2 Sp. -- Twenty Thousand Pounds at least, and a Name to out live Monuments. --
The Notion's (...) and coming; and methinks I see a Coach and Six a little
behind it, attending me as a small Testimony of such a useful Discovery.


1 Sp. -- Then you will forget me; Attendance and Ceremonies will prejudice your
Eyes from looking upon your old Friends: In short, you will be molded into a new
Nature.


2 Sp. -- Well, since you will be fancying Incorporation, methinks I hear your
Question urged in the Body, and my self making Excuses, and coming over you for
a handsome Treat, on purpose to seek an opportunity of telling you how lasting
my Friendship would be. -- Methinks I also see you vex that you were prevented
in the Question, and my self asking, What is become of all the auxiliary
Magazines sent in by your credulous Disciples?


1 Sp. -- Your Fancy's pretty near the Truth; but I could tell you that you will
be at a strange loss without an Apprentiship of seven years held in the
Subterranean Conclave, of the Southern side of the T -- le.


2 Sp. -- Why, what is to be learned there, more than Decoy or Wheedling in a Yo
-- re Squire or two?


1 Sp. -- To come off handsomely after all, and manage the Concern so wisely, as
never to fail bringing the useful Discovery to perfection; but for want of Two
or Three Hundred Pounds more, which will oblige the Engagers either to resign
their first Interest, rather than come in deeper, or force 'em to the last
shift of paying their Footing, (which is, Breaking,) and commencing Projector
themselves; which, in my Opinion, is a very fine Trade amongst soft Heirs,
credulous Bankers; nay, amongst all that are Babes in Worldly Philosophy. --
But to wave the Thoughts of the Body, and return to our first Subject. -- You
have supplied the exhausted Stores of Thunder and Lightning, etc. Pray which
way are your laboring Thoughts employed now? And what farther Discovery have
you to communicate to the Universe?


2 Sp. -- 'T is a weakness to design before Projectors; and the surest way that
can be found out to be supplanted; therefore I desire to be excused, farther
than to tell you in general Terms: I am offering Proposals to the Register of
Fate, for a regulation of the Solitices: I know no Reason the Sun should not be
called to an Account for being idle twice a Year, when the Inconveniences of
his loytring are so destructive to the whole Frame of Nature, by burning up its
radical Moisture on one side, and suffering the other side to lie imprisoned in
the Chains of Frost and Darkness, without the least demerit.


1 Sp. -- Indeed this has not yet been considered; but will not it disoblige the
Computation of the Astrologick Souls?


2 Sp. -- Particular Interests must not come in competition with a general
Good: -- But admit such a small inconvenience; I can quickly redress that.


1 Sp. -- Nay, then you will encroach upon my Studies; for I have been drawing a
Scheme of the Regulation of Time etc. for which I expect no small Recompense.


2 Sp. -- Pray where does your Calculation begin?


1 Sp. -- From the very Minute that the Deluge began; which, as I take it, was
about Seven a Clock in the Morning, from the Creation of Souls 2193 Years, 6
days 3 9/10 Minutes.


2 Sp. -- You pretend to great Exactness.


1 Sp. -- It Is necessary; or I had changed Winter for Summer before now.


2 Sp. -- Well, and have you any thing else to promote?


1 Sp. -- Nothing at present, but to secure my self from being pumped out of my
Project, till I am certain of my Reward.


2 Sp. Farewell then.


1 Sp. -- If you had not been in haste, I could have told you how Noah's
Compass and Sea-Card were the very first Enterprise I brought to perfection:
But more of this the next Meeting.


DIALOGUE XXVI.
Between Two Traveling Spirits.
1 Spirit -- WELL, met Brother; how far this way?


2 Spirit. -- Into the Sphere of Saturn; I have only that part of the Universe
to be acquainted with; and at my return home, I shall have a complete Iournal,
with some Remarks, not a little curious and diverting.


2. Sp. -- I am just come from thence, and am willing to give you a particular
Relation of every thing there? But pray what are the most curious Remarks you
have met with in this long Ramble.


2 Sp. -- In the Region of the Moon I found some surprising Novelties;
particularly, the manner of that Planet's Motion. -- The Moon is generally
believed to perform its Circuition by a Principle of Self-Motion, which Nature
at first communicated to it; but it is an Error; for the Moon is a Lifeless
inanimate Mass, and can no more move of it self than a Pewter-Dish can; nor is
it (as some have concluded) bowl'd along by Spirits amongst the rest of the
Stars; for then a swinging Gigantick Spirit would sometimes throw it out of its
due Cariere, and make it rob, or fall soul upon some of the other Planets. No
no, such Caprices in Nature are not to be met with. -- It Is continually carried
along by half a dozen Spirits in a large Lanthorn, half of it transparent, and
the other half dark, and these half dozen Spirits are relieved by another half
dozen, once in four and twenty hours: The reason of its seeming Increase and
Decrease, is nothing else but the turning of the darker or brighter side of its
Lanthorn more or less directly or obliquely toward the Globe of the Earth. I
can also assure you, that there is not one Star in the Heavens that moves of it
self; but what are carried along by Spirits (plain Spirits, not Intelligences,
as some Philosophers dream; for there is no such Beings.) There are many strange
Opinions amongst Mankind about the Motion of the Heavenly Orbs: A Spirit that
left its Body in a Dream, just when I came into the world of the Moon, gave us
some merry Tenets about it; as, that the Elements were divided into Spheres,
like the Films of an Onion, and that such and such Stars moved in such and such
Films. Some again held, That Stars were put upon Strings like Beads, and pushed
on by ^egions of Spirits. Some would have 'em half under and half over their
Films, and Channels cut for 'em to roll along: Some believe that the Film is
transparent, and that Stars are bowl'd along up em: Some, that they hang under
their Films, and that there is a kind of a mucous Matter, which makes 'em stick
like Flies with the feet upwards to a Cieling: but some believe there is no such
things as Spheres, Films, or Divisions of Elements; but that they hang in the
Air upon their own Center, whirling about like Boys Tops at Shrovetide. Thus
far the humane Spirit discovered the wild Opinions of his Brethren.


1 Sp. -- This is pleasant indeed; but I believe I light on some Passages as
remarkable. You know that every Globe has its particular Ether, which moves
along with it; and that there are indefinite Spaces, Vacuums, or Interstitiums
betwixt the Planets, if not, the vertiginous motion of one Ether would justle
with another. You are also satisfied, that the Globes of Mercury and Luna, have
either of 'em a Republic of Philosophical Souls, that left their Bodies, and
yet retain their old Notions. -- It was my chance to travel that way when there
was a public Dispute betwixt some late deceased Cartesians, and some
Peripateticks; every Soul was armed Cap-a-pe with Dilemaes, Propositions,
Objections, etc But the Dispute about Motion and innate Idea's, was managed so
warmly, that they forgot their Footing, which was upon the extremity of the
Vortex, and down they came sluttering into the indefinite Space or Vacuum I was
telling you of. -- Very well (says a Peripatetick Soul,) this Fall is no
Motion, because there is no Continuity of Matter to measure by; and therefore I
delie you all to prove a possibility of getting out again. A Carte^ian Soul
fell a laughing at such a Challenge, and told him, he ought to get a new Body,
and make Experiments; and afterward consider the Theory. -- No, says the
Peripatetick; it cannot be done; and therefore I Will not offer to budge till I
see a Demonstration of a possibility, in Mood and Figure. And as they were
examining, a certain Minor which was proposed, comes a Comet, and with a Brush
of its Tail scowr'd the Vacuum, and dashed the Disputants upon the Vortex again.


2 Sp. -- And what became of the Cause then?


1 Sp. -- It was put by till another Conference, by reason of a black deformed
Spirit that had had the Misfortune to leave its Body for a worse Place, which
came roaring and howling into the midst of the Cartesian Souls, crying out,
Where Is the Spirit of Descartes, that pretended to prove a Deity by Innate
Ideas, when he should have proved such Idea to be the Idea of a real Being;
'twas the weakness of this Argument that damned me: Besides, I Am continually
choused and hunted about by a company of snearing Devils, that stigmatize me
with the scandalous Character of a Cartesian Spirit; pointing at me with their
sooty Paws, as I pass along; Do ye see (says one) yonder Inhabitant of the
Cartesian World: See (says another) the Artist that preaches of a subtle Matter
which forms the Liquidity of Bodies. Pray (says a Third) will you go ask your
Master what he means by the Sun's forming a great Vertex of sluid Matter for
the Stars to swim in? And whether the Sun is both Agent and Patient in such a
Formation? If not, of what preexistent Matter he forms this fluid Matter? Or,
whether he pretends to an immediate Creation of it out of nothing? with a
thousand sand more such puzzling Questions, which doubles my damnation, to
solve 'em. -- Now Mr. Des Carts, if you can keep up your Credit, and mollify
my Plagues, do it quickly: -- Don't trouble me yet, replied the Philosophical
Spirit, lest you spoil a new Notion that I left unfinished upon my Deathbed. O
(says the Black Disciple) that my Master should study to damn People when they
are dead! I Will warrant you, it is to find out the reason why Mercury is
sometimes nearer the Earth than the Sun: But pray, by the way, what is the Use
of this, and a thousand more such Phaenomena's, if Virtue be the proper Task of
the Intellect, and if the business of a wise Man be not Talking, but living?
Thus the poor Spirit troop'd off again without his Errand, ra^ling his
invisible Chains, and calling Philosophy Beelzebubism.


1 Sp. -- This was a very strange Passage indeed, and puts me in mind of half a
dozen Philosophical Spirits, which were huddled together, and tied Muzzle to
Muzzle in the Bastile of Mercury, for pretending to find out a way to appear
visible to Mortals, without the assumption of Aerial Bodies, or any other
Vehicle; as I passed by 'em, there was one that had his Notion too settled to
remove it by such a Treatment -- Courage (said he) Comrades; I Will procure a
speedy Manumission from this Cage, by appearing in this posture to the
Inhabitants of every Globe, and making 'em send Ambassadors to our Judges about
us. -- Say you so (says one of 'em) I pray make a Demonstration to us first how
it may be done. Thus; (replied the other) The Representation of Things is not
always confined to the ordinary Method of assuming the similitude of the thing
seen into the Eye, which necessarily supposes a Subject to be assumed; but the
visive power may exercise Ideas and Similitudes of things that are not, by
indisposition or illusion. Thus by beating up the interior Organs, and acting
briskly upon the Fancy, I can make the Patient to believe a resemblance of what
I please, or I can deceive the Eye, by indisposing it, through the annoyance of
internal Fumes, Vapors, etc. -- Thus have I made Experiments on Persons, who,
whilst they have been lying in Bed, would look upon the Windows, and see
Curious Globes, and Figures of all shapes and colors, which would move before
the Eye, i^^ the Eye follows 'em, or would pursue the motion of the Eye, if it
drew from 'em. I might add the possibility of accomplishing my end by ^alse
Refractions of Light, Interpositions of Bodies, etc. But I Will let that alone
till I come into a Body; when I Will take some pains to undeceive the World below
about Apparitions of ill Spirits, which are as commonly formed in the Eye, as
enclosed in Aerie Vehicles. Hold, not a word more of their Customs (replied the
other) lest we should be overheard, and so receive double Punishment for
Correspondence with Apostates -- Thus the poor muzzled wretches were confined
for some time; but at their Trial, they; upon urging some such Arguments as I
have now offered, convinced their Judges, and were again set at Liberty.


2. Sp. -- I remember I was there at the same time, and there came in a
Messenger Post-haste, saying, There are just now arrived a great number of
Separate Souls upon the Confines of the Moon, that pretend to bring in
Remonstrances against the whole Philosophical Academy of Souls; at which, the
Spirit of Aristotle, who was always good at Subterfuges and By-holes,
complained of Indisposition, and that he wanted to converse with the Spirit of
Galen; but he was no sooner clear of the Crowd, but he mounts up through the
Coelum Empyreum, and gets out of the Wicket into that vast indefinite Space, to
be freed from the importunate clamor of his thousand thousand Disciples
fluttering about him. I could not forbear following him, to see the humor
on it; and amongst other things, I overheard him crying out, Oh that I had been
Alexander's Horse, instead of he being my Pupil; then I had lived quietly in
History, and had been only Curyetting, Pawing, or Neighing in the Fancy of the
Learned: But now (Wretch that I am) I Have dived so deep, that I have not only
lost my self, but am also accessory to the Destruction of my Proselytes.
Methinks I see my self catching at Imp^ssibilities, and instead of 'em, grasp
some strange bewitching Dream, that has either Blasphemy against the Gods in it,
or is a sacrilegious Story of their Secrets, belying what I could not discover.
Methinks I also see that in quisitive Race of Mankind listening to partake of
the ^orbidden Notions, and rather than fail, they turn ^ver my Works so often
till they find something in 'em, that I my self never thought of, nor designed.
Hereupon, they begin to explain Incomprehensibles, till they are served by
succeeding Ages as they served me, but the whole Blame and Punishment retorts
upon me, because I ^et 'em first at work. Oh that I had defined (...) to have
been Virtue; and Uice to have been Vice; I Would escaped the scowring of so many
duplicated Damnations, and might have walked quietly in the Battlements of the
Moon, without Noise and Disurbance.

But as I was intent upon the Philosopher's Expostulations, I saw at a distance
three Millions of separated Spirits, all Females; they had been ridiculed, and
chased out of all the Globes for their awkward Dresses, and brought along with
'em the Fashons of Two and Fifty Languages into the Indefinite Space above the
Heavens. Some had got Ruffs about their Necks as big as Cart-wheels; some Head
Dresses as large as the Tail of a Comet; some were in one Dress, and some in
another; a few were rubbing and scowring the outside of Heaven, to make it
transparent, that they might see to dress their whole Body by it; some were
doing, some were uning; some were pleased, some in a Passion: some liked their
own Mode the best, and some preferred that of another; and some were quarrelling
with every particular Dress, and made up a Iargon of all Dresses together: But
to see the different Figures, Postures, Courtsies, Complements, and
Tittle-tattle amongst 'em, made me believe that they were some Generation of
Spirits which I had never heard of: Whereupon, I applied my self to the
Aristotelian Soul I told you of, to desire his Opinion; who told me, he had
done Opinioning; but if I would ask the Spirit behind me, I might be informed:
Upon which, I turned me round, and saw a Thing all hung with Clouds and
Vapors, in an Aerie Humane Shape, wringing his Hands, and sighing at a wretched
Rate; as I made up to him, I could hear him say, -- Poor Heraclitus, Whither
now! Have thou searched the whole Universe, and every particular Globe of the
Creation, to retire from new Objects of thy Over-pity, and all this, to find
the greatest behind in this Indefinite Space? Alas, now I am desperate in my
Search, and will give over, since Female Spirits are so wedded to
Impertinencies, as not to leave 'em when dead. -- Upon the mention of the Word
Female Spirits, I troop'd off with all the speed imaginable, for fear of being
caught up for a Foot-Boy^Spirit, by one Madam C -- in Exchange-Alley; who I
well knew was as proud of a Livery-Boy, as Paint and Fucus: I had no sooner got
within the heavenly Wicket again, but I stumbled upon a Disputation that was
held upon the Verge of Saturn. But I came a little too late, and could only
hear the latter part of the Conference; which by Plurality of Voices, fixed a
Liberty of Conscience, and that the Spirits of Jews, Pagans, and Christians,
should all be free to believe themselves Children of Philosophy, and of the
Number of the Elect. I passed on from thence without taking any Leave; (for
there are no (...) among the Stars, that use Ceremonies, but European Female
Spirits, and they were most of them chased out of the Universe, as I noted
before; and coming near, the Globe of Jupiter, there was a great Concourse of
Spirits about a Challenge between a Heathen and Christian Philosophic Soul,
concerning the Burning up of the World: Here might Humanity if they would had Eyes
and Prospective Glasses strong enough, have seen their old Maxim confuted,
which says, There Is no penetration of Bodies; for here were at least ten
Millons of Spirits got together all into one Body to hear the Dispute; but
there was such a fluttering Hubbub, that the Orators were fain to leave off a
while, to see if the Noise would cease; though in vain, for every little Auditor
would pretend to dictate, and give his Opinion: I could hear one something
louder than the rest, crying out, -- Alas, alas, if the World is to be burnt
up, and all the Stars consumed, what shall I do for a Lodging; I shall never
away with the Converse of Feminine Spirits in the indefinite Space: Oh, says
another, for my Master Aristotle, how gladly would I learn over again the
Lesson of the World's Eternity, that I might be able to confute this Litigious
Spirit, that pleads for an untenanting of the Stars. Another was for Bantering;
and said, the Universe would make a prodigal Burnt-Offering. Thus one cries out
one thing, and another another; so that the whole Assembly began to vote it
penal to name such a Topic; and that there should be no more such Challenges
for fear of a Tumult. You know I was always a mortal hater of Tumults and
Quarrels; so that being in haste to get away, I made but one flight to the
World in Venus; where I light upon a very high Mountain; but I had not tarried
long there, but the Mountain was surrounded with Myriads of Female Spirits,
Armed Cap a-pe with immaterial Javelins, Bows, Darts, and Colors of War; and
one amongst the rest, comes up to me, giving me to understand in short, that I
must either quit that Globe, or prepare to encounter all the Inhabitants; which
were mostly Amazonians and Stoicesses, and had a Charter from the Secretary of
Fate, to make that Globe their Retreat, to secure 'em from the Insolences of
Male Spirits; and also, that they had the Privilege to chastise all intruding
Male Spirits as they pleased, by a Court Martial; and therefore, believing me
to be a Traveller, and a Stranger to their Customs, were so courteous, as to
give me time and opportunity to dispose of my self as I pleased. -- I viewed
the soft Herald from Top to Toe, and considering her Air and Features, I
remember that in my last Search in the Registry of Fate, I had seen her
Character, with this Signature over against it.

I had no need to ask Questions upon this Reflection, knowing the Riddle would
be resolved in another Globe, Anno Dom. 1691. and so without any acknowledgment
of the Obligation, or other complement, than in thought, I stood off again; and
in about two Seconds of a Minute, got to the Boundaries of the World in Mars:
There I was up to the Ears at first dash, amongst Male-Spirits; (forgive the
Expression, I Am to be embodied shortly,) and found 'em generally calling
Councels of War, which put me upon the Curiosity of enquiring what Religion
they were of; and I was informed they were mostly Christian Spirits: and upon
asking what their General was? I presently concluded, Nothing at all. -- A
strange kind of Exression, Brother, is not it? But it is not strange, when I
add, That it was farther told me, they were to fight against, and destroy one
another, for such mean Interests, as (when examined,) are not worth the
exercising any Passion but Hate. Indeed this amazed me above whatever I met
with in all my Rambles, although the next Encounter was not altogether unworthy
my Reflections. -- 'Twas thus:

A little farther was a Nunnery of Spirits, wherein a certain Fault had been
committed; but I dare not say what, for fear of prosecution the next time I
travel that way, since the Law was satisfied, in giving up the Criminal to the
Mob of Spirits; which handled her severely enough; and afterward away they
hurried her to a certain Meeting of Dissenting Spirits; and having pulled the
Nonresisting Preacher off his Pedestal, (for they use neither Chairs nor
Pulpits in that Globe,) one of the Ringleaders mounts, and begins as follows:

Liberty, Boys, Liberty; away with these dull Canting Spirits, who, under
pretense of being good, only meet to plot against our Freedom: Why do they tell
us of hard Names and thinking, and not preach up Liberty, or something else
that is new? For my part, I Am for Toleration of nothing but what suits my
Humor. No matter who is uppermost, or what the last ot next Council decrees;
it is all one to Mob; and whoever is of my Opinion, let him hold up the dirty
end of his Wand, and cry Cluck. -- Hereupon, they all cluck^d so loud that the
Spirits which carried that Globe, ran away from their Commission, and down it
fell betwixt Mercury and the Sun, and spoiled the Ptolomaick Systeme of the
Heavens; for my part, I got out of it as soon as I could, and left the Rabble,
who were going to pull a Pedant out of his School, for Tyrannizing over one of
their Brethren.

I was no sooner got safe out of the Whirligigg-Planet, but I met with
Charles's wain, laden with twenty dozen of Souls* bundled up close, and laid
neatly upon Pillows of Snow; as I came near, to ask the meaning, up starts one
of them, and called me Impertinent and Saucy, for not making my Honors before
I asked Questions; whereupon, I made a very humble Grin, and called 'em
worshipful Dons; thinking 'em to be Spanish Souls; upon which, one of 'em
condescended to tell me, in answer to my first Question, That they were
Gentlemen Souls, and scorning the Drudgery of walking into their Bodies, were
accommodated with that Heavenly Calash to ride in, cautioning me for the future
to be more exact in my Distinctions, and to observe a due Deference to the
Honorable. It growing late, I stepped into the next Star; where the Inhabitants
were very small, yet very courteous, and entertained me handsomely that night.
The next Morning I set out upon my Ramble again, and met the Caravan, (alias
Charles's wain,) the second time, laden with a new Shoal of Spirits, and bound
for the other world; at which I began to make my Honors (as precaution'd) but
was laughed at by the Waggoner, who told me, they were a Company of
Pick-Pocket, Highway, and Clipping-Spirits, (that is designed for Bodies of
such Professions) and foreknowing the unkind Treatment they were to meet with
in the other World, would not go into their Bodies; but were forced to be
carried. I was a little vexed at the Mistake; but you know (Brother) that
Travelers must comply with Customs, and put up Indignities on all hands.


1 Sp. -- ^Tis very right; and without such compliance, it is better to tarry in
ones own native Star, where there is freedom both to speak and act, without
constraint. -- But amongst all your Rambles, did you never make a Visit to the
Globe of the Earth?


2 Sp. -- Don't mention that Place, if you have any respect to my Ease; for as
it is the very Settling and Dreg of the Creation, so have its Inhabitants
proportionable Qualifications.


1 Sp. -- Pray pardon my Inquisitiveness, and give me one Instance; I know not
by what Fatality it comes about; but a new Theory of Pain is as bewitching to
me, as a small Practick in Pleasure.


2 Sp. -- Is it so? Why then Imagine your self amongst a numerous Crowd of
Mortals; every one a Bastile or Vatican to your old dear Acquaintance; Suppose
you saw your Relations looking out of Mortal Eyes, (as the Grates of Prisons;)
and now and then stealing a Glance at the Skies, the place of their old
habitation: Suppose you also hear one calling out to you, Pray pay me a Visit
at night, when the Body has little need of my Attendance, that I may give you
an Account what an ambitious, restless Lump it is that I animate: Pray (says
another) come see me when my Body's asleep, that I may have some vent to my
Sorrows, by telling you the vast difference betwixt a Body'd and an unbody'd
Spirit. No, (says a Third,) but if you will come and see me, I Will preach the
Doctrine of Humanity to you; possibly it may have such an effect upon you, as
you may escape the first Damnation for three or four hundred Years longer.
Suppose you hear five Thousand more beginning to make their Complaints, and the
Body, like a Tip-staff, or Sergeant, hurrying 'em away into new experiments of
Horror, before they can tell their Story out.


1 Sp. -- Hold, pray no more; -- IN have enough of Humanity: Let Us be gone; i^
your way lies toward the World in Saturn, ^'ll bear you Company,


2 Sp. -- I Am obliged to you: March then.


DIALOGUE XXVII.
Between the Spirit that is to be last imbody'd, and the Spirit that is to be
first reunited to the Body at the Day of Judgment.
1 Spirit. -- HOld, hold, Brother, don't leave me yet: -- Alas, he is gone, and
with him all the whole Society of Spiris! What have I to converse with now but
inanimate Globes, and senseless Constellations? What signifies it that I am
Lord of all, when I have no Subjects to reign over; no agreeable Mate (I mean,
of the same Species,) to accompany me? Unkind Fate, to imbody all the Thousand
Thousands of my Brethren, and to leave me to wander up and down the Universe by
my self! -- The World is to me a sort of Prison, not by Diminution, but by
Deprivation; for a Prison is not properly called a Prison, for being so great,
or so little; but being a Confinement from such and such Enjoyments. -- Oh that
I could cease to be, or transmigrate into any other Classis of Creatures! For
what state is more unhappy than that which gives a power of enjoying Good, and
denies a Subject to exercise his power upon? -- But stay, why do I repine? Some
Spirit must necessarily have been the last; and though it is I, yet it cannot be
long but my Turn will quickly come.


2 Sp. Nine hundred ninety nine Millions of Millions, -- Let me see again;
possibly my Calculation may be false. -- Suppose once more, that everry Man
(computing one Man with another,) is composed of a handful of pure Earth, all
the Particles of the other Elements being separated from it, then it follows,
that just so many Handfuls of Earth as the Globe contains in it, may be made
into Men; but no more, unless the God of Nature will make more Earthly Globes;
for when every Man rises at the Day of Judgment, and assumes his own particular
handful of Earth, if there should be more Men than Earth, -- Ha, -- Some Souls
must go without Bodies; which is very absurd. -- Nor is it very reasonable,
that the Earth should not every Bit of it be made into Men, that when they come
to take every one their own, there may be no Earth left; and then it is an easy
thing for the last Fire to consume the other Elements. No, -- that will not do
neither; -- for I Would forgot that Man is made of all the Elements; and therefore
when all the Earth is spent in making Men, the Elements must be spent likewise,
that is, the whole Earth, Air, Fire and Water, will (when every one takes their
own,) be equally divided, and march up and down an Eternal Indefinite Space, or
Vacuum, in living Glorified Humanity. -- Very well, -- now I have it; There
were at first 9999999999 Spirits, and there is just so many handful of Dust in
the Earth. Now if I could tell how many Spirits are yet unbody'd, it is but
subtracting the Remainder from the first Number, and the difference is the
Handfuls of Earth that are yet to be made into Men; and when I know this, I
shall know how long it will be before I shall be reunited again to my Body,
which I was separated from about 3000 Years since. -- Methinks I long to renew
the old Acquaintance.


1 Sp. -- What Mathematical Soul is this that is computing the Day of Judgment?
It has always been too deep a Secret for Humanity to pry into.


2 Sp. -- I have laid by that dull heavy Lump a great while since.


1 Sp. -- But it is said, that Angels themselves are ignorant of that Day.


2 Sp. -- Yes, they were so at that time, when such Words were spoken, because
they knew not how fast Spirits would be unbodied, or how the Age of Man might
shorten; nor consequently how long it would be before the World was made into
Men; but if you can give me an Account how many Spirits are yet unbody'd, I
will tell you just now how long it is till the Day of Judgment.


1 Sp. -- None of 'em but my self.


2 Sp. -- How! are all the 999999999 Souls (which were made upon the same day
that the Angels were) sent into Bodies, except you?


1 Sp. -- Yes, all but my self; I Have just now parted with my last Companion.


2 Sp. -- If so, the date of your pre-existence is just at an end; perhaps
within this quarter of a Minute; for there is always some young Body or other
gaping for a Soul to actuate it.


1 Sp. -- I shall be very glad of it; for it is afflicting to be the only
remaining Creature of one Species.


2 Sp. -- It Is so. But --


1 Sp. -- Farewell; I am called away too, and with me the whole Race of unbodied
Souls lose their Name, and change their very Nature.


2 Sp. -- Is he gone? -- I knew it could not be long that he had to tarry, --
Let me see; -- No, -- That will not do; -- That Is right; upon a modest
computation, the World must expire within these 70 Years; for it is great odds
this last unbodied Soul will be separated again before that Period: Besides,
there must be some left alive, which will undergo the same change without
dying, as the Body and Soul will do at their Reunion; therefore perhaps within
these 70 all will be over. -- Now methinks I see that little share of Dust that
belongs to me, receive its first Impression, and beckon to me to renew our old
Acquaintance and Union; Methinks I see my self as eager in my Embraces of my
old Comrade, and as busy in exercising my Offices of Perception, etc. as ever.
But I Am at a loss as to the manner how, because of the inexpressible Change
that my Organs must undergo. But I Will let that Thought alone. sinc^ I Am
satisfied, Experience will teach me, that and every thing else within a very
small Revolution of Time.


DIALOGUE XXIX.
Betwixt Two Spirits; one that pretends to deny Pre-existence, and the other to
prove it.
1 Spirit. -- WHat am I? Whence is my Original? And to what end am I designed?


2 Sp. -- You are a pre-existent Spirit, made upon the -- Day of the Creation;
Your Original is Nothingness, as to the Subject; but as to the Cause, it is the
Eternal Mind.; who, when he sees fitting, will provide you a Body to act in.


1 Sp. -- What do you mean? For my part, I believe you and I are both of us
just now created; but if you are pre-existent, and it now is 5000 Years and
more since the beginning of your Existence, pray answer me, How many Sons Adam
had; what part of the Year the World was made in; but don't answer after the
old Evasion, viz. at all times of the Year; but in what Sign the Sun was first
placed?


2 Sp. -- I have forgot now, it is so long since.


1 Sp. -- I thought Reminiscence had been co-essential with, or a part of the
Nature of Spirits; for according to the best Definitions, the Soul is a
Cogitative Faoulty. Now if Thinking, Disposing, Meditating, Examining,
Compounding, Dividing, Apprehending, Joining the Subject and the Attribute,
Affirming; Denying, Suspending, etc* be the Function and Natural Acts of the
Soul, it is necessary that Memory be an essential Attribute of it; for how is
it possible to compare two things together, unless we remember the First after
we have examined the Second; for to think of two Things at once, is impossible,
and it is so granted by all that make a due distinction between a Finite and an
Infinite Being; being what comes nearest this Act, is the quick distinction of
Letters in Reading, or the swift, yet regular Motion of the Fingers in Music.
Now since Reminiscence is co-essential with Souls, an Argument may be drawn
from hence to prove you degenerate, if not a Non Existent.


2 Sp. -- That I have a Being I Am certain, and this Converse with you,
demonstrates it.


1 Sp. -- Come, I Will grant you for once, that you are pre-existent, if you will
grant me, that my Body which I Am just now going into, is also pre-existent, and
was created before Adam had a Being; but I Will ask for no Concessions, which
I Will not first deserve by demonstration: -- For I may prove my Body
contemporary with Adam's although not visible till above 5000 Years after he was
created.


2 Sp. -- Pray how can that be?


1 Sp. -- When Matter was created, 'twas a great Storehouse of all other
Beings that were to be created from it, all which lay confusedly sleeping in
their Chaos; but of this Lump was Adam created; and if so, he himself was
potentially in it before he had a specific Being. After his Creation, he was
maintained from the productions of Earth and Water, by a destruction of, or
more properly, through a conversion of their Natures into his. Hence Adam's
Children were only a Transmutation of other material Bodies, or the Effect of
Meat and Drink in new Figures, which lay once in such and such Creatures, and
before that in the material Chaos we first spoke of. Now since the Mechanism of
Nature is ordered that it cannot be destroyed (unless by its Author,) but only
transmuted or changed into other Matter; as a Fire that burns, part of it goes
to Ashes, part into Soot, part into Air, but yet is always somewhere, or in
some thing; so that all the visible Changes we see, are nothing else but a
conversion of one Element into another backwards and forwards, according to the
adaptness and modifications of Agents and Patients; This considered, it will
plainly appear, that that Body which I am just now going into, was the last
year part of it growing in such a Crop of Corn, part of it in such an
Apple^tree, part of it in such a River, part of it in such an Ox, Sheep, Fowl,
etc. and only by a proper Revolution of Particles under different Species, so
adaptly disposited, that Nature found the Composition to fit one new distinct
Species by it self; and according to its Commission, or first Settled Chain of
Causes produced a humane Body, fit for the Actuation and Conjunction of a
Spirit. Hence it is manifest my Body was as soon in the Bosom of its Causes as
Adam's, and the last Body that shall be created, as soon as mine. Nay, to go
farther, since from Eternity the great Creator did design to make a World, from
which my Body was to be produced, I might say, that my Body was from all
Eternity designedly and potentially, though actually in time,; which is the
utmost that can be said of the Pre existence of Spirits. And I defy every
Spirit in the Universe, to prove the least difference in Time betwixt the
actual Commencement of the Existence of its Body, and its self, or that the
Potentiality of both is not equal, to wit, eternal.


1 Sp. This Argument would hold, if it could be proved, That the Soul is not so
clogged and incapacitated in its Act of Reminiscence by coming into the Body,
but that it might easily recollect what has happened in its pre existent state,
For we have innumerable Instances of the Soul's being more incapacitated in its
Functions one time than another, in the same Body, and this by Fits,
Distractions, Diseases, etc. Which to me appears demonstrative, that if the
Indispositions of the Body, which are only accidental, hinder a regular
operation of the Soul; much more may the Body it self, when first tied to, and
made coessential with it.


2 Sp. We'll grant, much depends on the Body, as to the Mode of Perception and
action, but not so very much as is supposed; To mention that leisure time of
Dreams; When perhaps the Body and Soul have the least actual dependence one of
another, we shall find the habit of Reminiscence fresh at awaking again; but to
show for once, that the Soul does not forget what it acts when separate from
the Body, by reason of the Body's indisposition. Consider the Cases of Trances,
Examinations of Witches, etc. what think ye of a Soul that has rambled out of
the Body for two or three days together, and when it has returned, and the Body
revived, it has told of infallible Truths some hundred Miles distance, where it
self actually was: This we have hundreds of creditable Instances to prove?
which considered, does fully (from the first presupposed consequence of
Reminiscence,) destroy the Doctrine of Pre-existence.


1 Sp, -- Well, I shall consider of it as soon as I have any leisure; in the
mean time Farewell.


2 Sp. -- Farewell.


FINIS.

