THE INTRIGUES AT VERSAILLES: OR, A Jilt in all Humors

A COMEDY ACTED BY His Majesty's ^ervants. AT THE Theater in
Lincolns-Inn-Fields.

Written by Mr. D' Urfey.

Wit will be wit though slighted by the Clown,
As Roses sweet though Asses tread 'em down.
LONDON, ^rinted for F. Saunders in the New-Exchange, P. Buck in Fleetstreet,
R. Parker at the Royal-Exchan^^* and H. Newman in the Poultry. 1697.

TO THE HONORABLE Sir Charles Sedley the Elder, Baronet. And to the WORTHY,
and my Much Honored Friend, Sir Charles Sedley his Son.
Most Honored,
THis New Comedy which I beg leave to Dedicate to ye, when it was first shown
to some Persons of Principal Quality and Judgment, and afterward Read to Mr.
Congreve and Mr. Betterton, had, from all, the good Fortune, to be esteemed as
one of the Best I have Written: And it is from this undisputed Authority that I
hope it will, in the Perusal, have the same Value from you; and appear worthy
the Honor of your Patronage.

As the World is full of Various Humors, so the Diversions that Poets are
obliged to Invent to satisfy 'em, must be also as various. And though it is one of
the hardest things in the World to do -- yet is the failure -- (for that time
especially) the Entire Loss of an Author's Credit as well as Profit; for an
Audience of this Age is destined to use neither Medium, Consideration nor
Modesty; wholly resolved to like what Indulges the Present Humor, though Reason,
if they thought it worth looking after, would always Inform 'em, that there is
often as much Art, Labor and Wit used, in what through the Vitiation of the
Palate they have no Relish for -- As what they willingly swallow with a
Voracious Gusto.

It has been my Fortune, through the short Course of my Poetry, to run over the
Rugged Ways of Public Censure, with as much Indifference as any one; and as I
have always Studied Variety to procure Diversion, so have I met with as
Various Success -- yet have been easy by Teaching my Self the Philosophy of
Patience, and the Use of that Common Saying, Many Men have many Minds, and
those Many Minds possessed with more Difficult Expectations then gen^ral^^ the
best Undertaker could satisfy. But to give Instance, that my Industrious Pains
have not been wanting to please the Town, if they look into my former Pieces,
they may find, without much trouble, a Variety, which has not been every Bodies
Tallent; they may find, in the Fond Husband, Regular Comedy with a Good Plot;
in the ^oarding-School, Satirical Humor and Char^cters with another; in the
M^rriage Hater, A Mixture of all digested with Comical Turns to the last
Scene; Also in the Don Quirro's ^arsical Scenes of Mirth, mixed with Variety of
Divertive Vocal Music and Dancing, with many others, some from Stories, but
most wholly my own Inventions, and all of Different Kinds, which have had their
several Lots; some have pleased more, some less, according as the Town Humor
eb'd and flowed; but generally as it is the Fate of things of this kind, have
met with Mistaken Judgment; the Meritorious having Indifferent Applause, the
Indifferent Extraordinary.

And it is in this manner that this last, the Intrigues at Ve^^ailles, has been
us^d by the Critics; Many less Labored, and Worthy, have had more Applause;
the Model of it being Courtly, and wanting the Farsical Scenes, with which the
Inconsiderate part of the Audience were formerly Entertained -- and also the
Turns requiring observation, and the Whole Contrived Machine exacting more
thought -- then i^ Natural for heads that are Buzzing with other matters in the
^layhouse, and sit on their Shoulders uneasy in a hot Summer season.

It Is therefore from the Considerate and Cooler part of the Company from whom I
did, in the Acting, and shall in the Reading, expect Justice; Amongst whom I
beg leave to Name you Sir, to whom this Piece is First Addressed -- as
Principle -- Nothing can Judge of Wit so well as Wit; And it has many years
been my Advantage, as well as other ^oets, to be Influenced by your Genius, and
Instructed by your Admirable Writings and Improving Conversation, I heard the
Fame of Sir Charles Sedley, as soon as I was capable of hearing, or (I Am sure)
understanding such a thing as Fame it self. And your being Bred in your youth,
and received all along in a Community and Friendship with Persons of the most
Exalted Spirits, and Uncommon Understandings adorning the then Flourishing
Nation, viz. The never-enough admired Soul, and Genius of Wit and ^oetry the
Present Earl of Dorset, the late Earl of Rochester, and others of their Refined
Rank, sufficiently gives the World knowledge of your equal Merit, and spares me
the share of Writing further on your Praise, which has so often (much better
then I am able to do) been done already.

However, Sir, I must beg ye to give me leave to make use of the ^oets common
gratitude -- Thanks, which I think my self never enough Capacitated to pay,
when I reflect on your Generous commendation and approvement of my Lyrical
quality, and writings of that kind, not only to your friends abroad, but even
before the Right Honorable the Earl of Leicester, the greatest Incourager and
Patron of all the Muses, and their forlorn and desolate Sons, to whom I wish
all the happiness that Heaven and Earth can give, and that 'twere possible his
Life could last like his Fame -- This, Sir, from you has given me a Credit
which I esteem as a Fortune, and which is not in the power of Malice to destroy.

That word Malice has given me a little occasion for Digression, only to tell
you that there is in this Comedy amongst the Characters -- One of an old Beau,
under the Name of the Count Brissac -- which I hear by some offended, has been
perticularly piqu'd at, I could not recommend its defense, Sir, to a person who
can better Judge its Innocent nature then your self, having very lately been
diverted by a very good Copy of Verses which I am told are yours, and which I
beg leave to insert, The Young Lady's Advice to the Old Beaux, A SONNET.
SCrape, scrape no more your Bearded Chins,
Old Beau's in hopes to please
You should Repent your former Sins,
Not study their Increase.
Young Fops do daily shock our Sight,
But Old ^ffend both day and Night.
(2.)
In vain the Coachman turns about,
And Whips the Dapple Grayes,
When the Old Oagler looks out,
We Turn away the Face.
Youth and Gay-Love will ever Charm,
But both affected cannot warm.
(3.)
The Summer Fruits we highly prize,
They kindly cool the Blood;
But Winter Berrys we despise,
And leave 'em in the Wood;
On the Bush they may look well,
But Gathered, fail in Taste and Sm^ll.
Which Verses are really of so Instructive a Nature, that I could wish my
Critic could digest 'em, as he ought, with all my heart.

And now, Sir, to you, the happy Son of the Author of these and other highly
Valued things of this kind; I humbly desire a Minutes Address, and that you
will be pleased to divide with your Father this Poetical Offering: Your
Judgment I can never doubt, though you think it not fit to Write; for, being so
nearly related to him in Blood, you must naturally have more than a small
Portion of his Genius; you show all the taking Qualifications for which his
Bloom of Youth was Admired and Loved, except his ^oe^r^ which it is reason to
believe you negligently desert, only because you observe how barren the
returns of Acknowledgment and Praise are in an Age, where Men's Minds are either
harrass'd with War, or Numbed with Ignorance, to a Muse even of his Excellence,
which Theme, if ever you do take Pen in hand, I am almost assured will be the
first -- there being more between you than the ordinary Duty and Love Incumbent
between Father and Son, an entire, free, and easy Friendship -- Submission
with Satisfaction on your side -- and Contentment with Pleasure on his, which I
have observed in the few hours of my Conversation with you, by your frequent
Expression of your uncommon Felicity in so good a Father's Indulgence. And,
that this happiness between you may last to the utmost Extent of Time and
Humane Nature -- is the Real Wish

Of Your Obliged, and Most Humble Servant, T. D' Urfey.

PROLOGUE.
AS in Intreagues of Love we find it true,
Stale Faces pall, whilst you are Charmed with New;
The Poet knowing the same in Wit prevails,
Fearing to tire ye with more English Tales,
Has laid his Scene in the French Court, Versailles.
Thus Changed your Diet for Variety,
From our Course Cheese of homely huswifry,
To fragrant Angelote, and Cher Fromage du Brie.
He doubts not, many that sit here to day,
That have observed the Title to his Play,
Believe it is for some Pollitique Essay;
Against this he says, a Proverb gives him Rules,
It Is never safe to meddle with Edged Tools.
To cause diversion Comic Mirth is best,
Warr's but a dull Occasion for a Jest;
And as in Cudgel Play, we find -- no Ioke,
From either party, when both heads are broke.
But then perhaps it may expected be,
That he should fall upon French Fopery,
It Is -- true, they have Fools -- I gad and so have we;
In Apish Modes they Naturally shine,
But we by Aping them think our selves fine;
The late blew Feather was Charmant divine,
Then the Sawse gathering Sleve and the huge Button;
And now our Coat Flaps broad as Shoulder Mutton,
With various colors faced, Red, Green and Sky;
Next year I hope they will give us Wings to fly,
With Sleeves so large, to cover Nails and all,
And every Button like a Tennis Ball.
No folly's theirs, but we have here as bad,
Their Brains have too much Air and ours have too much Led;
They swear and Rant in spritely Ela -- Sounds,
And ours in Gamut grumble Blood and Ounds.
To cool them they from Sallads seek relief;
To warm us, we debauch our selves in Beef;
And when half frantic we to Battle Run,
Priests on both sides never fail to ^oot us on.
Without Reflection therefore either Way,
The Cautious Poet has designed to day,
Nothing but Love intreaguing through his Play;
For sollid Reasons neither party Lashed,
His fury's not so Fierce but may be dashed;
Wit has no Armor proof against being Thrash'd,
Therefore in Terror of the Warriors Trade,
Suspends all Satyr till the Peace be made.
Drammatis Personae, and Characters.
MEN. Duke de Sans^rre. Proud, and Hot-Spirited; very Amorous, Jealous and
Revengeful Mr. Betterton. Guillamour. A young English Lord, a great Intreaguer.
Mr. Verbruggen. Count de Brissac. An Old Beau, Ridiculou^ly Apish, and fond of
young Company. Mr. Boen. Count de Fiesque. Witty, Generous, and good Natured,
but Amorous to a Fault. Mr. Hodson. Count de Tonnere. Young and Extravaant,
Intreagu'd with Lady Brissac, and Disguised in Women's Clothes, upon the account
of a Duel. Mr. Bowman. Sir Blunder Bosses. A dull sordid Brute, and Mongril
whose Humor is, to call every Body by Clownish Names. Mr. Underhill. Rambure.
An Old Affected Fellow. Valett to Fiesque. WOMEN. Dutch. de Sanserre Poetical,
High-Spirited, and Wanton. Mrs. Bracegirdle. Countess de Brissac. Young, Wild,
and Extravagant. Mrs. Bowman. Madam de Vandosme. A Right Jilt in all Humors.
Mrs. Barry. Daubray. A Retainer, and Spy to the Duke de Sanserre. Mrs. Willis.
La Busque. Confident to the Duchess. Mrs. Lawson. Grossiere; Page to Sanserre.
A Finical Jilt, Confident to Vandosme. Mrs. Leigh.

Singers, Dancers, and Attendants.

The SCENE, VERSAILLES.

Lately PUBLISHED,

A Plot and no Plot, a Comedy, by Mr. Dennis.

The Novelty, every Act a Play, by Mr. Moteux.

The City Lady* or Folly Reclaimed; a Comedy; By Mr. Dilke.

THE Intrigues at Versailes.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter Count de Fiesque, as newly Dressed, Valet following. De Fies. HEy, Rambure.


Ram. Monsieur -- Vat is your Plaisire?


De ^ies. Go to the Count de Tonnere's Chamber, and see if he be Stirring.


Ram. Begarr, he be noe only stir himself, but me tink he have stir all the
Whole Varle beside dis Morning; vor dear have bin in de Street de greata
Fidde^, and de leetel Fiddel, de greata Pipe, and de leetel Pipe, Drum, Drum,
Drum; Squeeka, Squeeka, Squeek: Oh Diable! me have no Sleep all this Night
Begarr.


De Fies. Ha, ha, ha, What has he been Serrenaded?


Ram. Begarr, Monsieur, me have de ver great reason to believe de Count is vat
you call de Frantic Person, dat is, he have but leetel here, Points to his
Forehead.
dat is, he have no sound Brain Begarr,


De Fies. Oh you are a great Judge of Brains, Sir, I believe: And what makes
you think so, Blockhead?


Ram. Morbl^au, De reason me think is very plain, he come here in de Woman's
Clothes for Disguise, in vish he look ver much like de great Whore Begarr; de
likeness of de Whore draw de Fool and de Fiddler, the Fiddler he draw de whole
Varle to Stare, Stare -- And vere den is his Brain to tinke he can be
disguise? Ha, ha, ha --


De Fies. Was there ever such a Coxcomb? -- Why thou talk of him, as if he
Concealed himself for a Burglary -- But, Sir, pray let your Discretion be now
Informed, that his is only a Disguise of Honor, till he can get his Pardon of
the King, who is, at present, a little Angry with him about a Duel he lately
Fought; So that if the Woman's Clothes he wears don't Conceal him from Cowardly
Poltroons, he is certain, however, of every Man of Honor's Protection.


Ram. Ver good; vil de Man of Honor Protect him for de Duel, against de
King's Positive Command, dat is ver fine -- Begarr, Monsieur, dat Man of
Honor, like your self, that will defenda him for de kill; de Man of Honor,
like my self, commit de worst Burglary in de Whole Varle, and deserve to be
hang Begarr.


De Fies. Well, Sir, Pray get you about your Message -- and Release me from
your Casuistical Opinions -- I took you into my Service, Sir, for your skill in
Pimping, not your Judgment of Prowess: Will you go, Sir?


Ram. Pimping, vat dam word be dat for de Man of Honor; Begarr, it turna my
Stomach, and spoila mine Breakfast -- he bien, Monsieur, I go -- de Pimpa --
Morbleau -- I go, Sir, I go -- Oh here come de Count himself.


Enter Tonnerre dressed in Women's Clothes. Tonn. Dear Fiesque, Good Morrow to
thee; Gad I have so longed to see thee -- that I had hardly patience to give
'em time to Dress me in my Female Trinketts here; thy Pleasant Conversation,
and some few Ravishing Thoughts on the Dear Angel I Adore, are the only
Consolation I have in my Confinement; hark, I tell thee News, Will thou believe
it? I have been Serenaded to Night, Ha, ha, ha.


De Fies. Serenaded, Is that all -- Gad, for my part, I wonder thou remainst on
Earth, here, in a Condition of Mortality; such Celestial Beauty, methinks,
some Amorous God should be ready to seize every moment; some Jove should come
dazzling in Golden Showers; or, as a Bull mount thee, like Fair Europa, then
swiftly bear thee, through the Helespont, to some Sweet Bower of Love: What
Gut-scraping Coxcomb has now been Insipidly Sacrifising? What Guittar-Thrasher,
Thrum, thrum, thrum? What Madrigal Chanter with a Love-trilling A -- h me, that
makes me Sweat to hear him? -- Or what Pitiful Pipero, with a Toodle, Toodle,
Toodle, -- has been profaning the Ears of so Admirable a Beauty.


Tonn. Why this Admirable Beauty, Sir, since you are pleased to divert your
Self so with it, has, to its Eternal Fame, gained an entire Victory upon the
old Count Brissac, whose Charming Wife thou know I have been so long in Love
with.


De Fies. Ay Count, and not without Satisfactory Returns on her Side too --
Your Secret has been blown upon, I can tell ye; The Court has heard Public
Information, perticularly, of your Late Journey to see her in the Country,
disguised like a Pilgrim -- What a Strong Fit of Devotion she had every day to
be Closetted up at Prayers with the Holy Pilgrim; How often she would Puke, and
be Sick, that the Pilgrim might be sent for; And what strange Benefits she made
her Credulous Husband believe she found in her Boddily Health, through the
Force of the Pilgrims Sanctified Beads and Sprinklings, Ha, ha, ha.


Tonn. The truth is, never was Intreague better managed for some time -- for
Nature certainly did never produce a better Stock to Graft Cuckoldom upon, the^
Old Brissac, for he has so great a Fondness for himself, and is always so
blindly partial to his own Abilities -- that his heart is still at Ease about
his Wife, nor would he ever have suspected us, had not Cavoys, that prying
Coxcomb her Brother, discovering, done us the Mischief, upon which followed the
Duel, in which he was Wounded, and I made shift to get hither in this Disguise.


De Fies. But how came Brissac to follow, that part of the Story, is still a
Mystery?


Tonn. Why, as the Devil would have it, he happening to be be acquainted with
the Lady that helped to Disguise me, came hither, and found me Just Dressed as you
see: But, to hear how many Oaths he Swore he was smitten with me, to see the
Old Beau Cock at me, and Smicker with his Grizl'd Chops, and frisk up and down
like an Old Ape, would have put one into a Fit of a Convulsion with Extremity
of Laughter.


De Fies. And in persuance of this Intreague, he has followed ye hither to
Versailes.


Tonn. Yes, Faith, and is as Hot and Eager upon the Scent, as the youngest
Hound in a Pack. And since I am sure he knows me not, it may chance to give
occasion for some Scenes of Pleasant Diversion, for to Crown my Joy, the
Duchess Sanserre her Sister, told me last Night, that taking this Advantage of
her Husbands absence, she resolved upon a Frolic also hither in Disguise.


De Fies. Very good -- why faith now taking all things into nice Consideration,
here is laid, between the Sisters, as pretty a well-modell'd compact Design for
Cuckold-making, as heart can wish; for I have long had my self an old
Love-Grudge to the Duchess -- though my Pretty New Mistress Vandosme has lately
-- allayed it; besides, I know the young English Guillamour is now Lord of the
Ascendant there, which makes the Hot-Spirited Jealous Duke ferment perpetually
--


Tonn. Prithee what is that Guillamour?


De Fies. Why, faith, a Man of Worth enough; brave, witty* and handsome; he
came hither just before the War broke out, in his return from Travel: he is one
that has all along professed an unbiased Candor for his Country, and their
present King, for which he was some time Imprisoned in the B^stile, till by the
Power and Interest of the Duke de Crequi, his intimate Friend, he was set at
Liberty; and now only stays till some private Affairs are dispatched, and then
returns to England.


Enter Rambure. Ram. Monsieur -- you may remember just now, you call me de
Pimp; me come now to tell you, dat dear is below de Old Madamoselle, dat use to
bring de young Prett -- Woman's, de Masquerele -- de She-Pimpa begar would speak
with you.


De Fies. Irreverend Rogue, Do You know who you speak of? She Is an Emisary from
the God of Love, ye Dog, therefore I charge ye go and Introduce her with
Ceremony.


Ram. Me voud kick her vid Ceremony begar vid all mine heart. Exit*


Enter Grossiere. ^hispers Fiesque. De Fies. I Will dispatch away the Company you
see here imediately; And prithee tell her I long for her Company -- take this
thy self too in part of my Acknowledgments, gives her Money.


Gross. What no Present then for her? -- indeed, -- Is it so Indifferent with
ye? you shall have but an indifferent Entertainment then, I can assure ye that
my frugal Gentleman -- ^side and Exit.


Tonn. I need not ask thee whither it be a Love Message, but prithee is it from
that dear pretty Cherubin that I used to see with thee, that thou told'st me of
just now, was a Bastard of the Familly of Vandosme.


De Fies. Why then, Sir, to satisfy your Curiosity, it is from the very same,
she is coming to visit me.


Tonn. Gad you are a happy fellow, -- for, of all Creatures I ever saw, except
my dear Countess, she is the most Charming; And is she thy own too, dear Rogue,
hah? And art thou sure of her?


De Fies. Sure of her, no Gad, no more then I should be of my shadow, if I
thought to catch it; for even in the Crittical moment when I am in Bed with
her, and one would think then a Man were sure of a Woman; if one word or
accident cross her, Presto, she is gone like a Juglers Ball in a moment, and
then if you think to stop her, like a hunted Cat, she takes but one Spring, and
is imediately from the Top of the Stairs to the Bottom.


Tonn. This is Miraculous, Sure, thou art not a good Bedfellow, and do not
use a Woman well, -- What can be the reason of this?


De Fies. Damned humor, nothing but damned humor, by Heaven, and because thou
shall not be too Envious of my happiness, I will now mix it with some allay,
know therefore that this Angel Creature we are speaking of, has by Intervals
and Fits, more and worse humors than all the She Devils put 'em together in
Belzebub's Seraglio; there never was such appearance of Saint and Spirit of
Satan mixed in one Woman, since the Creation, talk to her this minute, her brow
shall be unclouded, Sweet and serene, her Air Innocent and Engaging, and her
whole Composure all Harmony, Softness and quiet, and yet the next, Cross her
but with a Trifle, she shall roar louder than a Storm, Swear, Curse, tear your
Perruke, Linen, throw Bottles, Glases, Knives, Forks, nay Chairs and Stools at
your Head, in less time then I have been making the Description.


Tonn. Why this is a very Devil Indeed, -- But can thou that art a Man of
Sense and Spirit bear it and proceed.


De Fies. Oh friend, tho this Devil in her, -- I confess my Philosophy should
teach me, to conjure and avoid; yet when her Charming Person and the Joys she
sometimes gives me comes into my memory, her Cherubs Face, soft touch, and
fragrant Breath, -- I doubt my Sense, and think her all o'r Angel -- Oh I Love
her friend and she too too well knows it, -- She comes, prithee leave me for
half an hour, -- And take a turn in the Garden, it is possible e're long I may
wean may Self -- in the mean time reprove me not but Pity me.


Tonn. Pity -- Faith instead of that I Will do more for thee then I have done
for my self this Seav^n years -- i will go pray for thee -- for take it from me
thy Case is de^perate. Exit Tonnere.


Enter Vandosme. De Fies. So Venus Moved, when drawn by Ciprian Doves,
She met Adonis in the Myrtle Groves;
With Rosy face, and loose Expanded Hair,
Exposing all that is Charming, all that is fair.

Vand. Hey day, What silly fancy's this? What in the name of Poverty has set ye
a Rhyming this morning? -- Phoo, Jesu -- how hot -- it is grown o'th sudden? I
was bewitched, I think, to come out to day.


De Fies. Why how now Sweet? What de^ponding the first minute you see me?
prithee remember, Child, it is me thou come to see, I am I, my dear, the Man
that Loves thee, Loves thee beyond the World; and Gad, if desert may take
place, deserve thy Love again, better then any Man in it.


Vand. Lord you are always so full of your own Desert, if others could but see
so much in ye, 'twere well.


De Fies. Why can you see none at all in me.


Vand. Pish, Lord, What a does here every day with your desert, pray don't
Expect any flattery from me, I am not in a humor? -- I met a plaguey Black Coat
at my first coming out this Morning -- I am sure there is some ill coming
toward me -- would the Devil had them. I had rather a Raven should Cross my
Way, than a Priest, a thousand times.


De Fies. Fie Child, Would thou let such a Trifle as that put thee out of
humor when thou were coming to see me?


Vand. Well, well, If you don't like my humor, pray let me be gone, here is no
body will Confine thee to it that I know of. Ofiers to go.


De Fies. Nay -- nay, begone; why that is more ridiculous now than the other;
prithee dear Child do but Consider what a strange humor this is.


Vand. Well, well, If it be a strange humor, let it be so, I know no body will
mend it.


De Fies. Oh woman, woman, woman, for one dear Charming minute of Pleasure
amongst one hundred thousand of discontent, What are we poor Mortals Men born
to Suffer.


Vand. Why this is the Devil now -- ^lways complaining, complaining, always
uneasy, pish, pray let me go, I have other business to do then to stand fooling
here.


De Fies. Oh ungrateful! How can you call the chief, nay the most Advantageous
business of your Life fooling? come, this is a dissimulation so gross you ought
to blush at it -- but you know my Love can hide a thousand such Erorrs as this
-- Oh -- by Heaven I love thee so entirely that --


Vand. Love me -- yes Sir -- you take care to show it migh^ily, your Love was
expressed extremely in your Actions yesterdeay, D^ye remember the Flea.


De Fies. The Flea --


Vand. Yes, Sir, the Flea -- which tho an Inconsiderable thing in it ^elf yet
you know I passionately Loved it, and for you when I took it out of its Box, to
let it dine upon my breast, to come with your rubbing brush Chin, and
horse-play, to fright it, and make it leap into the Fire -- was an Injury I Will
never forgive: D'slife -- would the fire had been big enough, and you had been
bound to leap into it your self.


D^ Fi^s. Ah, sweet Nature, how I Love thee, prithee have some mercy, Child,
and consider your wish is a double Curse upon me, for I, poor Flea, as I am,
already burn with Love of thee, and to wish me to hop into another Fire before
I am purged in this, is a Martyrdom unexampled -- It Is beyond St. Lawrences
Gridiron, or any of the old Persecutions.


Vand. Oh, witty Sir, you may talk on, and fancy you are minded if you please.


De Fies. And so then the burning of this Flea, to Exalt my misfortunes, has
been the notable occasion of this your quarrel to me.


Vand. This or any other occasion, so I do but quarrel with thee Aside.
-- I Will not give yea any account what is the occasion -- or if I do, you and
your Actions perhaps are my aversion, that is the occasion.


De Fies. Is my Love become a Trouble?


Vand. Oh pray call it by its rig^t Name Impertinence, and then I can answer --
that is always a trouble.


De Fies. Insuportable vexation -- now am I ready to choke with fretting. Spets.


Vand. Ugh -- now hawking and Spitting -- on purpose to spoil ones Stomach to
ones Dinner, egh. Kecks.


De Fies. What a Devil -- must not I spet for ye, when I have occasion? sure I
may spet, Madam. Aloud.


Vand. Oh, your Lungs up with all my heart, Death and Hell let me be gone.
Aloud to him.


De Fies. No, no, you have a Fit upon ye, and I will not expose ye in Public till
it be off, harkee -- Madam, What did you come hither for?


Vand. The Devil knows what I came hither for, would I had been hamstring'd, or
my Feet crippled with Corns, as big as Wallnuts, to have hindered me; you shall
be less visited henceforward: What a plague do you stop the door for?


De Fies. Nay then my Patience is quiet spent, and let me now tell ye, Madam,
you shall stay a little for my humor.


Vand. Your humor; I will not, Fool, D'slif^ keep off your hands, or else may
Thunder Blast me, if my Nails don't dig as many Holes in your Face as ever the
Smallpox did; thou shall not have three Hairs left in thy Perriwig, and this
your Beauships Cobweb Steinkirk here shall be as quickly Tinder, as --


De Fies. Hush, Devil, there is some body at the Gate, knocks within. and
methinks I am still loath to make thee Scandalous, though thou deserve it Richly
-- Fiesque is going*


Enter Tonnere hastily. Tonn. Dear Fiesque forgive me this Intrusion, which I
was compelled to make, to secure my self; the Marquis de la Fert, one of my
greatest Enemies, is below to speak with thee, and thy Ignorant unthinking
Valet was just bringing him into the Garden where I was -- this Pretty Lady, I
think, has seen me thus Equipt before; And, I hope, will Excuse me, that I thus
rudely shelter my self in this Sanctuary -- where Angels are, there always must
be safety Bowing to Vandosme, and she modestly returns.



De Fies. He has heard nothing I perceive, Aside well, Count, since your good
Fortune has brought you hither, I Will trust you with my Paradise for once, and
go and dispatch the Marquis, and be with ye presently. Exit, shaking his head
at Vendosme.



Tonn. A Paradise indeed, too happy Friend, that have in thy possession all
that is Charming -- Pray, Madam, please to give me an Answer to one thing --
They sit down.



Vand. If my small capacity can do it, Sir -- Pray what is it? Modestly.


Tonn. Do you think the Gentleman that went out just now can ever be saved? --


Vand. What a Devil does he mean by that Question? -- Aside.

Bless me! Why not, Sir? -- We all have Faults, it is true, but you know Grace,
Sir, Repentance -- Calmly.


Tonn. Oh, Madam, yes -- I know Grace and Repentance goes a great way -- Was
there ever any thing so Seraphick? -- Aside. But, Madam, for another Reason, I
should think he cannot; for he has so perfect a Heaven here in Enjoying you,
that to have it hereafter too, would be Injustice to us his Fellow Creatures,
the Blessing would be too much for his share.


Vand. Oh, Sir, I find you have the Court-Lesson perfectly -- Whatever is to
come hereafter, you, I Am sure, have more then a Double Blessing here, A
Charming Wit, a Graceful Person, and then a Tongue -- that if I durst give Ear
to it -- Oh Heaven!


Tonn. What, dear Charmer, what, Aside.
She Is a Miracle, Igad, a very Saint.


Vand. Believe, even what you pleased -- yet, Sir, tho my nature is Easy, Mild,
Soft, and too Credulous, yet I am taught by your Friends Example here -- not
always to think what Men say is Gospel -- he used to talk so too.


Tonn. And does he faulter now? Oh barbarous Wretch -- I find it now Fiesques
Character of her was a mere Banter on me; D'slife, she is a mere Angel. Aside.


Vand. Alas his Humor is too rough for me -- that is well put in, in case he
should have heard any Noise -- just now Aside.


Tonn. Oh rude, Intolerable rude, Madam -- Gad, I Will be even with Aside him;
And can you then resolve, Sweet Angel, to be Charmed Eternally to such
uneasiness -- Will you propose no relief to your self?


Vand. Only by Patience, Sir; I Am skilless in revenging Injuries.


Tonn. No other Remedy, pray think again, Sweet.


Vand. My Sighs and Tears -- Pretends to Weep. and those, when they fall, are
Mil^stones -- Aside.


Tonn. Tender as ^nfant Innocence -- a very Magdalen. Aside. Yes Madam, there is
a third effectual Remedy -- which thus I offer ye -- my Faithful Service --
Dear, dear Countess, I beg thy Pardon -- I must be a Rogue for a few Minutes;
it is impossible for me to avoid it -- I Am ready, Sweet, to relieve ye from
Fiesque; he has forfeited the Bonds of Friendship, by traducing you to me: Oh
Execrable Villainy! -- Why he said you had the humor of a Devil.


Vand. Too kind to him, the ungrateful Creature knows, but since he dares
behind my back detract me.


Tonn. Revenge it Madam, if you have any Spirit, and since our tyme's too short
here to propose right methods, know Madam, we are to have the Fiddles to night
at the Duke de Sanserres -- please but to meet me there, and fear not, the
result shall answer Expectation.


Vand. A Devils humor did he say? -- Oh! I could cry my Eyes out. Weeps.


Tonn. Soft, gentle sweetness -- Why what a lying Rogue is this F^esque -- come
dear Creature -- your promise.


Vand. Well, since he could be so base -- there is my hand, I Will come.


Tonn. That Is right -- here he comes -- clear up sweet and feign a smile or
two, and let us talk of News.


Vand. I Will warrant ye.


Re-Enter de Fiesque. Tonn. Yes, yes, '^is Certain, Madam, the Grand Seignour
has passed the Danube, and with an Army of Fifty Thousand Ianiz^rys, is come by
Niss^ in his March toward B^l^rad.


Vand. Why then Sir, if the Bassa of Allepo, and the other thundering B^ssa
what do you call him, come and Join him, it is as certain that -- hum -- I say,
it is as certain that they will -- that they will bring a great deal of Powder and
Shot wit^ 'em, there will be thundering doings amongst 'em.


De Fies. Hugh, ha^ily Concluded that truly -- What has my coming frighted ye
into Pol^^ticks? I wish there has been no th^ndering doings here sense I left
ye, the false Lady there methinks looks somewhat Guiltilly, and you, M^dam, if
I mistake not, are a great deal better in humor, than when I left ye.


Vand. Who I? no: I Vow, I think I Am much at one -- but one cannot help being a
little diverted to observe the Count's behavior in his disguise, I vow he is
the best man^ger of a Woman's Petticoats that ever I saw.


De Fies. Humph, Does he manage women's Petticoats so well Indeed, Madam?


Tonn. Thou art the veryst Tirant Fiesque, the most insulting Triumpher, by
Heaven 'twere but a piece of Justice in Fortune, to whirle thee from ^y present
height of Happiness, and crush thee with the Chariot thou now drivest -- now
does he feign a Jealousy, Madam, out of mere Ostentation and Vainglory.


Vand. He may feign, Sir -- but alas, he never could Love well enough to be
really Jealous -- What would I give to have power to make him so? -- or that I
had so much Gall -- to Rail enough -- to make him Angry.


De Fies. Oh impossible, Madam! -- Impossible -- for you, with that Turtle
disposition, to Rail; -- why, 'twould be a Prodigy -- this is a subtle Banter,
grounded on some Mischievous Design by both of Aside. 'em, and yet I dare not
own I understand it.


Tonn. Well, Adieu ye happy Lovers -- I can look on ye no longer without Envy,
and therefore must withdraw in my own Defense -- Besides, I expect my dear
Countess in Town to Night -- She is my stately Banquet of Love; this shall be
my little pretty repas de plasire by the by -- Aside.


De Fies. So Calm when I return, yet when I went so Exit Tonnere. Stormy --
What can I think of this.


Vand. O you must not think at all of it; in such a humor I know not what I
say -- Forgive me, dear Sir: Belive me, 'twas only Passion -- Come, you must,
you shall forgive me.


D^ Fies. Oh thou bewitching Creature -- I am Charmed, and it is in vain to
struggle -- But must T^nnere share with me too -- for some Intreague there is
betwixt ye I Am sure.


Vand. Pish -- A Boy -- A Novice -- A Marchpane Toy for Green-Ey'd Girls to
play with -- I Will never speak a word to him again as long as I live.


De Fies. And have ye no Intreague?


Vand. Believe me, none. Looking Kindly.


De Fies. I do; For who can look on thee, and not believe thee? Come, go in
with me, and in my Cabinet I have a Brillant Diamond shall bind thee to be
Constant. Exit.


Vand. The Diamond shall be welcome, what ever you are --
It Is Glittering Profit is my Taking Theme,
Co^stancy's Folly, Conscience a mere Dream:
My Vows my Promise, or the Oaths I Swear,
I can Shift from me, like the Clothes I wear.
Thus the Wife Woman moulds her Loving Tool;
His best Enjoyment is his Flame to Cool;
But hers is always to make him a Fool. Exit.

ACT II.
SCENE. I.
Sanserre Solus. Sans. WHy have the Doting Sages, of all Times, allowed this
Charm, called Marriage, yet less hurtful Witchcraft, punished as Horrible and
Diabolick? The honest Conjurer must be Burnt for's Circle, only because it is
thought he Raises Devils; yet the Vile Pulpit Drummer must be Pampered, whose
Conjuring Rings prepares more Souls for Devils, then all the Seven Deadly Sins
together. Here Is one Marries in have a Scold, her Noise makes him think Life a
Torment: then a second, one that is Rich, but Ugly -- her Deformity eats him
with Spleen; he fancy's Hell at home, and that he bears Damnation still about
him: A Third torments with Pride; a Fourth with Wantonness; whose Face, Shape,
Air, Address, and Jigging Motion, giving the Lover hope: The Husband's
Jealousy, 'twixt hot Desire and fierce Revenge, Dams both. Now one of the worst
of this Cursed Tribe am I, doomed to the worst too of Husbands Torments,
Jealousy; which, like a Ra^enous Canker, knaws my heart, and grants me no
Cesation to my Doubt -- here comes my Credulous Brother-in-Law, old Brissac,
the mere Antipodes to me in Humor; he, though he Married a young Wife, fears
nothing; simply secure of her, and partial to himself, in spite of Time,
believes he is young; Talks, Drinks, Sings, Dances, Dresses like a Beau, and is
never better pleased then when you say, Years leave no mark upon him -- Pox on
him, I must be Civil to him -- So, Brother, I hope am so happy to have this
Vi^it meant to me.


Enter Brissac. Brissac. I, I my Lord to you; To whom else should I mean it?
Gad, my Lord, we wished heartily for ye where I have been; two or three young
brisk Fellows of us would have diverted your Spleen, Faith, ha, ha, ha -- we
have been up all Night Serenading my New Mistress -- My Lord, what do you mean,
no Ceremony I beseech ye? I have but just been at home to New Rig, Wash,
Powder, Patch, and put on a clean Cherry-Colour'd Cravat-string.


Sans. And dare you publicly own a New Mistr^ss, Count, without fear of a
Revenge from your Lady at home, if she should hear on it? -- Is not there such a
thing in Nature as a New Gallant? -- Will Not Horns grow in that Country think ye?


Brissac. No, my Lord -- the only proper Soil that I know for 'em to grow
fast in, is your Lordship's Head.


Sans. 'Pox on him; Pray Heaven he does not Prophesy. Aside. Come, don't be too
secure, Old Count.


Brissac. Old Count -- What a plague and ju^t come from Serenading -- my Patch
on -- Peruke Powdered, and Cherry-Colour'd-Cravat-string -- Old Count --
Harkee, my Lord, the first sign of Age is to be Jealous of ones Wife, take that
from me, Old Duke.


Sans. Nay, that is no General Rule, Brother.


Brissac. Most veritable -- for it is ten to one he that suspects his Wife,
does, in some kind, find a Defect in, and Suspect himself. And he that Suspects
himself -- it is vehemently to be supposed has some Feeble, Lepid -- Frigid --
Causes, that thank my Stars, I am a Stranger to --


Leaps at every word. Sans. Very well, Sir, I Am glad to see you so Active.


Brissac. Humph -- Indifferent well for an Old Count: Limps to him.
Harkee, my Lord, Shall you and I run a Heat to Morrow morning, for Fifty
Pistols, three times round the Park.


Sans. O not so fast, good Count -- you Run -- why I see ye halt now -- you are
foundred already.


Brissac. A Corn -- a plaguee Corn I have, a Pox on it; I trod upon a Nail
with it -- Halt -- Oon's, I can run Forty Mile an end without breathing.


Sans. Come, come, take a Friend's Advice, and be more sparing of your Vigor;
or if you will take a Journey of Forty Mile, let it be homeward, upon your
Pad-Nag, that your Lady may take care of your Gout, in stead of your Corn --
for you may Hop -- Frisk, or fancy what you please, Brother, but you are Old.


Brissac. Old again, and can you, in Conscience, think ^o my Lord?


Sans. Most unalterably.


Brissac. What -- for all my Peruke's Powdered, and my Patch on?


Sans. Ah that will not do.


Briss. Zoons, what and for all my Cherry-Colour'd-Cravat-string.


Sans. Ay, for all your Cherry-Couler'd-Cravat-string, reserve your Remains for
your Lady at home, good brother, and if you are wise look well to her, she may
be gadding this miunte for ought you know, for take it once more from me, you
are old, the Crow-foot appears Brother.


Brissac. Spite by the Gods, mere spite, and burning Envy -- my Wife gadding,
Oon's, that I know is this minute sitting at ho^e in her Closset, that looks
upon the Pond, Embroydering little Babies upon Dimety to make me a set of
Chairs and Stools.


Sans. Ah brother! she is more likely to be making little Babes in your
Bedchamber for you to Embroyder -- but since good Council is lost upon ye,
I Will be silent, only Informing ye this, that in Merchandise, Traders can mark
their Wares, but a Wife is such a kind of a Commodity, that a man may be
confoundedly cheated in her without missing one Pennyworth of the Property.


Enter Page. Page. Sir, there is one below to speak with ye, that says his Name
is Sir. Blunder Bosse.


Brissac. Oh! Pox on him, Is he come then? It Is a new Aquaintance of mine, my
Lord, he Lodges in the same house with me, gad I must beg your Lordships pardon
for presuming upon my Interest here, I have Invited him to dinner --


Sans. The Devil ye have -- this old fellow will make me Mad. Aside.


Brissac. Oons, he is the rarest humorist, the most odd out of the way fellow,
my Lord, that ever you knew -- he is a right Mungril by Birth -- his Father was
an English North Country Wooller, for his Wealth made a Knight, who trading
afterward into Holland begot him upon a Dutch Woman in Rotterdam -- And to see
his way of Breeding, and hear -- his method of Speech -- is a Rarity you have not
met with; harkee, boy, boy, Prithee what did he say too thee?


Page. Why he asked me first whose little Pimp I was.


Brissac. Hah a hah -- well, And what else? --


Page. And when I told him I was Page to the Duke de S^nserre, he asked me if
the Mangy Curr, Old Brissac, were not with him.


Brissac. Ay -- ay -- it is his way my Lord, it is his way --


Page. And what other Dogs and Bitches were in the Company?


Brissac. Ha, ha, ha, it is a strange sort of a fellow; go go, prithee bring him
up, he calls every Body without distinction, by such names -- it is his way my
Lord, Did you Lordship ever hear of such a Humor?


Sans. No: the Devil take me, nor I never since I was Born, confusion -- What
Company am I to have at Dinner? Aside.


Enter Sir Blunder. Brissac. Oh, Sir Blunder! your Servant -- and with my
Lord's leave here you are welcome.


Sir Blun. Ay, -- with all my heart, take whose leave thou will -- well, you
see ye old Theif I have found ye out at last, tho like a Cur Dog as you were,
you gave but Scurvy Directions -- Do hear, is that the Duke thou toldst me of.


Brissac. Ay, ay, Sir Blunder, this is the Duke, my Brother in Law.


Sir Blun. Hugh -- I knew one Gulchen, that used to carry Sacks to the Pinnace
in our Dock at Rotterdam -- just like him, it is a good lusty fore-handed
well-set Son of a Bitch.


Sans. Sir --


Brissac. Ha, ha, ha, ha, -- his way Brother his way -- I told ye --


Sir Blun. Give me thy hand, Bully, Stiff-rump -- What art loath to show it?
Have got the Itch? -- why ye whore^on dog you, you and I must be better
acquainted before we part, my name's Bosse, Egh. ^elches.


Brissac. Ha, ha, ha, Brother, What do think? Did ever see such a sort of a
Fellow? Gad, I don't think there is the like of him within the four Seas.


Sans. No, nor within the four quarters of the World, I dare answer for him.


Sir Blun. Harkee dogs-head -- prithee tell him that I am a Sociable Fellow and
Love to be familliar.


Sans. Oh! Sir, I need no telling, I see it plainly, you are so far from
Complementing, and ^are so little for Corupting a Language with fine Epithites,
that you give it us as it is primitively spoke -- for Rogue, Dog, and such words
are commonly the first we learn.


Sir Blun. Right, Dear Son of a Whore, you are in the right, faith; and I have
been bred up in that way ever since: plain words have plain meaning. It Is true,
sometimes when we have a Mind to Abuse any Body, we use the glozing English way
of Prating -- as thus now, I have Forty thousand pounds in my Purse, if I call
any Acquaintance of mine Dog, Scowndrel, Rascal, or so, why I mean him well,
and if he wants, will supply him with Five hundred pounds -- but when I Niggle
him with Dear Friend, and Sweet Sir, and upon my Honor you shall Command me,
or so forth -- though he were certainly starving, Gads bud, I would not give him
a Penny.


Sans. Why you ought to be valued extremely for this Plain-dealing Sir Blunder.


Sir Blun. I, I dear Pimp -- I am honest at ^ottom, and that is more then any of
your Complementers can pretend to; but do hear, prithe^ let me see thee at
my Lodging -- Gad I Will give thee a swinging Bowl o Punch -- there is an English
Son of a Curr, a Lord he is, though -- on^ Guillamour -- newly come to lie there
too: the Dog is a rare Joke^ faith, I Will bring him into thy Company.


Sans. Guillamour -- Ds'death, how the Name startles me! for I have often heard
my Brother Brissac say, that the House where he Lodges join to my Garden: Well,
Sir, go on, And what of this Guillamour?


Blun. What of him? why he is an Arch-Thief, a Plaguee Fellow at Wench -- and
the Rogue has found one out at the House joining to us she comes to him every
Night into the Garden, and he Whispers to he out of his Chamber-Window.


Sans. Hell and the Devil, it must be my Wife -- for I Have observed ^ late she
has taken an Evening's Walk there -- oftener than usual -- ay ay. it is so, I Am
certainly abused, and all my Blood's on fire at the thoug^ on it: Now, Count,
here^s a Discovery made by Chance -- of yo^ damned Sister's Intreague with
Guillamour; What say ye now, am I s^i^ blindly Jealous?


Brissac. Phoo, pox, one of the Chambermaids comes to him I warran^ or some
such Trifle.


Sir Blund. I Have seen a Ramping thing in a Painted Nightgown twinkle there in
an Evening -- I saw her Face once, 'twas a good handsome Bitch, Faith.


Sans. Still, still my damned Wife, for she has such a Nightgown -- Oh
Confusion! Is there no Faith in the Cursed Sex? -- No honor? -- but Patience
till I discover more; I Will have a Trick this Evening to surprise 'em both, and
I Will about it instantly -- Brother, you and your Friend must excuse me, that I
cannot entertain you my self at Dinner, a sudden Affair, which I had forgot,
hurries me hence; but pray Command my House till your Sister comes, who went
out this Morning about some private Affair of her own, but no doubt will soon
be here -- your Servant. Exit.


Briss. Oh your Servant, my Lord, your Servant, here is an odd Whim for ye.


Brissac. Your Discovery, Sir Blunder, was the cause of this sudden going; I
tipped the Wink upon ye two or three times, but, like a Millstone, down a Hill,
there was no stopping ye when ye were rolling.


Sir Blun. What Is the Clodpate Jealous? -- nay then I warrant he is a Cuckold --


Brissac. Gad, Cuckold or not Cuckold -- I Am resolved my Sister, nor my Lord
neither, shall not be surpised this time; for I, my self, will give 'em timely
Caution: What a Pox, my Blood runs warm, and I love these Young Tricks
heartily; I Will therefore, like a kind Brother of Intrigue, prevent their being
Caught in the Evening -- Then return with the Fiddles, Entertain my Mistress,
who is to be here with my Sister, by Appointment, and so all of us Laugh at my
Lord -- Come, Sir Blunder, we'll take none of his Dinner, since he is to Morose
not to stay with us.


Sir Blun. Well, well; Prithee good Rascal go where thou will, I Will follow
thee; but, as to my Lord's Moroseness, for my part I mind it not; it is a common
thing with us, at Rotterdam -- you shall have a Burger there Invite ye to a
Shoulder of Mutton, and just as it is set on the Table, if any sudden business
happens, he shall s^atch it out of the Dish, and Lock it up, run out of Doors,
and leave you behind to suck your Fingers. Exeunt.


SCENE II. A Garden.
Enter ^utchess Sanserre, and Lady Brissac, Dressed in Men's Clothes, and
Tonnere. L. Briss. Nothing in Nature can make a Wife more Easy, than her
Husband's good opinion of her: and I have molded my Old Count so well to my
hand -- that if I should tell him my self, that I am really here in Specie, and
run awayout of the Country hither, upon a Frolic, I dare Swear he would not
believe his own Eyes.


Tonn. Nay, dear Madam, do you but blind him on one Eye, and let me alone, for
the other -- for he is so Mortified with his Passion for me, that he da^es make
use of none of his Senses but as I shall Direct.


D. San. I believe I must call some body, that shall be nameless, to Council
too, about the management of my Conjugal Gentleman, for he begins to be
Obstreperously Jealous -- And when once they are so, they cease to be Husbands,
and turn Jaylors -- for my part, I had as live be in the Bastile, and ordered
to feed upon Bread and Water, as be Confined to the sneaking allowance that a
Parsimonious Husband shall bestow on me.


Tonn. Oh pox, a Husband's allowance, like a Prison Basket, will Starve those
that have nothing else to subsist on.


L. Bris. I, it is well that we Women have sometimes Courage enough to usurp the
Privilege of Freeborn Subjects, and Enjoy by Wit what our Husbands will not
grant us by good Nature, for then the Pleasure of deserving 'em is a
Substantial happiness. Now does my codel'd Matrimony securely believe, that I
am at home looking after the Rose-cakes -- or licking my Clammy Fingers after
potting up the Marmalade of Quinces -- when God knows I am here under his Nose,
dressed en Cavalier -- ready for the Plays, the Music, the Walks -- and I may
be for variety by to morrow, to please my self, will be in a Fruit Garden
twenty Mile off, with a very good Friend.


Tonn. Ay gad, and I hope at night, dear Madam, be better pleased in a better
Place with a very good friend.


D. Sans. All Entertainments are prized as the Apetite is inclined, Count now
if the Peaches, Apricocks, and Frontiniack Grapes, the Viand delicate -- of the
day shall regale my Sister better than your night treat; Lord, How Sneakingly
you would look in the Morning?


L. Bris. I Swear he relishes -- So much of our Sex, by wearing Petticoats so
long -- that if we chance to be straightn'd for Lodging, And I should be for^'d
-- to Roost with him -- I Vow I should fancy I was going to bed to my Nurse,
you would be a very Nurse Count.


Tonn. Such a Confounded Nurse, I should make too Child, gad, I fear, thou
would never be able to endure me. For I should be plaguey Cross if you tumbled
or squawl'd in the Night time, if you would take the Nipple quietly you might --
but if I gave ye any thing with a Spoon the Devil take me.


D. Sans. I don't know what sort of Nurse the Count would make, Sister, but by
his way of talking, he would make an Excellent Midwife -- or else some Gossip
Hostess -- Oh! he would make a delicate Gossip at a City Christning for he
talks just as they do to one another in a Lying-in-Room.


Tonn. Ay, or as you do to one another in your dressing Rooms.


L. Bris. Come, come, prithee leave this unprofitable Chat, and show me the
Garden and Rarities -- I warrant there is twenty new Monsters come since I was
ere -- besides, I have been so long tormented in the Country with the lowing of
Cows, bleating of Sheep, and Cawing of Rooks, that the least of the Town
diversion's a Calf with* four Legs, or a Russia Ram, with a long Tail, will be
a Rarity to me -- or else let us go to the Opera -- No, no, Stay -- the
Waterworks, the Waterworks -- Oh God! but then they say there is the rarest
Italian Rope-dancer come over -- And a wonderful Creature, that has three or
four Sexes -- D'slife I Have no patience till I see them all.


D. Sans. What altogether Sister? Prithee let 'em be seen one after another, if
you Love me.


Tonn. The greatest Rarity you can see, Madam, in this Disguise will be your
Husband making Love to me, he is to bring the Fiddles here by and by; prithee
dear Angel see that first for my Satisfaction.


L. Bris. With all my heart, and I Will Man it so, I warrant he never knows me,
I Will venture what his Instinct can do for once; I believe -- I may be a true or
a false Princess as I please, I need not fear any discovery he can make by his
Lion like virtue. Exeunt Tonn. and Brissac.


L. Sans. It Is a wild giddy-headed Creature -- and I must take care to govern
her Indiscretion for my own sake -- let me see -- Looks on Watch. It Is almost
the hour -- that by apointment I am to meet my dear Guillamour at the window on
the other side the Garden, an assignation I would not break to be Mistress of
Versailes -- bless me! Is not this he? or do my Eyes Dazzle?


Enter Guillamour, and L. Buske. Guill. That Is Impossible; but mine do always
dazzle when they meet thy Luster, thou brightest and most Lovely of thy kind.


L. Sans. Heavens! my Lord, you amaze me -- How durst you venture hither, my
Husband being here, and knowing his Humor?


Guill. Led by resistless Love and a kind Genius that helps a Lover still on
b^ld adventures to unriddle the Mystery, know, my better Angel, that the
Marquess has casually had Information of our Window-Intreague, but my good Old
friend Sessac, happening to be there at the time of the Discovery, and finding
the Jealous Marquess was resolved to surprise us, was coming in all have to
give me caution, whom I luckilly met Just as we saw your Coach return home.
Mrs. L. Buske here being at the Window, I beckoned her down -- the rest which
will make you Laugh, and the reason of my ventring hither, you shall have from
her.


L. Busk. Ha, ha, ha, yes if I have -- breath enough to tell it for laughing --
ha, ha, ha, be pleased to know th^n Madam -- that Mrs. Danbray the new Spy that
my Lord has lately E^^ertain'd, has been dressing him up in your blew
Nightgown and head-^^othes, in which he makes so awkard a Figure, it would make
one Dye to see him, he is just gone to the Window that opens upon the wall -- the
other side of the Garden -- I got so near, that I found his business wa^ to
watch for my Lord here, and that he would stay at his Post some hours -- which
made me assure him, that he might venture to you without danger.


Guill. Ay Gad, and for that Assurance, there is a Token of my Love for thee,
Ha, ha, ha; Was there ever so provoking an Adventure? Faith, Madam, it is but
reasonable we should Pay this diligent Watchman for his Waiting.


L. Sans. I am for having him deserve a little more first; we can, at last, but
Pay him altogether --


Guill. Gad, for the Honor of my dear Country, England, I Am of a Temper, that
desires to render every one his due; methinks I long to be out of his Debt.


L. Sans. For Punctual Payment of such kind of Debts, I have heard indeed, that
your Englismen are very Conscientious, if C^ckoldome would pay a Cittizen's
Bill -- the good Apron-man need never stir over his own Threshold to Dun ye --
But come, my Lord, not to discourage your Generous Intentions quite, I Will make
ye a Present of my Picture here, Gives her Picture.
the Shadow that you have so long desired; but I charge ye to think of no
Substances -- at least for a certain time that I shall prefix -- What, -- it is
but reason you should Invoke your Saint, before you enter your Paradise.


Guill. Invok Gives her Picture.
Ds'heart I shall turn Idolater, and forty to one be damned about it Gives her
Picture.
Oh! thou dear, sweet, pretty portraite of my Parradise Indeed -- Kisses
Eagerly the Picture.


L. Sans. To enjoy which Imaginary Paradise then -- My Lord, for the present,
I Will leave ye, to go and Play an After-Game with my Jealous Matrimony yonder --
the result of it, and where we next shall meet, I Will send you word in a Billet:
in the mean time, Adieu, Seducer of this heart of mine.


Guill. Joy Great, as thou to me, be always thine -- Exeunt.


SCENE III.
Enter Sanserre Dressed in his Ladies Night-Go^n and Petticaote, and
Nightcloths -- A Pistol in his Hand. Sans. No Bolting yet -- And the usual hour
past; sure she is grown pal^'d to her New Amoretto; methinks, he else would be
more Punctual. Here is a hot Remembrancer shall meet his Glowing Passion with a
quicker Flame: Stay -- let me think a little what I Am doing; Eternal Devil! Are
these the Joys of Marriage? Gives her Picture.
Here am I tricked up like a Summer Bawd, Dressed in the Tawdry Trappings of
her Function, to take Revenge on a young Hotbrain'd Fellow, for only managing
the Common Fortune Entailed on most of the Dull Fools that Marry, Cuckold --
Damnation Cuckold -- horrid sound, in that dear Bed, where, for my Term of
Life, I fixed my Pleasure, and my Soul's repose, to meet a Toad, for such to
me's another, tho dressed in all the Pride of Lavish Nature, is the worst of
Torments, and extremest Hell: the Window's open, What Is that, A Country Wench
appears, and a Fellow at the Window. it is he sure; the shade of the Trees
eclipse my light -- I Will go nearer, that he may Lure me to him, for it is
certainly he: Now do I expect to be Harrangu'd with some Lovers Amorous
Couplet, beginning with Mimicks a Lovers whining Vo^ce. So Walked Clarind^
midst the Myrtle Grove,
Like the Queen Mother of the Stars above.
And I Will Answer, like Vulcan, with Bullet and Fire.



Wench. Well, it is a pure Song, I Will say it; Good Honny, Roger, Teach it me it
once more.


Roger. Come -- with all my heart; Strike up then -- hem, hem.


Sans. Hah! What Is that?


Roger Sings. There was Andrew and Susan, Rebecca and Will;


Wench. Roger and Sisly, and William and Mary,


Rog. There was Kate of the Kitchen, and Kit of the Mill.


Wench. John the Ploughman, and Ione of the Dairy.


Roger. To Sollace their Hearts, and to Sweeten their Labor,


Wench. All met on a time with a Pipe and a Tabor.


Sans. How -- Nothing but two dirty Devils Singing a Damned Ballad; sure I have
not mistook the Window; Offer again, Sing again.
Ds'death, what a Squaling Noise the Queen makes. Hah, again; A Plague on ye,
stop your Braying, or I Will Shoot. They Squeak, and Exit.


Daub. Oh, my Lord, we are ruined! your Design, by some means or other, has
taken Air, and they ^re turning it yonder all into Raillery: there is a Window
and a Garden it seems at the other side of the House, which that Dunce, Sir
Blunder, mistook for this, and another Lady there too.


Sans. Ds'death! What with another Painted Nightgown and Petticoat --


Daub. So it seems, my Lord; besides, I saw my Lord Guillamour, and your
Brother Brissac this moment at the Door, shaking hands, and Laughing, till they
shook again; and, by what I can guess by him, he is bringing him in.


Sans. The Devil he is -- D'sdeath, I shall be the Laughing Stock of the whole
Town -- the very Footmen will Point at me -- and ten to one, in three days
time, have another Horrid Ballad made of the Noble Duke, and Sung to as
Confounded a Tune, at my own Window -- Run Daubray, and shut the Dining Room
Door, that I may sneak up the Back-stairs into my Chamber before they come.


Daub. Ah it is impossible, my Lord, they are got as far as the Garden already,
and see, here comes my Lady*


Enter Duchess Sanserre. Sans. What a Devil shall I say unto her now?


D. Sans. So, Mrs. Daubry, this is very fine Confidence indeed, the first Week
my Lord has Entertained ye -- What Creature, Have you been so Saw^y to Dress in
my Clothes? -- Ha, let me see Turns him about. ah, -- in the Name of Virtue, is
this possible? -- By that Baked Pear-colour'd Complexion, and that Stubbl'd
Chin -- this must be a Man -- O thou odious Creature -- How dare you bring your
filthy odious Fellows here, to D^b^uch my things with?


Sans. I must brush through with it some way or other Aside. Well, Madam, I
must Clear Mrs. Daubray -- And pray reform your Mistake -- it is I.


D. Sans. How, my Lord? -- bless me -- my Lord -- In the Name of Virtue what
Riddle's this? -- What means this Metamorphosis?


Sans. Humph -- I think I Have got a Lie will fit her Aside Why my Brother
B^issac -- intends to bring the Fiddles here this Evening -- and I intended to
Surprise the Company in Masquerade -- being mighty frollicksome to day.


D. Sans. Frolliksome, my Lord -- What with your Pistol there? Your Frollick, I
find, would have had more of Revenge in it then Mirth, base Man -- Must I always
be the Miserable Subject of your horrid Jealousy? -- Jealousy, that has always
made you as Ridiculous to the World -- as it will now be found to be in this --
Charming Disguise -- Heaven! that you could but see your self how you look.


Sans. Like a Witch in an Ecstasy, I believe; A Plague upon this headgeer here,
would the Devil had the Inventor.


D. Sans. But it is Satisfaction enough to me, to know, that the shame that
constantly attends this Frenzy, is always sufficient Punishment -- which your
Grace will apprehend better, when your Visitors within shall enter, in the mean
time let me Teach ye this Poetical Maxim. Let him whose Jealous Brain his Wife
suspects,
E're he Expose her Fame, prove her defects;
He that want's Proof, and on his Doubt relies,
Will sink his own, but her Esteem shall rise.
There Is a short Touch for ye, and so I leave you to your Baiting -- Sir --
Exit.


Daub. I Will go and seek the Butler, and get a Gill of Comfort, for I Am ready to
faint with Fretting as I Am a true Woman. Exit.


Sans. It Is so -- here they come -- A Plague upon 'em; and now am I to be half
suffocated with the Fulsome Jokes of that Eternal Old Coxcomb Brissac --
D'sdeath, Is there no Avenue, nor Shelter here? What would I give to be a Rat
now for two minutes? -- A Rabbit, with a Burrow near me; or any other Vermin,
so I had but a Hole to creep into.


Enter Brissac, Tonnere, Lady Brissac, Guillamour, Sir Blunder, and Vandosme.
Sess. Come, before the Fiddles play their Parts, Lets all resolve, by consent,
to have a Merry touch or two at my Lord; Prithee mind me, sweet Empress, thou
Sovereign Queen of all my Faculties, as the Poet says They Whisper.
do but observe me a little To Tonnere And you, my bold Britton Stick; by me,
do you hear -- I Will Joke him into a Fit of an Ague To Guillamour. but hold-first
a word with you, Sir Blunder.


L. Brissac. The Loadstone, I find, has lost: its Virtue; the Old Spark does
not know me; Ton. I see it, but -- the Defect is in the Steel, and not the
Loadstone -- A Pox on him, he has no more Natural Sympathy, then if his Skin
were Stuffed with Straw --


L. Briss. I Will try whether he has or no; for I Am resolved to Banter him before
we part.


Guill. That Pretty Creature yonder has been Oagling me this half hour, hah --
I know her now, it must be She, Fiesques Charming Mistress, that the Town
Celebrates so for a Miracle of Beauty -- Gad, her Smiles give me strange
Encouragement, I Will go and talk to her -- 'Twill be a pretty Amusement for
Sanserre there, who must then naturally believe my Intreng^e is with her, and
not his Wife. Apart, then goes to Vand.


V^nd. What a Bewitching Face and Air has that Englishman? whose very Look so
Charms me, that, by Heaven, I Have hardly Patience to forbear some
Love-Extravagance before the Company -- hah -- he Oagles me too -- Now Beauty,
do me right -- Dear Face perform thy Office. Smiles on him.


Eriss. T^at's all, Boy; Let him but think 'twas thy Mistake, and for the rest
of the Banter let me alone.


Sir Blun. Well, well, prithee Old Bullethead don't doubt me; if a Lie will do
the Business, my Conscience is Wide enough -- Pox, I hate a Jealous Rascal --
more than a Dutch Cook does a French Kickshaw.


Briss. Come now then, let us all sowse in upon him, like Spaniels upon a Duck
in a Pond -- I Will set in first -- Hey, where are these Fiddlers -- Come, let us
have a Country Dance; Strike up there you Rogues; Come, Cuckolds* all-a-Row --.
Here Is a Bucksome Lass shall be my Partner -- What say thou to it, my Jolly
Sixteen Ribs? -- Give me thy hand to Sans. Why where are these Cuckoldly
Fiddlers to Play this -- Cuckoldly Dance? -- Strike up, I say, to us, The Nimble
Cuckold-makers of Versa^lles -- Here Is one will Foot it Briskly In Faith.


Sans. Harkee -- Brother -- No more Jesting, do you hear, I shall grow Angry.


Briss. Harkee, my Lord -- So shall I* -- You have wronged my Sister, do you hear
-- and I have enough in me to call you to Account for it -- But hush, no more
words on it, for her Quietssake, and the Love of some Body else here, at present
I pass it by; but if I hinder any body from laughing at your Toppings here the
Devil take me -- ha, ha, ha, why Gentlemen and Ladies here^s a surprise will
make ye dye with laughing, we are all deceived here -- this is no Lady,
Gentlemen but a noble Lord, Gentlemen my Brother the Duke de Sanserre Gentlemen
who being horribly suspicious of being hornified Genttlemen by his Lady at
Court here.


Sans. As his Brother the old Count Briss^c Gentlemen is foolishly secure of
not being hornified by his Lady in the Country.


Bris. Has most cunningly dressed himself ha, ha, ha, in his Ladies Clothes,
Gent. with design to catch her napping, with a certain lusty young English
Lord, alias Whoremaster, called Guillamour Gent* -- at him my young Hercules --
speak for thy self now, at him, at him.


Guill. Who he designed to catch is not my business to examine, but I hope his
Grace has nothing to say to my Conversation with his Lady.


Sans. Oh, my Lord you are much in the right.


Tonn. His conversation with that Lady -- when her coming hither was only an
Assignation with me, ds'death, What means he? aside.


Sir Blun. Why the short and the long is, I was mistaken in the Whore, and my
Lord there like a Coxcomb as he was, was mistaken in the Window-what a pox
there is more windows than one to a house sare, and more Bitches then one in
Painted Night-gowns and Peticoats.


L. Briss. If my Lord had not been discoverd to be a Man -- by Jove, I should
have taken him -- for a very good fat jolly Lady of mine Acquaintance.


Sans. Which very good fat jolly Lady -- is a Baud I Am sure, for that lewd
smock faced ^mp can have no other acquaintance.


Tonn. I hope, Madam, my Lord has not so wholly Engrossed your Conversation,
but you may have leisure to put in your Jest too; pray give me your opinion,
methinks the head-clothes sitting so awry look like tawdry Mrs. Quakine --
sitting at Cards in her Chamber, the Evening of the day she has taken Physic.
to Vandosme.


Briss. Ha, ha, ha, ha -- dear Empress -- a witty Observation faith.


Sans. Oh! I^m sorry they don't please ye Madam, I hope your Comode there sits
cocking straight enough.


Guill. And the Nightgown there so loose and Negligent, looks just like the
tawdry Countess of Iersy in a morning without her Stays.


Sans. What Is that you say, Sir? Angrily.


Vand. Oh fie! How ill a frown becomes that Dress, which I confess I must own
is most extremely particular.


Sans. Is it indeed so particular -- Madam?


Sir Blun. Oon's -- the Dog looks like a Hermophrodite -- at a Leaguer,
drinking of Brandy with a Corporal of the Guard. They all laugh.


Sans. Nay, if that Porpuss be spouting too, it is time to shun drowning indeed,
a plague of your Merriment -- D'sheart I shall grow Mad if I stay and unman my
self -- Exit Sanserre.


Briss. Ha, ha, ha, ha, -- Now is he gone to vent the rest of his confounded
humor upon his Valet de Chamber, and Pages -- a pox on it, this con ^s of
foolish Jealousy; who the Devil would be Jealous, it makes a Man old,
ill-natured, ill Company, ill-belov'd; And brings a thousand Inconveniences, a
pox I hate the very thought on it.


Tonn. Ay, but yet it shows Love, Count, it shows Love.


Briss. Ay, that is before Marriage, dear Empress -- that is before -- you know
what, and then I grant there may be some reason to be Jealous to lose ones
Mistress, but of on^s Wife -- gad it is a mere breaking out, a Corruption of
Soul and Body -- it is a Disease worse than the Pox -- Why now have I a Wife in
the Country -- a very house-dove -- A pretty poor harmless contented thing --
that I warrant is this very minute reading the Ladies Calling to her Maids, or
a Treatise of the Duty of a Wife to her Husband -- and faith I Love her well
enough too, for a Wife -- She wants for nothing --


L. Briss. How -- A young Wife left by her Husband want nothing? reflect a
little on what you say, old Sir.


Briss. Why how now Monsieur, no Beard? -- Do the farthing Candles of your Eyes
want snuffing this Morning, old Sir? ye young Milksop, What do you see old
about me?


L. Bris. Why you stoop in the Shoulders, and bend in the Hams -- Old Aeson.


Briss. What a lying Jackanapes is this -- prithee look on me, dear Empress --
by gad I Am as straight as an Arrow.


Tonn. Ay, it is true, he is a little malicious -- but he is a very pretty fellow
faith Count, and I cannot forbear oagling him a little.


Briss. Prithee look on me -- Oo'ns do but look on me, ye young Coxcomb -- Am
not I straight^ Do I bend in the Hams, ye envious Puppy? -- let all the World
Judge if I am not as straight as an Arrow -- a very Arrow.


L. Briss. Not if your Wife at home were to give her Judgment Sir -- who, for
all your Conjugal security, you shall give me leave to believe does want
something.


Briss. Hah -- which want, you think your self proper to supply I warrant.


L. Briss. No faith, I should do what you ought to do, acknowledging my own
single ability de^^^tive, call in another able Person to assist, and all wants
indeed might be suply'd fairly.


Tonn. Well said again young Sir I swear.


Briss. Who the Devil is this young Dog? I wonder whither he dares fight or no
-- gad I shall be provoked to try if this hold, for to m^ thinking she begins
to be fond of him -- this is the plaguey vice of the S^^ in general, all
Womankind hanker after, and how to Debauch these Boys.


L. Briss. I heard you talk of Boys Sir -- dam me, do you mean me Sir?


Briss. You Sir, yes Sir, dam me too -- Are not you a Boy Sir?


L. Bris. No Sir, and I Will bring an abler witness then you are to justify the
contrary.


Tonn. That he can I assure ye Sir, there I must take his part.


Briss. How Madam, will you take his part against me? -- pox prithee dear
Empress let us leave him to his Raket and Balls -- you shall do m^ the honor
now to let me treat ye with a little Entertainment of Music and Dancing, after
which I intend to lead ye up a Corrant my self, which is a gr^ye thing, and a
graceful dance for a fine Lady --


L. Briss. And you and I will do a minuett Madam, which is a brisk thing and a
more graceful dance for a fine Lady.


Briss. Prithee -- male-varlet, What do do here? -- pox thou should post
into Italy -- here is no Boys play here -- here is no use of unbearded things --
Oo'ns get thee to Rome amongst the Cardinals.


L. Briss. No faith, they are fitter for your Company, they are old fumbling
fellows like your self.


Briss. This young Dog will never leave prating, gad I Will run my Sword in's
Guts.


Guill. Oh fie, old friend! no fighting amongst Ladies -- besides it is all
Gallantry, and you cannot in reason be angry.


Briss. Where Is the Music? a pox on 'em let us begin then and put it out of my
head, and in the mean time -- de hear, let the banquet be made ready in the
next Room.


L. Briss. Well, and to let him see I understand Gallantry, I Will add to his
Musical Entertainment, and Sing my self, if any here can bear part in the late
new Dialogue.


Tonn. That can I, Sir, and in honor of the Count I Will show ye my skill
Immediately.


Song and Dance here, and Exeunt all but Gulliamour and Vandsome. Dialogue
between Tonnere and Lady Brissac.
Lady B. THe World is full of hurry;
Our H^roe'^ ^unt for Glory,
^o swell our future STORY
With D^^ds of high Renown.

Tonnere. Religion and Am^ition
Make us in poor Condition,
Till for our sad Division
A Gener^l Peace Atone.

(2.)
L. Briss. Then Brawling War forsaking,
In Love u^w Tryalis making;
Instead of Cittys Taking
I Will Storm your Heart alone.

Tonnere. When to Enjoyment hasting,
Let Youth be slowly wasting,
And Beauty long be Tasting;
I Will wish no Monarch's Crown.

(3.)
Lady Br. When first the World and Matter
Were form^d by the Creator,

Tonner. Three only Things in Nature
Were worth a Mortal's Care.

Lady Br. First Wit in Bounteous Measure,
Then Women for our Pleasure.

Tonner. And Moderate store of Treasure:
To Entertain the Fair.

Vand. Nothing can make ye have a good thought of me, Sir, for this strange
confession of my Love, but your extraordinary* Merit and good Nature -- but
pray believe this is not common with me.


Guill. Such beauty, Madam -- must command all thoughts and services -- by
Heaven, it is a sweet Creature -- oh dear, dear Inconstancy, Who can defend
himself against thy Charms? -- hah, la Buske here -- nay then I Am caught in
the nick. Enter la Busque.

The Plannets shoot more strongly their Influence on the other side, and it is
Impossible to resist the Lady of the Ascendant. whispers him and Exit.


Vand. Hah, gone -- ten thousand Furies take that Messenger, for it is certain
she has fetched him away upon some other Intreague, but to go without taking
leave, or an Excuse, or so much as an Assignation for some other time,
D^'death, I Am all on flame with vexation at the thought on it -- I Will run and
overtake him in the Street, for I cannot live till night without that
Satisfaction. Is running out, and Tonnerre enters and stops her.


Tonn. Hold hold, Madam, Whither so fast? I hope you did not doubt my coming as
soon as I could get loose from the Company.


Vand. He here, cursed luck; but it is all one I am resolved I will go -- pish --
I neither wished nor doubted your coming Sir -- pray let me go, for I Have an
extraordinary affair has happened that exacts it.


Tonn. An affair, What greater then your Promise to me? come, you onl^ jest I Am
sure.


Vand. Oh, Sir, you shall find me no Jester, therefore on^e more let me go,
it is my humor, and (...) all the reason you are like to have.


Tonn. To follow my Lord Guillamour I suppose.


Vand. Suppose what you will -- I Will follow my inclinations, though you and all
such impertinent Teizers were damned in the preventing it.


Tonn. Is It possible? Can you so soon forget your Promise?


Vand. Pox OF promises -- that ever any fellow that proudly thinks he carries
half an ounce of Brains, should heed A Woman of my Characters promise -- Hell
and Furies* How am I plagued wi^h this Coxcomb? D'sdeath stand out 'th way.


Tonn. She Swears and Curses like a Baud in a Brandy-Celler -- I find now
Fiesque was in the right, and thou art indeed a very Devil.


Vand. I am so: why thou empty, hotheaded, flashy, Impertinent, ridiculous
Animal; Who would ever give her consent to make a lewd assignation with such a
Rampant Monster as thy self, but a Devil? -- when you deboach us first, you fix
damnation, then shoals of dressing powdered Sons of Belzibub, mingle with us
the daughters of Belphegor, and so the thriving Trade of Hell goes forward.


Tonn. Stand sollid Impudence, case hard^'d, and well grounded in the Trade --
and yet sometimes too you can act as an Angel.


Vand. I can act any thing to make a Fool --


Tonn. And lately when you praiz'd my Face Shape, Tongue -- you thought me a
Monster or an Idiot.


Vand. Right -- I never heard a fellow say he Loved me, but I had hopes to beg
him for a changeling.


Tonn. Thou art the exactest Jilt -- I ever met with.


Vand. Thou art the veriest coxcomb I e're bubled -- But why the Devil do I
stand prating with thee -- give me way to go whither my resolute humor drives
me, or all the Mischif in a Woman's Nature, all that Hells Legion can inspi^e me
with, I Will vent upon thee.


Tonn. Thou shall not stir, I Will keep ^hee here to plague thee.


Vand. Then take what follows -- sure I shall find something to further my
revenge -- the trappings you usurp there of our Sex I shall demollish
presently. pulls off his Comode.


Tonn. Witch -- Fury -- Succubus -- tho as thou lookst like Woman I dare not
strike thee -- yet as a real Devil Incarnate, I may pinch.


She gets off, and takes up a large Pruning-knife. Vand. Oh, here is something
will do better Execution -- look upon this thou hot brained fool, and tremble.


Tonn. Thou will not Stab me -- Harpy.


Vand. Not Stab thee, yes by the Rage that burns me, through Soul and Body, if
I could -- let this Confirm it. offers to Stab, he shrinks aside, she throws
the Knife at him, and Exit.


Tonn. Was there ever such a Devil? -- 'gad she frighted me -- for this pretty
Instrument had certainly bin sheathed in my Guts if I had ^pos'd her longer --
well I Will straight to Fieske, discover our adventures, and beg his pardon --
and hereafter agree with him. That amongst all Mischifs that with Vice engage;
Nothing so Barbrous as a Strumpets Ra^e. Exit.



ACT III.
SCENE I. Vendosme's Lodgings.
Enter De Fiesque and Tonnerre. Tonn. YOu have been to look for her in her
Chamber then --


De Fies. Yes, and there is no body there but Grossiere; I asked her for her
Lady, and with a composed modest look, as if she had been at Confession, she
answered, upon her veracity, she had not seen her since morning.


Tonn. Pox on her veracity; She Is as good as her Mis^ress, I Will warrant her,
whenever any ^hamber maid affects fine words, I take it for granted, she is a
Whore infallibly. Did you look into the Closet?


De Fies. No, the door was locked. Besides, it cannot enter into my head she
could be there and deny her self to me, after our last reconcilement, and the
kindness past between us this morning.


Tonn. Nay, if her Treachery cannot enter into your head, after the story I told
you of our late adventure, take it from me, your Head and the Brains belonging
to it, are in an incureable condition. Oh, confound her, she is the most
treacherous, the most base, the most ungrateful, the most pernicious, the most
--


De Fies. Charming Creature.


Tonn. Charming, damn her; she charms indeed, but it is by Witchcraft only, the
Devil has sent her an Enchanting Outside, to impose on a young Amorous
Fellow's Reason, till he^s relieved by wise Consideration; but then the Hag
appears in her true colors, and nothing's seen but hellish ugliness.


De Fies. I Have cause to think this true, but yet must love her. Nay, by Heaven,
it s^ems to me unnatural, to believe her treacherous; a thousand times -- with
Sighs, and trickling Tears, that down her Rosy Cheeks have sweetly fell -- Has
she sworn Constancy;


Tonn. And a thousand times with fulsome scoffs and laughter, has she behind
thy back abused thy kindness, and turned thy passionate Love to ridicule.
Besides, prithee be not so blind to think her true for weeping, for Sighs and
Tears are the Whore's Ammunition, the Tools and Implements of their damned
profession: Thus, like the Prince of the Air, they use both Elements, and Blow
and Rain, as often as they please.


De Fies. So you think to all Mankind alike for Profit, she doles her private
favors.


Tonn. Most certainly, unless she is caught as the Jilt sometimes is, and falls
in love: then the strongest back still carries her; he that has biggest Bones,
and drudges best. A pox on Merit, Wit, and Learning, Truckle the lustiest
Bargeman is her best Philosopher.


De Fies. Damn^d hellish Creature.


Tonn. I believe I can luckily give thee an instance of this presently, for
just now as I was coming to find thee out, I chanc^d to meet that Nauseous fool
Sir Blunder: I know not how, but it came into my Head to revenge my self, and
wean thee from thy passion, to try him with Vandosme; to pursue which, I told
hi^, she had kind thoughts of him; he ignorant of thy Intrigue with her, like a
sense^ess Gudgeon, swallows the Bait greedily, and told me he would go
presently and contrive a Billet-doux for her, and come and show it me. -- I
told him I should be here, and expect him in two Minutes.


De Fies. Nay, if she cope with that Brute.


Tonn. Why, that Brute has Money, and your true Ji^t shall cope with that or
any other Brute for Profit, with two Legs or with f^ur; take that for Gospel.
Oh, here he comes, as merry as a Blunder laughs successful Lover, and laughing
at the conceit of his rar^s^rowl, and the Richness of his fancy in it, I warrant.


Ent^r Sir Blunder with a Letter. Sir Blun. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha -- dear Devil
ha, ha, ha, ha, ha -- dear Son of a Bitch, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,
Rog^e, ha, ha, ha, Rascal, ha, ha. I have done such a ha, ha, ha, such a ha,
ha, ha, -- such a thing -- such a piece of Wit, ods Sacrament, nothing in al^
France can mend it, I Am sure -- ha, ha, ha, here prithee read -- how now, who is
that -- hold, hold a little.


Tonn. Oh, only a friend of mine -- he is one that understands these sort of
things very well -- and has a great value for you and your Country, Sir Blunder.


Sir Blun. Has he, hal^, it is a good tolerable sort of a scoundrel to look to.
Do thou understand Wit, Dogs-head --


De Fies. Enough to commend yours, Sir Blunder -- is it to a Lady?


Sir Blun. Ay, ye Whelpsface, ha, ha, ha, -- it is ha, ha, -- it is ha, ha, ha, --
it is to a Lady -- if thou wilt have the word lac d, for my part now I love
plain-work, I call 'em all Whores, faith. -- Come, pri^hee good Scoundrel read
it, let us hear, Gad I have tickled her off, I was in a confounded witty humor,
when I writ it.


Tonnerre reads You plaguey confounded, little tempting Devil you.


Sir Blun. Ha, ha, ha, smart -- ha, ha, ha, smart -- conceit at first dash -- I
love to begin merrily with the Jades -- hah -- to Fiesque.


Fies. You begin very merrily with her indeed, Sir.


Tonn. reads. You cannot believe I was such a Loggerhead, but that like a
Cunning, Sly-leering, Tittilizing Queen, as you are, I minded your Ogling
yesterday.


Blun. Ha, ha, ha, -- smart again -- go on dea^ Mongrel.


Tonn. reads. And if yours and my Father, Mother, Brothers, and Sisters,
Unkles, and Aunts, and all the Dogs and Bitches in both our Families should
have hanged themselves to hinder it -- I could not forbear sending you my mind
in this Letter.


Blund. Good again, ha, ha, was not I a witty Dog there -- humph!


De Fies. Oh a prodigious witty Dog.


Tonn. reads. I know you are a well gascoin'd good handsome Jade, and you shall
know that I am an honest, blunt, thundering strong-back'd Rascal, who in the
humor I Am in, resolve to beat up thy quarters.


Blund. Strong and sinewy still -- on, on, to the conclusion, dear Rogue.


Tonn. reads. And since I have 500 l. to throw away upon a young Doxy, as well
as other Fools, let your back door be open, do ye hear, about nine, and if I
ha^'t a smack at yourChops before ten, say I amthe Son of a Mastiff, who now
Subscribe my self -- The obsequious puppy, and languishing Lapdog,
Blunder-Bosse.


Sir Blun. Right, Rogue, in great Letters at bottom, ha, ha, ha, Gad it makes
me laugh to think how fast the Wit flow^d from me; why the Devil do not
laugh, how can forbear? why ye grave Hermaphrodite thou do^t not laugh at me.


Tonn. Ha, ha, ha, ha, -- Gad, but I do, Sir, and more then that, I Will secure
ye all that know ye shall laugh at ye.


Sir. Blund. Gad, I Will send it to London by the next Post; and have it Printed
in the next Collection of Letters, that come out by the topping Wits there. I
know a Bookseller that will give any rate for it, to set off the rest.


De Fies. Why, faith, your style will be very particular, Sir Blunder.


Sir Blun. Pox on it I, if there were a thousand, tho I Am told there is but one
comes to her -- A Count they say, but a pitiful sneaking Puppy.


De Fies. What says the Dog?


Tonn. Nay, Fiesque, is this your temper? ( aside to him.)


Sir Blun. Well, with ^e good (...) scoundrel I^ll go and dispatch this away
immediately, and afterward, if e're I meet any Count there, I Will kick the Son
of a Whore to Attoms Exit Sir Blund.


De Fies. Oh, Slave, 'dsheart must I bear this and not cut his Throat.


Tonn. Ye must; he is not worth your anger; besides, remember, friend, this
fool is to be the touchstone to try the nature of that Jilt Vandosme, and so
procure thy happiness and freedom: Come, let us go and take a turn or two in the
Garden, and then come again, perhaps she may have dispatched her new Intrigue by
that time and return.


De Fies. Hard fate, my Curse is want of Liberty,
And yet 'twill be a greater to be free. Exeunt.

Enter Sanferre and Grossiere. Sans. Not within say thou, Sweet heart?


Gross. No indeed, my Lord -- Oh dear, upon my veracity she will be extremely
concerned to be from home, when your Grace does her this honor of a Visit, but
she is so teized about recovering an Estate from some kindred of hers, and the
troublesome Lawyers do so plague her every, day that I speak sincerely, my
Lord, she is hardly ever at quiet for 'em.


Sans. Shes so incomparable a Beauty, that I should rather have thought her
Lovers, than her Lawyers had plagued her.


Gross. Lovers -- alas -- upon my veracity, my Lord, her head's upon something
else, but she seldom stays long out, and if your Grace pleases to take a turn
or two in the Garden, I Will run and inform you the very minute she comes.


Sans. Ay, with all my heart.


Gross. Your Grace's most humble Servant, I Will go watch her coming.


Exit Gross. Sans. This is a subtle Queen, for all her simpering, and trained
to lie; she is one of the Devils Scrutores, crammed full of secret sins, and
never opened but by the potent Master-Key cal^'d Gold: However, I am armed, and
if I can by cunning, or some expense, discover from her Mistress, who I
perceive is great with Guillamour, what I suspect b^tween him and my Wife, I
have my ends; the Viper shall then leave gnawing me to prey on them: If she
comes, to nights the time; if not, a Letter filled with Golden promises, and
the present of some Jewel, shall charm her in the morning. Beauty, man's
chiefest blessing, all must own,
Which we dull Husbands hope is ours alone:
But oh what torments does that wretch endure,
That doubts his power that blessing to secure? Exit.



Re-enter Grossiere with Vandosme, peeping. Van. Are you sure the Coast is
clear?


Gross. Yes, yes, very sure; they are all gone into the Garden, and if the
truth were known, with heavy hearts.


Vand. Ay, it is all one; I had rather their hearts were out, than I had lost
this dear minute.


Gross. Well, Madam, I see I shall never leave your service till I Am quite
damned about it: This is the three and twentieth lie I have told to day for ye;
Lord have mercy upon me, what will become of my Soul!


Vand. O prithee go and employ thy Soul in adding to the Musical performance
within, that is all the use thou have for it that I know of; for my part, I have
not thought of my own this seven year. Come, my dear Lord. Exit Grossiere.


Enter Guillamour. They sit down. Love's Rapture. A Song.
I.
Ye pretty Birds, that Chirp and Sing,
Ye Trees and Plants, that Bud and Grow;
Ye fragrant Flowers, that bless the Spring,
Tell me whence comes it you do so.
Hark, hark, they answer, it is Celestial Fire
The Gods call Love, that does us all inspire.
II.
That sacred Flame that sweetly Charms
My Soul when lovely Cinthia sings,
That all Creation; Labor warms,
And Matter to Perfection brings:
The busy useless Sun may cease to shine,
It Is Love that sheds the Influenoe Divine.
Second Movement.
Then Lovers love on, and get Heaven betimes,
He that Loves well, attones for the worst of his Crimes.
Jove's Gate is locked fast on the Sordid and Base;
But the generous Lover is sure of a Place:
And the Nymph her Elysium need question no more,
When her Saint has a Key to open the door.
Guil. Dear, sweetest Creature, I am charmed to follow thee. Oh, I shall tire
thee, my Dear. Besides, Fiesque may come.


Vand. -- And go, when he does come, he has proved that already. Oh my dear
Lord, there is vast difference between the man loves me, and him I love.
Fiesque is witty, honest, brave, and generous. I know he loves me too, even to
dispairing; but what is all this when inclination shuns him, I have no relish of
his entertainment, he always treats me with a palled repast, which tho it feeds
me, yet still it leaves me hungry.


Guil. And shall not I be palled too and insipid, when your nice fancy's
pleased to change the Diet?


Vand. Oh no, you are a Regalia where there is all variety, your Tongue; your
Face, your Shape, your Charming Air, your Motion, Mein, your every look's a
Banquet: You Are like that sweet Tree in the Sunny Continent, where all the best
Spices grow together; and if you ^an but bloom with Flowers of Constancy.


Guill. Oh enough of em to make a tolerable Nosegay, never fear, Child. Dear
Duchess I beg thy pardon, for I^m a very lying Rogue. aside.


Vand. Could you but love me only, for your sake I Would sacrifice the rest of
human kind, but you are an Englishman, and of a Nation, famous for Levity, full
of wavering fancies; you are never contented with the present good, tho Ruin
follows still the vice of changing.


Guill. Gad she has nicked us to a hair, right as she had the Spirit of
Prophesy. The very Women now have found us out. -- This is our blessed
Character all the World over.


Enter Grossiere hastily, and whispers Vandosme. Vand. Gurse on him -- the
impertinent is come back -- Come, my lord, let us go in again to my Chamber, I Am
resolved I will not see him.


Gu^ll. Oh no, not now, for his curiosity must needs disturb us; besides, you
must see him a little sometimes, 'twill give the less occasion to suspect us.
I Will slip down the back stairs. Exit Guillamour leaving a Letter-case on the
Chair.


Vand. Hell take him, would he were blind. Oh how nauseous an old teizing Lover
is, when our eager thoughts are bent upon a new one, I will not see him. --
Grossi^re, do you come back and invent another lie?


Gross. Nay, Faith, you must do it your self now, for I have ne^re a one ready.
Exeunt Vand. and Gross.


Re-enter Fiesque. Fies. How different are the various accidents that still
attend on Love, what vast distinctions between the happy and unfortunate: Now
is Tonnerre gone flushed with expectation, to meet his charming Countess; lucky
fellow! The Planets all conspire to bless his Minutes, whilst I, born in an
unpropitious hour, wait for those favors, which the Fair ingrate, perhaps,
just now is giving to another. -- How now, what is here a Letter-case -- it is
so; by your leave, secret Carrier, you may make some discovery -- hah, by
Heaven, a Picture too, and of the charming Duchess de Sannserre, joined with a
Letter of her Handwriting, and Subscribed to the Lord Guillamont -- Hell and
Furies, it is plain now he has been lately here with false Vandosme, and
negligently dropped these in his ecstasy, and to confirm it more, see here her
Glove, wrought with Gold Flowers, the very Glove I gave her; here has been
claspings, twinings, close embraces, the hand that wore this circling round his
Neck -- Oh Jilt, vile Woman, base, ungrateful Traitress; oh here comes her
Emissary, down passion for a moment, now where is your Lady? --


Enter Grossiere Gross. Not returned yet, Sir, and affirmatively I fear, since
her coming is so delayed, that the Gentlewoman she went to see, has prevailed
with her to stay and dine


Fies. Very good, there is one lie gone already, and no doubt three or four more
ready at her Tongues end; she keeps 'em lump'd up for her use in the corner of
her Jaw, as a Monkey does the remainder of his dinner. Come, pray draw near a
little, and answ^r, if you please, affirmatively, do you know this?


Gross. Hah, my Lady's Glove! Oh unlucky negligence, aside. O me, what, has
your Lordship found one of my Gloves? pray give it me, my Lord, I left it here
about half an hour ago, there is the fellow on it within.


Fies. Good again, there is another lie gone ou^ of the lump; the stock will
waste plaguily at this rate -- Your Glove, Sock-mender, did I get this work
done to Embroider your dirty Golls, hah? Besides, a pox on ye, your Gloves are
both of em on.


Gross. Oh dear! so they are affirmatively.


Fies. Are they so? good Pomatum-pot, by which then I think your veracity is
made out very plain, besides a Letter carelessly left here, subscribed to the
Lord Guillamour; and a Picture too of the Lady that sent it, sufficiently tells
me what Gentlewoman has been visited. Go, hunt her out, and tell her from me,
that I Am glad her price is so fallen, that she is subservient to one, that I find
only uses her as a foyl to another. I have some other advices for her, tell
her, which she shall have; at present I have changed my mind of seeing her:
Away, and pray deliver this with your best veracity.


Gross. Oh dear, but really your Lordship is under a great mistake, about my
Lord Guillamour's being here on her account, tho your Lordship has found a
Picture, and some things relating to him, yet I can assure your Lordship, upon
my veracity, that my Lord Guillamour; I mean that my Lady, I-I-I say, that my
Lord has been do-do-do doing, humph, that my Lady has been do-do-do doing,
pish, that my Lord, humph, that my Lady. --


Fies. Humph, that my Lord and my Lady have been do-do-do doing a great deal of
business, I don't doubt. Go, go, therefore without stuttering more about the
matter and do yours.


Gross. O dear, I cannot get out one bit of a lie more, affirmatively. Ex.


Fies. This last lie was tied to the lump a little faster than the rest, and
could not get passage. Stay, who comes here; hah, the Duke de Sanserres; can
his haughtiness condescend to an intrig^e with her too? Damn her, she deals
will all sorts, qualities, and constitutions; now I have Gall enough to make
his Veins Crackle with fiery rage, by showing him his Ladies Picture and Letter
here: But than I have a thought of putting the last to a better use, and since
Guillamour and his Grace have privately their designs upon my Mistress, I Will
try what my Brain can work out of this to effect upon his Wife.


Enter Sanserre. Sans. She Is not come yet I find. I must therefore have
patience till to morrow. How now, who is this? My Lord Fiesque! Why this is half
a Miracle, for you and I to meet in a young Ladies Lodgings: For my part, I am
a grave Married Man which keeps my visit from suspicion, but if my Amorous Lord
Guillamour, who doats on her so, should find you, I fear there would be Heart
burnings.


Fies. So, he knows of their Intrigue too, they are come to doting upon one
another, it seems, already. My Lord, this may indeed pass upon me for a common
visit of yours, but if the Duchess knew of it, I question whether she would
not have other sentiments; I believe she could hardly defend her self from
jealousy, my good Lord.


Sans. Hah, that was meant as a hit to me. ( aside) Well, Count, your double
entendre is not quite lost upon me, the shaft came a little oblique it is true,
but we know your design was to aim right; and tho you care not to marry, and
venture on your own Wife to be the Target, yet at another man's White, no doubt
but you would prove a very good Marks-man.


Fies. When ever I marry, my Lord, it shall be to such a one, that shall be
incapable to shoot others, and consequently, I need not fear her being shot at
her self.


Sans. Oh this is cunningly crying down the Market, like one that is buying a
rich Bargain of Land, and is afraid of being over-bid, and having it bought out
of his hand by another -- Come, come, Count, I know you love Beauty.


Fies. Ay, too well, to marry a Beauty that every body will love as well as my
self, my Lord. Besides, I should hate to be jealous and stint the poor things
of a little liberty; I should never think that giving 'em an inch they would
take an ell: not I, I should always love to have em satisfied.


Sans. Faith, Count, if so little as you say will satisfy 'em, they must be
very poor things indeed.


Fies. Ah, if that be the best reason for a Husband's jealousy, I should hold
my old opinion. You see here my Lord, this picture in my hand.


Enter Guillamour and observes 'em. Sans. Well, my Lord, and what of that.


Guill. Hah, the Duke de Sanserre and Fiesque here. By heaven, and my Picture
that I lost, and have fretted so about, open in his hand.


Fies. It Is of a Lady and infinitely beautiful.


Sans. Do I know her, prithee let me see it. Guill. rushes between.


Guill. 'Dshea^ and death, not for a hundred thousand Worlds, my Lord. I must
beg your pardon to concern my self in this matter, it is the Picture of a
Relation of mine which I lost out of my Pocket: She Is a Nun in Brussels, and
excluding her self from the World, obliged me upon Oath, to keep her Picture
from all Eyes. The privilege this accident has given yoo already* my Lord, is
past my power of hindering, but, Fiesque, as you are a man of Honor.


Fies. And is not your Honor a little tainted, my Lord, in being false to her
that gave this Picture, and does not the discovery of your flight here, at my
Quarry, oblige me to a Revenge. ^side


Guill. -- Upon me what you please, but considering the Lady's quality and
merit -- to all men of honor her reputation ought to be sacred.


Sans. But there may be a very great reason for my seeing it, perhaps, my Lord,
I have lost a Picture too.


Guill. You cannot lose my Picture, my Lord, therefore I must beg your excuse;
besides, my Relation here has a very long Nose, which is not customary, my
Lord, in your French family.


Sans. My French Family have as good Noses and Faces belonging to 'em, as e^re
an English Family in Christendom -- and now I think more on^t, I believe I am
concerned in the Picture --


Guill. Not in this, I once more am positive.


Fies. Nay, that it is his Picture, I must join with him there, but as to the
Lady she may be related to both, for ought I know. However, to deal like a Man
of Honor, the property being his, I must restore it to him. gives it to him.
And now my Lord, pray a word in private.


Sans. The property may be only his indeed, and it is not impossible that it
may be mine too; but then methinks it is unnatural to believe that this Wild
English Colt can have his Leaps with both of 'em, tho I once had an account of
a hot fellow of that Na^ion, that debauch (...) whole Family together, the
Mother, two Aunts, three Daughters, and four Niece^, all at a time; ^ut damn
him this is not authentic enough to prove his double intrigue here: My Letter
to morrow therefore to Vandosm must dissolve my doubt, I Will go and write it
instantly. Exit. Sans.


Fies. The Duke is gone dissatisfy^d; and now, my Lord, I think you have reason
to say I am a man of honor.


Guill. That I shall always say, I hope too I have satisfied you as to my
proceedings with your Mistress Vandosm; I fear you and I are but two of her
Lovers, my Lord; what discovery happens more, upon my honor, you shall know,
and so your humble Servant. Exit Guillamour.


Fies. As far as Generosity, by your own example obliges me, I am yours too,
but you shall give me leave to be even with you if I can* Mistress for Mistress
it is fit I should be rewarded, either by m^rit or stratagem; here is the Letter
still, which I find he has forgot; this, with my cunning management, may give
me a sweet revenge, and serve him in his kind too: Let me see -- Hah, in a
Poetical strain, by Heaven; I have heard indeed she had a pretty talent that
way. (Reads) If in the Marriage-state be Harmony,
It Is then like Music when the parts agree;
And Wives, like Lutes, when fumbled on, will soon,
Iarring in Artless hands, grow out of Tune:
You, dear Musician, have the only way
To touch my heart strings right, and sweetly play.


Oh charming Creature and above mortally happy Guillamour, was there ever any
thing so tender; but now for the Postscript. Reads. I shall be in the Arbor at
the end of the Garden, every night about ten, which is the only time I have to
undress, and my Husband spares me to play at Chess with his old Steward; the
Maid will be at the back door, to be your Guide in the dark, if your heart
inclines you to wast one short hour in my Conversation: Come therefore and be
sure to make no noise -- So, these are as plain instructions as heart can wish,
and I am resolved to supplant this happy Lover, come what will on it, if I can
but get in first, 'twill be easy to lock him out, and I Will be as punctual as
the moment. A cheat in Love does no dishonor bear,
For so you win, do^t any way, it is fair. Exit.



SCENE II.
Enter Tonnerre, and Lady Brissac, as from Cards. L Briss. Hang the Cards, I
never have any luck when I play with you.


Tonn. Quite contrary, for you never have better luck than when you play with
me.


L Briss. I will not play out the Game, I Am resolved you shall not conquer me now.


Tonn. What now? You're got into your Petticoats again, you think to bully me,
Gad if you had been in Breeches, I Would have had satisfaction: Besides, I wonder
you should talk of Conquering, I Am su^e at the end of the play, you have always
the better of me.


L Briss. Pish, you are always wresting ones words to your own silly meaning,
if I should talk of a Charnel-house, on my Conscience, your lewd fancy would
turn it to a House of good entertainment.


Tonn. No, Child, not unless we had some Flesh there too, to make up our
entertainment; to have a Regalia of all Bones only, is fitter for a Hound, than
a Whore master.


L Briss. Come, come, let us go into my Sister's Closet, and unbridle her
Pegasus, she is making Verses there.


Tonn. With all my heart: Oh, I love a Billet in Rhyme from a sweet Lady, with
all my Soul. Exeunt.


Enter Daubray. Daub. So, now I think my intelligence to my Lord, will be worth
discovery; for the first that went into my Lady's Closet, was a man I am sure,
I have observed him up and down here for two or three days together, and just
now I found his Coat and Breeches in an Alcove above Stairs, and who, now to
keep his Intrigue the more secret, is gone to her in a female dress. This is a
discovery worth Gold, Faith, and I Will give my Lord an account of it
immediately. ^xit.


Re-enter Lady Sanserre, Lady Brissac, and Tonnerre, reading a Paper. Tonn. Tho
reason his strong power imparts,
If passions keep their Torrent still;
If, spite of all our Praying Arts,
Love gains a Conquest over our hearts;
Where is the use of our Fre^ Wills.
What, Poetical Sophistry too, gad, Madam, you ought to be Arraigned before
Apollo, by all his Sons, for usurping their Masculine prerogative. Methinks
your Province should be Loves soft Government, or Wits Fairy ^and, and not
grave sophistical Arguments. Why does not your Ladyship write a Play?


L Sans. Because, like a new unpractic'd Pilot, tho I can make shift to steer
my Vessel in a calm, yet in a storm, and where so many Rocks are too, I never
durst have the rash assurance yet, to venture splitting.


L. Briss. Pho? It Is not a small Rock, Sister, that can hurt a Woman, when her
fancy is so vigorous as yours is. Besides, you have Examples enough: yo^ see
here are Poetical Sapho's venturing among the critical Rocks every day; and I
dare swear for 'em, with as little fear of splitting, as if, like little
Pinnaces, they were entering a Dock where a Vessel was Riding of two hundred
Tun.


Tonn* (...) ha, ha -- Faith, I even long, Madam, to see some of your
productions in that kind, I Am sure they must be good, and full of fancy Come,
I Will help ye to a Theme, and give ye a Name -- Let me see, you shall call it
the -- humph --


L Sans. Pish -- you are as long in inventing a Name, as a good Poet would be
writing an Act. If I were to undertake such a thing, I Would call it without more
ado -- The Intrigues at Versailles.


L Briss. Good -- that would raise expectation, Sister, because there is a
double entendre in it: The Intrigues at Versailles -- or, we must have an or --
ye know.


Tonn. Or, the Court Cuckolds -- you must have something of Cuckold-making
in it, or else the Comedy will not be worth a farthing --


L Briss. Phoo, and that jest is as stale too, as Matrimony is after the first
twelvemonth. -- No, we'll have, or -- let me see, or -- ha, ha, ha, or the
Count in Petticoats.


L Sans. No, no, Sister, methinks the Countess in Breeches would do as well --
ha, ha, ha, -- and make a Character of a wild giddy headed young thing, that
run out of the Country where her old Husband left her.


Tonn. Ha, ha, ha, ay, and for the love that she bore to the aforesaid Breeches.


L Briss. No, prithee the Count's love to the aforesaid Petticoats, will come
better in first: And then to embellish it with the Character of a fine Poetical
Lady, that has a horrible jealous Husband, and that uses him so properly, ha,
ha, ha, ha.


Tonn. That also keeps Company with an old Beau, who fancying his Wife is
conserving in the Country, gives her opportunity to come to Court here, and use
him so properly -- ha, death, damnation, here he comes.


Enter Brissac. L Briss* It Is he by Heaven -- cursed accident -- I have never a
Mask neither -- Oh, if he sees me I Am undone. Runs behind Tonnerre.


Briss. Why how now? What a Lady hide her self from me, that must never be
said, ( goes to see her. Tonn. hinders.) Pox, prithee, dear Empress, tell her I
love Ladies; and if she be a friend to her that charms me, I Will wear her in my
heart, tell her, as I do thee, my precious -- Goes to embrace her: She clasps
about his Neck, and kissing, covers his Face, whilst L. Brissac goes out.


Tonn. Oh my dear Count --


Briss. Oons, I Am in Heaven -- oh, my lovely, dear, enchanting Creature! Why
this is beyond imagination -- I never was so happy before.


L Sann. That embrace was wittily contrived of the sudden, he had certainly
discovered her else. Come, come off now. Count, you will smother the Lady.


Tonn. Ay, come, let us have a little Air -- So, now I Am a little cooler.


Briss. And so am I now too, well, I am the happiest fellow -- phoo -- phoo --
Fans himself. Gad, these Love toys have a greater fatigue in 'em than I
imagined.


Tonn. I must after her, and know where she hides, or else this old fool has
disappointed me still. Exit Tonn.


Briss. What is she gone? gad I must Rally again, I must not leave her so. Come,
Madam, how shall we divert this Afternoon, are you for the Opera or Gardens.
Hah, come, for my part I Am for any thing.


L Sans. And at these years, troth, that ^ little less than a wonder. Well,
Count, we'll resolve of that within; in the mean time let me give ye a little
good advice. When Age and Youth Love's ticklish Game begin:
Youth having still the odds, is sure to win.
Then since our Sex such subtle Gamesters are,
Be sure you set no more than you can spare.
Save your remainder for a future end,
And manage wisely, your last Stake, old f^eind Strikes him on the back and
Exeunt.



Briss. 'Gad thou't in the right -- so I intend


ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Enter Vandosme and Grossiere. Gross. ANd have you really ventured, Madam, to
send for the Count, after your resolution of not seeing him, and the last
whimsical trick you put upon him?


Vand. Yes that I have, and expect him here every minute -- Resolution ye fool,
why what signifies a woman's resolution, when any turn of interest appoints the
contray? have thou gleaned all this while from the harvest of my fertile brain,
and have I taught thee so long in my own Instructive Catechism, to boggle at a
silly word that signifies nothing? Resolution - why ye Moon-calf, I have
resolv^d, and unresolv^d, and resolvd again, forty times in an hour, if the
occasion has been proper.


Gross. And will the Onion that is wrapped up in the Handkerchief, and the
repentant^story, and the Tears that shall issue thereupon pass upon him, think
you, you know he is no fool.


Vand. Yes mine always -- and so are all Mankind when I think fit -- thou shall
see me mould his heart in the palm of my Hand like foft Wax, till I make it
bear what impression I please. Always* remember this from me* a man is no
longer wise than when a Woman is indifferent to him, if ever he falls in Love
once, farewell Brains, his Wit deserts him presently -- he is just like a Witch,
detected when ever she is in hold once, her favorite Devil leaves her; But come
now to our business. You say the Fool, Sir Blunder, that sent me this comical
Love Declaration, is come already.


Gross. Yes, and I have locked him up in the Inner-chamber according to your
order.


Vand. There let him stay then a little, and tell the Louisd Ors over, that he
has brought me for Entrance money, for as sordid a Clown as he is, he knows
nothing but the Gold Key can unlock the Cabinet of my Conversation. -- So there
let him cool a little, whilst in complaisance to the Duke de ' Sanserre's
Letter, as also to deserve his noble Present here, shows a Necklace but
particularly to revenge my self on Guillamour, whom I now know to be false,
I Will discover the Intrigue between him ct the Duchess, you saw the Letter in
the Count's hand you say; that was found with the Picture.


Gross. Yes, and am sure it must come from the Duchess by his following words.
Tell her, says he with a scornful Air* I am glad her price is so fall^n, and
that she is subservient to one that only uses her as foyl to another.


Vand. A foyl to another. Death -- how that word inflames me. Besides* I find
now too the reason of the Traitor's coldness, when I desired him to go in a
second time; he had a greater sum to pay, it seems, and and so sneakingly only
popp'd me off with h^s odd Money; but I Will revenge my self on both, and by
prevailing insinuation, and my never failing Tears, wheedle that Letter out of
fond Fiesque, then show it to the Duke to undo 'em; you have told the other
fool within, that I Am at present only a little busy with a Relation that came
to visit me.


Gross. I have told what you bid me, but affirmatively, Madam, it shocks me
strangely to think that you should abuse the generous good natured Count; for
such a horrid Monster as this Blunder, I swear I am extremely dissatisfied.


Vand. You are dis^atisfied?


Gross. Well Madam as inconsiderable as you think me now, my Wit at a pinch
sometimes, has done yo^ considerable service. And I must be so bold to say once
more, affirm^tively, I admire you should Jilt the Count for this Monster; for,
if you would but give your self time to think a little, you would find there is
never a man in France, fuller of Love, fuller of Generosity, fuller of Wit good
Humor, and all gentle Qualities upon my veracity, than the injured Coun^t is
-- but for the the other.


Vand. But for the the other -- upon my veracity, he has one solid Virtue in a
fu^l Purse of Louisd'Ors which he has brought yonder, that excels all the
Count's good Qualities together. He has come empty handed of late, and whenever
he does so, I fancy his Qualifications weaken extremely.


Gross. Oh horrid forgetfulness, it is but a very few hours since, to my
knowledge, he presented ye with a very good Diamond Ring, and before that,
hardly ever saw ye, without some acknowledgement o^ other. Besides, a true Love
always relished with a strong Inclination; what qualification has the the other*
I wonder?


Vand. Money* ye fool, Money.


Gross. The Count has a pretty Address, an excellent vein in Music and Poety,
and then the charms of such a Tongue, what can compare with it?


Vand. Money, Money, ye Ass, Money -- (eagerly.)


Gross. Besides, a Love so endearing and he himself so indefatigable, in
proving it that even I my self that have been seasoned in your principles, and
bred as very a Jilt as your self -- I beg your pardon, Madam, I cannot help
owning his Perfection -- can you deny this -- has he any equal?


Vand. Money, Money, Money, Money, Money, Money. (sings).


Gross. Damnation on Money, have I not seen you sometimes in your freak, throw
it like dirt about the room; nay, what has vexed me to the Soul, and seems
almost incredible -- to a fellow you have fancied I have seen you refund; a
thing unnatural to the two great damning functions of the World, Whores and
Lawyers.


Vand. Pish, thy Soul is so sordidly mercenary, it can set no value upon
pleasure, which as well as I love Money, I always fix the highest rate upon.
Besides, Bullion may be scarce, and then to Traffic with Goods for other Goods
will be practicable. And don't you believe, Idiot, but that if ever I refund my
Money, I have a prospect of other returns. -- Hark, that is the Count's knock,
-- away, and remember your cue, leave me to manage him. knocks within, Exit
Vandosme.


Gross. Examples in all things like this are found,
Some chowse, others are chows'd, and so the World goes round

Exit Grossiere. Re enter Vendosme with Fiesque. Fies. You cannot blame me,
Madam, if after some late passages I am surpised, to find my self summoned
hither by so obliging a Letter. It Is so extravagant a turn, that I fear I
dream, or am in Fairy-land, where joys are only visionary. Pray resolve me, are
you thus kind indeed, is it substantial happiness?


Vand. Pray sit down -- ( softly) They sit, she locks kindly on him.


Fies. How irresistible are Beauty's charms, when such a gentle softness makes
addition -- hah -- Tears too ( she weeps.) Oh, you know I am not proof against
'em -- whoever those dear pearly Treasures fall for, I am most prone to grieve.


Vand. They only fall for you.


Fies. Nay, do not kill me quite -- A phrase like that, if true, would murder
me with Rapture -- for Charity's sake, abuse me not so grossly, nor use my
oft-try'd fondness to my ruin.


Vand. I do confess you ought not to believe, if my past faults sway your
consideration. But, Sir, the vilest Creature may repent: Though Ihave sinned,
Iam not reprobate; by all the sacred powers they are for you, and could
Repentance this way merit pardon, thus they should drop eternally.


Fies. For me, for poor neglected me? What can I think of this!


Vand. Think me no real Devil, and every other wickedness I do confess, I Have
been in my ingratitude, for I have used the best of men most vilely, but oh my
Conscience now flies in my face -- now now -- I smart for it -- sibs and weeps.


Fies. Is it possible!


Vand. It is, dear Sir, it is -- believe these Sighs, these true repentant
Words and real Tea^s -- crying out.


Fies. The brightest Jems that Beauty can put on, to make her self more Lovely
-- oh, who can resist 'em, lo^ks amour^usly on her.


Vand. I wronged your Love, by an intrigue with Guillamour; your true, your
generous, your perfect Love, that valued me in spite of Injuries. I own it,
Sir, and thus low beg your pardon: Kneels, and tears her Gloves and Ribbands.
Oh, I could stab or tear my self in pieces, when I reflect upon my baseness to
ye.


Fies. Nay, nay, sweet -- no violence, I do forgive thee all.


Vand. Can you be so good.


Fies. So good! why ^adst thou murdered all my Family, ruined my Fortune,
consum^d my Health, done Injuries above all human malice; yet, pleading in this
posture, with those Tears, that lovely look, so us^d to charm my Heart, I
should ^orgive thee: Oh thou sweet influencer --


Embraces her eagerly. Vand. Charming, kind Fiesque -- if I prove false again --


Fi^s. Oh, I cannot doubt thee, this must be now the last of all our
differences, forget but Guillamour, and then, my Love --


Vand. Forget him, yes, and for substantial reasons, my dear friend, for as you
gave me a hint lately, I find he made me only a Minutes property, whilst his
more lasting intrigue was with another, Witness the Picture and Letter which
you found of his -- I know he will visit me again, to renew with ^e upon better
leisure: And if I had but either of them to fling in his face now, I should fit
him rarely: What have you done with 'em, my dearest?


Fies. Why, Faith upon a high point of generosity, I gave him the Picture again,
but for the Letter --


Vand. Oh, if you have but that 'twill be enough -- look in your Pocket, dear
Sir, and give it me to show him, and he shall know nothing but that I found it.
I know the sight of it, I must give occasion for such a quarrel, as will be
past all reconcilement, which is my design, for then I am yours entirely --
embracing him.


Fies. She has me again -- nor can I, for mySoul, help believing every word she
says. We^l, tho we are reconciled, and do I give her this Letter, to complete
my Revenge upon Guillamour, she shall excuse my present design upon the
Duchess, or else I am not even with her: Her having it hinders me nothing, I
know the contents well enough. There it is, Child, and let it, as you say, be
thought as if you found it.


Vand. It shall, and doubt not but you shall be pleased with the effects of it,


Enter Grossiere, and whispers. Gross. She has her ends, and now it is my time
to enter.


Vand. Oh hang him, she tell me, my dear, that nauseous fool: Sir Blunder B^sse
is come to visit me, I Am sure you ca^^t be jealous of that Monster; but I would
not have him see you with me, because you kn^w 't^s such a prating fool --


Fies. Ay, he is so, therefore dear Child, for the present adieu: kisses her,
and Exit. I^m glad it happened thus, for this being the hour, I should else have
been puzzled for an excuse to get away to the Duchess; Humph! A double intrigue
upon my hands, and with two such Angels, the Devil^s in it if I am not a happy
Man now.


Vand. So, here is the L^tter, and in it the utter ruin of Guillamour's
intrigue with his fine Poetical Lady; I^ll teach her to call me her foy! -- ha,
ha, ha, and then I cannot forbear Laughing, to think how artificially I have
play^d this last Tear-shedding Scene -- Here prithee take away the nasly Onion
and Handkerchief, and give me another dipped in some Orange-flower Water to wipe
my fingers. She gives her water.


Gross. Nay, you are a rare Actress, I^ll ^ay that for you -- What, and you are
resolved then that Beast Blunder shall come.


Vand. Come, fool, yes, and this minute too; I Will supple my Face with a little
Pomatum and Powder, to get it ^n order, and then let him enter.


Gross. Pox on him, I can hardly endure the thoughts of him. Well, be sure you
seize his Money on the first Attack, or e^se, the Devil take me, if I shall not
rail outright. Exit Vand.


Exit Grossiere, and presently Reenters with Sir Blunder. Sir Bl. Harkee, you
Flea-bitten, thou seemst to be a very good necessary Queen, prithee get a
Faggot or two into the next room against we come in -- I have stayed so long
there without Fire, that, gadzooks, I Am damnably cold.


Gross. And where is the Money? without Money you may get 'em your self, if you
please; for my part I do^'t owe ye so much service.


Sir B. Why, how now, ye piece of old Hat, what are ye musty? the Jade's as
musty as a st^le pot of Marmalade of her own making.

Enter Vandosme. What say thou my pretty Baggage of ten thousand, shall not we
have a Fire and a Bottle? ha.


Vand. Ay, by all means, Sir Grossiere, hold your Tongue, go and get a Fire.


Sir B. Ay, do do, old Tag-snapper, and then look to the Door, do ye hear, that
no body come and disturb us why, what ye lowering Jade, you know your function
sure. Ex. Gross. frowning.


Vand* She^s gone, Sir; and in the mean time pray come and ^it down.


They sit down at a Table* Sir B. Where Is Money a saucy Sow; Gad my Credit's
very bad sure, if'twon't go for the price of a Faggot -- And I think here is a
Witness strong enough to show, that the Family of the Bosseers hate to be
stingy. There^s a hundred Louisd' Ors for ye, ye little twinkling Devil; and
now give me a buss.


Vand. Your humble Servant, Sir, -- a hundred Louisd'Ors, why, then the Devil
take me, if the man be half so disagreeable, as I thought him. (aside.)


Sir B. Gad the Gypsy has a pure tickling touch with her; her Lips are as soft
as Butter, they almost melt in my Mouth. Gadzooks I like her better than my
former Punck the Potato-woman, a thousand times.


Vand. I warrant he would cuff lustily, before A Woman should be taken from him --
I like such a well-set Fellow, do ye hear; bring a Flask of Champaign hither.


Sir B. Why* well said? Gad I must have the other Buss, I must Faith. Hearkee,
do hear, I cannot Complement and play the Fool, as the Coxcomby, F^ashy, Town
Sons-of-Whores do, but I love thee ^oundly; and, gadzooks, will give thee as
hearty proof on it, as e're a fellow in Christendom.


Vand. Indeed, Sir, I Am extremely inclined to believe ye, your Air and Shape,
shows ye to be a very good friend to a Woman. --


Sir B. Nay, thou see I Am lusty enough, if that will do it: My back is three
quarters broad, measur^d by a Dutch Burgo-master's Yard, and the Calf of my
Leg, eighteen Inches Diameter.


Vand. Well, I know not what ails me, but, methinks the blunt humor of this
fellow wins me strangely; methinks there is something so very new in him.
(aside.)


Sir B. Pox on your cringing flashy Coxcombs -- Come Chuck, sit down, and to
make us merry, I have two English Chairmen without, shall sing a humor made
upon on of those Puppies -- Hey, Chairmen, come in their, bring the Chair, and
Act it as you used to do.


Re-enter Grossiere, and Butler* with a Flask. Enter 2 Chairmen with a Chair. A
new Dialogue, sung between two Chairmen, supposed to be waiting all Night at a
Tavern-door, for a Town-Rake.
1 Chapter HEy hoe, hey hoe, hey hoe -- yawning
The Clock has just struck four,
The Chimes to tel^ the hour;
And morning Cocks that Crow, hey hoe, hoe.

2 Chapter My Lord, yawns betwixt each word.
my Lord, my Lord --
My mad Lord Rantipoll
Sure now his Gutts are full,
Will think it is time to go -- hey hoe, hey hoe,

1 Chapter No, it is too soon, he is not yet Crammed to the Top,
Faith, Tom, let us home,
Pox on him he never budges, till the Sun be up.

2 Chapter Odsbud, as poor as I am grown,
I Would rather lose his nasty Crown

1 Chapter And so had I
Confound me if I lie,
Than wait on such a Fop.

2 Chapter What pranks has he been playing all this day,


1 Chapter Before, and since, we brought him to the Play*


2 Chapter He pulled a Parson by the Ears,
As he was going to say Prayers,
And Rabbit like from Cussack stripped.

1 Ch Next morning met a Senator
And him through Midrife whipped.

2 Chapter You Rogue says he, I Will maul you for
The want of Money in the Nation,
Land Ta^es, and the Damning Capitati^^*

1 Chapter Windows breaking,


2 Chapter Children scaring,


1 Chapter Women Ruffling,


2 Chapter Cuckolds daring.


1 Chapter Bullies frighting, slow of fighting,


2 Chapter Nor old nor young, degree nor Sexes sparing.

Both. Nor old nor etc.


1 Chapter He twice raiz'd the Mob


2 Chapter And we twice releiv'd him:


1 Chapter From Counter and Newgate,


2 Chapter Gallows reprieved him.


1 Chapter By handling our Poles, and stout words of def^al,


2 Chapter We brought him off safe to the Theater Royal:


1 Chapter But no sooner got there, and secure from the Rout,


2 Chapter When this troublesome Bear puts the Actors all out.
By squobling in the Pit
With a Ra^e-hell he met.

1 Chapter About two confounded Whores,
Who convey^d him out ofdoors.
And for Supper at last, saved the Fool and his Feather,

2 Chapter And here in the Tavern- they are drunk altogether.

Both. And here, etc.


Chorus. Then, Tom, to the Army let us away,
Nor longer wait at Tavern door,
But take King William's Royal Pay,
Sit up all Night, and Pimp no more.
Whilst they, like two Bitches, and he a third Brute,
Feel the Constable's Clutches, or trudge home a foot.
Gross. Oh, she has the Purse, I see* Well, there is a Fire now?


Sir Bl. Oh, that is well, tho, Gad I Am warmer by a great deal than I was: Give
me a Woman I can excuse a Faggot at any time.


Vand. Nay, I believe a very little brush would kindle your Faggot, Sir. Come,
here is your Health in a Bumper. Fills a Beer Glass and drinks.


Sir B. Why, Gad-a-mercy -- ah, well drawn faith, -- gad I must dispatch
quickly, I see the Jade will make me Drunk else. Come here is thy Health now,
and zooks, to the happy Minute. He drinks. Gad I have mauld her already, the
silly fool's in love with me, ha, ha, ha.


Gross. What a Devil does she mean by their Advances She Ogles and smiles.


Sir B. Come, never stand ^^mpering for the matter; do love me, my Lusious
Landabrides.


Vand. By all the Arts of Womankind I do, aside, she drinks again he has
betwitch'd me sure -- what if I should, Sir, ( to him)


Gross. Marry, the Devil fetch him first -- what dee mean, Madam*


Sir B. Hearkee, Goodee Crape, get you to your Post, or I have such a Salt-Eel
in my Pocket for ye, ( he drinks again.)


Vand. Huswife, get you gone -- she drinks.


Gross. Get me gone, Madam?


Sir B. Ay, get you gone, Huswife, Jade, Cockatrice, oons, I Will maul ye else.
he drinks.


Gross. 'Sdlife, here is likely to be fine work indeed, by her eager Ogling him,
on my Conscience; she loves the Brute, and then she is ruin^d andI too.


Sir B. Gad, thou can not deny't, I see it plainly now, I see it in thy Phiz,
thou do love me. -- Why how now, ye simple Queen you, why, what are ye
asham^d to own it.


Vand. If you can be grateful, I must own it: Come, I Have a cold Treat within,
we'll go and eat it.


Sir Bl. Ay, with all my heart, zooks, what a lucky dog am I. Nay, Faith, let
me be Purse-bearer too then, let my gratitude appear altogether,


takes the Purse from her Gross. Zoons, you will not part from the Money, Madam.


Sir B. Not with the Money, Sawcy-face, why who shall hinder? Hearkee, hold
your Tongue, or -- shakes the Rope.


Gross. Hinder it! 'Sdlife I^ll hinder it -- why, what are ye Mad -- dee know
what you are doing. snatches the Purse from him.


Vand. Why how now, impudence, dare you dispute my Actions, Huswife, give it
me, or I^ll tear your Eyes out. Pulls off her Head ^oaths, and takes away the
Purse.


Sir B. You are an impudent Slut indeed, to dare to dispute our Actions. Come
little Bo^a-roba, let^s go in and eat, humph, make your Curtsie and show
respect to your Master and Lady, ye Jade to G. then Ex. leading Van.


Gross. Ten thousand Furies take her, is there in nature such another Succubus,
not only to oblige her felf to a Monster like him, but in the Devils name, in
her Cups, to refund his Money too: Oh, I shall run distracted at the thought
on it, and she has vexed me so, that I have a good mind to set Fire to the
Lodgings, and burn 'em about her Ears, senseless Devil, ^dsdeath, to pervert
the main Topic of our function.

Subtlety, against method we (...) ^ur Gain^


SCENE II. A Garden.
Enter Datchess, Sanserre, Lady Brissac and Tonnerre. L Sans. Then sister, you
are resolved, you say, to go to this Masquerade, at the Duke de Creque's --
since your last escape from your Husband, I swear you grow as bold as a Lion.


L Briss. I have some thoughts of going, and yet the Music that I hea^ is to
be at the Marquis de la F^rt's, makes me lean a little on the other side -- or
else there is Basset at my Lady Cavoy's, what if I should go and venture twenty
Pistoles there.


Tonn. Ay, where the old Count your ^usband comes every night to play, who,
squatting down by you on the sudden, desires the civility to go your halfes.
Well, if you will run these Risques, Madam, even get out of 'em as you can; for
my part, I have never another Judas kiss for him -- a plague of Bristles, he
half ^lead my f^ce with the last.


L Briss. Nay, you ought indeed, to brag of that exploit, for I never knew a
kiss that did a Woman any kindness before.


Tonn. Oh, you must allow i^ a pretty Preludium to loves Music.


L. Briss. I remember I read once, a strange, old, dry-headed Poet, that was
damnably puzzled to find out the Etimology of it; amongst all fancies, says he
-- ay, -- it is so. Among all fancies, tell me this,
Whence came the whim, we call a kiss.



L Sans. Well, and there is another old Rhimer, as great a Crambonian as
himself, that answers pa^ thus -- From Infant Pleasure got and bred,
Upon the Lips still blushing red,
By warm desire always fed,
And makes more sweet the Bridal Bed.



Tonn. Why, God-a-mercy Dogrill, gad there is a conceit or two in this,
tollerably well.


L Sans. Ay, ay, and will do very well, to employ your thoughts upon in another
quarter of the Garden. Go, go, get you gone thither. This is Fairy-land, a
place where I always exercise my Poetical Talents.


L Briss. What thus, in the Dark, Sister, why you cant see to write.


L Sans. But I can see well enough to think; and if you don't go quickly, my
first thought will be, that you are impertinent if you ask any more questions.
Besides, darkness is naturally a confiner of fancy; and my Muse has taug^t me
just as people do Starlings: I sing always bes^ when I^ve least light: Go, go,
get ye gone, I say.


L Briss. I believe sweet Sister Sterling, yours is a tenth Muse and of
Male-kind, who teaches you so well with his Flage^et, that Company and al^
other Music is tedious to ye. W^^l* adieu, we won^t hinder your proficiency: I
hope I shall pitch upon some pleasurable diversion, to make me amends for your
absence. I Will to the Music, stay, or to the Comedy, hold, or to the Basset, or
to the Masquerade, or, or, -- or some where, cod I cannot tell where yet; come
Count.


Tonn. Come Count, ay but where, where the Devil must I come?


L Briss. Why, come away, I tell ye I cannot tell where yet: nay, if you grow
resty, farewell to ye. Runs off.


Tonn. Whiew! She^ll be at the Indies within this half hour: Resty! gad I think
I have some reason, I Am sure I^m run hard. Exit.


L. Sans. I Am glad her giddy head has hurried her away so opportunely, for the
happy minute just now comes on when I used to enjoy my dear Guillamour's
Conversation -- and hark, methinks I hear some walking; ay, it is certainly he,
and La Busque, for she has been waiting at the Garden-door above this half
hour. Enter Fiesque and La Busque.


La B. There Sir, that is the way into the Arbor; I Will now go in and see whither
the Duke be in his Closet still. Exit.


Fies. So, she mistakes me happily; and thus far propitious fortune is
favorable; let me but manage my Voice well, the rest will all be easy. Exit.


Guillamour comes over the Wall. Guill. The happy Ladder that I found hard by
here, in a corner of a House that is new building, has done me signal service;
but yet, I cannot but wonder, why la Busque should be from the door, but,
perhaps my Watch went wrong, and I have mistook the hour -- her diligence else
doubtless had not been wanting; for which -- besides -- this Purse that I have
brought her here, I know her L^dys favors are not trivial ( shows a Pu^se)
Stay, this must be the Arbor, -- hah, and sure I hear some bustling, -- it is
certainly she, -- the kind Soul was impatient, and is got hither before me.


Re-enter Fiesque, and Lady Sanserre. L Sans. Why don't you speak to me, -- am
I grown stale, that you aford me now but half the joy I used to have.


Guill. Hah!


Fies. I Am only speechless, with excess of Rapture.


Guill. The Devil ye are, Furies and Hell I Am jilted; and to confirm it with
the strongest proof, have caught her in the Fact. Come, Sir, guard your self
who e're you are, I Will give ye some fair play. she shreeks


Fiesque turns and fights. Fies. Hah -- it is sure the Duke -- now darkness
favor me. Exit.


Guill. Ah curse of Cowardice, and the clowded Stars, are ye got from me, but I
shall grope ye out. in fighting he drops his Purse.


L Sans. Oh, softly, dear my Lord, and do but hear me --


Guill. Witch, Traitorous Devil, -- I had rather hear a Mandrake Groan, or a
Toad croaking Vespers.


L Sans. By all that is good, I Am innocent in Will.


Guill. By all ill, that is thy self, I^ll be revenged.


Sans. (within) Lights, lights there -- hey, within, bring lights there.


Guill. So, that is well, first let the Cuckold play his horn part, I Will try to
find out the Intriguer to inform him further, ( la Busque doubtless can do it)
and I Will bribe high to charm her. (aside) And so vile Creature, farewell for
ever. Exit.


L Sans. I am so confounded -- I have lost my Scences; Thieves; Thieves.

Re-enter La Busque and Sanserre Armed, Servants with Lights. Lights, lights --
O my Lord I Am heartily glad you're come, I Have been so horribly fr^ghted with
Thieves.


Sans. Thieves -- what a Devil make you here?


L. Sans. It Is my custom, my Lord, (how I tremble!) I do so every night after
Supper, (I can hardly breathe!) to exercise my Poetical fancy.


Sans. O plague on your fancy -- this cursed Poetry has made more Cuckolds than
all the rest of the Liberal Sciences together: Go, search round the Garden
Letts, see what sort of Thieves these are. Ex. Servants.


La Bus. He you take for a Thief is far enough from thee by this time I hope,
for I left the Key in the door. aside.


Sans. If I mistake not, I heard a clashing of Swords; what were they fighting
about their Booty before they had it? or were you that part of my Goods and
Chattels they were tilting for, hah? they chose but an ill place for it here
among the Flower-knots: How now, what is here? A Purse under my feet -- It Is so,
'dsdearh, and cramm^d with Gold! ah, it is plain now, these Rogues were too rich
to come hither for Money, that could so carelessly drop a Treasure here.


L. Sans. A Purse! oh Heavens what shall I say now! ( aside.) Oh, I have it --
Oh, bless me, the fright I was in has made me drop my Purse too -- Pray give it
me, my Lord, it is my Card money, I have been lucky of late at Bassett, and
improved my allowance by good fortune.


Sans. Your Purse?


L. Sans. Mine! mine, who is should it be else? Nay, pray my Lord don't open it,
there is some small Gold amongst the rest, and you may drop a piece or two.


Sans. You are as eager to hinder me, as if some little dandiprat Gallant of
yours were lurking here, but I am resolved to know its inside however, -- that
I may say once in my life, Madam, I have dived to the bottom of our Intellects
-- oh, here is a Paper too, a Billet dou^ I Will lay my life.


L Sans. Ten to one he is in the right, and then I Am ruined past redemption. --
Oh horrid, is it possible you should still plague me with your jealousy. Curse
on it, if I had but taken a little faster hold --


Sans. Oh, is your Ladyship nettled, does the curious sec^et press ye so
st^ongly, that yo^ strive to tear the snatching tears the Paper Pape^ -- it is
excellent, -- but if I mistake not, here is enough left still to give me
^nowledge of your virtuous inclinations -- humph -- let me see, t -- dear,
dear, Mr. la Busque.


L B. O Lord me, -- odds heart the Letter to me, and ten to one but the Purse
too -- oh good.


Sans. reads. Tho you receive thi^ little tender of my kindness, I would have
you believe that I still remain in your debt; for it is not possible your late
diligence to serve me, can be two well rewarded. -- her late diligence -- very
good Let but our Intrigue be still carried on cunningly, and then let the
Horn-mad jealous D -- and here the rest is tore -- D -- what the Devil follows
now -- Hell and Furies -- the letter D -- begins Duke -- Curse on it, it must bo
so -- for what else can it stand for.


L Sans. Stand for -- D -- D -- why, why, D D -- stands for Doctor -- ha, ha --
L Busque, it is thy Letter the Son sent thee -- which I found and put in my
purse to keep for thee. Come* I hope you will give me my Mon^y now.


Sans. Humph -- the Devil has got her off again -- here is no certainty, tho
there be plag^y circumstances? gives her the Purse.


La B. Yes, yes, Madam, I remember the Letter very well, and the Purse too,
Madam.


La Sans. Ay, ay, I know thou do; you remember I told you when I won it.


La B. Not I, Madam, I remember nothing of that, but you must needs know, Madam
--


L Sans. I do so, as well as if it were done but yesterday; and prithee come in
with me, and I Will tell thee more of him and thee, and them, the Money, and my
self, and every thing, for I dare not speak a word more here, for fear my Lord
should be jealous. Exit in haste.


L B. 'Dslife, what is all this banter, this shall not pass upon me: Gad I Will
discover all rather than lose the Purse; I can tell her, that -- Ex. after.


Re-enter Servants with Lights. Serve. There Is no one in the Garden, my Lord,
but we have found the back door open, and suppose the Thieves are gone out that
way.


Sans. These might be Thieves, it is true, and they might be Cuckold-makers.
Damn that thought, how it stings me; oh how insupportable a Torment is doubt,
in a condition of Life from which men ought to expect all quiet and security:
They may talk of Local-hells I know not where, but that poor Husbands Bosoms
feels the hottest that doubts, and yet must Love. -- How now? Enter Daubray.
Daubray,


Daub. Ay, my Lord, I have been laboring to do you service, ever since. the
last time I saw ye, and now I think I may truly say, my intelligence is to the
purpose, -- for I have unrevell'd such a secret. --


Sans. Have thou, come then give it me at once, I hate a lingering pain.


Daub. It Is this, my Lord; I observed yesterday when your Grace was gone out, a
young, dapper, sparkish Fellow with my Lady.


Sans. So!


Daub. And to day, my Lord, he was here again, but had disguised himself I
suppose cunningly to prevent my discovery, in Women's Clothes.


Sans. Women's Clothes? good.


Daub. But for all his subtlety, I suspected at first it was the face again, and
to be sure of it, I watched matters so closely, that going into La Busque's
Closet after she had come out, and thinking he was hid there, amongst my Lady's
foul Linen, what did I find there, my Lord, but this vile Garment, the very
same that I saw him wear the day before, shows a pair of Breeches.


Sans. The Devil --


Daub. Ay, the Devil indeed, as you say, my Lord, for it puts me so in mind of
an ill Husband I had once, who was always a very infirm consumptive person; and
it brings such things into my head, that I vow to Gad I hate the Garment of all
others, I have a perfect aversion for the Garment.


Sans. A plague on the Ga^ment, it brings some things into ^y head too that are
not very divertive: But come to the purpose, dear diligence -- can I, think
thou, surprise this young dog with her.


Daub. Without sail, my Lord; come in with me and I Will put your Lordship in a
way immediately.


Sans. Dispatch then, I Will follow thee. -- Oh, thou absurd Philosop ^e that
against human ills did preach up patience, how art thou baffled here; A
Cuckolds case, I find poor lazy Drone, was ^e're thy study. Pl^gue, Death and
Hell? What strange new unknown punishment shall I contrive for (...)? hah, let
me see? keep her from Meat a month, and starve Concupisce^^^ no, that will not do,
or shall I cut her piece meal* that is impossible -- her; impudence has so
case-hardned her* that she will exceed the valliant Greek of old, and prove her
self all over impenetrable. Well then, to smoother her with her own Pillow, the
accessory Pillow -- good, then to the Forum like renowned Brutus, and tell the
weighty reason with la^ge Caveat. To all the Human Race that hapless vary
Their blessed State, run mad with fool and marry. Exit.



The end of the fourth Act.
ACT V. SCENE I.
Enter Guillamour, and La Busque. Guill. IF thou art tame and passive after
such injustice done thee, thou art not what I took thee for, a Girl of Wit and
Spirit; let thy Lady therefore know thou can resent an injury: what, to deny
giving the Purse I ordered thee, 'twas base, 'twas sordid.


La B. She puts me off hourly, with telling me she has another Business for me
to do first, but if ever I have a finger in her business till I finger the
Purse, my Lord, I wish it may rot: I know her love of Play too well, and how
like Birdlime Money sticks to her. I never hardly had any Wages of her, but
she would borrow it again in two days time; shes the very Devil at that trick.


Guill. 'Dsheart, and that very trick would ruin thee in a little time. Come,
come, Sweetheart, she is all over ingratitude; join therefore with me, and let
us revenge our selves; she has basely used thee for all thy diligent Services:
Take now the opportunity and right thy self, she has also been ingenerously
false to me and my Love, and for my part I am resolved I^ll never forgive her.


La B. Gad, if I have not the Purse between this and seven a Clock at night, I
will have my revenge, I will discover something that -- Well, I say no more.


Guill. So, the secret is bubling upwards, 'twill come out presently, the other
ten Pistoles, and she disgorges. ( aside) How, say no more, gad but thou shall
say more, and discover all too, -- and let the Purse be damned, with her
ingratitude, here is ( gives her Gold) something in lieu of it, which,
influencing Conscience, and improving thy good Nature, shall Bribe thee to be
mine: Come, come, the discovery. Nay, nay, no demurring Child, but out with it,
fear her not, from hencefo^th I^ll take care of thee.


La B. Why truly, I must needs say, your Lordship has taken the only, and most
moving method in the world to engage me. Looking on the Gold.


Guill. Ay, no doubt on^t, the Conjurer Gold can never fail in charming. aside.


La B. Which is your Lordship's tender applying it to my Conscience, for
Conscience I assure your Lordship goes a great still looking on his Gold way
with me, and really that was always the main thing I blamed in my Lady. If the
Woman had had but a Conscience, I could never have betray^d her secret; but to
be so horridly unconscientious to keep my Purse from me in the first place.


Guill. Ha, ha, the Purse still, that Purse lies damnably heavy upon her
Stomach, all will out I find. ( aside)


La B. Then in the next place, to use your own words to be ungenerously false,
to so fine a person as your Lordship.


Guill. Oh, your humble Servant.


La B. So well made, so beautiful a person as your Lordship.


Guill. Nay, nay, sweet Mrs. L Busque, what do you mean.


La B. Nay, more, so beautiful, so super-fine a person as your Lordship.


Guill. Oh fie, this is too much by half


La B. It really shows that the Woman had no Conscience at all, nor will I any
longer bear her the fidelity usual. Therefore know, my Lord, that for all her
Oaths, Tears, and Prostitutions, she really has Jilted ye.


Guill. Damn her, I believe as much now, do but te^l we with whom.


L^ B. Ay, dear my Lord, you shall know all, and more than all if I could
express it, for I find my Conscience prompts me exceedingly. Does not your
Lordship remember a young, smock'd faced, dapper Spark, that came into the
Garden with old Count Briss^^'s company, that Evening the Duke was laughed at,
for being found in his Wife's clothes.


Guill. I do, -- death and the devil, -- is it he.


La B. Most certainly, my Lord, and who has cunningly, ever since, to keep the
Intreague the closer, daily kept her Company, disguis^d in a Woman's Habit --
and is this instant with her, in her apartment yonder.


Guill. Hah, in Woman's Habit say thou? why this is a secret worth Gold
indeed; cursed, hellish, treacherous Creature, this is her Truth and Constancy
in the Devil's name, henceforth let that dull Animal, that will proclaim
himself and Ass with Ears,

Believe damnd Woman, when the vows and swears.


La B. For further proof, retire into this Closet, my Lord, I Will warrant you
see some bolting presently.


Guill. I Will follow thee, and ^tifle Rage a moment, that I may let it loose
with greater gust upon her. Exeunt.


Enter Daubray, with Sanserre and Brissac. Daub. They are certainly together,
my Lord; but to make the proof more plain, be pleased your self to peep through
the Keyhole of the Bedchamber, whilst the Count and I go another way, and
watched the door of the Drawing Room.


Sans. Do do, and if I find 'em here, I Will come and call ye: Damnation! these
are the joys of Marriage. Now Count, I hope I shall convinec ye what a Viper
I Have so long cherished in my B^som.


Briss. Well, well, let^s see the proof; the proof, I know your Lordship's
Eyes* sometimes see double, therefore, gad I Will not believe a word till I see
the proof. I love an Intrigue too well to have it slandered with doubts and
surmizes, the proof, the proof, my Lord.


Sans. Away then to the Drawing-room-door, I^ll this w^y.


Daub. Softly, softly, my Lord. Exeunt at several doors.


Re-enter Sanserre hastily. Saus. It Is so, by the spirit of Cuckoldom, there
th^^ are, close together, and Cooing like two Pigeons just going to Bill, I
could ^ot see my Wife for the Bed-Curtains, but the young rampant Fornicator, I
saw plainly in his female Trappings, wagging his Comm^de, I suppose eagerly
exp^ess^ng some new lewdness to her. Death and Hell, where shall I get a
Gridiron b^g enough to broyl him on, but hush, another Minute for that, I^ll
first go and call B^iss^e to be Witness of her Infamy: now sure I shall
convince the incre^ulous old Coxcomb, if this peeping proof be not plain
enough, the Devil take all Ogling. Ex.


Enter Tonnerre. Tonn. What happiness ordained to bless M^rt^lity, can vi^ with
that of the successful Lover. to him Guil^^mour from the Closet. Oh my full
heart, by Heaven, my Joys so swell my surcharg^d Bosom, I have hardly breath
left to express my Rap^ure.


Guill. Then, least the unruly passion should boil over, give me leave, Sir, to
bring ye some allay.


Tonn. Hah, my Lord Guillamour. Tonn. turns about and starts.


Guil. The same, Sir, and whither you had knowledge of my Pretensions to the
Lady you come from or not, I have not leisure now to examine; it is enough for me
to tell ye, that I have found my self abused by her, and your unexpressible
happiness as you term it, is the sequel of her unexemplary baseness to me,
which I am now come hither to revenge and expose.


Fon. Death and Hell, has he been intrigu'd with my Countess, this is a
discovery amazes me; hearkee, my Lord, pray let me ask you a question now.


They talk apart. Enter Sanserre and Brissac. Sans. Da^bray will watch the
Drawing Room door close enough, so that they can^t slip from us that way, and
for this passage Count -- hah -- what do I see, by all my pangs it is he, -- and
Guillamour a brace of the Court's rankest Cuckold-makers. Furies and Hell, she
deals with 'em in couples, -- but if they escape me now, draw Count --


Bris. Draw -- what a plague does he mean, is not that, my dear sweet,
luscious, charming Empress that stands there: Dsheart it is she I Am sure now:
Draw, -- oons the man's mad. ap^rt, stairing at Tonn. the^ runs to her.


Sans. Come, Sir, draw; for tho such Villainy deserve no fair play, I sc^orn to
take advantage; nay, nay, no evasion -- draw quickly.


Guill* My Lord, I Have something to discover, that perhaps may satisfy ye
without it.


Sans. Your life, Sir, can only satisfy, draw or I Will nail ye to the Wall.


Guill. Nay, then I will have play for it. fight here.


To^. It Is lucky, however, to have the old fool Sessac here, I know he will
de^end me. ( aside)


Bris. Hey day, why my Lord -- 'dsdeath, are ye both bewitched -- nay then,
then Gad I^ll put ye out of your tricks, I Will spoil your fencing -- hah, now my
Lord, parts them, beats Sanserre^ s Sword out of his hand, and takes it up, you
shall stockado no more till I think fit; if your Lordships please to go to
Cuffs, you man.


Sans. Damn^d chance, goes to fall upon Tonn. and Brissac guards her with both
Swords) yet I have Fingers left to tear your Devilship, your Strumpets covering
shant' disguise ye longer, nor shelter the lewd Monster underneath.


Bris. What raving, stark mad, -- 'dsheart do ye know what ye are going to do,
oons, keep back you had best, he that of^ers to touch my dear Empress, shall
have both these Pokers in his guts the next moment. What a Devil are ye
bewi^ch^d, my Lord, -- what of^er to strike a Woman.


Sans A Woman, a Wizard, -- poor old deluded Wittal, clear your Eyesight and
understanding, -- look again, is that a Woman.


Guill. Be a little cur^ous in your observation, old Count, and let her prove
her self a Woman if she can.


Bris. Prove her self a Woman? They^re both pos^est, Begad, -- why this is
Impudence unparrelleled: A plague on ye for a couple of ^ewd Fitchews, how
would you have her prove.


Sans. Show -- that stubbled Chin, a little nearer to your blind Eyes, look
closer ye old dotard, have Women beards?


Bris. Beards oons what care I, what is that to my dear Empress here -- oons
you don't think to make me believe that she is not femina propria, do ye? Do
hear, Goddess, prithee show em a Bubby. -- Convin^e 'em presently with the
sight of a pretty Nipple, or so; do Faith -- why, pox on ^em, they have the
confidence to hint here, that thou, the treachery of all my Joys art no Woman,


Ton. if I were otherwise, their Insolences should hear from me in another
manner, tell em that from me, Count.


Bris. Ah, dear, dear charmer, do ye hear that, ye brainless Peers, do ye hear
that?


Sans. If you were otherwise, death, hell and furies, do not I know?


Bris. Oons know what ye will, my Lord, keep back or -- guards her.


Sans. Confound his folly, why, I tell thee, old stupidity once more, that this
is a Man, a young rampant Rake-hell, lewd as the Devil, who, wearing that
Woman^s disguise there, to keep himself unknown, intrigues with your damn^d
Sister, my damn^d Wife, and abuses me; I saw him scarce two Minutes since in
her Apartment with her, and will instantly go and fetch her, to prove the truth
of all, and make that incredulous Pate of yours, once in your life, believe the
things you see. Exit Sanserre.


Bris. Hamp? Gad now I look better upon her: That Chin, those broad Shoulders,
and those pair of Mutton Fists, do show somewhat more mannish than I imagin^d.
Hearkee, what shall I call ye, if, instead of Female Trinkets, I do hereafter
find you of the Male-gender


Ton. I shall have one of those two Pokers ungender me, I suppose I am in a
very fine condition truly. ( aside)


Guill. What think ye now, Sir, of the vast happiness of a successful Lover?
Will your crowded joys now give ye breath enough, to express your Rapture.


aside to Ton. Ton. So, very good, on the other side, I am a very pretty fellow,
faith.


Bris. Gad, I do not like that Leer, -- I see more of the Whore-master's Air
now, than I thought for. Well, if thou should prove a Son of a Whore after
all.


Guill. Nay, you are snap'd, Sir, and now much good may do ye with Your success
in the Duchess, that your prevailing merit w^n from me. skreek within Oh, here
he is coming with her, and when you are both expos^d, I shall think my self
sufficiently rev^ng^d.


Bris. Ay, ay, Gad it is plain now, the very face looks with such a Ma^culine
impudence, as if it could not deny it: Here will appear the Male gender.


Ton. Better and better still, I am wedged in too, there is no flin^hing.


R-enter Sanserre, pulling in Lady Brissac maskt. Sans. Come, Madam, you must
this way with me now -- your disguise to escape at the other door is contrived a
little too late -- go forward there to that incredulous Gentleman, who has at
this time a very pre^sing affair with ye, whilst I, to proclaim your Virtue,
and the infinite pleasures of my life so long drawing, wish your Ladyship in
the Conjugal-yoke. -- Expose 'em b^refac'd to the world, snatches off her Mask
'Dsdeath and Hell, who do I see -- my Sister Brissac, -- wonder of wonders, how
the Devil comes this?


Bris. Oons my Wife, -- I Am dumb, -- I^m blind, -- I Am dead; -- it is
Witchcraft, -- it is impossible, -- 'dsheart, I^ll not believe it.


Guill. Hah, another Lady instead of the Duchess, 'dslife, ten to one then, La
Busque has been deceived by a mistake, and I have wrong^d an Angel. apart


Bris. Speak, speak thou Fairy, speak thou Fantosme, art thou my Wife, art thou
in the Country or no, art thou making Role-cakes there huswifely, or were thou
yonder just now making me a Cuckold whorishly, -- speak thou Cornucopia.


La B. Indead, my Lord, to tell you the truth, I am I,


Bris. Are ye so, -- then I am I know what, ye damn^d Dalilah.


La B. Just come to Town a little, upon a frolic, my Lord, to watch you,
because you staid so long here; but as for that Gentleman there, how he came
hither, I know not. I suppose he is going to a Masquerade somewhere; for my
part, I took him for a real Woman, till I found him otherwise.


Bris. Good again, then you have found him oth^rwi^e, it seems, -- and if he has
no Armor under his Bawdy-Jacket, this I think shall find out some of his
Small-guts, goes to stick him and they hinder the Moon shall shine through his
Midrife presently.


Guill. No, no, Count, we must not have no such violence neither -- here is only
suspicion of Cuckoldom yet; besides, you see he is unarmed, and you must not
take such advantage.


Briss. Unarmed, a plague on him, he is well enough armed to Jilt my Wife, and
let the same Weapons serve him against me, with a pox to him.


Tonn. Well, I see I am discovered, but however must assure you, upon my
honor, in right of your Lady, that she is wholly innocent of engaging me
further, tho, for a frolic, I contrived to get into her Company at her first
coming to Town, nor was my disguise taken upon the score of any Intrigue, but
to secure me till I could get the Kings pardon about a Duel; so that your Lady,
my Lord Duke, and yours there, Count, were very strangers to me till just now,
that to make a little Mirth, and humor my Habit here, I got into their Company.


Sans. Did you never leave a pair of Breeches, Sir, in my Wifes Closet.


Tonn. Not I, upon my honor, my Lord.


L Bris. Come, since the Gentleman has dealt by me like a Man of Honor, I Will
unravel that mystery: Therefore know, my Lord, that those Breeches were mine,
and part of the frolicksome disguise I came up to Town in, the day that a
certain young Bully bantered in the Garden, Court.


Briss. Admirable, and so you was then that impudent young Dog, that huff'd and
hectored me so, was ye.


La B. In propria persona, faith Count -- nay, never frown for the matter, for
if you do -- remember you did all you could to break your Conjugal-vow, by
making love to that Lady there, which, tho it prove ineffectual -- your will
was not wanting ye lewd Rake-hell, therefore either let us shake hands, and let
all go as frolic, for frolic -- or lookee Count, I can frown too, dee see.


Bris. It Is a mettled Devil, as like my Wife, as one Pea to another -- but I
cannot believe it is her yet; but for your part, Signior Aenigma, thou must not
put upon me, I do not like your Story.


Tonn. Why then, Sir, you must take your satisfaction as you please, I Will
venture to change my Dress and put on a Sword, whenever your scrupulous Honor,
Sir, shall require other satisfaction.


Bris. Hah, very fine gad; we Husbands have a fine time on it, if we are n^
Cuckolds, we must be fools for making a bustle about it, and if we are
Cuckolds, we must fight for making a bustle about it, -- but you shall not bully
me with that friend, I Will have a better reason for your being here, or expect
what you deserve. Oons, was ever Lover so disappointed, -- I thought I had got
the rarest Doxy, the most luscious armful, and in^tead of a Whore, to find a
Son of a Whore, ( apart) A pox on him I must murder him, there is no other way.


Guill. Oh fie, -- fie, -- r^member, Count, he is unarmed. -- It Is certain now
by my dear Duchess not being here, that his Intrigue was with the the other? and
I have basely wronged her by a cursed mistake. ( aside)


Sans. This is an hour of Wonders, -- and all so intricate too, that they
surpass my understanding, first to see my Sister here, whom I and her Husband
thought a hundred miles off in the Country, then to mistake ^er for my Wife
whom I was traind to meet here, and expected to find in that ^^om; what can
this be but witchery.


Bris. It Is so, oons, it is plain; for if that be personally my Wife that stands
there, we are certainly all bewitched -- no other way could set her before me
this minute I am sure but Witchcra^t.


Sans. And see, to improve the wonder, here comes my Wife from a quite contrary
quarter, sure we shall unriddle all now.


Ton. The Duchess here, nay, then I begin to take heart.


Enter La^^ Sanserre. Guill. It Is so, La Busque has made ^ confounded mistake,
and if she can but clear the Garden business last night, ^ll throw my self at
her feet, and beg a thousand pardons.


Sans. So long from your Apartment, Madam, and such visitants waiting for you
there; this is a piece of neglect uncustomary: What in the name of Ceremony and
good Manners, may be your Lodiship's reason. --


La S. Hah, my Lord Guillamour and Tonnerre both here, nay, then I apprehend
what he means by this coldness to me; but I am prepared for him as well as I
could wish. ( apart)


Sans. Madam, you don't see my Lord sure, methinks your Ladyship does not
receive your friends with the usual Air.


La S. Not as my friends, but as your Lordships, and upon the Ladys Account,
that waits for ye all within, bid em welcome.


Sans. The Lady within, ha, ha, ha, what trick, what fetch now, what Lady is it
you mean.


La S. Oh an intimate friend of your Graces, I Am very sure, one born and fated
for my ruin, adorn^d with Beauty incomparable, and so many other Charms -- Oh
heaven, it is your new Mistress, the heart breaker Vandosme, my Lord -- oh --
dee start, does your Lordship know such a person.


Sans. Know such a person? What then, what of her thou Siren.


Guill. Ha, ha, ha, some new trick I lay my life, methinks I catch the wit of
it already ( aside)


La S. What of her, nay, nothing, my Lord, but that she is a Wom^n of Honor I
suppose, and punctual to her Assignation; for she came this mo^ning to visit ye
at the very Minute -- and truly, I like a very Wife, a little ^^alous, and more
curious in the Matter than you desire, I believe, finding her business was with
you, pretending to receive her, have locked her up in the Dining Room.


Sans Subtle Devil, Vandosme, no doubt came to me about the discovery I desired
to make, and ten to one she has pumpt my secret out of her, and ruined my
design. ( aside)


Ton. What she means, is to me a Mystery, but Heaven send her a good
deliverance. ( aside)


Sans. Oh, I find you would turn the course of the Story, but pray be civil to
my Lord here, Madam, he wants his dispatch; I beseech ye what may his business
be -- hah -- may not I know.


La S. Ha, ha, ha -- wittily carried indeed; but my Lord, this cunning will not
pass upon me, I kn^w ye are all joint Companions in the Intrigue, only I find
your Lordship is preferred first, for she came after you, but they came after
her. Your Necklace of Pearl, my Lord has incensed her ^o extremely.


Sans. How the Devil now came she to know of that, dam her she puzzels the
Cause, I scarce know how to answer her. They come after her, that^s likely.


La S. Come, I know they are men of too much honor to disown Love to a fine
Woman, through fe^r, what say ye my Lords, was not your de^ign here to cha^ming
Vandosme. Speak the Truth boldly.


Guill. Hah, I understand that tip of the Wink. ( aside) Why then, since the
Truth must out -- it was --


Ton. Ah, witty charming Creature, I, (...) it was, it was, what a pox I hate
to tell a Lie.


La S. So you dogged her into the House, but not knowing the Room where I had
locked her, one of ye it seems got into my Apartment, -- and see -- oh power of
Truth what influence it works -- now could I see you blush, my Lord, if I were
a hundred Yards from you.


Sans. I blush? why thou provoking Mischief, art thou so hardened to tell me
that?


La S. What need I tell ye that, or any thing, is it not plain ungrateful man
that you sent for your Whore into my very House, to Intrigue with her under my
very Nose. loud and angrily You did, you did, you vile ungrateful, Wretch -- oh
Heaven, see how he blushes again.


Sans. The Devil^s in her, she will turn it upon me, right or wrong -- why thou
-- fury, can thou say I blush.


L Sans. Pray, my Lords, be Judges -- did ye ever see such a color.


Guill. The truth is, my Lord, you do blush extremely.


To^n. Your Face is all over in a ^^ame; but I confess there is some reason,
for I see my Lady has found out your Intrigue my Lord.


Sans. A plague Intrigue ye, this is plain juggling between 'em all, and I am
still the property.


La S. But to show ye what a piece of Integrity you have chose to sacrifice me
to, here comes another couple that I knew concerned in the same Ve^^el and
Cargo: I therefore sent for 'em to put in for their Shares.

Enter Fiesque and Sir Blunder. And now all Proprietors are ready, I think it
is fit to produce the Merchandise -- therefore have patience and I^ll deliver
up the effects immediately.


Exit Lady Sanserre. Fies. Oh intolerable Jilt, Traitress, Devil, I find now
all her late Oaths and Tears were nothing but intended Villainy, and that she
has been so very a Monster, to intrigue with this fellow too, this Monster of
Monsters. ( apart) Well, then, you say, Sir Blunder, you are sure you have
great power over her.


Sir B. I think I have, if I should not have power over my Punck it would be
hard, -- besides, I need not toil about it, f^^ ha, ha -- a pox take her, the
senceless Queen is in love with me, ha, ha, ha.


Fies. Oh Witch, oh Succubus. ( apart)


Sir B. Gives me the charge of all her Money and Jewels; looke^ here are the
Keys of her Scrutore, you may see by this I ^a^e tickled her fancy; here is a
Diamond Ring too I got from her this morning, she will part with any thing for
a nights Lodging; the Jade knew I ^^ a swinging Bedfellow.


Fi^s. Ha, by heaven, the very Ring I gave -- oh confusion.


Sir B. ^e^e she comes, I Will stand by and listen, and if I find she has been
playing the Jilt, I^ll come in, take her away home, and drub he^ tightly.


Fies. Oh damn her, damn her, the worst of Hell is too good. Sir Blunder stands
aside.


Re-enter Lady Sanserre with Vandosme, melancholy with a Book. La S. Come,
Madam, a little nearer, and pray throw off that ^emure melancho^ly look that so
disguises ye: I bring ye to none but your acquaintance here, accost them then
with the pure Air of your profession, and let your Eyes use their Artillery as
formally -- shoot, shoot them dead, you have done it a thousand times before
now, -- hah -- what is here a Book -- oh prodigious -- A treatise of Repentance
-- nay then, then, the Devil can cite Scripture for his purpose, indeed --


Van. Oh heaven, can you believe then I am so Reprobate, that I am past
repentance.


Fies. There is the soft tone again, and then that damming look would baffle
human reason.


La S. Oh, this Religious change is of so fresh a date, Madam, that you will
hardly be believed.


Vand. Yes, Madam, I am sure I shall, if it is proved unfeigned, and you ar^ a
Lady of that unsullied Virtue, Candor, and Charity, that your good Nature will
be first my friend.


La S. My Virtue -- sure this Devil does not banter me.


Sans. There Is no putting in a word now, she has got the ascendant over me
clearly.


La B. At her again, -- Sister, things go weil.


Bris. Humph! Me^h^nks matters look a little better than they did, for if that
young Petticoat Towzer there, came after this Harridan, I may chance to be no
Cuckold after all.


Tonn. She Is got in rarely, if she does but hold out n^w.


Guill. Say any thing, Madam, I Will second ye.


La S. Nay, since you think, most infamous of Creatures, to impose upon me with
Hypocresie, I Will lay your mischief open to the World, and be as loud as Thunder
in proclaiming it, thou chief promoter of the cause of Hell.


Vand. Oh I beseech ye have patience, Madam, I^m converted.


La S. Thou gulphy Quicks and swallowing all Adventurers; thou very Magdalen,
thou converted?


Vand. Alas, you know, Madam, Magdalen Repented.


La S. Intrigu^d with half the Court before this last, the Count here, and you
my Lord, I know can say enough of her.


Fies. I, a pox take me fort, she and I have been a little too well acquainted.


Guill. Humph, I have not altogether been a stranger to the G^ntlewoman,
neither.


Briss. Gad, I wonder she missed me, I never was in with her as I remember.


Sir B. A plague, at this rate half the Town have had her, this has been a
damned Jade. ( peeping out)


La S. It Is by the odiods Witchcraft of such hellish Creatures as you, that the
marriage State is so dishonored, imbellisht Virtue pines at home neglected,
whilst Riotous Vice is graced with Presents -- Jewels, but I Will turn back the
stream to its right Channel, and Honor and Virtue henceforth shall be
Reverenced, my Wit shall ruin thee, past all redemption. ( apart to Vand.) I Will
make thee change that canting Note, thou Hypocrite.


Sans. So, the Alarm is set a going; now shall I hear nothing but the noise of
her damned Honor and Virtue, for a month together, ( aside.)


Vand. Well then, you shall change my Note, my Virtuous Lady too soon to your
cost, you shall now hear me then, and ( loudly) know my wit shall ruin thee
past redemption; I Will make thee change that haughty Note, thou Hypocrite.


La S. Infamy, I defy thee, what can the Devil mean. ( to Guill.)


Guill. The Devil knows.


Guill. Read that, my Lord, and then let Virtue and Honor there, gives
Sanferre a Letter defend her self with her integrity, there is no Hypocrisy in
that, my Lord, it is a plain Billet doux to my Lord Guill.


Sans. It Is so, by Hell -- and of her own Handwriting.


Fies. The very Letter that she got from me, when last imposed on by her Sighs
and Tears. Was there ever such a Serpent. (aside)


Sans. To show you this, my Lord, was the morning business, which to secure,
she locked me up most wittily. Now let all human Creatures that can read, beho^d
in that the Dutchess's rare Virtue, then judge 'twixt the Strumpet free, and
Strumpet wedded, which is the worst? Come, who speaks loudest, let your sharp
Tongue, Madam, out wit me now, what not a word -- from Honor nor from Virtue,
nay, then it is plain, the Strumpet Wife's most blameful.


Sans. She has struct me dumb, I cannot speak a word, nor dare I lift my Eyes
to look upon em. Exit.


Sans. I Will vanish all thoughts of mercy from this moment, I will be as cruel
as Revenge can make me -- My Lord, your ear.


Guill. Well, my Lord, it is enough. they Whisper.


Sans. Here Is so much Fi^e it burns my very Vitals, dear, dear Revenge, I Am
wedded to thee now. Exit. Guill is going.


Fies. No, no, my Lord, I bar that, you shannot leave us.


Guill. My Lord, I Am only going to my Lodging?


Briss. Ay, my Lord, that is all one, no going, no going now, my Lord.


Tonn. No, no, let the business cool a little.


Vand. This is in return of your ungrateful usage, Traitor, and now thank your
self.


Guill. Ten thousand plagues upon thee. Death, is there no way left to be
revenged upon this Witch, this Sorceress.


Enter Sir Blunder. Sir B. Yes, here is some body left here behind the Curtain
that shall take her to task immediately. Come Jade, every Bodies Cleopatra,
come your ways home.


Vand. Hah, he here then, I am disgraced for ever, this is the only Devil can
torment me.


Sir B. Your entertainment Iesabel to night, shall be half a dozen of kicks, or
so, or it may be a light Drubbing, but to morrow expect to be turned a grazing,
to try for a new fortune, I^ll take care of these materials, and of the effects
belonging to 'em. ( shakes her Keys) Come.


Vand. Stand off, Monster, Furies and Fire, touch me, and I Will flea thee: Hah,
dare thou attempt it; nay then, assist me Rage and Vigor, that I may rip
this Brute and carve revenge, snatches his sword out, flies at him and beats
him off.


Fies. Farewell the Quintessence of all Coquets in general. Well, this gives my
heart some repose however, to find this brutish fellow revenges me in a right
method, (...) no more than what generally happens to to 'em. For, never wa^
true Jilt, but was so blind,
To love at last what paid her in her kind.



La S. 'Twas ten to one but the reve^geful Creature had invented some lie or
other upon me for my Sisters sake, but now the Riddle is expounded, who these
two Sparks were hunting here for. I hope Count I may sleep free from sensure.


Tonn. I must help her out in this. (aside) Madam, there can remain no scruple
of a doubt in your Ladyship's Case, and I am very sorry my intrigue with her
should cause any reflection to your prejudice.


Briss. Nay, I believe as things stands, I had as good be satisfied, as go to
prove any thing further; but Gad here has been swinging frolicks of all sides:
you smock-fac'd Dog, you Sirrah, you have disappointed me confoundedly. I took
you for a Loop and not a Button* you Rogue, but come, a pox on it, it makes the
Intrigue the better however, and gad I love that so well, that I can be angry
no longer. Come, my Lord, cheer up, you have treated my Sister I suppose the
old English way, but gad if she likes the cheer entire, with all my heart,
we'll have no fighting about the matter.


Guill. My Lord, I have been always obliged to your good nature.


Briss. What a pox, there is no such harm done as I see, he^e'^ ^o body. a
Cuckold but my Brother the Duke, and gad now he is out of the way, he was so
jealous, that I always wished him one: Why, if I had been a jealous Puppy, on
my Con^cience I ^^d been so too.


Fies. Oh fie, my Lord you, what an intrig^er, a Beau? No, no, Count, you are
safe enough.


Tonn. So, his Eyes are sealed however. ( aside)


Briss. Come, gad we have been so long out of humor, about these matters, that
methinks I want a little mi^^^: Let Us h^ve a ^or^e and a little Music. Spouse,
if you would have ^e in humor, and ^elieve what you say. Sing me a Song
against Cu^^old-making. Hey, within, bid my Servants that I ordered for the
^ulical Entert^inment ^o night, come and give it presently; and dee ^ear, bring
a Bottle.


Enter Servants with Wine, and then a Song and a Dance are performed. Fies.
Come, here is the Count Brisse's Health, and let him live for ever.


Guill. Ay, come* with all my Heart, and to all the Cuckolds in and about
Versailles. (aside)


Tonn. In the Fountain garden about 7 this eveni^g, dear Angel, if you would
have me live till morning. whispers Lady Brissac.)


La B. No, no, Count, no more intrigues, I have made some sudden Reflection
upon^t^ and have resolved severe amendment, you may think this rallery, but you
shall find it real, therefore I charge you forbear my Company, and all future
unlawful Solicitations, for I am conscious to my self, I have deserved the
same fate my Sister has, tho I have the luck to miss it. Not a word more,
content your self with what is past, and as you are a man of Honor, tempt me to
that course of life no longer.


goes from him. Tonn. Pish, thy sudden turn can be nothing but a qualm of
Hypocrisy Gad I will not leave her off so.


Briss. Come, give me another Bumper, and this last health is to all brave
fellows that stand upright as I do, at eight and fifty, and those happy,
Husbands that can see their Wifes sing, dance, joke, kiss, and be merry amongst
Company, without jealousy or having the Gripping of the Gutts about it, for
let 'em fatigue themselves how they p^e^se, rage, watch, pine, and grow lean
about it, let 'em take this as a Maxim from jolly Brissac. If the good woman
gets it in her Brain,
All Labor's lost, the Italian Eugine vain,
Whilst female inclination tends to man,
There will be Horns, let Heads do what they can.



EPILOGUE
Spoken by Mis. Barry, as in a fret. JVdge's of Wit, and P^ets tell me pray,
Have you e're seen among all y have known me play,
So strange a part as this, I Have done to day.
'Thas vexed me so, would I may never be famed,,
If I ca^e threepence if the Play were damned:
Or, if some Bully, some loved Iilt revenging,
Helped the Satyrick Scribbler to a swinging.
How long, and often, have I, in well wrought Scenes,
Dazzled like Glittering Empresses and Queens,
Acted all passions, love, grief, joy, and shame,
The Great Court Lady, and the ^ity Dame.
And if sometimes, a wanton su^ject came
Ye Poets Characters, decent were, and civil,
But ours -- Curse on it here, makes me act the Devil.
I never was so affronted in my Life,
Would he had such a one to be his Wife.
The hot brained Sonnetteer wo^ld soon turn Mome,
Were his poor Pen employed with a Vandosme,
Besides the part is contrary to Nature;
There cannot in our Sex be such a Creature.
We love no fools, ^^^ ^ure, never let 'em cheat us*
Nor can we do a fau^t for him to heat us:
Tho we should graft more ^^^rnes on every year,
Then stock St. James's Park, or else St. James's Squa^e,
But hold, now Anger somewhat cooler grows,
The ^art, bad as it is, may please you Beaus:
The Play by Judges, has commended been,
And if it bring but the new Money in:
Money's a certain Medicin for my Spleen.
Ah, how that hope, ill humor reconciles:
Money, turns every body's frown to smiles.
Controwling Mammon, can dispose lik a fate;
Money can make a dried warped Cripple strait.
The Wife play false, and the tame Cuckold blind,
^roud Widows pliant, and Coy Virgins kind:
Money corrupts the Body, damns the Soul,
And in Life's game still turning like a bowl,
Can by its By as all distinctions draw,
The Court, the Country, Clergy, and the Law.
How can it fail then, to have power o^re me,
Mine Is but a sort of Playhouse constancy,
My part, I own, I hate to a degree.
But if it Money gets, will patience borrow,
Set a good face, and play't again to morrow.
FINIS.

