Vera Effigies Rev.di in Christo Patris at D. D. Bryan Duppa quondam Episcopi
Wintoniensis


HOLY RULES and HELPS TO DEVOTION Both in Prayer and Practice.

IN TWO PARTS.

The fourth Edition.

Written by The right Reverend Father in God, Bryan Duppa Late Lord Bishop of
Winton, In the time of his SEQUESTRATION.

London. Printed for up. Hensman, at the King's-Head in Westminster Hall. 1683.

TO THE Christian Reader.
THe Name and Memory of the excellent Author of this Treatise needs not borrow
or derive a Reputation from any Pen but its own. There are already many useful
Pieces and Helps to Devotion set forth both by Bishops, and others of our
Church, more solid, serviceable, and advantageous to true Piety, and the power
of Godliness, than all the gifted Impertinencies (to say no worse) of some Holy
Pretenders: For if Noise and Clamor might pass for Inspiration, the Apostles
must go for Weak-Brethren, and mere Novices, compared with our new Lights and
Improvements. That Set Forms of Prayer are altogether necessary in Public,
cannot be denied, and needs not now be represented: They are abundantly useful
even for private Christians also; since it is not every one that can pray
extempore in his Closet, and he that can, may notwithstanding be defective
enough in the matter or manner of his Petitions: For though God principally
respects the Heart and Affections of his Servants, and the Spirit helps our
Infirmities with sighs and groans, yet we ought even in private to have an
awful orderly regard of the Great God, to whom we address our selves; and the
Holy Spirit teaches us to pray, as with ardent Affections; so with reverend
humble minds, and not with disorderly, confused or unprepared approaches, and a
rude confidence, without just ground or foundation: This is not to help or
diminish our infirmities, but to augment them more. He that prays extempore,
must be one of better Faith and Principles, Life and Conversation than many
are, who so familiarly pretend to it. But whatever some men's Graces may be in
this particular, which God forbid I should seek to diminish or reproach; yet
for such, who I doubt are far the greater number, as yet have not attained to
so great a Perfection in this holy Duty, I cannot but recommend these Rules and
Directions, which answer the Title, and will, I hope, the Expectation of those
that use them, to their benefit and comfort. God grant us all that Unity of
Spirit, which intitles us to the Gifts and Graces of of the Spirit, that so
praying with one heart and mind, as becomes Saints, we may have our Communion
in Glory among the Just hereafter.

Ben. Parry.

HOLY Rules and Helps TO DEVOTION, Both in Prayer and Practice.
But I will give my self unto Prayer.
O Eternal Wisdom, who communicatest thy self unto thy Creatures in such
measure as they are capable of, vouchsafe to impart to my Soul that Heavenly
Gift, to be a Guide to me in all my Thoughts, my Thoughts, my Words, my
Actions; that so being taught by Thy Holy Spirit, I may so far know Thee as to
love Thee, and so far love Thee, as ever to fix my thoughts upon Thee.

Of Prayer what it is.
THe several Properties and Excellencies of Prayer, have afforded matter enough
to the Ancient Fathers, to mold as many several and different Descriptions of
it; which like many Stars cast into a Constellation, may give all together a
full and perfect Representation of it.

Gregory Nyssen defines Prayer to be the conversing or discoursing of the Soul
with God, concerning her Salvation: Which being done by the outward Expressions
of the Voice, is called Vocal Prayer; but if by the Mind alone, Mental.

In this way of conversing with God, the Soul makes use of her Three principal
Faculties, her Memory, her Understanding, her Will: Her Memory, to call to mind
what she is to treat of; her Understanding, to weigh and to judge what she
delivers: Her Will, to perform this Duty feelingly and affectionately: For all
these Faculties must concur in Prayer, elevating the Soul, and fixing it upon
God as the highest Truth, in which we are to believe the Sovereign Happiness
which we are to hope for, the Supreme Goodness which we are to love, and the
infinite Excellence which we are to adore. So that Prayer is principally
grounded on a lively Faith of such things as God has revealed, an assured Hope
of what he has promised, and a servent Love, which serves as the Fire to
kindle this Sacrifice, and to carry the Soul upward, till it arrive at the
Throne of Grace.

From hence it is, that Damascen describes Prayer to be an ascending of the
Soul to God; being therefore compared to the sweet Perfume that ascended from
the Incense: But as the Incense being cast into the Fire ascends only in the
more subtle and delicate part of it, which being converted into Air and Smoke,
leaves behind it the grosser and earthier part turned into Ashes. So in this
ascent, the Soul leaves behind it the earthier parts, as Abraham left his
Servants behind him at the foot of the Mountain, while he ascended to the top
of it to sacrifice. For this is a business that belongs to Eagles, which as
they fly high, so in their flight they look steadfastly on the Sun. It is not
for those that entrench themselves in the Earth, as in their proper Element,
nor yet for Birds of Prey, which though they fly high, yet their eyes are still
cast downward. Sursum Corda, was the form in ancient Liturgies; the Priest
calling out to the People, Lift up your hearts; which the people as readily
answered, Habemus ad Dominum.

This ascending of the Soul by Prayer, was figured (as St. Austin conceives) by
that mysterious Ladder, whose foot being upon the Earth, the top of it reached
unto Heaven, seen by Jacob in a Vision, with Angels ascending and descending on
the Rundles of it, carrying up our Prayers to God, and bringing down Blessings
upon him that offers them. But because this ascent is not ordinarily by Rapture
(for the Angels were not seen to fly up the Ladder, but to mount by degrees:)
we are to consider the several Steps and Rundles we are to ascend by.

THe first Step is laid hold on by the Memory, which begins this spiritual
ascent, by putting the Soul in mind to look up to the Majesty of him that
stands above the Ladder, to remember, that though the place we choose for our
Devotion be never so solitary, yet we are not alone; that God hears what we
say, sees what we do; that the whole Trinity is present, as visible to thy eyes
of Faith, as grosser Objects are to the outward senses. For there is God the
Father, the Fountain of good Thoughts, ready to assist through his power and to
keep us from distraction in our Prayers; there is God the Son, the eternal
Truth, prepared to direct us by his Wisdom, and to deliver us from error and
delusion; there is God the Holy Ghost, the Source and Spring of divine Love,
able to inflame the Will with fervent Affections, and keep us from damps of
coldness and indevotion. And when we have thus put our selves into the presence
of God with an awful Reverence and Adoration of him as present, we have then
mounted the first step and degree of this Ladder.

O Heavenly Father, who hear the Prayers of all that seek Thee, purify the
Intention of my Soul in all the Prayers I make to Thee; that I may neither seek
nor desire any thing, but in relation to Thee, through JESUS CHRIST,

Amen.
THe second step or act of the Soul, is, To look to the directing of the
Intention, to fix it entirely upon God, and take it off from all earthly
things: For as the least Grain and Atom of dust offends the eye, so this
Intention admits of no mixture, no vanity of being seen or heard at your
Prayers, no curiosity of thinking to climb up by this Ladder into the secrets
of God, no spiritual Pride, in reflecting upon your self as more devout than
others; for as it must be sincere, so it must be humble, directed to the Glory
of God alone; which in this ascent of your Soul, must be always in your eye, as
the Center in which all the lines of Prayer must meet. But then this Intention
of the Supplicant must be accompanied with some Offering too: For it was Gods
Command to his People, that none should come into his presence with empty
hands. Being therefore come into his presence, deal generously and freely with
him, offer him the thing which he most desires, even thy heart, with all the
thoughts and affections of it, to be disposed by him, not only during the time
of Prayer, but for all thy life. For this Offering of thy Heart to God, if it
makes way for thy Prayer, and breaks through those Clouds which thy sins have
interposed between God and thee.

O Eternal God, who for all those Infinite Blessings which thou have bestowed
on me, requirest nothing back of me but my Heart. Behold I offer up to thee the
Heart which Thou demandest: And since it is now Thine, fill it with Thy Gifts,
and adorn it with thy Graces; that every beating, every pulse of it may be a
Prayer, and every Prayer being kindled by Thy holy Spirit, may be a Sacrifice
fitted for Thine Altar, through Jesus Christ.

Amen.
AFter this Offering, the next step is by raising the Understanding, and the
awakening of our Faith to a due consideration of that which you are about.
Being therefore retired into thine Oratory, make these few Questions to thine
own Soul, and engage thy self to an answer: O my Soul, Wherefore art thou
retired into this place? What is thy Design? What thy Pretension? Where is thy
God whom thou come to Treat with? Is he present? Does he hear thee? Or is he
merciful? Will he help thee? What is thy business thou art to negotiate? Is it
the saving of thy Soul, or the satisfying of thine earthly Desires? What words
will thou use to move thy God to hear thee? What humble gestures? What profound
reverence? Answer thy self briefly to every one of these Interrogatories, as
thy own Conscience dictates to thee: For by this discourse made with thy self,
thou shall be the better prepared to discourse with God.

But to make this preparation the more complete, the quality of the Persons
engaged in this Treaty, is necessarily to be weighed. Consider therefore first
with my self, who thou art that make thy approaches to speak with God: That
thou art but dust and ashes; Abraham himself was no more. Consider again the
motives that may drive thee to this duty; Thy sins many, thy strength little,
thy self nothing, thy dangers great; thy case the same with the Disciples in
the Storm, when they cried out, Master, save us, or else we perish: For he that
really lays these three things to heart:

1. The extreme necessity that he is in. 2. The small possibility of help
either from himself, or any other Creature. 3. The high importance of that
which he is about, that it is as much as his Soul is worth, will never dare to
come coldly and carelessly to a work of that concernment.
Having thus far reflected on your own condition, you are in the next place to
raise the Prospect from your self, to the Person you pray to, to consider, that
he is no less than God, who clothed himself with light, as with a Garment. A
God infinitely wise, from whom nothing can be hid, infinitely powerful to whom
nothing is impossible; infinitely good, ready to shed, and diffuse, and impart
his goodness to his Creatures; that therefore though his Majesty may terrify
thee, yet his Mercy may invite thee; especially if you consider God as he is in
Christ, reconciling you unto himself: For as the one may strike a reverence
into you, so the other will infuse a confidence, without which our weak Prayers
will never have strength enough to reach the Throne of Grace.

O My Glorious God, Thou art the Holy of Holies, but I the Impurest of sinners;
Thou art Mercy it self, I Misery even Misery it self: What should I seek
farther to know either of thee, or my self? Let my love of Thee make up the
knowledge that is wanting; For what should Misery be in love withal, but Mercy?
Or where should Mercy exercise it self but where there is so much Misery?

THe Understanding being awakened with these Considerations, the fourth act of
the Soul in relation to Prayer, is, to rouse the Affection, which is seated in
the Will: This being so necessary an Ingredient in your Prayer that is it but a
cold Offering without it. The understanding may provide for you this Spiritual
food, but it is the Will that must taste, and swallow, and digest it into
nourishment; the one may make you wise, but the other must make you holy. The
Prophet tells you, that the Seraphins in God's presence, with two of their
wings cover their face, and with two other their feet, leaving only their
breast open, which is the seat of Love. When therefore you present your selves
in the sight of God, be sure you so far imitate these Seraphins, that though
your eyes be veil (you cannot look into his Glory) you cannot know him as you
would, your Breast, the seat of your Affections, be open to receive and emit
those beams of divine love, which only can kindle devotion to the height and
unite your Soul to God by a most intimate Union. But alas! you will say, those
blessed Spirits that are in such a nearness to God, may well be all fire and
love, but you at such a distance cannot find the effects of it; the wood lies
upon the Altar, but you want fire to kindle it; all that you can do, is to
search in the ashes for some small spark to blow at: But know you not (says
Siracides) how great a fire a small spark may kindle? The same Spirit of God
that moved upon the Waters till it had produced the World, moves upon thy
heart, foments and cherishes the least spark of the love of God which it finds
there, and makes it flame out into a servent prayer. David found this by
experience, where he says of himself, while I was thus musing, my heart
kindled within me, and I spoke with my Tongue.

The Devotion of the heart (says St. Bernard) is the Tongue of the Soul,
without this it is silent and shut up; but actuated and heated with Love, it
poures it self forth in Supplications, and Prayers, and Discourses with God;
sometimes Praising him for the Infinite Blessings received from him, sometimes
Praying to him for those which we yet want. This is that conversing of the Soul
with God, which Gregory Nyssen speaks of, as a Son Conversing with his Father,
or a Friend with a Friend, into whose bosom he may pour forth with confidence
all the Secrets of his Soul as a Favorite with his Prince, or a betrothed
Virgin with her Lover. What the result of these discourses is, what words are
spoken, what secrets discovered, what delights enjoyed, may easier be felt than
spoken of: When the Soul being lifted up by the wings of Prayer, and rarefied
into a flame by Love, reaches the very Bosom of God. But though every devout
Soul mounts not to this pitch, this top of the Ladder, let none be dismayed at
it: For God knows whereof you are made, he sees the body of flesh which you
bear about you, and the Plummets which it hangs upon your Soul, and therefore
when you cannot rise high enough to him, he comes down to you; for so you find
in this Vision, there were descending as well as ascending Angels. We do not
read that St. Paul was often rapt into the third Heaven: Notwithstanding his
Raptures, the Angel of Satan that buffeted him, made him remember that he was
still upon the Earth: For one foot of the Compass will unavoidably be fixed
there, when the other moves in the circumference of divine contemplation. Jacob
himself was but at the bottom, at the foot of the ladder, when his Soul was at
the highest, and saw God at the top of it.

O Most wise God, the Unction of whose Spirit can teach me all things, teach me
the Rules I am to observe in this Heavenly Exercise of Prayer; Stir up my
Memory, to remember that thou art present; fix my intention upon Thee, upon
Thee alone: Awake my Understanding to consider what I am about and who I am to
speak to. But above all inflame my Affections, that my heart being set on fire
with Thy Love, my Prayers may participate of that Fervency, and be accepted of
Thee, for his sake who came to send this Fire upon the Earth, even Jesus Christ
my Savior.

Amen.
Of the Excellencies and Fruits of Prayer, as they may be drawn out of the
Lords Prayer.
THere is no clearer glass to see the excellencies of Prayer in, than that very
Prayer which our Savior thought fit to teach his Disciples. Where the first
entrance presents you with that unvaluable Privilege, to call God your Father;
that therefore you come not to treat with him as a Slave with his Master, or a
Vassal with his Prince, but as a Son with your Father: God infusing into you by
Prayer that Spirit of Adoption by which you cry to him, Abba Father. This being
(says St. Chrysostom) the highest excellency of the Creature to treat
familiarly as a Son with his Creator. A Dignity that raises us poor Worms of
the Earth to a kind of equality with the Angels themselves; for though in
Nature they are above us, yet this duty makes us equal: For Quid potest
inveniri sanctius iis qui cum Deo commercium habent? Says the same Father;
What can be more holy than he who is admitted to treat familiarly with God?
Moses by talking with God, had such a brightness shed upon his face, that they
who looked upon him were dazzled with it: For if they who have the ear of
Princes, as Favorites, having freedom of access, and opportunity at all times
of presenting their Petitions, cannot want the splendour of Worldly things,
which consequently will follow them; much less can the beams of an higher glory
be wanting unto them, who live as if they were always in the presence of God,
talking with God by Prayer, and God with them by holy Inspirations. What can
they want who are admitted to this Privacy? And it is your fault if you are
not. For there are neither doors nor locks, nor any greater Favorite to keep
you out. He that gives you leave to call him Father, cannot exclude his Son,
that cries, Father, I have sinned.

O Gracious Father, what thanks, what praise can we offer to Thee, for raising
us to that honor of entering into thy presence as Sons, and conversing with
Thee on the Earth, with the same Freedom as the Angels do in Heaven! O grant us
the Grace so to make advantages of so Divine a Privilege, that our sins may
never make us forfeit it, but rather by a devout and humble use of it, acquire
to our selves daily new degrees of Thy Favor, till Thou have brought us Thy
unworthy Sons to that incorruptible Inheritance which can neither have increase
nor end.

Amen.
THe second Excellency of Prayer, is, That it is a means by which the name of
God is hallowed, both by us and in us: We pray that his Name may be Sanctified,
and we Sanctify his Name by praying so: Our Tongues, but much more our Lives,
being made Instruments to glorify him, God is glorified by our believing in
him, by our knowing him, by our adoring him, and in Prayer we do all this: By
Prayer we bring to light those graces and gifts of God which he has hid for us
in his eternal Predestination, as we may see Joh. 17. 5.
in that Prayer of Christ to his Eternal Father: And now, O Father, glorify
thou me with thy own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the
World was. From whence the School infers, That Prayer is the principal means
ordered by providence for the execution of what God has decreed on our behalf.
God had decreed the Incarnation of his Son for the saving of the World; he had
promised, and could not vary from it: Yet this kept not Moses from his
Petition, Send him whom thou will send; nor the Prophet from praying, O that
thou would bow the Heavens, and come down! The Father had decreed to give
his Son, being Incarnate, the Nations for his inheritance, but the execution of
this Decree was to be by Prayer; the Son of God himself was to pay for it, for,
Postula, and Dabo; Ask of me, and I Psalm. 2. 8.
will give them thee. If therefore the Decree of your Predestination be yet
dark to you, and you would willingly know whether your name be written in the
Book of Life, there is no way of obtaining this, but humble Prayer: Do but pray
fervently, that God would glorify himself in thee, by making thee a Vessel for
his Honor, and thou shall find so much virtue in this Prayer as shall quiet
thy thoughts, and take away thy scruples.

O Most glorious God, glorify Thy unworthy Servant with that Gift of Prayer by
which I may be enabled to glorify Thee, that so I being sanctified by Thee,
Thou may be sanctified in me by those Gifts and Graces, which in all
Eternity Thou did decree to give me, through Jesus Christ.

Amen.
THe next Dignity of Prayer is, that it is the effectual means of enstating the
Kingdom of God in us, not only the Kingdom of Grace, in this World, which in
the Apostles Character is Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy the Holy Ghost; but
the Kingdom of Glory in the next, to which Prayer not only gives us the Title,
but puts us in a kind of Possession, by affording us a taste at least, and an
earnest of that Glory. The first time that we find it written that our Savior
prayed, we find in the very next words, three passages of wonder whereof Luke
in 21, 22.
the first was, that the Heavens were opened; the next, that the Holy Ghost
descended on him as a Dove; the third, that there was a Voice that came from
Heaven, which said, Thou art my Beloved Son, in thee I am well pleased. And
wherefore this, but to show us the admirable effects of Prayer? First, that it
is the Key to open Heaven to us; next, that it has that attractive power, as
to draw down the Spirit of God upon us; and Lastly, that it puts us into the
quality of Sons, and of such Sons in whom he is well-pleased. After this, when
he went up into a Mountain Luke 9. 28.
to pray; What followed upon this? The Evangelist tells us, That as he was
praying, Mat. 17. ^.
his face did shine as the Sun, and his Garment was white as Mark ix. 3.
the Light: So white (says St. Mark) that no Fuller on earth could white them.
And though it is not said that this Transfiguration of our Savior, was
absolutely and fully the Kingdom of Heaven come down to him, yet we find there
was so much of the Glory of it, as Peter Mark ix. 5.
in his Amazement took to be Heaven, and desired to fix his Tabernacle there,
and to go no higher. You see here the strange effects of Prayer, it draws down
one Kingdom to you, and lifts you up to another. It bows down to you the
Kingdom of Grace, and draws you up to the Kingdom of Glory.

O God my Sovereign King, who have taught me to pray for the coming of Thy
Kingdom, set up the Throne of Thy Grace in my heart, and so rule and govern all
my affections, that there may not be left a rebellious thought against Thee;
And when the time of my Transmigration comes, change thy Kingdom of Grace, into
thy Kingdom of Glory; and from obeying Thee in this life, lift up my Soul to
reign with Thee in the life to come.

Amen.
THE fourth Excellency of Prayer goes hand in hand with the former; for where
Gods Kingdom comes, there must be a perfect submission to his Will, which
cannot be more effectually done than by the means of that Homage which we do to
God in Prayer. For by Prayer we not only obtain, but exercise that Obedience
which is better than Sacrifice; we strip and divest our selves of our own Will,
and give our selves entirely up to the Will of God, whom we pray unto. And from
hence it is, that the Fathers say of fervent Prayer, that it makes us live in
the flesh, as if we were out of it, that it dis-intangles and unlooseth the
Soul from the Ties and Fetters of the body, and equals us unto the Angels: For
as they stand in the presence of God ready to execute his Commands, without
either delay or weariness; so Prayer puts us into the like posture with those
Angels, and quickens us unto the Obedience of doing the Will of God in earth,
as it is done in Heaven.

But that you may not think that all the treasure and riches of Prayer are only
in things invisible, there is a fifth Excellency in Prayer, in that it procures
for us our daily bread, which as it has reference to our body in such things
as concern our nourishment; so it reaches besides to the spiritual Refection
of our Souls: For by Prayer (says St. Bernard) we are stored with three sorts
of bread; the bread of Truth, for the Understanding; the bread of Divine Love
and Charity, for the Will; and in the last place, that grosser and more earthly
bread fitted for the sustaining of our weaker nature. These be the three Loaves
which Christ in his Parable encourages us to ask for, and never to give over
our importunity, till we obtain them; for obtain them we shall, and our
Prayers, if fervent, cannot be denied.

Imagine therefore (says Climacus) that you say Prayer is a Queen, seated on
her Throne, calling out to you in the words of our Savior, Come unto me, all
ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you that refreshing as shall
lighten your weight, and ease your weariness: For without me the burden of the
Law is heavy, but with me it is light; without me the exercise of Repentance is
bitter, but with me it is sweet; without me the Cross is insupportable to be
born, but with me the Crown of Thorns shall be as easy as a Crown of Roses.

Christ is the Bread of Life, but the means to make this Bread nourish you, is
Prayer: By Prayer you receive Christ into your memory, and ruminate upon him in
your Meditations: By Prayer your Affections tastes and relisheth this Bread,
and your love incorporates it. Whatever therefore your necessities are, fly to
Prayer: If this spiritual Bread be wanting, and you hunger and thirst after it,
pray and you shall be satisfied. Or if the food of your Body fails you, and
poverty lays hold upon you as an armed man; fall to your Prayers again, and be
sure that he who hears the young Ravens when they call upon him, will much more
hear you who have the honor, not only to be his Creatures, but his Sons.

Thus far the Excellency of Prayer is in opening Heaven to us, from whence all
Blessings come: We are now to look upon it as the Key that shuts up Hell, and
keeps all evil from us, which is of three sorts:

1. Evil of Sin. 2. Evil of Temptation, that leads to sin. 3. Evil of
Punishment for sin.
Against these three, Prayer is the Remedy, and first against sin already
contracted: For how came the Publican justified, but by a short and humble
Prayer? What moved and softened the heart of the Father of the Prodigal Son to
such a tenderness? Was it not his Prayer, Father, I have sinned against Heaven,
and against thee? The Debt of Ten thousand Talents, which the Servant owed the
King, was no slight ordinary sum, yet a few Words of Prayer had virtue enough
to cancel that great Debt. And because there is a condition required, of
pardoning the Trespasses done against us, if we look for pardon of our
Trespasses against God, Prayer helps you in the fulfilling of this condition
too; and though your hearts be as hard as Iron, Prayer is of the nature of
Fire, and is able to soften that Iron, and melt you into that compassion toward
your enemies, as to pray for them with the same earnestness as you do for your
selves.

But then when our past sins are pardoned, where shall we find a Remedy against
future Temptations? Our Savior tells you where, when he says to his
Disciples, Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation, If the fire of
Lust begin to kindle in your hearts, Prayer can extinguish that fire. Or if a
whole Sea of worldly Afflictions breaks in upon you, Prayer can set a Bank to
that Sea. If you are compassed about with Enemies, Temptations on all sides,
and are ready to be swallowed up by them, remember that Moses's Prayer
prevailed more against Amalek, than Ioshuah's Arms.

And then again in the close, as Prayer has the nature of a Charm, to keep
Temptations from you; so when by Humane Weakness and the Arts of the Tempter,
you are led into them, Prayer is as the thread to bring you out of this
Labyrinth: Or when you have unwarily taken in the poison of sin, Prayer is the
Antidote against the venom of it, it does not only remove the guilt, but the
evil of Punishment which is due to it, whether it be in this Life, or in the
next. And of this David was very sensible, when he cries out in a kind of
Ecstasy of Thankfulness, Blessed be God which has not Psalm. lxvl. 13.
cast out my Prayer, nor turned his Mercy from me: Intimating by this (as St.
Austin understands the words) that there is a kind of Contract or Bargain made
between Prayer on Man's part, and Mercy on God's: That where Prayer led the
way, Mercy should always follow.

O Father of Mercies, Give me that gift of Prayer, by the means of which Thou
do use to dispense those Mercies; suffer me never to be weary of praying,
lest that make Thee weary of forgiving. For this I am sure of, that if I cease
not to pray, Thou can not cease to have mercy: For because Thou art good,
Thou will always deliver me from evil: Not for mine, but for Thine own Goodness
sake.

BY this which has been said, may be inferred the necessity of Prayer, Mat.
xvil.
both in respect of your spiritual Life, which it preserves: And in regard of
spiritual Enemies, which otherwise would destroy you: For as the Body without
the Soul is dead, loathsome, and overspread with Worms; so fares it with the
Soul (says Chrysostom) that does not use to pray, and consequently has no
spiritual Life in it. For as soon as the Breath of Prayer fails, the Soul
putrifies, and the Worm of Conscience gnaws upon it. Daniel therefore chose
rather to hazard Dan. 6.
his life, than to omit his exercise of Prayer thrice a day, as being willing
that his Body should suffer, rather than his Soul. Would you know further, how
precious Prayer is, devout Men will tell you, That Prayer pierces the Clouds,
reaches the Heavens, rejoices the Angels, appeaseth God, obtains whatsoever
it sues for.

O Grace of Grace, holy and heavenly FATHER, what shall I say of thee, either
to express thy Excellency, or the Necessity my Soul has of thine help, I am
the Fountain of all Misery, and thou art to me the Source and Spring of Mercy:
With thee I live, without thee I die: With thee I am able to do all things,
without thee I can do nothing.

O Divine Spirit! whose Gift alone it is to know how to speak to Thee, Give me
the Spirit of Wisdom, by which I may sanctify Thy Name; the Spirit of
Understanding, by whose Light I may see the secrets of Thy Kingdom; the Spirit
of Counsel, which may guide me to do Thy Will on Earth, as it is done in Heaven;
the Spirit of Knowledge, to discover, and to ask what is Necessary either for
Body or for Soul; the Spirit of Charity, to move me to pardon my Enemies, as I
desire Thou should pardon me; the Spirit of Fear, to avoid all Occasions and
Approaches to sin; and the Spirit of Might and Courage, to overcome all Evil.

Amen.
Of the Impediments and Enemies of Prayer.
HAving considered the glorious Fruits, and admirable Efficacy of Prayer, we
are to look about, and to discover what Enemies we are like to meet with, to
oppose and hinder us in the exercise of this Heavenly Duty: For Prayer is in
its own nature a kind of Wrestling and Striving for a Victory, which
presupposes an opposition: And rather than it shall be wanting, God himself
will enter into the Lists, as he did with Jacob, in that Genesis xxxii. 24.
famous Wrestling, when to show the power of Prayer, he that was invincible,
was content to be overcome by him, who had no other weapons but Tears and
Prayers. Hos. xii. 4.
When therefore you find your selves afflicted, make use of our Savior's
Parable, Arise, though it be at Midnight, Luke xi. 5.
repair speedily to the Gates of your true Friend, God himself; (for you have
no Friend like him) though you find the doors shut, and your Friend asleep,
begin your Battery, and give not over knocking, with importunate Cries and
Prayers, till he open to you; as Jacob would not let the Angel go, till he had
blessed him.

O Omnipotent and Invisible GOD, who let thy Self down to my Weakness, and
give me strength to wrestle with Thee for a Blessing, strengthen my Prayer to
that height, that when Thou seem most to set thy Self against me, I may
prevail with Thee, as Jacob did: For my overcoming Thee, is but the effect of
Thy overcoming thy Self in me; so that the glory of the Victory which I get
over Thee, will be entirely Thine. Wrestle on therefore, O my Soul, give not
over thy hold, take no answer that brings not a Blessing with it: For it is Thy
God who strengthens thee; and through him thou shall at last be more than
Conqueror.

Amen.
AS Prayer therefore is a Wrestling with God, we look not upon this opposition
as an hindrance, but as an advantage to Devotion. The true Enemies of Prayer
exercise a more dangerous Hostility, where the Van is led by those damned
Spirits, who being fallen from Heaven themselves, endeavor the more enviously
to obstruct the ways that may lead us thither; and because nothing conduces
more to this than Prayer, they order all their Temptations to this end chiefly,
either to divert us from it, or disturb us in it: If they tempt us to excess in
Meats and Drinks, their aim is not only to make us guilty of Intemperance, but
by it to render us the more unfit for Prayer: Or if they prompt us to Anger and
Impatience, their design terminates not in that sin, but rather makes use of it
to a further end, that the mind being thus disquieted, may not be able easily
to compose and settle it self to Prayer. For the effecting this, they make
daily use of the humors of the body, the distempers of the mind, the weakness
and weariness of the flesh, the injuries and oppressions of the Time, the cares
and distractions of the World. Of these they make their Engines to assault us,
and weave their Nets to entangle us. And as S. Bernard observed by his own
experience, they are never more earnest to disturb us, than when they see us
most earnest in this duty. As it was said therefore of the Christians, That
that Religion could not but be very good, which Nero persecuted; so we may very
well conceive of Prayer, that it must needs be some divine and heavenly thing
which the Devil with all his Engines so violently opposes. And the truth is,
he has so much the more reason to set himself against it, for nothing is more
destructive, nothing more terrible to him, than a Soul armed with Prayer; for
he trembles at the sight of it, says St. Chrysostom. When St. Paul therefore,
having first shown us what Enemies we were to deal with, that we were to
wrestle with Principalities, with Powers, with the Rulers of the Darkness of
this World, with spiritual wickedness in High places; when (I say) after this
fearful Muster-Roll, he advises us to arm our selves with the whole Armor of
God, with the Breast Plate of Righteousness, Ephesians. vi. 12.
the Shield of Faith, the Helmet of Salvation, the Sword of the Spirit; he adds
in the last place, Pray always, with all manner of Prayer and 18.
Supplication in the Spirit; as if all the rest were nothing without Prayer.
And this the Apostles themselves found to be true, who being Matthew. xvii. 16.
not able to cure the Lunatic, and to drive the evil Spirit out of him, our
Savior showed them wherein they failed, by telling them, That this kind is not
cast out 21.
but by Prayer and Fasting. For though they might have so much Faith as to
remove Mountains, yet without prayer that Faith could not remove the Devil. For
this only is that perfume whose smoke will make him fly as far as did that
unclean Spirit Tob. viii. 3.
whom Tobias his perfume did drive away.

But there is an Hostility more dangerous than this, because being more inward
and domestic, it makes the heart the seat of the War, and opposes Prayer in
the proper place and bed of the conception of it, which the Devil immediately
and directly cannot do. Of these inward and intestine Enemies to Prayer, St.
Bernard reckons up four kinds; For there are our past sins to wound us, our
present cares to distract us, our distempered Passions to disorder us, and a
whole swarm of loose and floating imaginations to molest us. And of these
Ingredients is that cloud made up, which the Prophet Jeremiah Lam. iii. 44.
complains of, That God was covered with a Cloud, that our Prayer could not
pass through to him. For as gross Vapors ascend from the Earth, and being in
the upper Region of the Air, condescend into Clouds, hinder us from seeing of
the Sun, and enjoying the heat and splendour of it: So (says St. Gregory) out
of our earthly hearts arise those several Vapors, which being joined and cast
into a Cloud, beats back our Prayers, and intercepts the Beams of the Sun of
Righteousness from shining on us. St. Austin likens a Soul in this condition to
a man that is unhappily married; for as he having spent the day in managing his
affairs abroad, trembles at the very thought of coming home at night, being
sure to meet with nothing but bitterness and disquiet there: So the troubled
Sinner being haunted with these ill Guests, entertains his Thoughts contentedly
enough with objects abroad, but trembles to call them home, and fix them upon
Prayer. But there is no remedy, home we must come, and sweeten as well as we
can the Discontents we find there: Though the mind be clouded and troubled,
this must not make us cast aside our Prayers, but cry out the more earnestly,
as David did, Save me, O God, from the great Waters that are come even into my
Soul; Deliver me from mine enemies, for they are too mighty for me: Cast out
these Temptations that come about me like Bees, quiet my thoughts, compose my
mind, so that I may not fear to look home, or find that to be a torment to me,
which was made to be my comfort.

But to consider these Enemies of Prayer apart, we shall find in the first rank
of them our unrepented sins: When our Conscience stands up against us, and
cries out to us, First make peace with me, or else never think to make peace
with God. For he accepts of no unclean, no unwashed Sacrifice; and if
Repentance usher not in, Prayer will never find admittance. Holy David deeply
apprehended the Consequence of this: If (says he) I incline my heart unto
wickedness, God will not hear me: For what an impudence were it to expect
pardon for those sins which I am yet so far pleased with, as I am not resolved
to leave; or to look for Mercy, when that Lust is not yet cooled with which I
have offended? Bring therefore Isa. i. 13.
no more vain Oblations, your Incense is an Abomination to me, says God to
that people of his, who honored him with their lips, when their hearts were
far from him: Your appointed Feasts my Soul hates; 14.
they are a trouble to me, I am weary to bear them: When you spread forth your
hands, I will 15.
hide mine eyes from you; yea, though you make many Prayers, I will not hear.
Would you know why? The very next words will satisfy you: Your hands are full
of blood; you have not washed them in the waters of Repentance, you are yet in
your sins, therefore you are not heard.

But what is to be done then in this case? God tells you by his Prophet, Wash
you, make you clean, put away your evil doings 16.
from before mine eyes, cease to do evil: And when you have done this, Come,
says the Lord, and let us reason together: 18.
As if he should say, You are now qualified for a Conference with God, your
Prayers will be seasonable; and for your sins which hitherto have hindered you:
Do but confess, and resolve to leave them, Though they be as scarlet, they
shall be as white as snow; though they be red like Crimson, they shall be white
us Wool.

The Enemies of Devotion in the second Rank, are our Passions, which though
they are not in their own nature sins, yet quickly slide into them, and being
prone to be irregular, are like cross winds to hinder us, unless we can allay
and temper them. For unmortified passions at the time of Prayer, is like loud
music at a meeting of Friends, which suffers them not to hear one the other.
When God appeared in the flaming Bush to Moses, on purpose to be seen by him,
yet he would not suffer him to make any near approach to him, till he had put
off his shoes, which signifies Exodus xxxiii. 20.
something more than is in the Letter, and relates rather to the heart, than to
the feet: As if he should say to thee, Here I am, even I thy God; but come not
near me, till thou have put off thine earthly Affections, till thou have
divested thy self of whatsoever is displeasing in my sight; if not, take heed:
No man can see me, and live: that is, says St. Gregory. None can see me
spiritually, that lives carnally.

It was an high expression of him who was so great an Admirer of Euripides,
that he was wont to say, That if he were sure there were any sense in death, he
could be content to die, only that he might see Euripides: But then to see God,
who would not mortify himself? Say therefore with that earnestness as St.
Austin did, Moriar ut te videam.

O Thou Fountain of Life, Make me die that I may see Thee! Mortify me, that I
may enjoy Thee! Strangle me, take away my breath, that I may speak to Thee! But
then again, Videam te, ut Moriar; Let me, in some measure, see Thee first, that
I may value Thee, that I may be content to die, to the end I may see Thee
further: For if I know not at all how to contemplate Thee, I shall as little
know how to mortify my Affections, so as to fit my self for Prayer.

THE third Assault that is made upon the Soul, is by the Cares of this Life,
which like so many Thorns, are ready to choke the seeds of Grace as soon as
they are sown. For overmuch solicitude and anxiety of Mind in worldly things,
casts such an heap of Earth upon our Dan. vi.
Prayers, as will not suffer them to ascend, taking up the Mind, and all the
Faculties of it, and hardly admitting so much as a Thought of Heaven. But as
they say of Thorns, That they may do well in an Hedge, but ill in a Garden; so
is it with these Cares, which being kept within their bounds; and measures,
hurt not the Soul; but if we admit them among our Prayers, they corrupt the
very nature of them, and turn them into Sin. When thou art therefore setting
thy self to thy Devotions, imagine that thou hear thy Savior calling to
thee, as he did to Martha, Why art thou so careful? why art thou troubled about
many things? One thing is only needful, the saving of thy Soul: Since therefore
Luke x. 41.
thou art come to treat about it, dismiss whatsoever may disturb thee, lay
aside, thy Cares as Mary did; place thy self at my feet, hear me in my Word,
that I may hear thee in thy Prayer.

O Gracious Jesus, I am come at this time to humble my self at thy Feet, and to
beg Mercy for my Soul, which ought to be dearer to me than a thousand Worlds. O
suffer not then any Worldly Cares to divert or hinder me; Root out this Bed of
Thorns, and sow holy Thoughts instead of them. Let me not be like Martha,
troubled about many things, but fix me upon that One thing needful, which I am
come about; that so having chosen the better part, it may never be taken from
me.

Amen.
BUt the Conflict is not yet done; when these former Enemies are overcome,
there may be a swarm left of busy, vain, impertinent thoughts, of which we may
complain as David did, that they have compassed us about like Bees: For the
Imagination being naturally unquiet and tumultuous, interposeth it self many
times without asking leave of us, casting thoughts in our way, and forcing the
Understanding to reflect upon them. And these she either fetches from Objects
without, from something that we have either seen, or heard, or done; or if it
fail of new plies from thence, it presently busies it self within, in forming
of various Images, Figures and Forms, which like so many Atoms, casting
themselves into several Schemes, trouble and vex the Soul in the midst of her
Devotions; not unlike the Birds, which would have hindered Abraham in his
Sacrifice: Genesis XV. 11.
And happy it were if we could as easily chase away these thoughts from us, as
Abraham drove away those Birds: But their pertinacy is such, that when you
drive them out of one Form, they assume another; and are so importunately
troublesome, as makes many think it a thing impossible to be freed from them.
Cassianus confesses of himself, that he was brought very near to a dispairing
of it, till opening himself to a devout man of more experience (himself being
then but young) he was brought off by this Similitude: Should you ask (says
he) one that could neither swim himself, nor ever saw others swim, Whether he
thought it possible that the heavy body of a Man could spread it self upon the
water without sinking; Would not he answer peremptorily, That it was not
possible? But let the same man see once with what ease the Swimmer keeps his
head above the water, Would he not as suddenly change his mind upon the sight
of this Experiment, and apply himself to practice it? You say it is impossible,
but you do not try whether it be so or no. For either holy Men have deceived
us, or some of them, by the Grace of God assisting them, have attained such a
degree of Power over themselves, as the Centurion in the Gospel Matthew. viii. 9.
had over his Soldiers, they could have given the Law, not only to their
outward senses, as Job did to his eyes, that they should not so much as look on
Vanity, but to their more inward Faculties, they could command their Appetite
to love or hate, their rational Faculty to meditate, their imaginative to think
on this, or not to think on that: For the same St. Paul, who humbled himself so
low as to say, that of himself he could do nothing, could say too, without
arrogance, That he could do all things; but then it was in Christ that
strengthened him: All things in Christ, nothing of himself. The Centurion whom
we spoke of, that had his Soldiers so absolutely at his Command, confesses
ingenuously, that he himself exercised his Authority under another. For in all
powers subordinate, the way to be obeyed, is to obey: Nor can these
Imaginations be possibly subdued to Reason, till Reason be subdued to Faith.
Submit thy self therefore to God, O my Soul, and there will follow a glorious
Victory. But you must strive for it; for this unruly swarm of thoughts hurt
none but those that yield to them. When they buz about thee like Flies in a hot
day, drown their noise with the louder cry of thy Prayers. And as Spiders
cannot easily weave their Nets in a High Wind, so neither shall whole Armies of
vain Imaginations be able to ensuare thee, as long as thy earnest Prayers, like
a vehement wind shall blow against them.

O Most mighty God, who see my Weather-beaten Soul tossed and driven by vain
and various Imaginations, like a torn Bark by contrary Winds, and not suffered
to sail on in a straight Course toward Thee; send thy Holy Spirit to calm this
Tempest, and to lay these Winds, that they may no longer hinder me in my way to
Heaven, or disturb me in my Prayers; which are then most acceptable to Thee,
when they flow from an undivided and untroubled Mind.

Of Preparation to Prayer, and the Helps that conduce to it.
THough Prayer may well be reckoned amongst those gifts which are not of
Earthly race, but rather immediate Emanations from the Father of Lights; yet
this does not exclude the preparing and disposing our selves for the receiving
this Gift from Heaven, according to that Counsel of the Son of Sirach, Before
thou prayest, prepare thy self, and be Eccles. xvlli. 22.
not as one that tempts the Lord, For what is it to tempt God, but to come into
his presence with less regard than you would into the presence of some earthly
Prince? What is it to tempt him, but to try experiments with him, whether he
will hear you upon any terms, though you neither prepare your self, nor order
the manner, nor dispose the matter which you petition for. But be not deceived,
Heaven is not gained at so cheap a rate: Qualem ie paraveris Deo (says St.
Bernard) talis apparebit tibi Deus; If you slight God so far as to come
carelessly into his presence, without consideration of what you come about, be
sure he will slight you as much, and regard your Prayers as little. David, Lam.
iii. 44.
who was a great Master in this heavenly Art of Prayer, tells us, that God
hears the desires of the humble, he hearkens to the preparation of the heart;
he hears your desires before they are molded and formed into Prayers, and he
listens to the very preparations of those desires, he cherishes them, he goes
along with them, he leaves them not, till you can say as that Divine Prophet
did, My heart is ready, O God, my heart is ready. For as the Knife must be
sharpened before you cut with it, and the Lute tuned before you begin the
Music; so there is something to be done, some tuning of the heart required,
before your Prayers can yield that Music which God listens after. It is an
excellent Rule which Eusebius Emissenus gives, Quantum Tu apposueris ad
diligentiam, tantum Deus addit ad Gratiam: The more care you take in fitting
your self to your Devotions, the more Grace he gives. Elias 1 Kings xviii.
was to prepare the Sacrifice; though the Fire was to come from Heaven which
did consume it. To come therefore unprepared before him, is an Argument, (say
the Fathers) that we do not esteem God, we do not set such a Rate upon him as
we ought to do: For if the Virgins, before they were brought into the presence
of Ahasuerus, were to be purified first with Esther ii. 12.
sweet Oils and Odours, what an impudence were it for a foul unwashed Soul to
press into the presence of God himself?

But then if you would know more punctually wherein this Preparation consists,
your spiritual Guide will tell you: There are some Rules more remote, some more
immediate; of the remote, the main is a watchfulness over the whole course of
your life: For if the Devil order his Temptations with a design in chief to
blast and corrupt your Prayers, your care must be the greater to countermine
him in this design; and to live so (as far as humane frailty will give way) as
not to be at any time unqualified, or unfit to pray. To compass this, there
will be a need first of temperance in Diet; for the body once heavy with Excess
and Surfeits, hangs plummets on the nobler part, and weighs the Soul down with
it. This being done, there will be use of setting a guard upon your Senses, and
stopping the Avenues so far as nothing may from without be admitted to divert
you, as Elias is 1 Kings XIX. 13.
observed to have wrapped his Face in a Mantle, when he prepared himself to
speak with God. To this must be added, the frequent reading of Books,
especially the Book of Psalms, where the Spirit of Devotion breaths with such a
vigor as is able to kindle a fire in the coldest breast, to stir up and excite
the drousiest Soul, which being thus awaked and heated, may be more easily
prepared to break forth in fervent Prayer.

But then if we come to the more immediate Dispositions and Qualifications of
Prayer, we shall be pointed to them by our Savior, who gives this main Rule of
private Prayer, When thou prayest, enter into thy Closet, Matthew. vi. 6.
and when thou have shut the door, pray to the Father which is in secret:
Wherein you are not only directed to the place of Prayer, you are to choose a
place private and retired; but further, (as the Fathers observe) you are put in
mind of a more inner Retirement, the Closet of your breast, for there you must
enter too, and shut that door by some settled Resolution, to admit no thoughts
that may disturb you; for otherwise there may be noise and tumult in that
inward Closet, when there is Quiet and Silence in the other. But then this is
not all; but as the place must be secret, the door shut, so the room must be
furnished: For as our Savior would not eat the Passover in an unfurnished
room, Mark XIV. 15.
but sent Peter and John first to prepare it, so there is a Furniture necessary
for this little Chapel of ours, the Heart. There must be Faith to prepare the
Materials, and there must be Love to kindle the Sacrifice. But then after all
this, Remember that there is no Preparative more effectual to Prayer, than
Prayer it self. For as the Sun in its approaches to us, is ushered in by its
own beams, and begins the dawning; so in our approaches to God, Prayer must
make way for Prayer. For though the severe Judges of the Areopage would admit
of no Civilities of Preface to be used by them that pleaded before them, yet
God deals not so harshly with us, when we plead before him, but is content to
let himself down to be wrought upon by the Rhetoric of a devout Soul. This
David knew well, who so frequently makes use of it: Sometimes with all
lowliness, suing for admittance; O let my Prayer enter into Thy Psalm lxxxvili.
l. Cxli. 2,
presence. Let it be set forth in Thy sight as the Incense: Let the lifting up
of mine hands be as an evening Sacrifice. Hear xxviii. 2.
the voice of my humble Petitions, when I cry unto Thee, when I hold up my
hands toward the Mercy-Seat of Thy Holy Temple. Sometimes after a more
passionate way: How long will thou forget me, O Lord? xiii. 1, 2.
For ever? How long will Thou hide Thy face from me? How long shall I seek
counsel in my Soul, and so vexed in my heart? Hear me, O God; make haste to
hear me: Think no scorn of xxviii. 1.
me; for if Thou make as if Thou hear not, I shall become like them that
go down into the Pit. With these, or such as these, the devout Soul summons God
to a Parley, pleads for Admittance, opens the Windows of Heaven, qualifies her
self to receive Grace, and works God to a readiness in giving it.

O Most gracious God, who hearkenest to the preparations of the heart that
prays to Thee, assist me in the very first motions and approaches of my
Devotions; and so order the beginnings of my Prayers, as they may go on, and
never end, till they are accepted of Thee.

Amen.
Of the Reverence and Adoration that is to be used in Prayer.
AMong all the Duties that relate to Prayer, whether of Preparation to it, or
of Deportment in it, there is none of more prime Concernment, than to consider
that when we pray, we do place or set our selves in the immediate presence of
God, whose eyes, though they are at all times over us; yet then we must imagine
them more particularly and earnestly fixed upon us. And as from this
Consideration flows all the care and solicitude of fitting our selves by the
former preparatives, so besides, it suggests to us with what reverence we
should present our selves before so infinite a Majesty; not only because God
expects it from us, (though this were enough to oblige: For if I am your Mal.
i. 6.
Father, where is mine honor? If I am your Master, where is my fear? The words
of him that looks for Reverence) but because our Prayers are then only
effectual when they are presented with acts of Adoration: For so says
Siracides, The Prayer of him that humbles Ecclus. xxxv. 17.
himself goes through the Clouds, and cease not till it come near, and will
not depart till the most High have respect thereunto: Nor does the Son of God
himself disdain to be a President to us in this, whose prayers upon the Cross
being offered with strong cries and tears, were heard (as St. Paul says)
Propter Reverentiam; importing, as Aquinas observes, Heb. v. 7.
not so much the Reverence due to his own Person, but rather the Reverence
which he did in his own Person to God the Father. But because the Reverence
which was done there, was only the act of his Mind (for his Body being then
nailed unto the Cross, was not in a Capacity of performing outward Adoration)
he gave us before that pattern in the Garden; where St. Luke says, that he
kneeled; St. Matthew, that he fell on his Luke xxii. 41. Matthew. xxvi. 39.
face, when he prayed.

Having shown this of the Son of God Incarnate; of whom it is said, Let all the
Heb. i. 6.
Angels of God Worship him: It were much to descend to tell you of the four
Beasts, or Rev. v. 8. 14.
the twenty four Elders that fell down and worshipped him that lives for ever
and ever: But then if this lowly Reverence was done by them who were in such a
nearness to God, when they offered up to him the Prayers of the Saints, what
posture can be low enough for us miserable men, whose Prayers those are, and
who in comparison of those heavenly Spirits are viler than the Worms we tread
upon?

That Adoration therefore is necessary, none will deny, that either know the
Excellency of God, or their own baseness. But because this may be done either
by the mind alone, or by the Body alone, or by both conjoined, which makes the
complete Adoration, let us inform our selves, first what the inward act of it
is: For, as our Savior taught the Woman of Samaria, God who is himself a
Spirit, must be John iv. 24.
worshipped in Spirit; for the most profound outward Reverence, if not
accompanied with this, is but a Body without a Soul, a Pharisaical Ceremony, or
an Adoration of Complement, of which God sadly complains, when he says of his
people, That they drew near to him Isa xxix. 13.
with their lips, but their heart was far from him. The inward Adoration
therefore is Matthew. xv. 8.
the humbling of our spirit to God in regard of the excellency that is in him,
submitting our very Soul, with all the powers and faculties of it to his Divine
Disposal, as being the necessary Homage of the Creature, due to the Greatness
and Majesty of the Creator. The exercise of this Adoration consists in several
acts, partly of the Understanding, partly of the Will: For first there is an
act of Reverence required before you begin your Devotions, in an humble
Recognition of your unworthiness; of which the Patriarch Abraham has left you
so excellent a pattern, Genesis xviii. 29. 30.
when being about to beseech God that he would spare Sodom, he does not only
acknowledge himself to be dust and ashes, but upon every return of speaking to
God in that Cause, he does it with that fear and reverence as to ask leave, and
to deprecate his anger before he spoke: O let not the Lord be angry, and I will
speak.

I Confess, O Lord, it is an excess of holdness in me, that I so poor a Worm,
so vile, so contemptible a Creature, should presume to speak to Thee: Yet be
not angry with me for this, for it is not because I value my self more than
Abraham did (for if he were but dust and ashes, what am I?) but because I dare
not under value Thy Mercy, that I make my humble approaches to Thee. Behold, I
am nothing in mine own eyes, O let me be something in Thine; and disd^in me not
when I speak unto Thee, for Christ his sake.

Amen.
THis humble Recognition being made of your own vileness, there is a second way
of spiritual Adoration, when the Soul humbled by this Reflex upon it self,
changes the Object, and raises a further Reverence by the consideration of
the Excellencies and several perfections that are in God; sometimes crying out
in such Ejaculations as these: O most excellent God, I adore Thee for Thine
Infinite Wisdom, I reverence Thee for Thine Incomprehensible Goodness, I
glorify Thee for Thine Immense Charity. Sometimes again by a profound silence,
making a tacit acknowledgment that all that can be said by thee is nothing:
For not only the tongues of men, but of Angels, must fail in the expression of
his Glory.

Besides, there is a Reverence to be used to God in the Style or Titles which
you give to him; and these you may vary, according to the variety of the matter
of your petitions, wherein the Psalms of David are admirable, and afford you no
less than forty several ways of Compellation of him, some relating to his
Power, as when he calls him by the names of, The King of Heaven, the King of
Glory, The God of my Strength, The God that does Wonders; (the very style
striking a kind of fear and reverence into the Soul.) Others again relating to
his Goodness: My Savior, My God, My Might, My Hope, My Refuge in the time of
trouble: Which though they run in a style of Confidence, yet are not without
reverence too: But then (as Gerson observes) the style that is best fitted for
all persons on all occasions to use, is the compellation of Father, which our
Savior first taught his Disciples to make use of in that excellent Prayer
never to be disused, nor laid aside by us. Before the time of Grace published
to the World, we do not find this Title in the prayers of Holy Men, either
Patriarchs or Prophets: But after the Son of God, by taking our Nature upon
him, became our Brother, then was the boldness given to call God our Father;
given even to sinners conditionally, that they use it with that reverence as
the converted Prodigal did, who though he had the confidence to call him
Father, yet he had the humility withal, to confess that he was not worthy to be
called his Son, and therefore his Petition reached no higher, than to be made
one of his hired Servants.

O Most Great God, what shall I say in Thy presence, when I come to pray to
Thee? By what Title shall I call thee, or how shall I sufficiently adore Thee?
If I style Thee a Judge, I adore thy Justice; If a Master, I know my Obedience;
if I call Thee my Savior, I acknowledge Thy Mercy: Whatsoever name I use, I
find cause enough of Reverence. And since therefore I now appear before Thee,
to pay the Tribute of Adoration by a Thousand Titles due to the Thee, let thy
Truth direct me, and Thy Spirit guide me, that I may so adore Thee in Spirit
and Truth, as Thou requirest: And that all the inward Faculties of my Soul, may
be as so many fiery Tongues, to set forth thy praise for evermore.

Amen.
BUT as in a Watch, though there must be Wheels within, yet there must be a
hand without too, or else the inward Motion of the Wheels is useless; so though
the principal of all spiritual Motion is within, yet the Virtue of it must have
a time to work outward too, or else our Adoration is not complete: For as the
Nature of Man is not comprised singly either in Soul or Body, but in both
conjoined; so the Adoration due to God, who made both, is to flow from both:
And if the Soul be God's inward Chancel, the Body must be the Temple that
includes it: For know you not (says St. Paul) that your 1 Cor. VI. 19, 20.
body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost that is in you: Your own it is not; For
you are brought with a price, therefore glorify God in your Body, as well as
Spirit, for both are his. We are not therefore to think, the Reverence of the
Body to be an useless or an unprofitable Ceremony: For besides this Argument of
St. Paul's for the necessity of it, St. Austin observes, that this outward
Adoration of the Body is a notable help to the more inward acts of the Spirit,
and adds much to the earnestness and fervor of it. For the stretching forth of
the hands, the bowing of the knees, the beating of the breasts, the prostrating
and casting down the Body, with the like Gestures of Humiliation, are not
therefore used to discover to God what is within the heart, or to move him the
more, but to move thy self, and by these exterior acts, as by a vigorous
blowing, to continue and increase that invisible fire of Devotion that burns
within. But then as these outward acts are not always absolutely necessary; for
you may many times be inwardly moved to pray, when outward gesture cannot
either easily or conveniently be used; as Manasses praying in his Fetters,
Ezekiel in his Bed, Susanna in a Throng of People; so neither can I say, that
any one particular gesture of the Body in Prayer is so prescribed in Scripture,
either by way of Precept or Example, as to oblige to that gesture only. For in
the exercise of Prayer, we find several postures of Holy Men. Before the Law
Abraham is said to have fallen on his face; Genesis xvii. 3.
under the Law, Moses did the like. Among the Prophets, Deuteronomy. ix. 18.
Elias fell on the earth, bowing his face between his 1 Kings xviii. 42.
knees; Solomon stood before the Altar, with his hands 1 Kings viii. 22.
spread forth toward Heaven; Saint Stephen kneeled, Acts vii. 60. and 20. 36.
when he prayed for his Enemies; Saint Peter, when he raised Doroas; our
Savior Matthew. xxvi. 30.
himself in his Agony in the Garden, not only kneeled but prostrated himself,
as has already been mentioned.

The acts of outward Adoration being of this diversity: St. Austin's Rule is,
that in private Prayer (for in public we are to conform our selves to the
Commands and Customs of the Church wherein we live, rather than to the bent and
inclination of our own Wills) we are so to compose and order the outward man,
as may be of most advantage to the raising and continuing of the inward
Devotion of the mind. Of all these outward Gestures, Prostration is the lowest
act of bodily Reverence that can be used, when the Supplicant casting himself
upon the earth, acknowledges by that act, that he does but cast dust to dust,
that he is more vile than the least grain of that earth he lies upon; and this
posture best becomes us in times of great Affliction, and ever to be then
lowest, when our necessities are at the highest. But though this casting of the
body upon the ground, has been the practice of many Devout Men, especially of
those in the first Ages of Christianity, who after a more strict way
worshipping God in Deserts and solitary places; yet because they found by
experience (as Cassian tells us) that the continuance of their posture long
might incline to ease, and provoke to drousiness, they used it rather upon some
short Ejaculatory Prayers, than in their larger and more continued Devotions,
casting themselves often down with some short and vehement breathings of the
Soul; but rising again so suddenly, that some of them have been observed to
have prostrated themselves in this manner an hundred times in the day, and as
often in the night. But this we must leave to be imitated by those whose
Devotion is of an higher strain than ordinary, and which these latter times are
hardly capable of.

But the more ordinary and more convenient for all persons, is Genuflection:
Though we may have some excuse not to cast our whole body down, shall we not
cast our knees down at least? Has God said, That every knee Isa. xiv. 23.
shall bow to him, and shall any of us think to be dispensed with? Our Savior
kneeled, who knew no sin; and is the posture too low for us, that are nothing
else but sin? Whether Elephants have no joints in their knees, and therefore
cannot bend them, I will not enquire: But sure the Christian, that has not
this excuse, is a stranger Creature to be wondered at, if he become once so
sparing of his trouble, or so over-familiar with his God, as not to bend his
knees in solemn Prayer unto him.

But then you will say, Where is there Command for this? No Gesture of the body
can be other than a Ceremony, which being in its own Nature a thing
indifferent, may either be used, or laid aside.

But first, Though it be a Ceremony, every Ceremony is not of that
indifferency, especially such which the very Law of Nature dictates to all
Nations in all Ages, to fall down and kneel in the Veneration of their God,
whether true or false: But then, lest this inward Principle should apply and
cast it self upon a wrong Object, God has expressly given his Precept too: For
every knee (says he) shall bow to me: And what terms can there be of higher
command than these?

But yet because Affirmative Precepts, though they bind always in the Habit,
cannot be said always to bind in the Act, this cannot be pressed so
indispensably, as that neither sickness nor weakness, nor any other accident,
can be a bar to it: For where necessity intervenes, the bended knees of the
heart may well excuse the Body.

There is therefore one posture more that we find has been used in Prayer,
which though it may hear ill, being practiced by the Pharisees, who, as our
Savior describes them, loved to pray standing, not only in their Synagogues,
but in the corners of their Streets; yet this Mark vi. 5
is not enough utterly to exclude it from our Devotions: For not only the proud
Pharisee, but the humble Publican stood at his Prayers, Luke xviii. 13.
although with this note of difference: He stood, but it was afar off, in the
lowest place of the Temple, as thinking himself unworthy to come higher: His
body stood upright, but his eyes were cast downward to the Earth. But not to
stop either upon these Particulars, or upon the Custom of the Jews in general,
(for it was their Custom to pray standing) we find in the best times, the
Christians had their seasons to make use of it: For besides that, as between
Easter and Whitsontide (to express their Exultation for the Resurrection of
their Savior, and their Expectation of the Descent of the Holy Ghost) they
were not seen to kneel openly in their public Service of God: So, many times
in their private Devotions, (especially when they continued them long upon
their knees) they relieved themselves with that change of Posture. But to avoid
all necessary Scruples in cases of this nature, the result of all is this:

1. That Adoration is an act of Religious Worship, exhibited to God in
Recognition of his Supreme Dominion.

2. That as in Man the heart is first framed, so the heart must be first
offered as a spiritual Sacrifice of inward Reverence.

3. That the outward Adoration by Prostration, or kneeling, is not so much a
Ceremony, as a part or duty in Divine Worship, not to be omitted, but either in
case of necessity, or when we find some other posture upon some occasion really
to be of more advantage to us in our Devotion.

4. That this Duty of external Reverence does not then necessarily oblige, when
the Soul being suddenly and inwardly moved to lift it self up by Prayer, the
outward man is as it were surprised in some other posture: as walking,
standing, sitting, or lying down; in which case, God will rather look to the
inward Motions and Raptures of the Mind, than to the outward Form and Composure
of the Body.

Someother, though more minute, yet usual Circumstances of Adoration, are
summed up by Bonaventure; as the uncovering of the head (as it relates to Men)
the posture of either looking up to Heaven, with the confidence of Saint
Stephen, or fastened down to the Earth, with the humility of the Publican: The
hands lifted 2 Chronicles. vi. 13.
and stretched out, a Gesture which God honored with that famous Miracle: Thus
Exodus xvii. 11.
as long as Moses in this manner held up his hands, the Israelites prevailed;
but when he let them down, his Enemies prevailed. But the choice of these must
be regulated by the former Rule of Saint Austin, and so far made use of, as
they shall conduce most to every particular Man's Devotion.

FINIS.
HOLY RULES and HELPS TO DEVOTION Both in Prayer and Practice.

BY The right Reverend Father in God Bryan Duppa, Late Lord Bishop of Winton.

The Second Part.

London, Printed for W. Hensman, at the King's-Hea^ in Westminster Hall. 1683.

HOLY Rules and Helps TO DEVOTION, Both in Prayer and Practice.
Of Prayer, what it is.
PRAYER is an Humble Address of the Soul toward God, for whatsoever we stand
in need of, either in relation to this life, or the life to come.

Prayer is The lifting up of the Soul. The pouring out of the Soul. A wrestling
with God. A Sacrifice to God. A Succor to the Soul. A Scourge to the Tempter.
A Sanctuary in Troubles. A Remedy for sins. A Key to open the Morning. A Lock
to shut in the Evening.


Of Morning and Evening Prayer.
I.
MOrning and Evening Prayer are instead of that Morning and Evening-Sacrifice
which God enjoined to be daily offered in the Temple.

II.
They are outgoings of the Morning and Evening which David speaks of, The
outgoings of the Morning and Evening shall praise thee.

III.
They are to every devout Soul, like that Pillar which guided Israel through
the Wilderness, as a Cloud by day to shadow them, and as a Fire by night to
comfort them.

IV.
By Morning Prayer thou openest the windows of thy Soul to the Sun of
Righteousness, and by Evening Prayer thou shuttest them against the danger of
the night.

V.
In your Morning Devotions you are to say within your self, What shall I do
this day which God has given me? How shall I employ it? In the Evening, What
have I done this day? How have I spent it?

Short Ejaculations, or Occasional Prayers for the Morning.
BLessed art thou, O God, who have sent the Dayspring from on high to visit me;
who have given my body rest, and preserved this night my Soul in safety.

Blessed art thou, who (...)^^newest thy Mercies to me every morning, and have
given me one day more to serve thee, and call upon thy name.

Or this Psalm. cxliii. 5. 8.
Let me hear thy loving kindness, O God, betimes in the morning, for in thee is
my trust. Show thou me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up my soul
unto thee.

Or this, Numb. vi. 24.
The Lord God bless and preserve me, make his face to shine upon me, and be
gracious unto me; that it may go well with me this day, and evermore.

A short Prayer at up-rising.
O Blessed Savior, who have taught me, that the dead shall hear thy voice, let
me no longer lie in the grave of sloth; but raise me as thou did thy servant
Lazarus, unbind my hands and feet, set me in some good way, that I may glorify
thee by serving thee this day with a pure mind and humble heart.

Amen.
At your Clothing.
O My God, as I came into the World a weak, a naked, and a wretched Creature,
so am I still, if destitute of thy grace. Reach out therefore unto me, the
unspotted Robe of thy Sons Righteousness, and so clothe me with all the graces
of thy holy Spirit, that thy Image may be daily renewed in me, and thy Name
honored by me for evermore.

Amen.
At the washing of your Hands.
O My dear Savior, who have opened a fountain for sin, and for all
uncleanness; wash me thoroughly with those saving Waters, that being purified
from the stains of sin, and the guilt of my natural corruption, I may with the
more confidence, draw near to thy Throne of Grace, and bow myself before thy
Mercy-seat. Amen.

Eccles. xviii. 5. 23.

Before thou prayest, prepare thy self, and be not as one that tempts the Lord.

Three Rules of Preparation.
I.
FIrst, you are to remember when you settle to Prayer, you then place your self
in the presence of God, whose eyes are upon all men, but especially upon such
as call upon him.

II.
Secondly, the consideration of his presence is to put you in mind, with what
humble Reverence both of Soul and Body, you ought to appear before so great a
Majesty.

III.
Thirdly, before you begin to Pray, you are to resolve within your self
seriously to intend the Duty you are about, that your heart may not wander, but
go along with your Prayers, or if through weakness, it happen to stray, to call
it back again, and to ask pardon for it in some such short Prayer as this:

Lord, strengthen me and restrain me, and lay not this weakness to my charge.

A Prayer preparative.
O My dear and blessed Savior, who with so much zeal did drive out those who
turned thy House of Prayer into a Den of Thieves, clear at this time the Temple
of my Soul from vain and sinful thoughts, cast out all wandering Imaginations,
leave nothing behind, that may either disturb or distract me in the performance
of this my duty, that my Prayers may ascend as Incense, and thy Grace and Mercy
may descend as Dew to the saving of my Soul, and to the glory of thy Name.

Amen.
Morning Prayers collected out of the Psalms.
I.
DEfend me, O God, under thy Wings, and keep me safe this day under thy
Feathers.

Give thine Angels charge over me, to keep me in all my ways.

Preserve me as the Apple of thine eye, hide me under the shadow of thy Wings:
That no evil may happen unto me, nor no plague come nigh my dwelling.

Create in me a clean heart, and renew a right Spirit within me.

O hold thou up my goings in thy Path, that my footsteps slip not.

Who can tell how often he offends? O cleanse thou me from my secret sins; but
above all, keep me from presumptuous sins, lest they get the Dominion over me;
so shall thy Servant be undefiled and innocent from the great offense.

Amen.
II.
Unto thee, O GOD, lift I up mine eyes, O thou that dwell in the Heavens.

Yea unto the Hills will I lift up mine eyes, from whence comes my Salvation.

For, whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none upon earth that I
desire in comparison of thee.

Into thy hands therefore I commend my Spirit, for thou have redeemed me, O
Lord, thou God of truth.

Blessed art thou who have lightened mine eyes, that I sleep not in death.

Who have delivered me from the terrors of the night, and from the evil that
walks in darkness.

Who have driven sleep from mine eyes, and slumber from my eyelids.

Thou art my God, and I will thank thee; thou art my God, and I will praise
thee.

Amen.
III.
O Lord thou have searched me out and known me, thou see my down-lying and
uprising: Thou understandest my thoughts long before.

For thou art about my path, and about my bed, and spiest out all my ways.

Through thee have I been holden up ever since I was born, thou art he that
took me out of my Mothers womb, my praise shall be always of thee.

Lead me then, O Lord, in thy Righteousness, and make thy way plain before my
face.

Teach me to do the thing that pleases thee; for thou art my God; let thy
loving Spirit lead me forth into the ways of Righteousness.

Show thy servant the light of thy countenance, and save me this day for thy
mercies sake.

Amen.
IV.
My voice shall thou hear betimes, O Lord, early in the morning will I direct
my prayer unto thee.

For thou art the thing that I long for, thou art my hope from my youth.

O be thou a place to hide me in, and compass me about with Songs of
Deliverance.

For all the earth is full of darkness, and cruel Habitations.

Set me up therefore upon the Rock that is higher than I, and I will not fear
what man can do unto me.

For thou alone can deliver my Soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my
feet from falling.

Osatisfie me therefore with thy mercy, and that soon, that I may rejoice in
thee all the days of my life.

Lead me forth in thy truth and learn me, for thou art the God of my Salvation;
in thee shall be my hope all the day long.

Amen.
V.
Set a Watch this day, O Lord, before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips.

Turn away mine eyes, that they behold no vanity, and let not mine heart be
inclined to any evil thing.

Teach me thy way, O Lord, and I will walk in thy truth; O knit my heart unto
thee, that I may fear thy Name.

Order my steps in thy Word, that no wickedness may have dominion over me.

Hide me privily by thine own presence from the provoking of all men: Keep me
secretly in thy Tabernacle from the strife of Tongues.

For I will set thee always before me, thou shall be on my right hand,
therefore I shall not greatly fall.

Thou have been my succor: Leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my
Salvation.

But let thy merciful kindness be this day upon me, like as I do put my trust
in thee.

Glory be to the Father, etc. As it was in the beginning, etc.

Amen.
A Thanksgiving to God for his Protection in the night.
O Most gracious GOD, whose eyes have been open over me, when mine were shut,
and under the shadow of whose wings I have past this night in safety; I do with
all possible thankfulness, humbly acknowledge it, as thy great mercy, that thou
have not taken away my soul this night (as in justice thou might have done)
but have given me respite, and afforded me one day more to call upon thy Name.

O Lord, make me ashamed of my former unthankfulness, and wound my heart with
the consideration of mine own dullness, whom so many favors have not wrought
unto more obedience: Give me grace to consecrate the rest of my life unto thy
service, and to redeem the time at least which I cannot recall.

And, O thou who turnest the shadow of Death, into the light of the Morning,
enable me powerfully to cast off all the Works of Darkness, and to keep my body
and soul spotless and unblameable.

And as thou have brought me to the Comforts of this day: So go along with me.
I beseech thee, through all the parts and minutes of it, that in all my ways
being guided by thy counsel here, I may hereafter be received into thy glory,
even for the merits of my dearest Savior Jesus Christ.

Amen.
A Morning Prayer.
O My dear Lord and Maker, from whom alone I look for blessing, continue I
beseech thee to be the guide of my life; counsel me, govern me, lead me in the
way that I should go, or else I shall wander from thee into infinite Errors.

O possess then all my bodily senses, that my sinful affections may find no
place. Leave me no more to my own weakness, whereof my frequent falls have
given me many and sad experiments.

Restrain rather those inclinations to which my nature is chiefly prone, that
their violence may never have power over me, to make me swerve from thy holy
will.

Let not the corruption of these evil times prevail upon me, but keep me from
the flattering and the lying lips, the profane and blaspheming tongue; stop my
ears, and shut* up my heart against them.

Strike such an awful reverence into my soul, that I may watch over all my
actions, and carefully avoid whatever may be dangerous to my self, pernicious
to others, or any way displeasing unto thee; that so living in thy fear, I may
die in thy favor, rest in thy peace, and reign with thee in thy glory World
without end.

Amen.
A Prayer for forgiveness of Sins.
O My God, when I call sadly to mind what I have done, and what I have left
undone, how careless I have been to please thee, how diligent to offend thee;
how passionately I have been transported toward the pleasures of this life, how
cold and heavy in pursuing my everlasting happiness: When I seriously consider
the vanity of my affections, the folly of my thoughts, the idleness of my
words, and above all, the sinfulness of my actions, I stand amazed at my self,
that such a Contemplation as this makes not my flesh to tremble, and my heart
break at the very thought of it.

For, O my Lord, if thou should be extreme to mark what I have done amiss,
if thou should enter into Judgment with me, what would become of me, for of
so many millions of sins that I have committed, alas, I cannot answer thee one
of a thousand.

But, O my Savior, thou who have revealed it to me as a faithful saying, that
thou came into the World for no other end but to save Sinners, thou who have
so solemnly sworn, thy delight is not in my death, but rather that I should
live: what shall hinder thee to do that which thou delightest in? or what can
hinder thee to save the Soul thou came into the World for?

O pardon and forgive then all my sins past, that nothing may hinder thee: Lay
them no longer to my charge, cast them behind thee, bury them, drown them,
scatter them as a mist, and as a Morningcloud, let them vanish away. And when
thou have done this, O my merciful GOD, leave not here, but go on: Create in me
a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within me; let me feel once the
powerful effects, the saving operations of thy Grace, in fervency of devotion
toward thee, in bitterness of repentance for offending thee, in holy
resolutions never wilfully to sin against thee more, and in perseverance in
those resolutions, till I shall pass out of this valley of tears, into those
everlasting Joys, where no evil can approach me.

Amen.
A Prayer against Relapses into sin.
O My gracious GOD, the only stay and comfort of my soul, seeing thy will is,
that in all things I should sincerely serve thee, and I, through thy grace,
desire nothing more than to do the same. How is it, O my Lord, that I still
offend thee; or why fall I so often into my former follies?

Alas, thy Grace is not wanting to me; but my ungraciousness, and the
corruption of my nature, my slipperiness, and easiness to offend, my
inconstancy in my best resolutions, and my forgetfulness of my former purposes,
is the cause of it.

And for this, once more I humble my soul before thee, beseeching thee to lay
aside thy rigor, and not to multiply thy anger according to the measure that I
have multiplied my sins, but rather to remember whereof I am made, that I am as
a flower, a wind, a vapor that passes away, nay I am viler than all this,
even weak and sinful dust and ashes.

And thou have visited and considered me in these my despicable and wretched
Principles; O then show thy strength in my weakness, thy glory in my
infirmities, increase in me daily thy renewing grace, and strengthen me against
all future temptations, that I may never start aside again, like a broken bow,
but go on from grace to grace, though it be with weak and trembling steps, till
I shall appear before the God of Gods in Sion.

Amen.
A Prayer to be prepared for our last End.
O Eternal GOD, my Maker, my Redeemer, I adore and bless thy Holy Name, that
thou have with such admirable patience, not only suffered me to live this hour,
but withal have multiplied thy daily blessings on me, even then when I by my
sinful life have most unkindly and treacherously rebelled against thee.

But who knows, O merciful Lord, how soon thy abused patience may end, or how
speedily thou may call me to a sad account for all my former days so
miserably misspent?

For O how many are they on whom the Morning Sun has shined, that shall not
live to see it set? And how know I but this may be my last day too? the only
day which thou, O GOD, have left me to set my soul in order, and to prepare for
that day which never shall have end.

O my dear Lord, suffer me not then to neglect this blessed season, but by an
hearty repentance speedily, even this day, this instant to return unto thee;
that how soon soever thou shall call me to my Transmigration from this life, my
accounts may be found audited, my sins cancelled, and my soul acquitted by the
blood of that Lamb that takes away the sins of the World.

Grant this, O my God, for his sake that vouchsafes to die for me, thy only
Son Jesus Christ the righteous.

Amen.
Advice concerning the Examination of the Conscience.
THE only Heaven that is afforded us upon Earth is Peace of Conscience; the
only way to preserve that Peace, is to keep our selves unspotted from the
World; or if we fail of this, (as who does not in some degree?) to call our
selves speedily to a strict account for it; for upon this depends not only our
present Peace, but our future Happiness, according to that of our Savior, If
you judge your selves, you shall not be judged. The oftener this is done, the
cleaner and the quieter your Soul will be. If you make it not your daily task,
yet find a time for it at least once a week. But especially omit it not, when
you prepare your self for the blessed Sacrament; for as the benefit of it,
being well managed, amounts to no less than the saving of your soul, so the
danger is as great on the other side, if you carelessly or wilfully neglect it.

St. Paul therefore is punctual, and vehement in pressing the Corinthians with
it where he lays a peremptory command upon them, Let every man examine himself.

For this is no trivial ordinary Duty, no exercise on the by, but a work of
high concernment, wherein the soul of a Christian seriously reflects upon it
self, and the penitent Sinner laying all the Actions of his life before him,
arraigns, accuses and condemns himself.

And that this may be done with the more advantage; some hours at least, if not
some day must be set apart for this examination.

Especially let the immediate preceding day be kept as the Eve to this great
Feast, wherein you are to humble your self by Prayer and Fasting, that you may
be the better disposed and qualified for the performance of this Duty.

For the carrying on this private Assize and Trial of our selves, devoutmen
have proposed many several methods; but the most general and approved way is to
set before you, as the most clear and impartial glass, the Moral Law of God,
with such heightnings of it and deductions from it, as either our Savior in
the Gospel has drawn from it, or our own reason well informed to make use of.

The Examination by way of Articles upon the Moral Law, to every particular of
which the Soul is to answer it self, whether guilty or not guilty.
The Examnation upon the first Commandment.
I.
Do thou really believe, O my Soul, that there is a God, or have thou set
some secret touches of Atheism within thee?

II.
Have thou doubted at any time of his Providence, or of his Power, of his
Justice, Mercy, or any other of his Attributes?

III.
Have thou been willing to entertain scruples of this nature, and to listen to
their discourses, who turn the reason that God has given, as a weapon against
himself.

IV.
Have thou proudly ascribed the good that thou have done unto thy own strength,
or imputed thy sins and follies to the necessitating and inevitable Decrees of
God.

V.
Do thou think thy self obliged to obey God, as well as to believe in him, to
love him as thy Father, to fear him as thy Judge, to praise him as thy Maker,
with daily, and most humble Thanks for all his Mercies to thee? Have thou done
this, or wherein have thou failed?

VI.
Have thou really in thy Thoughts no other Gods but him? Have thou set up
nothing in Competition with him, no Pride, no Pleasure, no Ptofit, no
Self-Love, no Self-Interest of thine own?

VII.
Have thou given credit to vain Predictions of men, to Dreams or
Fortune Tellers, or gone about to know any secret thing by lot?

VIII.
Have thou in thy Prosperity forgot thy God, or in thy Adversity have thou put
thy confidence more in worldly helps than in him?

The Examination upon the Second Commandment.
I.
Do thou apprehend God as an infinite, incomprehensible Essence, without
framing to thy self any bodily shape or form of him that is invisible?

II.
Do thou worship God in or by an image, or any other way which either he has
forbidden, or not commanded?

III.
Do thou give the worship that is due unto the Creat or, to any of his
Creatures, either Saint or Angel? Or do thou consider that he is a jealous
God, who will have nothing loved, nothing honored by thee like himself.

IV.
Do thou in all thy Addresses to him, either of Public Prayers or Private,
come into his presence with reverence, kneeling, and religiously bowing thy
self before him, and before him alone?

The Examination upon the third Commandment.
I.
Have thou used vain, impertinent customary Swearing?

II.
Have thou sworn any thing false, knowing it to be so, making the Name of God a
Broker to thy Lies?

III.
Have thou been perjured by violating any public Oath made to thy lawful
Superiors; or failed in any private engagement which has been in thy power to
perform?

IV.
Have thou broken any voluntary, religious, deliberate Vow, made purposely to
God and his glory?

V.
How far have thou kept that great and solemn Vow which was made for thee in
Baptism? or have thou seriously considered thy frequent and dangerous
violations of it?

VI.
Have thou given God, upon all occasions offered, the honor due unto his Name?
or have thou any ways spoken of him without fear or reverence?

VII.
Have thou abused either God's Name, or any of his Creatures in Curses or
bitter Execrations?

The Examination upon the fourth Commandment.
I.
Have thou kept the Lord's day holy, or has it been as a common day unto thee?

II.
Have thou constantly sanctified this day, either by being present at the
Public Service of the Church, or (being hindered of this) by private Prayer,
and reading of holy Books.

III.
Do thou show forth thy Charity this day in works of mercy to them that stand
in need of thee?

The Examination upon the fifth Commandment.
I. Have thou loved, honored and obeyed thy Parents, thy King and Sovereign,
and all that have a lawful authority over thee?

II. Have thou upon all occasions assisted them to thy power, and offered up
daily Prayers to God for them?

III. Have thou respected thy spiritual Guides, such as labor for thy Soul; or
have thou grieved or despised any of those whom thou art bound to honor?

The Examination upon the sixth Commandment.
I. Do thou endeavor as much as in thee lies, to preserve the lives of all
men, as bearing the same Image of thy Maker with thee.

II. Art thou a lover, a follower, a procurer of Peace among those with whom
thy conversation is?

III. Have thou been either causelessly or sinfully angry? Have thou born
Malice, Hatred or Revenge in thine heart? Have thou forgiven, have thou loved
thy Enemy for Christ's sake, who loved thee when thou were yet his Enemy?

IV. Have thou compassionate bowels? Have thou, to thy power fed and clothed
them whom thou have known to be ready to perish with cold and hunger?

V. Have thou been careful of thine own life, or have thou any way hastened
thine own end by wilful Intemperance or Disorder?

The Examination on the seventh Commandment.
Do thou consider that thy body was made to be a Temple of the Holy Ghost,
that whosoever therefore shall presume to pollute this Temple, him shall God
destroy?

II. Have thou preserved it in that purity which is required of thee, or have
thou defiled it by Fornication, Adultery, Lasciviousness or any other
Uncleanness, of which the Apostle pronounces, that they who do such things
shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven?

III. Have thou deliberately pleased thy self with any foul lascivious
thoughts, or continued in them, to a delight? Have thou consented to them, or
have thou rejected them?

IV. Have thou been careless in avoiding the occasions and approaches that lead
into those sins, or have thou exposed thy self either unwarily or wilfully to
temptation.

V. Have thou delighted in wanton company, in unchaste songs, or unclean
discourses?

The Examination on the eighth Commandment.
I. Have thou taken away from others by deceit or violence, that which belongs
not to thee? Have thou injured no man in his rights?

II. Have thou defrauded Servants of their wages, Laborers of their hire, or
Creditors of such debts as thou art able to satisfy?

The Examination upon the ninth Commandment.
I. Have thou upon all occasions been witness to the truth, without fear or
flattery?

II. Have thou said any thing falsely that has been injurious to the good name
and reputation of another? Or have thou pleased thy self either in inventing or
spreading rumors of that kind?

III. Do thou willingly give ear to Slanderers, and to such as go about with
lies; or do thou abhor them both in thy self and others?

The Examination upon the tenth Commandment.
I. Do thou rest contented in that condition or state of life wherein God
has placed thee, or have thou at any time inordinately lusted after that which
belongs to others?

II. Have thou entertained secret covetings in thy thoughts, with any delight
or complacency? Or have thou labored to restrain them and quench them in their
first beginnings?

When you have considered seriously, and answered your self in these
particulars one by one; sum up the Account you have made, where you find your
self innocent, give the glory to God, whose Grace has kept you from falling
into those sins; but where you find your self guilty, humble your self before
God in Prayer, confessing sadly the evil you have done, and imploring mercy in
these or such other words as the devotion of your heart shall suggest to you.

An humble Confession after Examination.
O The God of my Soul, with all humble Reverence I appear this day before thee,
not as the proud Pharisee to justify my self, but as the poor Publican who
striking his breast, durst not lift up his eyes toward Heaven, nor say any
more than this, Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

For I have sinned, O Lord, I have sinned; Woe is me, I cannot cast my searching
eyes into any corner of thy Commandments, but I find my self miserably guilty.

But in what manner soever I have offended thee, O my merciful Lord, whether in
Thought, Word or Deed, whether secretly or openly; I am now sorry for it from
the very root and bottom of my heart, beseeching thee to look compassionately
upon the frailty and ignorance, the wilfulness and presumption of my life, and
graciously to forgive all that I have done amiss.

For alas, I am neither able to stand thine indignation, nor present thee with
any thing of mine own, but tears and prayers to appease thine anger: Be
reconciled therefore to me, O God, in the blood of thy dear Son, which was so
freely offered up to thee as a full ransom for the sins of the whole World. O
require not that payment again of me, a poor and bankrupt sinner; but for his
sake, for his abundant Satisfactions sake, cancel the handwritings that are
against me; blot out all my sins past, new and old, and for the time to come,
let there be an everlasting tie between my Soul and thee, that thou may be my
God, and I may live and die thy servant.

Amen.
A Protestation to be made after Confession.
O My great and glorious God, I who am less than the grain of dust that hangs
upon the balance, profess seriously, and with the remorse of a wounded spirit,
that I am not only sorry, but ashamed and confounded within my self, that I
have so many ways sinned against so good a God, so gracious a Father: But what
is past I cannot recall, though thy mercy may forgive.

But for the time to come, I call all thy holy Angels to witness, that I this
day sacrifice my self wholly to thee, resolving to break of from all sinful
courses; and fully purposing never to offend thee more. But because thou
know my failings and my weakness is not hid from thee, I beg of thee, O my
God, to show thy strength in my weakness, and to confirm my infirm mind in this
holy Resolution. That so never repenting of this Repentance, nor wavering in
those Resolute Purposes, which I have now by thy Grace fo deliberately made, I
may go on constantly in a pure and holy life, till in the end of my days I come
to everlasting joys, which thou have prepared for them that love thee, through
Jesus Christ my Lord,

Amen.
A Prayer before the receiving the holy Sacrament.
O My most blessed Savior, who in the bowels of thy Mercy toward Mankind,
did not only offer thy self a Sacrifice for the sins of the whole world, but
did institute this heavenly and holy Sacrament, as the means to convey the
Benefits of thy precious death to all such as with humility and repentance come
unto thee: Accept, I beseech thee, this my humble Address, who here present my
self a woeful sinner, I confess, but such a one, who am heartily sorry for my
sins, and penitent for my offenses.

Direct me therefore, O my God, in this great action, with such a reverent and
awful fear, that all the faculties of my soul may be attentive rightly to
apprehend, and joyfully to receive this wonderful Mystery of thy Body and Blood.

O my Lord, I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof; let thy Holy
Spirit therefore before thy coming prepare and dress up a Lodging for thee in
my Soul, cleansing it from the stains of sin, and suffering nothing to abide in
it, that may keep thee out; so that being wholly possessed by thee, all sinful
thoughts, and unclean suggestions, may not only presently vanish, but never
find entrance more.

Grant this, O my Jesu; and so, this day, receive me into thy favor, that I
may with joy receive thee into my soul, and being once united with thee, thy
Grace may never depart from me; that so thou may live in me, and I in thee
for ever.

Amen.
A Thanksgiving after the Receiving of the Sacrament.
O Lord, the only Spring and everlasting Fountain of all good, who have this
day revived and quickened my poor Soul, by giving thy self unto me after a
wonderful way in this Blessed Sacrament, I praise and glorify thy holy Name
for this thine infinite mercy; beseeching thee to crown what thou have begun,
by a continual supply of thy heavenly grace, that I may never forget whom, or
what I have received; but being purified by thy Blood, and strengthened by thy
Body against all future Temptations, I may constantly run through all the parts
of an holy life, to the possession of thy glorious Kingdom, World without end.

Amen, Amen.
Rules of Devotion to be observed toward the Evening, or some time of the
Afternoon.
I. THat you fail not (unless some extraordinary or unavoidable accidents
hinder you) to allot some part of the Afternoon or toward the Evening, for the
advantage of your soul; when freeing your self from business and company: you
may retire into your Closet, or private Oratory, and there direct your thoughts
without disturbance, upon God alone.

II. That being thus retired, you constantly make it your business to read some
part of the Holy Scripture, (especially in the Psalms, which if all other Books
of Devotion were lost, are sufficient to supply us in that kind;) having begun
there, go on to the reading of some part of the New Testament, not carelessly or
in haste, as if you had a mind to have done, but so attentively, as to be able
to give some account of what you have read, or to single at least some one
passage or more out of it, to be laid up in your Memory, and to be made use of
in the practice of an holy life.

III. That in this time of retirement, you lay all things aside, that may
divert you from Holy and Heavenly thoughts, considering that you set your self
in the presence of God, and that you are to give him an account of what you are
doing, which that you may the better do, you may begin with this Prayer.

A Prayer upon the Entrance into your Closet.
O My great and gracious God, whose infinite mercy it is, that I have this
minute of my life left me, I here appear in thy presence lamenting sadly that
so much of my time is already lost either in doing ill or doing nothing, or in
doing that which has been unprofitable and vain; O grant that I may redeem the
hours that are past, and dispose of those that are to come in serving thee
hereafter with a devout heart and earnest and passionate affections; draw me
off more and more from the pleasures and vanities of this life, that I may the
better settle my wavering and divided Soul upon thee alone; and since at this
time I have here retired my self, that I might the more freely commune with my
own heart and meditate on thine only Word: let thy Blessed Spirit assist me,
that I may not only barely remember what I read, but digest it into the
practice of an holy Life, to the comforts of my soul, and the Glory of thy
Name, through Jesus Christ,

Amen.
Prayers toward Bed time.
I. LET my Prayer, O Lord, be set forth in thy sight as the Incense, and let
the lif^ing up of my hands be as an Evening Sacrifice.

For thou, O Lord, have granted me thy loving kindness in the daytime, and
therefore in the night-season I will think on thee, and make my prayer to the
God of my life.

O thou that saidest, Let therebe light, and there was light; open mine eyes,
that I sleep not in death.

Make me to commune with my own heart upon my bed, and to search out all my
ways.

That I may lament my sins as thy servant David did, and cry unto thee for
mercy.

Consider and hear me, O God, and hide me under the shadow of thy wings, and
let my soul rest in thee. Amen.

II. Blessed art thou, O God, who make the outgoings of the Morning and
Evening to praise thee.

Who have not cut off my life this day, nor shut me up in the grave where all
things are forgotten.

I will not suffer therefore my eyes to sleep nor my eyelids to slumber, till I
have prepared my heart for my God to rest in.

For thou art my God from my youth, thou have numbered out my days and nights,
that I might serve thee; thou give thy beloved sleep, and make them that
fear thee to rest in safety.

Thou deliverest me from the terrors of the night, and from the evil that
walks in darkness.

Return then unto thy rest, O my soul, for God takes care for thee. Amen.

III. Lord, let me make my Prayer unto thee in an acceptable time.

Teach me to remember thee in my bed, and to think of thee when I am waking.

O thou Watchman of Isreal, that neither slumberest nor sleep, watch over me
this night.

Give thy Angels charge over me, that the spirits of darkness may not come near
me.

That no evil thoughts may betray me, nor any sad or sinful dreams disturb my
quiet.

For into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit, for thou have redeemed me.

O keep then what thou have redeemed, and let not thy servant for whom thou
have died, perish for ever.

Amen.
A short Prayer.
O GOD, my everlasting keeper, blessed be thy Name for evermore, for thou
made me when I was nothing, thou redeemedst me when I was worse than nothing;
thou have so multiplied thy mercies on me through all the minutes of my life,
that the Sun has never yet rose or set upon me, without new Blessings from
thee.

And as thou have done so much for me already, for which I pour out my very
Soul in thankfulness, so in the same degree of lowest humility, I humbly
beseech thee to continue thy care of me this night, and so to shadow me under
the Wings of thy Protection, that neither visible nor invisible Enemies,
neither sin nor danger may approach to hurt me.

That so when the joyful Light of the day shall return again, I may rise in
safety with an unspotted Soul, and a Body fitted to be the Temple of the Holy
Ghost, even so Lord Jesu,

Amen, Amen.
Is any afflicted, let him pray.
The Complaint of an afflicted Soul.
I. BEhold, O Lord, I am as a bruised reed before thee, O break it not.

I am as smoking flax, O Lord quench it not.

Send down from on high and visit me.

Save me out of many waters that are come into my Soul.

For I have been left unto thee ever since I was born.

Thou have been my God, even from my Mothers womb.

O go not then far from me, for trouble is near at hand, and there is none to
help me.

The sorrows of my heart are enlarged, O bring thou me out of all my troubles.

Thou have formerly been my succor, leave me not now, neither forsake me, O
God of my salvation.

For from the ends of the Earth will I call unto thee, when my heart is in
heaviness.

O forgive all the offenses of thy servant, which have justly brought these
bitter things upon me.

Take away at last all thy displeasure, and turn away from thy wrathful
Indignation.

Arise and help me, and deliver me for thy Mercies sake.

O God make speed to save me.

O Lord make have to help me.

II. IN the time of my trouble I will call upon thee. O God, in my heaviness I
will cry unto thee, and unto thee alone.

For whom have I in Heaven but thee, or whom shall I desire on earth in
comparison of thee?

My flesh and my heart fails me, but thou art the strength of my heart and my
portion for ever.

But how long will thou forget me, Lord, for ever?

How long will thou hide away thy face from me?

How long shall I seek counsel in my soul, and my spirit be thus troubled
within me?

In my Prosperity I said, I shall never be moved.

But as soon as thou did hide away thy face from me, I was troubled.

But will the Lord absent himself for ever? Will he be no more entreated?

Has God forgotten to be gracious, or will he shut up his loving kindness in
displeasure?

Alas, innumerable troubles are come upon me.

They have laid such hold upon me, that I am not able to look up.

There is no strength left in me, O my God, neither know I what to do, but mine
eyes are toward thee.

I am troubled above measure; help me, O God, or else I shall sink under the
burden.

O consider what thou have laid upon me; forsake me not when my strength fails
me.

But in the multitude of my sorrows that are in my heart, let thy comforts be
the refreshing of my soul.

O my God, the more weak I am, the more let thy strength be made known in my
weakness.

And suffer no temptation to seize upon me, but such as thou shall give me
grace to overcome.

O Lord hear my Prayer.

And let my cry come unto thee.

Amen, sweet Jesu, Amen, Amen.
The Prayer.
O My dear God and most merciful Father, who have not only directed, but
encouraged me in all my troubles to call upon thee; Hear, I beseech thee, the
complaints that I now make, and the Prayers which I pour forth in the anguish
and bitterness of my spirit; for thou have shown me heavy things, O God.

And in the midst of all my prosperity have been pleased to mingle a bitter Cup
for me.

What the troubles of my heart are, how heavy they lie upon me, how deeply they
wound me, I need not labor to express to thee, for all my comfort is, that
nothing is hid from thee.

For not only the Blessings which thou have poured upon me through all the
minutes and moments of my Life; but the Afflictions which I now groan under,
come from the same hand to rouse me, and awake me to a more devout and earnest
way of serving thee.

And since it is thy own work, look down with the more pity on this wounded
Soul of mine. See, O my God, how I pant and labor under the heavy scourge of
thy displeasure, a scourge which my own sins have twisted, and mine own
iniquities have drawn down upon me.

But, O my dear Father, to whom it is more easy to do all things, than for me
to ask any thing that is good.

Thou that have promised to all them that love thee, that they shall not be
tempted farther than they are able.

Give, I beseech thee, that measure of grace and patience to thy sad and
afflicted Servant; that I may not only endure what thou layest upon me, but
entirely, willingly and cheerfully submit my will to thine.

And, O thou God of Comfort and Spirit of all Consolation, be not only with me,
but with all of my Relations that mourn in secret, either for their own sins or
sufferings, or whatsoever Bitterness thou shall think fit to lay upon us.

O teach us all to look up to the hand from whence these Judgments come, to
kiss and to adore it.

And when thou have done so, let thy mercy go one step further with me, and
compose my troubled mind into such a calm, that none of my Sufferings
(whatsoever they are or may be) may either make me repine at thy Judgments, or
despair of thy mercies: but rather let all that is afflictive to me, serve only
to wean me from the World, and to draw me the nearer to thee; but because this
cannot be done without thee, O thou Preserver of the Children of Men, behold I
throw my self, and all that is dear to me, clearly and entirely into thine
arms, to do with me whatsoever shall be good in thine eyes.

And therefore amidst all the unquiet thoughts, which now trouble and disorder
me, say unto me, as thou did to thy Disciples in the Storm, Fear not, for it
is I. Or else if thou shall find it better for me, that I should find no calm
abroad in the midst of the various changes and chances of this World, let me
find it at least in my own breast and bosom, and possess my soul in patience,
whatever other storms thou shall please to raise against me, that so placed
under the shadow of thy wings, and refreshed here with the comforts of thy
Spirit, I may long earnestly for that blessed day, when all tears shall be
wiped from mine eyes, and all sorrows shall be forgotten.

Grant this, O my God, for thy Son's sake, who sits at thy right hand to
meditate for me. Grant it for thy Holy Spirit's sake, who pleads for me, and
all that love thee, with Groans that cannot be expressed. Grant it for thy own
sake, O my God, who art never more thy self, than when in the midst of Judgment
thou remembrest Mercy.

Amen. Amen. Amen.
FINIS.

