Sips of Sweetness; OR, CONSOLATION FOR Weak BELIEVERS. A Treatise,
discoursing of the Sweetness of Christ's carriage toward all his weak
Members. Particularly to such as are weak either, 1. Habitually; or 2.
Accidentally, by reason of 1. Working. 2. Sinning; or 3. Suffering.

Being the sum of certain Sermons Preached upon Isa. 40.11.

By John Durant Preacher of the Gospel in the City of Canterbury.

(...)

i.e. His fruit was sweet to my taste,

Cant. 2.3. (...)

i.e. All of him is desirable.

Cant. 5.16. London, Printed by M. S for Hanna Allen, and are to be sold at her
shop in Popes-heed Alley, 1649.

TO THE Candid and Christian READER.
THou art here presented with some Sips of Christ's, streaming through a poor
creature. If thou expect any puddle in them (as sure thou may) its by reason
of the polluted breast through which they came, for the fountain was clear.
Its our misery that pure flowings forth from Christ, become impure in their
passage through us: As the water, which in its fountain was as clear as
Crystal, becomes muddy in its course through some kennell. I wish I were
sensible enough of what a filthy kennell my heart is. Sure I am, if there be
any clearness or comfort in what is offered, its not mine, but Christ's.

It Was a rainy day in which those thoughts were brought forth. My own heart
needed some resreshing; and Christ's Spirit brought that Text to my hands, which
is treated of in this Discourse. Concerning which, I have this to say.

If thou expect strong meat, it is not here: All that I pretend to (and oh that I
may attain that!) is to give milk to babes. If free grace have dignified me
with that worthy name (Believer.) I must add to it this Epithet (weak.)
Being such I so spoke: And (as our Proverb is) I measured others corn by my
own bushel. I thought some might be as I was, and am, weak: And if thou art
strong, I have nothing to say to thee but this; Be not high minded, but fear:
Even the men in Christ, sometimes are as the children, weak. But if thou be
either habitually or accidentally weak: here is a Sip for thee, I promise no
more: Neither will thou find so much, if Christ do not undertake (which I
have desired and do) to make my promise good.

That which encouraged me to appear in Print, was this hope, that as Christ
had made this, some way, sweet in the Pulpit, so he would also make it in the
Press. Some Lambs of Christ were refreshed in the preaching of this: and that
made me hope, that some others might also be refreshed by its perusal. I must
proclaim it to the glory of free grace, that my own soul has tasted some
sweetness by what Christ gave in to me in this Treatise: And because I would
not eat my morsells alone, I was the willinger to this work of publishing.

If I might be a means to give a Sip of consolation to some weak Believer, I
have my reward in this, and encouragement to the like.

Its Christ's peculiar Prerogative (and therefore Paul and Timothy would not
pretend unto it) to have dominion over faith: It Is hard enough for any (too much
for me) to be counted helping of his peoples joy. I have always feared that
Kinglyevill, which I see swell under the throats of some; while they rather
Magisterially press things upon peoples consciences, then Ministerially help
believers comforts. To this last I have aimed, and if I obtain it not, I
confess I have missed my mark.

I have studied to be above offenses; therefore I shall not print complaints,
otherwise I might sigh and say, that I knew what David meant, when he said, his
soul was among Lions, etc. Psalm. 57.4. Some have been so weak as to deny,
others worse, to endeavor to disgrace my Ministry: But Christ (whom I bless,
who enabled me, for that he counted me faithful, putting me into the
Ministry) has sweetened my endeavors, by causing some of his sheep (who know
his voice) to own my Ministry, and vindicate me from being a stranger. Its my
humble hope, that if thou be a Lamb of Christ, thou will in this (though
through an oaten reed) hear his voice; which (if thou do) follow it.

When I shall understand, that what is now Printed, either pleases, or profits
any poor believing soul, I shall be encouraged to publish something besides, of
the like nature to this, viz. The sweetness of Christ's carriage to believers
under temptations: And also the tenderness of his heart toward believers,
with reference to their ignorance, unbeleefe, and inability to act.

At present I have done, when I have entreated thee (Reader) to pray for me,
that I may find grace to be faithful, and wisdom to be skillful in feeding
the Lambs of Christ, the flock of God, over which the Holy Ghost has made me
overseer; That in the day of my Masters coming, I may be able to give up my
account with comfort.

If thou in this be my Remembrancer to the Throne of Grace, thou will do an
office of charity for, and lay an obligation of service upon him, who is,

Reader, The meanest of the Servants of Christ. John Durant.

Sips of Sweetness; OR, Consolation for weak BELIEVERS.
SECT. I. Declaring Christ's sweet carriage to all his weak members.
Isaiah 40.11. He shall feed his flock like a shepherd; he shall gather the
Lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom; he shall gently lead those
that are with young.


CHAP. I. The Introduction to the Text, with the drift and scope of the words.
IT has still been the design of the Enemy of our salvation, Satan; to keep
souls from closing with the Author and Captain of our salvation, Heb. 2.10.
(...).
Jesus Christ. Now for the advancement of this his design, Ephesians. 6.11. (...).
he does still endeavor (amongst other his wiles) to raise and nourish in the
hearts and minds of poor souls very hard thoughts of Jesus Christ. If Satan
cannot keep souls in his slavery (as he does the Indians) by representing
himself to them as terrible, he will (if possible) keep them from entering into
Christ's service, by persuading them that he is not merciful. Indeed it is the
Devils maine design, to detain a poor soul always under his own yoke; and
to this end he would feign delude the soul, by making it believe it is all
golden; but if he miss in this, his next method is to dissuade the soul from
taking up Christ's yoke; and therefore he endeavors to deceive, by pressing the
soul that it is all iron: and if a soul desert him, and will serve Christ, he
must look (so the Serpent insinuates) to meet with hard employment, and a harsh
Master, in whose service he must expect many sorrows, but few joys, great
work, and little wages

But in all this Satan acts like himself, a liar, and speaks of himself,
lies. For surely never did poor soul give up its name (and with that its heart)
to the service of Jesus Christ, but found both in the Master and the service
incomparable sweetness. 'Twas but a slanderous, and slender excuse of him in
the Parable, Luke 19.22. (...).
that said he knew Christ was an austere master. The faithful servants found
Christ's bounty, fully confuting that slander. Indeed Christ is a Lion, and so
knows how to be angry, and tear in pieces such as forget him and themselves,
and forsake their own mercies, by harkening to lying vanities, preferring
Satan's slavery, before his service. But Jesus is also a Lamb (and so fitted to
be kind) and he knows how to follow such poor souls with embraces of love,
as love themselves by loving him; and cleaving to him forsake all things else.
True it is, Christ is great, and if sinners stubbornly stand out, they shall
feel that he is severe; but with all he is good: and if souls sincerely come
to him, they shall taste that he is sweet. Indeed the Lord Jesus is a flame of
fire to consume those that obstinately refuse to hearken to the Gospel: but
withal he is a sea of love to comfort all those that cordially obey it, by
taking him. However Goats out of his fold shall find him dreadful; poor
Lambs within the fold both do, and shall find him merciful. This is that
which this great Prophet in this place prophesies concerning Jesus Christ.
Where speaking of Christ's carriage toward all his members, he says that,
before time, which believers seal to in time. viz. That never did any soul,
which received Christ as tendered in the Gospel, miscarry either through want or
weakness: For Christ still fed and carried it, etc. This I conceive to be the
scope of this Prophetical speech concerning Christ: namely, that his carriage
should be full of sweetness toward all his members, especially such of them
as are weaker then the rest.

CHAP. II. The Context, with the Division of the words and the Doctrines
arising from them.
IN the beginning of the Chapter, the Prophet brings in God, commanding to
preach comfort to his people. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people says your God.
The coherence and dependence of the Text.
Its Gods mercy that he has provided; and Ministers duty they should preach
comfort to the godly.

Being commanded to preach comfortably, he brings in the Baptist, ushering in
of Christ, v. 3. If comfort be to be preached, Christ is to be the Text.

Speaking of Christ he presents him coming with a strong hand, v. 10. Indeed
such a Savior does the soul need, who has a strong hand able to rescue the
poor Lamb, out of the mouth of the devouring Lion. And that Christ might be
seen to be a suitable and sweet Savior, the Prophet adds; that as he was
powerful, and so able to rescue the poor sinner: in like manner he was
merciful, and so willing to feed the soul when it hungered, and to gather it
in case it wandered, and in case of weakness, to carry it in his bosom. So
that in these words Christ is held out, under the similitude of a Shepherd,
carrying himself in all things, as a Faithful and merciful shepherd to poor
souls. In general it is said he should feed his flock; and answerable to
particular necessity of the weak of the flock, he is also particularly
described to be careful: As in case the soul wander, (as sometimes the best
sheep do) It is said, he shall gather it, the word is, (...) which signifies a
careful gathering, and therefore so used, Genesis 41.48. Joseph was not more
careful in gathering up the food of the seven years, then Jesus is in
gathering wandering believers. And in case of weakness (as Lambs will be)
Christ is said to carry them; the word is, (...) from (...) which is not only
to carry, but to take up, (as supposing they may be fallen) and carry. And
lastly, in case of breeding, or being with young. It is prophesied of Christ,
that he would lead them. Yea and that all these acts of Christ might be set out
in their full sweetness; every one of them is hightened by its manner of
performance. He will gather the wandering with his arm, and carry the weakling
in his bosom, and lead the breeding gently in his hand, for so the word (...)
signifies, as I shall show hereafter. So that now the words holding out,
Christ's sweet carriage toward his members, do easily divide themselves into
these particulars.

1. The General carriage of Christ toward all his, he shall feed them.
Division of the words.
2. The special carriage of Christ toward the weak; held out in the 1.
Substance, which (as the golden apples) is set down in three particulars. 1.
For the wanderers; he will gather them. 2. For the weak ones, the Lambs, he
will carry them. And 3. For the Ewes (as I may so say) he will lead them.
2. Circumstance, which sets out the golden apples in pictures of silver. He
will do all these in a sweet and safe way gather with his arm, carry in his
bosom, and lead ( Jacob-like) very gently, those that are with young.

I might observe diverse Doctrines from these words; As,

1. Jesus Christ is the great Shepherd of the souls of all Gods Elect. 1 Pet.
2.25. (...).
2. As God the Father has made Christ chief Shepherd of our souls; so be did,
does, and will discharge his trust carefully, faithfully, and tenderly. 3.
There are diversities of forms in Christ's fold: some are Lambs, weak; some
Ewes, big with young. 4. Jesus Christ carries himself in a suitable way to
all the souls that be in his flock.
These, and many such I might note, but I pass them as not aiming at any thing
in this Discourse from this place, but only the carriage of Christ, as it is
described with reference to his weak ones

CHAP. III. The maine Doctrine propounded and opened.
THe chief thing which I aim at, being the comfort of weak Saints, in
observing the carriage of Christ toward such: I shall hold it out in this
Doctrine.

Jesus Christ carries himself very weetly, and tenderly, The Doctrine.
as toward all his members, so toward his weak members especially: Or,

Christ's carriage, is specially sweet and tender, toward every poor, weak
believer.

I suppose it lies fully and clear in this place, as I shall show hereafter.
For the opening of this Doctrine, Explication.
it being a Theological Proposition; I shall first explain the subject, and
then the predicate thereof.

1. The subject of the Doctrine, and discourse, is the carriage of Christ. What
Christ's carriage is
And this is nothing else, but the way, or manner of Christ's manifesting of
himself through sundry, and various dispensations toward the souls of his.

2. The predicate, or the thing which we affirm of this demeanor of Christ,
is, that it is sweet and tender; now although the full meaning o^ these words,
as they relate to Christ carriage, cannot be sufficiently ^^pressed (which is
its glory) yet I shall offer what I intend in two steps.

1. Negatively, Christ does not carry himself in harsh, sour, severe manner,
(...) some do: Indeed the wicked servan^ said, that be, Christ, was an auste^^
man (the Syriac signifies a hard man.) But however he said; those that have
tasted Christ's carriage, can confut^ this slander. None of his have any just
ground to complain of Christ, as he in the Poet of a self-conceited
servant-despising-Master. Aristophanes, (...).
Howeve^ Nabals carriage gave just occasion to his servants complaint, that he
wa^ such a son of Belial, that they kne^ not how to speak to him, as it is, 1 Samuel 25.17. Christ's carriage was never such He forbids his under-shepherds
sever^-lording over his flock, and he (who is the chief Shepherd) abhors
that, (...). 1 Pet. 5.3.
which he forbad them. Believe it, (Christian) Christ's carriage was not, is
not crabbed.

2. Positively. Jesus Christ demeanes himself softly, sweetly toward his. In
every manifestation he discovers himself meek, and mild. He speaks so, as
if his design were (as it is) to tie the hearts of hearers to his lips with
silken threads (as it is phancied of the French- Hercules) he acts so, as one
that makes good Platoes counsel, i.e. to tie his servants by love-necessities
to his service. (...).
In this Titus (if the Historian do not hyperbolize) was a type of Christ, who
carried himself so, as that none ever went sad from him. As he came to
Jerusalem meekly, so he carries himself toward his members still; Love is his
name, and love is with him; it is his nature, as well as his name. This all the
members of Christ can seal to, as a sure experienced truth; but especially
such of them, as are, or have been weak. And this I am to prove. Proof of the
Doctrine.
All the servants of Christ can witness for their Master. All his Epithites
speak him sweet. Lamb is a name of love. Husbands carriages are (or should be)
sweet, and tender. However they (as men) may forget themselves. Christ (as God)
is unchangeable. He bore his people of old, Exodus 19.4.
as on Eagles wings. And of late, and still, in his own arms. Indeed he
commanded the Angels, Psalm. 81.11 12.
to bear his people in their arms, but (as if they were not soft enough) he
takes them into his own. He bare their sins on his back, and their souls in
his bosom. If the soul walk abroad, Christ walks with it, and carries
himself kind. All the way shall be paved with love under their feet, Cant.
3.10
that it may be soft; and over their head he will spread a banner of love,
Cant. 2.4.
that they may be safe: If the soul be sick, and must lie down, he will make
the bed, Psalm. 40.1.
and sit by; and that he may show himself tender and sweet, he will put one
hand over, and the other hand under. Cant. 2.6.
But what need I hold up a candle to let you see the Sun. God the Father
undertook for him, He should not cry, Isa. 42.2.3.
nor lift up, etc. i.e. (not to exclude other senses) he should not be lofty
and majesticall, but lowly, meek, and merciful. Bruised reeds, and smoking
flaxes i.e. weak and feeble souls, should not be broken, nor quenched by him,
i.e. they should tenderly, and gently be dealt withal; in a sweet way
(answerable to their weak condition) should they find his carriage. Search
(soul) the Annals of his life: See, did not all his actings toward weak ones,
speak love? Inquire of those with whom he did converse? this will testify to
this truth concerning his carriage; that he was indeed very tender, and sweet
to all, but especially so, to such souls as were feeble. All the flock, but
especially the weak of the flock, found him a surpassing careful, kind
Shepherd, in all his carriage.

CHAP. IV. A more full explication of the point, and a general demonstration
of the truth thereof.
BEcause the Text chiefly (in my eye) carries out the sweetness of Christ
toward weak believers; and as I said, this was my sole design in the
discourse to hold out comfort for such (as being indeed most suitable to my
own state) I shall therefore more amply open the point, The point amplified.
and illustrate it in three particulars, viz. by showing.

1. Who these weak ones are. 2. Wherein the sweetness and tenderness of
Christ's carriage to them does appear. 3. Why Christ does carry himself in
such a way, especially toward them.
Who are weak.
First, that it may be known who these weak believers are (with reference to
whom this Tract is chiefly pend) you may be pleased thus to distinguish of
weak believers.

1. Some there are, who are habitually weak. 2. Others there are accidentally
weak.
Habitually weak.
Of those that are habitually weak; I shall speak under this first general
Doctrine and speak to the other, particularly by themselves, and that also, out
of this Text.

Now I call such souls habitually weak, who by reason of their age in Christ,
or the form and rank in his School, have not attained to any great strength
in Christ, or any full measure of the graces of the Spirit. In whom, the life,
and habits of grace (which I humbly conceive might in more apt phrase be called
the breathings, or fruits of the Spirit) are but yet, in a low, feeble, scanty
measure, or degree. And these I suppose may be reduced to two heads, for
illustrations sake.

1. Beginners, or under-graduates in Christ's School: Grace at first being but
little (and therefore compared to the least of grains, mustard seed.) And
Saints at first being but feeble (and in that respect likened to the feeblest
of creatures, Lambs.) These are the first rank of weak persons, whom I call
beginners (who yet are in a capacity of more strength, as they prove in time,
proficients in the School of Christ; but) for present are but weak, as all
beginners are.

2. Babes in Christ's house, (called in the Text, Lambs in Christ's fold) such as
were so a long time, as those 1 Cor. 3.1. Or always, as some are, 1 John
2.12.13. for it is in Christ's house, as in yours, many that are borne there,
Psalm. 87.5. (...)
live not beyond the age of babes and children, but dye (as it were) in their
infancy; who albeit they attain to the measure appointed them, yet they come
not up to the measure of a full age in Christ, (...)
as the word signifies, Ephesians. 4.13. But as babes dye; having indeed the truth of
life, and the divine nature; and so the breathings, or fruits of the Spirit;
yet (infant-like) in a very feeble degree, all their days.

Under these heads, I think all may not unfitly be considered, whom I call
habitually weak, to distinguish them from others, who are accidentally so: of
which hereafter.

Now both these ranks are weak in a threefold respect.

First, in respect of life; in whom indeed the Spirit breaths but faintly, Some
weak in respect of life.
whose pulse beats but feebly, whose heart pants but weakly, in whom the very
principles of Religion are laid, indeed sure (being upon the foundation Christ)
but yet the practice of Religion (which is as the superstructure of that
foundation) is not high, nor sublime, whose souls are alive, but whose actions
are not lively; who pray, and read, and hear, etc. from a true internal
principle, or power of spiritual life; but yet so, as it plainly appears to
them (yea and to others) that they are rather the pantings, lispings, essays
of beginners, and babes, then the performances of Graduates, and men in Christ
Jesus.

Secondly, in respect of light; for there is not in every believer the same
knowledge, Some there be, who are weak, in respect of knowledge.
i.e. not the same measure of knowledge, 1 Cor. 8.7. Indeed the Sun of
wisdom (Christ the wisdom of God) shines in them, but through many clouds,
very dimly. In them there is the knowledge of the Alphabet, that Christ is the
first letter, Alpha, and the last, Omega. They understand the rudiments of
Religion, and some maine axioms, or conclusions, they are able to read and
hear, to interpret, and understand some plain, and necessary places, and
truths; but yet so, as that they can rather apprehend, then hold out divine
truths, and can better dye, then dispute for Christ, so as that they are still
rather lovers of knowledge, then masters; (...)
whom you may call learners, but not learned, and to whom the life of the
Gospel is come, but not in a measure stretched out (that I may elude to that
Psalm. 19. (...)
and 2 Cor. 10.13, 14. and Romans 10.18.) souls who in truth are scholars, (...)
but not Doctors in Christ's school, Heb. 5.12.
who know rather how to learn themselves, then how to teach others.

Thirdly, Some souls weak in faith. (...)
in respect of faith; for there are some true believers, and yet weak in
faith, Romans 14.1. Indeed they do receive Christ, and free grace, but it is with
a shaking hand. They have (as Divines say) the faith of adherence, they will
stick to Christ as theirs; but they want the faith of evidence, they cannot
see themselves as his. They are believers, (...) Mat. 16.8.
but of little faith. They will trust, though he kill them: But they do not
know fully that he will save them. They hope that Christ will not cast them
off, but are not sure that he will take them up. They would believe that Christ
will not reject them, because he commands others to receive them, Romans 14.1.
but cannot conclude that Christ will embrace them. Believers you may call them,
and indeed they are Abraham's children, but yet they are but Babes, not (as
their Father was, strong in faith, Romans 4.20. Indeed Abraham (their father) was
not, (but they as children) are weak in faith as it is, Romans 4.19.

Thus you see the first thing, who they are that I call weak members of Jesus
Christ.

For the second head: wherein does the carriage of Christ appear to be sweet,
Demonstrations of the truth of the Doctrine from the Text.
and tender toward these. I shall (if God will) in a particular Tract show it,
with reference to each of these sorts, by declaring that Christ [is] sweet, and
[how] to those whose life, and light, and faith, is but weak and little; only
from this Text, I shall hold it out in a general way, how Christ's carriage, is
tender toward all these, and such as are thus, for (at least) distinctions
sake, habitually weak; whom the Prophet calls his Lambs in this place.

Now this appears from the Text in two things.

1. He will gather them, and that with his arm. 2. He will carry them, and
that in his bosom.
First, Christ carries himself very tenderly toward his weak Lambs, is that
he will gather them. Lambs, all the flock are but weak, and so apt to wander,
if not looked to. Now Christ he will gather, and that with much care (for so
the word signifies) his poor weak members, that are apt to wander. Christ,
thou (poor weakling) will carefully look to thee. That thou may not wander
(at least too far) he will make bare, and stretch out his arm to gather thee.
The poor soul says I am weak: which is worse; I am wicked; I have a
straggling heart. I shall go astray like a lost sheep; Psalm. 119.176.
will Christ seek me? Yes poor soul, he has a tender heart, and he will
seek thee carefully, and he has a long arm. He will gather thee surely. Thou
do not forget him (as David intimates) and he does not forget thee, nor
himself. He is thy soul-shepherd, he will therefore gather thee; O thou
weakling of his flock!

Secondly, Christ's carriage is very tender, for he will carry those that cannot
go. The weak Lamb lies down, it cannot go; the Shepherd takes it up, and
bears it. The weak believer cannot walk with Christ: Now Christ will stoop
down, and take it up, and carry it, so the word signifies. Oh, says the weak
soul, I would follow Christ, but I cannot; I would, walk with him hand in
hand, but I am weak. Well believer, thou art weak, and Christ is kind; thou
lie along, and he will take thee up. Thou can not go, he will carry thee.
Oh but how! will he put me on his back, expose me to wind and weather? No
poor soul, he will carry thee in his bosom, and keep thee warm and safe
there; True, he will lay thy sins upon his back, and bear all the lashes of
his Fathers wrath for thy wickedness; but he will carry thy soul (O believer)
in his bosom, and cherish thee there with the warmth of his love, because of
thy weakness.

Dear soul! I hint things but briefly, that I be not burden some; read the
Prophet, think of what is said; tell me, does not Christ carry himself
tenderly, and sweetly, toward weak believers, in gathering them with his arm,
and carrying them in his bosom.

CHAP. V. Six particulars further setting out Christ's tender carriage toward
his weak members.
HAving in a general way hinted the sweetness of Christ's carriage toward his
weak members, as it is held out in this Text by the Prophet; I shall now
endeavor, in a more particular manner, to acquaint you how sweetly and
tenderly Christ carries himself to weak believers; and,

1. The sweetness of Christ's carriage appears in this, that he is ready to
entertain any poor soul (though never so weak) that comes unto him. He
stands with open arms, yea and heart also, to give those, sweet embraces, that
desire to embrace him. He proclaims it, (...) Joh. 6.37.
that he would not cast off, or out in any wise, any that come to him. Though
the approaches of the soul to him be in much weakness, yet he accepts of the
approach, and embraces the soul with much tenderness. Never did any that came
to him, find him harsh. If their coming were but sincere, his entertainment
was always sweet. Thou poor soul! who have a desire to come to Christ, because
thou see thou shall perish without him; and yet do doubt whether thou shall
be entertained by Christ, because thou find thy self (as thou think)
unfitting for him: why, go and try; Taste and thou shall see, that Christ is
sweet and tender; he will not cast thee off, if thou will come to him. His
invitation is general, If any thirst let him come to me, and (not doubt, Mark.
10.46, 48, 49.
but) drink. Ask blind Bartemeus, who sat by the high way begging, when
Christ went by; and he will tell thee, though men were harsh, and bid him hold
his peace, and would not let him cry to Christ; yet Jesus was sweet, and not
only let him cry, but bid him come to him. Thou weak believer, that say I
would go to Christ, but I doubt whether he will embrace me being blind: Arise
and go, and thou shall find the Lord Jesus, tender, and ready to entertain
thee sweetly, yea and so far, from rejecting thee, for thy blindness, that he
will receive thee to give thee sight. One would have thought that if ever
Christ would reject any, he would have surely rejected Nicodemus, Joh. 3.
who was so weak as being either afraid or ashamed (or both) to own Christ in
the day, he comes to him in the night. What might (as one would think) Christ
have said, Nicodemus is thy desire after me so faint, as that thou fear to
come to me in the day time? or am I so unworthy, as I am not to be owned but
out of sight? Have thou either so low an esteem of me? or bear thou so
little love to me, as that thou come thus now in the night? Go, return as
thou came, I will not accept thee in the dark, who would not acknowledge me
in the light. I will not entertain thee in the night, who would not embrace
me in the day. No, No, Christ has not a syllable of these sad sayings. But
presently (knowing him to be but a beginner in spiritual, though a Dr. in
literal Israel) he entertaines him, embraces him, instructs him; gives him
leave to reply to what he spoke: bears with all the ignorance, and absurdities
that were in his questions; stoops low to his capacity, that he might lift him
high in Spirit: And in all things carries himself as a sweet tenderhearted
shepherd, to a poor, weak faint hearted Lamb.

Secondly, The carriage of Christ is discovered to be tenderly sweet to weak
believers, in that he cherishes and preserves those little buddings of grace
that are in them. Oh! says the weak believer, my fire is so little (such a
little spark in so many ashes) that I fear 'twill out. My candle gives so
little light (and burns so weakly in such mighty winds,) that I doubt I shall
be in the dark: my pulse beats so faintly (there is such little vital
strength under so many mortal sins) that I think I shall ere long give up
the ghost, and dye. But stay weak souls! why say ye thus? Christ is sweet and
tender; what he has begun, he will preserve. Thy spark of fire shall not be
extinguished, thy dim light shall not be blown out; thy weak life shall not
decay. No, No, Christ will preserve, maintain, cherish these true (though
weak) beginnings of grace that are in thee. 'Twas the Priests office to keep
the fire in the Sanctuary from going out. And it is Christ's work to do the
same in thy soul. Christ is this Priest, and that spiritual spark of fire,
which God from above has laid upon thy heart (the altar) in the Sanctuary of
thy soul, he will look to, that it go not out. Though thou be fearful,
remember Christ is faithful; he will be tender of thee, and thou shall find
his carriage sweet, in cherishing those weak graces that are in thee. Mary's
faith was very feeble; and when she was secking sorrowfully her Lord in the
garden, Joh. 20.
her faith was like to fire that is going out; yet she seems to doubt whether
Christ were God, and able to raise himself, and speaks as if he were but Man,
Ver. 13.
and that some had stolen him away. Sir (says she) if thou have borne him
hence (as if Christ could not go without carrying) tell me where thou have
laid him, Ver. 15.
and I will take him away (as if she were stronger then he;) Mary's faith you
see is weak: surely this spark will out, if not presently blown: why mark
now, Christ discovers himself to be sweet and tender; and therefore that he
might cherish her faith in him, he speaks to her, Mary. The like carriage you
see in Luke 24. toward those weak Disciples, who discourse doubtingly
concerning his Deity, Luke 24.
and begin to speak, as if they questioned, whether he were the Messiah, the
Redeemer, yea or no. Their faith began to flag (said they) ver. 19. We trusted
it had been he, that should have redeemed Israel; and besides all this, to day
is the third day since these things ver. 20. were done. Weak hearts; three
days delay makes them distrust; surely their faith is almost out. But mark,
how sweetly Christ speaks (indeed ver. 25. he checks their doubting, as
arguing folly; and though their heart was sincere, See v. 26, 27.
he intimates 'twas but slow to believe, etc. yet) he cherishes and preserves
their faith from dying; and carries himself very tenderly in arguing from
Moses and the Prophets, to keep their faith alive. That place in the Prophet
discovers Christ as sweetly careful to preserve the least buds of grace in
his, Esa. 65.8. Thus says the Lord, as the new wine is found in the cluster,
as one says, destroy it not, for a blessing is in it, so will I do for my
servants sake. Calvin in locum.
How ever some seem to carry the meaning of this place, as if it related to
Gods sparing and preserving the righteous, while he is punishing the wicked;
yet I think, we are rather to understand it, as relating to the tenderness of
Gods carriage, for Christ's sake, to elect Israel. God found them indeed weak.
Rather as having wine in them potentially, then as being wine actually, as the
wine in the cluster, i.e. they had some few faint buddings of grace: And Christ
said (for he was that One) Do not destroy it Father, there is a blessing in
it; though it be but yet weak, 'twill in time be strong: cherish it, preserve
it, there is a blessing in it. You see Christ is very tender over his weak
members. He is careful to preserve their blossoms, their buds. Take us the
foxes, the little foxes that spoil the vines, Cant. 2.15.
for the vines have tender grapes, Cant. 2.15. Christ will have a tender care
of cherishing the tender graces, that he sees in weak believers.

But thirdly, Christ discovers a sweet carriage not only in preserving the
weak beginnings of grace, in the hearts of believers, but also in strengthening
their weakness every day. Its note-worthy, that Christ does not only not
break the bruised reeds, nor quench the smoking flaxes, i.e. cherish the
faint graces which are in feeble Saints, but he strengthens and increases them.
He makes an augmentation, brings forth judgment unto truth, Esa. 42.3. The
meaning is says (Dr. Sibs sweetly) That the gracious frame of holiness, set
up in our hearts by the Spirit of Christ, shall go forward, or increase, till
all contrary power be brought down. My feet (says the poor soul) are so
feeble, that I am ready to stumble at every straw. Sure, I shall never be able
to stride over a log, to go over a mountain. Doubt not, O thou of little
faith. Christ will carry himself tender toward thee; and though thy feet be
now weak as Lambs feet, that thou art scarce able to go over a molehill,
without sliding, he will make them strong as Hindes feet, that thou shall be
able (ere long) to leap over a mountain. He makes my feet like hindes feet,
says David, Psalm. 18.33. Christ is very careful to carry on the soul from
strength to strength, Psalm. 84.7. He therefore gave some Apostles, some
Prophets, etc. that they might be for the perfecting of the Saints; that weak
believers who are but Infants, may grow stronger and stronger, till they come
to men's age, as it is Ephesians. 4.13. Ah says the poor soul, my light is but
little; will it ere be bright. It Is but as the dawning of the day. I think the
day of grace is risen in my soul, but it is but glimmering as the early morn,
will it ere shine gloriously? shall it ever be noone? shall it be in my bosom
as the Sun in the meridian? will it ever rise so high? Yes poor soul; stay
a little, and it will be lighter. The path of the righteous is as the shining
light, and shines more and more to the perfect day, Prove. 4.28. Christ will
make it day and a perfect day in thy heart; though it be morning now, and but
even Sun rising. Oh how sweet is Christ's carriage to his weak members! that
thus he strengthens their weak graces every day. He will cherish thee O
believing babe, till thou grow bigger, in his bosom.

Fourthly, weak believers have found Christ's carriage very sweet, in that he
has borne with those many infirmities which he has found in them. Weak souls
are apt to slip, and Christ sweetly smiles, notwithstanding those slips. Lambs
are feeble, and sometimes they fall, but the shepherd passes it by. Christ
rather pities his members for their weakness, then casts them off. Peter was
weak in refusing Christ's tender of washing. Joh. 13.
But Christ was sweet; Ver. 7.
he knew Peter was rather ignorant then obstinate. Christ tells him (and in
that excuses his weakness) that he did not know what his intention was in
that action; What I do thou do not know, and therefore though Peter carried
himself weakly, in refusing the washing; yet Christ carried himself sweetly,
and passing by that weakness, comes and washes his feet. Cant. 1, 2.3.
'Twas an infirmity of largest allowance in the Spouse, to put off Christ with
such a poor excuse after he stood so long waiting, I have put off my coat.
Childish, as if she could not put it on again: And because she could not rise
to let him in; Christ must go away in the morning, though he had stood knocking
all night. Yet Christ bears all. And (though the Spouse might fear, he would
take the business so heinous as never more to come to her house) he came
again afterward. Indeed he permitted some lordly watchmen to whip her for her
lazy weakness. (and it was kindness thus to fetch it out) But carried
himself tender still, Chap. 6.2, 3.
and admitted her into his garden sweetly, albeit she kept him out of her house
sluggishly. Surely Peter, and James, and John failed much, to sleep while
their Lord sorrowed; and not to regard his sorrow, though he chose them out (as
it were) on purpose, to watch with him. Indeed, Christ sighs to see them so
weak, as not to be able to watch with him one hour; yet he carries himself
sweet, and instead of chiding their unwatchfulnesse, he excuses their
weakness. Mat. 26.41
The spirit is willing, says he, but the flesh is weak. Our children
sometimes do faults, break glasses, etc. but we say, alas poor hearts, 'twas
their weakness. Christ's children are as weak as ours; only he is kinder to
his, then we can be to ours. He bears with more infirmities, and passes by
more faults then we do or can. Poor Thomas is very weak, he will not believe
except he may open Christ's wounds afresh, and put his fingers in the print of
the nails. Christ is very sweet, bears with all this, and is willing to have
his wounds opened afresh, to help Thomas his faith; Joh. 20.
surely Thomas saw Christ's heart through his wounds; I will put in my fingers,
says Thomas, or else I will not believe, v. 25. Ah poor weak soul! come and
thrust them into my side (says Christ:) Oh tender Savior! V. 27.
surely Christ will punish me (says the poor soul) I am so wicked. No,
Christ (poor heart) will pity thee, because thou art so weak. Ah Lord! how
many frailties, infirmities, nay inormities do thou pass by in thy poor
weak Lambs? verily thou carriest thy self like a tender, loving, sweet
shepherd toward us.

Fifthly, Its easy to discover in Christ's carriage, much sweetness and
tenderness to weak believers, in that he puts them upon no duties above their
ability. As he will not permit them to be tempted above their ability, 1 Cor.
10.13. so neither does he put them upon any business which is above their
power. Though Christ has many works, about which he will put his members, yet
he will tarry till they are able for them. I have many things to say unto you,
but ye cannot bear them now, Jo. 16.12. Because they were not able to bear,
Christ was not willing to speak. Alas, I see great works to be done, hard
lessons to be learned; sure I shall never be able to do that one, or learn the
other, says the weak soul, at least, not yet; for I am but a babe, very
weak: why, Christ is content to stay till thou shall be stronger. As yet thou
art unable, and as yet he is unwilling. Fasting, it was a weighty work; and
Christ's disciples were as yet but weak: He therefore forbears them, and puts
them not upon it. And when some wondered (who indeed knew not the weight of the
work) that Christ's disciples safted not at all, Luke 5.33.
when Jesus did often, Christ excuses his disciples, and by two parables
apologizeth for them; and the drift of both is this, the work was as yet too
high for them; they were weak, and that was weighty. Its worth noting, Christ
would not have the Apostles go from Jerusalem, till they had received power
from on high. He would not leave them while (at least comparatively) low, to go
about a work which was superlatively high, i. e. Apostolical. Never trouble
thy self poor soul! about this or that work, which is too high for thee,
above thy power, thy ability, if thou can clear that sincerely, Christ will
carry himself sweetly, never call thee to it, never put thee on it.

Sixthly, Its apparent enough, and one that runs may read sweetness, and
tenderness, in the carriage of Christ toward his weak members, in that be
kindly accepts of what they do in his service, though accompanied with many
failings. What the poor soul does sincerely, that the precious Savior takes
sweetly; and though it be done but ill, yet he accepts it well. Christ
remembers himself, if he gave the soul but two talents, and he looks not for
ten. And Christ considers the poor soul, that it has not much; and therefore
he is pleased with a little. The poor creature works but bunglingly, and
Christ accounts the work brave; he accepts the prayer, though imperfact; and
yet that the Father may look upon it as perfect, he mingles his incense with
our prayers, Apoc. 8.3.
and so imperfect prayers from us are put up perfect by Christ to the Father.
The weak child cannot speak articulately, and yet the indulgent mother
accepts, with much love, its poor prattle; so does Christ: (...)
Let me hear thy voice (says he) for it is sweet, Cant. 2.14. the word
signifies any sound, such as bruits or birds make. Christ accounts stammerings
as sweet: Meih, Meih, says the little one, and the mother accounts it music.
The poor soul, many a time, at best, and most, when it comes to pray can but
sigh; and the Lord Christ takes it as a sweet song, and is pleased with it. Our
drink offerings have much water in them, and but little wine, and Christ
accepts of the little wine, though mingled with much water. Some think there
were many failings in the woman's obtruding of her self into the Pharisees
house, Luke 8.37.
and troubling Christ while he sat at meat. However Christ saw much love in
the action, and not only passes by, but excuses the woman's seeming failings,
Luke 7.37. Woe be to me says the poor soul! my gold is mixed with much
dross! my righteousness, with much unrighteousness; surely Christ will
reject all, and me too. No, Christ is kind, and albeit thou carriest thy
self, in thy choicest performances very weakly; yet he will carry himself,
even toward thy failings, very sweetly; and will accept of that which thou
do kindly, although done in much infirmity. Ah could I but work neater, pray
better, sing, read etc. better, I could think Christ would accept. But alas! I
do all that I do so badly, and every prayer, etc. is mixed with so many
infirmities, that I fear if Christ do not cast them back with anger into my
face, yet sure be will not take them up with love into his hand. I were
therefore as good sit still, and do nothing. Say not thus, O weak creature!
up and be doing. Carry thy self but with sincerity, and thou shall find that
Christ will carry himself sweetly; and accept of little actings with great
love, and be pleased with thy performances, though accompanied with many
infirmities.

CHAP. VI. Containing some reasons of the point.
HAving showed some particulars in which Christ's carriage appears sweet and
tender toward weak believers. I shall now give some reasons why Christ carries
himself thus to them.

First, God the Father who did appoint him to be a shepherd, did also appoint
him to be sweet. 'Twas the Fathers will that Christ should take the care of his
flock, and that he should manage the care with much tenderness, especially
toward the Lambs. Look as Christ, though he had a singular care of all the
flock (and therefore bid Peter feed them all) yet he had a special care of the
weak of the flock, i. e. Lambs, and therefore especially he commanded Peter
to have a care of them; and as ever he would declare his love to himselse, Joh.
21.
he should be tender over the Lambs, and be sure to feed them (which might be
another instance of the special care and tenderness of Christ to weak
believers.) In like manner God the Father, when he gave Christ his commission,
in which he committed the whole flock of the Elect to his care, did put in as
it were a singular clause, that he should be very tender of, and very indulgent
toward the weak of the flock. I look upon the Text not only as a Prophecy
of the carriage of Christ, what it would be, but also as the commission of
Christ, wherein the Father gives him (as it were) instructions what his
carriage should be toward the Lambs, i.e. the weak souls of the Saints. It
may not be passed by slightly, that the tender carriage of Christ toward
bruised reeds, and smoking flaxes, is built upon this, that he was Gods
servant, as it were for that purpose sent by God, Esa. 42.1. Christ's sweetness
to weak believers, is his service to his Fathers appointment. God the Father
did appoint Jesus Christ to this carriage, when he gave him his commission. The
Spirit of the Lord is upon me, and he has anointed me to preach good tidings
to the meek, Esa. 61.1.
he has sent me to bind up the broken in heart. The Father charged Christ in
special to carry himself kindly toward them. Indeed the great thing (next to
the sweetness of his own nature, which set him on to undertake the office)
that moves Christ, either to take freely any poor soul into his care; or to
demean himself sweetly in his carriage toward it, Joh. 6.38.
is his Fathers will, which he came to fulfill, Joh. 6.38. Now it was the
Fathers will that Christ should be very tender in his carriage toward the weak.

Secondly, The very weakness of believers, works a tenderness in Christ's
bowels, which he cannot but express in his behavior. Weakness, is a word in
it self speaking for tenderness. And a sweet disposition (such as Christ's is)
needs no other Oratory to move pity, but necessity. Jesus Christ knows how to
hear the cry of the souls of his. Exodus 3.7.
Affliction has a cry that can be heard as high as heaven. Thou weak believer
thy secret sighs come up shrilly to thy Savior. If thy bosom breath, Christ's
bowels hear. And the very weakness that is in thee is argument enough with
him (such is his sweetness) to declare himself very pitiful, and tender
toward thee, in his carriage. The head takes care of the whole body, and every
member in particular; but especially of the weak; and that, because such;
Believers! 1 Cor. 12.27.
Christ is the head of his body, and ye are members (yea ye weak little ones)
in particular: And doubtless the bead, because wise, will have a tender care
of the toes, because weak. I fear I shall break says the weak soul;
surely if Christ be not the kinder to me, I shall dye; my spirit will fail
very soon, if his carriage be not very sweet. Christ knows thy fear, O thou
feeble soul! and it is his fear too. His language seems to be such. Esa. 57.17.
The spirit would fail before me, and the souls which I have made. Adam
marred thee poor soul, Christ made thee; and surely he will not suffer his
work to fall, which would, if thy spirit should fail. We let our bigger boys
run by themselves, while we lead our little ones in our hands, and show much
tenderness to them; and this we do, because our least is the weakest. Christ
is that, and more then that (in point of under carriage) to his children, that
we are to ours. Surely if we who are evil, know how to be tender in our
carriage toward our weak children: How much more does Christ (who is the
everlasting, yea and ever-loving Father) know how to express much sweetness
and tenderness in his carriage toward his children, and that upon this very
ground, their weakness.

Thirdly, Christ will carry himself thus, that his carriage may be convincing.
Evil men have hard thoughts of Jesus Christ, and sometimes they speak as they
think. Wretches think that Christ is like them, because they want bowels,
they conclude that Christ wants too. Their bowels are brass, and they will
not believe that Christ's are better. Now Christ's sweet carriage toward weak
believers, confutes all this, and might convince, that his nature is as his
name, love: (weak (believers) Christ will make you his witnesses. And that you
may testify his carriage to be sweet to all his servants, he will be sweet to
you who can do him but little service. Christ resolves to make his Lambs bear
him witness against the Wolves. His carriage shall bear him record, that he
would have gathered softly and sweetly, like as a hen gathers her chickens.
Mat. 23.27 Mat. 25.44.
And because he knows Goats will be apt to word it (as at the last day) he will
appeal to the experience of his Lambs, to testify for his carriage. He that
had but two talents and used them as well as he could, shall be evidence enough
against the evil servant, that Christ is not an austere man. That Christ may
stop their mouths that are idle, and will not work, he will fill their mouths
that are sincere, though weak. Thy little cisterne (O weak believer) shall be
filled with sweetness, because Christ will use thy cisterne as an evidence of
his sea. Christ will at once evince, and convince others wickedness, by the
sweetness of his carriage toward thee, notwithstanding thy weakness.

CHAP. VII. Some Uses of all this.
I Am loath to let so precious a point go without its application. It may be
of singular use, if Christ will be so sweet as to help; I hope he will, and
therefore,

First, this might inform us in the difference between Christ's carriage and
the creatures. We have a proverb, The weakest is turned to the wall; but men
practice otherwise, cast them into the kennell, and trample upon them there. Ah
Lord! how unlike are men to Christ? He is very tender to wards his weak
members; they are very harsh. Christ carries weak Saints in his bosom, and
men will not let them be in their land. O England, England, thy unkind
carriage to Christ's weak ones, makes me much fear lest he destroy thee! How
dare thou be cruel to them to whom Christ is kind. Verily Christ will
destroy thee if thou cease not from these unkind (that I say not unmercifull)
carriages of thine toward his. Those that he embraces, thou persecutest.
Fear lest he tear thee like a Lion, for mis-using of his Lambs. I have
sometimes wondered, that ever any who pretend to be shepherds under Christ,
should preach, or press a nonbearing with those in the Kingdom, whom Christ
bears in his bosom. Surely these sub-shepherds differ very much from the
supreme-shepherd, who is kind and tender to all; but especially the weak of
his flock.

Secondly, This doctrine, might beget in us lamentation over many, who are
indeed Christ's Lambs, but are apt to utter unkind and untrue speeches of their
shepherd. It makes me sad to hear a Lamb of Christ, sigh, and say, Surely
Christ will cast off me; I am so feeble that I can do nothing that is good, and
so foul, that I do much which is bad. I am so weak that I cannot come to
him; and therefore I cannot think that he will be so kind to come to me. Ah
poor souls! when did you ever find Christ so unkind in his carriage, as to
make you speak thus? when was Christ a wilderness to thee? what harshenesse
have thou ever found in him, that thou speak thus hardly of him? Surely I
lament to hear thee saying, it is in vain to wait on Christ. But I bleed to
hear thee crying (as they Jer. 23.1.) Thou will never more come at him: why
poor soul? why? is not Christ sweet? is not his carriage tender? does he not
gather with his arm? does not he carry in his bosom? I, he does so by some,
but he will not so by me. Yes by thee (O poor soul!) it is his custom to be
sweet, in his carriage, to his weak members, such as thou art: verily I lament
to hear any speak otherwise of Christ, then he is, and they shall find.

Thirdly, the sweetness of Christ's carriage, reproves the sowrenesse of ours,
toward his weak members. The Prophet asks the question (as if it were
strange) who has despised the day of small things? Zach. 4.10. Though few, or
rather none should, yet many do despise; shall I say, or discourage, or both,
or worse, such, as in whom the day of grace is but dawned. But be reproved ye
rugged spirits; Christ bears much with his weak ones, and you bear but little.
Thou dare not deny, but that such are in the faith: but thou will say, they
come not up to believe all that thou do, they are weak: what then, wilt not
thou bear with them? shall the elder son beat the little child, his brother,
because he is not so big as he? shall the Dr. in Christ's School disdain, and
abuse the under-graduate, because not so profound as himself? should the
strong beat the weaks, because they are not so strong as they? Romans 15.1. (...)
i.e to bear upon our sh^ulders.
should not they rather bear with them? what? because some of the Lambs cannot
follow so fast as the strong of the flock, shall they be cast off for that? Ah
Lord! shall children be whipped, and scourged, for not going as fast as men?
Did you ever read of such a thing in Christ's commands? did you ever see such an
instance in Christ's carriage? Surely we must rejoice to hear some speaking in
Jacobs voice, sweetly for unity, etc. but we must reprove them, when we feel
them with Esau's hands, handling weak ones roughly, for want of uniformity.
Christ reproves (and then 'twill be to purpose) those that carry themselves
contrary to that carriage, which they see in him, to wards weak believers.

Fourthly, Christ's carriage being thus, toward weak believers; it must needs
comfort them to think of it. Ah Lord what a weak creature I am! why, be of
good comfort; thou art weak, and Christ is sweet to such as thee.

Ob. The dugs of divine love are full; but I am very feeble: I cannot suck,
though Christ open his bosom, and I must needs dye, my weakness cannot live.

Answ. Be of good comfort poor creature! Christ will not only open his
bosom, but thy mouth. He will take thee up in his arms, and carry thee in his
bosom; will not this refresh thee?

Ob. Yes: But I cannot fetch out the milk that lies in his breast; I want a
strong faith to draw, I am but weak.

Answ. Be of good comfort (weak soul) Christ is sweet, and with his fingers
he will force out the milk of mercy, into thy mouth (as the mother does to the
weak infant) if thou can but open thy mouth, though thou be without breath (
i.e. strong faith to draw) Christ will fill thee. Psalm. 81.10.


Ob. My feet are so feeble, that whereas I should run the way of Christ's
commands; I can hardly go; I am fain to creep upon all four to follow Christ,
and yet am faint when I do but thus. Ah Lord! says the poor soul, I shall
be left behind.

Answ. Say not so. Jesus Christ will tarry, and take thee in his hand; and
rather then he will leave thee behind, he will carry thee in his bosom.
Remember it, and rejoice O believers. Christ is very sweet in his carriage,
toward his weak members.

But ere I proceed further in this Use, its meet I put in some signs of those
souls, to whom I chiefly intend this comfort. We must muzzle the dogs, while
we feed the Lambs.

First, This may comfort thee, O poor heart, whose grief it is to think how
much sin thou have, and how little grace; who mournest to see self high, and
Christ low in thy heart. Me thinks I hear thee cry, O wretched soul that I
am! my corruption is strong, it makes me do the evil which I would not; my
grace is but weak, I cannot do the good which I would. O woe unto me! my
heart is hardened to Christ's ways? I cannot fetch a turn in them, but my feet
are swift to evil. Verily thus it is with me; and I am ready to dye to think
that it should be thus: What a little spark of fire is my grace? but what a
vast sea of water is my corruption; my heart breaks with fear to think least
Christ will cast me off, and have nothing to do with me. If I pray, or rather
lispe, it is with much deadness, and little life. If I read, hear, etc. it is
with little sincerity and much infirmity.

Q. What will Christ be kind to me?

A. Yes poor Lamb, he will: His carriage was, is, and will be very tender,
and sweet to such weak ones as thou art.

Secondly, Thou that can do but little for Christ, and weepest to think or
see, any do much against Christ. Ah Lord! what a poor worm am I, that cannot
kiss Christ, while others spit upon him; others can, and do crown him with
thorns; but woe is me! I cannot crown him with gold. Others can, and do
buffet him, but poor I cannot embrace him. It goes to my heart, to see some
putting a reed into his hand, while I want a Scepter to put there (which is a
thousand times more fitting.)

Q. Will ever Christ regard me that cannot cry Hosanna, while others cry
crucifige? what will Christ kiss me that do not, cannot give him wine, while
others give him vinegar. Other wretches thrust him through with a spear, and I
wretch cannot embrace him that while. I beseech you Sir, will ever Christ own
me, look upon me?

A. Yes, yes, poor heart, Christ loves thee that thus weepeth for him: he
takes it well that thou go in mourning, while he is in sackcloth: though
thou cannot take him down from the cross, yet he accepts of thy weeping while
thou stand by, and can but look on. If thou have but a Lamb-like love to
mourn while thou see thy shepherd smitten, Christ has a shepherd-like
sweetness to pity thy weakness, though thou cannot rescue him.

Thirdly, This comfort is for thee, that albeit thou mournest that thy grace is
but little, yet thou prizest it so much as that thou will not part with it for
a thousand worlds. Ah Lord! my life says the poor soul, is but weak: I am
rather dying every day, then alive at any time. My faith is so weak, that you
may better call it a painted hope, then a powerful belief. My light is so
dim, that it is more like the gloworme in the bedge, then a star (though of the
least magnitude) in the firmament. Be it as thou say, O weak soul.

Q. What will thou take for thy life?

A. Not a million of Rocks of Diamonds.

Q. Will thou part with thy faith?

A. No, not for all the riches of the creatures.

Q. Shall I buy thy light?

A. No, if you would give me the light of Moon and Sun, and the Stars to the
bargain too. Well, comfort thy self, O thou poor Lamb. Thy Shepherd is very
tender to all, but especially to such as thee. His tenderness will take the
advantage of thy weakness to abound the more. As thy weakness shall abound,
so shall his sweetness also toward thee. O consider this text and truth, you
weak of the flock; ye who are weak in your life, that can hardly stir, and
weak in that light, and can scarce see; and weak also in your faith, and can
hardly believe. Be of good comfort, the Lord Christ, who is the Shepherd of
your souls, will have a special care of you his Lambs. He is sweet and tender
in his carriage to all, but especially his weak members. Comfort ye one
another with these words.

Fifthly, This doctrine serves to encourage you to duty. Work O poor souls,
though weak. Christ will be sweet in his carriage toward you; pray, read,
bear, etc. do all that Christ calls for; though thou be weak, yet stand not
out; Christ's kindness will pass by thy weakness. If thou be sincere,
remember he is and will be sweet. Let this grace make thee to abound with, and
to overflow in actings of duties, as demonstrations of love. If thou act from
love, Christ will receive in love.

Sixthly, This doctrine calls for imitation. Christ is tender in his carriage
toward his weak members; so should we. Do not dishearten, but encourage
weak souls. Be ye full of bowels of love, as Christ is. His carriage is
sweet, let not ours be sour. Christ deals tenderly with weak believers: O my
Brethren, Be ye followers of Christ as dear children.

Ob. But these, and these differ from me.

Q. But in what? in fundamentals?

A. No, they hold all there as I do, Christ is my foundation, and no other
foundation do they lay.

Q. Do they differ from thee in practice?

A. No, as to the maine, both of worship, and walk, we are alike; I pray,
read, expound, hear, etc. and they do so too. I walk godly, and they labor in
all things to have a good conscience.

Q. Wherein then is your difference?

A. Its in government.

Q. What, will not they be governed by Christ? will they have any other ruler,
as to spiritualls, but Jesus? or do they deny lawful obedience to civil power?

A. No, but yet in matter of Church, order, and government, they will not do
as I; they do not hold as others.

Q. Is it out of wilfulness, or weakness, that they do thus?

A. I fear the first; sure I am, it is by reason of the second, their
weakness. O friends, I beseech you then, remember, Christ bears with weak
Lambs; do ye the like: His carriage was sweet to all weak believers: let ours
be so too, for they are our weak brethren: You that are strong, ought to bear
with them that are weak, Romans 14.1.

Lastly, This doctrine cries loudly to such as yet wander from Christ, that
they would come in. Friend, Christ's carriage is, and 'twill be sweet. Absoloms
carriage was seemingly sweet, and 'twas strongly persuasive; many followed him
in the simplicity of their hearts, because of the appearing sweetness of his.
Believe it, that which was but a show in Absalom, 2 Samuel 15.
is a substance in Christ. He kisses every soul that comes to him. And when he
takes the government in any heart, he carries himself uprightly, and tenderly
too. You all love a mild government. You hate tyranny, Psalm. 75.2. Talis Rex
eft Christus. Mollerus in locum.
and its your desire to be under a Scepter managed with sweetness. Every one
would serve a Lord whose name is love. O that you could but believe this truth.
Christ is a most gracious Sovereigne. Sweetness is his Scepter. Alphonsus won
much upon the people, by taking a sheep out of the ditch. Jesus Christ takes
not one, but all his sheep out of the ditch. He gathers them, though dirty,
with his arm, and carries them in his bosom. Will not this, win yet thy heart
to serve Christ? If this will not, then think of the severity of Satan, whose
sheep thou art, all the time that thou keep off from Christ. When God would
dissuade the people of Israel from that kind of government, which it seems,
his soul liked not, and under which, he was unwilling they should be, says
God by his mouth to him. He will take your sons, 1 Samuel 8.11, 12, 13, etc.
and appoint for himself; for his chariots, and to be his horsemen, and some
shall run before his chariots; and be will take your daughters to be
Confectionaries, and to be Cooks, and to be Bakers, etc. so goes on to show
how that in all things he would seek himself, and not them, so that they should
cry out, etc. It seems, God foreseeing the misery of such a condition, that
they would be in, if they should come under that government which they
foolishly (and sinfully too) desired; would dissuade them, by telling them of
that before, which he knew they would feel afterward. In like manner, let me
tell you, if you will serve Satan (and you must serve him if you will not
serve Christ.) Satan will be a cruel King to you. He will ride thy soul and
body too. He will make thee only to serve his lusts (though thou think it be
thine own.) Ah poor soul! me thinks I see the Devil sitting upon thy
shoulders. He lasheth thee cruelly; though thy brawny back do not feel it;
he will ride thee off thy legs, and he is on the way to hell; and when horse
Thou, and rider Satan, fall into that pit, thou will cry out. But O then
'twill be too late. Therefore be wise now. Kiss Christ to day, and he will
presently kiss thee. Enter into his service, and thou shall experience his
sweetness. His carriage is very kind in sundry particulars, and upon all
occasions as you have heard. Come, taste and see; and you shall find Christ's
carriage to be sweeter to thy soul, then thou can express. He gathers his
Lambs with his arm; he carries them in his bosom. He is the faithful, yea
and the merciful shepherd of his flock. This is his name, this his nature.
Because of the sweetness of this name, which is as an ointment powered forth,
the virgins love him, do thou too. Oh that in the savor of this odor, thy
soul could run after him. Oh that these cords of love might draw thee to
Christ, and bind thee to him. Verily who ever thou art, if thou come into
Christ, and embrace him, thou shall find his carriage to be exceeding tender;
and though thou may see much weakness in thy self, yet thou shall
experience much sweetness in Christ; for it is his office, his charge, his
care, his carriage, to be sweet and tender toward all his, especially those of
his that are weak.

SECT. II. Christ's sweet carriage to such as are weak accidentally; and who
they are that are so.
Esa. 40.11. He shall gently lead those that are with young.


CHAP. I.
HAving in the former Section discovered (in some measure) the sweetness of
Christ's carriage (in a general way) toward such of his as I did call
habitually weak. I shall now come to show that his carriage is the same in
sweetness, toward those who are accidentally weak. And as in the former
part, I spoke of Christ's sweet carriage, to those that are habitually weak, by
what is said to his demeanor to his Lambs: In like manner, I shall set out the
carriage of Christ as sweet to those that are accidentally weak, by what the
Prophet speaks here of his carriage to those that are with young.

He shall gently lead those that are with young.

Now as a foundation I shall lay this position, which is clearly deducible from
these words of the Prophet, viz.

The carriage of Christ is very sweet, toward all his members, who are
accidentally weak.

I call some members accidentally weak, to distinguish them from such as are
so habitually. And I use this phrase of accidentally weak, Accidental
weakness, what it is.
because I would by it note those, in whom indeed the habits of grace are
strong, and so they are not liable (as the others were) to a constant
weakness; only at some times upon some occasion (as it were by accident) they
become weak and feeble. As now, Men who are (that I may so say) habitually
strong, and so not liable unto that constant weakness which is in children;
may yet sometimes be accidentally weakened by some great work, which they are
to do, some great sorrow or sickness under which they lie; or else by some
great and desperate fall which they have had. In like manner, believers who are
grown up to Men in Christ Jesus, and so freed from that habitual weakness
which is in babes, yet notwithstanding, sometimes come to be accidentally
weak, by reason, either of great services, to which Christ calls them, or
sharp sufferings, unto which Christ does bring them; or else by some falls
into sin, which through infirmity (and as it were by accident) they have taken.
Now of Christ's sweet carriage unto such, I suppose the Prophet does speak here
under the metaphor of a shepherds sweet carriage, toward those that are with
young. Even the strong of the flock (such as the Ewes) may be, and sometimes
are weak (especially when with young) or (as the word will also bear) when
they give suck. For bearing, and giving of suck, do (as it were
accidentally) much weaken. And thus Christ's carriage is sweet to his who are
not only weak habitually, as Lambs; but also who are accidentally weak, as
Ewes that give suck, or else are with young, for so the Rabbis, Solomon
Jarchi, and David Kimchi, with other our late Expositors, do gloss this place
of the Prophet.

Now for the better proceeding in this point; and so for a clearer discovery of
the sweetness of Christ's carriage toward his weak members; I shall do two
things.

1. Discover who those are which I thus call accidentally weak. 2. Demonstrate
how Jesus Christ is sweet in his carriage toward such.
For the first of these, viz. who are weak beleavers accidentally. Who are
accidentally weak.


Besides what I have already hinted concerning such, I shall add this general
description of them, viz.

They are such, as in whom the light, and life of saving and sanctifying grace
are, in some good degree and measure: And who for the most part in the general
way, and order of their life, are fit, and able both to undertake, and go
through ( strongly and successefully) those common, and ordinary duties of
Religion, in which Christ does for the most part exercise his members; so as
that you may rank them with those, who are in the highest form of Christ's
School, not only above little children, but even above the young men, with
the Fathers: And of whom you may conceive the Apostle speaks, when he says,
we that are strong: But yet notwithstanding, by reason of some occurrences in
their Christian course; and some passages which providence does (as it were by
accident) now, and then, permit to befall them, they are much debilitated and
weakened thereby; so as that they do in that respect, at some times lie and
groan under some weakness.

But because it were too large a field to go out into; if I should inquire
after all the several sorts of believers, who in this sense, at some seasons,
or upon some occasions are weak: I shall instance only in three particular
kinds of that which I call accidental weakness, and show how Christ's
carriage is sweet to those who labor under such weakness. A threefold
weakness by accident.


1. There is weakness, which comes by work or labor. 2. There is weakness
which c^mes by sickness or falls. 3. There is weakness which comes by grief
or sorrow.
With reference to this threefold weakness, I shall speak of Christ's sweet
carriage of himself unto three sorts of weak believers.

1. Such as are weak by reason of some great work unto which Christ does call
them, or about which Christ does set them; and about which Christ does not (at
least commonly) set all his members. 2. Such as are weak by reason of some
falls or slips into sin; either through their own inward corruption, or some
outward temptation. 3. Such as are weak by reason of great sorrow or grief,
which they may happily take, because of some sufferings, or trialls, whereunto
Christ (in a more then ordinary way) does bring them.
Of the sweet carriage of Jesus Christ to each of these, I shall speak
particularly, and by themselves: And so much the rather I shall speak of these,
because I conceive that the phrase here used by the Prophet, may allude, or be
applied to either, or all of them.

The phrase is, those that are with young; which Translation I think is better
then that of giving suck, because the word in the Hebrew is, (...) which is
used Genesis 33.13. and so rendered there, (...)
the flocks and the herds with young; and it is used thus, and so rendered, Ps.
78.71 and there it is expressed by Ewes great with young. The Hebrews, when they
do speak of giving suck, do use another word, (...)
and that more proper for it, i. e. (...) from (...) suxit, which fignifies to
give suck; so that the phrase being thus. Those that are with young. I think
it may allude to those three sorts mentioned, viz.

1. It may allude to those that are weak by work. Thus Paul sets out his
work for the Lord Jesus toward the Galathians, as if he were big with them,
as an Ewe is big with young: My little children of whom I travel in birth,
Galat. 4.19. Paul in the work of his Ministry, was as it were big with young.
In like manner any believer called out to, or set about more then ordinary
work, may be said to be big with young. And so much the rather, because the
work of childbearing, or of being big with young; and to bring forth, is a
work which does weaken more then ordinary; to this the generallity of
Expositors apply this place.

2. It may allude also unto such as are weak by reason of falls into sin. So
thou shall find the phrase of being with child, or young, often in a
particular manner applied to such as are big with sin. Vox significal (says
Ilyricus upon the word) tum poenam, tun culpam. And so it is used both in a
sense of sinning, and of sufferings: sometimes sin and temptation (through
the incogitancy of the best believers) may commit as it were a spiritual rape
upon the soul; and the beleeyer may be (as it were) big with young, in a
sinful sense. For when temptation corns, and in a manner forces the soul,
there is something within us (which was not in Christ) and that may concur, and
conduce to a sinful conception; and the soul may be big (as it were) with
sin. The Apostle has a phrase which is to this purpose, When lust has
conceived it brings forth, Jam. 1.15. It is an allusion to a natural
conception and birth. So that we shall not, I suppose overmuch strain the
place of the Prophet here, by applying this phrase to this thing also. Sad
experience tells us: that the chastest souls of the Saints, are sometimes in
this respect, guilty of spiritual adultery. Believers are sometimes big of
illegitimate births and conceptions. Lust sometimes may conceive, and they may
be big with young, in that respect also.

3. It may allude unto those that are weak by reason of sorrow and sufferings.
And thus the Holy Ghost does often use the Metaphor of being big with young. As
Esa. 26.18. We have been with child, and been in pain. And thus the great
sorrow and trouble, unto which God threatens to bring his people, is set out by
their being as it were big with young, and holding their hands upon their
sides, Jer. 30.6.

CHAP. II. Christ's carriage to such as are weak by work, demonstrated to be
sweet.
THe first branch, or kind of that accidental weakness, unto which believers
are liable, is (as in the formen Chapter I noted) weakness by work. So that
now according to the method which I propounded, I am to show and make good this
Proposition, viz.

The carriage of Jesus Christ, is very sweet to every believer that is weak,
by reason of work.

Sinners are sometimes big with young in regard of wicked works, whereunto
Satan excites them. Hence is that phrase, Psalm. 7.14. He travelleth with
iniquity, and conceives mischief. Now toward such, God carries himself
severely, and is (as the Psalmists there notes) angry ( i.e. with them) every
day, v. 11.

Saints are sometimes big with young, in regard of good works, unto which the
Spirit does stir them. And toward these Christ carries himself sweetly. For
(as the Prophet here speaks) he leads them gently.

The expression notes two things, as proving the Proposition.

1. That Jesus Christ is so sweet to those that are weak (while in or about
some holy work) that he is with them, and leads them. As he said to his
Apostles; Behold I am with you to the end of the world (that was, in regard of
strength and assistance) so he does to all his working members. He does assist
them. He is with them. And he leads them. Believers are sent about some work
of Christ sometimes as it were a long way; and Christ (that he may show
himself sweet) goes with them and leads them. The Ewe big with young, is
unweldy, and it is pain unto it to go. Now the shepherd that is sweet leads
it. And the belcever big with young ( i.e. bent, resolved upon some good
business for Christ) is weak, and in pain it is, while in travel, till it
be delivered: Now Jesus Christ to show his sweetness to such a soul, takes it
by the arm (as it were) and leads it.

2. That Christ's carriage may appear to be sweet, he is not only present to
lead; but tenderly present, to lead [gently.] He leads softly, that he may lead
sweetly. I know there is but one word in the original, but it includes both
these, viz. the act, and the manner of the act. The word is (...) from (...)
which signifies as Hebricians know, commode and leniter ducere, i.e. to lead
commodiously and softly. David Kimchi glosfeth it, he shall lead them according
to their quiet or commodity, (...)
i.e. so as may suit best with their quietness and ease. Jesus Christ does not
drive furiously, but tenderly. He does not (as the same Rabbin notes)
over-drive his flock; but gently, softly, and sweetly, he leads all his
weake-working members. He will lead you, O ye working believers! according to
your weakness, step by step, Pedetentim.
as Vatablus glosseth the place. Christ will not first lay a heavy burden upon
your back, and then come after lashing, to make you run, when it may be you
can hardly go. But he will come and lead you, and walk with you, your own
pace: As he will assist, so he will assist sweetly. He will lead [gently.]

Thus as Jacob (the most faithful and merciful man that ever was a shepherd)
said of his flocks and herds with young; he would not over-drive them, but
(said he) I will lead on softly according as the cattle that goes before me,
can be able to endure; or (as it is in the Hebrew) according to the ease of
their feet, Genesis 33.14. In like manner, Jesus Christ he will softly lead (for
the word is the same in both places) his Ewes big with young; he will gently
lead those that labor in any work of his. Thus sweet is his carriage toward
those that are weak, by reason of any great work, about which he sets them at
any time, and with which they are big by the Holy Ghosts over-shadowing of
them. Working believers, mind it. Your work (you say) is hard, it overpowers
your strength, and it makes you weak: remember Christ's carriage shall be
sweet: He will be with you in your work: And that it may appear he is tender,
and mindful of your weakness, he will lead you, and that very gently; so
says the Prophet, He shall gently lead those that are with young.

CHAP. III. Six pariculars showing Christ's carriage to be sweet to all
weake-working Believers.
THat you may yet more clearly see the sweetness of Christ's carriage, toward
all such members of his, as are weak in regard of work; I shall declare it in
six particulars.

1. Christ's carriage appears to be sweet and tender toward his weake-working
members, in that he puts them about no other work then such as himself both
done. Masters and Sovereignes carry themselves sweetly to servants, Nihil lege
ulla sanciret in alios cu jus non ipse primus in se daret documentu^. Dan. Par.
in Hist. Univers. medull. p. 40.
and subjects, when they employ them in no worser works then themselves would
do. Its reported of Lycurgus (the great Lawmakers) that he imposed nothing by
Law upon others, of which he did not first show a pattern in his own
practice. It Is true of Jesus Christ, you read of no work which he requires of
his, which himself did not while in the flesh. Does he require believers to
resist Satan, fight with the Devil? Jam. 4.7. He did the same himself,
Matthew. 4. Does Christ call upon believers to pray always 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. and
strive in prayer? Romans 15.30. He did as much himself while on earth. He prayed
often, he prayed long, all night, Luke 6.12. and fervently, with strong cries,
and tears, Heb. 5.7. Are believers called to fast? (an extraordinary work,
and such as is not for every day, no nor for every Christian, as Divines gather
from Luke 5.36, 37.) why consider Jesus Christ in this work went before them.
He fasted, and that longer then he requires us, even forty days, as it is Matthew.
4. Must Ministers preach, dispute, contest for the truths of the Gospel? they
are to do no more then what Christ has done before them. Believers, did
Christ ever call you to any service about which he would not go himself, if
need were? Servants you have good Masters, who put you about no worse work
then they would do themselves. And believers you have a sweet Savior, who did
do that himself about which he sets you, and never will lay that burden upon
your backs, which he would not if need were, bear himself. Oh how tender and
sweet is Christ to all his working members, in not setting them about any
service but what he is willing to do himself. Oh believers, you may comfort
your selves in any service to which Christ calls you, with this thought, what
though the business be burdensome? what though the work be weakening? yet
still Christ is sweet, kind, tender, in that he has set you about no other,
then what himself has done.

2. Its easy to see sweetness in the crrriage of Christ toward his working
members, in that he has provided, and accordingly gives encouragement unto
them, answerable to all the discouragement they do, or can meet withal.
Ezekiel was to go out upon some design for Christ; and such was his weakness
that he falls at the appearance of Christ's coming to command him: But mark what
Christ says to him, Son of man stand upon thy feet, Ezekiel. 2.1. Christ loves
(says a late Commentator upon this) to encourage man to his duty. Its the
weakness of believers, when set about any work, they are apt to dispond and
be discouraged: But its the sweetness of Christ, he is ready to raise up your
spirits, and to take off their discouragements.

Three things usually discourage believers when they are to set about any
business for Christ; and Christ is so sweet as that he has provided, and does
give out encouragements answerable to them all. 1. Internal reluctance in your
own spirits. I would, Saints are unwillingly willing, and willingly unwilling.
and I could do this or that (says the believer) but I find such reluctance
within, my heart is so backward, my spirit so unwilling, that it discourageth
me much; why Christ has said he will make thee willing. His people shall be a
willing people, Psalm 110.3. Christ has provided a voice behind to put thee on
to that, whereunto thou art backward. Thine ears shall hear a ward behind
thee (because of the reluctance that is in thee) saying this is the way walk
in it. Esa. 30.21
I will put my Spirit within you (which is a free Spirit) and because you are
backward, and unwilling, he shall make you forward and willing, and cause you
(sweetly) to walk in my ways, Ezekiel. 36.28. Christ has provided an
encouragement answerable to this discouragement of thine (Oh Believer.) Thy
spirit is unwilling, and does resist, his Spirit shall rake that away.2.
Disgrace, and opposition from man, is a great discouragement to working
believers: and Christ has provided encouragement suited thereunto. Men will
deride me, and oppose me if I do this or that: The disgrace of the proud, and
the opposition of the violent, do mightily weaken my hands in work, says the
believer sometimes. But know, O soul! Christ has provided encouragement
answerable to this. Thou say men oppose thee, Christ says he is with thee;
Fear not, I am with thee (said the Vision to Paul) Act. 18.10. Men thou say
disgrace thee, O weake-working soul! The Father (says Christ) will honor
thee. If any man serve me, him will my Father honor, Joh. 12.26. strengthen
thy weak hands (O working soul!) with these words: Here is suitable
encouragement unto thy discouragement in this particular also.

3. Doubt of success discourageth sometimes those who are upon work for
Christ. The hands of the believer begin to fall down in the midst of his work
when he doubts of success. I shall labor in vain (says the soul) this
discourageth me. Your labor shall not be in vain (says Christ) let that
encourage thee, 1 Cor. 15.58. Moses being to go to Pharaoh about a gallant
work ( Isreal's freedom) He doubts the success, But behold they will not
believe me (says he) Exodus 4.1. That discouraged him; Christ therefore takes
off that discouragement. If they will not believe at the voice of the first
sign, they will or shall believe the voice of the latter, says the Lord. I
would fight and resist Satan: Shall I be succesfull? Yes, O believer! Christ
has said so. He, i.e. Satan shall fly, Jam. 4.7. and the God of peace shall
tread down Satan under your feet, Romans 20. Thus, answerable to all those
discouragements which believers are liable to meet with, Christ has provided
encouragements; and this clearly argues Christ to be sweet in his carriage
toward his working members. But,

3. In as much as Christ gives ability, and strength to perform whatsoever he
calls any believer to; it is clear, that his carriage is sweet to those which
work; Christ gives power to do what ever he sets believers about; Ezekiel
must stand on his feet; alas! he is weak, and cannot. Christ's Spirit therefore
enters into him that he may. Stand upon thy feet, Son of man (says Christ)
and the Spirit entered into him, and he stood up, Ezekiel. 2.1. I thank our Lord
Christ who has enabled me, says Paul unto Timothy, 1 Ep. 1.12. the Apostles
must preach to all Nations, and Christ gives them tongues to enable them so to
do. Ah! says the poor soul, the work is weighty, and I am weak. True *
but Christ will make thee strong and able, O weak soul. If the burden be
big, thy back shall be strengthened. Christ will not lay a heavy burden upon
weak shoulders. Doubtless he will strengthen thy shoulders, O believing
soul, according to the weight of that he lays on. I must answer before Kings,
and Counselors, and States for Christ (says the believer.) But alas! the
work is weighty, and I weak. Fear not O believer! Christ will be with thee,
and will give thee a mouth, and wisdom, which all thy adversaries shall not be
able to gainsay, nor resist, Luke 21.15. I am to go a long journey for Christ,
but I have but weak legs (says the soul) why Christ will strengthen thy legs,
O soul! according to the length of thy journey. I am to lift a great weight
(says the soul) and have but weak hands. Christ will strengthen thy hands
according to the weight which thou art to lift, O poor soul! what ever the
work be, about which Christ sets any soul; if the soul carry it self
sincerely in doing, Christ will show himself sweetly in helping. Howsoever
hard-hearted Pharaoh may command the number of brickes, and not give straw to
help: yet tenderhearted Christ will not. If he command the soul to work, he
will send the Spirit to help with strength suitable to that work.

4. Christ's carriage appears to be sweet to working Believers, in that he will
perfect their work by his own strength, wherein it was deficient by their
weakness. Thou workest all our works for us, and in us, Esa. 26.12. The
believer works, and leaves that which he does, very imperfect, because of his
weakness: But Christ comes, and perfects that imperfection, because of his
sweetness. Lord (says the Psalmist) thou will perfect that which concerns
me, Psalm. 138.8. The believer is set on the work of prayer, and Christ sends
the Spirit to help his infirmities: And at the end of prayer, he takes it, and
mingles with it his own incense, and so presents it perfect to the Father. His
pure water perfects the souls puddle. Look as the writing-Schoole-Master, not
only holds the hand of the learner, in every letter, but after al, takes the
pen and perfects the whole: So Jesus Christ holds the hand all the while the
believer is writing (suppose a love-letter to Heaven) and because of the
shaking of the believers weak hand, there are after all, many imperfections,
he takes the golden pen of his own grace, and perfects every letter, that it
comes to the Fathers hand perfect. O the dark, and deformed lines, that
believers draw, when set about some curious piece. How imperfectly do they
perform that, about which they are set sometimes. But oh the sweetness of
Christ! who comes with his own pencill, and after all, perfects those
imperfections. Believers carry themselves weakly in all their works, and
almost mar all, about which they are set; but Christ carries himself sweetly,
and comes and mends all that they do amiss, making their botched and bungled
works very brave with his own hand. Surely, believing souls, you have found
this. How many times did Christ set off that duty richly, which came from thee
poorly? How often has he perfected thy imperfect performances? when thy
weakness came short, has not his sweetness made it up? Believe it friends,
Christ carries himself sweetly toward working believers.

5. The carriage of Christ appears to be sweet toward, etc. in that he comes
in often to the souls of his working members with refreshing in the midst of
their labors. Believers are weak, and (while at work) are apt to be weary
and to feign: But Christ shows himself sweet, in that he visits them, and
refreshes them in their work. 'Twas the praise of Boaz, and 'twas a sweet
carriage of his, when he went into the field, where his servants reaped, to
encourage them in their work. And its the praise of Christ's sweet carriage
toward working beleeevers, that he visits them frequently, and incourageth them
sweetly while they are about his work. Baruch was at work for Christ, when he
had written the words of Christ at the mouth of Jeremiah; but he began to flag
and saint: And Christ gave a particular Prophecy to the Prophet, to comfort
and refresh Baruch. Jer. 46. Christ gives power to the faint, to them (who by
working have as it were) no might, Esa. 40.29.
he refreshes, and gives strength. Daniel was at a great work, and his
strength was almost gone while he fasted, and there came like the appearance of
a man (that was not Christ, but an Angel from Christ) and he strengthened him.
Oh the sweet refreshings which Christ, by his Spirit, brings into the souls of
weak Saints, even when they are ready to saint and sink in their work. How often
(O believing soul!) has Christ refreshed thee, by his sweet spiritual
smilings on thee, even in the time of duty, and while thou were about his
work? Surely, thou must needs say, Christ carries himself sweetly toward
working believers; does not thy experience in this particular, seal to this
truth?

6. It is evident, that the carriage of Christ is sweet to the working Saints,
in that at the end of their work be gives them rest and reward. Its sweetness
in Christ, that he should accept any work of the believers, but more, that he
should reward. Christ will deal sweetly with his working servants, he has
made beds of rest for them in glory. Satan deals not so; They shall rest in
their beds. Esa. 57.2.
his servants never rest to eternity. I am weary (says the working believer)
Thou shall rest anon, oh weak soul! There remains a rest to the people of God,
Heb. 4.9. The word is a keeping of a Sabbath. (...).
There is a sweet and a long Sabbath remains for you, O working Saints! and
the morning thereof is ready to dawne; or about morn, and 'twill be day. You
shall rest from your labors, Apoc. 14.11. Christ's will is sweet to thy soul
(O weak believer) and he has provided rest for thee. There is a Sabbath
appointed for your souls* Working Paul shall have that rest; yea, and weak
thou too, when the day shall dawne. You who are thus troubled shall have rest
with us (says the Apostle) when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven
with the Angel, of his power, 2 These. 1.7. And if rest be not enough to declare
Christ to be sweet to his working members; they shall have reward also. You
shall not lose your labor, ye working Saints: Christ comes, and his reward is
with him; Apoc. 22.12. you shall not work all day and all night too,
Believers. You shall rest at right, and have reward in the morning. The upright
shall have dominion in the morning, Psalm. 49.14. For a days work, you shall
have eternities rest. For a little labor in this world, you shall have an
everlasting reward in the other world. Oh sweet Christ! that give long rest
for a little labor, and great reward for little work. Surely, when you shall
in the end of your dayes-work go into Immanuels land, and there rest your
souls upon the rosy banks that are by the Crystal streams which run
there, you will cry out oh! How sweet is Christ toward his working members,
that gives such ravishing rest to them after all their works for him; when the
day shall be in which Christ shall come with Crowns of glory, to put upon the
heads of working Saints, and you shall feel the weight of that glory, with
which you shall then be crowned; then you will say, oh! the sweetness of
Christ toward working believers, who gives such an eternal weight of glory,
for such light and temporal works as the best Saints do. Conclude (O thou
believing Ewe, who art big with young) that the day comes in which thou shall
travel, and bring forth; and then thou shall see that Christ deals sweetly
with such as thou art, when for the joy of that rest, and reward which thou
shall have hereafter; thou shall forget thy work, and thy weakness under
which thou did groan, and travel here. The shadows apace fly away, and the
day begins to dawne; in which Christ shall give both sweet, glorious,
ravishing, eternal rest, and reward to all his working members; and then shall
the fullness of this truth be sung, viz. that Christ's is very sweet to all
weak-working believers.

CHAP. IV. Some reasons of the point.
YOu have seen both [that] and [how] Christ carries himself sweet to working
believers. I will now add a word why Christ does thus. And there may be (to
omit others) three reasons given of this.

1. Christ loves to make his carriage answerable to himself. He is sweet in
himself, and therefore will show it by being so to his. As he will declare
sweetness to those who are weak and cannot work at all; so will he show
sweetness to those who work, and are weak therein, or thereby. As Christ
sees our condition, he is moved with compassion. He has yerning bowels
toward working believers, and he cannot refrain, (such is his sweetness) but
he must show it. Men love to show themselves (as we say) what they are. Christ
does surely love to carry himself sweetly, that believers may say, As we have
beard, so have we seen in the Savior of our God. Others, by their words told
us, that Christ was sweet, and in our works we find it so. When Christ spoke
to the man sick of the palsy, Thy sins be forgiven thee: He did it, that
men might know the power of his Godhead (says he giving the reason of that
speech) that ye may know the son of man has power on earth to forgive sins,
Mat 9.6. As Christ speaks in such a manner, as that he may be known to be
what he is; so he acts also, he leads his working members gently, and carries
himself toward them sweetly, that he may declare himself to be as he is.

2. Christ sees that those that work for him, cannot work without him:
Therefore it is that he carries himself so sweetly to them. The strongest
^aint is too weak for any work if left by Christ. Indeed Christ cannot have
his work done by any soul, in case he deal not sweetly with it. The big Ewe
cannot go if not let gently; and the working believer cannot act, if not dealt
withal sweetly. Without me ye can do nothing, Joh. 15.5. This Christ sees, and
therefore it is that he is thus sweet. (...). Phil. 4.13.
Because Christ knows our weakness, as that without him we can do nothing,
therefore he shows his sweetness, that by him we may be able to do all
things by his strength.

3. Christ is thus sweet in his carriage to wards his working members, that he
may leave all without excuse. Christ's carriage to his shall condemn wretches
at the last day, that will be none of his. Sinners will be ready to say, we did
not serve thee because there was harshnesse in thee: Thy work was hard, and
thou were austere: Thy servants went for the most part in sackcloth, while
others wore filke, etc. Now Christ will stop their mouths by his sweet
carriage. Wretches that will not work for Christ, shall be left without all
excuse, when they shall be told, and convinced of the sweetness of Christ, to
his working members. Christ is resolved to stop all mouths in that day. His
sweetness to laborers, shall silence loyterers. His gentle leading of
workers, shall condemn the idle-living of wanderers. The Ewes that have been
big with young, shall witness against those, that would not have Christ to be
their Shepherd; Christ's sweet carriage to the one, shall convince and condemn
the obstinate standing out of the other. Wretches, Christ calls upon you to work
for him; he has given you talents, and he bids you employ them; you are
fearful and sluggish, you hide your talents, and spare your pains; you do not,
will not act, or work for Christ. Consider you shall be without excuse, at the
great day: It will be foolish and false to plead, Christ was a hard master. His
working members by their experience shall confute you, and Christ's sweet
carriage to them shall leave you without apology, or excuse.

CHAP. V. Some uses of the point.
HAving seen the sweetness of Christ's carriage toward all his Ewes, and such
as are big with young, i.e. those who work for him. I shall offer some thing by
way of application in some uses. As,

1. It serves to discover the difference between Christ's service, and all other
service, and between his carriage of himself toward those that work for him,
and the carriage of all others toward any that work for them. If men serve
the world, they do not find (always at least) sweet carriage. Its often seen
among men, after their work is over, the workman is often forgotten. It stands
upon record, as one of the greatest stains of the Roman State, that after
Scipio Africanus had sincerely and successefully served that Commonwealth (when
it was almost spent and ready to dye) and had thereby raised it up: he was
banished, or forced to inhabit in a poor waste desert. Insomuch that when he
dyed he commanded this to be engraven over his sepulcher, Ingrata patria, ne
ossa quidem mea habes. The Commonwealth was so base, as not to have his bones,
who saved their blood: Solomon tells us, of a poor man, who had been very
serviceable to a distracted State, when it was warred against by a great
Prince. The poor man delivered the City by his wisdom, but no man did so much
as remember that same poor man, Eccles. 9.15. And it is reported of Cardinal
Woolsey, that upon his deathbed he should say in much sadness of spirit, If I
had so faithfully served Jesus Christ as I have done my Master ( Hen. the 8.)
he would not have cast me off, as my Master the King has. Oh! that men could
but see the difference that is between the service of man, and the service of
Christ: How ever the sons of men will deal (like themselves) with their
servants sordidly; the son of God will deal with his sweetly.

2. This Doctrine may also reproove these, who deal not with Christ's working
members as Christ does. Oh how cursedly and coursely do many deal with Christ's
workmen! How do they deride, ride, disgrace, oppose, and persecute the Ewes of
Christ, i.e. those that are big and travel in work for him. How did a company
of vile persons vilify Paul, who yet was as an Ewe, ready to bring forth, who
was in travel with the Galathians, as with Christ's Lambs. And then those that
were borne after the flesh did persecute him, that was both borne, and
[bearing] after the Spirit, even so it is now. But nevertheless, what says
the Scripture? what says the point? Christ deals sweetly with his working
members. Are not they then to be reproved that deal harshly? Be reproved
therefore all of you (especially you that pretend to the work of Christ) for
not dealing kindly with his working servants; see thou a person, or preacher
that does the work of the Lord, that preaches Christ, works for Christ, be
reproved for thy unkind, unchristian dealing with him, as knowing that in that
thou art very unlike to Jesus Christ. Be reproved therefore, O ye rugged
spirits, who deal ruggedly with any of Christ's working members; what though
they differ from thy way, if they do Christ's work, Christ deals sweetly with
them, and so should you.

3. The truth of this Doctrine falls heavy upon those, who being both enabled
for, and called to the work of Christ in any kind, and yet refuse it. Friend;
how is it that Christ has given thee a talent and thou will not occupy it for
his use? How is it that Christ has given thee parts, and set thee in place,
and afforded thee opportunities to serve him, and yet thou will not work?
Dare thou say, either that he is a hard Master, or that his work is
unreasonable, or his carriage unkind. Be convinced ye loyterers that will not
labor for Jesus Christ: At the day of account you will want an excuse, when
all the working members of Jesus Christ shall come and say, The work that we
did for Christ, was honorable; the encouragement which we received from Christ
was unspeakable, and his carriage to us all along, was passing sweet and
amiable; then will you be dumb and speechless, as not having any thing to say
for your selves why you stood out from his work and service.

4. The Doctrine speaks encouragement to all those who labor for the Lord,
who are at work for Christ. You that are in Christ's Vineyard; that labor
(though in the heat of the day) who sweat in the service for your Savior:
consider, his carriage is, and will be sweet toward you. Go on, hold on, give
not out: you are in his service who is very sweet: what ever the carriage of
the standers by be, his will be like himself, i.e. loving.

Ob. But yet (will you say) we find harsh usage in the world, merely for being
in this work. We think we should be dealt better withal by men if we did do
so much for Christ* Surely, if we were only Lambs our selves, we should find
kinder carriage: But this renders us hateful, and makes men harsh that we are
Ewes big with young, i.e. that we are endeavoring to bring forth somewhat for
Christ, that we would have others Lambs as well as our selves, and that we can
never be well, but when at work.

Ans. Well be it so, yet be not discouraged: It is your glory to be Christ's
Ews. Christ has dealt well with you, in making you able to work for him, and he
will carry himself kindly to you, while you work for him. What though the
travelers by the way, curse and revile the laborers in the field, so long as
the Lord of the harvest ( Boaz like) bless you, and speak kindly to them, the
Lord be with you. Verily (ye working Saints) who are laboring for the Lord
Christ, you have no just ground of discouragement from all the unkind usage of
the creature, so long as you have the kind carriage of Christ: Oh! be not
discouraged so as to give out, but be rather encouraged so as to go on in the
work of the Lord, for as much as you know your labor shall not be in vain,
and that Christ's carriage to you-ward, shall be sweet.

5. Lastly, the Doctrine speaks comfort to all the working members of the Lord
Jesus. You Ewes that are big with young, here is a point big with comfort. You
go on heavily; you groan while in travel; you cry out (as the Prophet in
another case) My belly, my belly! well he of good comfort, Christ is with you,
and will be sweet in his carriage to you, while you work Christ can? not be
away; Christ is not absent and idle, while you are traveling in his work; no,
he is present, and will be helpful; he will be with you, and lead you gently.

Q. What is thy work (O blessed Ewe?) what art ready to bring forth?

A. (will some say) my work is woeful. I am working too, not to bring forth
any great good, but to cast forth great evil. Christ has set me on work to
cleanse a kennell, to carry out a dunghill: I mean to conquer corruption, and
to cast out lusts! and the very smell of my lusts is ready to choke me; and
which is worse, I can scarce master my work; nay it almost over-masters me;
yea and I have cried more then once and again: thrice have I besought Christ,
and yet I labor in this work, and can do but little at it.

Be it so (O working soul!) yet Christ is and will be kind. His grace shall
be sufficient for thee, and his strength shall be perfected in thy weakness,
as it is 2 Cor. 12.9. He will enable thee in time to master thy work. Sin
shall not have dominion over thee, Romans 6.14. Thou shall be made Lord over thy
lusts. There is a blood of sprinkling which shall cleanse thy kennell. Thou
resistest thy sin unto blood, and thou do bleed while at work against
corruption, yet it remains (thou say.) But know still Christ is sweet, and
his carriage to thee shall be so. And therefore, though all thy blood and sweat
will not cleanse thy soul, nor do away thy sin; yet the blood of Christ
shall, as it is 1 John 1.7.

Ob. But oh! (says another soul) I am at harder work then this: Its my work
to war with the Wolf: I am laboring against Satan. Many temptations daily
beset me. Not any messenger of Satan, but Satan himself does beset me.
Surely (you will say) my work is grievous; is it not?

Resp. True, but thy Lord is gracious. Christ is with thee all this while (O
working soul!) He has promised thee to make away for thy escape, 1 Cor.
11.12. you may expect kind carriage even while you are in this work, and know
that he will help you to go through with it. The very God of peace will (or
shall) shortly tread down Satan under your feet, To. 16.20. It may be Satan
does stand ready to devour that blessed birth, wherewith thou travellest; but
know, Christ is near also, and he will help thee. Build upon it (O thou working
believer!) Christ's carriage shall be kind unto thee.

Ob. Nay but (says another working soul) I have been laboring a long while;
the work about which I have been set is almost over, but first I want a little
strength to perfect it; and secondly, I am in much fear whether when it is done
it shall be accepted. Now this grieves me, this troubles me.

Resp. Well, but hear O soul! thou art at work for a kind and sweet Master,
who will help thee with strength to perfect thy work, and crown thy work
with acceptance when perfected.

For help: Know he will work all our works for us, and in us, Esa. 26. 12.
He will work in you both to will and to do, and that of his good pleasure,
Philip. 2.13. yea the Spirit of Christ (which is the power from on high) shall
help our infirmities, Romans 8.26. This is the sweetness of Christ whom ye
serve, that never did any servant fail in his work, for want of his help. And

For acceptance. Be confident O believer! Christ will accept of every endeavor
of thine in his work. Its Christ's nature to accept of what we have, and not to
look for what we have not. Pigeons are welcome, where Lambs are wanting. Sighs
are sweet, and groans are acceptable unto him. Yea in Christ's work, Voluisse
sat est. A willing mind is accepted. (...) 2 Cor. 8.12.
Trouble not thy self, O working soul, about acceptance. Do thy best, be
thou sincere; and be of good comfort, as knowing this, that Christ is sweet.
His carriage ever was, ever will be, passing tender to all his Ewes big with
young; very sweet to all those that work for him.

Ob. But alas! will some say, my case is comfortless. For it is true, Christ is
sweet to his members that work for him; but what is he to those who sin
against him. Woe is me, I have been big, but 'tas been with badnesse; and I
have brought forth, but oh, 'tas been wickedness; what will the carriage of
Christ be unto me?

Answ. Why for such souls; I say at present no more but this. Jesus Christ is
a merciful high Priest; He knows how to have compassion on the ignorant, and
them that are out of the way, Heb. 5.2. He is a shepherd, that can be kind
even to the Lambs that wander, and go astray. Its his grace (and therefore his
glory) that he can be sweet, even to you (O poor believers!) that have been
sinful. And this is that which I am to make out in the next Section.

SECT. III. Christ's sweet carriage unto Believers weak by sins.
Esa. 40.11. He shall gently lead those that are with young.


CHAP. I.
GOD in Nature has prov^ded a salve for every sore: And Christ in Grace, has
provided a cordial for every believer. Its your Saviors glory, that he is
furnished with suitable sweetnesses (O believers!) unto your weaknesses. And
its his grace that he is as (nay more) ready to give them forth, then you can
be to need them. In this Scripture is held out Christ's sweetness unto weak
believers, who are such (as I distinguished) accidentally. Now these I divided
into three ranks, viz.

1. Such as are weak through work (unto which I spoke in the foregoing
Section.) And 2. Such as are weak through falls: unto which I am to speak
now. And 3. Such as are weak through sufferings: which will be the subject of
the last Section.
So that now the business here is to show the sweetness of Christ unto those
members of his, who are weakened by falls into sins, which I said might also
be couched under this Metaphor of being big with young. The word (...) comes
from (...)


The Scripture tells of a conception of sin, James 1.15. When lust has
conceived, it brings forth sin. And the same Apostle tells in many things we
sin all, James 3.2. Yea John tells that if we ( i.e. those whose fellowship
is with the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ, and who walk in the light, and
have fellowship one with another) If we say we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us, 1 John 1.8.

So that there being in Saints the seed of sin; there may be a sinful
conception sometimes in them; and they may be big with young in that sense.
Indeed all our steppings aside from Christ (especially unto sin) is called in
the Scripture a whoring, and adultery. So that it will be no straining of the
Metaphor in the text; I am sure 'twill be no deviation from truth, to say that
Christ carries himself sweetly, and deals gently, even with those, who have
been, or are weak, by their being big with young in a sinful sense.

The thing therefore which I shall now speak unto is this, That

Christ's carriage is sweet even to those members of his who are weak by their
falls into sin.

CHAP. II. Some things premised for the right understanding of the point, and
the proof of it.
THat I may the more clearly proceed without mistake, and make good the
Doctrine. I shall premise three things.

1. That the best believers are liable unto falls into sin. Even the choicest
Saints, may sometimes either by more violent rapes, or secret temptations, be
big with young with sin. Solomon tells us, that a just man falls seven
times, Prove. 24.16. In the case of Bathsheba, David himself did conceive, and
he was big with young by sin. Its true, Saints by reason of that immortal
seed of grace within them, do not, indeed cannot make a trade of this; they
are not (as I may say) common Strumpers; they do not make this spiritual (as
David did not that literal) adultery their trade: yet still I say it is
possible that sometimes they may, and indeed are overtaken this way. Albeit
grace do sometime render the conceptions of sin abortive, and mostly does kill
them as soon as borne; dashing the brats of sin (while young) against the
stone, breaking them upon crucified Jesus (that I may allude in a spiritual
sense to that Psalm. 137. ult.) Notwithstanding all this I say, yet so it too,
too often is, that even Saints, and true members of Jesus Christ do fall into
sin, or as the phrase is do conceive and bring forth that which is sin.
Experience, and conscience witness unto this, that even such as are borne of
God, do sometimes bear sin. That is one thing which I premise.

2. Believers by falling into sin, do become weak: Their being big does render
them feeble. As breeding and bearing in a natural sense do much weaken; so does
it also in a spiritual sense. Sorrow and conception go together, and every
bringing forth is with pain. Sin is the greatest weakner that can be. The soul
is most unhealthfull when, and while sinful. Sin makes feeble hands, and weak
knees. The very habits of grace (which are our new birth strength) are
exceedingly debilitated by the acts of sin. David after his lying in with
Bathsheba, was much weakened; there was no health in his bones by reason of that
breeding. Any fall weakens in a degree. Psalm. 38.3.
Saints sinnings are their fallings: David broke his bones by sin. Strong men
are oftentimes weak by falls which they have taken, and Saints otherwise strong,
are yet very weak after their falls into sin. Indeed wickedness is
weakness. How weak is the soul after sin! How little a push of temptation
throws it down! How easily is David being weakened with adulterous conceptions,
overthrown by murderius suggestions! And how long was it after that ere he
could work again? Till Nathan came to visit him (as is gathered from the
title of the 51. Psalm) David had made no song. He was so weak, as till then
he could not work: Nathans visit was (as we say) David's up-rising. It seems
he lay in long upon that sin, and was so weak thereby, as that he could not
work, till the Prophet rouzed and raised him up. Surely his sin did make him
very weak. Believers! I think you will seal to this; that sinnings make you
feeble; wickedness renders you weaklings: your fighings say it is true. This is
the second thing I would premise.

3. The next is this, Jesus Christ is displeased with believers sin. Adultery
is displeasing to the husband. Christ is your husband (Believers) and he cannot
but be angry with your sinnings, for they are your adulteries. Christ cannot
smile upon your sinful brats. 'Twere unhusband-like in him, not to be offended
at them. The Lord Jesus loves chaste souls. To be spiritually barren, or
sinfully big are both alike displeasing to Christ. As he is angry, when we
conqeive, not by him, so he is offended if he see us conceive by sin. Not to
abound in good fruit is a failing; but to have any bad fruit is a fault. You
who have at any time been big with young in a sinful sense; tell me, dare you
say Christ ever liked it? nay was he not offended at it? Omnis amor continet in
se aliquid odii.
Jesus Christ must needs loath bad conceptions, and bringings forth, because he
loves good ones. Its certainly the weakness and wantonness of some that
think and speak otherwise. Christ's anger and sin go together. Thou wast a
God that forgavest, though thou to okest vengeance of their inventions. It Is
spoken of Christ (who is Immanuel, God with us, or the Lord our God) Psalm. 99
8. This therefore I premise in the third place, that Jesus Christ (though well
pleased in the maine with believers, yet he) is displeased with them, when they
have rendered themselves weak by sin. Christ likes not to see corruption
rocked in the cradle. He loves not to see David in Bathshebas bosom; Christ
though he loves sinners, yet loathes sins; he is displeased with the sins,
though pleased with the persons of his people. Thus being premised, I shall now
prove the point, viz.

That Christ's carriage is sweet, even is those members of his, who are weak by
falls into sin.

Peter will be a proof to this. Dear soul! Satan got leave to winnow him,
and he weakened him. Yet Christ was very sweet for all that. I suppose you know
his fall, 'twas great. He denies Christ, and swears he knew him not. There Is
one degree. He stands to the denial, and is not ashamed of what he had said,
but lies, and says, he was not one of them that belonged to Christ. Ah Lord,
how he tumbles down! yet he falls a step lower: He begins to curse himself
((...)) i. e. to execrate and anathematize himself, if he were, etc. what a
fall is here! Surely Peter brake his bones (though Christ which was his
sweetness kept his neck) with this fall. How weak was he by his wickedness?
The Damsel that looked upon him, and spoke to him, surely raped his soul. He
conceived sin, and brought forth a lie: and he was very big with young, for
the lie was very great. Well, yet Christ led him gently: He looked on him
graciously. Christ was sweet, though Peter was sinful. Doubtless Peter felt
his bones broken by that fall, surely he was weak, and that made him weep
bitterly: yet notwithstanding Christ was very sweet in his carriage toward
him: And therefore he left special word with the Angel, to bid the women tell
his Disciples, and Peter (specialliter dicit and Petro) of his Resurrection,
and going to Galilee to meet them, and him. Christ prayed for him before he
fell, in an especial manner ( I have prayed for thee, says he) and looked
upon him after he fell. Minds him at the Resurrection, confers sweetly with
him before the Ascension, Joh. 20.) Shall I need to add more, to let you see
how sweet Christ is to believers, weakened by falls into sin.

'Twas singular sweetness in Christ toward those seven Churches that fell,
and were much weakened by their falls. He looked upon them all, and wrote to
them all; and however some passages in his Epistles to them were severe, yet
the very writing of them, and the end thereof was sweet.

I will add but on Scripture to prove this point, yet more. It Is, Isa. 57.17.
For the iniquity of his covetousness I was wroth and smote him (Christ I said
before, is displeased with his members sinnings) and be went on frowardly in
the way of his heart. Ah Lord! what weakness is here, to grow worse for
whipping? yet see Christ is sweet for all this. I have seen his ways, and I
will heal him: I will lead him also, v. 18. Just almost as it is in the text;
he will gently lead those that are with young. Covetousness is Idolatry; to be
big with this, is abominable (Christ was wroth to see it) but to harden the
heart under chastisements is worse: Surely a soul thus fallen, is very weak;
yet even to such souls Christ is sweet, his carriage kind; for even those he
heales, these he leads, and to those he restores comforts.

CHAP. III. One general demonstration of the sweetness of Christ's carriage to
sinning Believers.
HAving cleared the point a little in the intent thereof; and having also
offered something for the proof thereof, I shall now further demonstrate the
tenderness of Christ bowels unto sin-weakned souls, in his carriage unto them
both generally and particularly.

Generally. Consider how that Jesus Christ takes much pains, and lets out
merciful power for the raising of fallen believers, and for the gathering of
wandering Lambs: And this considered, demonstrates Christ's sweetness at first
sight. Sinning souls, Christ will not lose you. Though you through weakness
wander from him, he will not let you go: He Will walk after you, while you
wander; and because he is sweet, he will gather you from your sins. He that
gathers weak Lambs with his great arm, will gather also wandering Ewes with
his shepherds crook. You know the parable of the lost sheep, Luke 15. it
concerns you who have gone astray from your Lords fold. Believer, thou say
thou have wandered in the ways of sin, and art a lost sheep (that is lost in
thy own sense) know thy Shepherd is sweet, and will not lose thee, he will seem
rather for a while to leave others, that he may seek thee. When Antigonus a
King passing by a ditch into which a sheep was fallen, the Historian says, he
pulled it out (though dirty) with his own hands: and for this he was
exceedingly beloved and commended of his subjects. Heavenly sheep, your King is
kinder. He Will not only stoop to filthy ditches of sin into which you fall,
and take you out with his arms, but he will lay you in his bosom, that he may
wash you with his blood. He deals not thus with all sinners; but he will deal
thus with you. Judas falls into one ditch, he betrays his Master. Peter falls
into another, he denies his Master. Christ lets Judas lie, but takes up Peter.
Mind this, O ye poor of the flock! Though Christ let Judase's fall and
perish, He Will gather his Peter's Say now, is not Christ sweet in his carriage
toward his own, even when they sin? It may be thy soul has been straggling
abroad ( Dinah like) and some corruptions or temptations ( Schechem like) have
humbled thee, so that thou art big with young: Now how is it with thy soul?
It't not very weak? Does not joy faint, and faith flag? Art not ready to say,
Christ will whip me for my wandering? He Will be sorely displeased with me. I dare
not say Christ is not displeased at this: Indeed his Spirit is grieved (Jacob
like) at this; yet let me tell you, he is sweet, and so will be notwithstanding
this. Add not weakness to weakness: say not, Christ will never be sweet
more, because I have sinned now: But know, he is and will be sweet in this,
that he will be avenged on the head of sin, for defiling thee. He Will take thee
into his heart, and cast that whereof thou art big out of thine: Say believers,
after sinnings, has not Christ made you most out of love with sin? Have not
you hated it after, more then ever you loved it before? Ephraim shall say, what
have I any more to do with Idols, Hos. 14.8. Has not Christ made you, to
defile that which defiled you? and have not you cast it away as a menstruous
cloth; saying unto it, Get thee hence? as it is Esa. 30.22. How has Christ
showed all his severity against your sins of which you were big? and how has
he mean while been good unto your souls: He has, and does deal grievously
with your sins, destroying them; but he deals graciously with you, gathering
you. Witness to the sweetness of your Shepherd, O ye sinning Ewes, who have
been big with young: Has not he gone after you, and found you, and laid you on
his shoulders rejoicing? Has he not dealt with you as with David: when you
went astray like lost sheep, did not he seek you? Psalm. 119.176. And when he
found you, did he deal with you according to your finfulnesse? Did he whip you
all the way home? Rather did he not lead you gently? Now does not this
demonstrate undeniably, Christ's sweetness to you, O ye sinful believers! If
Jesus Christ, after lust has conceived in us, and brought forth sin, should
leave us to our selves, till sin being finished, should bring forth death, as
it is Janes 1.15. If Christ I say, should deal thus with us, could we deny his
Justice? But now for Christ, even when we have been big of sin, to lead us
gently; not to leave us to our sin, but to gather us out of it, and to raise us
after it; surely this does declare his sweetness. But this is only a general
demonstration; I shall therefore add some particular ones.

CHAP. IV. Some particular demonstrations of Christ's sweet carriage unto
believers weak by sinning.
THe first thing wherein Christ declares his sweetness unto sinning believers
is, his chastening of them for their sinnings. Solomon tells us, that he that
spares the rod [hateth] his son, but he that [loveth] him, chasteneth him
betimes, Prove. 13.24. Chastisement for sin is a privilege peculiar to
Saints: Its childrens bread; Bastards go without it, and this bread (as I may
say) of affliction does Christ give his members after sinning. And that this is
sweet dealing will appear, if you consider,

1. Its Covenant privilege, promisemercy, so says the Text. If thy children
forsake my Law, etc. If they break my Statutes, etc. [Then] I will visit their
transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes, Psalm. 89.30, 31,
32. Believers, Christ deals sweetly with you, when he chastises you after
falls into sin. He Will chastise you with the rod: Its true, he will not cast you
off for your sins; no, nor whip you with Scorpions; yet he will chastise you
(for every one whom he receives after falls, he deals so with for the most
part) His rod (not of iron but) of men, shall be upon you; and those stripes
wherewith he will chasten you, shall be the stripes of the children of men, as
it is 2 Samuel 7* 14. where that in the Psalm is taken. So that Christ deals
sweetly with you, when after your sinnings he chastises you for his Covenant
privilege. And,

2. It Is denied to others: Christ deals not thus sweetly with all sinners. They
sin, and are not in sorrows as others. Its the thundering voice of wrath (as
Origin observes) that says, I will not punish your daughters when they commit
whoredom, Hos. 4.14. Sinners commit whoredom, and are not punished; Saints
are but big with young, and chastised. Indeed those only has Christ known of
all the families of the earth, Amos 3.3. (...) Chastisings for sin are Christ's
visits of the soul.
and therefore he punishes them, that is (as the Hebrew word signifies) visits
them. Believers, Christ lets others sin, and comes not near them: Its his
wrath. But you fall and sin, and Christ visits you, take it as his love. He
does more for you, then for them; and its sweet dealing. This then is the first
particular. Christ carries himself sweetly unto sinning believers, in that he
chastises them for their sins.

Indeed his chastisements are their meltings, they serve to purge them from
their sins; and how else, or what else should he do for the daughter of his
people, as it is Jer. 9.7. Its the care and tenderness of the husbandman to lop
and cut corrupt branches: And its Christ's care over you (and when he declares
it, he shows sweetness to you believers) to cut you, either when you are not
fruitful in good, or when your buddings are bad. And this is the fruit of all
to take away sin, Isa. 27.9. Now surely this is sweer. There is a difference
between (...). Its one thing to cut, another thing to cut off. Its maternall
and sweet to give the sick child a Pill (though bitter) to purge out corrupt
bumors that hinder health. Believers! Christ should not be as tender as a
mother (and yet he makes himself more, Esa. 49.15.) if he should not purge
you, after sinnings, i.e. chastise you, For by this is the iniquity of Jacob
purged, Esa, 27.9. And how sweet does Christ deal with sinning Saints in
purging them from their sins, while he lets others lie, and rot, and perish,
for want of punishing purges. But.

2. Christ deals sweetly with sinning believers in that he does not cast them
off for their sins. As sins before believing could not make him to reject
them; so sinnings after believing, does not cut off love from them. Though he
visit their sin with stripes; yet nevertheless his loving kindness will he
not utterly take from them; nor will he suffer his faithfulness to fail,
Psalm. 89.33. you break your faithfulness in sinning (souls) and that is
weakness enough; But if you think that Christ for your sinning will take away
his love; you make him unfaithful too, and this is greater weakness. Though
you forsake the guide of your youth, and wander till you are big with young,
forgetting the Covenant of your God; yet Christ will not forsake you, nor
break his Covenant with you. Christ should break Covenant if for [your]
sins (O believers!) he should cast you off from love. Dinah had weakly walked
abroad, and upon Shechems ravishing of her, comes home big with young: But
Jacob turns not her out of doors. It may be thou have been weakly wandering
from thy Fathers house (O believing soul!) and corruption in the time of thy
wandering has ravished thee: thou art big with young, and art afraid to go
home. Thou sighest, I have sinned; and if I return, will Christ accept of me?
Fear it not, go and try. He Will not cast you out of doors: Though you come
with big bellies, (to keep to our Metaphor) he will deal gently with thee (though
with young) Though thou have played the barlot with many lovers, yet return
unto me says the Lord, Jer. 3.1. What though a man would not be so sweet to
his wife, yet Christ will be to you. Only acknowledge thine iniquity, (and
what a poor recompense is that?) and fear not to return, for Christ is
married unto thee, Jer. 3.13.19. Happily thy sins have eclipsed love: but know
love remains still, and in due time it shall shine again. The thick cloud
will blow over, and the light of love will arise (in time) on thy heart. Christ
is sweet that he calls you, though weary, and heavy laden. He bids you to take
unto you words, and turn to him, and say take away all iniquity, and receive
us graciously Hos. 14.2. How parent-like does Christ deal! Say (says the
mother) to the offending child (after she has in love whipped it) Pray mother
forgive me, etc. Christ it may be has whipped thee in love (O believer) for
thy offense. Now he puts words into thy mouth, and tells thee what to say. His
love surely is not gone. Is not his carriage sweet? For,

3. Christ in due time smiles upon believers after sins. As their sinnings
did not cut off his love totally, so neither can they keep off the
manifestations thereof. Finally, is not Christ's carriage sweet to you (Oh ye
sinning souls!) that smiles notwithstanding your fins: Speak comfortably to
Jerusalem: Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says (Christ who is) your God,
Esa. 40. How sweetly does the mother take up the child, after she has
corrected it, and dandle it, and kiss it, etc. so sweetly deals Christ with
his members after their sinnings. Is his mercy clean gone (says the
fallen-Saint) for ever? Will he be favorable no more? Has he forgotten to be
gracious? Why remember, O soul! surely Christ has heard thee thus bemoaning
thy self; Thou have chastised me, and I was thastised, etc. Yea it may be so,
will thou say, Christ has heard me thus; but what of that? why, He has said
of thee, Is not he or she my dear child, since I spoke against him, I do
earnestly remember him, therefore my howells are troubled for him: I will
[surely] have (i.e. show) mercy toward him. Christ cannot hold his love always
in: It must, it will burst out at last. Go and tell Peter. Christ cannot hold.
I will restore comforts to him, Esa. 57.17. Christ must be sweet. Do you, dare
you, can you deny it O ye sinners of the stock! Is not this sweet carriage, to
^^^ning believers? well,

4 Christ is very sweetly and tenderly affected toward sinning believers, for
his is sad for them, even all the while that he afflicts them. The mothers
heart is sad, even while she whips her child: and sometimes she turns away,
and weeps to see the child weep, whom yet she made to weep. Its so with
Christ. He chastises for sin, and when he sees the soul weeping under that
chastisement; he weeps too. My soul (says he) was troubled for him, Jer,
31.20. (...) i.e. Thus: thus my bowels founded for him. The word signifies to
sound as the aroubled waters, or tumultuous people* look as the waters after
some storm sound loudly, or as a tumultuous people under some great oppression
(for that is mostly the ground of tumults) are much troubled. Even so was
Christ troubled at Ephraims bemoaning of himself you have not an High Priest
who cannot Sympathize (as the word is) Heb. 4.15. No. but he is so sweet, that
he sympathizeth with you in all those sadness of yours, under those sufferings
which he brings upon you for your sins. God had afflicted Israel for their sin,
but when they cried out under that affliction, deliver in this [once], (it
seems a deliverance then would be so acceptable as that it would countervaile
a destruction afterward) its said, his soul was grieved (as it were cut short
with sorrow (so the word there signifies) for the misery of Israel Judge. 10*
15. Oh how sweet is Christ's carriage to his sinning members! (...) The same
word is used Jud. 16.16. and rendered, vexed.
who sympathizeth with them in those sorrows under which they lie for sins.
Christ sighs and weeps with you; O ye sighing and weeping souls. Is not this
sweet carriage?

5 Christ carries himself sweetly unto sinning Believers. In speaking to the
father to pardon those sins. When the mother has whipped the child her
self, husband faith she, pray forgive it, And thus Christ he fees his children
(for he is the father of believers (therefore he is called the everlasting
father, and they are called his children. Compare I say 9 6. and Heb. 2.13.) I
say Christ fees them fall in the dirt of sin, he takes them up, whips them
indeed: but faith Father forgive them, for my sake. If any man sin we have an
Advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the Righteous: and he is the
propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2.1. Christ is both our (...) that is, our
patron who takes our cause upon him (as Beza glosseth it well) and our (...).
That is, our propitiatory offering, to reconcile the father to us after our
sins. What can he be more to show himself sweet? ^^deed believers he
therefore lives, and is at the right hand of the Father, that for your daily
sins, he may make daily surplications, and intercede with the father, in your
behalf for your failings. And if this be not sweet, tell me what is.

6 Singular sweetness shines in the carriage of Christ toward finning
believers, in that he takes notice of all that good which is in them
notwithstanding their sins. Its a mighty failing among the sons of Adam, that
they so mind men's vices as they forget their virtues. A little evil makes men
sometime forget a great deal of good: But its not so with Christ, for he
remembers, though but a little good, notwithstanding a great deal of evil.
Unskilful men throw away gold, because of the oar mixed with it, so do not
artificers. The Lord Jesus (o believers!) knows how to discern your gold,
though covered with much oar, he can see the least of your sparklings (ye
Divine Diamonds) while ye are in the dirt. Its observable how sweetly Christ in
all his Epistles to those 7 lapsed Churches, takes notice of all the good that
was in them, and records it. Ephesus had forsaken her first love. Yet this she
had, and note, it 'twas but a (...) a this, some one thing: and what was that?
she hated the works of the Nicholaitans, which Christ also hated.

Observe: it was but (as I may say) a negative goodness. Thou hate the
works of the Nicholaitans, which I also hate, Apoc. 2.6. Here is but a little
good, hating bad deeds, and this Christ forgets not, but observes, although
mingled with a great evil, viz. the leaving of first love. Christ O ye sinning
souls, forgets not your graces though weak, when he corrects your corruptions
though strong. 'Twas not a little unbeleif which appeared in the Disciples, when
they were afraid of perishing in the Sea, by reason of a tempest, Mat. 8.24,
25. 'Twas I say, not a little, but a great deal of unbeleif, which discovered
it self, in that deed, what reason had they to fear, who carried Caesar, as
the Historian said: why should they cry out we perish, when they had saving
presence with them? yet note it, Christ does not so eye their fear, as to
forget their faith: No, he thinds, and mentions their faith though but little:
And he speaks of their faith while he chides their fear, Why were ye
searefull, O ye of little faith? When you sin against men, they will be sordid,
and forgetting al your good, they will blazon your blame: But when you sin against
Christ, he is sweet, and albeit he may secretly tell you of your lault (in your
own conscience) to humble you, yet he will still remember the grace that is in
you. Sining Sardis has but a few good names (amongst many bad) and Christ
records them. Thou have a few names even in Sardis Apoc. 3.4. And falling
Philadelphia has but a little strength, and yet Christ eyes it, and blazons
it, thou have a little strength (there it is eyed) and have kept my Word (by that
little strength) and have not denied my name. Thus it is blazoned, You say
sometimes poor souls! we have much evils but little good, and strong
corruptions, but weak grace: And is not this sad? It Is true: but Christ is and
will be sweet, He Will not so mind your evil, as to forget your good, He Will not
forget thy weak grace, though mixed with strong corruption. Though you are weak
(O soul) by sin, yet Christ will and does remember your little strength, here
is sweetness indeed.

Lastly, The brightness of this truth that Christ is sweet unto sinning
believers, shins in this beam, viz. in that he turns all their sins to their
good, Christ makes Sampson^ riddle: truth in believers souls. Out of the eater
there comes forth meat, and out of the strong sweetness, Judge. 14.14. Christ
makes the devouring corruptions in believers, to become meat for their faith to
feed upon, while by killing one he gives ground to believe the ruin of
another, And he brings forth sweetness out of their strong sins, in making grace
to super abound, where sin did but abound Believers, is not this truth? cannot
you interpret the ridle of Sampson in the carriage of your Savior toward you
after sin. Has not Christ helped you, to suck honey (Be like) from
Worme-wood. Have not you O Believing Be been taught by Christ to suck the
honey of sinne-hatred, from the Worm wood of sin-acted! How sweetly does
Christ kindle the Spouses love even by her coldness? Does he not cause her
sleeping, while he knocked, to end in a healthful fit of love-sicknes, when
she awaked, Ca^. 5.2.8. did not Christ make Peter's cowardice in denying him to
a Maid, turn into courage of owning him before a Magistrate? compate Luke
22.56. with Acts 4.8. How did Peter by the lamenesse which he took in his fall
of denying Christ, even after (as the Athenians mother told him) learn well to
own Christ, and that as the Speaker for all the rest, Acts. 2.14, and 3 12
surely Christ is sweet in his carriage toward ye, Oye sinning Souls! have not
you loved the fold more by your wanderings? have not you (A^^iah-like) learnt to
hate your sins, were then ever you loved them? As children* have not you been
taught to hate the fire that burnt you? Speak, O ye Ewes that, by the rapes of
sin have been big with young. Has not your Shepherd taught you to loath
those sins which ravished you? And to keep closer to him, since your straying
from him? Thus you see how Christ carries himself toward his sinning Members;
And tell me now if in all this carriage there be not singular sweetness.

CHAP. V. Some Reasons of the Point,
IF now any ask whence it comes to pass that Jesus Christ is thus sweet unto
believers, even notwithstanding their sinnings: The answer is easy, and the
reasons are.

First, Because of the sweetness of his nature, as God. Its the nature of God
(for his name denotes his nature) to be merciful and gracious, i. e. to
sinners (for mercy and grace allude to sin, there being no place for either,
where sin is not) God is said to keep mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity
and transgression, and sin Exodus 34.7. All the sorts of sin are included under
these three terms, iniquity, transgression, sin, (...)
and God is said to keep mercy to forgive these, as if his mercy were kept on
purpose for pardon, and sweet dealing with sinners. Your Christ is God O
believers. This pardoning fulness of the Godhead dwells in him, for in him
dwells [All] the fulness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2.9. Christ (as God)
is merciful to all sinners, but (as your Shepherd) he is sweetly merciful
toward you. But,

2. Christ is therefore thus sweet unto sinning believers, because of all his
members these are the weakest. Sick men are weaker then healthy children. Many
times the mother lets the child cry in she cradle, while she looks unto the
sicke-one in the bed. Christ is wise, and therefore most tender of the weakest.
Christ knows your weakness, O souls under sin! And he will therefore be
sweet to you, because you are weak. Poison causes pain, and pain
proportionates pity. You have a pitiful high Priest (Believers) who measures
on his pity, according to your pain. (...). Heb. 5.2.
And because your falling into sin, is to you, most painful, he will be most
pitiful Naughty conceptions (say some) are most painful and dangerous: sure I
am, sin full conceptions are. Believers are never worse then when big with
finne, and Christ is still kindest to those that are weakest.

3. Satan is most busy with believers when under sin; and therefore Christ
has the more care of them then. Satan would feign tempt the soul to despair
upon its sinning, and should not Christ be very sweet, so it would. Christ came
to destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. Christ by his sweet carriage
will destroy this work of the Devil, viz. desparation, which he specially
endeavors in believers, after sinnings. How bitter is Satan to the soul
after sin? How sadly does he buffet it? In what black and bloody colors
does he set sin before the soul? How home does he lay it? And how high does
he aggravate it? In all this he drives to despair. Now Christ is at hand to
destroy this work of Satan, which he will do, by manifesting to the soul his
sweetness, for that alone keeps the soul from sinking. Believers would sink
under sin, but Christ prevents it by sweetness.

4. Christ knows this to be a sad state for the soul to lie under sin, and
therefore he is sweet to believers under theirs. He was tempted unto sin
(though without sin) and so knows the sadness of that (as a City that has
been besieged, though not taken, knows the misery of a siege) and he
experimentally knows the bitterness of being under sin ( being made sin
for us, Haud iguara mali miseris suscurrere disco. Dido apud Virg.
and forsaken of God for that) so that Jesus Christ knowing the sadness of
being under sin, does therefore especially show sweetness to his members in
this condition.

CHAP. VI. Some uses and application of this.
I Would feign that the Proposition thus proved, should be improved. Its a
clear truth you see, That Christ's carriage is sweet and tender toward his
sinning members. Now there is special use which may be made of this. I will
only touch at four, viz.

An use 1. Of Reproof. 2. Of Comfort. 3. Of Encouragement. 4. Of Counsel.


First, this point is profitable for reproof, and it serves to reprove those
whose dealings with sinning believers are not like Christ's. How sharp and
severe are the dealings of some with believers for their sin s. If a believer
be overtaken with sin. What unchristian carriage do they meet withal from
some. How unbrotherly are the exclamations? And how bitter are the aggravations
thereof? Thou see thy brother sin: Its doubtless his weakness. But do
thou deal roughly with him? Is thy carriage sour? Do thou make the most of
every failing? Do thou spread it abroad to his shame? Be reproved: for now
walk thou contrary to Christ. I profess I fear some will inherit Chams
curse, for they take his course of uncovering the nakedness of fathers and
brethren. Ah Lord! was it ever heard, that any who profess the name of Christ,
should make it their study, to defame and publish the failings and faults of
the godly, to shame them, and profession in them, yea and Christ too at once.

Ob. I but that which we report is true? Shall they do evil, and not hear of
it?

Resp. Be it so, that it is true, yet your dealings are not Christ-like with
them. Tell him between thee and him alone, that's Christ's command, Matthew. 18.15.
And be sweet to him, in dealing with him, that is Christ's carriage; know you not
what the Apostle says? Brethren if any one be overtaken in a fault, ye which
are spiritual restore him in the spirit of meekness, etc. Gal. 6.1. Is
railing, reviling, publishing, and proclaiming errors, and failings of
brethren, (...), i.e. Tenderly put his bone in joint.
restoring in the spirit of meekness? Has thy brother broke his bones in
falling, and will thou break his heart by severe and harsh dealing? Has he an
error, and will thou forget all the truth that he holds, to exclaim of that?
Must thou forget all his graces, because of some corruption? What, because thy
brother fails, will thou be foul? Because once he did evil, shall he never
hears well? Be reproved, O ye whom it may concern: you deal not as Christ
does with sinning souls, your reproves of brethren should be excellent oils,
which should not break their heads, as it is Psalm. 141.5. so should you declare
kindness to them: And so would Christ's carriage appear in yours, your dealing
even with offending and sinning believers, should be in the weeknesse of the
spirit, and in the sweetness of Jesus; and if not, you sin in your dealings,
for you are unlike to Christ, and to be reprooved for it.

This point is precious, and it may be as a cordial to fallen souls. Christ's
carriage has been, and is to be sweet to such as you. You cry out, I have
sinned, I have sinned, and what shall I do? I have faild in this duty, and
fallen by that sin. I have been overtaken with such an infirmity, overpowred by
such a temptation, conquered by such a corruption: And woe is me, I am undone!
I have gone astray from the Shepherd of my soul: I have played the harlot with
many lovers, and I am big with young: Lust has conceived, and it has brought
forth sin.

Q. Now what shall I do? will not sin bring forth death? I have deserted
Christ, will not he desert me? Say man of God, whither shall I go? what shall
I do?

Ans. Stay thy self (O poor soul) upon this point as upon a pillar. Christ's
carriage will be sweet even to sinning souls. You have a gracious Lord: A
merciful high. Priest. A sweet Shepherd, who can have compassion on them that
are out of the way, Heb. 5.2. He Will gather thee, O weak wandering soul! He Will
restore thee to himself, and comfort to thee. His rod and staff shall comfort
thee; with his Shepherds crook he will fetch thee in from wanderings, and with
his staff, he will support thee under weakness. Bear up, O ye fallen Saints,
Christ will be sweet unto you; for he will heal your backslidings, and love you
freely, Hos. 14.4.

Four sorts of souls in special I aim at in this use of comfort.

1. Such as are fearful to sin. You that stand in awe and would not sin; you
whose souls were afraid before sin, and are now much more afraid after
sin. Take you this comfort. It Is yours, Thou say, before I sinned I was
afraid: Its sight was sad to me, my heart trembled for fear lest I should be
overtaken with it. Now that I have sinned, I am more afraid lest I be kept in
slavery by it. Be not afraid, only believe: Christ will deal sweetly with
you: He Will subdue thine iniquilies, I and cast all thy sins into the depth of
the Seas, Micah 7.19.

2. Such as are sorrowful under sin. You believers, who go in black; I
speak to you, Christ is sweet to sinning souls. Why mourn you so much as if
you would not, could not be comforted? That spirit which is now in thee, as a
mourning dove, will ere long bring an olive branch of peace from thy beloved.
He that now convinces of sin, will speedily comfort thee notwithstanding
sin. You weeping Peter's; Christ is sweet, though you have sinned in denying
him; he will smile shortly upon you. Hear, O ye groaning Paul's! you cry,
wretched men that you are; Christ came into the world to save sinners, of which
you are chief: And you shall find sweetness in his carriage, though there
has been sinfulness in yours.

3. You who mourn under the filth of sin, as much as under the guilt of it.
This comfort is yours: you grieve to see your souls so defiled; and you say
what though I am free from damnation, I am pestred with defilement. I have a
filthy hand, and a more filthy heart. My conversation is dirty, but my
disposition is more dirty. Ah Lord! will a pure Christ own such an impure
wretch as I?

Q. Will the Lamb without spot own me who am nothing (as it were) but a great
scab and botch?

A. Yes O soul! know thy Savior is sweet. He that loved Lazarus, when he lay
at the gate of Dives full of soars, will love thee; though thou have been in
thy blood, and he will wash away the filth of thy botches with the purity of his
blood. He has loved thee, and given himself for thee; and he will sanctify
thee, and cleanse thee, by the washing of water, and by the word, that be may
present thee glorious to himself, not having spot or wrinckle, or [any such
thing] Ephesians. 5.27. Rouse up thy self oh believing Soul! who groanest at the
filth of sin. Christ will be sweet in his carriage toward thee. But,

4. Its your comfort also, who do mourn under sins might: who are afraid, now
sin has you down, it will keep you under its dominion. Jesus Christ will be
sweet unto you: And sin shall not have dominion over you, for you are not under
the law, but under grace, Romans 6.14. Thou say, Ah Lord! I am afraid since my
fall into sin, that I shall get such a haunt, as I shall never leave. I
question since I have been big with sin once, that I shall be so ever. And
which is as bad, if not worse: I fear lest that since I have done evil, I
shall never learn how to do well. Say not thus, O believing soul! Jesus
Christ is sweet in his carriage toward his sinning members. He Will not cut off
his little toes, because they have been out of the way; but rather make them
straight, and keep them in the way.

Saints under sin remember this point for your comfort; Christ's carriage is
sweet to his sinful members.

Q. May not we mourn for falls into sin. Is it not lawful to be sorrowful,
since we have been, yea and are sinful?

A. Yes, you may mourn, but not to desparation; you may be sad, but not
over-sad. There may be a failing even in mourning for sin.

Q. Why, when does the soul fail that way?

A. Then when it hinders us from seeing and tasting Christ as sweet. So much
sorrow for sin (said an experienced Preacher) is sufficient as brings us to
Christ. Dr. Sibbs souls conflict, p. 380.
And I may say that which obstructs this is too much. Its one of Satan's
stratagems, to make us pore so long upon sin, as to make us neglect looking
to Christ: sin is too bitter, when it makes you forget that Christ is sweet.
That weeping is too much, which makes the eyes blind, and dis-inables the
soul from seeing Christ's smiles.

Ob. Oh! but alas, I may well give way to sorrow, for my sin is of the greatest
size.

Rep. Why what is thy sin, O soul!

A. Its forsaking of first love, wandering from my beloveds bosom.

Rep. But know though thou have forsaken thy first love, Christ keeps his. He
changes not in his affection, as men do. Having loved his own, he loves them
to the end, as it is, Joh. 13.1.

Ob. But alas! I shame to speak out my sin, for it is worse.

Rep. Why what is it bleeding heart? Its well thou art ashamed of it; but yet
speak, what is it.

Ans. Why, Its adultery, spiritual adultery. I am guilty of going a whoring
from Christ: Alas! sin has conceived, and I am big with young, etc.

Resp. Notwithstanding know, O soul! that Jesus Christ leads gently those that
are thus with young: His carriage has been kind to others in your case, and
it shall be so unto you: Thou have played the harlot with many lovers, yet
return again to me says the Lord, Jer. 3.1. You wandering Ewes, hearken to
this sweet call of your Shepherds pipe, and go return unto him.

Oh. But alas, if I could return with weeping, and supplications, it were
somewhat:

Ans. Why what were it, O soul? It were but sweet, not satisfactory. And
Christ knows how to be kind, though you know not how to cry. He Will love you,
and that love shall melt you. Besides, what mean those sighs of thine? those
groans of thine? these dolorous questionings of thine? Surely they are the
breathings of his Spirit in thee, and surely Christ will be, nay is sweet unto
thee.

Thus you see how useful for comfort this point may be unto believers
overtaken with sin. Therefore

3. Let it be for encouragement unto you (O believers, who are weak by
sinnings) let it encourage you to go unto Christ, in consideration of the
sweetness of his carriage to such as you. Jesus Christ calls you, and says,
Return unto the Lord your God, for you are fallen by your iniquities, Hos.
14.1. Go and say, Behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God, Jer.
3.22. What though you have sinned, yet he is a Savior: As all your sins
before conversion, did not keep Christ from coming to you; so neither let
your sins since, keep you from going to him. He is still the same in
sweetness, be you the same in faith. Why tarry you, O wanderers! why enter you
not the folds of Jesus? call out some one that was once in your case, and
enquire whether Christ did deal kindly with him. Doubt not, Oh ye of little
faith! but he will be so to you. He uses to be sweet to all the weak of his
flock, and in particular to such as you who are weakened by sins. Consider this
your Saviors sweetness, and be encouraged to go to him, O ye sinning souls.

Lastly, Let this doctrine persuade Japhet to dwell in the tents of Shem: my
meaning is, that those who as yet are altogether strangers unto Christ, should
come in unto him; you who as yet never knew what it was to be infolded in the
bosom of Jesus, who as yet were never Lambs nor Ewes in Christ's fold. Consider
the sweetness of this Shepherd, and come into him. Satan deals seemingly
sweet, that he may draw you into sin, but in the end he will be really bitter
to you. Christ indeed is seemingly bitter, to keep you from sin, hedging up
your way with thorns. But he will be really sweet, if you come into his flock,
even notwithstanding your sins. Thou look into Christ's fold, and thou see
it hedged, and fenced all about to keep you in from sin, and this keeps thee
from entering: But oh! let it not. Christ indeed is unwilling that any of his
should wander, and if they be unwilling too, its well. And if they wander,
he will fetch them in, it may be with his Shepherds dog (some affliction) but yet
he will not be (as we say) dogged himself: No, he is, and will be sweet. It may
be now Satan smiles, and is pleasant to you while you sin, but know he will be
bitter in the end: He that sings Cyrene-like now, will devour Lyon-like at
last. He Will torment you and vex you, and be burning and bitterness to you. Oh
come in therefore to Jesus Christ, let him be now the Shepherd of thy soul:
And know then, he will be sweet in endeavoring to keep thee from sin, before
thou commit it; and he will be sweet in delivering thee from sin after thou have
committed it. Oh that this thought that Jesus Christ is sweet in his carriage
unto all his members, unto all of his flock, especially the sinning ones;
might persuade the hearts of some sinners to come in unto his fold.

SECT. IV. Christ's sweet carriage, sweet unto Believers weak by sufferings.
Esa. 40.11. He shall gently lead those that are with young.


CHAP. I.
THe sharpness of the air in the field makes us keep within; and the harsh
usage which children find abroad, causes them to mind home. The sordid
dealings of men with Saints, occasions them to think of the sweet dealings of
Christ; and then we are most desirous to see Christ smiling, when we behold men
as frowning.

Its a hard time abroad: And some that call themselves brethren, are yet bitter
in their behavior. Open enemies strike, and seeming friends chide: Its but
meet therefore to look up to Christ, to see how he stands affected to us, and
will deal with us in such a time.

Holy Souls! who endeavor to keep your selves from sin: you meet with
suffering: and that upon this ground, because you fear to sin, You are not of
the world, and you are therefore hated by the world. Christ has freed you from
the evil of the worlds polution, and therefore it follows you with the evil
of its persecution. You find heavy hands, and you fear hard hearts in the
world. I know where your thoughts be. You think how does Christ's heart stand
toward us now.

For this, know: Christ's heart toward you is very sweet. His thoughts to
youward are very precious. His dealings with you will be very kind. In the
midst of your saddest sufferings, expect sweetest carriage from your Savior.
Its his nature to show pity, especially when he sees any in misery.

I am now to speak unto the third sort of such believers, as I call
accidentally weak, viz. to those who are weak through sufferings: And I am to
show how Christ's carriage toward them also is sweet as it is to others.

The Prophet tells us. He shall gently lead those that are with young. The
words may (as I have opened) be applied unto suffering Saints. Its a metaphor
in which the Scripture does much delight it self to set out sufferings by. The
voice of the daughter of Zion bewailing her self (under tribulations) is as of
a woman in travail bringing forth, Jer. 4 31. And Christ speaking of the
sorrows, and persecutions, which his Disciples should meet withal; speaks of
them in this phrase, they should be as a woman in travail, Joh. 16.21. I am
loath to make a Scripture bleed (as Austins phrase was) by straining it too
hard: And I hope if I apply this Scripture unto suffering souls 'twill be
milk, not blood. I am ^pt to think it a safe way where Scrip^ures admit of
many (but not contrary) significations to take all, least I miss the meaning.
Bleeding heart for Christ's sake! here is milk to comfort you, in ^his
Scripture, It represents Christ's car^iage very sweet to such as you, He will
^ently lead you. Your way is rocky; full of briars and thorns: persecution is
a prickly path: Your feet bleed, yea, and it may be your hearts too. Well, be
of good comfort, Christ will lead you gently. The truth which I would a little
insist upon from this interpretation is this, viz.

Jesus Christ carries himself exceeding sweetly to his suffering members.

CHAP. II. Somethings premised, and the point gentrally proved.
I will in some steps ascend to the truth in hand. Two things I shall premise
as preparatory to the proof, by way of prevention of objections.

1 This first I premise, viz. Christ permits his choicest members many times to
meet with sharp sufferings for his sake, and the Gospels. Sometimes he gives
the dearly beloved of his soul into the hands of her enemies Jer. 12.7. 'Twas a
speech spoke by Christ himself unto his disciples, that in the world they
should have tribulations, Job. 16.33. The pastor prophesied to all his flock,
when he said, ye shall be hated of all Nations for my names sake, Mat. 24.9,
John was the bosome-beloved, of Jesus, yet he must to Patmos, and there be a
companion (with suffering Saints) in tribulation, Apoca. 1.9. Your Shepherd (O
ye heavenly flock!) may permit you to walk in the vallie of the shadow of
death. Christ's lambs are sometimes worried by the dogs. I shall not need to
expatiate. Surely Saints, its no mystery unto you. Sufferings every where meet
with you. This Paul knew, that the Holy Ghost witnessed every where, that bonds
and afflictions did wait for him, Act. 20.23. What a bloody bed-role is that?
2 Cor. 11.23.24. And Stripes, Prisons, Rods, deeps, Perils of all sorts, and
from all sorts, these and the like Paul met almost every where, This is the
first word I premise.

2. The second is this, That this is consistent with Christ's sweetness.
Believers you may be precious in Christ's eyes though in persecutions. Jesus is
a beloved, though you are in blood: Though he permit you to suffer, yet he is
sweet. Himself was the deare-one of the father, yet he suffered, and his
father was still dear. Christ's sufferings were consistent with his fathers
sweetness; and yours are with his. To you it is given, not only to believe on
him, but also to suffer for his sake, as it is Phil. 1.29. Affliction is a gift
of love even as faith is. Its grace as well to bleed for, as to believe in
Christ. It may be fair over head, when, and while foul under foot. In a bad
way a man may have good weather. A fair sky, and a filthy way may consist.
The Shepherd may pipe, though the dog bark. Build upon it ye suffering
Saints! Christ may be sweet, though you suffer. Though your cup be bloody, he
drank first, and surely for the servant to drink of no worse then the Master,
its not hard. Admit men are unkind, yet Christ abides kind, yea, although he
suffer men to deal harshly with you, he is merciful still. Their malice does
not make void his mercy. Its a fallacious way of arguing, because you suffer,
therefore Christ is not sweet. No, your sufferings, and Christ's sweetness may
stand together.

If you ask how can this be? I answer, well enough. And this I shall prove.

The phrase in the Text includes two things, tending to consume this truth,
viz, 1. Presence, 2. Supportation.


1 Presence, Christ is with his Members in all their miseries (he could not
else lead them). Saints in their saddest sufferings, in their sorest
persecutions, have Christ's presence, when thou passest through the waters I will
be with thee, and Isay 4^.2. When the three children were in the furnace,
Christ was there to make the fourth. I see four men loose, walking in the
midst of the fire, and the form of the fourth is like the son of God. Dan.
3.25. Christ you see was so sweet as to be in the fire with those Saints. And
it seems he led them there, for it is said they walked. John was in the Isle
called Patmos, for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus, Apoc. 1, 9.
And Christ was there too, verse. 13. David knew well this sweetness of Christ
his Shepherd: and therefore he assures and comforts himself with this: That
though he were in the vale of the shadow of death, yet Christ would be with
him, Psalm. 23. But

2 Christ is not only present, but suppartingly present with his in their
sufferings. Christ leads his gently, while they suffer grievously. This David
also knew and therefore he says, thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff they
comfort me. Saints are weak in sufferings; so weak that they cannot swim (at
least) long. But Christ will keep them from sinking. Feeble feet can hardly
go upon rockie ground, If some body do not support, they will fall. That the
feet of the Saints may not slide, and they fall under, or in sufferings, Christ
will be present (for he keeps the feet of the Saints) and lead them. Paul
tells Tymothy, though men were so weak as to desert him, when he was to answer
before Nero, yet Christ was so kind as to be present with him, and to support
him. He speaks of it with a notwithstanding as if he should say, though all
shamefully shrunk back, and forsook me, yet notwithstanding Christ the Lord
(sweetly) stood by me, and supported me, 2 Timothy 4.17. Speak Saints! in your
sufferings to have Christ's company, and support, is it not sweet? When you
pass through fire and water (as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 66.12) to have
Christ to go along with you, and to lead you gently, is it not glorious? why,
this others have had; and you shall have, to let you see this as true, that
Christ carries himself sweetly to suffering Saints.

CHAP. III. One great instance to prove the point.
I Desire to let you see the truth of the point fully: Therefore I shall lay
before you one great instance in which you may see it plainly.

I will instance in Christ's carriage toward his Disciples (who were to suffer
upon his departure.) And you shall see how sweet it was.

There are five particulars in which Christ did sweetly declare himself
toward his Disciples, with reference unto those sufferings, that he knew they
would meet withal, for his sake, in the World, as soon as he departed.

1. He gave them not only real, but royal testimonies of his love. In that
he washed their feet, and serves them: In that he instituted his supper, and
feasts them. And in that forgetting his own sufferings, he comforted them.
When Jesus knew that his hour was come (faith the Scripture) Christ knew that
this was the hour and power of darkness (as he elsewhere calls it). He knew
that he was now to suffer: and that upon this, his Disciples would be
scattered, yet even now; Having loved his own he loves, them to the end. He
does not withdraw from them to spend this hour in preparing himself: but he
spends it in loving them. Have you ever heard of one who being ready to suffer
death himself, and who had but one night, ere he should be taken, and yet did
spend that one night, and all that night in washing, feasting, comforting some
others. Why Believers: Jesus Christ was such an one, when the hour was come,
and he knew it, that he must be taken and dragged to suffering: he forgets (as
it were) himself. And spends all the time in feasting and chearing his
Disciples, as if he were rather sensible of theirs then of his own sufferings.
All this is clear out of Ioh. 13 and 14. But

2. He fore-warnes them of all, even the worst of those evils that they should
suffer. There was not a prick, a Stone in the way in which they should go, but
he acquaints them with it. He tells them how that the world would hate them,
persecute them, excommunicate them yea, kill them. How sweet is he? to tell
them the saddest things beforehand that when they meet with them they might
not be offended, that is (as the word John 1.16. will bear) so scandalized as
to fall. Christ tells them all the rubs in the way, that when they meet with
them, they might not falover them.

3. Christ (having forewarned them of the sufferings they should meet withal)
he gives them comforts to sweeten those sufferings.

As 1. He assures them that (though he left them) they should not be as
Orphans, without a Tutor, or Guardian. 2. That therefore, he would send them
the holy Ghost, who should both comfort and take care of them, John. 14.16.18.
To this he adds, that they were near to him, even as near as the branches to
the Vine. And that therefore they should suffer no worse then himself did,
John 15.1.20. Lest they should be borne down with the thoughts of the length
of their suffering, he tells them that it should be but short, and though the
sense might be sharp, yet the issue should be sweet. To this end he tells
them that their sorrow should be turned into joy: And that they should be but
as a woman in travail, whose sorrow is measured by an hour (as is hinted in
that expression, when her hour is come) but whose joy should be such, as that
it should swallow up that sorrow, and make her forget it, Ioh. 16.16. To this
he joins, that as their sorrow should have an end, so their joy should have
none, for it should be such as none could take from them, verse. 22. Thus he
cheares their hearts against that fear of sorrow which had filled them.

4. After all this, He bends his knees to his father, and prays for them, Ioh.
17. And how far-passing sweet was he in his prayer! Observe, he intreates the
father to keep them from the sting of sufferings, i.e. the evil of the world.
verse. 15. And that the father would grant them that, which is the mystery of
glory, i.e. union to himself, that they may be one as thou father art in me,
and I in thee; I in them, and thou in me, verse. 21.23. And (as if all this
were not enough) he wills it: That they might have as glorious a Mansion as
himself, and that they might have the same glory that he had with the father
before the World was, verse. 24. Thus he powers out his heart in prayer for them
And which is considerable, this he did in their audience (as the context
shows) O how were the Disciples hearts ravished think you all the while!

5. Lastly, that he might yet show them more sweetness: He actually submits
himself to sufferings, and be offers himself to free them. If ye seek me let
these go their way, Joh. 16.8. So he suffers, that they might not; he takes
the blows on himself, to keep them off from them. And this still he does
spiritually; for all our sufferings are rather the remainder of Christ's
afflictions, as it is Col. 1.29. then our own.

So that now put all this together, and parabolically (yet plainly) it speaks
thus, There was a great Captain to fight a bloody battle (in which by being
conquered, he would get the day) he knew that himself should be taken in the
first onset, and that afterward he should be slain; yet for all this, some
few hours before the enemy fell on, he feasts his Soldiers, and serves them
himself in that feast. Tells them of all the worst the enemy would, or could
do; spends his oratory in making a long and sweet speech to encourage and
comfort you: Tells them plainly that he should be taken and slain; yet assures
them of another Comforter and Cheiftaine. In the midst of them lifts up his
eyes to heaven: And (as if he minded them more then himself) prays more for
them, then for himself. Having done this, he prepares to meet the enemy. And
as soon as they appear, he approaches; and by giving himself up as their
prisoner, makes way for his Soldiers escape. Tell me, was not this a sweet
Captain? was not this sweet carriage? Why believers, the Parable is concerning
the Captain of your salvation, Jesus Christ. The prementioned particulars open
and make good the Parable in all its parts; and does not this parable prove the
point? viz. That Christ is very sweet to his sorrowful, suffering members.

CHAP. IV. Eight particulars instancing and declaring the truth of the point.
AS a further demonstration of the truth of the Doctrine. I will add some
particulars in which the sweetness of Christ's carriage toward his suffering
members does especially appear. And

1. It appears in this, That he secures your choicest jeu ell in your sorest
suffering. Saints have a pearl of great price, which if they have secure, they
fear no loss. This pearl is their soul; and this Christ secures in all
their sufferings. Upon this ground it is that he bids them not to fear. Be not
afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have no more that they can
do, Luke 12.4. This he spoke in the beginning of his Sermon, and that was
intended to his Disciples, as appears v.i. Tunde capsum Anaxarchi, said the
Martyr. Believers, all the threshing of your enemies, can but beat away your
husks. The worst that sufferings can, or shall do, is but on the worst part,
your vile body: Christ still secures your best part, your soul. I know your
cry in suffering: Is it not that, Deliver my soul from the sword, my [Darling]
from the power of the dog, Psalm. 22.20. Why believers, Christ will do this. He
always keeps that in his own hand, and none can, or shall pull it thence. Ye
shall be hated of all men for my names sake; But there shall not a hair of
your bead perish, Luke 21.17, 18. Some expound this thus, you shall suffer
much, but not in the maine; not a hair of your head (which may be an Hebraisme
for that which is the chief) shall perish. Sure I am of this: That which is a
Saints chief, is secured in the midst of sufferings. Believers, your enemies
shall but bruise your heel, your worser part, Christ will secure your head,
i.e. your precious, prime, chief part. Your wood, and bay, and stubble; your
poor, base, drossie part may suffer loss, but your precious things shall not.
Your Soul, your God. your joy in God, these things Christ will have and has a
care of; and what ever your sufferings are, these be safe. Indeed if in
afflictions and persecutions, your soul, your salvation, were in danger, 'twere
sad, but it is not, because Christ is sweet. Your sufferings shall be so far
from indangering those things, that they shall rather turn to your salvation,
as it is Philip. 1.19. But

2. Christ carries himself passing sweet unto his suffering members; in that
he gives them cordialls suitable to all their sufferings. Its worth the noting,
that as those cordialls which* Christ gave to his Disciples were sweet, so they
were suitable to what they should suffer, Joh. 16.2. The nature of their
sharpest sufferings is held out by excommunication, and killing, They shall put
you out of their Synagogues and kill you. The term (...) (which is here used)
answers unto that degree of excommunication which the Hebrews call (...) which
was a solemn kind of excommunication (above that which they called (...))
published in the fight of the whole congregation; in which they did totally
cast out of the congregation, reading and denouncing the dreadful and horrible
curse of the Law. This was one thing that they should suffer. Now as suitable
unto this, Christ had told them, That he went to prepare mansions for them in
his Fathers house, Joh. 14.2. In which he comforts them thus; Though you shall
be cast out of the Jews Synagogues, yet you shall not be cast out of my
Fathers house; I have prepared mansions for you there, be not therefore
troubled at that. And for that suffering unto death (which was hinted in this,
that men should think they served God in klling them, esteeming belike your
slaughter his service) Christ! gives them a cordial suitable unto this, Job.
14.19. where he assures them, that their lives should be as sure as his: For
because he lived, they should live also. And however they might be killed, yet
he would raise them up again, as it is Joh. 6.44. Thus Christ gives cordialls
suitable to all their sufferings. Bear up your hearts, ye bleeding believers!
there are suitable cordialls for you in your Saviors bosom, and he will give
them forth. If men frown, he has smiles: Do men disgrace, he has honor?
Do you lose perishing riches, he has unsearchable? Do men deal with you as
foes? He has called you friends; what ever you suffer loss in, he will make
it up. If you lose life, you shall find it. Do your sufferings abound, his
consolation shall abound also: If you suffer for him, you shall reign with
him. What can he? what would you more? Say, is not this sweet carriage, thus to
provide, and give forth suitable sweetnesses to all your sufferings?

3. In all the sufferings of Christ's members, Christ carries himself sweetly
to them in that he sympathiseth with them in all. In all their affliction, be
was afflicted, Isa. 53.9. Believers, suffer where, or when you will, Christ
suffers there and then with you. Had persecutors eyes, they would see this, But
though they are blind, yet do you believe. Paul thinks he only persecutes
men, and women at Damascus. But in them he persecutes Jesus. And though he knew
it not at first, yet he did afterward. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me,
Act. 9.4. If we perish, Christ perishes with us (said Luther.) Suffering
Saints, Christ is so sweet to you, as that he suffers with you. Are you in
dungeons? Christ is there too. Is John in Patmos, banished for the testimony of
Jesus? Christ is there too. Do you bleed? Christ bleeds with you: Are you
reproached? Christ is reproached in you. When enemies smite you, they smite
Jesus, and he feels it. While you mourn, he weeps. While you sigh, he is sad.
He sits on your dunghills by you. And if you wear sackcloth, he will not wear
silks. Every drop of blood that you bleed, goes to his heart. All those
afflictions that Paul reckons up in 2 Cor. 11.25, 26. etc. he puts them upon
Christ's score, Coloss. 1.24. The Baptism of affliction wherewith you are
baptized, is Christ's. Count not, call not that yours, which is his. Surely he
rather suffers in you, then you for him: or if you will say you suffer for him,
yet know he sympathiseth with you in that suffering. Surely this sympathy is
sweet. Have you ever a frienp, that while you fast, refuses to eat; that while
you are in the field, neglects his bed; that while you watch, will not sleep;
that weeps with you, sigh s for you: Tell me, what is this friends name? what
call you this carriage? Christ is this friend, this is his carriage; sweet is
his name, and sweetness is with him. Is it not apparent in this carriage?

4. The carriage of Christ is sweet unto his suffering members, in that he
orders all their sufferings, for quality, quantity, and duration. Persecuted
Saints! Christ is the supervisor of all your sufferings; whether thy sufferings
are, or shall be cruel mockings, bonds, stoning, sawing asunder, etc. what
kind soever, Christ is to order it, not thy foes. And he will see what
suffering will best suit thee, and thy strength. Some (says the Martyrologie,
Heb. 11.) were stoned, others sawne asunder, some slain with the sword, others
wandered, etc. Christ orders all your sufferings. He tells Peter by what death he
should glorify him, Joh. 20.19. And so for quantity Christ orders all; Thou
tellest my wanderings, etc. Psa. (...) i.e. Thou numbrest as with a pen.
56.8. He means his wanderings while persecuted (such as the Apostle means,
Heb. 11.37.) not a step more, then Christ would, did David wander. Believers,
you shall not weep a tear, not bleed a drop, not bear a stripe more then
Christ will number out. As he will appoint your sufferings for the quality, so
for quantity too. No other, nor no more affliction then he will, no, nor no
longer neither: for he orders the duration also. Ye shall have tribulation ten
days, Apoc. 2.10. The Gentiles shall tread the holy City under foot forty and
two months Apoc. 11.2. The Witnesses shall lie in the street three days and a
half, ibid verse. 9. So many days, so many months, Christ orders all. Oh how
sweet is this! should Christ leave the ordering of our sufferings to our
enemies, how sad were it! might they do what, how much, and how long they
would, 'twere grievous. But they shall do no other, no more, no longer then
Christ will. Believers Christ will order all your sufferings. Because he is
sweet, he will not leave it to your selves for you are simple, you know not what,
or how much, or how long you are fit to bear. But Christ does, and he will choose
and order for you. You would be exceeding disorderly, were your selves to
order your sufferings: and your enemies would be more extreme: you would think
no affliction too little, no measure too scanty, no time too short: And your
enemies would account no affliction too great, no measure too much, no time too
long. But Christ will order them, and you too, and this because he is sweet.
He Will carry the business so as that your affliction both for quality,
quantity, and duration, shall neither be contrary to your State, above your
strength, nor beyond your patience. And be ye now Judges your selves, is not
this carriage sweet?

5 Jesus Christ lets out much sweetness unto his suffering members, in giving
them most glorious visions in their most grievous sufferings. Christians; what
see you in your Sufferings? are there not beamings-forth of glory on you? What
a vision had John in his banishment? I saw (says he) seven golden
candlestickes: and in the midst of the seven golden candlestickes (one like
unto the Son of man) clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt about
the paps with a golden girdle: his head and his hairs were white like wool,
as white as snow, and his eyes were as a flame of fire, etc. I but where did
John see this, and when? Why, in Patmos, when he was there a companion (with
sufferers) in tribulations, Apoc. 2.9.12, 13. Its reported of one Theodorus
that while he was on the rack, suffering, he was noted to continue smiling,
and being asked how, or why, he smiled so, He answered, he saw a young man all
in white wiping from him his sweat, etc. Moses endured, as seeing him who is
invisible, Heb. 11.27. The invisible God appears very visible to Saints in
sufferings, and this helps them to endure. When was it that Stephen saw the
glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God? was it not when his
Enemies gnashed their teeth on him? Act. 7.54.55. There be divin comforts which
are felt under the cross and not at other times (said Dr. Sibs) The spirit of
glory is to rest on us, while reproached, as it is 1 Pet. 4.14. How have the
Martyrs spoke of such spiritual visions, and incomes, which they have had in
prison, the like unto which they never found, nor felt at other times. The
child has never so many fine things when well, as when ill: We give our
Rings, Jewels, chains, neat works, etc. to our children if they be in pain,
which we lock up in Closets, and Cabbinets at other times. Christ gives
Cabbinet-comforts, lock up, and unusual discoveries to his members in Prison,
and Dungeons. And this Christ does, that he may declare his sweetness to his
in sufferings.

6 Christ discovers singular sweetness to his suffering Members in that he
makes them (even while they suffer) glorious in their enemies eyes Bazil tell
us (in his oration of the 40 Martyrs) that one of those that did watch them saw
a strangesight ((...)) etc. viz. certain powers as it were descending from
heaven, (...)
and bringing Kingly gifts unto them: His meaning is, that the man saw the
Angels descending upon them with Crowns to Crown them. Christ is able to open
Balaams eyes, and let him see the (otherwise invisible) glory of Israel. The
Scripture tells, that Stephen was made very glorious, even while he stood in
the council of his foes; and this also in their eyes; for it is said all that
sat in the Council, looking steadfastly upon him, saw his face as it had been
the face of an Angel, Act. 6.15. Christ often lets out a convincing glory in
his members, even while they suffer, Tell me suffering souls, is not Christ
sweet to you in rendering you glorious in your enemies eye? But

6 Christ is sweet in avenging his Martyrs on their enemies, for all their
sufferings. 'Twas Gideons kindness to his Brethren: when he avenged them upon
Zeba, and Zalmunna: Its said, he slew them, and took away their ornaments: and
this out of respect to his brethren whom Zeba, and Zalmunna had slain: for he
protested; As the Lord lives if ye had saved them alive, I would not slay you,
Jud. 8.19. Its a sign of favor, and Christ is sweet, when he suffers not our
enemies to triumph over us: as it is Psalm. 41.11. But its more sweetness for
Christ in avenging us to triumph over them. It is the fathers sweetness unto
Christ (and therefore promised) that he would cloth all his enemies with
shame, Psalm. 132. ult. And its Christ's sweetness that he will do that for
his suffering Saints which his Father did for him. Therefore rejoice, for God
has avenged you, Apoc. 18.20. That Scripture Isay 63. presents Christ not
suffering (as has been mistaken and mis-applied) but triumphing, in avenging
his redeemed ones. And observe it is woved up thus: I will mention the loving
kindnesses of the Lord, verse. 7. Its loving kindness to you (ye Sufferers)
that makes him execute vengeance on your enemies.

Lastly, the sure remembrance, and the great reward for all the sufferings of
Christ's suffering Members, is a declaration of his sweetness to them, Christ
will not forget neither your labor, nor sufferings of love. To you that have
continued with me in my temptations, i.e. afflictions and interpreted, if you
compare, Luke 8.13. with Mat. 13.21.) I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my
father has appointed unto me, Luke 22.29, 30. your light affliction works
for you, a far more exceeding eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.19. A sweet
Lord gives a weighty reward, for a light suffering. Paul was good at reckoning,
and yet he says, I reckon that the sufferings of this present time, are not
worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us, Romans 8.18.
Romans may forget Marius both in service and sufferings, in worth and wounds.
But Christ always remembers his servants sufferings, and rewards them, not for
any worth that is in them, but for the sweetness which is in him. And
believers, when you shall be taken up into glory, and see those weighty
Crowns, which shall then be given to sufferers for Christ's sake, you will say,
and sing: Oh how sweet is Jesus to those that out of love to him underwent
sufferings for him.

CHAP. V. Some reasons of the point
I Hope by this that has been hinted, its clear enough that it is so, viz.
that Christ is very sweet to his suffering Saints. I will now show some grounds
why it is so. The reasons are Either 1 More General, or, 2 More Particular.


General, if we consider, either the law of equity, the nature of relation;
or the power of love, we shall see that which is the ground of this point. 1.
Its but equal that Christ should carry himself thus to them, who suffer for
him. Christians would be as free from sufferings, as others, were it not for
their Savior. Did not they love him, none would hate them. They are hated for
his sake, Luke 21.17. Men reproach them, because they honor him. When as you
are reviled, persecuted, and have all manner of evil spoken against you
falsely; Christ knows its for his sake, as it is, Mat. 5.15. Now Equity requires,
that Christ should deal sweetly with them, who suffer thus sharply for him.
Could, or would Saints desert their service of Christ; if they would but join
with others to crucify him; they should not need to fear any sufferings
themselves, were it not that they observe his laws, make conscience of his
ordinances, stand to his truth, maintain his Gospel, and alas, were it not
for those things; they might be as secure as others. They are good people, but
they are Puritans, they are to be mis-liked for nothing, but that they are
precise. They might be free from the curse, would they renounce Christ. Hence
it is that Jesus Christ carries himself thus tender to them, because they are
true to him: He cannot but sweeten their sufferings, by his carriage to them,
since they suffer for conscience to him. How did the persecutors of old,
endeavor to persuade Christians, to deny Christ! what Serpentine subtlety with
Sugered-poison-rhetoricke was used to make them deny him! what high honors,
vast wealth, alluring pleasures were laid before them? And how did their
adversaries say, All these will we give you, if you will not worship Jesus.
But alas! how little did this prevail; how gallantly and graciously did they
deny these, and own Christ! how Christianly-couragious, did they scorn all
profers, and hold fast their profession. How roundly, did the forty Martyrs
reply unto the flatterings of the Governor, (...) etc. i.e. What, or why (said
they) do thou go about (O thou fighter against God) to entice us to forsake
the living God, etc. But why do I dilate you? your selves know, would you but
crucify your Lord your enemies would crown you: would you dishonor Jesus by
sinning, men would honor you. But you cannot, will not, dare not deny Christ
in any thing; and therefore it is that you suffer in every thing. Surely
beloved: Christ is not unrighteous, to forget your work, and labor of love:
Since you cannot be unfaithful, he will not be unkind; and since you suffer for
him, he will (indeed cannot, but) be sweet to you.

2 Where there is relation between parties, there will be kindness showed in
sufferings. Christ and the Saints are related nearly, as near as friends, for
so he called them, Joh. 15.15. yea as near as brethren. For he is not ashamed
to call them Brethren, Heb. 2.11. Bleeding believers, Christ is your brother.
And a brother is borne for adversity, Prove. 17.17. Should not Christ be sweet
and kind to you in your adversity, he should forget (but sure he will not) why
he was born. If you say there is a third friend that sticks closer then a
brother, Prove. 18.24. I tell you Christ is your friend: and he will prove
himself so in your sufferings. Jobs friends were friendly in their visit, and
compassion, though faulty in their charge. Christ will as friendly visit you,
and sympathize with you, as they did; and be more sweet in his carriage then
they were. He Will not blame, but bless you. He Will not add affliction to
affliction by his censures, as they did: but he will be sweet in his carriage;
for he knows, that to him that is afflicted, pity is to be showed by his
friend, as it is Job 6.14. Suffering Saints, remember you are related to Christ,
and that relation may be a reason, why you may conclude that he will carry
himself sweetly to you in all your sufferings. But

3. Love constraines: Christ loves his own, and his love to them will
constrain him to be tender over them in their sufferings. The mothers love
will open her bosom to give the child her breast at any time, especially when
it cries. Ye Martyrs in life (for there is a slaying all the day long, Romans
8.36.) remember your Masters love. It Is very strong, therefore he will be very
sweet. Christ is bound with cords, in all your bonds. The cords of love are on
him, they will pull him to you, while you are pulled by persecutors; if you are in
prison, his love will make a key to open the door to visit you. If you be in
banishment, his love will invent wings to fly after you, what ever be your
sufferings, his love will sweeten them. Jonathan was passing sweet to David,
especially while David was in his sufferings: And David expressed patheticke
love to Jonathan always, but he was most passionate, when he heard of his
slaughter. The reason was, their love was wonderful, passing the love of
women. Christ (O ye suffering souls!) loves you with a love passing the love
of Jonathan and David; and the power of this love will appear (and indeed
most) when you are in sufferings, and appointed unto slaughters. You see the
reasons in the general; I will add but some more particular ones briefly, to
let you see Christ is, and will be sweet in his carriage unto suffering
believers.

Consider him in his offices, of King, Priest, and Prophet, and you will see it
in all grounds of the point.

1. As King, Christ is your King, and he will be kind. He Will neither tyrannize
himself nor suffer others. If he do, he will be sweet and tender, while they be
swore and tyrannize. The Psalmist expostulates cheerfully with reference to the
Churches affliction; thus, Why have thou cast us off for ever? How long shall
the adversary reproach? why with-drawest thou thy hand, even thy right hand?
pluck it out of thy bosom. For God is my [King] of old, Psalm. 74.11.12.
Observe the Church was bold to expect Christ to be kind, because he was King.
Heathen Princes have been very kind to their subjects, especially such as
suffered in their Wars. Surely you may be confident Christ your King will be
kind to you, (O ye Martyrs) for you suffer in his wars. Write it in golden
letters, King Jesus is sweet to all his subjects, especially his suffering
ones. Indeed Christ were not your King, if he were not kind.

2. Christ as Prophet cannot but be sweet to Saints in sufferings. It was his
command to the Prophets, which he set as under him, that they should Prophecy
sweetly to his people in their sufferings, Strengthen ye the weak bands, and
confirm the feeble knees. Say to them that are of a fearful heart, be strong,
etc. Isa. 35. The Spirit of the Lord, ( which anointed Christ as Prophet) was
upon him to this end, (...) i.e. That bewail Zion.
as well as others: To appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them
beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the
spirit of heaviness, etc. Isa. 61.3. Musculus and Oecolampadius understand
this of those that mourn for Zion: The original will bear it, and the
context seems to favor it; without doubt Christ the Prophet (as well as the
King) of Zion, was anointed to preach glad tidings to the Martyrs, as well as
to the meek. Your Savior (O ye sufferers!) will, and must be sweet unto you
under your persecutions, as he is your Prophet. But

3. As a Priest, Christ cannot but sympathize with, and be sweet unto his
people in their sufferings. The Priest (in the Parable, Luke 10.) forgot his
office of Priesthood, when he passed by on the other side, v. 31. and neither
looked upon, nor showed kindness to the wounded man; but though he did, Christ
will not forget himself; but he will be sacerdotall, and sweet to you (O ye
wounded souls for his sake) Some think, and that groundedly, that the
watchmen (mentioned, Cant. 5.7.) were the Priests and Presbyters of the Church:
If so, you will say, surely they were strangely metamorphized; for its said,
they did beat and wound the Spouse, v. 7. Its a sad truth, that some that
pretend to be in a peculiar manner Priests, do sometimes forget themselves, and
turn persecutors. But yet comfort your selves with this (believers) though they
persecute, Christ will be kind: he is, and will be very sweet unto you in your
sufferings: And this as your Priest.

You see now the grounds of the point both generally and particularly: There is
one special ground in the Text; I will only add that, and come to some
improvement of the point. The special ground is this, Christ is a Shepherd.
How tender, how careful is the Shepherd to, and of all his flock, but
especially of such as the dog has bit; or the wolf torn? What washing of the
wound, what binding up of the limb, etc. How hastily does he run to it, and
how tenderly does he drive it, and all because it is hurt. Christ is your
Shepherd (suffering believers) and he hears how the dogs bark and snarle at
you; he sees how they go about the streets, and about the City, and make a
noise like a dog (as it is Psalm. 59.6.) Christ observes all the goings of the
wolves, that walk about you, and he takes notice of the Lions among whom you
lie; and doubtless he will see if they bite you, and if they do, he will come,
and Shepherd-like, he will be sweet unto you. Oh that you did but see your
Shepherd in your sufferings! how would that sight support you? Mark how angry
Christ is with those shepherds that did not strengthen the diseased, nor healed
that which was sick, nor bound up that which was broken, nor brought again
that which was driven away, etc. Ezekiel. 34.4. And mark moreover, how he says,
that in regard of their neglect, He would seek the lost, bring again that which
was driven away, and bind up that which was broken, and strengthen that which
was sick, etc. ibid. v. 16. O believers! your chief Shepherd is, and will be
sweet unto you. He Will in all cases apply himself suitably kind unto you.
He Will pour in oil and wine into all your wounds (which the dogs and wolves of
this world make in your names, States, persons, etc.) He Will wash and supple
them all. He Will kiss you with the kisses of his lips. He Will embrace you in
his arms. In all things, he will show himself to be a sweet Shepherd to you in
your sufferings.

CHAP. VI. Containing some uses of the point, and the conclusion of the whole.
YOu have now seen the point proved, I desire it may be improved. Christ you
hear is sweet in his disposition toward, and in his dealing with his
suffering members. Will you make these uses of it.

1. Let this keep you from being over-afraid of sufferings for Christ's sake. Be
not like Jonah; so to fear, as to flinch from the work of Christ. You are bid
not to fear the faces of men: and why should you? For admit they be cruel,
Christ is kind: If they afflict you, he will comfort you. Sufferings were never
disadvantagious to Saints, but when dreaded: Desert not the ways of Christ for
fear of the cross; Fly not from him out of fear of men. Sanctify Christ in
your hearts, and let him be your fear. What if sufferings come from men,
sweetness shall come from him. Its a shame to see it, and a sorrow to speak
of it: Many people for fear of persecution fly from the work of Christ. They
leave the dwellings of Jacob, out of dread of Esau; and because they fear the
crucifyings of Pilate, so it is as that they forsake their Savior. I beseech
you fence your heart against these fears, with this truth, Christ is, and will
be sweet to suffering Saints. But

2. Let this keep you from sinking under sufferings: Christ will be sweet unto
you: why should you sink under that which Christ sweetens, though the thorny
crown prick thy head, the love of Christ shall refresh thy heart. Its for
persecutors to shrink upon Christ's frowns: The persecuted may rejoice, for
Christ looks on them with smiles. Let them sink in sorrow that do evil; Its
for you to sing with joy, who suffer evil. Paul and Sylas may sing Psalms in
prison, while the high Priest and the Rulers fear the people. Mind this (ye
that suffer in any kind) Jesus Christ uses to show much sweetness to his
people in their sufferings: Do not you therefore sink in your spirits.

3. This sweet truth is a sharp reproof unto those that deal otherwise with
believers under sufferings then Christ does. How ready are men to censure
Christians that are in troubles, and sufferings for Christ. O this is your
headiness, your rashness, your inconsiderate, zeal your being too forward,
etc. Had you been sober, you should not suffer, you have brought misery upon
your selves: As you brew, so drink, none do pity you: eat the fruit of your
own folly, etc. Thus do some deal sordidly with those, that Christ will
himself, (and would have us too) deal sweetly with. O how are these to be
reproved: What for men to be wifer then Christ; for them to call that
headiness, which the Spirit counts holiness; for men to condemn those as
fools, who are so wise as to suffer, rather them to sin. And to take up a
cross, rather then not to follow Christ. Is this to be like unto Jesus? Is
this to have the spirits of Christians? Nay is not this to be like to the Jews
who mocked at Christ upon the cross, and gave him vinegar and gall to drink.
Surely you who censure, slight, scoff, or the like, at the godly, in prisons,
or pillories, or under any sufferings for Christ; you are sharply to be
blamed, severely to be reproved, for dealing thus sordidly with those, to whom
Christ is so sweet: Its true they are not the worse for this, neither need they
to care, but you are the worse, and you need care for being so unlike to Christ
in your carriage.

4. Since Christ is, Oh let us be also sweet to suffering Saints. Let the same
disposition be in us, that is in Christ, and let us deal with Christians who
are in affliction, as he does. To this end.

1. Let us own them, why should we be ashamed of them, whom Christ ownes; and
who own Christ so much, as that they are not ashamed to suffer for him. Nil
magis aequum quam consulem defendi a consule said Cicero. Sure Nil mag is
aequum quam Christianum defendi a Christiano.
It stands on record as the glory of a good, and great man, that when the
Christians were brought to answer for themselves before the Heathen Emperor, he
(that was Vectius Epagathus,) stood up, and demanded to be heard in the defense
of the brethren. Oh that in suffering seasons you would own suffering Saints!
Do not look away from those that suffer for the testimony of Jesus. 'Twas
sordidly done by those that forsook Paul, when he was brought before Nero, 2 Timothy 4.16. why should we desert those by whom Christ stands; let the world know
that you allow of Christ's ways, by owning those that suffer in them, and for
them: Take notice of those that are in rags for righteousness sake, and let
not those who suffer for Christ, have occasion to complain that your carriage
is not like his.

2. Encourage them, write letters of love to those that are in Banishment for
the Lord. Hearten them by word and writing, that stand it out in a storm for
truth. Bless them as the beloved of the Lord, who are the hatred of the world.
Parents encourage your children, not only in well-doing, but in
evill-suffering; say you are glad that ever you begat any, to bleed for Christ.
Friends, encourage your friends that do, and dye for the Lord Jesus: tell them
its their honor to be counted worthy to suffer for his name. While men revile
them, do you praise them: and as others seek to make them desert truth, to
avoid suffering; so do you strengthen them in the truth, notwithstanding
suffering. Its Christ-like to write an Epistle to a suffering, and a
not-fainting Ephesus: To write, that you take notice of their works, their
patience, and sufferings for the Gospel, etc. This will be sweet to them.
Discouragements unto Martyrs are sinful; Paul counts and calls dehortation from
sufferings a heartbreaking, Act. 21.13. But encouragements in sufferings are
divine, and to hearten those who bleed for Christ is very Christian.

3. Sympathise with them. Next to suffering our selves, is sympathizing with
others. To rejoice over the children of Judah in the day of their destruction,
is sordid, and argues the profane spirit of Esau, Obad. 12. but to weep with
them that weep, is sweet, and it argues the Spirit of Jesus. He was, and we
should be persecuted in the persecutions of those that suffer for his sake,
Act. 9.4. Compatior, fignifies to suffer with
It Is Apostolic exhortation, Remember them that are in bonds, as bound with
them, and them which suffer adversity, etc. Heb. 13.3. your mournings with
them, will sweeten theirs: And your compassion, will be their consolation. By
sympathizing with those that suffer for Christ, we do at once give them
present, Note this.
and secure to our selves future comfort. Rejoice with joy, (i.e. be exceeding
joyful) for Jerusalem all ye that mourn for her, Isa. 66.10. Your mourning
with Saints is their comfort in band, and your own in hope. Either be on the
cross with Christ suffering, or be by the cross with Mary weeping. 'Twas
Nero's shame that when Troy was on fire, he sang, but 'twas Jeremiabs glory,
while Jerusalem lay an heap, that he knew no tune but lamentations. Its
Antichristian to insult over Martyrs, and to cry, aha, aha, but its Christian
to say, ah my brother, and ah my sister! let that be your sweetness to Christ's
friends, which was the sweetness of David (even to his enemies) that he
afflicted himself with fasting and was bowed down heavily whilst they were
sick, etc. Psalm. 35.13, 14. Certainly 'twill be a cordial to them; (and O let
it!) I beseech you, while they are in the travail and pain of persecution, do
you afflict your soul by sympathy; Fast, bow down, pray for them, 'twill be a
singular discovery of your love to your fellow members, and also of your
likeness unto your head Christ.

4. Add to all the rest this, viz. Releeve them, let not those perish, who are
in prisons for Jesus. To visit them, and relieve them, is so pleasing to
Christ, that he both registreth, and rewards it. Paul speaks of the
sweetness of Onesiphorus, this way, as being much refreshed by it, and
affected with it, The Lord give mercy to the house of Onesiphorus, for he often
refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain. But when he was in Rome, he
sought me out very diligently: And in how many things be ministered to me at
Ephesus, thou know very well, 2 Timothy 1.16, 17, 18 See how he sets out the
sweetness of Onesiphorus in his carriage to him while he suffered, you
communicate with Martyrs in the glory of their afflictions, while you relieve
them; and you do well if you do so, Phil. 4.14. all your supplies that you
give, or send to sufferers, are precious presents unto Christ: The things (Paul
speaks of supplies sent him in prison) were an odor of a sweet smell, a
Sacrifice acceptable, and well-pleasing unto God, Phil. 4.19. To pour out of
your bags upon those that pour out their blood for Christ, is a sweet
sacrifice: To give a cup of consolation in relief, to those that pledge Christ
in the cup of suffering, is a divine drink offering; And as its a refreshing
to those that suffer, so its pleasing to Christ. Its Angelical to comfort
Christ in his agony, Luke 22.43. In this you may be like to the Angels; for
what you do to any of Christ's Martyr-members, he takes it as to himself, and
will one day tell you so, Mat. 25.45. For as much as you did it to one of the
least of these my brethren ( i.e. in tribulation) you did it unto me.

I will contract this use, and conclude it with this word: while others as
Instruments of Antichrist persecute, do you as imitators of Christ be sweet to
suffering believers. Let your owning, encouraging, fellow-feeling, and relief,
be as sweet droppings unto those who travel for the testimony of Jesus. But,

5. Let this Doctrine be improved for Consolation. Comfort your hear^s ye
suffering Saints with this, that Christ will carry himself sweetly toward
you. Methinks I hear some suffering Saint sigh, and say it is nothing (for so it
may read) to all that pass by, etc. Lam. 1.12. and I weep sore in the night,
and among all my lovers there is none to comfort me; All my friends have dealt
treacherously with me: They have heard that I sigh, and there is none to
refresh me. I stand for Christ but there is none stands by me; I own him, but
none ownes me, etc. Well, bleeding believer, bear up. Though men forsake thee
treacherously, Christ will yet own thee, and though they will not comfort thee,
he will; what though men, as Swallow (and as one said well) shallow friends
leave thee in the Winter of thy affliction, yet Christ as a constant friend
abides. Its your glory that you suffer for Christ; and its his grace he will
refresh you. Rejoice (as Paul did) in your sufferings, since in them you fill up
that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ, as it is, Collos. 1.24. And
know this for your comfort, you that suffer with him, shall also reign with
him. Its the misery of those that deny Jesus Christ, he will deny them. But for
you who do continue with, and follow him in his sufferings, he has appointed
you a Kingdom, and ere long he will inthrone you in it. Suffering souls! I ask
you what Sips of sweetness have you from Christ? See you not heaven clear
over you? Does not Christ lead you gently? Its your privilege that you may,
and I hope you do expect more then ordinary sweetness from Christ. The cup
that you have in your hand, though flesh taste it bitter, does not the Spirit
make it sweet? what is that in the bottom of your bloody cup? It Is not love?
are not your draughts of suffering, sweeter and sweeter? What glory is that
which rests upon you? Say, Is not Christ with you in the fire, and does not he
pass with you through the water?

Q. Soul, Why weepest thou? say thou, Christ is absent, in this thy storm of
wind, and rain, and blood, does not the Sun shine?

A. No, ah n^o, I suffer for Christ, and yet I am without Christ; could I but
have his presence, I should slight persecutions, did he smile, I should laugh
at my foes frowns; were I but in the light of him, I could sing in this
darkness: And did I but enjoy the least of his love, I could triumph in the
flame of their wrath. But ah, alas, woe, etc.

Rep. Stay, O soul! speak not out thy sorrow too speedily: Christ cannot be
long away. Hark! He comes leaping over the mountains. See how the clouds fly
away: Surely the Sun will shine presently: he cannot be long away, your sins
shall not, think not then, that your suffering can separate between him and
you, Why say thou, O Jacob, and speak, O Israel, my way is hid from the
Lord: Have thou not heard? have thou not known the everlasting God, the Lord,
the Creator of the ends of the earth, he faints not? he gives power to the
faint. Sing ye sufferers, rejoice ye prisoners of hope! the Lord whom you look
for, and long after, he is with you, he cannot be absent from you. Christ is in
your prisons (though it may be you are not aware of it.) However cast not away
your confidence, for be that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. Now the
just shall live by faith. ('It Is spoken to sufferers,) Heb. 10.31. Live, (Oh
live) by faith, ye that dye daily for the faith. In the faith of this truth
refresh your spirits, Christ is, and will be sweet in his carriage to suffering
Saints. Therefore,

6. Be ye encouraged, O believers, to be willing to suffer for Christ.

But because (as the Apostle says) it is good to be zealously affected always
in a good thing: and in as much as experience seals to this Scripture truth,
that some have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge. Therefore ere I
proceed to press this use, I shall premise this: that four things are to be
wisely heeded by all such as expect Christ's sweetness in their sufferings. If
you therefore look to experience the truth of this doctrine in your own
souls; mind them. You must look in all your sufferings, that 1. Your cause be
good. 2. Your call be clear. 3. Your carriage meek. And 4. Your end be right.


1. Look that your cause be good: Its not for every cause that a Christian
should engage unto sufferings. Neither will Christ let forth sweetness to
every sufferer. Let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a theife, or as an
evill-doer, or as a busie-body in other men's matters, 1 Pet 9.15. To suffer in
these or the like cases, is not Christian, neither will it be comfortable. Some
men suffer rather as malefactors, then as Martyrs. To suffer, either for
disturbing a States tranquillity, or for endeavoring the introduction, or
settling a peoples slavery, is so far from having a Divine, that it wants a
moral approbation. And certainly such sufferers have little reason to expect
Christ's sweetness. As ever therefore you would, that in your sufferings you
should be able to say Christ is sweet; make sure of this, that your cause be
good.

2. See also that your call be clear. Christ calls not all to Martyrdom, no
more then he does to Ministry: The one is a gift, as well as the other. To you
its given to suffer, Philip. 1.29. As preaching, so likewise suffering without
a call will have little comfort. I am persuaded both the reason why some have
been in the Pulpit without success by Christ, and others have been in the
prison without sweetness, has been this, viz. want of call. Its true,
sometimes one called to preach, may want success, and also one called to
suffer may not presently find comfort (as in godly Glovers case.) But
certainly without a call either to the one or the other, a soul has no just
warrant to expect comfort. As false prophets of old, ran before God sent them,
Jer. 29.9. So some false Martyrs of late, have suffered ere Christ* called
them. Be therefore wise to clear your call: If that be sure, you need not
doubt, but Christ will be sweet. Indeed when truth suffers by our silence, we
are called to speak: And when our life will be Christ's denial, we are called
to dye. When I am before a Magistrate for Christ's sake: He then calls me not to
be ashamed of him: And when sin and suffering surround me so, as that I am
necessitated to take the one, if I will leave the other, then without doubt I
may conclude that Christ calls me to suffering, and that in it, his carriage
toward me shall be sweet. But

3. Let your carriage be as your Saviors in your sufferings; if you will have his
sweetness, i.e. let it be meek: Its possible to be sinful in ones carriage,
when one is righteous in his case. And if so, its no wonder, if Christ be not
found sweet. To be feirce and and raging, to rail, and revile in suffering
has more of a Beast, then a Man: Surely its not beseeming humanity, and
unworthy of Christianity. Christians should be as Lambs in their sufferings.
Sheepishnesse in this is Saint-ship: Its true the Apostles rejoiced, that they
were counted worthy to suffer shame for Christ's name, Act. 5.41. But they never
reviled the powers under which they suffered. It becomes Christians to give
blessings for curses; all manner of evil speaking is to be put away, Ephesians.
4.31. Satyricall invectives are not becoming Saints, (especially) in
sufferings. Christ was a Lamb dumb before the shearers, so (says the
Scripture) opened he not his mouth, Act. 8.32. Surely the more we have the
likeness of his Spirit; the more may we expect the tastes of his sweetness,
in all our sufferings for his sake, and the Gospels.

4. Lastly, eye your end in all your sufferings. If thy end be either self or
Schism, how can thou expect Christ should be sweet to thee in thy
sufferings. Some have dyed that their names might live. Many I fear venture and
act unto sufferings, rather to maintain their own tenets, then Christ's truths.
Socrates dyed to justify that there was but one God; but whether he dyed not
for his own opinion, rather then for Gods sake is no great scruple. It Is sure
one may (I wish none did) suffer as much for selfish as sublime respects. Some
suffer as they do, i.e. for their own glory. A Roman spirit can hold to
suffering and death. An opposing spirit will put on some to dye, rather then to
yield. The Apostle has left it a clear thing, that it is possible to give ones
body to be burnt, (...) signifies strong love and sincere Charitas, signifies
spiritual love and sublime.
and yet to want true divine love (for so I render that place, 1 Cor. 13.) I
beseech you to mind Christ's glory, truths propagation, the maintenance of
equity and righteousness, in all your sufferings, if you expect Christ's
sweetness.

Having therefore premised these things, let me only entreat you to mind
them. Indeed it is, and must be your wisdom to see your cause be good, your
call clear, your carriage meek, your end right: And if then, go on, fear not,
flinch not, let sufferings come when, where, how they will, Christ is, and will
be sweet unto you in them. But If you draw back, his soul will have no
pleasure in you. Nor can your souls expect any from him. Certainly, if you
draw back from persecution, you draw on to perdition. Christ is not so sweet
in his dealing with Martyrs, but he is as dreadful in his discoveries to
Apostates. Ask Spira, how doleful a condition denying is? he will tell you,
that he could feel no comfort enter into his heart, and that there is no place
there, but only for torments and bitter vexings of spirit. He Will sadly relate
to you, that he knew that justification was to be expected by Christ, but he
denied it, to keep his frail life from adversity, his wife and children from
poverty: But now behold how bitter is this life to me, etc. There is no
punishment so great, but I have deserved it, for this so heinous offense; I
assure you, it is no small matter to deny Christ and yet it is more ordinary
then commonly men do conceive it, etc. Well, I beseech you beloved, take heed
of denying Christ, for fear of sufferings. It Is sweet to suffer for Christ,
and if you do, you will find it so. He Will (as one said) pour out love upon
the soul, when the body pours out blood upon the truth. But in case the soul
to keep its blood, deny Christ's truth: it may (as Spira did) wish, O that I
might feel, but the least sense of the love of God to me, though but for one
small moment, as I now feel his heavy wrath that burns like the torments of
hell within me, and afflicts my conscience with pangs un-utterable, etc.

To wind up all, I beseech you do more then think, i.e. O meditate of these
things. And let this whole (though little) Tract of Christ's sweetness,
prevail with your hearts to enter, and to continue in the fold of Christ.
Remember while you are without Christ, you are without God in the world: you
wander in a wilderness of sin and sorrow: you are but (at best) among
wild-beasts: you can expect nothing but dangers and devourings. But when once
you are returned to the great shepherd of your souls; when once you are brought
to, and walk with Christ, you are safe and sweet. For if you are weak, he will
carry you, and that in his bosom: If you wander he will gather you, and that
with his arm, while you are lambs he will carry you safely, and if you are Ewes
great with young, he will lead you gently. Say not, sin is sweet, and suffering
bitter, ease is pleasant, and labor painful: But know, that if Christ take
you, into his Fold, you will say, sin is bitter; and persecutions for his sake
(though unto blood) are sweet, you will then conclude, the yoke of Christ is
easy, and his work is full of sweetness. Believers, bear witness to this
truth: To the rest I say as Philip to Nathanael, Come and see.

Let me end all with Calvin's Comment upon my Text. Calvin in locum.
In these words is expressed the singular indulgence of God, by which he is not
only led forth with a common affection toward his whole flock, but by which
he declares according to the weakness of any; his solicitousnesse in taking
care, his humanity in nourishing, and his patience in bearing. In which he
omits nothing belonging to the office of a good Shepherd. For all the sheep
must be taken care for, especially they are to be borne with, or relieved, if
they be weak. O taste and see, that the Lord is good, Psalm. 34.8. Sit down
under Christ's shadow with great delight, Cant. 2.3.
and you shall find his fruit sweet unto your taste.

THE ANALYSIS, OR The Table of the chief things in this Treatise.
SECT. I.
CHAP. I. AN Introduction to the Discourse, holding forth, 1. The fallacy of
Satan to keep souls from Christ. page 1. 2 2. The sweetness of Christ to
such as come into his service. page 3
CHAP. II. An entrance upon the Text, showing, 1. The dependence of the words.
p. 5 2. The division of the words. p. 7 3. The doctrines of the words. p. 8
CHAP. III. The maine Doctrine propounded, setting forth Christ as sweet in his
carriage to all his weak members, which is, 1. Explicated, opening what 1.
Christ's carriage is. p. 9 2. Sweetness of that carriage. ibid. 1. Negatively.
p. 10 2. Positively. p. 11

2. Proved. ib.
CAHP. IV. A clearer explication of the point by discovering, 1. Who are weak
members of Christ. p. 14 1. Habitually, whose weakness is described, 1.
Generally, by what it is. 2. Particularly, by what they are. ibid. 1. Beginners
in Christ's School. p. 15 2. Babes in Christ's house. ibid.
3. Specially, by the things in which it is, as namely, they are such as be
weak, 1. In their life. p. 16 2. In their light. p. 17 3. In their faith. p. 18


2. Wherein Christ's carriage is sweet to them, held out from the Text in two
particulars, viz. 1. In that he gathers them with his arm, when they wander.
p. 19 2. In that he carries them in his bosom while weak. ib.

CHAP. V. Particular discoveries of Christ's sweetness, in 1. His not casting
them off when they come to him. p. 22 2. In his preserving the weak graces
which are in them. p. 25 3. In strengthening and increasing the said weak
graces. p. 28 4. In bearing with the infirmities of their weakness. p. 30 5.
In not putting them upon any work for which they are too weak. p. 33 6. In
accepting that little which they do, though accompanied with many failings. p.
35
CHAP. VI. Reasons of all this drawn from the consideration of 1. God the
Fathers Commission which he gave to Christ. p. 39 2. The weakness it self
which is in weak believers. p. 40 3. The intention of Christ to convince such
as have hard thoughts of him. p. 42
CHAP. VII. Application of all in Uses of 1. Information. p. 44 Uses of 2.
Lamentation. p. 45 Uses of 3. Reproof. p. 46 Uses of 4. Comfort, p. 51 Uses of
5. Encouragement. p. 51 Uses of 6. Imitation. ib. Uses of 7. Exhortation. p. 5.
5

SECT. II.
CHAP. I. THe point, that Christ is sweet in his carriage to such believers as
are accidentally weak. p. 59 1. Proposed from the Text. p. 60 2. Explicated,
in showing who are said to be accidentally weak. ib. 1. Generally, hinting
what accidental weakness is. p. 62 2. Particularly, instancing in such as are
so, viz. such as are weak. p. 63 1. By works. ib. 2. By Sins. p. 64 3. By
Sufferings. ib.
3. Specially, applying the said things to the metaphor in the Text. p. 67

CHAP. II. Demonstrations from the Text that Christ is sweet in his carriage to
such as are accidentally weak by work. p. 68 1. Actually being with them in
all their work. p. 69 2. Tenderly leading them about their work. ib.
CHAP. III. Instances clearing the point of Christ's sweet carriage unto working
believers by his, 1. Putting them upon no other work then himself has done.
p. 72 2. Giving suitable encouragements to the discouragements of their work.
As to the discouragements, 1. Of Reluctance. p. 75 2. Of disgrace. p. 76 3. Of
doubt of success. p. 77
3. Affording ability to do what ever work be sets them about. p. 78 4.
Perfecting their works himself, with reference to their imperfections. p. 80
5. Refreshing by incomes when in their work they grow weak and weary p. 81 6.
Bestowing eternal rest and reward in the end of their work. p. 83
CHAP. IV. Reasons of the point, taken from the consideration of 1. Christ's
desire to declare himself to be as be is. p. 86 2. His knowledge, that soul
working for him, cannot work without him. p. 87 3. His design to leave
loyterers without excuse. p. 88
CHAP. V. Application of this, in uses of 1. Information. p. 90 2. Reproof. p.
91 3. Conviction. p. 93 4. Encouragement. p. 94 5. Comfort. p. 95

SECT. III.
CHAP. I. THe doctrine that Christ is sweet to believers weak by sins. p. 101
1. Proposed in its truth. p. 102 2. Founded in the Text. ib.
CHAP. II. The point further offered, 1. By premises to open it, viz. 1. That
believers fall sometime into sin. p. 103 2. That such falls render them weak.
p. 105 3. That Christ though sweet to their persons, is yet displeased with
their sins. p. 106
2. By proofs. p. 108 1. In the examples, 1. Of Peter. ibid. 2. Of the seven
Churches. p. 109
2. By that of Isa. 57.17. which is likened to the Text. p. 110

CHAP. III. One general demonstration of the Doctrine, viz. In that Christ
loses not, nor will the soul for all his sin, but seeks it, and gathers it
Shepherd-like. p. 111 CHAP. IV. Particular demonstrations of Christ's sweet
carriage to believers weak by sins. p. 115 1. In chastening them, which is
showed to be sweet in its effect; and 1. In that its promise-priviledge. 116 2.
In that its denied to others. ib.
2. In not casting them off for sin. p. 118 3. In revealing love
notwithstanding after his chastisement. p. 120 4. In mourning for them even
while he chastises them. p. 122 5. In interceding to the Father to pardon
them. p. 125 6. In observing their graces, notwithstanding of their sins. p.
126 7. In turning their sins to the good of their souls. p. 127
CHAP. V. Application of this Doctrine. p. 132 1. In reproving the rugged
carriage of men to sinning believers. ibid. 2. In comforting believers weakened
by sins especially. p. 135 1. Proposed unto, 1. Such as were fearful of sin
before committed. p. 136 2. Such as are sorrowful after sin committed. p. 137
3. Such as sorrow for the filth of sin. ibid. 4. Such as fear the weight and
tyranny of sin. p. 138
2. Pressed upon these in the answer of sundry objections. p. 139
3. In encouraging believers under sin to go to Christ. p. 142 4. In persuading
all to come unto Christ. p. 143

SECT. IV.
CHAP. I. THe Doctrine of Christ's sweetness unto believers under sufferings.
p. 145 1. Proposed in its sum. p. 146 2. Grounded on the metaphor of the
Text. p. 147
CHAP. II. The point prosecuted further, 1. In some cautions premised,
preventing objections. As, p. 148 1. That Christ permits his dearest members to
meet with sufferings. ib. 2. That this permission is consistent with his
sweetness. p. 149
2. In two things offered from the text to prove the truth, viz. by showing
from it, that Christ gives to his suffering members. p. 150 1. His presence in
their sufferings. p. 151 2. His support under their sufferings. p. 151

CHAP. III. The demonstration of the truth of the Doctrine, in the instance of
Christ's carriage toward his Disciples at his departure from them, in relation
to their sufferings thereupon, which is discovered, 1. By his feasting of them.
p. 153 2. By his forewarning of them. p. 154 3. By his giving cordialls fitted
for their sufferings, showed in diverse things. p. 155 4. By his praying for
them. p. 156 5. By his submitting to suffer himself, and freeing them. p. 157
All which are wound up in a Parable, and applied. ibid. CHAP. IV. Particular
demonstrations of the point. 1. By Christ's securing their choicest part in
their soarest sufferings. p. 159 2. By Christ's giving in sweetnesses, suitable
to their sufferings. p. 161 3. By Christ's sympathizing with them in their
sufferings. p. 163 4. By Christ's ordering all their sufferings for kind,
quantity, and time. p. 165 5. By Christ's giving of them glorious visions in
their sufferings. p. 167 6. By Christ's rendering them glorious in their enemies
eyes. p. 169 7. By Christ's avenging of them on their persecutors. ib. 8. By
Christ's sweet remembrance, and singular reward of all their sufferings. 170
CHAP. V. Reasons of the point held forth. 1. Generally, drawn from 1. The law
of equity. p. 172 2. The nature of relation. p. 174 3. The power of love. p. 176
2. Particularly, built upon the offices of Christ, as 1. King. p. 177 2.
Prophet. p. 178 3. Priest. p. 179
3. Specially taken from the metaphor in the text, of Christ's being a shepherd.
180
CHAP. VI. The application of this point concerning Christ's sweet carriage to
suffering Saints. 1. In dehortation from being over-afraid of sufferings. p.
182 2. In disswasion from sinking under sufferings. p. 183 3. In reproving such
as deal sordidly with suffering believers. ibid. 4. In pressing of all to
imitate Christ's carriage toward sufferers, 1. By owning them. p. 185 2. By
encouraging them p. 186 3. By sympathizing with them. 187 4. By relieving of
them. p. 188
5. In comforting of such as suffer for Christ. p. 190 6. In encouraging souls
to stick close to Christ notwithstanding sufferings, especially to take heed
of drawing back. p. 193

FINIS.
Errata.
The Authors absence from the Press has occasioned these faults in the Print;
which candor I hope will bear with, and care correct.

EPist. line 5 read espy. p. 1. mar r (...). p. ^. l. 24 r. fallen. p. 17. l.
25 r. line. ibid. l. 27. r. allude p. 20. l. 9. r. and which. p. 84. l. 4. r.
one bout more p. 9^. l. 19. r. stains. p. 94 l. 17. r. did not do. p. 134. mar
r. (...). p. 158. l. 3. r. comfort them. p. 159. l. 22. r. capsam.


