Butler's Ghost: OR, HUDIBRAS. The Fourth Part. WITH Reflections upon these
Times.

Iacta est alea. Eras --
LONDON, Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh, at the Black-Bull in Cornhill, over
against the Royal Exchange, 1682.

(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) A second and a third time too,
This dog-like Fate has been your due,
Had not propitious Fortune swayed,
And from the danger you conveyed.
And now upon this slight occasion,
To make upon your self Invasion,
Instead of Towns where Plunder lies,
Take your own Castle by surprise:
For you your self to act Squire Dun,
Such Ignominy never saw the Sun.
But pardon, if ye are such a Tony,
To pine for Wormwood Matrimony;
If like our Lovers in Romances,
You Are plagued with Dreams, and fleeting Fancies;
When midst the Ioys that Love infuses,
Phillis never gets, tho Damon loses,
And cannot prop the tottering Nation,
'Till deeds are done of Generation.
Dismount your wooden Courser straight,
Then to Advice incline your Pate;
And if I do not show a way
To make her your Commands obey;
If she don't listen to your Fiddle,
And follow ye as Thread does Needle;
Nay kiss ye, hug ye, and Adore ye,
Within a Week then I Will hang for ye
At this the Knight did silence break,
First taking the Cord from off his Neck,
Well pleased to hear that cheerful noise,
Which now he knew was Ralpho's Voice:
Who as Fate ordered sleeping lay
Upon a Bundle of fresh Hay:
Yet to pursue the Humor on,
Begun this Counterfeiting Moan.
Is there, ye Powers, no Station free?
No place of Rest for Misery?
Unlucky Squire! had thou been gone,
My business had e're this been done,
And I thronged with Seraphick Loves,
In Sacred and Immortal Groves.
For Heavens sake, quoth the Squire, Sir Knight,
Once in your lifetime be in the right;
And let me (though perhaps unsit
To sight your battles) teach you Wit.
He that admires you Azure Skies,
And longs to taste Eternal Ioys.
E're Nature half his thread has Wove,
Is like that Niggardly damned Oaf;
That having Gold and Jewels store,
Leapt into the Sea to dive for more;
And so, like Esop's Dog, was crossed;
Who snatching shadows, substance lost:
Besides, I fear he that should scan
Your inward, and your outward Man,
Examine your offenses Rife,
And weigh the Actions of your life,
Would find you are, for all your Iokes,
Unfit for Heaven as other folks.
But from the Brethren I believe
You learnt this Custom to deceive;
Who, to be thought devoutly given,
Do always wish themselves in Heaven;
When for all the Saints and Angels there.
They had rather be with Sister here,
And only use that Canting Notion,
As proper to their feigned Devotion.
There is a Tale, whose Moral's good,
Of an Old man, that gathering Wood,
Grown sick with Age, and out of breath,
Sat down upon it, and wished for Death.
Death straight appearing, cried, I Am here,
And come to end thy Mortal Care.
He seeing Monsieur Bloody-bone,
And that there was no way but one;
Shaking through fear, now ten times more
Than e're he did for Age before,
Cried, Sir, your Help I only lack
To lift my Wood upon my back.
Friend, quoth the Knight, this simile,
Though good, can never allude to me;
And thou these Figures do Commence,
Only to cloak thy Ragged sense;
Else why this Story in this place,
Whose purport's nothing to my Case;
At least so little, that I doubt
I Have hardly brains to find it out:
Like bellowing Friar, that when he preaches,
Religion in cramp Latin teaches,
And mouths it with conceited Passion,
TO amuse the Ignorant Congregation,
With Rhetoric, and specious Stories,
Fine Shams, and pleasing Allegories;
Roves wide, and schools the Female Sex,
'Till he has quite forgot his Text.
So have thou ranged about, to bring
A Tale that is nothing to the thing;
Yet in the Banter made more flaws
Than Lawyers, when they thrash a Cause:
For when did I exclaim for Death,
For being old, or out of breath,
For Sickness sake make such a motion,
Or case of Conscience, or Devotion?
Is not Despair in Loves Intrego,
Of greater moment than an Ague?
Or can the Toothache e're compare
With the Heart-ach for a wealthy Fair?
And tho I should from Beam turn over,
And show Example of true Lover,
Yet for a less cause so to dye,
I think there is little reason why.
Quoth Ralph, You have much cause to know,
When it is fit to dye, and how;
Yet those that saw you in that place,
Would guess y' had very little Grace:
But for that a valiant Knight should swing,
Take Pet, and dye like Dog in string,
For Widow, a stanch cunning Dame,
Not to be got by Love, but Sham;
That likes not those that most admire her,
But those that at her own tricks tire her.
Like Salmons, that with Line and Hook
Are wearied first, and then are took;
That he in Death his Love should quench,
When I can help him to the Wench;
Nay, all her Wards and Passes break,
Or else I Will forfeit here -- my Neck;
Must be the Effect of Melancholy,
Or brainless Presbyterian Folly.
Quoth Hudibras, Now by my Sword,
Bold Squire, I take thee at thy word;
Thy Thesis here I do insist on,
And therefore now take care that it is done:
For should thou fail, I swear by Mars,
By the Moon, and my propitious Stars,
Nay, by my now expected Marriage,
Thy Head shall answer the miscarriage.
Hold, hold, quoth Ralpho, good Sir Knight,
First let us settle all things right,
My Head's not such a thing of no worth,
It Is to be shamed away, and so forth,
And by a threatening be effected,
Like his that the Black Box expected.
There Is yet to be a small Harangue,
A word or two before I hang;
And tho I promised you her Heart,
'Twas not except you did your part.
I like a Tool do idle stand,
Without the Workman's helping hand:
For as a Christian Merchant drew,
And sealed a Bond once to a Jew,
A Pound of Flesh should the Forfeit pay,
If he did fail, and break his Day:
Which happening, and the Infidel
To weigh the Flesh had fetched a Scale,
The Merchant cries, your Bond is good
For Flesh, but not one drop of Blood;
If thou spill'st that, thou murder'st me,
And then the Law takes hold on thee.
So tho this friendly Oath I made,
I did not say without your Aid.
A Pound of Flesh I gave, it is true,
But the Life Blood still lies in you,
You must the Matrimony teach her,
Tho I perform the Pimp to fetch her,
And do your best to make her join,
Or else your Head's as due as mine:
But if you will calmly take advice,
And be by my Example, wise,
Aiding the trick with best endeavor,
I once more promise, you shall have her.
Take there my Hand, quoth Hudibras,
Descending with an awker'd Grace,
My Hand the Earnest of my Heart,
That I Will not fail to do my part;
And tho our last Efforts were vain,
For all the Wisdom of thy Brain,
Yet I have now especial hope
Thou Wilt do it, for fear of fatal Rope.
Thy Judgment I Will insist upon,
And banish for a while my own.
And as some valiant Knights of late,
That were in Love unfortunate,
Have (seeking there attractive Plackets)
For Frolic worn their Footmen's Iackets:
And sometimes to their Wits given place,
Their own being lost, or out of case;
So I thy sense will now pursue,
And think I but receive my due*
For if I Wages give my Squire,
His Head as well as Heels I hire,
And have no doubt, as the Law maintains,
Substantial Title to his Brains.
Then speak bold Wight, and may thy Wit,
Like Cato's, Fame Immortal get;
For I have argued long, and fought,
And yet at last have nothing got,
But frowning Scorns, and smarting Flaws,
From her, and for the Good old Cause,
That Good old Cause, that trick for Money;
Quoth Ralpho, has Sir Knight undone ye.
'Twas by your sneaking starcht behavior,
You lost all Titles to her Favor;
For as to the Loyal, and the Brave,
The more you look Reformed and Grave,
The more your Deeds are thought amiss,
More noted your Hipocrisie's.
So here the more you strove to improve
The Cause, the less you won her Love;
The more your Hat hung over your Face,
The less she still approved your Grace;
And when you would sight over, or weep,
The Civil Wars -- in Tale -- she would sleep,
And wittily then make appear,
You ever took wrong Sow by the Ear;
And therefore cared not Three pence for ye,
You being a Whig, and she a Tory.
Besides, what Lady is not scared,
Ods-heart! at that confounded Beard!
That Bush that grieves your Heart to lose't,
Where living Creatures swarm and roost;
That Face now changed to Saffron hiew,
Begrim'd by Dust and Nature too.
Or can you think that bit of Band,
Has Charm enough to make her fond?
Or that your threadbare Coat's enough,
Or shapeless Gloves, with Thumbs bit off,
E're in her Heart to gain a Place,
Or sit Enthroned in her good Grace?
Or can that piece of Cloak, which now
Just makes you like St. Martin show,
By careless negligence surprise,
And steal her Heart through wondering Eyes?
It Is true, in Gallantry there is Charm,
That often do Ladies Passions warm;
One Spark his Mistress does subdue,
By a pincht Foot in high-heel'd Shoe;
Another a great Heiress got,
By a large dazzling Shoulder-Knot,
One that prized more Gay Pantaloon,
Than all the Wit below the Moon;
A third into great favor grows,
Through the Dimensions of his Nose;
By which the Victors of our Hearts
Serenely guess our better Parts.
A certain Lady loved her Coachman,
A brawny Fellow, born a Dutchman
By seeing once the hungry Thief
Devour a large Surloin of Beef,
And pitch the Bar by active strength,
Beyond the rest three times his length;
At which she would be much pleased, and laugh.
Another Lady loved a Dwarf;
And being asked what fiend could move her,
To take Sir Dumplin for a Lover?
Her answer was, She satisfied
Both Female Passions, Love and Pride,
For when the purring Hour was gone,
If Gallant any fault had done,
That she designed to be revenged,
And he could merit to be swing'd:
Trussed on her Knee she would briskly taw him,
And, like Virago, clapperclaw him.
Such trivial things Love often finds
(By fancy swayed) to fetter Minds;
But that a Wight for Wit distress't,
Ill stored with Courtship, and worse dressed,
That contradicts her fair opinion,
And yet designs to be her Minion.
And tho in sneaking formal Habit,
For Puss imagines to get a bit,
That he should charm a Woman's Blood,
The Devil's in her if he should.
Quoth Hudibras, thy Tongue will fail
To speak, when it forgets to Rail;
Thy Malice gets pre-eminence,
And soon o'reflows thy creeping sense.
And as Attorney dull, that uses
To fall from Arguing to Abuses,
Thou leave my weighty Cause to scan,
To rally on my outward Man,
And no Redress or Counsel's heard,
By fooling with my Band and Beard,
As if my Parts were less Serene,
Because my Garments are but mean;
Or that Diogenes's Soul
Were the baser, 'cause his Shirt was foul.
Most precious Jewels often are worn
In threadbare Cases, old and torn;
Nay, the Soul it self, that is richer far
Than all the brightest Jewels are,
As most of the wisest Elders say,
Has but a Casket formed of Clay;
And as to my Opinion -- Fool,
Know, the Brethren hold this for a Rule,
That Interest does the matter frame,
Religion's but a taking Name;
It Is our Leaf Gold that hides the ill,
And guilds the Poison of our Pill:
When a Phanatick Cheat's found out,
Observe he always turns Devout,
Prays daily, and with Pious flam
Conceals the blackness of his Shame:
So wanton Girls too hot to tarry,
Do the trick, and then to hide it -- Marry.
Therefore if that Create thy fear,
Take Courage, for I Will make it appear,
Religion for our ends we use,
As those that want, do wealthy Jews.
Quoth Ralph, This generous explaining,
Sir Knight, is better much than feigning;
For what would Canting signify,
To one that has found out the Lie?
It Is halting just before a Cripple,
And teaching Faction to the People,
And you much less are found Aggressor,
So much the more you are Confessor.
Therefore the business to pursue,
That I may be as plain with you,
See but these three Injunctions done,
Then boldly say, the Lady's won.
First, off with that superfluous Hair,
And in its stead Heart-breakers wear;
That Beard, the rugged Type of War,
Let it be shaved and Chin be bare;
For though a sturdy Soldier known
For daring Acts in Forty one,
Loyal and Valiant famed in both,
Once took a rash, tho honest Oath,
"No Razor e're should touch his Chin,
"Or mow a Hair 'till the King came in*
I hope you have not sworn the same,
Until you should atchieve the Dame:
She would be frighted, for you wear
A Cupid dreadful as a Bear.
When have you e're in Picture seen
The God of Love, with Bearded Chin;
Or with that Ornamental Grace,
To deck the Finis of his Face.
The Ancients paint him like a Child,
Young, soft, smooth, beautiful, and wild,
To show he cannot be confined,
And there is no Prison for the Mind;
But to change him into reverend Genus,
Is to make Saturn of a Venus.
In the second place, Hem -- hem -- I say.
But here his Brains being out of the way,
The Squire bogled for Conception,
To give our Hero more direction:
His Ancestor's Laconick Soul
Had charmed the inside of his Pole;
And dullness, as his proper place,
Took legal Seizure of his Face;
Until with three large Hums and Has,
The Rubbing-Brush o'th canting Cause,
By which the Saints themselves express,
And scrub up their Remembrances;
He freed himself from stupid Yoke
Of fettered Fancy -- and thus spoke.
Quoth he, You must in the second place
Unstrip from out that ragged Case;
Those Leathern Breeches too must soon
Be turned into gay Pantaloon,
And that small Band of low Degree,
Into Cravat of Point-venee;
That reverend Stole begrim'd with Dirt,
Must off, and in its stead a Shirt
Of Holland, Cambrick, or fine Lawn,
Must shroud the Bum's Heroic Brawn.
Clean Linen is a gentle mover
Of Passion, and a Friend to Lover,
Renders the Person neat and grateful,
That would on the contrary be hateful.
This makes the plump young Lady play
The Huswife, and shift twice a day;
When blooming Youth, and wanton Heat,
And Love and Summer make her sweat,
And the Soul's Aromatic Store
Sheds balmy Dews from every Pore,
At least as we that Love imagine,
When our fond Hearts are caught in a Gin.
Thirdly, to win the slippery Dame,
Sir, you must wheedle, lie, and sham,
"For Widows, like a Sharpers bets,
"Are got by Shuffling and Cheats.
Wriggle your self into the acquaintance,
(The better to defend the main-chance)
Of her Kinsmen, Overseers, and Trustees,
They ten to one will do you Justice;
For the only sure way to defeat her,
That is, in downright terms to Cheat her,
Is to trapan with Golden Bribe,
The Consciences of all that Tribe,
Who still are fittest to procure,
And Pimp for such as come to Woo her.
Amongst those her Husband did appoint her,
To make account for Lands and Iointure,
Two City Patriots are named,
And in our modern Stories famed,
Who to purge the Town, have undertook,
Of Pope, and French, and K -- and D --
And set their Zealous Brethren free
From haughty Clogs of Monarchy:
The one Squire Stalliano hight,
That lately might have been a Knight,
Had he loved Honor, that Camelion,
More than Sedition, and Rebellion:
But he was of your constant hiew,
Old Forty one Fanatic Blew;
Tho modern Statists now are seen,
To change the Color into Green;
A secret and implicit Type,
That their Brains Projects are not ripe,
And will no honored Title take,
But from a Prince himself shall make.
As to his Person, it is like Hectors,
Burly and large, as the Protector's,
Whom he with Pride does imitate,
And hopes to reach his soaring Fate,
When Whigs, like Wasps, shall once more seize
The Honey of the Loyal Bees,
He Is one Abjured the Royal Race,
And there is a Story writ in's Face
Of all the Villainies that Man
E're acted since the World began.
His half-shut Eyes were never seen
To look abroad since the King came in,
But blink, as if they could not see
In the Sunshine of a Monarchy.
So have I seen a purblind Owl
All day sit lurking in a hole,
Plotting, like the Saints, for Commonweal,
Dull as their Wit, blind as their Zeal,
And never open his Sawcer Eyes,
'Till night does all the World surprise;
But then with shreeks from hollow Breast,
He robs the People of their Rest,
And seizes with more ease his Prey,
Than if it were in the brightest day.
By Fortune favored, the lowering Novice
Was made a potent Knave in Office,
Strong, opulent, and formidable,
Raiz'd up, and backed by nasty Rabble,
Who threw up greasy Gloves and Caps,
And opened wide their bawling Chaps,
To Choose one that the Crowd could swell
With proper Tenets to Rebel:
Learned in Law he was, and famous,
Profoundly skilled in Ignoramus;
Could Conscientious Iuries pack,
And tie the Foreman to the Stake,
Teach him to vault, come over the Stick,
And as he winkt, make Spaniel speak;
Black fate's Commissioner he lived,
And like her by Confusion thrived;
Hung, drew, and quartered Folks for Sin,
And spared, and saved, as Pence came in,
Lopt by the head offending Peers,
Not giving time to say their Prayers,
Made quick dispatch of all were brought,
That were, or were not in the Plot,
And with the Hangman went a snack
In all the Money he did take
From Traitors, Priests, or Knights of Roads,
Cheats, Burglarers, or Whores and Bawds,
'Till Ketch observing he was choused,
And in his Profits much abused.
In open Hall the Tribune dun'd
To do his Office, or refund.
In public Matters, every hour
He gave Men cause to know his Power;
Often through the Streets, like Corncutter.
Stephen, rid,
Butter to weigh, and Loaves of Bread:
And that he might be sure to right
Himself, if any wanted weight,
He Would send it, not where the Law allows,
To the City Gaol, but to his House,
Not to relieve the starving Rabble,
But to help out his starving Table:
Thus making Proverb aptly come,
That Charity begins at home.
The the other (to give both their due)
Is the most famous of the two,
And with more Demons is possessed,
Tho clothed in the Cassock of a Priest.
Doctoro, styled in S --
But here stands in the noted Rank
Of those, that to their lasting Fames
Have no Religion, nor no Names.
By Chemist Nature he was drawn
From Rebel Anabaptist Brawn,
And wisely to himself was Donor,
Of Name, and also Style of Honor;
As late a Judge affirmed to right us;
No Doctor, Gentleman, nor T --
"For if that Sect, as plain appears,
"Are often their own Godfathers,
"As plainly it is supposed, that he
"Gave himself Baptism, and Degree;
He all Religions has professed,
"No doubt to inform him which was best,
And been as nicely true to all,
"As to his Landlord of Whitehall.
Sometimes he is Orthodox -- then Papist,
Now Whig -- and then as often an Atheist;
Can Curse ye, God confound 'em all,
As loud as any Roarer shall,
Each pious Sect for Gain can use,
Or shift it as he does his Shoes;
And if it chance to go awry,
Can change, or else can lay it by.
Kind Nature has, to teach him Grace,
Painted a Blush upon his Face,
As if she were ashamed to know
The Mischiefs that he prompts her to:
Nay more, to place her Favors high,
In Mystic Phisyognomy.
"His Mouth she fixed with curious Hand,
"Where other people's Noses stand.
"Just by his Eyes with studious Care,
"That he might see what he does swear;
"Yet runs he blund'ring wrong or right,
"As heartless Cowards wink and fight.
Of Oaths he has upon occasion,
A Storehouse to oblige the Nation.
Amongst Knights of the Post was still renowned,
He all their Acts with Conduct crowned,
Secured their Ears, shuffled and cut,
Swore People into Plots, and out;
Perjured himself, or else refrained,
Just as the Demon in him reigned.
"Once did a good thing against his Will,
"But for it since a thousand ill.
And as for the Churches Interests,
(And Royal Pay) he routed Priests;
So when the Bounty was restrained,
And Golden Showers no longer rained,
He told the Senate many a Lie
Of Priests, t'exalt Presbytery,
And falsehoods blacker than his Coat is,
Were sealed with Verbo Sacerdotis.
For Pride, he does surpass all Comers,
Nay, all his Brethren at St. Omers,
And held it an unfitting thing
To veil his Cap, tho to the King;
But to all Noblemen and Peers
He scorned, although they put off theirs.
He called the painful Clergy, Rats
Of low and despicable Fates,
And often plagued their Ears with noise,
From Canting, Squeaking, Bagpipe voice,
To prove their preaching, or their hearing,
Never profits like Emphatick Swearing,
He covets to be styled the Pater
Patriae, or at least Salvator;
Vows to his lasting Fame, not long since
He saved the Town through Case of Conscience.
And now although he saved their Souls,
They wish him hanged as high as Paul's.
A most ungrateful thing, I vow,
"Were all his Depositions true!
But as sly Synon once looked honest,
And yet was found a Villain soonest,
For all his Tears, and Oaths, and Tricks,
Betrayed Old Illium to the Greeks;
So our Doctore, with Clodpate Faction,
Gulled by his Shams, and close Transaction,
His Arguments, and Senseless Babble,
With which he Balderno's the Rabble;
With groundless Fears distracts the Town,
For Rebels Interests, and his own,
And only roots out Romish Prigs,
The sooner to get in the Whigs.
These two, to make her Fame the greater,
Her Husband did entrust to cheat her,
As if he, Prophet-like, discovered,
That you should be the second Lover.
Nice Honesty you must corrupt,
But not with open Bribe obrupt,
But clean conveyance into Fist
A hundred Guinneys is the least;
"For Money, as our Elders say,
"Is Matrimony's Captain Key,
"That maugre all the Bars beside,
"Opens the Padlock of the Bride:
What mighty Actions Gold has done,
Or what, but Heaven, has it not won?
The Hero's Sword, the Lawyer's Art,
The Poet's Brains, the Ladies Heart,
Made Reverend Judges speak with aw,
And a bad Title good in Law;
Wrested even Nature by main force,
Like Streams to run a backward Course;
Made Zealous Saints of hair-brained Letchers,
And Sons of Aretine turn Preachers,
And will as soon seduce these Trustees,
As ever Turky-Pie did Justice.
Therefore with speed your self apply,
These are the marks to know them by:
The first, by his purple-colour'd Train,
His Footmen, Horse, and Copper Chain:
The the other, by his quadrant Face,
And three starved Bullies at his A --
Quoth Hudibras, 'The Devil will have thee,
'Nor can the Churches Interest save thee;
'For these malicious wicked Rants,
'And slanderous Libelling the Saints:
'Like poisonous Snakes in fragrant Bowers,
'Thou shedst thy Venom on those Flowers,
'That often a kind Umbrage made,
'Cool'd and refreshed thee with their shade.
'Have not Stalliano, and the Doctor,
'Sav'd the Town from Villains, would have smok't her;
'Plunder'd and massacered the City,
'Slain Wives and Matrons without pity,
'Plagu'd us with many a wanton freak,
'And put our Virgins to the squeak,
'Rifled their Treasures several ways,
'Well stored with Nature's Picklock Keys?
'And can we be such base Detractors,
'To vilify our Benefactors,
'And term them Profligate and Lewd,
'Have done the Nation so much good?
'What tho Stalliano, for the health
'Of England, broach't a Commonwealth.
'What tho he fought against the King,
''Twas with design to bring him in.
'He with a prosperous Defeat
'Routed his Troops, to make him Great,
'And made rebellious Crowds reveal
'His Indefatigable Zeal.
'And what if Learned Doctoro has,
'To nervate and support the Cause,
'Rais'd doubts and fears, swore true or false,
'Just as the Brotherhood prevails.
"What if he once was Evidence
"For the King, and for the Prisoner since,
'And railed at these whom Conscience tried,
'Because they were not of his side.
'All must, (that know how he is endowed)
'Believe 'twas for the Nations good:
'For as a wise expert Physician,
'To fest'ring wound makes deep incision,
'And by that dangerous way does heal
'A wound, which else would never be well;
'So he that knew the Constitution
'Of the City, and its grand pollution,
'No better Medicine could devise
'Than wholesome Perjury and Lies.
'In Arguments there are no Rules,
Quoth Ralph, 'with Madmen or with Fools;
'For one confounds with want of Sense,
'And to other with Impertinence;
'And though your honored knightly spurs
'From downright folly you prefers,
'Yet all that hear what you have said,
'By G -- must think you drunk or mad:
'For would a Man that is well in's wits,
'And is not Lunatic by fits,
'Argue for Villains, Fiends of Hell,
'(For all are such that would rebel)
'And yet run down the Royal Party,
'Though true and firm as Magna Charta:
'Besides, I fain would understand,
'What's this to the business now in hand?
'Will your applauding Bully-rock,
'E're get the Widow by the Smock?
'Will searching what the Nation suffers,
'Procure you e're to search her Coffers!
'Can you by giving them their due,
'Engage them both to Pimp for you?
'Or will your lies, though enough to scare one,
'Make her come under Covert-barron?
'If so, your sense I will obey;
'If not, then mines the better way;
'And must, when all your Topiques fail,
'In spite of Arguments prevail:
'A freindly bribe, Sir, still affords
'Much greater influence than words,
'Tho Rhetoric speaks with never such skill,
' Money's the smoother Language still;
'And at the last must act your Part out,
'Flatter and Cogg and lie your heart out.
'When Poems are to Patron sent,
'Who sends back only Complement,
'Does not the Author grudge his Wit,
'And wish his Lordship were be-sh --
'Or does a Lawyer e're agree
'For an Applause to excuse his Fee?
'Desert pecuniary hope
'For a fine figure or a Trope,
'And that he is well contented, answer ye,
'For a long tedious Bill in Chancery?
'You'l find his liking more expressed
'Clap but ten pieces in his Fist;
'And that your gold has greater force
'Than all your flourishing discourse.
'Once more then, lest success be wanting,
'Let me advise you leave your Canting,
'And now occasion shows you her top,
'Advance, and take her by the fore-top.
'The Motto of the Duke D' Alva
'In war, was Post Occasio Calva;
'Inferring, that no good could come on it,
'If he once lost the happy moment:
'And the same Crisis still is known,
'To rule over Love as over Renown.
'Rowze then, Sir Knight, and take advice,
'And without more demurs be wise;
'Or else I swear by yonder pole,
'Nay by my fathers Rural soul,
'Henceforth to take a rougher course,
'And, what you would demur, to force.
'Despair and prove the Village Scoff,
'And hang or draw, all is one to Ralph.
When Hudibras this Threatening heard,
And saw the Squires gloomy beard
Wet with the Argumental froth,
That decked the outside of his mouth,
His ferret Eyes look red with passion,
To hear his groundless disputation,
He thought it was no prudent Trick,
To touch his fury to the quick;
But cool and settle all things right,
As Bullies do to those will fight:
Besides, he often had heard a rumor,
Of Ralpho's blunt and sturdy humor,
And knowing 'twas ill time to jest
With tough Battoon and tougher Fist,
He wisely now agrees to do
What e're the Squire should prompt him to;
Not that he valued his haranging,
But through a prudent fear of banging;
For Ralpho, tho not used to vapor,
Yet now resolved to make it appear,
That Cowards, when their bloods are up,
Are stout, as Captains of a Troop.
There dwelt a Wight near end of Town,
That far and near atcheiv'd Renown
For strange mysterious Art in Stitches,
And framing Heroes Coats and Breeches:
He, with hair tuckt behind his Ears,
Made Ermin Robes for Noble Peers;
And out of Woollen Manufacture
Could make a Clown look like a Hector;
By Garb, make fools thought men of sense,
Like Parrots Gay, or Germain Prince,
And win unthinking Ladies hearts,
Charmed by his fine External Parts;
From Gaudy scraps of Weaver's Loom
Make Worth and great Perfection come;
Whose influence has often prevailed
Over Women's hearts, when Wit has failed;
Weilding a Weapon one Inch long,
And tuning scraps of Ancient Song,
He wonderfully could provide
To adorn a Bridegroom or a Bride:
From tattered Gull, raise doughty Squire,
Whom those that scorned before, admire;
And of a course ungaindly flattern,
Create a most acccomplisht Matron:
A man of mighty Faith and Trust,
To Honor and to Interest Just;
And (as it often has appeared)
In Court and City loved and feared;
Loved, when the promises were made;
But feared, when debts came to be paid:
Valliant as Hawkwood when he lived,
And some say from his Race derived;
And though his Ancestors of yore,
Were famous for the drubbs they bore
In bloody wars, both back and side,
By which there courages were tried,
Yet all must on his side Confess,
None had more battered been in peace;
Witness fore finger daily pricked
By Engine small, and backside kicked
By Bullys flustred with ill Wine,
That neither Conscience had, nor Coin;
Yet none his Wit could cavil at,
Nor baffle his contriving pate:
Arithmetic, his chief delight,
Taught him both how to account and write,
And none like him had e're the skill
To etch and lengthen out a Bill,
By sly misplacing Ciphers round
He Would make ten Shillings be ten Pound,
Dashes for figures pass, and blotts
For Nine pence, Sixpences and groats:
He Would often write one thing on the Top,
And the same at bottom to fill up,
One line for thread and silk was read,
Another straight for silk and thread,
Nor could the careless debtor see
The Mystical Tautologie.
To this rare Man, Botchero hight,
Ralpho was sent by Lovesick Knight,
To ask Advice and Council sage
About his Wooing Equipage;
Who finds him close in little Cloister,
In Cross-leg'd Mathematick posture,
Musing upon the unhappy fate
Of an old Doublet, that of late
Belonged to valiant Cavalier,
But now the brunts of many a year,
And Age had most unfreindly grieved,
And rudely torn away a sleeve.
Sir, says the Squire, I Am come to Town --
Thankee, says the other, Pray sit down.
I Am come, I say, to employ your skill
To help my Master -- That I will,
Cries he. But (quoth the Squire) just now
TO must be, or else you nothing do;
Post have, e're you can say, What Is this?
By G -- quoth he e're you can piss --
Reach me my Shoos within there, hoa!
Which buckled, straight away they go,
To measure Corpse of tattered Knight,
And dress him for the Amorous fight.
And now seven times the Sun, that fool,
Had put on Coat to go to School,
As often combed Carrot Pate, and Whinny
Fetched from the Stable worth a Guinny:
And seven times had the bafled light
Fled the Queen Regent of the night,
Who revell'd with her glittering fry
In the broad Chambers of the sky.
In plainer terms, a week was past
E're Hudibras for all his have
Could be accoutered, to pursue
His Love, and decently to woo:
But then, like Summer, he appeared,
Or Rose new blown; face void of beard,
Stockings with Garters, Shoos with Sole,
And Christian breeches without hole:
In brief, so much disguised, you would swear,
Art got the best of Nature here,
And Reason could not conquest gain,
But Garb and Fashion made the man.
No sooner was the Hero dressed,
But storming the outside of his beast,
To the Trustees, with Lovers speed,
And hopes of thriving well, he rid,
And finds 'em with their factious fellows,
Settling the Nation in an Alehouse.
Whom, (with a solemn scrape of foot,
And look demure,) having called out,
With sober grace fit for the occasion,
He makes 'em privy to his passion,
Tells 'em, that Love has long possessed
The battered Castle of his breast;
Protests, it is not the Widows Riches,
But Person, that his heart bewitches;
And since between 'em there is such distance,
Humbly desires their assistance.
Sir (says Doctoro. --) But the knight,
Knowing some dogs 'till muzled bite,
And fearing the end of his discourse,
Thought his best refuge was his Purse,
And therefore to avert the Thesis,
Gilded his Palm with fifty pieces,
Which did so close and neatly come,
Mouth was shut up, the Priest was dumb.
To Stallian -- too the same was given,
To keep their Countenances even --
And now there is no more to do,
But when to Wed, and when to Woo;
Each promises the affair to settle,
And give him right to her and Chattle,
Inform him without trick or Cheat
The punctual Truth of her Estate:
For as the Tutor to an Heir,
Can by his diligence and care
Make him in Excellence surpass,
Or by his negligence, an Ass;
So your Trustees and Overseers,
The Widows Scizzers, and the Sheers
That snip her Mouldering Estate,
And Courtail second Wooers Fate,
As honesty does hint, can set
The Adventurer in or out of debt,
Help him to find a Fortnight after
A wealthy Bride, or Catch a Tartar.
With some such Plots their brains did beat,
And now grown pregnant with the Cheat,
They smile to see the Knight so addle,
And bid the Maid, fetch to other Bottle:
Where we will leave 'em for a space,
To look into the Widows Case,
And find, when Love and Interest vary,
What other cause can make 'em Marry.
Her Husband had not given up Ghost
Above a Fortnight, at the most,
But like true Woman, she began
To think upon another Man,
And knowing youth could not be kept,
And Grain would spoil not duly reapt,
Permits her Will and Veins to agree
With Natural Necessity.
The Trustees too, that watched her Motions,
Much closer than their own devotions,
'Like dogs that hunt about a Crowd
'The spotted Bitch that's growing proud,
Resolved to try the happy minute,
And since the Fort's unguarded, win it:
Which after a short day or two,
They found not difficult to do;
For she first having made 'em swear
The secret never to declare,
Bound 'em to be a shield between
The public scandal and the sin,
Freely on both her favors placed,
And both at equal turns Embraced:
Now Stalliano, now the Doctor,
As often as flowing blood provoked her.
Nor was this Act precipitate,
But prudent and deliberate;
She knew her Constitution well,
With all the passions that rebel;
Found by some motions in her Eyes,
One single friend could not suffice;
And that she greater Joy should know,
By having two strings to her Bow.
Long had this close salacious League,
This Modish Tripartite Intrigue,
Concealed it self from Common Eyes,
Had not lewd Belly 'gan to rise,
And swell above its fellow Parts,
Infected by venerial Arts:
For the plump Squire had so kiss't her,
And the Cassock Merchant so Caress't her,
That Nature from them both had drawn
A Mass of Presbyterian Spawn.
And between haunches, Mountain bigg,
New molded a young Moon calf Whigg;
For which, they different hopes did gather,
And each himself imagined father,
Till they, by Arguing, did descry
They both had fingers in the Pie.
So have I known in modern Age
A wretch to two her self Engage,
And leave the man she first carest
To be by a second lewdly kissed:
For her sake, the whole sex be cursed,
Man's torment, and of Ills the worst;
For never a Saint had sweeter face,
Serener Look, or Modest Grace;
Or seemed more Innocent or Civil,
Angel without, within a Devil;
Yet hold -- oh pardon me, ye few
Chaste Beauties, Innocent and true;
You that your Constant flames improve,
To bless the happy Man you love:
For your sakes I could rage far worse,
And to my self convert the Curse,
Did not my sense this truth pursue,
That y' are so very, very few,
That Phaenix-like in distant clime,
Scarce more than one's seen at a time.
But to proceed -- The Squire and Priest
Being of the Widow both possess't,
And knowing Wranglings and Fewd
Would to the Matter do no good,
Resolved at last, with cunning spite,
To Top her off upon the Knight,
And make his grave Fanatic zeal
The Balsam, wounded Fame to heal.
No sooner had they baited hook,
But greedily 'twas snap't and took:
For the Knight unwary of the Slaughter
In Frigot made 'twixt wind and water,
Resolved to run the Marriage Course,
And take for better and for worse.
This in due season being declared,
They next most orderly prepared
The Widow to receive his visit,
And lend a friendly Ear to his suit;
Who scarce had time to dress her self,
To charm the view of amorous Elf;
But word was brought the Knight was come,
Unhorst, and entering just the room:
Surpised with news thus unexpected,
She Prayer Book snatched, that lay neglected,
(Whose use was not so much for Pocket,
As to fix Candels in the Socket)
And with it making swift retreat
To Elbow Chair, sits down in State.
Mean while the Knight at Parlour door
Bows, that his Nose just touched the floor,
And (with an Air august and grand)
Most humby begs to kiss her hand:
Which she permitted with a Grumble,
That half expressed he was too humble.
So long he in that posture stood,
Some thought his Lips had been there glew'd,
And though no water from his Eyes
Did flow to show his hearts surprise;
Yet some affirm, that value truth,
There fell abundance from his Mouth,
And Nature there did much prevail,
Though Love the 'tother did exhale.
At last, awaking from his dream,
And clearing of his mouth from phlegm,
First making hem, and Prologue Cough,
Thus his Wit's Blunderbuss went off.
'Madam your slave is once more come
'To sound your heart, and know his doom,
'Whether amongst the blessed he is named,
'Or like a Criminal condemned;
'Let your fair Eyes allow the grace
'To turn their optics on my Face;
'You'l have I hope no cause to explode
'My Person, Method, or my Mode:
'I am not now that Hudibras
'That Monarchy once strove to raze,
'He that to make a Knave a Lord
'Durst live a Villain on record,
'Swear 'twas the Brandish't Sword must heal
'The state, and called Rebellion Zeal;
'Nor is my Judgment now so small,
'To bow before the Idol Baal,
'Or in that Brutes applause to sing,
'That's ridd and managed against the King;
'For as Heaven's Fountains, when they flow,
'Influence the plants, and make 'em grow,
'By sacred Mystery dispersed
'In spouts ore all the universe*
'So Loyalty, by your great Art,
'Spread and diffused about my heart,
'Makes its dilated Power reign
'O're the barren Island of my Brain.
''Tis only you could thus succeed,
'You teach my Infant zeal to read,
'And Capital Letters of large dint
'Distinguish from Geneva Print:
'By you I am regenerate,
'Transplanted to a happy state;
'And by your face, that is like the Sun,
'Or Rather like the Shining Moon;
'Your mouth that calms intestine Jarrs,
'And Eyes, my most propitious Stars;
'Charm'd from a Whigg in heart and soul
'To Tory stanch from foot to Poll,
'I now dare Canting Saints rebuke,
'Drink Brimmer high to K -- and D --
'Rail and confute their carnal Reason,
'That for State Politics talk Treason.
'In fine, for you I durst do more
'Than ever for the Cause before;
'Such wondrous feats can Beauty do,
'When blessed with Love and Money too.
Quoth she, I plainly must confess
Your altered Mien, and Sparkish dress,
Has charmed me to a kinder fit
Than ere your Rhetoric did yet:
You look as if y' had something in ye,
Much different from the quondam Ninny,
That sat with hampered foot in the Stocks,
Dispersing his insipid Iokes;
And had not Modesty possessed
With Scruples my unerring breast,
And told me, she that is Wedded twice
Forfeits her Credit to the Wise,
There Is something at this time would move
My Tongue to tell ye, that I Love;
But Honor sways my doubtful Mind;
Honor, the Soul of Womankind,
That to us Widows will allow
No Dispensation of first Vow;
But proves, that having once known man,
It Is Lust not Love Weds us again.
Quoth he, 'What you call Lust I Will prove
'To be the darling Child of Love,
'And all his best Rewards does merit,
'And lawful'st flames does still inherit.
'Nay more, if once I go about it,
'I'le prove, you cannot subsist without it:
'He that is warmed by Hymen's fire,
'And yet no spark has of desire,
'Is like one sitting at a feast
'That wants ability to taste;
'She vilely does abuse the Creature,
'And the worst way debauches Nature,
'Who still designed through Earth and Seas
'All things to generate and Increase,
'Which cannot be, nor never must,
'Without the Aid of Generous Lust:
'The Flowers and Plants desire the Sun,
'Seas, Brooks, and Rivers, court the Moon,
'The pert Cock-Sparrow bristles up
'T' enjoy his Miss on houses top,
'And to give proof of ardent flame,
'Each minute he renews the same;
'Till time puts end to eager chase:
'Those nere live long that live a-pace.
'All Animals to Nature bow,
'And consequently I and you;
'Must mildly in that station move,
'Rankt with all Creatures else that love;
'For Reason leaves us in that Case
'When raptured Passion storms the place,
'And Brutes and Birds that love, may be
'As fortunate and blessed as we.
' Lust is the Spirit of our Youth,
'The Salt that seasons Natures Broth,
'In which all humane-kind have shares,
'The young and those that are in years;
'Nay even in Children every hour
'It gives them cause to know its power;
'The Boy of seven, just big enough
'To keep his Breeches pissing proof,
'Cocks hat, and imitates the Men,
'To please the tiptoed Girl of Ten,
'Whom rudely she away does shove,
'Hoping to get a bigger Love;
'And what is 't think ye that Inspires
'These hopes in her, but green desires?
' Lust is the chiefest cause of this,
'Though yet she knows not what it is:
'Therefore, since all it do pursue,
'Why should it fail to reign in you;
'Being as proper on your score
'As Sursingle or your Bandore,
'Or Peak, which like a Bill is set,
'To show the Shop is to be let?
'Then let not frailty so common,
'So pertinent to every Woman,
'Make you believe, you reason have
'To blast the hopes of your poor slave,
'That swears by the Eternal Powers
'To dye, or live for ever yours.
At this, with some few Artfull sighs,
And turning up her whites of Eyes,
Quoth she, Your happy hour at last
Is come, to atone for troubles past,
Nor can that Castle hold out long
Where the besiegers are so strong,
And with such Judgment too assailed,
I Am yours, your merit has prevailed;
But on this gentle fair condition,
That I may use my disposition,
And that you study still to please,
Else there will be no Love nor peace:
This Sealed and granted on your part,
Take here my hand, with it my heart
And person, at your will to enjoy,
Have, hold, possess, and occupy.
Who can express the vast delight
And eager Raptures of the Knight?
'Twas such, that the Entrancing bliss
No tongue can e're relate but his;
Nor tell his Sentiments of Joy,
Or Transports of his Ecstasy.
In which long-wish't and happy state,
Full of the Joys of coming fate;
We Will leave him for a while to rest,
And dress us for the Wedding feast;
Where how his friends and he succeed,
In the next CANTO you shall read.
The End of the first Canto.
HUDIBRAS REVIVED
The Argument of the second CANTO.
The Character of every Guest,
The scuffle at the Marriage feast,
Comment's about a Loyal story,
And hot dispute 'twixt Whigg and Tory;
Which the Knight just going to decide,
Was fetched away to guard his Bride,
By Ralph, who happened to trapan her
With Stallian -- in undecent manner.
CANTO II.
NO tongue can e're express the Joys,
Nor Pen discribe the Ecstasies
Of him that snares in Hymen's net
Rich beauty, he despaired to get.
Like Criminals from Death reprieved,
It Is with such eagerness received,
That the abundance of the Blessing
Abates the pleasure of Possessing,
'Till Reason by degrees does rule,
And swelling Passions flag and cool,
Then airy Transports all remove,
To solid and substantial Love,
Obliged with this long wished for case,
Was now Love's Minion, Hudibras;
Who tho at first charmed with surprise,
Yet growing every hour more wise.
No longer would let Passion cloy
His Heart, but soberly enjoy.
So needy Libertines, whose use
Was to be lavish and profuse,
Falling by chance to Wealth, grow dingy,
Base, fordid, niggardly, and stingy:
His Tongue no longer Grief expressed;
His Eyes were dry, his Heart at rest;
His Breath that dimmed with moans the Skies,
Or coined by Passion into sighs,
In tuneless Sonnets now was eased,
Or cooled his Broth, or what he pleased;
For now the Priest had shown his skill,
And each had bowed and said (I will).
"The sacred Words that fast enrolls
"In the Marriage-Book Bodies and Souls,
And every thing in order said,
To License them to go to Bed:
But stay, the Hour's not come yet,
The Guests must have a bit to eat,
And now in order to it were come
Into a spacious Dining Room,
Where Herbs were strewn, and Cloth was laid,
And three old blind Crowdero's played.
But to return to Hudibras,
He had not been from Church a space,
So long as one his Name could write,
But the old Maggot 'gan to bite,
And buzzing Whimseys warmed the Addle
Part, of his disceptious Noddle;
His Conscience that for Commonweal,
Had long been Laquey to his Zeal,
Turns Head, and smites him over the Face,
For being in that Tory Dress,
And each invited Guest swears Zounds,
Seeing him in those Pantaloons.
In fine, he was by all so hurried,
And by each factious Bandog worried,
That he resolved to prove new Man,
And fairly now turn Cat in Pan,
And every former Protestation
Evade by Mental Reservation;
"For Presbyters and Priests are the same,
"And merely differ in a Name,
"Tho they of various Matters treat,
"As one to Lie, and one to Cheat,
"Yet nightly Friendship they pursue,
"As Lawyers in a Tavern do;
"Who tho one Hour they bawl and jar,
"Another, constant Cronies are:
Possessed with Rules which these allow,
The Knight resolved to break his Vow,
Urged to it by the envited Tribe,
Whose Characters I thus describe.
First, to the Tables highest place,
Publicola, with humble Grace
Approaches; he was one, whose Foes
Had led a long time by the Nose,
And by a Baud they called Ambition,
Deboach'd into a sad condition,
Nor did his Fate e're make amends,
And let him know 'em from his Friends,
But led him on to disobedience,
And, like them, forfeit his Allegiance,
Who when their Cards were shuffled right,
Soon left him, and played least in sight.
And as I have seen Boys at play
Glass Windows break, then run away,
And leave one Impote^t and Lame,
To bear the beating and the blame.
So they, when mischief was on foot,
Withdrew, and let him stand it out.
Famous he was for Birth and Race,
For Courage, Person, Mien, and Face,
For Horsemanship, and skill in Fence,
And every thing indeed, but S --
For Nature thinking she has done,
With lavish Hand enough for one,
In ordering his Person fine,
And that she need not dress his Mind,
Unfurnisht Head on Shoulders set,
And to his Agents shov'led Wit.
Thus as adventurous Knights of old,
Made Squires their Shields and Lances hold,
With which for Fame they were to fight,
Or to defend their Ladies Right,
His Battle Politiques were fought
With Weapons that his Faction brought,
And he the weighty Cause maintains,
Argues and plots with others Brains.
His place being filled, there next him sat
A crippled Cobbler of the State,
Deformed, and scarce in height a span,
Distorted Relic of a Man;
Yet the Oracle of the dull Rout,
Tho plagued with Treason, Pox, and Gout,
"O Miracle of scandalous Age!
"Tho all his Bones at Nature rage,
"Crampt with Diseases and sharp Pain,
"Yet there is health still in his Brain;
"His chattering Tongue does still rebel,
"Although his Body feel a Hell.
Near him old Sodom sat, whose Fame
Is justly suited to his Name;
His Lewdness claims the first degree,
And Treasons coined in Italy,
Makes him with brainless Factions move,
As lewd and bestial as his Love.
Whispering with him was a squab thing,
That always railed against the King,
Yet gave worse Reasons for so doing,
Than e're choused Cully did for wooing.
With his imagined Wit he is wrapped,
And like an Autumn Spider shapt.
His busy Pate extracted Fears,
As Whores do mercinary Tears:
He Would swear in the Skies he heard a drumming,
And that the Bugbear French were coming,
Or if a Blazing Star were seen,
The fault must be in King or Queen,
Some mighty flaw in Government,
For which their Prodigies were sent;
But never believed the Heavens foretell
A Plague for Villains that rebel.
To all ill News he was a Prophet,
But if 'twere good, knew nothing of it;
In his opinion most precise,
And obstinate to all advice,
"For in all his Race and Progeny
"No Rebel e're was found but he.
Two City Sparks next filled the Table,
New placed in Office by the Rabble,
And used just like a pair of Bellows,
To blow Sedition amongst the Zealous;
Pimpino and Backoso named
At Court, tho not in the City shamed,
Scorned by the Loyal and the brave,
Tho cherisht by the factious Knave.
The first a tall affected Prig,
In entertaining Gown and Wig,
With Spanniel gate, and fawning form,
That Porpuss-like foretells a storm,
Low Cringes and uncovered Pate,
He hugs the Man he means to cheat;
So proud of purple Officers,
That he often pulls 'em by the Ears,
To show 'em in what Sphere they move,
And that his Worship's placed above.
The second was a drunken Sot,
So scared and frighted with the Plot,
That he durst never see the Cuts
Without two Bottles in his Guts,
Nor with the story on it dispense,
'Till he were fairly past his sense:
And as the true Geneva breed,
When any thing does ill succeed,
Seek to avert their State Commotion,
By formal settling to Devotion,
His Zeal another way inclined,
And fortified his fears with Wine,
That what his Wit could not pursue,
His Courage thus infused might do;
So Asia's Conqueror inspired
By Greekish Brimmers, Fame acquired,
And the vast World before him shrunk,
Nor e're durst meet his Arms when drunk.
Thus stored with equal Virtues, they
Were likewise placed in equal sway,
Like Beagles coupled in a Chain,
To hunt the Loyal, and arraign
All those that would not break the Laws,
Kiss and Espouse the Good old Cause;
Recusants were for Faction blamed,
Dissenters cherisht for the same,
And what was Treason in the one,
In the other was an act well done,
As if so base a thing would be
In Courts of Law and Equity;
As that more Justice should be due
To a Dutch Swabber than a Jew,
Especially when all pretenses
Are void, and equal their Offenses.
Law is the Guardian of our Lives,
Our Fortunes and Prerogatives,
By which our proper Rights are known,
And every Subject gets his own,
Unless some hired Vermin shame us,
And lose a Cause through Ignoramus,
Expose their Consciences of Steel,
To justify their lasting Zeal,
Make ye a sly fallacious Quibble,
Act Vi and Armis against a Bible,
And lies in Rhetoric expressed,
As if Men took an Oath in jest;
Or that a Monarch's Life were far
Less worth than the Prisoners at the Bar.
Men should have Souls and Consciences,
And Loyalty to join with these,
"Tho in a business lately known,
"'It Is thought the Jury there had none;
"When from the least to the greatest thing,
"They all had Justice but the King.
Near him was placed a sniveling Cur,
Wrapped up in Scarlet lined with Fur,
With gilded Lady by his side,
Trickt and Embroidered like a Bride,
Well known to every Kinght and Lord,
And intimate with all the Board:
Her Husband's Riches did surmount,
Grew and Increased on her account
Like rolling Snow-balls, for tho he
Extorted much by Usury,
She found the surest way of gaining,
By her obliging entertaining;
Famous he was for Procuration,
Demurrings, and continuation,
Hedging Estates in, and the Title
For nothing (or as bad) for little,
On tender Conscience setting Tax,
And ever softening it like Wax,
To make it fit to bear impression,
Of true or false upon occasion.
His name, as I Am informed by hearsay
From friends, was Noverint Universi,
Renowned amongst Pauper Cavaliers,
Bilkt Widows, and young Bancrupt Heirs,
As much admired for Poynant Wit,
Especially at his own Treat,
For drinking Healths in Brimmer Gills,
To Senates and Exclusive Bills,
Sirnaming Bishops England's Foes,
And Drone-like singing Raree-Shows.
Others of this rare Tribe were met,
And at the Board in order set,
Like Toads that in black Fogs appear,
To suck the Poison of the Air,
And then infuse it to the Blood,
And Entrails of their crawling Brood;
Whilst round about the spacious Room,
Loud Laughs, and then confused Hum,
And scraps of Treason made the Jest,
From Pignies mouth with Grace expressed.
When Hudibras appeared again,
And ushered all the Dishes in,
Sawces and Sallads on a pile,
All ranged in order, Rank and File,
At Tables end the Lady fair
Was placed, whilst all the Guests stood bare,
Each gratulating with submission,
The happy altering her condition,
Who with down-look and shamefast Mien,
Acted the Virgin of thirteen,
And by her carriage might be guest,
As pure a Maid as ever P --
But Ceremony's growing old,
And lest the Supper should be cold,
Up to the Board Doctoro comes,
Hanging his Hat upon his Thumbs,
And with his quondam Tone and Face,
Squeak'd out this formal Canting Grace,
Bless, I beseech thee, Lard, quoth he,
This buttered Dish of Furmity;
Ah! let the luscious Plumbs therein,
Mind us of our more luscious Sin,
And prove unto us sacred Meat,
For thy Disciples loved Wheat.
Let this Surloin have also Blessing,
This Venison Haunch, tho spoiled in dressing.
"At that the Knight erecting head,
"And finding it was so indeed,
"Frowning with discontented look,
"Stole softly out to beat his Cook,
Whilst thus the Priest went on -- And, Lard,
When thou have blessed this plenteous Board,
Keep us the feeders too from fallings,
And bless us in our several Callings;
Give us, we pray thee, leave to tread
Once more upon a Bishop's head:
Let not the Land those Silkworms nourish,
And then thy chosen Saints shall flourish.
Religious Button-makers teach,
And gifted Weavers stiffly preach;
Schoolmen with Rhetoric decoy us,
It Is the most ignorant are most pious;
All Colleges and Schools are vain,
Breeders of Learning most profane,
Except that University
That graced my Virtue with Degree,
A Nursery built to preserve us,
And not for Doctrine but for Service.
Greek is a Heathen Tongue professed,
Latin the Language of the Beast,
Nor is Philosophy found good,
Unless to teach us to be lewd,
To trace mysterious Secrets home,
And search our Mother Natures Womb:
But we a near and shorter cut,
A North-East passage have found out,
To those immortal heavenly Mines,
Where gracious Noll in Splendor shines,
And all those holy Men appear,
Once Sanctified at Doncaster.
Here stopped the Priest, not having done,
But to pump Breath up to go on,
'Till Pigmy having long overcome
The hungry Demons in his Womb,
And justly now began to fear,
No end would be of this long Prayer,
Tipped him a wink to cease, and then
Put on his Hat, and cried Amen,
And now began the Massacre,
Whilst stillness seized each Member there;
Even Zeal it self had Self-denial,
The lust of Eating made him Loyal,
'Till second Course the Table crowned,
And the Whig Healths were coming round*
But then, as if the passive Bottles
Had charmed Sedition to their Noddles,
Pigmy starts up with Zealous fury,
And like hired Foreman of a Jury,
Tickled with old rebellious Itch,
Began this edifying Speech.
'That Hieroglyphick Loyn of Veal
'(Quoth he) is like the Commonweal,
'From Body Politic so lopt,
'And like the State mangled and Chopped,
'Heaven even in Naturals does express
'Perfect Idea's of our Case,
'And by mean Symptoms makes us know
'The Troubles we must undergo;
'For it is not only Railery,
'Blasting our deeds with Infamy,
'Which hair-brained Scriblers frame to cramp one,
'Or seeing of our names in Lampoon,
'Must e're have power enough to vex us,
'Or with their emptiness perplex us;
'Nay, should we hear a fellow prate,
'There goes a Rogue of Forty eight,
'It must not on us make Invasions,
'The Touchstone of the Saints is Patience,
'And the pleasure will be ours at last,
'Revenge, tho slow, is surely pac't;
'Little disgraces still must be
'Companions of our Constancy.
'Halters, sharp Axes, breach of Laws,
'Must aid and propagate the Cause;
'But like brave Thieves, if any dies,
''Tis not for Trifles, but a Prize,
'What Troubles did on Brutus wait,
'E're he had power to change the State.
'How did he let pert Coxcombs rule,
'And squint and slaver like a Fool,
'Abus'd by the Monarchal Crew,
'Oft spurned and cudgel'd black and blew,
'And yet with patience without snobbing,
'How did he bear the unfriendly drubbing,
''Till Lucrece died, (the first Coy thing
'That e're did so for Ravishing)
'But then, as if her wanton Fate
'Gave cause enough to change the State,
'He boldly threw off his disguise,
'Aided the Rebels, and grew wise.
'As he proceeded, so must we,
'The best of Wit is Policy,
'And opportunity's the main
'Thing to make us our ends obtain.
'What made the quondam Draymen Lords,
'But time and patience, and good Swords?
'Or the Hotspur of the North expire,
'But testy Wrath, and too much Fire?
'Rage, as in Reason needs must appear,
'Is like a gust of Wind to a Taper,
It Is either puffed and melted fast,
'Or quite extinguished by the blast:
'And so shall we, if we expose
'Our kindled Angers to our Foes.
'Passion converts our solid sense
'To folly and impertinence,
"Like Hectors that make Cullies fret,
"And then are sure to win the Set;
'Or like a Squib that flies about,
'Buzzes and bounces, and goes out,
'But never can do half the ill turns
'Of the Fire that moderately burns.
'Besides, we have Examples still,
'That Caution was our chiefest skill
'In late successes, a sly fleer
'Carry'd more Cunning, than to swear;
'And Yea and Nay with formal Dress,
'Gave us such great advantages,
'That those that did against us fight,
'Almost believed we were in the right,
'Deceiv'd by holy Politiques,
'And influence of Canting tricks,
''Till we with Men and Arms were stored,
'But then Religion was the Sword,
'Each pious Pastor warmed with Bub,
'Would were his Buff-Coat in his Tub:
'In his right hand would weild a Bible,
'In the left an edifying Libel,
'Thence loudly bawling Gospel Law,
'And if they not believed, would draw.
'But this was when the point was gained
'A step, which yet we have not obtained,
'And therefore mildly must agree,
'And grace our Plots with subtlety.
'A Commonwealth's as hard to bring in,
'As 'twas of late to get the King in,
'When fatally his Cause was tried,
'And tho it happened the wrong side;
'Yet if we do but mind our hits,
'Our Party such advantage gets,
'Such shoals of Rabble daily draws,
'To back and fortify the Cause,
'We doubt not the Conscientious Men
'Will one day get him out again;
'For Monarchy is still professed
'A foe to all our Interest,
'A headlong Arbitrary sway,
'That proudly makes us all obey,
'When we in Justice should maintain
'The Privilege of Englishmen,
'Whose humors with Republiques breed,
'But seldom honor a crowned Head;
'Pleas'd with the freedom of their State,
'And blind Ambition to be great,
'Which cannot be effected when
'The Nation has a foremost Man.
'The wise Plebeans feared to bring
'Their Votes for Caesar to be King,
'As doubting that his Power might rise,
'T' incroach upon their Liberties,
'And keep them from their honored Due,
'Who one day might be Consuls too;
'And in our latter Age we found
'A Wight aspiring to be crowned,
'Who tho he had gained the utmost height
'Of the lofty Pyramid of State,
'Would yet have made our stubborn Folk
'To bow to a more haughty Yoke.
'Had they not boldly checked the thing,
'And cried, No Bishop, nor no King,
'Two Names that never yet would heal
'The Wounds made in a Commonweal,
'But make it rankle a worse way,
'Than a neglected Slave's at Sea.
'Yet tho a Monarch be the Bug,
'A thing we hate like a mad Dog,
''Tis fit we humor Times, and with,
'Fit subtlely, beware his Teeth.
'In Royalty is a strange Power
'That sometimes higher moves and lower,
'When low the blow is to be struck,
'When higher we must only look,
'And its declension watch with pains,
'As Pigmies do the soaring Cranes.
'Our Wit is now a wiser course
'To propagate the Cause, than force:
'As Horseleeches, with eager might
'Suck to the Blood, but never bite.
' Petitions, and such Gentilesses,
'Convenient are, but no Addresses:
'Rumours of Popish Cavalcades,
'Armies in the North, and Hatfield Maids,
'Dreams, Whimsies, and the strange affrights
'Of Enthusiastic Bethlemites;
'All things that can the King perplex,
'And with Eternal Buzzings vex,
'To urge him to strike first, and then
'We have good cause to do it again;
'For Causes however understood
'In wrong or right, will do us good:
'And what can better charm a Widgeon,
'Than the old Authentic sham Religion.
'What made State Carpenter rebel,
"Religious Cause of doing well?
"Or brought Mun's Murder to be found,
" Religion? -- No, five hundred Pound,
Answered an old neglected Guest,
That sat at the lower end of the Feast,
Who tho by Mrs. Bride envited,
By all the rest of the Board was slighted,
His Tory Principles not being
Squared right with theirs, but disagreeing;
He finding that the warpt Statemonger
Would preach his Canting Treason longer,
Resolved to cut him off, and make
Him know, 'twas now his turn to speak.
The Orator looked plaguey pale
To be thus hindered in his Tale,
But seeing tother's Resolution,
And hoping this might breed confusion,
Jogs the next Rascal near him seated,
Both being in Vice and Blood related,
Whilst Proto follows his Position,
And thus harangues the Politician.
Quoth he, 'I have observed some years
'The Authors of the Nations fears,
'To be indefinently, two,
' Videlicet, The Devil and You,
'You wisely to escape his Whip,
'Have entered in Copartnership
'And all the Subject Rabble made
'Chief Customers in your joint Trade:
'He brings the Treasons to effect,
'Which politickly you project.
'Nature to Custom he Converts;
'And old Rebellion newly starts.
' Your Office is to urge the Evil,
'And to infect the Crowd, the Devil;
'So both of ye take equal shares,
'Profit and Praise in the Affairs.
'The subtle Scales that slily weighs
'Heavy or light the Consciences,
'Of those that with State Poison swell,
'That fear the Lord, and yet Rebel.
'Thus as your Bully the Protector,
'The Commonwealth and Causes hector,
'Tho he to kill his Prince did dare,
'Yet in that instant went to Prayer;
'So you pretending to do good,
'The blackest Crimes and Mischiefs brood,
'And all the Villainies of Hell,
'Do cover with Religions Veil,
'Vernish and guild you horrid Ills,
'As 'Pothecaries do their Pills*
'Only to hide, and keep unseen
'The nauseous Poison that is within.
'You, Witch-like, to perform your feats,
'Can let the Devil suck your Teats,
'Or practice any odd Diversion,
'Shall please him best upon your Person;
'For it is agreed, to gain their ends,
'The Brethren may have League with Fiends,
'Hold Correspondence with the Furies,
'As well as Ignoramus Juries,
'Provided that the Cause goes on,
'And nothing's idly left undone.
'From thirteen years to threescore odd,
'You've Traitor been to King and God,
'And yet have sought 'em both at times,
'When Justice was pursuing Crimes;
'Oft been devout for fear of Death,
'Rebel and Loyal in a Breath;
'But ever kept a constant way,
'When any Faction bore the sway.
'Like Carriers Horse you bore the Bell,
'And knew the beaten Path so well,
'The rest of the Asses with their Loads
'Could never fear to miss their Roads;
'Nor did you ever come too late,
'To fall in at a Turn of State.
'But private Pardon would allege,
'('Among all the rest) your Privilege,
'Your Crimes being of a deeper dye,
'Gave you the reason to tell why,
'And that secure you could not be
'In the general Indemnity;
'Which passing under Royal Seal,
'Your Agent Devil, and your Zeal,
'Made you forget the mighty Grace,
'And steeled with Impudence your Face,
'Bearing with Pride the Conscience Clog,
'You turned to the Vomit like a Dog.
A Dog, cries Pigmy; at which word,
He rapt an Oath that shook the Board,
And star'd as if a Witch had dressed him*
Or that the Devil had possessed him:
Quoth he, In all my cunning searches
For the Nation's Interest, and the Churches,
I never encountered such Offense,
Nor bandied with such Impudence.
As I have met with here to night,
Affronted by abusive spite,
For what but National Distress
Could draw from me such Flourishes;
Or hints of Doubts, of Fire, and Faggot,
But Zeal -- Quoth Proto, ' Yes, a Magot,
'That e're since Forty one did paddle
'In the deep Quagmire of your Noddle.
'What made me busy in the State?
'Purblind Ambition to be Great?
'But when Great, how was I subdued?
'By the Devil and Ingratitude?
'Why did I make a Speech to the Peers?
'To set the People by the Ears?
'But had it then no tang of Arts?
'Perhaps 'twas then to show your Parts,
'How gravely proper to advise,
'And how Rhetorically wise.
'What made me amongst Roundheads Muster
'Against the King -- ' His luck at Worcester?
'But was I not by Conscience driven
'To do it, think you? ' No, by Heaven.
'What could inspire me to such Evil,
''Gainst so Divine a Prince, the Devil?
'He still, had we then no Abettors?
" Yes, Cromwell, Bradshaw, and Hugh Peter's.
At this, a (Zeal-expressing) Mug,
Thrown by an Independent Pug,
Flew with such swiftness over his Pate,
That it struck two Yards off, his Hat;
But Scull was saved by dopping Noddle,
And lifting up a Tory Bottle,
He flung it at the Aggressor's Face,
But missed, and struck a Brimming Glass;
Which grave Doctoro had begun
'A Health to the Lads of Forty one.
The Priest, half drowned in Burgundy,
At Proto's Head a Tart let fly,
Which meeting with a flying Cheese,
Dashed all the Cream on Pigmy's Phiz --
Who starting back, and glowing hot
With Rage, to be thus Custard shot,
On Mutton shoulder lays his Fist,
And vows Revenge on this new Guest,
Who now with throwing the Meat about,
Had scuffled all the Candles out:
Yet could not darkness, not the hurry,
Allay our Politicians fury,
Who brandishing Fore-leg of Sheep,
On Proto's Head laid such a heap
Of blows, that had he not retreated,
He totally had been defeated;
Nor did he cease, but still pursued
His Conquest, steeped in Grease and Blood;
Not he, whom Divine History tells.
With Jaw Bone did such Miracles,
E're swifter could his Foes divide,
Or drive 'em faster from his side,
Then did our Hero with his Truncheon,
Or Weapon good of roasted Luncheon,
'Till fickle undiscerning Fate,
That makes the Brave least Fortunate;
His Victory did countermand,
By slipping from his eager hand
The mangled Shoulder, which was caught
By Proto, who the advantage watched;
And now returns with doubled Rage,
And the wearied Conqueror engaged
So fierce with thumps about the Scull,
That tumbling backwards over a Stool,
The stunnied Statesman with the blow
Was left at the mercy of his Foe;
But Pallas, whom the Schools relate
The Darling Offspring of Jove's Pate,
And therefore in Distresses deigns
To take great care of Mortal Brains,
Fearing the fall might make Contusion,
Under his Head conveyed a Cushion.
Mean while, Pimpino and Backoso
Doubting their luck would be but So-So,
And that it would disgrace them all,
Tamely to see their Captain fall;
To Pigmy's aid advanced, to pull
His Corpse from Barricado Stool:
But in the attempt by friend of Proto's,
That of the Brawl had timely notice,
Received some blows and hardy thwacks,
Furiously laid on Sides and Backs;
Yet being strong, and such as knew
How much a Cudgelling came too,
In spite of drubbing and battooning,
Rescued their Friend, that just was swooning,
For fear some awker'd stroke should reach
His Noddle, as he sat on's Breech;
But now the Genius that still is chief
Defender of Mankind from mischief,
Unwilling the Fight amidst good Cheer
Should grow into a Massacre,
Sent Hudibras with Lights to stop
Their Rage, and take the Matter up;
He peering round from hollow Eyne,
And the havoc saw of Meat and Wine,
The Custard wrack, with which the Asses
Had now bedaub'd their Clothes and Faces;
And finding all his hopes were lost,
To save the remainder of his Cost,
That what should serve the Folks at home,
Was rudely thrown about the Room;
Disturbed too at their lavish Crimes,
He on a Sideboard Table climbs,
As well to make mimself heard better,
As to amend his Dwarf-like Stature,
And propt on the Domestic Fortress,
Thus pow'rfully beats up their Quarters.
'Ye Sons of Rancour and Sedition,
'Ye Rats that gnaw, yet spoil Provision,
'Whose low, absurd, and brainless Strifes,
'Ruine the Cause, your selves, and wives;
'You, whose Enthusiastic Itches
'Fondly your knowing Sense bewitches,
'What lavish Demon could inspire
'Your Souls with such unhallowed Fire,
'To be thus heathenishly lewd,
'And make such wrack of Christian Food?
'Swagbelly'd Danes, it is true, in Drink
'Brawl much, because they seldom think.
'The taper Spaniard sopt in Wine,
'By tilting makes his Honor shine.
'The Frenchman, of amphibious Mold,
'Soon fiery hot, and freezing cold,
'At play, or over a Bottle draws,
'Cocks Hat, and justifies his Cause.
'The drowsy Dutch, with boggy Breech,
'And Nature barbarous as his speech,
'About his Nation's Gallantry,
'Draws knife to stab at Snick-or-Snee;
'But none but the English have the heat,
'Like Dogs, to quarrel at their Meat,
'And for their fierce offensive Weapons,
'Make use of Mutton Legs, and Capons,
'Make fiercest Instruments of Rage
'To be Plumb-Pudding and Pottage;
'And Pease just taken from the Pot,
'To serve instead of Pistol Shot.
'Shall we for Trifles disagree,
' Religion, and Sham Loyalty,
'When all we have on it we can put
'With wond'drous ease into a Nut?
'The Nation's Interest, and our own,
'Are Themes our Brains must work upon;
'When Monarchy goes down again,
'Then let us fight, but not 'till then;
'Nor wilfully abuse the Creature,
'That feeds our Life, and props our Nature,
'And makes us hardy, strong, and able,
'To lead our Forces on -- the Rabble.
'Why, what a shame is this to Sense?
'What great distrust of Providence?
'That one weak Stickler for a Crown,
'Should make our Frailty thus be shown,
'And with his witless Chat should break
'Th' united Body Politic;
'Th' Epitome of the wise City,
'Cull'd out and met in this Committee.
Then gravely looking round, and frowning
On battered Pigmy that sat groaning,
(Who sick with being tossed and jogged,
Had all his Supper disembogu'd)
Coughing with grace, the Statesman's pang
Always before he makes Harangue,
The Knight went on -- 'And you that late
'Were styled Right Reverend of the State,
'For Politic sharp-pointed Reason,
'Bitter, yet no Law-breaking Treason;
'You that gave us Advice just now,
'What for the Cause we were to do,
'Prov'd, that all Fewds, 'till we were strong
'To go through stitch, would do us wrong;
'Like Arrows upright shot in Meads,
'The harm would fall on our own heads;
'That you, I say, should so forget
'Your Sense, and lessen so your Wit,
'Your honored and dear-purchas'd Glory,
'Poorly to encounter with one Tory;
'Threaten to kill, and cut, and slash,
'With what were fitter for a hash,
'And proudly swear to break his Head
'With Puddings, upon which you feed.
'Have you, I say, in manner ample,
'By way of specious grave Example,
'Look't wise, and taught hotheaded Fools
' Democracy's Authentic Rules;
'In all Orations and Complaints,
'Extoll'd the Patience of the Saints,
'And the silent way of Governing,
'When they had hooted out the King,
'And yet be first to break the Laws,
'Your self has made with such Applause;
'Like Country Vicar, preaching down
'The Sin of Drunkenness in his Town;
'Yet at a Wedding, or a Fair,
'Is sooner sopt than any there
'In Double Beer acts many a frisk,
'Tho he each Sabbath bangs his Desk,
'In laying the Enormance home,
'And preaching Torments are to come;
'I own the fierceness of our Zeal,
'When it concerns a Commonweal,
'Ferments to such insubid hate,
'As Reason never can abate;
'But then it is when we are overthrown,
'And in our Arguments run down:
'Not when the business is supplied
'With ten to one the strongest side;
'Obstreperous noise ('it is true) does much,
'When we have a crabbed Point to touch;
'With hums and has we carried on
'This Canting Trade in Forty one;
'Noise brought the Sisters to our Church,
'Cram'd Conventicles to the Porch;
'Turn'd up their Whites and made 'em groan,
'Not feeling the matter, but the tone;
'The tuneful Tale such influence wears,
'It made 'em play at Bowls with Tears,
'But never raised the Passions equal
'In Temples Orthodox and Legal;
'Their Senses all were in confusion,
'To see dear Deacon thrash his Cushion,
'Believ'd Salvation sprung from thence,
'And that they need not mind the Sense.
'When Zeal by noise is understood,
'The subject Matter must be good,
'And Nonsense as Soul-saving be,
'As the Body of Divinity.
'The Saints have often need of shifts,
'Each Brother has peculiar Gifts;
'And tho discerning Providence
'Bestows not on us equal sense.
'Some other way amends is made*
'We thrive as well as if we had;
'With Sighs and Groans like Ananias,
'We stretch the Purses of the Pious;
With Eyes erect, and humble Mien,
'Draw the Religious Sisters in;
'Nay, even Diseases, Sores, and Pains,
'The Curse of others, proves our Gains;
'Gouts, Agues, Fevers, nay the Crincum
'Often contributes to our Income.
'A certain Elder had a knack
'To counterfeit a Wolf in's Neck,
'Which was indeed an Issue made,
'To draw the Magots from in's Head;
'Yet from the Reverend of the City,
'Procur'd strange Sentiments of Pity,
'And wrapped in Tippet Handketcher,
'Brought in Five hundred Ponnds a year.
'Another by promoting Strife
'Procur'd a Pension for his Life,
'Made Lies, and Stratagems, and Oaths,
'Bring him in Money, Food, and Cloths;
'But no one e're a Souse could earn,
'Unless on National Concern;
'A private Fewd breeds private Mischief,
'And of our ill Successes is chief,
'Makes us and Reputations weak,
'And the other side the advantage take:
'Besides, to perfect these Intrigues,
'With Loins of Veal, and Mutton Legs,
'To think to proclaim War, and Chastize
'With Rumps of Beef, and Venison Pasties,
Is the most low and brainless trick
That e're was counted Politic.
'To plant a Commonwealth's a matter
'Of an occult and mystic Nature;
''Tis introduced with Care and Pain,
'And solid Judgment of the Brain:
'For it is no slight or easy thing
'To fight by Law against the King,
'Make Magna Charta and Decree
'Storm Regal Power and Loyalty,
'And slur and sham a Quo Warranto,
'As the Brethren do a Loyal Canto.
'We must have Circumstance and Reason,
'To vernish and adorn our Treason;
'Swear that Monarchal Dignity
'Brings Arbitrary Tyranny,
'That a free State is still the best,
'And fittest for our Interest;
'And still the Law must back and further
'Our Projects, tho it come to Murder.
'Law is the States familiar Imp,
'The thriving Politician's Pimp,
'That cherisht by all conquering fee,
'Suits with each Business and Degree,
'Like Spiders Web can hold the Fly,
'But let the gilded Gnat go by;
'Make Littleton and Cook to say,
'Falshoods or Truths just as we pay,
'And pass unparalled Offenses
'By Legal Quirks, and sly Pretenses;
''Twas show of Justice that subdued
'In our late times the Multitude.
'How had the Cause missed Swords to fight,
'Had they not thought they were in the right?
'How had the Zealous Party scorned it,
'If form of Law had not adorned it,
'And made even Murders, Plunders, Rapes,
'Appear but natural mishaps,
'The Curses of Intestine Jars,
'And strange misfortune of the Wars?
'Therefore no thwarting Joke in prattle
'Should make the Brethren enter Battle,
'Unless some weightier Cause they know,
'Or have at least effectual show,
'For seeming Justice is as good
'As Right, when it is not understood,
'As a Copper Shilling, if 'twill pass
'For Plate,'s as good as if it was.
The Knight had still gone on, but Ralph,
In a most fierce and pelting Chaff,
Enters the Room as pale as Death,
Gogling his Eyes, and out of Breath,
And running up, swollen and inflated,
Where Hudibras stood Elevated;
With savage and distracted look,
Rowzing his senses, thus he spoke.
'What cursed Case is now debating,
'Sir Knight, that you should stand here prating,
'When in next Room a Rampant shaver,
'Odswoons! is ploughing with your Heifer,
'And with licentious hands does touze
'The Bridal Vesture of your Spouse?
'Whilst you are teaching Points of State here,
'He's teaching her the Points of Nature,
'In symphatizing Ecstasies,
'Of Lips, and Arms, and Legs, and Thighs,
'With glowing Cheeks, and equal Flames,
'They eagerly indulge their Shames;
'No spark of Modesty allow
'To Husband, or the Marriage Vow,
'But wantonly pursue the Course,
'Like bellowing Bull, or Boar, or Horse.
'Oh Curse of Marriage, and the Suit on it,
'If this must ever be the Fruit on it!
'And doubly cursed be fond Amors,
'That weds us still to Bawds and Whores;
'When we expect a Virgin Rose,
'Narrow as Paradise, and close,
'Too late, alas! we find and fear
'Some Insect has been sucking there;
'Find the Alliance was Compact,
'And that the Pipkin has been cracked.
'Who could have thought, you having won her
'With peerless Worth, and Deeds of Honor,
'That she could e're forget your Court,
'And to another yield the Fort?
'Kiss you -- yet let another come
'With lewd intent so near her Bum?
'Back Gammon play, like Harridan,
'And let a Whig enter his Man;
'When (pardon Sir) like wedded Sot,
'You left her never a lawful Blot,
'But carefully resolved to wrack,
'Inervate Limbs, and aching Back,
'To satisfy luxurious Sense,
'And give her due Benevolence?
'But Widows of deboacht Intrigue,
'Are just like Cackling Hens with Egg,
'When once the itching Passion's known,
'Are trod by every Cock in Town;
'And so will yours, not timely stopped,
'And if not Padlockt, Sir, or Coop't:
'For of all Sights e're seen, the oddest
'Now met my Eyes, and most immodest;
'Lips joined, bare Legs, things far from blameless
'And something else -- that shall be nameless.
The Knight at this, gave Breast a thump,
And hanging Head in dolesul dump,
The Genius of his honored Race,
Painted with sanguine Blush his Face,
And shame soon made him know the harms,
Were done his Knighthood and his Arms:
Thoughts crowding now his Breast on heaps,
He nimbly from the Table leaps,
To follow Ralph in wild distraction,
And make his Foe give satisfaction;
But passing in great have along,
Rusht on Doctoro in the throng,
And threw a Jar of Urine down
Upon his Sacerdotal Gown:
The Priest, although to rage not wonted,
Yet finding Cassock thus affronted,
Made Oath on the Evangelist,
To right his Injuries by Fist;
Where we will leave him, cleansing Crape,
And murmering at the strange mishap;
And Hudibr as, with eager hurry,
Following the Dictates of his fury;
To speak of th'Widow and her Love,
Now closely met in dark Alcove.
Stalliano, when the Politician
Was opening first the States Condition,
Knowing his Speech, tho false or true,
Would hold 'em tack an hour or two,
Resolved to let 'em mind their Histories,
And tip the wink upon his Mistress
To quit the Room, and prove her Passion,
Whilst he was making his Oration;
This granted, straight away they shufflle,
Just when new Guest began the scuffle,
And through an Antichamber creeping,
Where drowzy Ralpho had been sleeping,
He followed them to inner Room,
And saw his Master's Cuckoldom,
Through Keyhole saw the amorous Chases,
And interchangable Embraces,
And much enraged at uncouth sight,
Ran speedily 't inform the Knight,
And brought him just in the nick, to see
His unavoided Destiny:
But Hudibr as, whose mind was bent
On his old Method, Argument,
And seldom any Truths believed,
Through needless fears of being deceived,
New Whimsies now had Brains o'retaken,
That the bold Squire might be mistaken,
And, through the Cranny, a false Light
Might casually delude his sight;
Which to pursue he rallies Forces,
And thus with angry Ralph discourses.
''Tis possible my friend (quoth he)
'And all the Schoolmen do agree,
'That drowzy Epileptick Nature
'Cannot at all times judge of Matter,
'The Eyes and Understanding being
'Unfit for knowledge, or for seeing;
'The Sense by sleep may be corrupted,
'As it is by Wine, when long we have supt it,
'And the Objects, which we seem to view,
'May be but Fancies, and not true,
'The effects of Rage, and stupid Folly,
'Diseases, or of Melancholy,
'Sudden Surprises, and Affrights;
'As Women, walking in dark Nights,
'Charm'd by their fear, think every Post
'Or Bush, a Devil or a Ghost;
'So thou, with Rage possessed, and Spite,
'(Passions which often delude the sight)
'Perhaps do take some Chamber Blowze,
'Trickt up in Manto, for my Spouse,
'And Stalliane, whom thou think a Such-man,
'Who knows my prove but Dick the Coachman,
'Gone thither to conclude a League
'Of matrimonial Grand Intrigue.
'The Laws of Honor are so nice,
'That it behooves us to be wise,
'And in our minds that Proverb keep,
'That bids us look before we leap,
'And take substantial satisfaction
'Of the truth, before we fall to Action:
'Why what a fatal Injury
'Were this, if it should prove a Lie?
'If thou should chance to be bewitched,
'And nothing true that thou have preached?
'What great Atonement or Submission
'Could make amends for my suspicion?
'If we should prove thy Eyes were glew'd,
'(As well I know thou have been lewd)
'And that through Keyhole thou could never
'With those thy farthing Lights perceive her,
'But that promoting this Extreme
'Was some mad Whimsie, or a Dream,
'How would the Lady put on Coy look?
'And then how like a Dog should I look?
'The Spartan Gallants loved so well,
'They knew their Misses by the smell,
'And thought it clownish and unwise
'To trust their Feeling, or their Eyes.
'Thus confident in strong Belief,
'Each Lover knew the several Whiff;
'And tho no Judgment can suppose
'That thou can have so good a Nose,
'Plac'd in the Sphere where thou do move,
'Not generous enough to Love,
'Yet I may thus far be in the right,
'That it is not fit to trust thy sight,
'Especially when the occasion
'Concerns a Lady's Reputation;
'Therefore I think it requisite
'To make an honorable Retreat,
'Lest, haunted by some Cacodemon,
'This matter thou should only dream on;
'Which if it should happen the wrong way,
'As I am apt to think it may,
'By all my Joys, which she has crowned,
'I would not for five hundred Pound.
Quoth Ralph, 'When the Devil owes a spite,
'As he does now to you, Sir Knight,
'He uses the strongest influence
'To hoodwink and corrupt the Sense,
'And now your Reasons are so dull,
'I find he is working in your Skull,
'Where he intrinsecally forms
'Doubts, Whimsies, and great store of Worms,
'That hum, and buz, and make a bustle,
'And your discerning Judgment puzzle;
'For with all Calmness I Will maintain,
'Had Wisdom seized your Pericrane,
'Or had I any cause to allege
'Th' effects of your impartial knowledge,
'You would just Sentiments pursue,
'And grant my Depositions true;
'For salve the matter how you will,
'I fix to my Narration still;
'Nor am I frantic as you take me,
'Bewitcht, or blind, as you would make me,
'Stupidly drunk, or what is worse,
'But fit to reason and discourse;
'Nor have I swallowed a Fool's drug,
'But know what is what, and Pig from Dog,
'And can distinguish well between
'Your silken Spouse, and durty Jane;
''Twixt lousie Dick, in Canvas Frock,
'And Trustee fierce, with Beaver cockt:
'The firm foundation of my Wit
'Is surely not so shaken yet,
'But I can judge upon occasion
''Twixt Chat and Carnal Copulation,
'Distinction and the difference see
''Twixt Lip and Hand, and Rem in Re;
'And tho my sense you would have scanted,
'Yet amongst the wise this must be granted.
The stubborn Jews could never be brought
To Credit what the Prophets taught,
Or think the Hand of Heaven was on 'em
Till the Destruction showered upon 'em;
And though the Allusion prove not true
Between your Worship and a Jew,
Yet he that shall your Story tell
Must say you are an Infidel,
And that you still your wrongs deny
Till they are past all Remedy;
Else you could never be so unwise,
To Cavil at my Ears and Eyes,
When they their natural use possess*
And Justly do their Offices;
Or strive their Credit to withdraw
From what I plainly heard and saw,
Beheld your new rigged Frigate manned
As plain as now I see my hand.
Quoth Hudibras, 'The Stoics tell us,
'(And those I think were learned fellows)
'That no one certain Matter knows,
'But only through a grand suppose;
'As thus now -- if thy passive Bones
'Were drub'd with plant, or bruised with stones
'Or that opinionated scull
'Were Bastinadoed soft as wool,
'Beating you must not bluntly own,
'But only must suppose it done;
'Implying from less things to greater,
'There is no certainty in Nature:
'And this Philosophy should teach thee,
'If any occult Art can reach thee,
'Not to affirm what Objects show,
'But to suppose it may be so.
Quoth Ralph -- 'Dam your Philosophy,
'That teaches you to whore and lie;
'A science, none should e're have felt
'But Antiquated men and Gelt,
'Or lame Physicians, or night Iades,
'That ease of Loads, Bigbellied Maids;
'And though renowned in Pedant schools,
'Still makes you Athiests, Knaves and Fools;
'The thoughtfull constitutions sad,
'And the brisk shallow Coxcombs mad;
'And will, Sir, have a potent force
'On you I find by your discourse;
'You that would have me to suppose,
'I have a foot, an eye, a nose,
' Imagine that I hear or see,
'But not be Possitive 't can be:
'As if my Judgment were so reeling,
'That I could ever doubt my feeling,
'And when my Bones with drubs are aching
'Fancy that I may be mistaken;
'Or if (as now) I chanced to see
'Bare legs, or other nudity,
'Sense should such oppsition find,
'As to suppose that I was blind;
It Is Nonsense, and was never believed
'By such as would not be deceived,
'And therefore with your Pardon, Sir,
'My Reason here I must prefer,
'And credit mine (although but dim) Eyes,
''Spite of your Philosophic Whimsies:
'Wise Nature kindly did produce
'Each limb for its officious use,
'Our Ears to hear, or Tongues to talk,
'Our Eyes to see, our Legs to walk,
'Our Hands and Arms to toil and drudg,
'And our Internal part to Judge;
'Made all things punctually agree,
'Without defect or fallacy;
'And, though we hardly can believe
'Obliging friendship can deceive,
'Or that the man we thought no ill in,
'And trusted most, should prove a Villain;
'Yet if the Trechery's made out,
'I think there is little Cause to doubt
'Or fear our Bodies impotency's,
'When vouched by the better part our senses.
'This tho it wear a homely dress,
'Sir, Knight, I take to be your Case:
'Your Easy nature cannot bend
'To slander or accuse your Friend,
'Or think your Spouse could e're allow
'To break her Matrimonial Vow,
'When you were tied in Sacred Bonds
'With Interchange of hearts and hands;
'But let not forms and outward show
'Possess your mind and Judgment so,
'To think that friendship now in fashion
'Will balk at Carnal Copulation,
'When it is believed the least of Crimes
'And the mode and fashion of the Times;
'For, Sir, although your friend professes
'Much love to you, his best addresses
'Are to your Wife, whom he will trapan,
'And Cuckold you when e're he can;
'For Wives like Golden Medalls are,
'Proper for every one to wear,
'And tho by several used, this blessing
'The husband has, to find naught missing;
'The property is always right,
'Although it is worn both day and night;
'Then if you can conceit yours Chaste,
'And only by your self embraced,
'As the old Proverb aptly shows,
'What the Eye never sees, the heart never rues,
'Your happiness is firm and clear,
'And you're as bless't as if she were.
'I lately knew a zealous Brother
'Was Married to just such another,
'And to flat Cuckoldom submitted
'From one that her Complexion fitted,
'To make her humble and outwit her,
'And on each small offense to twit her
'With the lewd Crime and wanton freak,
' Reproachful and Lascivious trick:
'And, Sir, if this be your intent,
'I've shown you here a President;
'Of solid and effectual Nature,
'And very proper to the matter;
'Besides to Curb wild Female Passions
It Is proper upon most occasions:
'Insulting Virtue often indues
'Women with Pride, and makes *em Shrews;
'Gives Theme and Scope for noise and clamors,
'Neglect of Duty, or in Amors;
'When Vice detected, humble proves,
'And all that haughtiness removes,
'Which the Cleft-sex still make the most of,
'When they have any thing to boast of;
'But for your Backside Friend, I know,
'Your Valor best knows what to do,
'With one that thus your honor Treats,
'Soyls and contaminates the Sheets
'Design'd for honorable Joys,
'The Marriage Bliss, in Girls and Boys,
'Chew'd Pistol Shot and Poking Steel
'Should be the Guerdon of such ill,
'And the only way to wipe your stains out
'Is without words to knock his Brains out;
'Or, if you would have the grand affairs,
'Kept secret, -- break his Neck down stairs,
'And show by his resistless fate,
'The Effects of Presbyterian-hate,
'Showr'd on all those that blindly dare
'Affront a Champion of the War*
Quoth Hudibras, "I understood
'Long since thou did delight in blood,
'And from that old Kill-Cow thy Father
'Thy Savage sentiments did gather,
'Thou would the same decorum keep,
'As often kill Men as he did Sheep,
'Consider Friends no more than Dogs,
'But stick them as thou usest Hogs,
'Did not my Judgment prudently
'Oppose thy cursed Barbarity,
'But as the Law does think it fit
'No Butchers shall in Iury's sit
'Because their hearts are cruel made,
'Bloody and hardened by their Trade,
'So I Am resolved no Butchers Cur
'Shall tempt my valor to a War;
'Where friends engage, not enemies,
'And is commenc't by prejudice;
'Besides, when I am once obliged,
'With gratitude my heart's beseig'd,
'The tender plant has taken root
'And spreads in me from head to foot,
'For Love in uncorrupted friends
'Should grow like Brambles at both ends.
Scarce had the Knight this sentence spoke,
But Ralpho hears the door unlock,
And sees from the inner part oth' room,
With Glowing Cheeks, the Lovers come:
At which, (and being vexed) grown bolder,
Clapping the stupid Knight on the shoulder,
'Look up (quoth he) and eyes extend
'To view the man you so commend,
'See the Virtue too you late did Wed,
'New risen like Sol from watery bed,
'And blushing with such Rosy grace,
'As if she had supplied his place,
'Or rather had bin Arguing high
'On Natural Philosophy;
''Tis true, if you will continue kind,
'You may suppose you still are blind,
'That those two forms no bodies wear,
'But Insubstantial Figures are;
'Imagine too, that her Night-rayl
'Was ruffled so with telling Tale,
'And though you hear 'em making Love,
'Suppose they still may virtuous prove,
'And their discourse not vain or lewd,
'But for your honor, and your good:
' Philosophy strange works commences
'When it can rob us of our senses,
'And make our Eyes and Ears and Tongues
'Subservient to our Shames and Wrongs;
'A mighty point! and for my part
'Were I to be a man of Art,
'Learned and Cuckold, at your Rate,
'I'de rather wear my own dull pate,
'And plot how to revenge at once
'My Injuries upon his Bones,
'That made me wear the Horned Badg,
'And Cleft my Timber with his Wedg;
'Than be in Judgment so besotted,
'Idly to think no mischief plotted:
'But now I hope your Wit will Credit
'Your own, and the Case of all are Wedded,
'Or else, by Hell! I Will hold a Guiney,
'Not one, but all the Devils are in ye.
At this, the Knight, his Optics raising,
And seeing Friend and Spouse Embracing,
Blew out a Sigh so violently
'Twas like to raise a storm at Sea;
Quoth he, This Villain Stalliano
Deserves then to be burnt in manu,
Whom I Will Immoderately swinge,
And to Execute my Just revenge
Will call him to such strict account,
His life shall answer the Affront.
This said, he hand on Bilboe lays,
And drew it out with as much ease,
As if the kind though rusty steel
His fatal Injuries did feel;
The Mortal point he straight prepared,
And standing stoutly on his guard,
As one well skilled in Martial Law,
Kicking the Trustee, bid him draw,
Which was obeyed as soon as don,
For seeing now no way to run,
The Guilty Stallian tackt about,
Stood and resolved to fight it out;
But knowing weapon was to short
To match the Knights at this rude sport,
A Fork that in the Chimney stood
He snatched to make his party good;
But ere 'twas reached the hardy Knight,
Possess't with fury, grief and spite,
With heavy hand and Boystrous thump,
Twice bruiz'd his Head and twice his Rump,
With back-sword hilt, and hands up heaved,
That doubtless had his Noddle cleav'd,
Or back and sides benumbed with bruises,
And Tanned his hide worse than a Iew's is,
Had not the Genius of the War,
That often has over Wenchers care,
To his discretion recommended
The harm was furiously intended;
But now provoked beyond aswaging,
Shrugging with the late smart and Raging,
Upon the Enemy he Rushes,
And with the Sea-coal Engine pushes
So quick and feirce, as if in the strife
Each blow would have extinguished life:
Not Trojan stout in bloody field,
That wore the Ox-hide for a shield,
Not haughty Greek, with skin so tough,
From head to heel, 'twas Poniard proof,
E're made so desperate a fight,
As now our Trustee and the Knight.
Victory, with Expanded wings,
Over both their heads in Triumph sings,
And had Infallibly bequeathed
To Hudibras the Conquering wreath,
Had not some Male-contented Demon,
Envying that he should ground his fame on
Deeds so Essential to his Honor,
Opposed his Fortune in this manner;
By sending the Virago Bride
To Combat on her Lovers side;
Who boldly to his Aid did come
Armed with an Arbitrary Broom,
And nimbly brandishing it high
At Hudibras a blow let fly,
Which lighting smartly on his Pate,
Stunned him, and laid the Hero flat:
Which Ralpho seeing, and the wrongs
Were done his Master, takes the Tongs
That in the room neglected lay,
Swearing they now for all should pay;
And, falsifying the Trustees blows,
Steps in and snaps him by the Nose:
Yield, Wretch, (cries he) and keep the Peace
Or thou shall never be releast.
Yield, quoth the Trustee, in disdain,
Though sorely Pincht with awkward pain,
As being with smart and shame surpised,
To be thus rudely dunstaniz'd,
Snuffling the recreant word denied:
Till Ralpho, who his strength defied,
And knew that doing what he could
Should never make him loose his hold,
With turning Tongs and little wrench,
Gave the imprisoned Nose a pinch
So strong, the ill Genius must command,
For fatal weapon dropped from hand,
And Conquered Stalliano now
To the Squires happy chance must bow,
Who craven then, though late so stout,
Vowed, if he would give him back his Snowt,
To beg his Pardon, and agree
To all the Rules of Victory.
Sit then (quoth Ralph) and acquiess.
Then looking round to see what case
The Knight was in, observed the strife
Grew dangerous 'twixt him and's Wife,
And that old Iron and sturdy Broom
To some dire Exigence would come;
To whom advancing, Hudibras
Cries out, Friend Ralpho keep thy place;
By me this Conquest must be won,
I Will tame alone this Amazon,
Alone the power unquestioned show
Of Husband and of Hero to.
This said, his Sword away he threw,
And she forsook her weapon too,
Resolved to do her self the right
Bravely to take no odds in the fight.
Then jointly they together clung,
And wrestling on each other hung,
Both striving to prevail with trip,
Or force of Arms, or foot, or hip;
But Hudibras, who every day
Had learned this Junior Schoolboys play,
At an advantage takes across
His Buttocks brawn the valiant Lass,
And (as addition to his honor)
With cunning slight had easily thrown her,
Had not her strange and lucky fate
(Somewhat assisted by her weight)
Performed an unexpected wonder,
And made the Conquering Knight sink under.
A Foyl, a Foyl, (cries Ralpho then)
Courage, brave Sir, and to it again;
A slip's no blot to manly valor;
Take her in the Inturn, and you maul her.
The Knight, ashamed at this damned luck,
Rose, and in Arms Virago took,
With strenuous lift he held her safe,
And aided by a trip from Ralph,
The Championess did so attack,
At last he laid her on her back:
Then lifting haughty front above her,
Thus scornfully 'gan to reprove her:
'Thou Cormorant, Insatiate Wretch,
'(Whom in due time the Devil will fetch)
'Thou see thy Stars renounce thy quarrel,
'To add fresh Verdure to my Laurel,
'My name to the Nations will be seen,
'For ever shining and Serene,
'Whilst thou art by the world abhorred,
'For combating thy lawful Lord:
'Oh thou, for whom my early years
'Were spent in Groans, and Sighs, and Tears.
'Whom I through blood and dangers sought,
'For whom I wept, for whom I fought,
'And for whose sake more than the Church
'Oft left our Party in the lurch,
'From Colors fled whilst they were Mauling,
'Like Puss to come a Catterwauling;
'And is Rank Cuckoldom the due
'Of one has always been so true?
'Shall Ignominy offend me here,
'That never durst in War appear
'To shade my Valor, but was still
'Vassal to Courage and my skill?
'And thou, who from Loves plenteous store
'Wert hourly feasted, to crave more;
'What Pampered Abbot could supply,
'Or Lustful Satyr satisfy?
Quoth she, I swear by Beauties Charms,
By Love, and your Victorious Arms,
My faithful thoughts have still been worn
As innocent as Child new born,
Nor came I here on lewd Affairs,
But with this Saint to join in Prayers,
That Fate should never our loves untye,
Nor blast our Matrimonial Joy;
And if no truth I Have now protested,
The Devil fetch me, as you have wished it.
'Quoth he, In Books I never found yet,
'What woman e're played false and owned it;
It Is like self-wounding, bruise, or stabbing,
'Or bringing in our selves for robbing;
'Nor can I be with Oaths deceived,
'What Lovers swear is never believed:
'But if it is true what you have professed,
'Consent to take the Ancient Test,
'Which tries the Faith of those are wedded,
'And then perhaps you may have Credit;
'An English Princess was suspected
'Of Crimes like yours, and being rejected
'By her fierce Lord, made this defense,
'Thus nobly proved her Innocence;
'And to show how much she was abused,
'Walk'd on hot Irons without her Shoes.
'A Roman Virgin too, called Whore
'By one was hired, and fasly swore,
'To prove the Certainty of the last,
'And that show was divinely Chaste,
'The Image of Cybele draws
'Up Tiber streams without a Pause;
'A Statue that (as Authors prove)
'Not twenty thousand men could move:
' Virtue by Miracles is known;
'And though I do believe you have none,
'Yet if you walk, to stop revenge,
'On red hot Irons without a singe;
'Or, to confute your spreading shames,
'Can draw the Monument cross the Thames,
'I will believe you have been wronged,
'And Ralpho here malicious tongued;
'But a true Swinger, if you fail,
'As Whetstone's Park e're set to sale.
Quoth she, I never have been bred
To do that which the Ancients did,
Nor am so holy and devout
To tread on fire, not scalding foot;
Besides, Sir, you your self must grant
You have not made me yet a Saint,
Nor do such Sanctity inspire
To make me Proof against streams and fire;
But thus far I Will the Injunction prove,
To let you see my faith and love,
Propose some others that may be
Partners, and prove the Test with me,
As many Women, you will allow,
Suspected are, as I am now,
And I Will come off, I Will lay my life,
Better than any other Wife.
' Madam, (replies the Knight) I see
'Plainly your drift and fallacy,
'Can well discern your female Magic
'And Cunning, by your Chopping Logic;
'You know it impossible to bring
'Another e're to try the thing,
'Unless like you her Crime appears,
'Which may not chance in twenty years,
'But your deceit shall now want force,
'For instantly I Will get divorced,
'And your fair Ladyship will draw
'To plead to Justice and the Law --
'Show Woman, when the Devil has won her,
'And right the wrongs done to my Honor.
This said, the Squire, by Knights commands,
With her own Garter ties her hands,
And Stalliano binds with Cord,
Nor suffers him to speak a word,
But calmly take what was consigned him,
And thus to several Rooms confined 'em;
Resolved in the morn to make all common,
And bid adue to Love and Woman.
And now the Bell-man Chaunticleer
Had notice given the day was near,
With kind, and yet unwelcome, Art,
Tells Lovers, it is high time to part;
The sickly Moon grew pale and wan,
To think that she must lose her Reign,
And every Planet did prepare
To usher in the Morning Star;
The Drowzy Carrier packs his Horses,
To travel on their Journal Courses;
And the watchful Grizl'd Husbandman
Calls up his men to plough his Land;
When Hudibras, with grief oppressed,
Tumbling on Couch, could take no rest,
But mourns in Tears his late Miscarriage,
And curses Fatal Love and Marriage.
FINIS.
Books Printed for and sold by Joseph Hindmarsh, at the Black Bull in Cornhil,
over against the Royal Exchange.
THe History of the Civil Wars of France, Written in Italian by H. C. D' Avila,
translated out of the Original. The Second Impression, whereunto is added a
Table.

Reliquiae Raleighanae; being Discourses and Sermons on several subjects. By
the Reverend Dr. Walter Raleigh, Dean of Wells, and Chaplain in Ordinary to his
late Majesty King Charles the First.

Sermons upon Faith and Providence, and other Subjects. By the late Reverend
William Outram, D. D. Prebend of Westminster, and Chaplain in Ordinary to his
Majesty.

Loyalty and Peace; or, two seasonable Discourses from 1 Samuel 24.5. viz.
David's Heart smote him, because he cut of Saul^s Skirts; The first of
Conscience and its Smiting. The second of the prodigious impiety of Murdering
King Charles the First: Intended to promote sincere Devotion and Humiliation
upon each Anniversary Fast for the late Kings Death.

The good Old Way, or a Discourse offered to all true hearted Protestants
concerning the Ancient Way of the Church, and the Conformity of the Church of
England thereunto, as to its Government, Manner of Worship, Rites, and Customs:
By Edward Pelling, Rector of St. Martin Ludgate, and Chaplain to his Grace the
Duke of Somerset.

An impartial account of the Arraignment, Trial, and Condemnation of Thomas
late Earl of Strafford, and Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, before the Parliament
at Westminster, Anno Dom. 1641.

The Loyal Citizen revived* A Speech made by Alderman Garraway, at a Common
Hall on Thursday, the 17th of January, 1642. upon occasion of a Speech
delivered there the Friday before, by Mr. Pym, at the reading of his Majesty's
answer to the late Petition.

The unfortunate Heroes; or, the Adventures of ten Famous men, viz. Ovid,
Lentulus, Hortensius, Herennius, Cepion, Horace, Virgil, Cornelius Galus,
Crassus, Agrippa; Banished from the Court of Augustus Caesar. In ten Novels.
Composed by that great Wit of France, Monsieur de Villa Dieu. Englished by a
Gentleman for his diversion.

(...), or King James's Instructions to his Dearest Son Henry the Prince, now
reprinted by his Majesty's Command.

The Ingratitude of a Commonwealth, or the fall of Caius Martius Coriolanus, as
it is acted at the Theater Royal: by N. Tate.

The London Cuckolds, a Comedy as it is acted at the Dukes Theater. By E.
Rrvenscrot Genesis

Sir Barnaby Whig, or not Wit like a Woman's, a Comedy, As it acted by their
Majesty's Servants at the Theater Royal, By T. Durfey, Genesis

A short account or state of Mr. Sheridan's case before the late House of
Commons, in a letter to T. I.

The Progress of honesty, or a view of a Court and City, a Pindarique Poem, by
T. Durfey, Gent.

Mercurius Menippeus, the loyal Satyrest; or Hudibras in prose, written by an
unknown Hand, in the time of the late Rebellion, but never till now Published.

Satyrs upon the Jesuits.

Some new pieces never before printed, by the author of the Satyrs against
Jesuits.

The Poets complaint of his Muse, or a Satyr against Libells, a Poem, by Thomas
Otway.

An exact Joarnal of the siege of Tangier, from the first setting down of the
Moors before it, on March the 25th. 1681. to the late Truce May the 26th
following, in three Letters, written by three eye witnesses of the whole
transaction.

A discourse touching Tangier, on these Heads, 1. The service Tangier has
already rendered the Crown. 2. What service it may render if improved. 3. The
mischief it may do us if possessed by any other powerful Prince. 4. some general
observations touching Trade.

A-la-mode Plebotomy no good fashion: or the copy of a Letter to Dr Hungerford,
by Richard Griffith of Richmond in Surrey. M. D.

FINIS.

