THE COPY OF A LETTER SENT FROM THE Cardinal du Perron Ambassador for the
French King at Rome, CONCERNING THE Divisions of the Papists of England, their
difference in Government, whether by Bishops or Jesuits, with the Care of his
Holiness in the agreement, and his Judgment in placing of Bishops in England,
for making Priests to increase the Catholic Number. Whereunto is added a
certain Conjecture of the use both Prelates and Papists have made of the
Cardinals Counsel to augment and establish their Greatness.

Printed in the year, 1641.

IT is not long since accidentally I did fall upon a Book written in French of
the Negotiations and Embassages of the famous and learned Cardinal du Perron.
Where amongst many notable passages which happened in his Embassage at Rome,
and wherewith he acquainted the French King Henry the fourth his master, he
has one in one letter to the King his master concerning the divisions of the
Papists in England, and the means to be used for their reconciliation. With
his judgment of the Bishops of England. Which after I had read and considered,
I was induced thereby not without reason to believe that it had served for a
Counsel to both the Bishops and Papists to ground their greatness upon and to
advance both the one and the other to that height they were in before the
Parliament began. Now imagining that it might serve to inform the judgments
of many, and help them to rip up the arcana principia, and hid Maxims the
Prelates and Papists have used these many years to increase their own
greatness, oppress all those that should dare to oppose them. I have set down
the true Copy (not varying from the original) so truly as I could, to which I
have added my conjecture in few words of the advantages Prelates and Papists
have taken from it, as also of their complying together to uphold one another.

The Copy of a Letter sent from ROME by the Cardinal Du Perron to HENRY the
fourth King of France, his Master; extant in the second volumn of his
negotiations and Embassages, being this Argument.
He communicated to the Pope, that which it had pleased his Majesty to write to
him, of the estate of affairs in England, and of the dispute betwixt the
Fathers Jacobines and Jesuits there: that which his Holiness spoke to him,
and desired him to do: a dissension amongst the English Papists: the means
proposed to appease them: contrary difficulties and remedies to be used.

TO HENRY the Great.
Sir,
I Shall supply in this Letter, my shortness in the last I sent to your
Majesty by the Ordinary. On Tuesday the 23. of the last Month, I had audience
of the Pope, and did communicate to his Holiness, that which it pleased your
Majesty to impart to me of your opinion concerning the affairs in England, and
the dispute betwixt the Fathers, Jacobines and Jesuits: he was much satisfied
with both the one and the other advise, and often thanked your Majesty for the
good duties your Majesty had done him, in blotting out of the King of Englands
imagination the sinistrous impression diverse had moved him to conceive of his
intentions. Concerning the dispute, he seemed highly to approve of your
Majesty's opinion, which was to endeavor by all means to end that difference
by one agreement; to which purpose, he gave me charge that at the first
Congregation of the Cardinals, which should be holden for that effect, I should
propose somethings to try if possibly that expedient might be used. I did
communicate also to his Holiness, concerning the affairs of England two
Letters sent to me from Venice, the one from Mounsieur De Beaumont to Mounsieur
De Fresnes; the other from Mounsieur De Fresnes to me, accompanied with a
third sent from a certain Doctor of England, (by their means) to his Holiness.
The end of all those Letters was, that the divisions amongst the English
Papists might be taken away, some of them obeying one Archpriest governed by
the Jesuits: others appealing from the unlawfully administered authority of the
archpriest. Their common opinion for removing that difference was, to
establish a good number of Bishops, to whom neither the appealers nor the
Jesuits could lawfully refuse obedience. I read those Letters gladly to his
Holiness, as being written with great wisdom and discretion, evidencing also
the care your Majesty's servants had for the advancement of Religion in that
Kingdom, and especially because the Letters of the English Priest heretofore
well known to his Holiness, was filled with the praises of your Majesty's
prudent carriage in the matter of the Catholic Religion there, and much
blaming that of the Spaniards: as also because myself had proposed the same
things to the Pope at his first Inauguration, esteeming it profitable, not
only for the good of the Church, but also for your Majesty's service: because
the faction of the Jesuits in that Kingdom depends on Personius, and other
instruments of the Spanish faction. His Holiness made me answer, that Pope
Clement had continually made scruple to hearken to that expedient, fearing
least it should stir up a greater persecution in England against the
Catholics, I answered him that on the* contrary, it would rather diminish then
augment it, because that in general the Heretics did not carry so much
hatred against the Bishops, as against the Jesuits, who (as they believe) do
meddle themselves much more with the estates and lives of Princes, nor any
other of the Ecclesiastical orders. Morever that the name of Bishops was yet
in great reverence amongst them, and where as they do reject and abhor the
title of Priest, because they believe there is no sacrifice in the Christian
Religion: they do honor and respect the name of Bishops, and by this means
they should moderate and diminish their persecutions against Bishops, much more
against the simple Priests or Jesuits. To which I added, that there being no
Bishops in England, there could be no Priests consecrated there, and that it
behooved those who desired to be promoted to the order of Priesthood, should
come take their orders here beyond the Seas: whence did arise two notable
inconveniences. First, that it did hinder the multiplication of Ecclesiastique
persons in England, inregard of the expense, perils, and incommodities it
behooved them to undergo in passing and repassing the Seas. The other, that
this communication and acquaintance they came to make here with strangers, made
them afterward suspected to their Country men, as having been corrupted and
suborned of them, by whose means they had obtained those orders; so that I did
foresee great utilities in the proposed advice, and did only find one
incommodity, which was that the Protestant Bishops of England (whereof many do
secretly favor the Romish Religion, allured possibly in hope to be confirmed
by the Catholics in their dignities) should fall from all such hopes, when
they should perceive his Holiness had consecrated others in their place. But
the remedy that might be used, was to consecrate only some Bishops in place of
those who were married, and already out of hopes they should keep their wives
and Bishoprics together in the Catholic Religion. His Holiness took time to
think upon it: after which according to the commandment I shall receive from
your Majesty, I shall continue, or leave off to present the business further;
and thus much from that Letter.

NOw I hope ye see clearly from the Cardinals Letter, what his judgment was
of our Bishops, wherein if he was deceived or not, I will not judge, only this
I may say confidently, if he spoke falsely of Bishops of his time, he has been
an oracle of truth concerning the Bishops of our time, as may easily appear to
those, who will inform themselves but slenderly of their doctrines and
practices so well known to most sorts of men, that it is wonder they should
find so much as one, to speak but one word in their defense, for have they not
used all violent courses to suppress the truth of the Gospel by pilloring,
scourging, imprisoning, fining, banishing, and confining numbers of the most
zealous professors of the truth, for no other known offense, but because they
would not submit themselves to the superstitions, tyrannies, and oppressions of
those bloodthirsty persecutors? Did ever any of that cruel society hitherto,
publicly disapprove either by word or writing the barbarous rage of their
Tygerlike fellows, the misery of those injustly persecuted men, the deplorable
c^lamities of their distressed Mother the Church, oppressed by the too too
prevalent factions of Papists and Arminians to this day? But for all this, some
will not spare to aver that diverse of the Bishops had never any hand in those
businesses, but on the contrary cherished piety, abhorred cruelty, resisted
superstition to the utmost of their power, and endeavored (as they were able)
to conserve the peace of the Church, and State. My only desire is, that those
men would consider, that neither love, affection toward the one party, nor
hatred toward the other does so much move me as the love to the truth, which
ought to be freely spoken at all times, but especially when men seem as it were
to doat on those Bishops who seem innocent to diverse, and it may be they
neither did contrive nor desire those abominations; which charity would make
me believe, if I should find reason to persuade me, that they did either
disapprove or reject them being once urged by their fellow companions; nay on
the contrary, diverse reasons induce me to believe that they did approve all,
without any the least opposition; as first, suffering all things to be imposed
upon them without any repining. Secondly, urging the practice upon all men
punishing severely the refractory. Thirdly, their unanimous consent to the late
diabolical Canons (whence I Imagine all things to have been done in the same
manner) Lastly, their prodigious silence which is one infallible sign that
even to this day they allow of them, for qui tacet, consentire videtur.

But the end of introducing those superstitions, and setting those persecutions
on foot, is most probable, as I can conjecture to curry favor of the Papists,
and seek by their means and assistance to raise their monstrous greatness, and
boundless ambition to such an height as they might easily crush and ruin all
those who should attempt to oppose their superstitious, cruel, bloody, and
hellish designs. As for the Papists, humane policy could never have invented
one surer foundation (then the Cardinals councels) for them to have builded
their greatness in this Kingdom, all things wisely considered; for has not
the pacifying of discords amongst the Papists here, and the sending over of
Bishops, been the chief instruments, and in a manner the sole causes of the
excessive increase of the Romanists in these Kingdoms? Let Papists themselves
speak, who tell us plainly, that the dexterity of the Romish Bishops (who are
no fewer then the Protestant Bishops in number) has been such, that in
complying the one with the other, they have equally shared in the divisions:
for if we may believe some of their catalogues, there be above 6000. Priests in
England, which number being compared with that of the preaching Ministers,
shall not come far short, if not equal them, as I suppose. And truly this
council of the Cardinal has been received by his part with as great policy
and good success, as it was given with solidity and wisdom. Now if the number
be so excessive in England, what shall we expect of Ireland, where the most
part of the Natives has known no other Religion from their infancy; truly the
prodigious multitude of that whores sons (who in blind zeal to that
Idolatrous strumpet and blasphemous beast) can, finding opportunity, devote
themselves to murder Kings and Princes, blow up Parliaments, betray their
Country, and bring all to confusion without fear of God, or reverence to man,
as woeful experience, the master of fools, has too too often taught by
lamentable examples, to the infinite damage of the Christian world.

The sympathy and affinity of those men with our Bishops, is such as I
conceive, would not require much labor to make in most things a notable
parallel, which I leave to some other, contenting my self only to show that
their correspondency has been such these many years, that the Bishops have
taken all things done against Papists as done against themselves, and the
Papists all things done against Bishops, as done against their head the Pope
and them; but this has been so cunningly performed, as few could heretofore
perceive it, whilst at last the Papists seeing both themselves and the Miter of
Bishops wronged (as they thought) by the factious covenanters of Scotland,
could contain themselves no more, but burst out in rage against those
Heretics, and openly undertook to defend, that our Bishops were Iure Divino
tales, more I am sure then ever they would have said for their infallible head
the Pope, whom they defend only to be Iure Ecclesiastice Pope: but this they
did, perceiving that if ours should not be proved to be Iure Divino tales, no
Ecclesiastic or humane constitution could hinder their Miters to be fallable,
although themselves believe all that the Church the Pope believes, who will
never believe any thing to his own disadvantage. And least our Bishops should
seem to be behind with the Papists in mutual courtesies, I assure you, they
have rendered them tenfold the league being offensive and defensive; for they
will have us believe that the Pope is not Antichrist, but the true successor
of Peter; that the Romish Church as it is presently, is the true Church; that
in it they defend no material or substantial errors; that our Religion
differs from the popish in matters of small or no consequence; that
invocation on Saints, prayer for the dead, worshipping of Images, crucifixes,
and other relics, with more then seven mountains of other abominations of
that blasphemous beast, and her whorish Locusts, are not only lawful, but
expedient and profitable to be used. I may further aver that Papists have
been the men of greatest esteem with our Bishops, and that they went free being
convicted by the Laws of the land, when Godly and laborious Ministers, zealous
professors, and sound Christians were most barbarously martyred, and that for
obeying the Laws of God, and the King; all this undoubtedly to please that man
of sin, who under promise of assistance caused them to sin. But I can tell
them that he has (...) written on the triple crown, which covers his
blasphemous head: and though this seem a mystery to most men, yet they may
persuade themselves it is true, that the Pope would redeem their dignities with
millions, and furnish them all with competent maintenance, only to cover under
their wings, the nest of his newly cleked vipers, not without reason,
suspecting that their fall shall be his ruin in this land. And although diverse
will affirm, that Segnior Conne and Rosseti brought bags full of Apostolical
benedictions, to all those who would spend their lives and estates, where the
Miter was so much concerned, yet their infallibility ^ea^ed them, all those
things not being capable to save from censure C. C. and some others, who
received a yearly pension of Angelical and Pistolicall benedictions from the
P. his H. and the K. of S. to advance their affairs in England.

And now diverse Merchants assure me that Gregory is to have the bill of
exchange to pay them the last wages for their service, who (as I am informed)
will be so ready upon the first receipt thereof to show them the same courtesy
he uses to others, that they shall have no just occasion to complain of his
sound dealing, more then others have done before; for my part, I am so
confident, he will do them right, even behind their backs, that I could
heartily wish all such as their Lordships to address themselves to him who can
certainly end their desires.

FINIS.

