AN ESSAY Toward the THEORY OF THE Intelligible World. Intuitively Considered.
Designed for Forty-nine Parts. PART III. Consisting of a Preface, a
Postscript, and a little something between.

By GABRIEL JOHN.

Enriched with a Faithful Account of his Ideal voyage and Illustrated with
Poems by several Hands, as likewise with other strange things, not insufferably
Clever, nor furiously to the Purpose.

(...) Archetypally Second Edition. (...)

(...) Why
Should all the (...) be mad but I?
You that are wisest, tell me why.
Tribues HIS temporis quantum poteris,
Poteri^ autem quantum voles.
Tully's Offices. Printed in the Year One Thousand Seven Hundred, etc.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
I. A Tedious Advertisement. II. Concerning Prefaces. III. Of the Approbation
this Treatise has met with, and likewise of the Author's Design, his Loyalty
and Eminent Poverty. IV. The great Use of Defamation and of Flattery, when
dexterously administered. His ill success therein. V. A Section addressed to
great Scholars, that are not very Cunning. VI. A Par^phrase upon some Verses in
Homer. Burlesque. VII. The Vanity of Riches, imitated from Anacreon. VIII. A
Song. IX. To Flavelia. X. A Song. XI. An Elegy upon Raisins and Almonds, or the
Passage from Dover to Calais. XII. A Song. Two Epitaphs. XIII. Epitaph on a
Maidenhead. XIV. The Calendar. XV. The Divided Heart. XVI. How Dr. Flights,
with Mars, Bacchus and Apollo, drank up the Sea to a Chorus of Thunder. An Ode.
Phillis in Breeches. A Ditty. An Anagram. Two Ditties. An Epithalamium upon the
Death of St. Epiphany. Two more Ditties. A Ballad. A Satyr against Size-Ace. A
Panegyric upon Thirteen-pence-half-penny. A Word to the Wise. Seven more
Ditties. XVII. The fair Sacrifice, or a Vow to Cupid; a Song. XVIII. A Copy of
Verses upon I don't know what. XIX. The Mourning Nymph; a Song. XX. The same
varied by a Friend. XXI. A Section treating of my self, one of the best of
Subjects; and such a one as both I and HER MAJESTY have Reason to be peculiarly
Fond of. A Discovery what sort of a Person I am, together with something
concerning my Mistress, and the same contradicted again. My own just
Commendations, especially that of my Great Modesty. Complete Annals of the
First 55 Years of my Life. A Prediction of my much lamented Death. All humbly
dedicated to the Manes of Mr. De Montagne, St. Evremont and Sir W -- T -- e.
XXII. A Section following the former. XXIII. A Chapter chiefly designed for the
Benefit of Philosophers and wise people. XXIV. Of the Poetical Philosopher's
Stone, or my Royal, Imperial, Angelical, Critical, Tincture of Parnassus, for
clarifying, brightening and strengthening the Wit, without the least Grain of
Mercury. XXV. My Public Spirit. My Care for Posterity; and Method of Educating
Young Gentlemen. XXVI. How -- de Maintenon offered to make me Poet Laureate,
upon Condition I would speak in her Praise, and how I could not tell what to
say. XXVII. A Description of the Chaos; the Construction of the Primigenial
Earth; its Convulsion at the Deluge; the Rise of this Ruinous Orb; the
Generation, Nutrition and Diseases of the Great Leviathan, otherwise called the
TrojanHorse, or a Commonwealth; the Lives of Ignatius Loyola, Oliver Cromwell,
-- W -- and S -- 4; a Panegyric upon Adultery, Sodomy, Sedition, Blasphemy and
Atheism; the Natural History of May-Poles, together with a Chronological
Account of the Rule of Three; Reasons proposed against the Maintenance,
Breeding and Entertaining of Cats, apparently tending to impoverish the Company
of Mouse-trap-makers. XXVIII. A Section containing such sad Truths, that I
would not advise you to understand it, nor so much as read it, if it can
possibly be avoided. XXIX. Of a wicked World and sad Times. Of the Present
Tense, Infallibility, Tradition, Pope Joan, Queen Dick, and Alexander the
Great. Of the Golden Age, Vtopian Regions, Vcronian Days, Formosa, China and
Peru. Of Fashion, Faction, Weather-cocks and Chronologers. Of senile Fables,
Fevers, Dreams and hard Beds. Of St. Evremont's Woman that could not be found,
the Epick Poem of Empedocles, certain famous Personages that never were Born,
the laudable Designs of certain Patriots, and my tender Respect for the
Republicans. Of Sr. William Temple's Eloquence, his Powder of Policy, the
Philosopher's Stone, and rusty Iron. Of R^bbing Churchyards, a Barrel of
Colchester Oysters, Antiquity, Sempronia, Motion, Muddy Rivers, Hour-Glasses,
Saws, Doctor's-Commons, Horace's, Odes, Felicity, Generation, Travelers,
Procrastination, Extremes, Envy, Distance; The Macrocosm, Complaints,
Innovations and Revolutions. XXX. A Section for which the Author could find no
manner of Title. XXXI. An imperfect Description of the RareeShow, and the
Music of the Spheres. XXXII. A short Apostrophe to the Ideal World, in which
all the principal Matters are brought in by the Bye; viz. An Ecstasy, a Welcome,
Glory, Thanks and Acquaintance. A Quotation, Day all abroad, Mirror of
Intelligences, Pillars of the Fabric of Wisdom, Chaos, All and Nothing,
Quakers, Eclypses, Shadows, Visions and six beautiful Non-entities; besides the
Haecceiteiteiteiceiceiteiceity of the Haecceiteiteiteiceiceiteity of the
Haecceiteiteiteiceiceity of the Haecceiteiteiteiceity of the Haecceiteiteiteity
of the Haecceiteiteity of the Haecceiteity of the Haecceity of HAEC. XXXIII. Of
Payment in part, together with fair Promises concerning Unity, Bonity, and
Specimens. XXXIV. Of Ancients and Moderns, as likewise of a great Revolution in
my Affections, and three Schemes of my Nativity, cast according to Mr. Hobbes's
new Method of Calculation. Of Dido and her Sister, the Sorts Virgiliana^,
Chestnuts, and how King Pepin of France was confuted. XXXV. Of the full Moon,
Intimations, the Building of Babel, the Will of Destiny, and how Oliver
Cromwell, in a Passion, shot off a Gun at the Solstice. XXXVI. My Discovery. My
Lineage from King Lud. My making over all to the Public. What Preferments I
have bestowed upon the Emperor, and some other of my particular Friends;
especially upon my self, to manifest the Great Respect I bear to that worthy
Person, the dearest to me of all the World; and who seems to entertain
infinitely the highest Opinion of my Merits, either from a particular Kindness,
or, as I, in Gratitude, rather ought to believe, from a singular Excellence of
Judgment. XXXVII. A Chapter in Imitation of Dr. B -- and Mr. Wotton. Of my
great Diligence and Success. Of Slackning. Of my Ama^nuensis, my Pillow and the
learned Dr. B -- tly, with some other Matters, no less considerable. XXXVIII.
The best Section in the Book, concerning seven hundred a Year. XXXIX. The next
best Section, concerning six hundred a Year. XL. Concerning wonderful Things.
XLI. Concerning Ivy. XLII. Of Monsters, Long-Distances, Cleanliness,
Chancellors, Transsusion of Blood, Staff^rd-shire, and the Foul Disease. XLIII.
Of Ba^rbican, Narcissus, Witches and Paper-diet. XLIV. How I rejoiced, and why.
XLV. Of the East India Company. XLVI. Of Critics. XLVII. A Section, containing
no manner of Treason against the Government. XLVIII. Several Commendatory
Verses and Epistles sent me from foreign Professors. XLIX. A Catalogue of
several Famous Persons of my intimate Acquaintance, together with a Political
Dissertation upon Green Peppar, written first in Arabic, and now made English
from the Original High Dutch. L. Which End of a Book to begin at. How to betray
one's Country with Discretion and Honor. How Pope Col^sso got the Cholick in
his Thumb, by Yawning at Dinner; how he cured the same with Black Pudding. How
the D -- ^ appeared to H -- n and gave him a Ring. LI. Something which you may
call either a Postscript or a Preface, according to the Humor you are in.
Advertisement.
THAT no Reader may complain of the least Obscurity in any part of the
following Papers, Mr. Norris his own Words shall be transcribed, to show what
he means by that Intelligible World, which is here made the Ground of a
Satirical Fable. In his first Volume, between the 8th and the 13th Pages, we
have this Account of it.

8. By the Ideal State of things, What (...) lows, to ^ 8th page taken o^ of the
F^^ Vol. of ^ Ideal T^^ ory.
I mean that State of them which is necessary, permanent and immutable, not
only antecedent and praeexistent to this, but also exemplary and representative
of it, as containing in it eminently and after an intelligible Manner, all that
is in this Natural World, according to which it was made, and in Conformity to
which all the Truth, Reality, Order, Beauty and Perfection of its Nature does
consist, and is to be measured. The System of things existing after this
manner, is what we call the Ideal World, which is not a contingent, temporary,
mutable thing, as this, but a self-existing, eternal, necessary and immutable
Nature, really simple and one, but yet vertually and eminently multiform and
various, and by its multiform and Variety having in it the Reasons, Essences
and Specific Natures of all things, that is, such Degrees of Being and
Perfection as answer to them, and are intelligibly expressive of them, and
whereof all things in the Natural World are but as the Prints and Impressions,
I might say, the Shadows. In sho^^, by the Ideal World I understand that World
which is Intelligibly what this is Sensibly, the eternal Model and Exemplar of
all created Essence, distinctly exhibitive of all that is or can ever be, and
so the Measure and Standard, not only of what actually is, but of the whole
Possibility of Being.

9. This is our Ideal World, the (...) so much celebrated by Plotinus and Philo
in his Cosmopoea, the first intelligible World, the World that truly is, and
the World of Truth, the great Type and Mould of external Nature, and the
measure of the things that are. The only eternal, stable and immutable World,
that existed before the Almighty Fiat was issued forth for the Production of
this, and would remain unshaken if it were reduced to nothing, that was before
the Foundations of the Earth were laid, nay even before there were any morning
Stars that might sing together, or any Sons of God to shout for Joy, Job 38.
This is the World of Original and Essential Beauty, where Order it self, and
very Reason and Proportion dwell, that never had a Chaos, and knows no black
Intervals of Night, but where it is ever Light and Day, and where Truth shines
pure and without a Cloud. A World simple in its Variety, and various in its
Simplicity, infinite in its Store and Fullness, and stored with incorruptible
and unsading Treasures, universal in its Presence, and uncircumscrib'd by any
Limit of Time or Place. The genuine Country of Truth, and its proper native
Soil, the Place of Spirits, the living and ever springing Fountain of
Intelligence, and the great Academy of all Arts and Sciences. Where those solid
Realities, and substantial Entities perpetually flourish and shine, whereof we
have here only the faint Reflections, and in Comparison of which this material
World is but a Phantom or a Shadow. Where all is Youth and Pleasure, Life and
Joy, Essence and Flower, where happy Spirits drink of the Wine that Wisdom its
self has mingled, and are sed with immortal Truth. Whosoever is Simple, let him
turn in hither, Prove. 9.

10. But though very great and glorious Things may be spoken of thee, O thou City
of God! yet how little art thou known, and how much less art thou in the
Thoughts and Minds of Men! Plunged as they are in a Life of Sense they are
ignorant of thee, Thou first and only Intelligible, and immersed as they are in
a Body of Flesh, they seldom think of thee who art all Spirit and Truth, and
that though thou shinest into their very Eyes, and they see continually by thy
Light. Thou make their Day, and thou thy self art the only thing that is not
seen by it. They take the Shadows of this Natural World for most real and solid
things, and thy most substantial Realities they look upon as Shadows and
Visionary Chimera's, and all Discourse about thee, (though never so Rational) as
but extravagant and delirous Talking, or at best but as Notional Romancing,
pure Metaphysical Reverie, a Subtilising upon a fine nothing. They are indeed
united to thee by their Souls, but by their Bodies to this Sensible World, and
as their Bodies are to them their principal Selves, this latter Alliance makes
them insensible of the Former. Thou art nearer to them than this World is, nay
than their very Bodies are, and yet they are far distant from thee, meet Aliens
to thee, and so utterly insensible of thee, that they will hardly believe that
thou art. If any mention be made of thy Name the amazed Vulgar stare, and the
Learned gravely smile, and if the Discourse be any whit long, they sleep. But
if they continue awake, they sleep however to thee. Though they were cast in thy
Mould, and formed upon thy Model, yet (ungrateful Stupidity) they seldom or
never mind their Original, nor look up to the Rock from whence they were hewn.
But had Men but one clear and distinct View of thy rich intellectual Scene,
could we but draw the Curtain of our Mortality so far, as but once to see thee
as thou art, we should be so transported and ravished with thy Divine Beauty,
so enamored of thy glorious System, all shining with the very Essence of
Being, and full of Grace and Truth, that we should lose not only all Value for
this Sensible World, but even Sense it self too, and pass along in the Crowd
and Throng of Creatures, without any Notice or Perception of them, all fixed
and intent upon thy more engaging Views, not minding the Bodies we see, nor
feeling those we touch. We should in a manner be dead to this sensible World,
and alive only to thee.

II. This great intellectual System is by some termed the Ideal, by some the
Intelligible, and by some the Archetypal World, which are but so many relative
Appellations for the same thing, to distinguish it according to so many
different respects it carries to the System of created Beings, which
accordingly is sometimes called the Natural, sometimes the Sensible, and
sometimes the Ectypal World. It ought to be farther observed here, that when we
say the Intelligible World, the meaning is not as if it did exist only in our
Conception, and had no real Being out of it, after the manner of an Ens
Rationis, but it is therefore so called, partly because it is the first and only
proper Intelligible, the sole and immediate Object of all our intellectual
Views, and that which exactly speaking is the very thing we always understand
and reason about. And partly because it is a Word of a Nature purely spiritual
and intellectual, and such as is not Sensible, but Intelligible only, and
partly again because it is a World of a conceivable Being and Existence, and
such indeed as we cannot but conceive to be, not subjected indeed to the
perusal and examination of our bodily Senses, but as certain and as really and
truly present to our Understanding, as this Natural World* is to our Sense. But
chiefly is it so called because it is the Idea of this Sensible World, as being
truly representative and expressive of it to the Understanding. For the Idea of
a thing is intellingibly that thing, and as the Idea of a Circle is called an
intelligible Circle, or the Idea of a Square an intelligible Square, because
they express these things to our Thoughts, so in like manner the Idea of the
World, or if you will, those Ideas which answer to the several Beings whereof
it consists, may very reasonably and fitly be called the Intelligible World.
Thus far the Theorist.

Had not this Philosophy come from so excellent a Person, I should have used
more Freedom in exposing it than I have done; but as Mr. Norris is the Author,
I would not have allowed my self so much, did I think it could lessen any Man's
Esteem of his Character and Deserts. However to countenance my own Reflections
upon this Subject, I shall set down the Sentiments of some other Persons, who
are allowed to be good Authors in their several Kinds. And now I assure the
Reader, that there is nothing in the Book so hard to understand as this
Advertisement it self, especially considering the first Quotation is to be in
Latin.

TESTIMONIA DE Mundo Intelligibili.
Erasmus in Moriae Encomio. QVID interesse censetis, inter eos, qui in specu
Platonico variarum rerum umbras and simulacr^^ demirentur, modo nihil
desiderent, neque minus sibi placeant, and sapientem, qui specum egressus,
veras res aspicit.

Ii cum nihil omnino sciant, tamen omnia se scire profitentur; cumque se ipsos
ignorent, neque fossam aliquoties out saxum obvium videant, vel quia lippiunt
plerique, vel quia peregrinantur animi, tamen Ideas universales, formas
separatas, primas materias, quidditates, formalitates, instantia videre se
praedicant, res adeo tenues, ut neque Lynceus, opinor, possit perspicere.

Sunt innumer abiles (...) de formalitatibus, de quidditatibus, haeceitatibus,
quas nemo possit oculis assequi, nisi tam Lynceus, ut ea quoque per altissimas
tenebras videat, quae nusquam sunt.

Out of Mr. Baker's Reflections upon Learning.
IT is not every one that is capable of understanding Metaphysical Truths, and
there are yet fewer that understand their use. Chap. IX. Page 98.
They are usually under the Conduct of subtle Men, and these nice Professors,
instead of resolving Doubts, have spun out new Difficulties, and framed
Labyrinths out of which they have scarce been able to disentangle themselves:
So that Metaphysics, which were at first only Natural Theology, are now become
the most artificial thing in the World.

One need only dip into any System, to see how these Men are plunged in setting
out, for whereas there are two things of principal Consideration in
Metaphysical Knowledge, its Objects and Affections, and whereas Philosophers
are pretty well agreed about the Object of other Sciences, as that Quantity is
the Object of Mathematics; and Matter of Physics; and so of the rest; the
Metaphysicians have not come to any tolerable Agreement about the Object of
this Science, or Sapience, or what you will call it: Suarez produces six
different Opinions, and himself brings the seventh, which is his own. And as to
its Affections, they are again at a plunge to find out Affections different
from Being (which seems to comprehend every thing) for if the Affections and
Subject are the same, their Demonstrations are Identical, and prove nothing.

If any Man could have understood Aristotle, Avicen had the best Plea, who was
as subtle a Philosopher, and studied him as much as perhaps any Man ever did;
and yet after he had read his Metaphysics forty times over, and had them all
by heart (which I will venture to say is more than ever any Man will do again)
he was forced to lay him aside as unintelligible.

I must rank Malebranch in the same Order with Mr. Poiret, whose Recherche has
furnished out such refined and abstracted Metaphysics, as if they were
designed for Comprehensors; he has exalted Ideas to their utmost Height, and
because they bore not with them Certainty enough, whilst they were barely
Operations of the Mind, or Representations from external Objects, he has placed
them in Subject that cannot err, to wit, in the Wisdom of God himself, whom
having supposed to be the place of Spirits, as Space is of Bodies, and that
there is an intimate Union betwixt God and the Soul of Man, by attending to
him, who is always prefential to our Minds, we are to see all things in this
Ideal or Intelligible World Rech. L. 3. Par 2. Sect. 6.
. Now though there can be no doubt, but God can lead us into all Truth, by
displaying himself to us, and perhaps may deal thus with us when we are in
Heaven, yet this way seems too supernatural whilst on Earth, and too clear for
weak and frail Men, who are yet to know by Vision; and is withal so like the
inward Light of a new Sect of Men, as not to make it over reputable: To which
purpose it is very remarkable, that Malebranche's Opinion having been espoused
of late, by an ingenious Person of our own, with all the Advantages of Beauty
of Style and Perspicuity of Expression, yet the Men of new Light have taken
such hold of it, as to make it necessary for him to write an Apology to
disengage himself from the Quakers, who would needs have it thought they had
gained a Proselyte vid. Cond. of Hum. Life, page 183.
: Wherein though he has distinguished himself from these People, yet thus much he
owns, That if the Quakers understood their own Notion, and knew how to explain
it, and into what Principles to resolve it, it would not very much differ from
his.

Out of Hudibras.
Of Sir HVDIBRAS.
HIS Notions fitted things so well,
That which was which he could not tell;
And oftentimes mistook the one
For the other, as Great Clerks have done.
He could reduce them all to Acts,
And knew their Nature by Abstracts.
He knew What Is what, and that is as high
As Metaphysick Wit can fly.
In School Divinity as able
As he that hight Irrefragable;
A second Thomas, or at once
To name them all, another Duns.
Profound in all the Nominal,
And Real Ways, beyond them all,
For he a Rope of Sand could twist,
As tough as Learned Sorbonist.
And weave fine Cobwebs, fit for scull
That Is Empty when the Moon is Full;
Such as take Lodgings in a Head,
That Is to be let Unfurnished.
Deep sighted in Intelligences
Ideas, Atoms, Influences;
And much of Terra Incognita,
The Intelligible World could say;
A deep Occult Philosopher,
And learned as the Wild Irish are,
Or Sir Agrippa, for profound,
And solid Lying, much renowned.
In Rosy-Crucian Lore as learned
As he that vere Adeptus earned.
He Would extract Numbers out of Matter,
And keep them in a Glass, like Water.
Of Sovereign Power to make Men wise;
For dropped in blear, thick-sighted Eyes,
They Would make them see in darkest Night,
Like Owls, though purblind in the Light.
By help of these (as he professed)
He had first Matter seen Undrest:
He took her naked all alone,
Before one Rag of Form was on.
So the ancient Stoics in their Porch
With fierce Dispute maintained their
Church,
Beat out their Brains in Fight and Study,
To prove that Virtue is a Body;
That Bonum is an Animal,
Made Good with stout polemick Brawl.
Of SYDROPHEL the Conjurer.
THE Intelligible World he knew,
And all Men dream on it, to be true:
That in this World there is not a Wart
That has not there a Counterpart;
Nor can there on the Face of Ground
An Individual Beard be found,
That has not in that foreign Nation
A Fellow of the self-same Fashion;
So cut, so colored and so curled,
As those in the inferior World.
The Intelligible World, says Hudibras his Annotator, is a kind of Terra del
Fuego, or Psittacorum Regio, discovered only by the Philosophers, of which they
talk, like Parrots, what they do not understand. No Nation in the World is more
addicted to this occult Philosophy than the wild Irish. Upon this Distick Where
Truth in Person does appear,
Like Words congealed in Northern Air,
he has these Notes.

Some Authors have mistaken Truth for a Real thing, when it is nothing but a
right method of putting those Notions or Images of things (in the Understanding
of Man) into the same State and Order, that their Originals hold in Nature.

Some report that in Nova Zembla; and Greenland, Men's Words are wont to be
frozen in the Air, and at the Thaw may be heard.

De Idea Platonica quemadmodum Aristoteles intellexit.
DIcite sacrorum praesides nemorum deae,
Tuque O noveni perbeata numinis
Memoria matter, quaeque in immenso procul
Antro recumbis otiosa Aeternitas,
Monumenta servans, and ratas leges Iovis,
Caelique fastos atque ephemeridas Deum,
Quis ille primus cujus ex imagine
Natura solers finxit humanum genus,
Aeternus, incorruptus, aequaevus polo,
Vnusque and universus, exemplar Dei?
Haud ille Palladis gemellus innubae
Interna proles insidet menti Iovis;
Sed quamlibet natura sit communior,
Tamen seor sus extat ad morem unius,
Et, mira, certo stringitur spatio loci;
Seu sempiternus ille syderum comes
Caeli pererrat ordines decemplicis,
Citimumque terris incolit Lunae globum:
Sive inter animas corpus aditurus sedens
Oblivios as torpet ad Lethes aquas:
Sive in remota forte terrarum plaga
Incedit ingens hominis archetypus gigas,
Et iis tremendus erigit celsum caput
Atlante major portitore syderum.
Non cui profundum caecitaslumen dedit
Dircaeus augur vidit hunc alto sinu*
Non hunc silenti nocte Pleiones nepos
Vatum sagaci praepes ostendit choro;
Non hunc sacerdos novit Assyrius, licet
Longos vetusti commemoret atavos Nini,
Priscumque Belon, inclytumque Ofiridem,
Non ille trino gloriosus nomine
Ter magnus Hermes (ut sit arcani sciens)
Talem reliquit Isidis cultoribus.
At tu perenne ruris Academi decus
(Haec monstra si tu primus induxti scholis)
Iam jam poetas urbis exules tuae
Revocabis, ipse fabulator maximus,
Aut institutor ipse migrabis for as.
SECT. II.
Of Prefaces.
Learned Reader,
WHEN you have settled your grand Affair with Mr. Stationer concerning the
Purchase of this Golden Manual, you are desired to receive a modest Address
from the Author. Some thing must be said to a Person of your Character and
Office, toward rendering him attent and docile, especially where the subject
Matters are profound and intricate, as well as important; and some Civilities
must needs pass between Author and Reader, toward introducing a better
acquaintance, before they proceed to their main Business. It must indeed be
owned, that many Readers of great Candor and Judgment, being endued with a
mighty timorous Constitution, can never enter upon a Preface, Introduction, or
Apparatus without the utmost Circumspection, and very great Uneasiness, lest in
every Line some fly thing should be lurking to circumvent their Judgments. Now
I am willing to do all I can toward easing their Minds of such Jealousies, and
therefore assure those Faint-hearted Gentlemen, upon the Word of an honest
Author, (if an Author can be honest in these times) that they may boldly and
safely venture through, even to the Catastrophe, nay the very Peroration or final
Period of All. The only thing to be apprehended, is that by too great
Precipitancy, many Graces of Composition may escape notice; much Watchfulness
and Advertency of thought being necessary to discern them all, as you go on,
where they are strowed so thick in your way. For, though I have clothed this Body
of Philosophy in the most proper and pellucid Dress, yet the Beauties of it are
too Fine to be easily distinguished at first View, as they are too Dazzling to
be long contemplated. There is also a vigorous Spirit pervading the Whole, and
pregnant with Sentiments of a surprising Nature, being either wonderfully
Sublime, or vastly Profound, but generally both; which shows how mighty a
Capacity is required to comprehend them. However, there is nothing to trepan
any inadvertent Reader, nor the least Design upon him, but what is purely and
solely for his own Good. Alas, I am so far from drawing up a subtle Harangue to
bespeak your good Will, or prepossess you in Favor of an idle, unorthodox, or
injudicious Book, that I am fully resolved to make this very Preface almost as
valuable as the Book it self, and perhaps twice as long. Nay I can witness this
for my self, that I have had much Debate in my own Thoughts which would serve
best for the Book, and which should stand for the Preface; whether it agrees
with the Rules of Grammar, or of Heraldry, that the Book should be accounted
the more Worthly, or the more Honorable, of the Two. Due Examination being
had, and all Arguments weighed on both sides, I could not in Equity, but give
it for the Preface; as well because, by the universal Consent of Nations, it
was always allowed the Precedence, as because the Book has no other Office but
that of filling up a Gap in the Middle, See the Treatise in Praise of the Gout.
when it happens that a few useless Inter-leaves may be spared from the
Introduction and the Index. This shows us what a strange Absurdity our modern
Innovators have run into, who bring in the Book before their Chief Preface, or
which is all one, put off what was promised in the Title Page, till the Candid
Reader begins to grow impatient; for who can bear to see things so
preposterously disposed, that all the principal Matters, which have an
undoubted Right to be admitted in the Preface, should violently be kept out,
and reserved to make up a pitiful Appendage, that is appointed to come
servilely in the Rear of it: as if the Head should be forced to change place
with the Belly, or the Brains thrust down to take their Seat in the lower
Region.

SECT. III.
Of the great Importance of this Theory, and the Applause it has been received
with. Of the Author's Loyalty, Honest Designs and Eminent Poverty.
EVery sagacious Person must needs be sensible, how much it imports the
High-lands of Scotland, the Dominion of Wales, and the Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, to procure a right understanding of this noble Subject I have undertaken
to expound. As for my own Performance, though I have promised to insinuate
nothing that may any way Biass the Reader's Judgment, yet this I may fairly
say, that, such as it is, it has been very kindly entertained in the Places
abovementioned; neither is any modern Treatise of Philosophy, except the two
incomparable Works of Father Malebranche and Mr. Asgyl, so much enquired after,
studied and admired in all the Intelligible World, which is most concerned in
it, and best understands its worth. It has already been translated into all the
Ideal Languages with great and faithful Exactness, in each of which it has sold
off near twenty Editions. Nay, such a peculiar Disposition of reserved, private
and modest Liberality appears in some Noble and Refined Spirits, that the
Author has been surprised with several imaginary Presents, though he could never
find out any one Donor, by all the flattering Designs and cunning Projects that
he could contrive. Some of these Bounties were very considerable, being larger
Sums than he had ever been Master of, or could now have expected. Hereby to his
great Satisfaction, he is grown strangely enriched in Idea, all of a sudden;
and has happily attained the great Ends of all his Study, having ever labored
to do Some public Service to the World, and withal to get a Penny for his own*
private Use. Till now, he never succeeded to his Wish, nor was Fortune ever so
kind to bestow upon him, either a Pension, or any thing of that nature,
suitable to his Deserts, and the Greatness of his Spirit. Neither did it avail
him any thing to have been a Person of unshaken Virtue and Loyalty, which he
must be acknowledged to have approved himself upon all Occasions. This indeed
is the more Remarkable in him, as having formerly been known a Furious
Iacobite, and continuing at present a Furious Republican, and a Furious
Preacher of Scotch Moderation, having some time ago learnt, and settled in his
Heart many a good and useful Doctrine, among which this is laid down for a
Fundamental, That since by the unanimous Confession of experienced Statesmen
and Casuists, Time is the only thing which brings about all our good Fortune,
and is consequently our best Friend and Benefactor, we are manifestly engaged
by Gratitude and Generosity to be true to it, and never shrink from serving it
to the best of our Power, in any the worst Circumstances, or Revolutions of
Condition it can fall into.

SECT. IV.
The great Use of Defamation and Flattery, when wisely administered. The
Author's ill Success therein.
HAving observed that small Advantage accrues from praising Men of Honor and
Integrity, or censuring of Knaves, I formerly resolved upon the contrary Method
of bestowing Satyrs upon all that are loyal and virtuous, and Panegyricks upon
'tother sort of good People. But in both kinds I found some of my Betters so
expert, that I could not hope to find my accounts, or make any Figure in
either. The first Essay I made of my Faculty was at Nando's Coffee-house,
where, not considering who lolled at my Elbow, I ventured to let fly half a
dozen strong Lies against Archbishop Laud, together with a smooth Sentence in
Defense of Trimming; and what should I find in Print within a Week, but these
very Products of my own Impudence; the former displayed in the Observator with
ample Improvements, and the latter set down in Dr. Davenant's Essay upon the
Versatility of his own Soul, and not without a formal Allusion to Tacitus.
These are all to be seen still in my Common-place-Book, and any Gentleman that
pleases may command the Sight. I resented this Affair, as very unkind Usage
from my Brother Touchin, though I would not take so much notice of Dr. D -- nt's
little Theft, because he was then as it were a Stranger, and but newly come
over to our Party.

A Section.
MY next Project was to beg a small Estate of the Muses; in Hopes of whose
Favor, I made them daily Libations of liquid Jett, and sacrificed to their
Deities, each year, a hundred Reams of Paper. The Reader will see that my
Oblations have not been quite in vain, if among all the Poems in this Volume,
he can discover which are my own: and I don't in the least mistrust a Person of
his singular, and so well known Humanity, but that he will vouchsafe to Father
upon his humble Servant the most deformed Pieces that, with great Diligence, he
shall be able to cull out.

Pope Joan's Kissing-Dance. BALLAD.
I.
ALL you that do to Love belong,
Mind what my Tale discovers,
And listen well to this new Song,
A strange Rondeau of Lovers.
II.
There were eight Lads so Blithe and Gay,
That loved seven Buxom Lasses;
But that is untoward alack-a-day,
When each his Love misplaces.
III.
Young Roger made a Vow (de'e see?)
To be a Spark of Lucy's;
But Lucy longed the Spouse to be
Of Joseph, that so spruce is.
IV.
Now Nan had won the Love of Joseph,
His Heart, and eke his Faney;
He Would be content to lose his Nose, if
He could but gain his Nancy.
V.
Nan cut her Heart in two, to share it
'Twixt Marmaduke and Aaron;
Both likely Lads, quoth she, I Will swear it,
As Maids need wish to stare on.
VI.
Both Marmaduke and Aaron courted
Kate, Daughter to a Prick-louse,
Though Katern with her Suitors sported,
For her Sweetheart was Nicolas.
VII.
This Nicolas wooed young Joan, who never
With such a Spark would take-up,
For Joan, as sure as you are there,
Had a Month's Mind to Jacob.
VIII.
Poor Jacob made a woeful Stir
To compass nut-brown Lettice,
And failed with much ado, for her
Affections never met his.
IX.
Lettice likewise her Love was crossed in,
(Fate ordered it should so be)
For once in vain she courted Austin,
And now in vain woo's Toby.
X.
What Maid would wish to be in her Case?
For Toby she is so fond on,
Run almost mad for little Dorcas,
That newly came from London.
XI.
Whereas she purely came to visit
Her Fellow Servants Edward,
To see his pretty Face, and kiss it,
And gladly would go bed-ward.
XII.
While Ned his little Dorcas answered,
For loving I don't blame ye,
'Cause you may take an honest Man's
Word,
That I as much love Amy*
XIII. [See Stanza 3.]
Amy so passing fair to look on,
And slender to behold,
Cried till her Heart was almost broken,
She would be Roger's Consort.
This Passage seems to have been corrupted, as may be gathered from the last
Line, in which the Ryme is something stiff and harsh, not coming up to that
Easiness of Sound which is found in other Parts of the Poem. This Difficulty is
evaded by the ingenious Conjecture of Joseph Scaliger, who is therein
universally followed by the Critics, having restored the^Text by this
Correction.

Amy, belike, so stayed a Body,
(You Would say so had you seen her)
Doated on Roger So-Adod I
Should never a' thought 'twas in her.
XIV.
These People good, in saddest Mood,
With Love grown woundy stupid,
Made piteous Plaints, and told their wants
To Hymen and to Cupid.
XV.
Fain would they wed in Ring so round,
Eight Husbands and seven Wives;
And doubtless they must needs have found
Great Comfort of their Lives.
XVI.
But 'twas a puzling Case to Hymen;
O strange! said he, 'twill work ill,
For I Have no Licenses to tie Men,
And Maids in such a Circle.
XVII.
He bid them be, as 'twas but right,
Content with this Expedient,
To kiss all round, for so all might
Have Kissing, that had need on it.
XVIII. [See Stanza 3.]
Young Roger should begin the Play,
The rest were, in their Season,
To put it round in friendly way,
And do each other Reason.
XIX.
So Roger tall did Lucy call,
Quoth he, I Will not abuse ye;
Good sooth it would have done one Good
To see him kiss sweet Lucy.
XX.
Then Lucy fair demands her Share
Of her dear Sweetheart Josey,
And kissed him so, all People know
They both grew wondrous Rosy.
XXI. [See Stanza 4.]
Next Ioe did greet his Nan, as sweet
A Damsel as you can see;
Nan for this Youth made up her Mouth,
So Joseph kissed his Nancy.
XXII. [See Stanza 5.]
Her Sparks were twain, and that being plain,
Some said that she might spare one;
She by her Troth, cried, none or both,
And kissed one more than Aaron.
XXIII. [See Stanza 6.]
Then Marmadoke and Aaron broke
Their Minds to Kate the Slattern;
Kind Kate held out her dainty Snout,
And O how they kissed Katern!
XXIV.
O Nicolas, Nicolas, where is my Nic laid?
Quoth Kate the Taylor's Daughter,
And kissed, and was with Joy so tickled,
She scarce could hold her Water.
XXV. [See Stanza 7.]
Nic run to Joan, that had no Stays on,
But looked as red as Claret,
And kissed her so, that 'twould amaze one
How any Maid could bear it.
XXVI.
Joan flew at Jacob most outrageous,
And kissed, and called him Sweeting;
Could he have bleated, as Cinque-trey does,
Uds-bobs, she would stop his Bleating.
XXVII. [See Stanza 8.]
O Lettice, then quoth Jacob stout,
On thy true Love take pity;
She bid him kiss his kissing out,
Because he was so witty.
XXVIII. [See Stanza 9.]
But Lettice called aloud for Toby,
As one would call for Mustard;
He fain would give fair Let the Go-by,
But Lettice kissed him first hard.
XXIX. [See Stanza 10.]
It Is strange to tell, or to declare,
How 'Ioby simpered,
When he got Dorcas his own Dear,
And kissed her quite half dead.
XXX. [See Stanza 11.]
Dorcas, she leer'd on Ned, right wistful,
And kissed him all to Pieces,
So fired, that were she but a Pistol,
She had gone off in Face his.
XXXI. [See Stanza 12.]
Sir Edward made her no Repartee,
Though he was kissed so Fashion,
As knowing well, by Rules of Art, she
Had done it in her Passion.
XXXII.
And then himself was passionate too
Of Amy, Queen of Spinsters;
He threw his Wig off, and his Hat too,
And run his Face ag'inst hers.
XXXIII.
He tows'd her with his Beard, so Bushy
'Twas far and near admired,
And tore her Coife quite off, although she
Had scarce wherewith to tie her Head.
XXXIV.
Poor Folks may be, most sartinlee,
In Love as well as Ladies,
And kiss as well, for ought I can tell,
As they with all their Gayities.
XXXV. [See Stanza 13.]
Amy never let a Sweetheart dodge her,
But kissed like any Widow,
And stifled Roger, though poor Roger
Loved her no more than I do.
XXXVI.
Thus finely they all danced the Hay*
Or the best Boy of Mother;
The jest went round, and none were found
That would not pledge the other.
XXXVII.
At length they closed, and whisk'd about,
As those that Margery-Cree dance,
Or like to Folk quite wearied out,
Who fain would make good Riddance.
XXXVIII.
Yet loath to give it over, they cried,
How cursed fast the Day stirs!
Though before Night, or they are belied,
their Lips all needed Plasters.
XXXIX.
There never was known, in all the Town,
Such Kissing as this same was;
Yet, keeping Lent (as is Decent)
Pray who, quo' they, can blame us?
XL.
For since (as Hymen told them plain)
Though they most grievously burn,
The Wedding-Noose will never contain
So many as will Tyburn.
XLI.
They all resolve to live right Honest,
And never be upbraided.
O that Young Folk were all admonisht
To do no worse than they did!
XLII.
But for all this, they did not miss
Each Sunday after Sarmint,
To meet and kiss, some more, some less;
For Kissing has no Harm in it.
There is a different Reading of this Stanza in the Vatican Manuscript, where
it runs thus,

And yet they loved, as you may guess,
To do a thing would charm one,
And kiss a little, more or less;
For Kissing is no Harm, Mun.
XLIII.
Nor would they fail, for a Dozen of Ale,
To kiss before the King and
His Gracious Queen, on Turnham-Green,
Or any Ground in England.
XLIV.
Suppose you might see such a Sight,
As Cupid and as I did,
Whatever you are, I Would almost swear
You Would not be much affrighted.
Sic visum est Veneri, cui placet impares
Formas atque animos sub juga ahenea
Saevo mittere cum joco.
Virtus S^ipiadae and mitis sapientia Laeli,
Quando se a vulg^ and scenain secreta Remarant,
Nugari soliti and Discincti ludere.
The Ideal, or Precarious Beauty. SONG.
I.
Damned for ever to complain,
Must I court, and court in vain?
Phyllis, let Interest make you kind,
If nothing else will do;
Should Conceit, which makes you blind,
Clear these Eyes and change my Mind,
What would your Pride come to?
II.
Foolish Phyllis not to know
Where you all these Beauties owe!
The wicked Town will not own thee fair,
Then thank the Man that will;
Beauty you but seem to wear;
Beauty's self can scarce compare
With Doting Fancy's Skill.
III.
Fancy paints the Nymph Divine,
Thus your very Charms are mine;
It Is Fancy, Phyllis, make the Chain,
And binds me with the same:
But should Phyllis slight my Pain,
Fancied turn me loose again,
And spurn the scornful Dame.
IV.
Beauteous Angel then no more,
But homely Phyllis as before.
Ah -- never, no -- well then comply,
Since Fancy all procures:
Do but real Blisses try;
Pay my Fancy with true Joy;
And all the Charms be yours.
The Good Advice. SONG.
I.
CLoe be wi^e and soon comply,
Thirty and five i^ coming on;
Then all your Train, as well as I,
Will leave Adoring and be gone.
II.
When wrinkled Age deforms the Brow*
All will deride the withered Case,
The very-Glass which flatters now,
Will call Old-Woman to your Face.
III.
Youth is the Parent of Desire,
And Beauty each Beholder burns,
But none will ^et their Hearts on Fire*
At Flames expiring in their Urns.
The XLII. Ode of Anacreon. Upon CUPID's Darts. Done into English by Dr. w -- ^.
AS Vulcan at his (...),
Forging Love's Darts, gentle and good,
Of Red-hot Steel; which did retain
Some Sparks, that use to burn again;
Venus in Honey dipped them all,
And Love allayed the Sweets with Gall.
When furious Mars returned from Fight
Without a glimmering of Delight.
No smiling Looks, no unusual Grace
Disturbed the Majesty of his Face.
In's dreadful Hand a Spear he bore,
The rougher Instrument of War.
And laughing took* up Love's light Dart,
(But little thought it caused such Smart)
This is, said he, a pretty Toy,
A Play-thing fit for such a Boy;
Cupid at length made this Reply*
Sir, if you please the Lightness try*
With that he shot the new-made Arrow*
Which pierced him to the very Marrow,
And wounded deep: but Venus smiled
To see the God of War beguiled.
Who vainly prayed; hence, hence remove
The Dart, I feel enough of Love.
No, no, Love cried, your Pain enjoy,
You know my Arrow's but a Toy.
The Same, IN Another Translation:
Some Verses of which the Translator himself dislikes, but could not for his
Life make (...) better^^, such was the great Unkindness of his Muse.

VVLCAN did once his File employ
To point new Darts for Venu's Boy;
Venus in Honey dipped them all
But Cupid tempered it with Gall
Meanwhile there came the God of War,
Shaking in's Hand a bloody Spear;
And laughed at Cupid's Tools, too light,
And weak to be employed in Fight.
Here Is one, says Love, perhaps you will find
Strong and Heavy to your Mind.
Mars took the Dart with no ill Thought,
While Venus smiled to see him caught.
He could not now the Truth deny,
But owned it Heavy, with a sigh,
Here, Love, said he, pray take it away;
No, no cried Love, you keep it pray.
Madam Dacier tells us that the Beauty of this Ode transported her Father into
a Couple of such Distichs as the Reader will be glad to see.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
^

The Vanity of Riches, Imitated from ANACREON. (...).
I.
Could Gold immortalize a man,
Or stretch his Days beyond their Span;
Could it retain our parting Breath;
Or blunt the pointed Sting of Death;
I Would cringe, I Would write, I Would fawn, I Would pray
All Parties favor, all obey,
To raise vast Treasures of the precious Clay.
II.
But since these Toys, these glittering Baits,
These little Arts, these holy Cheats,
Since all their Stores will naught avail,
When drooping Nature once does fail,
Why this Clutter, why this Pain,
Why this Sweating all in vain,
For great Preferments, and a gaudy Train?
III.
Death makes the Bays, the Robes, the Gown
To lay their fading Honors down,
Nor can their Bribes make him relent,
Or their impending Fate prevent:
Then since these mighty Men, and I,
The Rich, the Poor and all must die,
Why should I heap up Wealth, O, Tell me why?
IV.
No, blooming Garlands round me twine,
I Will drink, carouse; the Present's mine.
To Wine and Pleasure, come, let us give,
The small Remains we have to live;
Then lest by Sickness Youth decay,
In ceaseless Joys we'll spend away
(All over Wine and Love) the Night and Day.
A SONG
IMpartial Chloe is in hate,
Thousands have loved, but loved in vain:
And all have met an equal Fate,
Whilst Chloe triumphs over the slain.
2.
I only live, whilst after these
So goodly Triumphs of her Eyes,
After so many Victories got,
Chloe contemns so poor a Prize.
3.
Nay why should I, my Chloe, prove
The cruel Force of your Disdain?
Why shall so base a Victim fall,
And all your former Trophies stain?
4.
Even Pride at length may Kindness work,
And Scorn it self preserve a Slave;
For whom your Hate disdains to kill,
Your Love can do no less than save.
Advertisement.
You are to consider that the following Poem was written at Cambridge, about
Two Months after I had commenced Doctor of Law. The Design of it is to keep up
the Spirit and the Reputation of Ryme, now in Danger to be thrust out of the
World by some invidious Persons, notwithstanding the Laudable Endeavors of Mr.
Bishe, and Mr Wy -- ly, to the contrary. I may be bold to say, that my
Composition is according to the Dictonary, and to the strictest Rules of
Poetry; only with this Improvement of the Poetica Licentia, That Euphoniae
Gratia, or for Rymes sake, I have presumed to call several things out of their
Names, affixing new Significations to some Words of our Language, which were
before too barren; be pleased therefore to take exact Notice that Drum
Signifies College-Commons. Black-Art Long Vacation. Make a Mansion Tarry.
Origin Beginning. Terminus Term.

This Advertisement being duly considered and kept in Mind, you may proceed to
the Perusal of the Poem, as it here stands before you, with great Hopes of
Satisfaction.

A Poem upon Raisins and Almonds: OR THE Passage from Dover to Calais.
TO their Respective Halls few Scholars come,
Just at this Time, with Teeth to chew their Drum;
For this Time being the Time of Black-Art,
Most of them all from fair Town-Walls depart;
Each makes a Mansion in his Rural-House,
Until the Origin of Terminus.
Now then they come, dropping to Town in Troops,
As thick as any Millstone is, or Hops.
If I would tell their-Names, I say if I would do it,
T'ud take up too much Ink, and Paper unto Boot.
The Mourning Nymph. SONG.
I.
IN pity, Fate, let poor Marcellis die,
Pale Death shall come in joyous Hymen's place;
That poor Marcellis, and her Swain, may ly
In one unrivaled Grave, and cold Embrace.
A happy Pair down to the Shades we'll go,
And Lover's Pensive Ghosts will give us Joy
below.
II.
Or if in vain to Fate I Have prayed,
Yet on my Damon's Tomb
Death shall find Marcellis laid;
There I Will lament my Shepherd's Doom.
I Will weary Heaven it self with Prayers,
With Sighs, Complaints, and ceaseless Tears,
Till all the Powers above relent,
Or I turn Stone, to be his Monument.
III.
For ever will this wounded Breast
My Damon, and his mournful story, bear
In deepest Characters impressed;
There will his lasting Epitaph appear.
for ever his dear, sacred, Dust I Will keep,
For ever in my Marble weep.
The Same, Varied by Another Hand.
IN Pity, Fate, let poor Flavelia dye,
And grant me, Death, what Hymen could deny,
Lead me, Dear Monarch, to that blissful place
Of one unrivaled Grave and cold Embrace;
Down to thy Realms, a happy Pair, we'll go
And discontented Shades shall give us Joy below.
If not, a Coarse, on Damon's Tomb I Will lie,
And weary Heaven, if Hell will not hear my Cry.
I Will never, never cease to mourn my Swain,
Till stiff with Grief, and stupefied with Pain,
The kinder Gods shall at the Sight relent,
And turn me quite to Stone to build his Monument.
Then in this Vault his sweet Remains shall rest,
Long, long, enjoy their dear Flavelia's Breast,
No Poet there shall grave his flattering Song,
Nor loud officious Friends lament my Wrong.
My Heart, thus changed, his old deep Lines shall keep,
And ceaseless Streams of Tears the faithful Stone
shall weep.
SECT. XXI.
A Discovery made who the Author is. Something said concerning his Mistress,
and the same immediately contradicted.
IT IS possible I may hardly find Credit among many well-meaning People, when I
declare that this Damon is no other, than my own self, though still alive; but as
for Marcellis, alias Flavelia, that appears to be so desperately afflicted for
my Death, I must own that she is utterly unknown to me. However, I pity the
unfortunate Lady, not doubting but she is a very Lovely and very Worthy Person;
for, otherwise, it is highly probable she would not be so much concerned.
whoever the Lady be, in composing this Poem, I designed that after my Death,
which at that time was hourly expected by my Heirs, it should pass in her Name,
both for her Honor and my own; as by the Whiningness of it, you may believe it
was indicted in a melancholic Season. But since my happy Recovery, I am taken
with a Jealousy, that the said Nymph deals by me disloyally, entertaining my
worthless Rival, to her own Dishonor, and my Despair. Therefore I now think it
Reason to take to my self the Credit of my own Verses, and make public my
loveing Intention of entitling them to Marcellis, that the World may see the
Justice of my Dealings, and what she has lost by playing me false.

Together with this Ditty I had devised an Epitaph for my self, that my Memory
might be preserved in my own Works; besides that I was unwilling to have
Marcellis turn her self to Stone on purpose. Now such is the Nature of that
kind of Composition, as necessitated my speaking much in my own Commendation,
and making a Catalogue of all my extraordinary Endowments. For this reason it
might be construed a piece of Immodesty to let it come abroad in my Lifetime,
and seems therefore more advisable to reserve it for one of my postumous Works.
Among these will be found also very particular Memoirs of all, even the very
minutest of my Concerns; especially my most material Thoughts, which I never
yet discovered, and the wise Sayings that I chiefly delight in. Of all which I
give this public Advertisement, because it will be a mighty Help to the
Learned Person, who is to be the Writer of my Life, for whom I always entertain
a very particular Respect, and therefore bequeath to him the said Journal, not
doubting but he will perform according to the Dignity of the Subject, and
thereby lay the highest Obligation upon Posterity.

A Section following the Former.
IT was well for these innocent Verses here present, as likewise for me and my
happy Reader, that Fate provided for their Security from all the Injuries of
inclement Seasons, the hostile Invasions of domestic Vermin, and the Rage of
devouring Elements; being partly carbonado'd out upon the Walls of my Garret,
and partly fumigated upon my Cieling with a Taper of Sheep's Wax. The single
Elegy that treats of Raisins and Almonds, happened to remain alive in my
Cerebellum, having but newly been engendered there by a wonderful Irradiation
from that masculine Muse with which Mr. Wy -- ly is now Possessed. Had these,
or any of these been entrusted to frail Paper, they had certainly been
delivered over to secular Flames and eternal Oblivion; the same Fate that was
undergone by some Thousands of their Fellows, altogether as deserving as
themselves. That fatal Execution has since cost me a sad Repentance; but it was
done in the heat of Passion, and it is a Happiness these few were preserved for
my Comfort. Immediately after the Massacre was committed, I found means to
enter my self among a Club of Pamphleteers, which was truly the best regulated
Society that I have known, except only some four or five of our Academies. When
a Volume of any considerable Figure was in hand, every Man had his particular
Province assigned him, according as he was Gifted.

For this excellent Method of Proceeding the Hint was borrowed from the ancient
and famous Corporation of Cyclopses at Bromigham. Alii, says Dr. Plot, in his
incomparable Natural History of Stafford shire, -- Taurinis Follibus auras
Accipiunt Redduntque alii Stridentia ting unt
Era lacu, etc. --
This Vulcan shapes the Have, that files the Blade;
These whet Love's Wanton Darts, and those Death's Fatal Spade.
One works the Keyhole, others turn the Wards,
And others form the Bolt, which Golden Treasure Guards.
Mr. Dryden in Hind and Panther. Haud aliter, si parva licet componere magnis,
In our Society,

-- Pressit Labor omnes
Improbus, and duris urgens in Rebus Egestas;
Munere quemque suo; Grandavis Lexica curae,
Et munere the Margin, and horrid fingere Scandal,
Sunt queis Praelorum cecidit custodia sorti;
Inque vicem speculantur opus, Velut agmine facto
Ignavum Criticos pecus a Praesepibus arcent,
Aut oner a Accipiunt collectorum.


One was constantly at Work in compiling Prolegomena; there were Two Members
that flourished all our Dedications; a Fourth had a happy Genius for setting
out Title-Pages, and my Talent was thought most proper for putting together an
Index. One Month by constant Practice, had made me such a Proficient in this
Faculty, as is Incredible to tell, and it might indeed look like a piece of
Vanity for a Man to publish it of himself. Thus much perhaps may be said with
Modesty of my great Dexterity, that I am able to set down a copious Index
without ever casting an Eye upon the Book. Reader, this is not a thing for
every Man to pretend to; but I say no more; you shall have a Sample at the End,
if the paper holds out.

By this time, it is to be supposed, you begin to think me a rising Man, and my
Business certainly done; as to which erroneous Conclusion, I hold my self
obliged to undeceive a Person of your Sagacity and Deserts; for though I was, and
am, Master of such extraordinary Abilities, and my Brother Penmen in their
several ways, but little behind me, yet were we soon reduced to Ruin and
Despair by private Interlopers. Their Names and Characters, with all their
Rogueries, you shall know at a more convenient Opportunity.

Sua quisque teneat non vitiosa. SECT. XXIII.
A Section Principally designed for the Benefit of Philosophers, and other wise
People.
SInce the foresaid Index-Trade proves so dead, and the Gains so vastly short
of what we had promised our selves, it has been in my Thoughts, that if any way
could be contrived to pass my self upon the World for a Person of rare and
singular Wisdom, some extraordinary Preferment, or at least a Good Accession to
my poor Income might ensue. Bent upon this Project, it cost me infinite Pains
in Collecting wise Sayings, and raking together a Heap of Proverbs, whereof I
found it requisite that a sufficient Fund should be laid in to deliver out at
prop^^ Seasons, by way of Observation or Instruction. I likewise stinted my
self (...) my Walks, to proceed but five Steps (...) three Minutes and two
Seconds, not forgetting to bind up my sweet Countenan^^ to a profound Gravity
of Behavior, (...) that for every Half-smile allowed to daw^^ upon it for a
Half-minute; it has bee^^ some Years under Covenant to look Studious, and lie
overcast with Frowns, fo^^ at least three Hours together. Beside^ this, it has
verily from Nature the peculiar Felicity of a Cloudy, Sullen an^^ Philosophical
Beauty, which is of much Use and Assistance as to the Business (...) Wisdom.
Yet being my self, by the Benefit also of my Constitution, wonderfully inclined
to Simplicity, after all my Care and Strivings, I have found ou^^ that it is a
more difficult Part for a Fool or a Fool's Mate to act the Wiseman; than for a
Wiseman in time of Need, or when the Humor takes him, to play the Fool. Thus
-- I did once read it recorded of some Counterfeits, that they have upon
Occasion pretended themselves dead, but never knew any, to the ^est of my
Memory, how sly and cunning so ever, that when they were really de^unct, or
dead in good earnest, could make as if they were alive.

Misce Stultitiam conciliis brevem. SECT. XXIV
Of my so famous Tincture for the Wit, approved by the Author's own Experience
for above two and thirty Years, as likewise by several impossible Cures it has
wrought upon Persons of Quality in and about this Kingdom; who can testify that
it mightily helps Digestion of what you take inwardly, removes Dullness,
comforts the Vital Heat, strengthens the Poetic Spirit, helps Inspiration,
provokes Ryming, cherishes the Fancy, corrects the Judgment, etc. By
excoriating all* membranous Diaphragms in the Musculus Ensiformis; and finally
it brings your Vena Docta to a due Crasis of Body, and is a Medicine infinitely
Preferable to any hitherto in Use among the Critics, and will keep its Virtue
in long Voyages for th^^ Benefit of Seafaring Persons, especially such as
dwell in Her Majesty's Navy, (...) otherwise reside in long Voyages.
FOreseeing that this Volume may possibly fall into the Hands of some Person,
or Persons, either so very Fruga^^ or so very Injudicious, as to repent the
Purchase, I had once thought to throw into my Purchaser's Bargain the mo^^
valuable Thing I could present him with even a Discovery of my whole Art (...)
Writing, or the Means whereby I have attained to such wonderful Perfection^
This my generous and noble Design wa^ favored by a Rule of Heraldry that I
remembered to have seen in Tully, (...) somewhere delivers it for his Opinion
that it is more Honorable to sell A^^ than the Productions of Art. Now (...)
have always been a Person very ambitiou^ of the most Honorable Employment
(even though they should happen to be en^cumber'd with vast Revenues) and
likewise reverence the Philosophical Rea^sonings of that worthy Author at a
(...) Distance, without presuming to enter, intrude, approach, or pretend the
least Acquaintance with their Excellencies; but standing off with a contented
Modesty, and paying the Homage of implicit Deference. My foresaid laudable
Inclination was likewise encouraged by the Authority of Father M -- che, and
abstarcted Person who has blessed human Race with such an unparllel'd
Composition as never fails to incite the staring Faculty most strangely, either
by way of Astonishment, if the Man have a strong Constitution of Mind, or by
way of ^rency, in Case the Enthusiastic Recipes succeed, and work the desired
Effect on the Patient-Disciple's Intellectuals. Yet this Admirable Philosopher
has cautioned the World against all Kind of Admiration, as highly pernicious to
the Welfare of human Understanding, and a great Obstruction to the Growth of
Truth. Now whereas I have a most tender Concern both for the Preservation and
Improvement of my good Reader's Senses, and this Treatise of mine is also
calculated to provoke the most passionate Admiration, especially in the
greatest and finest Spirits, which are not only most precious, but soonest
endangered; in such a Case as this, I judged it would become and Author to use
the utmost Precaution for moderating the Surprise that is to come upon his
Reader, and no better Expedient occurred to me than that of confessing and
laying open the whole Mystery of my Art, since nothing does more take off from
our Astonishment than a right Apprehension of the Way a thing is done. On the
other side, in Opposition to these Considerations, I plainly saw that many
unlucky Consequences would attend the Publication of my Secret, which I may
truly call my Choice Receipt, or Elixir Scribendi; For First, unless it be taken
and applied with utmost Caution, it operates too strongly on the Style, and
turns every thing into Elevate and Surprise. Let a Banker, a Doctor, or a
Scrivener set himself to dash over a Bill, or Deed of Conveyance, he would have
his Ink run insensibly into Flights and Metaphors, Quaint Conceits, Grave
Apophthegms, Politic Sayings, and Learned Dissertations, such as the Body of
this Treatise consists of; so that such Gentlemen would receive little Benefit
by my Elixir; for a wise Man would no more wish that every Pen he handles
should flow nothing but Wit, than that every thing he touches should instantly
commence Gold.

Concerning the Wandering Jew. that Phalaris's Epistles were written by a
Turkish Spy, who resided 44 Years at Agrigentum. A Dissertation upon the Age of
Lucius Bocius. The Novel of Nicthycranculus and Pollidona.
IT is but reasonable that in the Second Place, I should consider my own
Benefit, not that I design to lock up All -- (...), and thereby endanger its
dying with my self, as it too frequently happens by the selfish Humor of
Discoverers; but only to make such a reasonable Profit, as ought to be allowed
for Encouragement to the Ingenious. What I propose is; to teach my Art at
moderate Rates, not doubting to raise a sufficient Estate, from the great
number of Scholars that I may reasonably expect. And I do here take Occasion to
certify Gentlemen of both Sexes, whether Knights, Burgesses, Justices of Peace
or their respective Constables; that, if they or any of them, will be pleased
to send their Sons, or Daughters, of any Age between Twelve and Twenty-one, to
my House near Flintshire, they shall find decent and suitable Entertainment,
and be faithfully instructed in the Depths of my Art, if Capable; otherwise my
Wife will, notwithstanding, engage to teach them the choicest Rules for making
sweet Powder, Pomatum, all kinds of Pastry-ware, besides Carving, Moulding
Cockle-bread, Playing on the Jews-Harp, and all other necessary Parts of
Genteel Education.

SECT. XXVIII.
The next Section does really contain such sad Truths that I would not advise
you to understand it, nor so much as read it, if it can possibly be avoided.
THE Cabala, says Rabbi Talmid, contains First, the Doctrine of the four
Worlds Aziluthical; and Secondly, the Doctrine of Sephiroth Now the Second
Doctrine of Sephiroth. is the Predicament of Chochma, i. e. Wisdom. Wisdom,
says The Lexicon Zohar, is The Beginning of actuated Ideality, from which it
most clearly follows, that it is also The Head and Principle of Aziluth.
Besides this, in the Metallic Doctrine, Wisdom is the Degree of Lead or
Primordial Salt, in which Salt lies hid the Lead of the Wise. Upon which the
great Expositor has this Comment. Cognomina and Subordinate Cochma sunt 1. Jah.
2. Jod Tetr. 3. Principium 4. Primogenitura. 5. Voluntas. 6. Terra Viventium.
7. Jesch, Ens seu Essentia. 8. Lux primitiva. 9. 32 Semitae Idearum. 10. 70
Legis Species. 11. Bellum. 12. Iudicium. 13. AMEN. 14. Liber. 15. Sanctum
Sanctorum. 16. Inform. 17. Profundum Cogitationis. 18. Cogitatio. 19. Formido.
20. Eden 21. Olei Vnctionis Scaturigo. 22. Vinum asservatum ab orb condito.
See Burneet's Archaeolog. whence all this Doctrine is transcribed
23. QVIS? 24. Membrum Virile summum. 25. Verbum seu Oration.

The whole Doctrine being thus made out, and illustrated to my hands; it might
seem Superfluous to attempt any further Comment, since it is evident that
nothing can be plainer than the Exposition already given. However in our
Volumes upon this Subject that Are to be, we shall a little farther expatiate
upon the Quiseity of Amen, as likewise upon the Ensophicality of Aziluth; which
to an Understanding rightly prepared, will doubtless become like the Odor of
the Voice of the Beauty of Sublimated Intelligence. Two-legged Truth shall be
caught with Saline Essence upon her Caudality; She shall edify and nidificate
in the Petticoats of his Pia Matter, or the supercilious Eaves of his
Pericranium; She shall fish for Ideas with his Rete Mirabile and Processus
Vermifsormis, and inject them through the Infundibulum into the savoury
Drying Pan of his Cerebellum. There shall she sit chewing Cuds and Enthymemas,
or brooding over infant Sciences; She shall drive him cross the Streets to seek
out the Sages that are gone astray, and salute the unknown Children of
Philosophy; to salute the unborn by Name, and the unbegotten by Lips Anonymous,
is the Delight and Priveledge that Wisdom enjoys from her Successors, and
bequeaths as a never-failing Inheritance, to her Forefathers.

It Is possible some few Persons may have followed at least, one part of my
Advice at the Beginning of this Section, against understanding, or so much as
reading it, if they could by any means forbear. It Is possible also, that some
Persons may be inclined to wonder, why such a Section as is judged improper to
be understood, or even perused, should be allowed a Place in the Volume; the
true Reason of which is this, that I perceived the following Section would have
little Coherence or Relation to the precedent, and therefore judged it might be
convenient to put between them something of this Nature, for the sake of
Connection.

A very Rhetorical Section.
IT IS this that makes me weep, in the most piteous Manner, at the Thoughts of
being imprisoned in this Wretched Sublunary World; as Alexander, among the
Ancients, is said to have done before me. However, to make the best of my
Con^inement to so vile a Place, I have been long thinking to retire, together
with Sir W. Raleigh, Bp. Wilkins and others, into the most Eligible Time. See
Sr. W. Raleigh's History, Bishop Spart's Observations upon Sorbieres's Voyage,
and the Dedication before D. Cave's Lives of the Apostles.
I knew for certain, that the Present is the worst of all Times, if Tradition
it self can pretend to the least Infallibility. For, this Doctrine is not only
Attested by as many living Eyewitnesses, as there are now in Being Persons of
the last Age, but has been always delivered down from Father to Son, Ancestors
to Posterity, with such satisfactory and uncontrollable Evidence, as to obtain
the universal Assent of all Ages and Nations. From hence with great Reason, it
may be deduced that the Present Time is not the Worst just, Now only, but was
also the Worst in every Age since the Creation; not that other Times were
better, but each had its Turn of being the Worst just when it came to be
Present; each was compelled to undergo the same Ignominy before it could be
dismissed; upon which Account the Present has never been known to stay more
than one Moment, just to hear it self railed at and upbraided, as if it were
sensible how Intolerable its longer Continuance would be to mortal Man, who as
it is does generally Abuse it. And indeed how should Mankind be like to endure
a real Nunc Stans, who are so angry and displeased, whenever it does but seem
to stand still, or even to move slowly?

Neither is there any God, or Godling, above Ground, that shows any manner of
Regard to the Present, but that of Contempt or Aversion. Observe the bashful
and demure Cynthia, alias Hecate, alias Diana, Luna, Trivia, etc. Goddess of
Changelings, Fanatics, State-Camelions, Flying-Squadrons, Menders and
Reformers; how she discovers always the same Discontent and Dislike to the
Present, as we may read in her very Face. For, is she not always shifting it
off for whatever comes next; running over the Changes, and playing Tricks to
elude and deceive it? sometimes we have her mounted and riding Post in the Sky,
where she puts on a new Look for every new Posture of Affairs; then after a
while, grown weary even of constant Changing, she disappears and gets down to
the Banks of Eurotas, where she hunts away the Present Time, till tired also of
her present self, she turns from Diana to Proserpina, and flies to the infernal
Regions, there to converse with Folk of past and future Ages.

-- quibus Altera fato
Corpora debentur. --
If Cynthia's Practice be not Authority sufficient, let us consult Metis,
another Goddess that deals in Good Advice, Due Deliberation, and
Considering-Caps; and she takes no more Notice of Time Being than Vacuna her
self, but prohibits all Enjoyment of the Present as worthless and pernicious;
Times Past are indeed of some Value, as furnishing Matter of Observation, and
Reflection, to make one Wise, but whoever is made Wise thereby, must be sure
ultimately to refer every thing (never to Now, but) to Hereafter.

And what shall we say of Ancient Ianus, who is accounted also one of the
Wisest among his Fellow-Gods, but thinks as little of the Present as any Person
whatever of that Quality. He neither conceals his constant and steady Regard to
the Future and the Past, nor did he ever bestow a single Glance upon the (...)
(...), or so much as allow it to see his Face. That is not an Object for a
Double God Bicipital as is the Muses Hill,
Quinunquam Custos absistit limine Templi,
but rather for such a Tricorpulent Monster as Geryon, or the Tricaniniceps
Custos of Hell, Infera qui rabidus Latratu regna Trifa^ci
Personat, immani recubans Immanis in antro.


As for Jove himself* the Cloud-compelling Grand Seignior of the Gods, or Great
Mogul of Heaven, have we not the Testimony of Horace, Coeli Tonantem Culminibus
Jovem
Regnare Praesens. Divus Habebitur.
that he sits like a Lord A Top of Heaven, and flings his Thunder thence
To sour good Ale, and spoil the present Tense.
And when he has achieved that fierce Intent,
The Future, for his Pains, will call him Saint.
To spare the Trouble of more Instances let me advise you to believe, for my
sake that there is not a single God, among the twice ten Thousand, that does in
the least regard what we have been discoursing of. So far from it, that if the
Condition of their Nature were at their own Disposal, they would rather choose
to secure to themselves one single Month of Future Life, than to enjoy their
very Immortality it self, if it were only just for the Present. For farther
Satisfaction in this point, I refer you to the following Poems, in the former
of which you will find some account of the Principal Gods; the other is Part of
a Speech of Apollo's own making, upon Occasion of his Cows being stolen by
Ulysses.

Money, or the Miser's Speech. By another Hand.
OF Gods and your Goddesses tell me no more,
King Jove and Queen Iuno're a Rogue and a Whore;
Great Mars is a Hero, when ever he can show ^it,
Apollo's a Fool, and the De'el of a Poet;
Dame Venus a Hag, and so you may tell Her;
A poor Rogue is Bacchus, never a Flask in his Cellar;
Nay Cupid's a Whim, with feigned Arrows and Wings;
And all without Money mere fanciful Things.
It Is Money Almighty that fills us with Wonder,
That whirls the Globes round, and makes the Skies
Thunder,
That bullies down Castles, and routs with mere Sound,
And makes up a Hero, with never a Wound:
Come fill up my Coffers, I Will build me a Throne,
I Will scale the blue Heavens, and pull the Gods down;
What are those poor God-things without mighty Money?
Fair Danae had been kept, and Jove baulkt of his Sweetheart.
Bully Mars without Coin were a pitiful Thing;
It Is Money takes Towns and lets the Troops in.
Though my Skull were quite empty full Coffers Could do it,
Could make me a Wit, and a Beauty to Boot.
It Is Money that keeps up great Bacchus from Sinking,
That buys us Champaign, and maintains our good Drinking.
For since all our good Wines are set forth to Sale,
Without Money poor Bacchus must break and sell Ale.
Now as for the Empire of Beauty, and Cupid,
I laugh at the Fancy, and think it all Stupid;
For who can win Miss without Money a Courting?
And where is a Venus without a good Fortune?
Then tell me no more, blind impotent Boy,
For want of a Passion, that Phillis is Coy;
Since Beauty, and all the whole World may be sold,
Thy Shafts can never wound unless Pointed with Gold.
Out of Homer's Odysseis.
WHen Milk-maid Susan told the Sun,
How his poor Mulls were dead and gone,
He fell in such a raving Fit,
You Would scarce have thought him God of Wit.
For with that Phys that makes foul Weather,
Away he run to tell his Father.
And bounced at Heaven-Hall Gate, like Mad,
Till he got in to speak with Dad.
Jove was just then at Even and Odd, as is
The Sport among the Gods and Goddesses;
Who were all 'stounded and affrighted,
When Phoebus to the Bench draw nigh did,
That one they counted so Wise-nodled,
Should look so featly and betwattled;
Which made him fall to storm and bully,
And sputter at 'em most woefully,
Then call them all to naught; he swore
This was a Rogue, and that a Whore;
They never had heard the like before.
Conva-va^vart ye now, quo'^he,
Would ye were all at York, for me.
Death and Fuf-furies! What at Play!
At Even and Odd-Good-lack-aday!
You take your Pleasure, and don't care
A straw how other Folks may fare,
So your own Carcasses but thrive well;
Faith you're as Cunning as the Devil!
At this the Gods did all him sooth, with
Sweet Words, as any Courtier Moutheth.
Jove chuck'd his Chin, and bid him name
Who 'twas had wronged him, and he would pay 'em.
With that Apollo strait began, Sir,
To blubber something of an Answer.
De'e see the Barges there? Po-pox on
The Watermen, the've ate my Oxen.
They might as well have eat my Horses,
Or picked my Pocket -- where my Purse is.
Consume 'em all; I wonder when
My Oxen would have eat the Men!
They never had injured this Ulysses,
Nor plundered any thing that is his.
My Cows never burnt his Barns at Ithaca,
Nor robbed his Trunk without, or with a Key;
Never open broke his Cellar Door,
Nor tried to make his Wife a Whore,
Nor got his Maids with Child (as some do
In every Family they come to)
Demolished none o's Mutton-Pasties;
But let the House continue as it is.
I loved the Cows from Top to Bottom,
Dearer than if I had begot 'em,
So dear, that it rejoiced my Heart
Both to go to 'em, -- and to part.
The Verses in the Original are these.

-- (...).
(...)
(...)
For when my Link-boy Vesper, come,
At Setting-time -- to light me home,
I used to Ogle 'em 'cross my Neck,
Till I devised a kind of Trick,
And lest my Head might grow awry,
Learned to ride backward down the Sky.
Not a Cow of 'em but, in my Opinion,
was handsomer than Io.
For Simpering, none of 'em could miss
T'out-simper Daph-(both)- ne(and) nis.
Even tho 'they both should turn to Kine,
'Snigs, they would be two Fools to mine.
My Cows were ^rettier (I don't ^eer ye)
Than your (...).
They gave the sweetest Milk for Posset,
Or Syllabub (there is Cupid knows it)
I never sipp'd any thing perfecter,
Not to disparage sugared Nectar.
Besides, 'twas good for Physic (mark it)
Either Emetick, or Cathartick.
If Milk once fail my Credit cracked is,
And Opifer must lose his Practice.
The youngest was a Maiden-Body;
I little thought that she should so dye.
For she could cure Distempers, marry,
And was a kind of 'Pothecary.
There Is Dr. Salmon would have bought her,
Tho merely for her The Cant-word, or Term of Art for Cow-Piss.
All-flower Water,
At making which she had such Skill,
No Lady better could distill.
'Twou'd cure Green Sickness and the Scurvy;
(No Cow in England could with her vye)
The Fluor Albus, and the Tumor,
Hydropick, and Athritick, Humor;
No Beast of 'Natomy ever knew more.
She Would have made Water for a Wager,
Had any ventured to engage her.
Nay Bromf^ild's Pills 'twou'd soon have cast out,
And Daffy's 'Lixir is an Ass to it.
Pray what would Juno say, if Folk
Stole Peacocks, though twere in a Joke?
I Am sure, I Would sooner eat my Nails
Than touch a Feather of their Tails.
She Would set her Clack up, and so scold me;
Heaven would be soon too hot to hold me;
Nay Jove would rather wish (Udzookers)
To have his Chimnies all turn Smoakers.
There Is Pallas keeps her Owls as chary,
Even as the Apple of her Blear-eye,
The Goddess-ship of her Divinity,
Or Maidenhead of her Virginity,
Her very Wisdom, and Puissance,
With which she frightens Rats and Mice hence.
Could the Harpies so torment Aeneas,
That shortly will be chosen a Deus,
And spoil his Dinner with a Vengeance
That was as Odious and as Ingens,
As the most wisest History mentions?
Bellum etiam pro caede boum?
Quoth the Old One in a Passion to 'em.
I mean that Fury, Dame Cela^no,
So dire a Monster never was seen, ho!
Then came the Flock, and set a fluttering,
A Clawing, Stinking, and a Sputtering;
Drove the poor Trojans from their places,
All squirting in their Eyes and Faces.
Could Hercules, the Giant, take as
Much Vengeance as he pleased of Cacus,
Although his Cows recovered were soon,
And had no Violence done their Person?
And I (forsooth!) that can the Bar throw,
Drive Coach, or Shine, or shoot an Arrow,
Break a new Horse-shooe, crack a new Rope,
Or dry a Stall, and common Shore, up
With ever a Hercules in Europe,
Must be affronted and upon pissed!
Pray answer me -- on what acconp is it?
I was induced to recede a little from strict Orthography in the last Line,
merely out of Pity to the Ryme, which would evidently have been in a miserable
Condition, if I had suffered either Ly REASON, or even (...) ACCOUNT, to get
into the Penultimate Place, which they both offered to supply, but were both
rejected, though otherwise very worthy, as not being agreeable to the Society.
The Verse and I are greatly, and equally obliged to Syncope the Amputatrix, as
well as to some other Reformers of Modes and Superfluities, who were extremely
ready* and willing to come into Assistance in the present Case, according to
their usual Goodnature and very compassionate Disposition upon all such
Emergencies.

From these two Proofs out of Poetry, together with the Prose Arguments that
preceded them, it seems to be a very Rational Inference, that of all Times,
Ages, or Siecles, those deserve the highest Renown, as indeed they are allowed
to be, beyond Comparison, the best, which neither Are, Have been, or Will be
Present. Have we not an illustrious Instance of this in the Saturnian, or
Golden-Age (truly so called, had so pernicious a Metal been consistent with the
Happiness of those Blessed Days) and have we (...) another more illustrious in
the Millennium at Jerusalem? What more Peaceful and Innocent than the one? What
more Devout and Contemplative than the other? And then if we enquire of our own
Country in particular, does not Great Britain confess, that the Days now
current are vile, worthless and illaudable, nor any way comparable for
Blessedness to the precious Reign of that most gracious and magnificent
Princess, Quee^ Dick?

Agreeably to this, and no doubt upon the same Principles, has the Sage St.
E^remont determined, concerning naked Goddesses and young Lancashire Witches
that the Nymph which Finds her self (...) where, is VASTLY a fine^ Creature
than any that can be Found in Her Se^, and must upon every Account carry the
Golden Apple from all Her Fellows.

We likewise all know for certain, (...) least all that are Unprejudiced will
agree that Empedocles's Epick Poem is a (...) Diviner Piece than either of
Homer's, (...) Lucretius's Aeneis must also be owned infinitely Preferable to
Virgil's; the Truth of this may be put beyond Dispute by one plain Reason; viz.
That Virgil (...) actually written an Aeneis, or a certain Book of long Verses,
beginning with Ille Ego, and Homer also is judged (...) have made his own Epick
Poems, whereas the other Gentleman has writ (...) and as for Lucretius's Twel^^
Books of Aeneis, See the Dissertation upon Phalaris's Epistles.
they never were in Rerum Natura.

By Parity of Reason has the Wisdom of the Ancients declared, and pronounced it
for a Maxim, of most indisputable Truth, Melius non nasci.
That of all Persons in the whole World, none are in such a desirable Condition
and happy Circumstances; none so much to be envied, or in so great Favor with
Fate and all the Stars, as those innocent Strangers that never knew the
Misfortune of being Born, and therefore, as in Charity we ought to believe, had
no way deserved to be sentenced to that Execution, or to have the Penalty of
Life inflicted upon them. Now does not all Philosophy, with one Voice, proclaim
the Reasonableness of the foresaid Maxim? for does it not assure us that
Vtopia is a finer Region to dwell in than any other whatever; not in this
Terraqueous Globe only, but even in either Hemisphere of that other in the Moon?

These Reflections may show us how justly the Religion and Virtue of Oliver C
-- l, the Virtue, Loyalty and Merits of --, the Loyalty, Merits and Poetry of
-- have been so highly celebrated by Mr. W -- r, Mr. S --, Mr. A --, etc. for
what can give to a Man's Virtue, Loyalty and Poetry, or Merits of any kind, so
eminent an Advantage; what can make them so Worthy of being highly celebrated,
as that singular and characterizing Property of having no Existence?

The Life and Exploits of SANCHO PANSA, After his Master's Decease.
AS the supreme Temporal Perfection is not found in any Times, but those which
neither Are, have Been, no^ shall Be at all, so is the second Honor very
justly ascribed to those, which although they do not come up to the same
Perfection of Not-being with the other yet keep however the greatest Distance
from the Moment in Being Now namely, at my present Writing, or you present
Reading, whenever that happen even though at a Thousand years Interval There is
in Nature a parallel Case, that may illustrate this Philosophy. It Is not
imaginable the nice and strict Analogy between the Doctrines of Time and of
Place, can possibly have escaped the Observation of so discerning a Genius as
my Reader. You see therefore (as I take for Granted) how the several Phenomenon
of both depend upon the same Reasons, and may become assisting in the Solution
of each other. Did Felicity choose the Days of v^ronia And does not she choose
the Country of Vtopia? Are the most distant Times the next in her Favor? and
are not also the most distant Climates? Are the most ancient Writers the best
in their kinds? Are they Giants in Learning, and the Moderns but Puncinello's
and Pygmies upon their Shoulders? and are not the most Remote Inventers
incomparably the most Inventive? Nay, is it not very remarkable, that the
ancient Greeks and Romans have outstript, in all the Liberal Arts, their
Cotemporaries, the modern French and English, chiefly by reason that the
Chinese are great Wits? Nor is it less Remarkable, that no Kingdom, or
Commonwealth, whatever (always excepting those unrivaled States in Vtopia) is
allowed to be framed, modeled and constituted with such a Vein, a Strain, a
REACH, a RACE, a STRETCH, See Temple's Essay upon Heroic Virtue.
a FETCH, a JIRK, a QUIRK, a SPIRIT, POWDER of Politic and Critique, as those
of China and Peru, which are OUT-LYING^ Nations, I don't know how far beyond
the Worlds End.

Of Liberty and Property, and several other things that conduce to the better
understanding of this Famous History.
SInce all Parties are unanimous in this Principle, that Time becomes more pure
and excellent in Proportion to the distance it recedes from the Nunc Temporis,
the only remaining Controversy about it is, taking any Degree you please o^
Distance or Latitude, whether it will not be equally Estimable on either side
o^ the Equator, or the Linea Praesentialis* either Arctick or Ant-arctick, Past
or Future, (which is all one between Space and Time) or if they be not equally
Estimable, which must be allowed the Preference? There are a Species of
Philosophers, who setting up for Moderation, endeavor to defend the Equality,
and urge us with the foresaid famous Analogy of Time and Place, which obtains,
as they pretend, in this point as well as any. For, granting that at an equal
Distance from the Torrid Zone on either side, the Force of the Sun's Malignancy
does equally abate, it seems to them a plain Consequence, that at an equal
Distance from the Punctum Tonunicum, which way you please, the Virulency of
Praesentialness must in the same measure be taken off, qualified and
debilitated. Now it is true indeed, that the Inference here seems very just and
inevitable, but the Ground of it is fallacious and cannot be insisted on; for
it supposes the Analogy between Time and Place to extend farther than it ever
did, since we see that several Countries, though at the same Distance from the
Sun, yet have various Degrees both of Heat and Fertility, occasioned by their
peculiar Situations, and such like Collateral Arguments; whereas in the case of
Time, on the same side of the Present, and at the same Distance, Days and Years
have always the same Excellence and Worth; because it is very evident, that
nothing has any Influence upon the Happiness of Ages, but their Distance from
the Present only.

A Section containing,

Two Receipts out of Echard's See Echard's 2d Dialogue, where he treats of
boiled Cushions.
Translation of Duns Scotus, viz. How to broil Hazle-Nuts with pickled
Ivory-Sauce and Ablative Cases; and the best way of stewing Curds in a Visian.

These Levellers or Moderation-Men being set aside, since either the Future, or
the Past, must have a Pre-eminence, we proceed to examine the next Point in
Debate, viz. To which of them it ought to be awarded. There are hot Zealots, or
High-Flyers, on both sides, and so great Animosities are kindled between them,
that if either should get the supreme Power into their Hands, their Opposites,
or Dissenting-Brethren, will have cause to apprehend a Persecution. To state
and represent the Cause at full length, and deduce all the Arguments Pro and
Con, in Logical or Rhetorical Array, shall be thy Undertaking, O my next
Philippick, -- quae Divina vulveris proxima Famae.

This present Oration, Dissertation, or Commentary (or whatever Name you shall
please to honor it with) will be mightily satisfied, if it can but give human
Race a convenient Insight into the Business before us, by pointing at the chief
Topics, Offensive and Defensive, which the Parties militant employ against
each other. Therefore Pergite Pierides -- on the part of the Futurists it is
confidently talked, that a Minute to come is worth an Age that is gone; may,
they pretend it to be an avowed and current Maxim among Philosophers of all
Ages, That a Week in Prospect is not only more valuable, but even apparently
longer, than a Twelvemonth that is slipped away, by the exactest measure yet
known. Nor do they scruple to refer us to the universal Sense of Mankind, who
discover so great an Opinion of the Future, as to long for it with Impatience,
while they always acknowledge the Past to be no better than Vanity; the days
that are coming, at a distance, being Fine and Delightful, though they change to
quite another thing, as soon as they are gone by, and begin to show us their
Reverse. All this and a great deal more, they endeavor to confirm by a great
number of Instances, but chiefly insist upon the particular Case of a longing
Nymph, who is always very well assured that the Future will make her Happy, but
when once that future is converted into Past, perceives her Expectations
deluded, and herself betrayed by it into Misery and Repentance. A thousand
other Arguments that are mustered for the Defense of this Tenet, I shall
reserve for my subsequent Volumes; nor will I now dismiss miss the Subject
without this Concession, which all Parties, Orders and Degrees of Men seem to
conspire in, That the Future is the only proper Season for mending, and
repenting of, Faults that are Past; that it is absolutely the most convenient
Opportunity of setting upon any Work of great Labor and Difficulty; and the
rather, if it be a thing of such Necessity, or Importance, as should not be
entered upon with Precipitation; for it is plainly impossible to undertake
Matters of that Nature, till the Future is come, though some prejudiced Persons
have a Conceit, that this Future tantalizes our Resolutions, and always flies
before us.

The Novel of the Tall Inquisitive continued, and that of the Lovely Amphibious
begun.
THese are really very plausible Arguments, and many other things there are to
be pleaded in Favor of the fame Cause, seemingly no less conclusive than
these. Yet the prevailing Opinion runs on the other side, and has many Reasons
to support it. In my other Volumes I design entirely to exhaust the Argument,
by displaying all that can possibly be said in Favor of Days elapsed, Dr. B --
y formed a modest Design of this Nature, in the Case of Phalaris's Epist. which
he promised that no Mortal should take to be Genuine, from the time his
Dissertation came out, 'till the Conflagration.
so that for the time to come, no Man shall offer to write, speak, think, or
opine any thing against the Dignity and Precedence of Times Past.

I am so well satisfied in the Proofs and Evidence of this Doctrine we are now
defending, as to believe that the contrary Persuasion wherever it be found,
can arise from nothing in the World but mere Ingratitude. For is it not even
visible, that Men show a mighty Respect for the Future only, because they have
great Expectations from it, whereas the Hours which have left and bequeathed to
them all the Goods, Possessions and Enjoyments which they are Masters of, are
often slighted, turned away, and out of mind, only because they are Past the
Condition of doing them any further Service. Now instead of that Disingenuous
Principle, we ought to forget only what Injuries the Age expired has done us;
to forgive all that is past and gone of that Kind; be easily reconciled to its
Memory, and willing to speak well of the deceased. This I esteem to be one of
the most eminent Virtues, yet it has always been flourishing and triumphant,
and so much the more conspicuously, because by this Virtue, which by its own
Nature is solitary, and even self-subsisting, we are convinced that all other
Virtues are either extinct or languishing; upon which Account there is Reason
also to be the more fond of this. There is in the World a certain Society whose
laudable Disposition, as to the point before us, must not be passed over
without due Commendation; a Society well known, of a great Rank and Figure, and
bearing a great Sway in sublunary Affairs, having produced more Persons of Note
in all Kinds, than ever appeared besides. My Meaning is doubtless obvious
enough to conceive, for what can any charitable Reader think of me in his
Conscience, but that I do most joyfully lay hold upon this happy Occasion of
vindicating our Specific Reputation, by doing Justice to the noble Race of
Mankind; to whom I am known to bear a very singular Affection, as having the
Honor to belong to that celebrated Species, in the Quality of an Unworthy
Individual; so much at least I may say, that this Character is allowed me by
all that love and understand the Good of my Country. For such my Birth and
Breeding, I own an infinite Obligation to the Manes of Sir Samuel Luke, my much
Honored Grandfather, as likewise to some others of my illustrious
Progenitors, who were good old Men, true Zealots for the Good Old Cause, and --
nati melioribus annis.

I take the Boldness therefore to maintain the Honor of human Race, as to this
most excellent Virtue of forgetting what Sufferings Times past brought upon
them, as well as remembering and exaggerating with the utmost Gratitude,
whatever Blessings they enjoy from the Goodness of those happy Days, now
departed. Nay, I will venture to go a Point further, the more firmly to
establish my Cause, though by seeming to oppose it; as some Persons of known
Honor and Integrity, are laboring to undermine something or other, it is hard
to affirm what, by pretending themselves its Protectors.

For since the Press, the Pulpit and the Stage Conspire to censure and expose
our Age, Provoked too far, we resolutely must To the one Virtue that we have,
be Just.

I assert therefore, for the Glory of our own Time, and will maintain it to the
last Drop of my Ink, that it does not fall short of any other in this good
Quality of preferring all others to its self; that it does not fail to pay due
Honor and Respect to elder Ages, or to aggravate its own Degeneracy. I assert
farther, for the Credit of my own Country, that without flattering our selves,
we are not out-rival'd in this Point by any Nation whatever, let our Neighbors
think of themselves as fondly as they please. How few among us can ruminate
upon the last Century, or revolve in our Minds some glorious Scenes with which
it was illustrated, without the sweetest Complacency, and even Rapture of
Delight? Could the same happy Days return, the same blessed State of things be
restored, with what Joyous, what Triumphant Acclamations, would the Glorious
Day be hailed, and ushered in by Multitudes of British Souls, and how welcome
Quadr agesimus Octavus Revolubilis Annus? How celebrated even among the Ancient
Writers are those Times which were Ancient to them?

Aurea Prima sata est Aetas --
-- subiitque Argentea Proles.
See Milbourn's Translation of Ovid.
The Age was Gold at first, it is said, 'till Jove
Choused all the World to put his Silver off.
Aere, dehin^ ferro duravit secula --
For Jove to allay the Silver-age with Brass,
All Pious Men have thought a hardish case;
But harder still he makes the Brazen-age,
By turning Steel to Iron and to Rage.
Mr. Creech Damnosa quid non imminuit dies?
Aetas parentum, pejor avis, tulit
Nos nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem vitiosiorem.
Which some Iacobitish Fellow, I don't know who, but possibly it may be the
Author of the Memorial, has translated against the present Ministry, or Liberty
of Conscience, or what else you please, and deserves to be sent some where or
other for his Pains, as you may see.

Our Grandfathers were --
Our Fathers Oliverians;
Their Sons, it is said, are --
Ours may be --
-- omnia satis
In pejus ruere --
See Mr. Dryden's Translation of Virgil.
What are Fates good for, but to Spoil and Wast?
Optima quaeque dies miseris Mortalibus aevi
Prima fugit --
-- See the same Translation.
It Is never known
That better comes, when e're the old one's gone.
And we find this confirmed by the Practice of Mankind, See the Theory of the
Earth.
which best discovers their real Sentiments; for, in the Primigenial Earth the
Inhabitants, or old Hero's, were content to live near a Thousand Years; whereas
nowadays, say all that can be said, you will never persuade one Man in ten
Thousand to live so much as a tenth part of that Time; and all because they are
angry at the Degeneracy of the Times, and vex themselves to Death to think that
the Axis of the Earth should be grown so cross, as to stand in a skew Posture
to the Obliquity of the Ecliptic. This Philosophy may seem not to want any
poetic Authority to confirm it, yet it will not be amiss, however, to use the
following Verses as Collateral Proofs.

Another Fragment of the Sun's Speech concerning his Cows.
THey cost as much in Education,
As any Cows of the best Fashion;
Not that I ever grudged the Money,
No, then indeed I Would been a Tony.
For Breeding (though it were at Goatham)
Is better than good Portions to them.
And they never wanted for Instruction,
Nor ever idly did their Book shun;
But learned to race as well as dance,
So swift -- you would think 'em in a Trance.
The fleetest Nag they would outstrip,
So wise they* were at Footmanship.
Yet scorned to make Discourse for Alehouses,
Like scoundrel Jades and Hack-Cahalluses,
Or like your beggarly Jack-pudding,
That gladly on a Sheep's Head could dine.
Though they themselves did pretty Gambols,
As any Tumblers or Funambules.
While one's a-showing of a Trick, Sir,
Another follows and Mimicks her,
So like an Andrew -- you would swear 'twas
one;
And one good Andrew's worth a dozen.
They Would leap through 20 Hopes, or tumble
On the bare Ground -- they were so humble;
Slide down a Rope from any Steeple,
To the great Amazement of all People;
Walk on their Hands, with Glass of Ale
Brim-ful, erected on their Tail.
Nay one (perhaps you will scarce believe)
Would on Hind-leg, or Tail so stiff,
Spin her self round, like any Top,
When ever I pleased to set her up.
You never did see the like (nor shall)
Not the oldest God among ye all.
They (let me tell you) were Injanious,
And better Scholards too than many o'us.
They Are reckoned to be Weather-wiser
Than (...).
(...) himself, that great Adviser*
They tell It when to rain, or mizle,
And show when Riding's good, or is ill.
By snuffling up the Air, according
To Art, and Rules of Herme's wording.
(You need not sneer, it is no absurd thing.)
I speak of him that Hight Tris'gistus,
Who by the Gypsy-Folk so missed was.
Nec lu^isse pudet, nec nondum incidere ludum.
To Dr. Bl -- by Mr. Flights.
I.
WE'll consort with Tempests, with Earthquakes agree,
To a Chorus of Thunder we'll drink up the Sea.
And when in Clouds it shall arise
From our Nostrils and our Eyes,
Up to the middle Region we'll repair,
To meet again our Liquor there,
And teach the Gods to drink and stare.
We'll consort with Tempests, etc.
II.
Then in our drunken Flights we'll go a Region higher,
Where in Harmonious belch our Crew
With an Universal Sp --
Shall quench out all the Element of Fire.
We'll consort with Tempests, etc.
III.
Strike Lightning (if smoking above be allowed)
We'll light our Tobacco with a Tinder-box Cloud;
And to see that our Frolicks may fairly go round,
Light sixty Wax-candles of three to the Pound.
Then stand to your Tackle, and brandish your Pots;
We'll ennoble the Gods by making 'em Sots.
We'll consort with Tempests, etc.
IV.
Look narrowly to him there, Jove shirks his Glass;
He Is an impudent God, fling the rest in his Face.
Jupiter flinches and Bacchus; I see
The Gods are not half so much Drunkards as we.
Then stand to your Tackle again,
And Fuddle, and Fuddle, like Men.
We'll consort with Tempests, etc.
Dii Patrii! quo Bacche rapis! capite Orgia meo^m
Furius Hybernas cano nive conspuit Alps.
A Scotch Epitaph.
HEre lig I Martin Eltinbrode,
Have Mercy on my Saal, Loord Good;
As I would do, if I were Good,
And ye were Martin Eltinbrode.
An Epitaph upon John Button.
HEre lies John Button -- Heavens and Poles!
Are Graves become but Button-holes!
An Elegy upon the Battle of Landen.
O that my Lungs might bleat, like buttered Peace,
And eke with Bleating catch the Itch,
To be as mangy as the Irish Seas,
Engendring Wind-mills and a melted Witch!
I grant that drunken Rainbows, Iull'd asleep,
Snort like Welsh Hooks in Ladies Eyes;
Which made them vex to see a Pudding creep,
For creeping Puddings only please the wise.
Not that a Hard rowed Herring should presume
To swing a Tythe-pig in a Cat-skin Purse,
For fear the Hailstones which did fall at Rome,
By lessening of the Fall, might make it worse.
For it is most certain, Winter Wool-sacks grow
From Geese to Swans, if Men could keep 'em so.
Till that Sheep-shorn Planet gave the Hint
To pickle Pancakes in Geneva Print,
Some Men there were, who did suppose the Sky
Was made of Carbonado'd Antidotes;
But my Opinion is, a Whale's left Eye
Need not be coined All in King Harry's Groats.
The Reason's plain; for Charon's Western-barge
Running full Tilt at the Subjunctive Mood,
Becken'd to Landen Fight, and gave a Charge
To fatten Padlocks with Antartick Food.
Now the End will be, that Mill-pools must be laded,
To fish for White-post in a Country Dance,
That those who had the Wrong, and were upbraided;
May be made Friends in a Left Handed Trance.
These Authorities may be sufficient, though it is with utmost Difficulty that I
restrain my self from throwing in a hundred or two more, having (if it may be
allowed me to speak so much in my own Commendation) perhaps as fruitful an
Invention for this sort of Quotations, See Dryden's Preface to his Fables, or
to any other of his Works that you please.
as most of my Cotemporaries; which the World should see, were it not that I
want due Encouragement to labor in that way; the Pension allowed me by our
Grandees being so slender, that the few vacant Hours, which can be stole from
my necessary Duties, of spreading Lies against the Church and Monarchy, I am
forced to consume in such Studies as bring in more of Gain than of Fame; and
accordingly shall now immediately endeavor to find my way back again to the
Subject we have just deviated from, and le^t almost out of sight.

From the foregoing Conclusions it is as plain as can be wished, how very Absurd
some Persons are in their Expressions, who talk of an Infancy, Minority or
Nonage of the world, and seem to suppose that the several Periods of it run in
a just Analogy to the ordinary Stages of Human Life; improving at first 'till
Years of Maturity come on, then after a while, declining again into a second
State of Puerility. Now the Truth of the Case without Dispute is this, that the
Age of Nature does not proceed Parallel to that of common Men, but resembles
the Condition of Adam, who as Dr. Duport in his Sermon concerning the
Longaevity of the Ante-Diluvians, has very Reasonably and Ingeniously
conjectured, was created about four or five and twenty Years old; so that he
might soon pass into a State of Declension, or gradual Tendency toward the
Imbecility of Age. The World in like manner being brought out of Nothing
immediately into its full Perfection, more Probably in June than, as some have
imagined, in Autumn, after a short Continuance, entered upon its Decay; began
to languish in the Sprightliness of its Beauty, to fade, and then wither; no^
shall its Course complete any more than three Seasons, Spring being excluded by
the Will of Fates, who have decree^ that it shall run no farther than Winter
but perish by Antiperistasis of Heat and Cold, about December of the Platoni^^
or Great, Year of Years. This is wha^ is said by Learned Platonists to accoun^
for the growing Depravity of the World other Philosophers explain the sam^
Phenomenon, each in his manner, according to the Hypothesis he is engaged to.

The Epicureans are subdivided into two Sects; the one hold that the Past and
Future are equally Excellent at an equal Distance, and endeavoring to prove
their Tenet by the allowed Veracity of our Senses, form their Argument in this
manner.
EVery Thing Is just as it appears; now it is certain Things appear the Greater,
the farther they are from us; this they several ways demonstrate, and call even
the Sun and Moon to witness, both which are evidently larger in Circumference
at their Rising and Setting, than at Noon while they hang over our Heads, and
are nearer (especially to those that live within a few Degrees of the Line) by
many a fair Mile. Now by Parity of Reason, say they, the Happiness of the
Present Time, or such Times as are not far distant, must of necessity seem
less, and consequetly be so, than the Past, or Future, Felicity of a Setting,
or a Rising World.

The other Party pretend that the whole World must always be in a gradual and
growing Declension, because all the very Atoms of which it consists, are for
ever in a declining Condition; and that more and more violent every Age; as we
learn from undoubted Records, that they declined more in Epicurus his time,
than they did in the Days of Democritus.

As for the Stoics, who are implacable Enemies to Epicurus, and all his
Doctrines and Disciples, they assure us that Men are become miserable only by
growing so besotted as to think Pain can do them any Hurt; whereas if they were
but wise enough to love Pain and Pleasure alike, or to esteem Pain the more
Eligible and Pleasant of the two -- Why they might live as happy as their
Ancestors ever did before them.

The Chemists believe that Time carries in it a very strong Menstruum, which
debases the Purest Metals into the Grossest; See Boyle's Orig. of Forms and
Qualities.
has depretiated the Mundane Secul^ from Gold to Iron, and proceeds to corrupt
even the latter, by a certain Tincture infused into it of a Corrosive and
Venomous Quality, by which it frets and maligns it self.

The Doctors of the Faculty, like their Brethren of the Corpuscularian
Philosophy, are also at Daggers drawing about the Vitiation of the Serum
temporis; some supposing that the Virtue of it evaporates through the Rapidity
of its Motion, others offering to demonstrate, that the Fault lies in its
Sluggishness; that it begins to move too heavily, and tends violently toward a
Stagnation. For the several Hypothesis concerning the Heart-burning Acid, the
Alkali, and the Nausea Temporis, vide my next Volume; in which also shall be
faithfully explained the Opinion of the Aristotelians, who impute all to the
continual Ra^efaction of substantial Forms, by the intense Heat of the
Subconcavo-lunary Fire. Therein I shall likewise dilate upon the Pythagorean
Doctrine concerning the Abstracted Number, which they hold to be the
Quintessence of Things. But, Whether any of these Suppositions be the true
Account, is more than I dare offer to determine; or, Whether it be that the
World is the worse for Keeping, like a Barrel of Oysters, or like the late Lord
C -- r, and other unthrifty Fornicators; Whether it takes after the Microcosm
that governs it, and equally affects to be -- Laudator temporis acti
Se primos Numerante annos. --
Whether the old Cavalier with the Hourglass and Scythe grows more and more
Difficilis, morosus -- querulous and untoward, the more he grows in Years, and
loses of his Sand; Whether Time and Eternity, bear Analogy to a River and the
Ocean, the former rising pure at first, but becoming more and more turbid in
its Course, till received again into the same Abyss, whence it took its
Beginning; Whether the Felicity of an Age, like that of a Hero, depends
entirely upon future Fame, or the After-judgment of succeeding Ages. However
this be, it is undoubtedly true, that there are some five or six Persons, at
least, in the World, who disbelieve the matter of Fact, and seem to be of the
Sect of Sceptick Philosophers. You will be surpised to hear what Paradoxical
Notions these strange sort of People have set up. First, they pretend that
former Times were, one with another, as bad as the present; and future Times
also are like to be so, the World being never without Reason to complain of bad
Times, if Complaints were to any Purpose toward making them better. For if
former Ages have not suffered so much of the same Grievances which ours is
troubled with, they have had others of their own, which we are insensible of;
and all Vices have reigned in their Turns, like Diseases or Fashions, according
as mortal Men are pleased to change, and grow weary of one after another. Hence
they would infer, that for a Man of the present Generation to tumble over
worm-eaten Volumes, and hunt up and down Chronology, in quest of a better Time
than this which keeps him alive, is to imitate the restlesness of a Bedridden
Patient, who when displeased, or grown out of conceit with his present Posture
of Affairs, tumbles and takes Pains all in vain, to settle his crazy Tabernacle
in some other Situation that shall please him longer.

Nor was I less restless in Mind during the Course of these sorrowful
Meditations, till Morpheus in great Compassion stepped in to my Relief, and not
only gave me present Ease, but an infallible Amulet against any Relapse; as
will be more clearly understood by perusing the next Section, if you have but
any tolerable good Success attending you in your Studies.

Qui fit, Maecenas, ut nemo quod sibi Tempus
Sors dedit, hoc vivat contentus?
-- O utinam inter
Heroas natum tellus me Prima tulisset!
O Tempori! O Moribus!
Haec Rhombus sapiens, haec Janus summus ab imo
Personat. --
Perpetuo risu pulmonem agitare solebat
Democritus -- fato nostrum delatus in aevum
Si foret, ad risum pulmones mill, genaeque,
Pectoris aes triplex, centenorum and laterumvis
Ferrea deficeret. Quid si vidisset Elisam,
(Vidisset tantum) geminumve (heu Reptile carmen!
Heu mites animos vatis, Musaeque sequacis!)
Arthurum, pietate bonum and fulgentibus armis?
Arthuri Aeneaeque manu victoria vatum
Haeret Graecorum; mala plurima passus uterque;
Aemulus Arthurus, terris jactatus and alto,
Vi Bavii, ob Musarum iram, invitaeque Minervae.
Tantae molis^ erat spoliare Aeneida sensu.
SECT. XXX.
A Section for which after deep Study, and Solicitude of Brain many Days
together, the Author could devise no manner of Title.
AT length my Intellectual Part quite drooping under the Pressure; began to
retire from the sensible World, and would have resigned it self into the dark
State of Incogitancy, had not Father Malebranche appeared, in the very Instant,
to divert it from that Inclination. I had never seen him before, but found an
Innate Idea to know him by, without which I could never have known him by any
Description, If we had not an Innate Idea of a Circle, etc. says Mr. Norris,
we could never acquire an Idea of a Circle by seeing material Circles.
or even Sight of his Person. After a few Compliments (which it is neither
decent, nor civil, to omit upon such Occasions, whether Waking or Dreaming) he
told me it was the Respect he had for a Person of my extraordinary Merits, that
brought him thither to intrude upon my Privacy; that he knew the Grounds of my
present Discontent, and would instantly remove them, by taking me into a better
World, where I should be put in Possession of entire Felicity; where every Man
had Riches and Honor, Wit and Beauty as much as could enter into his Wishes,
or his very Imaginations. I concluded this Blessed World could be no other but
That called the Ideal, and therefore growing impatient to be upon the Voyage,
began to look about for my Wings. They were a very strong and a new Pair; and
such I had Reason to provide my self with, having long owed, and designed, a
Visit to an old Acquaintance, who has been settled some Years at Copernicus in
the Moon; a very rich and delightful Country as any in those Parts, but a great
way from my Lodgings in Barbican. Now I very well understood by my Innate Idea
of the Ideal World, that the said World must certainly lie in some of the Lunar
Regions, or at least, that we must take the Moon in our way toward it.
Notwithstanding which, the Father ordered me to leave my Wings behind, for they
would be a mighty Hindrance to me in Flying, and he would undertake for my safe
and easy Conveyance without them; only I must needs give my self up entirely to
his Guidance, and also submit to be hoodwinked; Nay, if my Desire was to become
a true Philosopher, by seeing the Ideal World to the best Advantage, there was
nothing so proper or expedient as to put out my Eyes. For this he alleged
Examples, both his own, and of many other Philosophers of famous Memory;
moreover assuring me, the only Reason of imposing this Condition, was the great
Inconvenience that arises from the Use of our Senses; for, it is Sense,
continued he, that is the great Impediment to Knowledge and Enemy to
Philosophy; for Alas -- we should find our Eyes infinitely sharper, if it were
not for Light; nay we should see even Ideas themselves, did not this Outward
Light stand in the way. I greatly fear that it must remain a Doubt in History,
whether I was more surprised by the Novelty of this Philosophy, or satisfied by
the Clearness of it; it is certain that I was struck with great Admiration, and
likewise received entire Satisfaction; as every thing that comes from Father
Malebranche is new, and admirable, and clear, and satisfactory. Upon this, I
immediately banded over my Eyes with my own Hands, and then delivered them up
to my Guide, that he might pull me along behind him; treading sometimes upon
his Heels, and sometimes pushing him forward out of Eagerness.

Not with more Alacrity did the Trojan Hero, of old, See Virgil's sixth Aeneis.
and the Cumaean Goddess, pursue their Journey, upon a like Occasion; nor shall
their Fame be more celebrated among late Posterity.

And now -- Stand off O ye Profane Vulgar; presume not to pry into the
mysterious Secrets of Truth uncreated; pollute not with one impious Glance the
pure, and radiant, Scenes of Invisible Light that are coming on, ye that have
your Intellects imbodied, or immerst in Matter, and defiled by the Contagion of
Sense.

But You, Sacred Shades, that inhabit inaccessible Inanity; You Extatick
Dreams, Plastic Imaginations and Beatifick Frenzies; Parents of the
intelligible Universe: You illuminated Genio's, Hero's intellectual, Sages
unbodied, profound Necromancers, transcendent Visionaries; Guardians of the
System of superlunary Essences: All Ye revered Powers, Ye fleet and aerie
Inhabitants, indigenar^ and Born-Members of that Archetypal Republic;
Conceits, Whimsies, Hopes Fears, Caprices and Chimera's, with all other
sovereign Disposers and Guides of human Conceptions, Designs and Attemps; Grant
me now your kindly Influence; permit me without Offense, to bring to Light
Things invelop'd in ancient Darkness, and veiled from human Minds by the
Interposition of blind Reason.

Of Truth, Prejudice, Delusion, Plato's Republic, Epicurus's Atoms, Blount's
Oracles, Baxter's Divinity, Collier's Essays, Pilgrim's Progress, Crumbs of
Comfort, and Mr. D -- 's Epistolary Discourse.
WE traveled on very Lovingly together, and passed through ^ Labyrinth (as I have
since learnt) that has a single Path leading to Truth, but ten Thousand that
draw you away from it. Hic labor ille domus, and inextricabilis error,
Qui fertur caecas Ambages, ancipitemque
Mill viis habuisse dolum quo signa sequendi
Falleret. --
Among these there are many that carry a Man wrong the first Step he takes, and
others that proceed some Length in the Right Course, and then turn aside from
Truth, after having far advanced toward it. Each of them spreads into infinite
Subdivisions, which running out every way at random, do often interfere and
twine among themselves; so that one may imagine them to resemble either the
Multiplicity of Tracks in a Wilderness, or the Propagation of Veins in an
Animal, or rather the Branches of a Tree, which issue from the Trunk at
different Heights; as secondary Branches ^o also shoot out from them; and
others still less, from these, in the same manner, frequently confounding
themselves with one another. Nam saepe Alterius ramos impune videmus
Flectere in Alterius. --
It would be too long to enumerate all the Casualties that are incident to Men
in this Labyrinth; causing them so frequently to deviate from the Sight of
Truth, and run after Delusions. Many are biased aside by the Tendency o^ their
own Nature; many are wrong directed at first, and turned a-wandring by false
Guides. Great Numbers mistak^ their way through Inadvertency, Precipitation, or
Confidence, and bear other along with them in the Crowd. No^ a few are led
astray by a kind of Ign^ Fatui, or dazzled by Appearances of Tr^ in the grossest
Falsities, like Parhelii, ^ Images of the Sun impressed upon a Clou^ Some pursue
Shadows, and lose the way in a Dream; some are corrupt^ by Bribes, and consent
either to have themselves blinded, or misled with the Eyes open. Habit
facilitates their Proceeding, and Pride swells them to an I^capacity of
returning.

These Prejudices, and a thousan^ others, and a thousand Species of eac^ are
the Emissaries of Error, that cont^nually lie in wait to spirit away our
D^scernment, and seduce us from our true Guide, faithful and circumspect
Reason. Hereby they have distracted Mankind into a Confusion of Sects,
Philosophical and Religious; setting opposite Parties to demonstrate
Contradictions, and reproach each other with equal Justice, as well as
Ignorance and Obstinacy. These drilled on Democritus into an Abyss of Atoms,
and have carried the Platonists from an Ideal Republic to a Universe of the
same No-nature.

In my sixteenth or seventeenth Volume you will find a most accurate Map of
this famous Labyrinth, wherein shall be faithfully delineated the Traces of all
wandering Philosophers that have been since the Deluge; and of those in
particular, who have ventured upon that Subject -- Pelago dare vela patenti.
For, of the Antediluvians no Footsteps are now remaining.

-- Nil dulcius est been quam munita tueri
Edita doctrina sapientum Templa serena,
Despicere unde queas alios, passimque videre
Errare, atque viam palantes quaerere vitae.
-- Nil tam absurdum quin a Philosophis assereretur.
Quid tam vulgar quam desipere?
-- Ridentem dicere verum
Quid vetat?
One Characteristick observed, by which the Path of Truth is distinguished from
(...) others.
THE Path that leads to Truth, is said to be the only one, in this Intellectual
Labyrinth, that gives a Man any solid Ground to proceed on, (...) support
himself steadily. This, had (...) known in it time, would have damped all the
fond Thoughts that I was possessed with of my Ideal Voyage; for the way I was
conducted there was seldom any Footing at all to be felt under me. often
thought my self treading the Air^ sometimes by way of ordinary Steps, (...)
more frequently skipping by uncertain Intervals, and springing forward I knew
not how.

Vadentem aequavi patrenm
-- non passibus Aequis.
Of the Cartesian World and its Vortices. The Perfection of a Vortex. An
extraordinary Way of Traveling. What happened to me in my Voyage, and to my
Head. Of Gravitation. Our Arrival at the Ideal World. Our Reception there.
Several Symptoms and Properties of Ideality. My Guides Complaisance. The
calefying Quality, and remarkable Nature of a good Fire.
THE Vortex of the Intelligible World, According to Mr. Norris.
like every thing else that appertains to it, is infinitely more perfect than
any Vortex, Whirl-pool, or Whirl-gig that our Sensible World can boast of; now
this Perfection consists in such a Rapidity cui nihil deest ad constituendum
suun^ Esse. As soon as we came within the Sphere of its Activity, you may
imagine it was some Surprise to find my self very Gravely turning round upon my
own Axis; which to me was a strange way of proceeding, and very much against my
Inclination, having never traveled in that manner before. And this probably
might be the Reason that my Brain was seized with a most violent Sickness; as
if a great Number of Windmills had been very diligently at work within it; and
I verily persuade my self, that there is no going over to the Ideal World
without being so affected. We were easily sucked down by the Vortex; as you may
guess that weighty Bodies have no great Appetite to resist in that Case; being
seldom known so obstinate as to insist upon nothing, or fly upwards when they
are moved to the contrary. My vertiginous Circumstances of Brain were not in
the least abated by the continued Rolling of my Person, which grew more violent
as we descended. At last I descried something that seemed to be a Scull, and
was making very discernible Circumvolutions about its own Center. My Guide bid
me welcome to the Intelligible World, and immediately we were a^ it; for this
Scull was no other than the Shell of it, or the Ideal Scull. It is the
Archetype of all Real Sculls, and a Promptuary of all Ideas whatsoever; from
which, as from a never-failing Springhead, they are constantly drawn forth
into Things; each at its appointed time, when summoned by Fate to exert it
self, and put on Real Existence. Within the Cranium, though for certain there is
little or nothing of Brains, yet it is thought, there is the Idea of Brains,
which is altogether as good, and accounted even far Preferable by the more
subtle and refined Species of Philosophers. I saw also the Ideas of two Eyes;
the Pupil of the one just discovered it self peeping from behind the Lid, like
the Sun half-set; but the other had turned its self quite inward. From this I
concluded that if they had any Sight at all, they must fee things Double.
However, they were evidently more Perfect than Real. Eyes; for the Perfection
does not consist in external Seeing, but in pleasing the internal Sight; now
these were endued with a very shining Je^^. which may be esteemed the true
Emblem of Illuminating Darkness; and if they were not clearsighted themselves,
that was compensated by a more rare and admirable Virtue; for both of them were
transparent, and might clearly be seen through. My Guide proposed to my Choice,
whether I would content my self with a distant View, or make Application for
personal Admittance. We might take a Prospect conveniently through those Inlets
of Sight, whereas there was no way to enter, but along the same Ductus, by
which all kind of Vapors insinuate into the Penetralia of human Head. I
declined the Proposal of getting in, being come only upon Likeing, and loath to
be initiated at a Venture; conceiving also that for the present, it would be
satisfaction enough to make my Observations at a distance. Thereupon we fixed
each at his Pos^ like two considerable. Leeches; my Guide giving me as a
Stranger the Compliment of his Right Hand. In this Position were we rolled
about by the Rotation of the Scull, so that (if you are in a very good Humor,
and willing to overlook a small Disproportion in point of Magnitude) you may
conceive us to have resembled either two Spots in a Planet, or a brace of
Flies, should they choose to plant themselves, for the Benefit of a warm Fire,
upon some convenient part of a Goose as it is roasting.

-- Sic parvis componere magna solebam,
Mollia sic duris, sine pondere habentia pondus.
-- O te felicem, Bollane, cerebri,
Cui caput assidua fervet vertigine raptum?
Ceu quondam torto volitans sub verbere turbo.
The Address, or Kentish Petition.
TO Cupid I addressed my Prayer,
Cruel Cupid would not hear;
Then Venus I in vok'd with Tears,
Cruel Venus stopped her Ears;
Now to fair Sylvia, Hapless Swain,
I fly to tell my amorous Pain.
Sylvia, like Venus, could bestow
The fairest Nymph the World can show;
Fate still depends on Either's Will,
Kind or Cruel, they can kill.
For did not Venus once destroy,
By granted Bliss, the Trojan Boy?
But loving Corydon must dye,
If Sylvia should the Bliss deny.
SECT. XIII.
To Mrs. C -- s.
Epitaph on a Maidenhead.
I.
BEneath these Stones in tomb'd, is laid,
Something that was a Maidenhead.
That Word alone does here lie dead,
Whose Substance into Naught is fled.
Does any ask me how I lost my Breath?
I broke a fatal Vein, and bled to Death.
II.
Some think (and it is a common Fame)
That I (however a Place I claim
With Beings of Substantial Frame)
Am but a Nothing with a Name.
Else Man did my Reality create,
Since he alone can it annihilate.
III.
Yet I, the Guardian of the Zone,
(While such) unbuckled it to none;
But since that I am dead and gone,
The wincing Minor hurries on:
Lavish of Love, at once turns Prodigal,
And Spend-thrift-like keeps open House for All.
SECT. XXXIII.
Of Payment in Part, together with fair Promises.
THUS was I conducted, and thus have I faithfully conducted my very good
Friend, the Reader, to the Place proposed at our setting out. He must not
expect that I should now go on in the same manner, or undertake to lead him
through all the Discoveries I have there made.

Non mihi si Linguae centum --
Ferrea vox --
Ferrea Latera, etc.
Non mihi si' (...) ( Metri Gratia.
heu!) (...)
There are many Things of the Production of the Ideal World, which have this
unhappy Property adhering to their Essence, that they can never be of any use
to poor Mortals in the Way of Reason neither can they become any way Agreeable
to their Sense and Understanding As for the rest, in my several Volume upon
this Subject, which in due time are to be forthcoming, there shall be deduced
a large account of whatever is Remarkable. The fourth Volume shall present you
with the History of the Ideal Commonwealth, their Policy, Discipline,
Constitution, present Security and flourishing Condition; what severe
Cognizance they take of traitorous Ministers; what Speed they use in
dispatching Affairs, especially in Nice Extremes, and how they suppress all
Teachers and Nurseries of Sedition.

The fifth shall contain a true account of their excellent Seize in all
Arts and Sciences, and more particularly of their Architecture, i. e. their
Method of erecting Castles upon Aerial and Pensile Foundations; which are
Edifices of such a Nature, as may truly deserve a place among the Wonders of
the Ideal World.

In the fixth Volume you shall find a Dissertation concerning their manner of
Conversing, Thinking, Dreaming and Propagating their Kind.

These, and many other Particulars shall, with my Country's Leave, be referred
to the said subsequent Volumes; toward completing of which, I shall call in
all the Assistance that can be drawn from Iamblicus, Porphyry, Cel^us, Suarez,
Spinosa, Moor, Hobbes, Glanvil, Fox, Pen, Bourignion, Asgyl, Mendeza Pinto,
King Oberon's Pneumatologia, and the two Orthodox B -- s; besides many other
Luminaries of Philosophy, Authors and Benefactors to the ancient and famous
Corporation of Letters. At present the sensible World must be contented with a
Specimen of those curious and inestimable Rarities, that will in time be
imported from the Ideal, and become common among us.

SECT. XXXI.
The Raree-Show described according to the Author's Innate Idea, he having
never bad the Honor to be otherwise acquainted with it. Hereby is made appear
the Perfection of such Ideas, and a Parallel introduced between the Raree-Show
and the Ideal World.
HAve you not at any time inspected the traveling Theater, or little in
animate World Erratick? Have you not penetrated into the System of Rar^
Wonders, which either the Art of plastic Nature, or the prudent Architect's
Daedalean Hand, has enclosed in that magnificent Frame of Things, circumfusing
the exterior Regions with a solid Atmosphere of Oak Dodonean, or of British
Pastboard?

Thus constituted, it has erst been seen to move aloft, and in slow Procession,
through the spacious Ways of some renowned Metropolis, Mosco or Pekin, or where
St. Patrick's Shrine is visited by Paludigenous Wight, Doublinion; while
Phoebus from his Eminence, with busy Rays played round the Surface, curious to
peep into the absconded Scenes, and view this new-form'd Universe; so emulous
of the Old, and celebrated by Fame among the Stars. But they, who dwell in
those calm and peaceful Regions, want not his Beams, enjoying more refulgent
Day within from their own Lucid Sky, -- solemque suum, sua sidera norunt.

Nor has it not been seen defixt, or erected conspicuous, in the Center of some
populous Forum; the Arvonian Mart, or annual Wake of Morg anumia, ancient Town,
high famed. Nor fails it there to be encircl'd by attending Multitudes of
judicious and inquisitive Sages, Burgers, Burgomasters, Aldermen; aged
Counselors and potent Magistrates, that crou'd and press, and struggle to
satisfy their impatient Thirst after true Knowledge, by contemplating the
internal Constitution, or real Essence of such an amazing and portentous
Phoenomenon. The sullen Officer, by Fates appointed Guardian of this sacred
Treasure, still mindful of that great Trust, and the Duty of his
Administration, staves of the rash and eager Clients, all inexorable to their
vain Entreaties, rebuking, menacing, and chastising each audacious or
unqualify'd Intruder; but admits in due Order, according to their Rights of
Precedence, those Favorites of the Stars, that can give in for Credentials an
Authentic Medal of the Face Royal, or Portraiture of the King's Person legally
copied out on Metal genuine of Corinth.

There lies near the Equator of this Mundane Fabric, a private Aperture or
Hiatus, wrought, as it is reasonably supposed, by the Force of penetrating
Heat, or violent Perustion; where, by Virtue of a certain Pellucid Quality, the
Species Intentionales are freely transmitted and pass to and fro at pleasure.
Hither is directed each dignified Virtuoso, to make his so desired
Speculations; he bows himself approaching Submissive, and lifts off the wide
Circumference of his renident and pinguedinous Bonnet, in Token of Reverence to
the Guardian's Person and Office.

No sooner has this Inquisitive rightly fixed the Telescope of his ocular
Vision, but immediate Astonishment and Confusion surrounds him; nor can he
suddenly believe the Testimony of his own Sense, That the same individual Body,
whose external Phases represented it as a Cabinet of portatile Nature and
exiguous Dimensions, should prove upon a closer Survey, to be really of such a
prodigious Profundity within; where even Lyncean Sight would lose it self, in a
more boundless Expanse than the Horizon of the open Heavens could spread out,
either from the Aetherial Achme of Teneriffe, or the snowy Mountains of
Melambaia. The Speculator continues Speechless, entranced and incredulous,
'till what time exerting his inspective Faculties with more resolute and
violent Attention, his Doubts all vanish by the perfect Discernment of
undoubted Realities; lofty Mountains, naked Rocks, fierce Savages, bloody
Armies, towering Cities, rapid Streams, flowery Dales, beauteous Nymphs, loving
Swains, besides Feastings, Fightings, Caballings, treacherous Practices, and
barbarous Assassinations. Nor does the faithful and knowing Keeper forget to
expound the Nature of these surprising Objects, or to set forth their famous
Histories, by declaring the most secret Thoughts, Plots, Projects, wise
Counsels and wicked Machinations of every General, King or Emperor, that shows
himself in any Transaction of Affairs; all which this great and experienced
Minister, by his wonderful Sagacity, either Natural or Acquired, does as
perfectly lay open as if he were versed in Astrology, or could see into the
inmost Recesses of their very Hearts.

Mean while his Hand so delicate and skilful, is observed to have strange
Influence on a certain Machin of slendid Steel, attri^e by Use (what will not
Use atteare!) and of versatile Form reflex. Which actuated by overruling
Impulse, flies round describing Circles swift, unnumber'd and delusive of the
Eye; and works rare Melody Delectable and Jocund, by Sympathetick Power, On
golden Wires enchanted, dancing Keys,
Or tuneful Spheres unseen, that answer sweet
In various Tone, solacing human Ears,
Arrect, nor Impotent to sooth the Mind,
All lost in turbid Wonder at such Sight,
Of Visions strange and new; or to demulce
Beholder's Bowels, when at traitorous Deed
Descried, or tragic Spectacle, he weeps
In tender Sort, and sore aggrieved, makes Moan
Piteous to hear; or when indignant I^e
Rises with boisterous Fury to revenge
Foul Villainy, and rip the Traitor's Heart.
Sic primo medium, medio sic discrepet imum,
Ut fiat sermo modo tristis, saepe jocosus.


The several Particulars of the foregoing Section applied. The Raree-show
proved to be an Emblem of the Ideal World. How the Governor of it may
represent Father Malebranche. How they both agree in their method of
Instruction and Philosophising. That the Ideal Spheres Aequipol to the Raree
Music.
JUDGE now, by your own Experience of this surprising Spectacle* how I was
Wonder-struck to behold a new Universe beautiful and immense, opening it self
so suddenly to my View; and within a Scull of no larger Proportions, than might
have fitted a good reasonable Giant.

Imagine how my Guide's paternal Care explained the Scenes Ideal, and my
curious Eye directed, to survey original Forms naked of Being, and unessential
Essences, Specific or Generical, that lie for ever buried dark and deep, in
the unfathomed Womb of bottomless and inexhausted Nothing.

Nor did the intelligible Orbs surcease their Raree Harmony, but blessed my Ear
with Song unutterrable, (not carnal Ear, but that which inly hears the gentle
Whispers and still Voice of Truth, in Philosophic Slumbers) nor does its
Loudness drown the Harmony in Silence, as of old of Crystal Spheres by learned
Sage was sung. For Who is with the Faculty endued of innate Deafness, here has
Privilege undoubted to enjoy the rapturous Song.

Even Deafness 'self has equal Power to hear
The Ideal Music of Ideal Spheres.
Obscuris vera involvens. SECT. XXXII.
A short Apostrophe to the Ideal World, wherein all the principal Matters are
explained by the Bye.
HAIL to the happy Mansion of separated and quintessential Truth, the serene
and bright-shining Region of intelligible Light and Glory! Welcome thou, my
dear Reader, that have traveled with me thus far, and art now safe arrived,
and already much enlightened in thy Intellectuals. Thanks to the good Father
for his Guidance, and Thanks to thee for thy good Company, without which all my
Attempts had been Unsuccessful, my Travel void of Satisfaction. I know and can
evidently read it in thy Countenance, how thy Heart is ravished, and beginning
to bless the Hour that brought thee to my Acquaintance. But with what
Gesticulation, what Elocution, shall we signify the Emotions of our Spirits,
express our Joy, and proclaim our Raptures? Shall we fall into a Trance
together, or shall we leap out of our Essences for very Gladness? See the very
intelligible Theorist is at hand in our Necessity, to teach the impetuous
Motions of mirifick Exultation.

Here the contemplative Eye is saluted with a fair and beautiful Prospect of a
bright and glorious World, See Theory of Ideal World, p. 1. p. 133.
as with the Rays of a rising Sun, shooting forth Beams of streaming Glory,
bringing Light enough with it of its own from its Eastern Treasures, to render
its Beauty visible, and to charm them that behold it. And now we may say it is
Day all abroad, a serene and refulgent Day, now our intellectual Sun is up,
that shining Orb of Ideal Light, the great Luminary of Spirits, and bright
Mirror of Intelligences. We carry forth our View into the Regions of Truth, and
can descry the very Basis and Foundation upon which it stands, Pillars upon
which Wisdom has built her magnificent and stately Fabric. They are the
eternal Essences of things, which we view in our World of Ideas, or
intelligible World, all shining with the Light and Glory of essential and
substantial Truth. The only World that is eternal; that was in the Beginning,
and yet never began, that was never made, and can never perish, neither subject
to Time, nor Chance, nor Alteration, where are those Essences of things, that
are neither generated nor corrupted, which had their orderly System when the
Earth was without Form and Void, and shone forth in full Light and Luster, when
Darkness was yet over the Face of the Deep, and should still persevere what
they are, tho^ this sensible All were reduced either to Chaos or Nothing, where
there is Substance without Shadow, (that is, where we are all in the Dark) Act
without Capacity (i. e. where a Man does more than he can) and Light without
Darkness.

And will not this convince Mr. Dodwel, that Light and Darkness are Persons of
different Opinions, and the most opposite Parties? Does not he see what
Antipathy has been raised between them, purely by this unhappy Disagreement in
their Principles? Let him try his own Skill, exert his whole Eloquence, and see
if by any means he can persuade them to set their Horses together (as no less a
Man than our English Varro, expresses the thing.) And after all, if he should
succeed thus far, yet it would be ineffectual to his Purpose; for such is their
untoward and sullen Obstinacy, that whenever they are brought to an Interview,
nothing comes on it but squabling and falling foul upon one another: the
Darkness immediately sets a dazzling the Light without Mercy, and the Light on
the other side, if it have not Strength to eclipse the Darkness, yet annoys it
more spitefully another way, and forces it to shine, whether it will or no, in
a most wonderful manner.

An impartial Enquiry into the Etymology, Orthography, and various
Acceptations, of the Particle Least or Lest, adorned with 5 or 6000 Quotations
out of lost MSS. in Foreign, as well as English, Libraries. A Work very useful
for all Critics and Students in Casuistical Philology, inscribed to Dr. (...)
by his (...) humil. and (...) obeiss. (...) and most votat. and ossequiosiss.
Ammirat.
Gabriel (...)
IN this World, we are now visiting, there is not to be found any thing so mean
and despicable as Things, but pure Essences only.

Here Entity and Quiddity,
The Ghosts of Defunct Bodies fly;
And Truth in Person does appear,
Like Words congealed in Northern Air.
Even Error in the Ideal World, is Truer than whatever is most True in the
Sensible. Nor is it any Wonder, that Truth should be here in Person, when very
Personality in Person, and the Person also of Personality of the Personality of
the Person of Personality is here to be seen in Person. All other things have
only the Shadow of a Person, whereas this is the True, the only True,
Substantial, Complete Person; and a very Charming Person it is indeed. Here is
likewise to be seen simple Visibility, the Optic Glass intelligible, the Actus
Purus, or eternal Essence, by which all things are seen; and therefore it is
easy to conclude, how plainly it must needs be seen it self. O thou Visible of
Visibles! Thou Queen Regent of glorified Glory! Thou superlative and
untransmountable Visibility! You Haecceiteity of Haecceity, Idea of Ideality,
and Thou also, O great and celebrated Nonentity of all high and mighty
Not-Beings, disembogue your unsubstantial Vacuity; shed forth the genial Rays
of your incommunicable Impotence upon the Glandula Pinealis, of my Ideal
Essence; enabling me to see all things that are, and all things also that may
be, nay and even those things themselves, which never were nor can be, and have
therefore by blind and barbarous Anti-Idealists been abused, just as if they
were so many nothings, and had no manner of Intelligence.

How the Countess of Z -- X fell upon the Turkish Fleet a-horse-back. How she
overtook the same at St. Omers, and put them to flight with a Cross-Bow.
THE next Observation we shall oblige you with, will in all likelihood be that
which follows. It Is well known, how the sensible World is disfigured by
innumerable Blemishes, and a misshapen Brood of Monsters, that affront all the
Laws of Nature, and disgust the judicious Observer. Now in the Ideal World, on
the contrary, every Species keeps to its just Proportions, and never appears
distorted, in any Instance, or otherwise than exactly as it should be.

There might you behold all shining, unsullied and complete, the Essences of
every Virtue and Grace, of Love and of Beauty; which, in the sequel of my
Works, shall be drawn at full Length. Nay, the naked Essence of Deformity it
self is so exquisitely Deform, that what is most Beautiful and most Charming,
in the sensible World, can never compare with it for Handsomness.

How Geometry and Physiognomy were improved by the famous Mathematician (...)
Malmesbury.
MY Reader being so celebrated a Well-wisher to the Mathematics, (which is as
much as to say, Student in Physic and Astrology) will doubtless receive a very
particular Satisfaction from the News I am to tell him, concerning all manner
of Figures and Diagrams. These abound in the Ideal World, and are esteemed the
most excellent in their several kinds, that can any where be met with. There
are Circles, for instance, many of them much resembling Hoops, which also are
reputed the Causa^ Exemplares, or primitive Patterns of all Hoops whatsoever.
There are other Circles to be seen of Mr. Hobbes's Square sort, which it is
possible a common Spectator might scarce know to be Circles. They are of great
use in establishing a Commonwealth, and demolishing immaterial Substances; but
the Logicians disallow them as altogether unserviceable to a Disputant. For,
these Circles, say they, will afford no Assistance toward drawing up an
Argument into the Round Figure; which is universally acknowledged the most
complete of all Figures, and to be of soverain use in War, as well as in
Philosophy. The Difference in the two Disciplines is only this, that Warriors
never conject themselves into an orbicular Body, but in Cases of Extremity;
whereas Philosophers do not only recur to this expedient, when they act upon
the Defensive, or when they are pressed by some Necessity of their Affairs; but
frequently surprise the Enemy by it, and use it not unsuccessfully for a Feint,
in making their Attacks. Nay, sometimes (so habitual is this most excellent
Practice become to them) they run into it without thinking of it themselves, or
so much as knowing what they are about. Witness a Thousand Demonstrations in
the Works of C -- s, M -- che, N -- s, S -- t, H -- s, S -- ck, and a Thousand
other worthy Authors, all either as round as Ideal Hoops, or at least, blessed
with as much Dissipability as Carmina Cumaeae foliis mandata Sybillae. O
Theorists! Foliographers! Cosmarchitects! Enlightners and Distracters of Sense
and Reason, (...) Cogit enim excedere propositi formam operis erumpens animo
and pectore indignatio. Nil egistis, O (...) nil inquam egistis, nis^

Insanire juvat --
-- certa ratione modoque.
-- Vos ego tandem
Insanus inter verearne insanus haberi*
All Objections and Evasions answered. Difficulties solved. An Hypothesis
proposed for assigning the Essential and Efficient Causes of the Perfection of
the Ideal World, together with a perfect Idea of the said Causes, and the
Causality of the said Idea.
THE Ideal Hoops, or Circles, are not without their Cylinder, or Ideal Tub; but
this Vessel is now become a very empty and dry Subject, According to the
Diss^rtator upon Aesop's Fables, and Monsieur de Meziarac's unseen Biography.
having lately been exhausted, as it were, in the Telling of a merry Tale. Yet
still it can afford. Or Pun ambiguous, or Conundrum quaint. Touching this
Chapter, my Reader will doubtless agree with me, that thus far it is wretched
Stuff, or at least, that it is not extraordinary Fine; but it is such as
frequently comes into Tully 's Head, and Mine, and likewise Dr. B -- ly's.

O fortunam Natam me consule Roman. Aesop was too short a Man to make a PROPER
Ambassador. However, See Dissert. upon Aesop's Fables.
We Three are not without something to say for our selves, for Wit, like Terse
Claret, when it begins to pall,
Neglected lies, and's of no Use at all:
But in its full Perfection of Decay
Turns Vinegar, and comes again in Play.


Your Belief of this great Exactness in the Ideal Figures will be mightily
eased, when I shall have informed you, that the Ideal Compasses, etc. by which
they are described, are no less exact than the Figures. For Quod habet potest
dare, and the Perfection of Diagrams must follow the Perfection of Instruments.
Now it is certain, that material Tools are but so many clumsy and lame
Businesses, if compared to the admirable Contrivance of the Intelligible; and
yet even these material Goods, how mean soever, were not of human Invention,
but only copied from those exquisite Originals in the Ideal World. There, and
there only, are reposited the Patterns of all things that are, or can be
devised; and it is certain, that even the famous Standards at Winchester were,
one time or other, all borrowed from thence. The same we must acknowledge of
all other Utensils, and all Contrivances whatever; which may serve to take down
the Vanity of our conceited Discoverers. For, Whoever first thought of Eating
or Drinking, Living or Dying; or pretended to invent Shining, Sneering,
Half-crowning; Acrosticks, Eclipses, Lord-Mayors, Bread'n'butter, etc. he did
no more than look into the Ideal World, and make Transcripts of what he saw
there.

A Panegyric against Basilisks, by a Person that pretends to be in Love with
Flavelia, which I believe is all a Sham.
STrange Serpents that in Lybian Deserts lie,
Unarmed can wound, and murder with their Eye;
But then we find the Gasping Sacrifice,
When once it falls, is never known to rise.
But you, Flavelia, can do more than these;
Your Eyes can kill and quicken when they please.
Hence I by fatal Turns, Unhappy Swain,
Die but to live, and live to die again.
N. B. This seems to be the Person abovementioned, that Invented Living and
Dying.

The Calendar.
1.
NAY never talk, it is a whole Year
Since first I saw, and was undone;
The Time I have exactly here,
And to a Moment written down:
Don't be profane and laugh; this Diary
Is Love's whole Body of Divinity.
2.
Other Historians as they please,
May light Occurrences omit;
But said, or done, whatever it is,
We take the Book and enter it.
The pettiest Circumstance of When and Why
Is of vast Weight in Love's Chronology.
3.
To see me register that Smile,
You Will call me heinous Fool, I know;
But laugh, and banter as you will,
It Is down, and in Great Letters too:
Should Frowns and Smiles be cancelled hence, no doubt
My Calendar would half be blotted out.
4.
That others may, I don't deny,
Quite different Schemes for Seasons raise;
But it is by These alone that I
Know all my Fasts and Holydays:
Ah! could I there record one Kiss from Thee,
That Kiss alone begins my Jubilee.
How old Authors ought to be transfused into modern Languages, in such manner
that the Spirit of them may evaporate. How the Caput Mortuum must be
hermetically rimed up. The way of making LucretiusWater, and Sirrup-o'-Virgil;
of which the Reader shall have a Taste, when he he gets toward the end. How to
tinge them both with a false Color.
MY tenth Volume shall be imbellished with an account of these Essences, among
others, viz. the Essence of a Chaffing-Dish, of a Bell-founder, of a
Clock-maker, of Stewed-Prunes, of the Number 16, of Pain, of Mustard, and of
Apples, which in the new World are generally Golden; besides which will be
inserted the Effigies Amoris, the Idea Moralis Philosophiae, 7258918 different
Ideas of Wisdom, 12345678987654321 of Unity, and 392351782 41862749283163859 of
Cushediship and Weeweesiness. See Bp. S -- t's Letter to Mr. Lock.


Tractatus de Suppositalitate suppositi supponentis, seu de Alleg oriarum
Mallea^^lium Individuatione.
THE Idea of Harmony is infinitely more charming than the most exquisite
Compositions of Purcel, Baptist, (...) Carissime. This Discovery does happily
supply us with Answers to several acute and judicious Quaeries. What are become
of the Charms of Music ( says the great Author that chose himself to represent
the Ignorance of the modern People) Charms by which Men and Beasts, Fishes,
Fowls and Serpents, were so frequently e^chanted, and their very Natures
changed; by which the Passions of Men were raised (...) the greatest Height and
Violence, and then as suddenly appeased, so as they might (...) justly said to
be turned into Lions or Lam^s, into Wolves or into Hearts, by the Power and
Charms of this admirable Art? There now remains no difficulty of solving the
important Doubt. What are become of these Charms of Music? It Is evident they
are all in the Ideal World, where they ever were, and ever will be; and safe
enough from being lost by Inundations, either of merciless Waters, or barb^rous
Enemies; for either of these, it seems, has at certain Periods, overpowered
the Charms of this admirable Art.

The Life of Merlin and Mother Shipton, extracted from the Miscellanea.
WE have found something also that may be replied to the following Demand --
What have we remaining of Magic, by which the Indians, the Chaldaeans, the
Egyptians, were so renowned, and by which Effects so wonderful, and, to common
Men, so astonishing were produced, as made them have Recourse to Spirits, or
Supernatural Powers, for some Account of these strange Operations? Though it
must be granted, that the forementioned Science is no where at that Perfection
as in the Ideal, or Supernatural World, yet are there some visible Footsteps,
and Rudiments of it, that seem to be known, in the Natural. Witness that
Sympathetick Powder, which being infused by Military People into long pieces of
Brass, will kill a Man, by Conjuration, without coming near him, or letting him
know any thing of the matter.

Though this Instance might be sufficient to our present purpose, a few more
shall be added, and by that means we shall put the Case beyond all Dispute.

It Is certain there is still extant in the Natural World, that famous
Raree-show, so deservedly celebrated as an Ectype of the Intelligible; not to
mention the Enchanted Labyrinth we traversed in our way thither.

Besides, who has not seen the strange Operations performed by the admirable
Art of German Magicians? Who has not had his Purse enchanted out of his Pocket,
or been himself enchanted out of his Senses? Who knows not, that a Jargon of
sounding Periods, though perfectly insignificant, shall carry a Cause against the
most powerful unregenerated Arguments, See F. Malebranche's Treatise concerning
Sir K. Digby's Grand Elixir, or regenerated Medicine.
and convey Delusions by the Enchantment of mee^ Sophistry?

Who knows not, that our modern Gypsies, either Stroulers or Domestics, or by
what other Title soever dignified and distinguished, have Power to Bewitch such
Persons as take a Fancy to them, or bestow upon them any kind of Benevolence?

And don't we every Day see a thousand strange Operations from the Power of
Obstinacy and Conceit; which Bewitch Men, and Turn them to perfect Asses, in a
most astonishing and unaccountable manner?

Thus much we may modestly affirm in Vindication of our modern and natural
Magic, that A --, and B --, and C --, and D -- l are most certainly bewitched;
the last especially in a very eminent degree, though by some erroneously taken
for a Conjurer himself.

Carmina vel sanos possunt avertere sensus.
Carminibus Circe socios mutavit Ulyssis
-- in vultus ac terga ferarum.
Did it not seem an Affront to the Memory of so great an Author as Sir W -- ^ T
-- (...), I should be tempted to suspect, either that he had not duly perused,
or did not well remember the learned History of the Renowned Dr. Faustus, or of
our famous Friar Bacon, together with the merry Waggeries of his Man Miles, and
the Exploits of Vandermaster the German, and Friar Bungy the English Conjurer:
how they studied the Art-Magick, in making a Brazen-Head, and a Brazen-Wall, to
have Walled all England with Vinegar; which were Effects as astonishing to
common Men, as most of those renowned Operations performed by the Ancient
Indians and Chaldaeans.

You are desired to take particular notice, that there is not the least witty
Passage in this Section, nor so much as two Words cleverly put together; at
least, I am not conscious that any thing of that kind has here escaped me; but
since Accidents may happen, it is but a reasonable Request, that, if you should
here and there have met with a Period, or a Phrase, a little brighter than its
Fellows, you would be pleased to believe the Author entirely innocent thereof;
and that it is purely a Mistake of the Printers, or some Blunder occasioned by
Inadvertency.

Apollo's Impeachment of Ulysses for Robbing his Cow-roost. Abridg'd by way of
Paraphrase, in Seven Canto's.
Canto III.
They Have hackt and mangled 'em so Barbarous,
'Twould grieve Keil's Heart or Dr. Scarborow's.
Here Rumps and Sirloyns, there a Man see^
Kidneys, and Maws, and Purtenances.
Brains, Guts and Gore (so mash'd and clotted
That one would think 'em all besotted)
With Hearts ( O quam mutata now!)
That in their Lifetime were so True.
Poor Beasts! they are changed in Shape so, and in
Their Faculty of Understanding,
That if I met them in a Dish,
We scarce should know each others Phiz.
But (that which makes me fret most basely)
Here does the Devil of the Case ly;
The Limbs, and Pieces which remain
Are maumauk'd so, that though I fain
Would stitch and patch 'em up again,
They Will never be put together more,
So clever as they were before.
These Jaws and Hoofs don't suit so well as
They ought to do, if they would be Fellows.
That Tongue and Udder never will hit it,
And these same Horns can scarce be fitted.
Here Is a Tail's End wants the other Piece;
And there be Ribs will not Coalesce.
That Thing without a Rump, or Skull,
Makes but an Oddish kind of Mull.
O my Dear Cows and Heifers Dearest!
Whom I so often and sweetly Caressed,
Am I Awake, or in a Vision?
See the Beginning of Mr. Dryden's State of Innocence.
Is this a Case, this a Condition,
For you to meet my loving Eyes in,
And kill me with the Sight, like Poison?
Is It thus you welcome in your Phoebus;
That used to leap, and fawn, and me buss?
I meanwhile Inscious and Ignarous
Of what had happened in my Warehouse,
Was just contriving a new Ballad,
To make you Merry at your Sallad,
But now my Heart will break in Pieces,
At the sad Spectacle my Eye sees.
In vain I kept you safe from Lions,
And Wolves, that often Patience try ones.
For what has all my Caution booted,
That saved you to be thus Cut-throated,
By a vile Strouler, as infamous.
As ever any Varler's Name was?
It Is true I had as fair a Warning,
As any Cuckold of his Horning.
For might not his old Tricks have taught us;
Or is Ulysses now sic notus?
This Rogue the Son of Old Laertes,
And what de'e call his Wife? -- A Fart he is!
Or it is as sure as we do breath here,
The Son will never be like his Father.
How should such Vagabonds and Errants
Ever prove a Comfort to their Parents?
Laert^s is a true Old Lad;
A special Workman at his Trade;
That goes about his Work a Mondays,
And never Rambles as his Son does;
But lives in good Repute, and, further,
Kept all his House at Home in Order.
But now Ulysses and his Rivals,
Pull back him, he would be sure to thrive else.
He keeps a Mug of stout October;
This Curr, I fancy, will keep no Beer,
And yet it is hard to catch him Sober.
The old Gentleman will take his Pot,
It Is true enough; but what of that?
Pray can you tell me who will not?
He can be Wise and Merry both;
You shall never hear him swear an Oath,
Nor a worse Word than Faith and Troth.
For when h'has had a Cup of the Creature,
You Would say he is nothing but good Nature;
He takes his Pipe and talks so Loving
In his old Corner next the Oven.
The Method of making a Chasm, or Hiatus, judiciously; the great Reach of
Thought required for the Contrivance thereof, together with the Difference
between the French Academies and the English.
SUpposing my Reader to be grown weary of the Words Sensible and Intelligible,
I will so far comply with his Humor, as to change them for the Terms Old and
New; being also the more inclinable to get them dismissed, because, though they
have hitherto done me faithful and laudable Service, yet they seem now to
Reflect upon me, and seldom agree to my Proceedings: Upon which account I make
no doubt but His tu prima malis oneras, atque objicis hosti:
meminisse pigebit Elisae.
The Author very well understands that a good sizable Hiatus discovers a very
great Genius, there being no Wit in the World more Ideal, and consequently more
refined, than what is displayed in those elaborate Pages, that have never a
Syllable written on them. Yet this Vacuity, now under your Consideration, was
not designed, or compiled, upon that Inducement, but full sore against the
Author's Will, who has been forced to suppress a Multitude of his choicest
things, in Compliance with Mr. Stationer; a Person of so scrupulous
Intellectuals, as to refuse to print Things which, he said, he could not
understand.


These, O Europe, are wonderful Speculations, nice, dark and abstruse, but
important; the Philosophy lies deep absconded, but may easily be drawn out, and
laid open in the following Scheme. You are to keep in mind that Sensible and
Intelligible, Old and New, are the Matter we have to work upon; and the very
Words point out to us the Way we must proceed, namely Partakingly of both
Algebra and Geometry; by the Equation of Cubick Sections and Conick Roots; See
Hobbes's Treatise at the End of his Letter to Bp. Bramhall.
for the most part Graphically, but always Parallelipipedonically, when the
thing can be conveniently so done.

Explanation of Fig. 1.
N new. O old. w word. W world. I intelligible. S sensible. D december. T
totum. P pronouns.

From which substracting the fourth Operation by Cylinders, it will stand thus,
aa -- ax -- d
ad -- bc -- 5
xb -- og -- y2
1/20 -- 11/1 -- 3/4
7183165291 -- 9 -- 6
Quod erat demonstrandum.
All this the Ancients used to perform by nine Ciphers, though something more
obscurely indeed; so that I must beg of the Learned Reader, that he would
bestow upon it the greater Application of Thought, in order to comprehend their
way of proving it, as exhibited in this Scheme; The Ciphers were carefully
ranged in the Order you see, as we may learn from the Description, or rather
Directions, that Virgil has left us in the Second of his Georgicks. -- Omnis in
unguem
Dispositis signis, secto via limite quadret.
Vt saepe ingenti bello, cum long a cohortes
Explicuit legio, and campo stetit agmen aperto,
Directaeque acies, ac late fluctuat omnis
Aere renidenti tellus, necdum horrida miscent
Proelia, sed dubious mediis Mars errat in armis.
Omnia sunt paribus numeris dimensa viarum:
Non animum modo uti pascat prospectus inanem;
Sed quia non aliter sp^tium dabit omnibus ^quum
Charta, neque in vacuum poterunt se extendere rami.
Thus translated by Uncle Ogilby, Dancing Master to Mr. Wicherly's Muse. -- in
every Tract
The Ciphers range in Distances exact,
As when a mighty Battel's to be fought;
Up to the Front the ordered Files are brought,
Troops hide the Fields, and ready for Alarms,
All the vast Champaign shines with glittering Arms;
Before in horrid Fight the Battle joins,
And doubtful Mars to neither part inclines:
Even so thy Circles Thou, like Nine-Pins, place,
That Lines may have both Elbow-room and Space


Now the Spirit of Quotation is upon me, there is no Possibility of Suppressing
Lucan's Noble Thoughts upon the same Subject. See Lib. V. Verse 237.
Interea domitis Caesar remeabat Iberis,
Victrices aquilas alium laturus in Orbem.
Sphaer a autem justocontent a sit Aequore Campi,
Impune ut tenuis circum se Linea flectat,
Lasciva, and spiris intact a immanibus errans.
Maeander qualis Labyrintho ludit aquarum,
Et vastos liquidis montes complectitur ulnis.
Victrix causa Deis placuit, sed vict a Catoni.
Quem super-imposito moles geminat a Colosso.
The translating of these Heroic Lines I most humbly recommend to the
Ingenious Dr* Br -- n, or the most Ingenious Sir R -- d Bl --, hoping that they
will at their Leisure, make proper Reflections upon this other Semi-Distick,
Qui Bavium non odit, amet tua Camina, Maevi. For this, I can assure them it is
to be found in a great Passable Writer of Verses, if they please only to
consult Dolphin-Indexes with due Care.

Matters being thus prepared, and all things tending violently toward an
Engagement, the two Parties, Opponent and Respondent, stood in Posture, with
Pencils and Compasses drawn, the one to mark Whence and Whether a Line of
Communication should be described, the other wholly bent to execute the said
Orders, not without the utmost Contention of his Abilities; Trembling with high
Ambition, and impatient Love of Applause.

Whoever had the best hand at bringing round his Lines a Quovis Cipher ad
Quodvis Cipher, not allowing them to touch, or intersect each other, was in
those learned Ages, accounted the wisest Philosopher; and great were the
Honors decreed him, of which I shall but name one. This victorious Person was
wheeled round a public School with much Pomp, in a kind of Vehicle contrived
for that Purpose, and not unlike to a modern Barrow. During the Procession he
kept his Face fronting directly toward the Spectators; which being all over
planted thick with Plumage of Subfuse Appearance, not without the Ornament of a
proportionable Beak affixt in its proper Place, did much resemble the graceful
Countenance of an Athenian, or Palladian Bird, so called from being Favorite
to Minerva. The Eyes only were suffered to show themselves, and these appeared
very Glaring and Illustrious, by the Advantage of two Magnifying-Glasses, which
were Concave, like the Crystal of a modern Watch, of Blazing Dark-Lanthorn.
Many other Ceremonies and Triumphal Decorations being laid out upon the
Sucessful, lest too great an Inflation of Mind should ensue, there was
appointed an Officer to follow at a cer-Distance, supplying him with frequent
Sprinklings of Dust and Cinders, and at the same time loudly calling upon him,
Not to forget that he was still but a Mortal. This Custom was afterward
revived by the Romans, upon wise Considerations, and used for many Ages on
warlike Occasions, among that noble People.

Aristotle is said to have rode Triumphant in the foresaid manner, some five
and thirty Times, and gained himself thereby so great a Reputation, for a
shrewd Person at this way of disputing by Ciphers, that Alexander the Great
chose him for his own Master. It must be acknowledged, that the Exercise we are
speaking of, seems to have been in Vogue chiefly among the Stoics, 'till it
was taken up by Plato, some Years before, for the Practice of his own Scholars;
which is thought to be the only Reason why Diogenes so fiercely inveighed
against it, as an Artifice designed purely to serve the ends of Popularity and
Vainglory. I think it has never been denied, that this very Thing occasioned
the famous Quarrel between Pythagoras and Archimedes, concerning the Invention
thereof; as likewise their late unhappy Duel at Roterdam, in which Archimedes
debauched Semiramis, the Wife of Don-Confuchu, and Pythagoras was so
successful, as to confute King Pepin Le Grand, by distinguishing directly
through his Lungs.

Of the Building of Babel.
THE very Bottom of Designs being thus discovered, and even laid before your
Eyes in the foregoing Schemes, you will doubtless acknowledge, that I have
therein showed a high Degree of Wisdom, as well as a great Insight into
Philosophy, both Natural and Civil; though it is possible that you might
otherwise have wondered what these Proceedings were driving at.

To manifest my Desire of dealing openly and fairly with my Reader, I judged it
convenient to give this public Notice of my Terms being altered, that all
things being duly performed on my side, if any Misunderstanding should happen,
the Fault may^ly entirely at his Door. I therefore farther advertise him, that
by the Old World shall be understood the Sensible; from which he may readily
collect, that the Intelligible is to be meant by the new. For, although the
Sensible World be in very Deed the Recenter of the two, in regard to Age;
having been created but of late Days, whereas the Intelligible has been a World
from the first Moment that Eternity it self saw the Light; yet the Discovery of
the Intelligible is of later Standing than the Creation of the Sensible. The
Discovery of the former is owing to a Lucky Accident in the Building of Babel,
upon which I am not now at Leisure to dilate. This Accident gave the Hint; but
had it not been favored and coadjuted by the Conjunction of certain
Circumstances and Planets, together with a benign Irradiation from the Moon, we
had been buried in Darkness to this day, and the Curtain would still have
continued Drawn between human Minds, and that bright Region of Intellectual
Light, though seated and residing even within them; such having been the Will and
Pleasure of Fate, that notwithstanding the New, or Ideal World consists in
nothing else but every Man's Knowledge, yet sublunary Things should be so
nicely ordered, that for many Ages together no Man should know it.

A Disappointment that gave me much Uneasiness and Astonishment. A very good
Jest. The Nature of a Praedicable.
AMong all the Particulars I discovered, there was one which dissatisfied, as
well as surprised me, to such a degree, that I blessed my self not a little for
my happy Caution in keeping out of this Ideal Enclosure. Not one of my own
Species could I set Eyes on, (I mean the Eyes of my Understanding) nor discover
the least Idea of a human Creature in any Corner of the Ideal World. This I
remonstrated to my Guide, and plainly told him my Suspicion, that there was no
being made Free of the Ideal World, without being first divested of the
Rational Nature, and assuming some other Specific Essence. A very good Jest,
said he, I thought I should catch you showing your Ignorance; and now do I
know, as well as can be, that you imagine the true Idea of a Man must be like
such Men, as you are used to see and converse with -- This it is to be under the
Prejudice of Sense! But take it from me, that Men are not changed in the Ideal
World, but it is the Idea that suffers an Alteration, when it becomes a Man.
Look about you now and see, though there be no Men in the Ideal World, whether
you cannot discover the Idea of a Centaur. Plain enough replied I; there are
several between that same Chimaera^ yonder, and the Dimunitive Hircocervus.
Very well, See the Musae Anglicanae and Smiglefius.
said my Guide; now a Centaur (de'e mark) is the complete and original Idea;
for, Centaur, or Animal, being the Genus, its two Species, Rational and
Irrational, are only broken Ideas of a Centaur dismembered, or distributed into
the Parts of its self. This Division the Aristotelians, if they shall see fit,
may pretend to have happened in the Lifetime of their Master; but the Thing is
undoubtedly of a much ancienter Date, as having been a necessary Effect of that
great and general Dissolution at the Noetical Deluge. See the Sacred Theory of
the Earth.


A Corollary.
IT IS absurd therefore, and ridiculous, to talk of the eternal and unchangeable
Idea of a Man, or of a Horse; Since, taken apart, they are no better than
Monsters in Nature. For the Truth of this, as far as concerns the former
Species, I may appeal to Observation of Particulars; such as Tarquin, Nero,
Domitian, our Richard the Third, the West India Spaniards, East India D --,
Regicide English, and the Iesuitico-Fanatical Saints, wherever dispersed; not
to instance in Cain, Judas, Sir Satanides Goatham, and a Multitude of other
great Worthies, very nobly qualified to adorn a Black-List.

Advertisement very necessary to be here inserted.
YOU are to know, that this Sir Satanides Goatham, is a certain Man in Office,
who by several great Attempts has made himself very considerable, and purchased
an invaluable Reputation, Honor and Esteem, among all the Nobility and Gentry
that live within the Sound of his Name. The Particulars are, a harmless Rape
upon a Young Lady of extraordinary Virtue, as well as Wit and Beauty; a civil
Design to murder one of her Relations; together with sincere Endeavors to
ruin and defame her whole Family: in all which laudable Undertakings, by the
Spite of envious Fortune, he has come off with Disappointment and Infamy,
though not Shame.

A second Corollary in Honor of the Trojan-Horse, or Great Leviathan.
IF we remember how that great Doctor Freneticus, Thomas of Malmesbury, has
irrefragably demonstrated the State of Nature to be a perfect State of War; and
if we add to that Conclusion what has now been discovered concerning original
Centaurs; these Doctrines, so laid together, will amount to a full proof, that
in our degenerate Times, nothing can approach so near the true State, whether
Natural or Ideal, as Fighting a-Horse-back.

From this Consideration is chiefly derived the great Dignity of a Trooper, and
more particularly of such as rode in the Oliverian State of War.

A further Account of Centaurs; A Mistake concerning them rectified. The
Ancient Poets censured. That Pegasus was neither Proteus, nor Ben Johnson. That
-- is neither St. Peter, nor St. Paul.
I could not but observe, to my great Amazement and Indignation, how basely
Learned Men have all along been misled in their Notion of a Centaur; and that
by taking up with such lame Descriptions as the Poets have delivered, in their
Metaphysical Histories. These Gentlemen have, most certainly, either had very
poor Information themselves, or been very unfair in suppressing Part of the
Truth. For though in their Chronicles concerning Ixion and his Ideal Juno, they
have given us a fair Account of a Centaur's Generation, yet there is another
Point wherein the whole Nation of Poets have greatly deviated from the Truth,
and brought an ugly Suspicion upon their own Veracity. For, with what Reason,
or Countenance can it be pretended, that the entire Genus of Centaurs is
comprised within the two Species of Risible and Hinnible, or Man and Horse?
Doubtless they were induced to this Partiality, either thereby to do an Honor
to their own Pegasus, or to make their court to some Knight Errant, or other
puissant Person that delighted in Chivalry. For, had they reported the Truth,
we should have been informed, that the Generality of Centaurs^ are of other
Compositions, our Ideal Humanity being coupled with more irrational Kinds than
Proteus could put on seeming Transformations, or than Human Individuals were
really transformed into, when Metamorphoses were in Fashion. This I can fairly
attest, that in my most accurate Survey of the Ideal World, I could not descry
more Men-Horses, than Men-Bulls, Men-Camels, Men-Elephants, Men-Sharks,
Men-Cuckows, Men-Foxes, or Men-Asses, which make as good Centaurs as the best.

An Essay toward the Theory of Human Nature.
IT IS from these primitive Copulations that mortal Men inherit the great
Disparity in their Tempers and Constitutions; every one retaining a Tincture of
that Nature to which his Human Essence is Individually, or Intelligibly united.
This gives an amorous Disposition to one, and a revengeful to another; See what
Aristophanes says in Plato's Sympos.
makes one a Friend, and another a Traitor. This makes Sir Midas C -- love
himself alone, and yet use himself as if he hated no Body else so much; and the
same -- inclines W -- h, T -- t, and G -- er, to enjoy their own Wealth, but
find the greatest Pleasure in that part of it which they communicate.

Hence it is that some prefer their Countries Interest to their own, and others
betray the Commonwealth rather than be a little eclipsed in their Domestic
Greatness. Hanno, the Carthaginian, is said to have acted in this manner; I
cannot certainly tell, whether there are any other Instances that could be
given.

See Dispensary.
Milo derives Athletick Vigor hence;
Hence -- his Atheism and his Impudence.
Hence Lewd Sempronia has her wanton Fire,
And -- raves with Impotent Desire;
Hence -- so muddy, S -- p so Clear,
Rich Vulpo Sly, Poor Stuttereero Queer.
How to deduce Ideal Genealogies by the Qualities observable in particular
Persons.
SIR Satanides Goatham, the forementioned Animal, boasts his Ideal Pedigree
from the Satyrs, or Man-Goats; a celebrated Branch of the Centaurean Race.
There is in this Family an Hereditary Distemper, something allied to the
Syphilis, and the Furor Priapeius, which ferments in their Veins with few
Intermissions. It once threw Sir Satanides into a raging Fit, that most
deplorably distressed for some Relief, and even wild with Impatience, he
demanded an Exchange of Blood with a Nymph descended from the Phoenix; but that
being attainable, neither by Love nor Money, nor the Charms of his Eloquence,
nor the Might of his Puissant Arm, in a most outrageous Fury, to ease his
Spleen of the Satyr, he transfused into his Jugular an incredible Quantity of
Hounds-Blood; so that now remaining Man-Goat as to his Concupiscible, and
Man-Hound as to his Irascible, his very Name is become frightful to Male and
Female; neither of which can endure to meet him in the dark, being a dangerous
Person in Quality, either of an Enemy or a Lover; in the latter Capacity
especially; for, the meanest Operatrix would be loath to transfuse with him
since the unhappy Accident of Dr. Harborough's Death; that convenient Graduate
Physician, so Famous in the Daily Courant.

The Doctrine of intelligible Centaurs further prosecuted.
WHezius and Querpillo, the two Brethren Ramnusides, bear the Arms of so many
Families, that a good Herald might be at a loss where to begin their Pedigree.

Considered in their talkative Capacity, they discover the Jay, Magpie, or
Parrot; In their Port they bear great Resemblance to a Peacock, though their
Pertidapperipragmaticofinicality betrays the perfect --.

Take them in their Poetical Dress, and Mr. P -- will vow and swear that they
are descended from the Aesopea^ Daw; and the very P -- that calls them both
Virgil and Maecenas to their Faces, does really think them two Cuckoos or
Ninnyhammers; or instead of being Transmigrated from the Mantuan Swan, to
belong to the other Species, which once indeed preserved the Capitol by the
obstreperous Sweetness of their Singing, -- argutos inter strepit anser olores.

Some imagine they came from the Italian Wagtail, but Mr. B -- ls pretended he
knew them to be Canary Birds.

Notwithstanding this I have known others mistake them for City Mice, and plead
several Arguments in Defense of that Error. The Principal of these are drawn
from their Faculty of skulking, and creeping into fat Places; as likewise from
the great Disorder of Mind, which has been visible in them at the very mention
of the Fox and Weasel; See Aesop's Fables.
and from the excellent Courage they lately discovered in their single Combat
with Sir Joseph Fl -- ton.

N. B. This Chapter was written about the time of that Transaction. See Ld. Cl
-- n's Hist. Vol. 3.

R -- and S -- will have them to be more probably Bat-Mice, having observed
their Trick of shunning the Light, and that remarkable Weakness that renders
them so subject to be dazzled; especially by the Rays of a Louis'dor, or any
splendid Body of that Nature.

Time was that Dr. D -- r adjudged them to the Wolf-Men, and that with great
Appearance of Reason: For who, but ravenous Animals that came
From the Ideal Wolf of Wolfingam,
could ever have proved so Redoubtable -- in the Hesperian Fleecing. Office?
See Ovid. Met. 7.


Were we at leisure to enumerate all Surmises and Allegations, there would be
thrice as many Savages found to claim Kindred with Whezius and Querpillo, as
Cities contended for Homer, or Religions for Mr. Bays. This last Paragraph was
written of late Days. See the Rehearsal, and T. Brown's Dialogues.
But in this there is a Disparity, that those Animals are all certainly akin
to these Ramnusides in some or other Degree; whereas Homer might possibly be
born in the Country, and Mr. Bays might possibly be of the same Lay-Religion
with Smith, or Iohnon, or Ramnusides themselves.

Concerning my Pedigree, and the present War.
I know not whether I may expect Thanks for my Discovery of a new World; See
Dr. Bently's Dissertat.
for I am resolved to stand it out, that it is entirely my own Discovery, though
the thing was long since discovered by my Predecessors. Therefore We the Author
of this Theory, in our own Name and Person, pronounce (...), and challenge
Mankind to appear, and do us Homage for the new Province put into their Hands.
We may fairly presume, that a Newfound World, so much more Perfect, Fertile
and Delightful than the Old, should reflect no little Glory upon our Age, and
upon our selves the Discoverer. Let me add that we, who boast the Happiness of
our Birth from this Noble Island, and our Descent from the Ancient Britons, are
able so clearly to make out our Country's Title, that there is great
Probability no other Nation will set up any Pretensions against our Propriety
and peaceable Enjoyment; for the King of France himself discovers no
Inclination to quarrel with us about any part of the Ideal World.

Concerning my impartial Distribution of the Preferments in my Gift.
THERE are, it is true, several Honourary Dignities now vacant, and several
large Countries, that have neither Names nor Governors yet assigned them.
Finding these unoccupied, I have an indisputable Right to confer them on whom I
please, producing for Precedents those late Discoverers that disposed of all
the finest Dominions in the Moon by an Arbitrary Nomination.

There is a Province peculiarly remarkable for a People of great Loyalty, for
Godfathers, to which I have provided two noble Brothers, the Joy and Glory of
Ancient Rome, who have freely bestowed upon it the illustrious Name of
Gracchia. In this Laudable Canton, purely to gain my Reader's good Will, I do
constitute and appoint for Lord Lieutenant -- any one he shall please to
recommend.

Many a good Title have I granted away, either upon the Application of a Purse
dexterously transferred, or in Recompense for Passive Obedience at Baggamon.
Many a one have I parted with freely (for the sake of Old Acquaintance or the
Old Cause) to Persons of Prime Quality, and not a few also to my Inferior
Friends. The --, in Consideration of the Great Services he did to Me and my
Family, during our unhappy Rupture with the late Grand Seignior, I have elected
King of Bubleria and New Formosa; and when ever the Archbishopric -- or --
Duchy of Puntillonia shall Fall, being a -- Tattered -- Superbe Im -- s and
August Oscitancy -- I am very willing to entail it upon any Branch of the House
of -- or -- or -- or -- or --

The other (especially the European) Monarchs shall have no reason to complain
of any unequal Favor, or the least Neglect of any one's Merit; for having
observed, that in making their Court, they have carefully avoided all those
Squablings and Sinister Practices that are usual among Competitors, I have
determined that they shall all have their Shares in my Bounty, and be promoted
each to such Posts and Offices as he shall be found best qualified for.

To make these Honors the more Honorable, and Illustrate the Noble List, I
have faithfully enrolled my self, erecting my Pillars on a certain Hesperian
Promontory, that is to rejoice in the Denomination of Gabriel Johannes; and
because some of my select Favorites, whom I admit to a great Degree of
Familiarity, have got a Custom at merry Seasons, to Salute me by the Name of
Timothy; that I might deal impartially between both my Appellations, which are
equally dear to me, I have appointed one of the most con^iderable Islands in
New Vtopia to go by the Name of TIMLAND.

A CHAPTER In Imitation of -- and SomeBody else that shall be Nameless.
I am not a Person of the same Humor, and Principles, with your Ordinary
Preface-Authors, to fill my Worthy Reader with high Expectations of what he is
invited to, and then put him off with a Flat and Beggarly Entertainment. It Is
well known that I made Promise, some few Hours ago when we first met, to be at
extraordinary Expense, for providing him a Treat in some Measure suitable to
His great Quality. And now upon the nicest Review of all that has been set
before him, I cannot but bless my Good Genius, that every thing has succeeded
so well, and pleased him in so extraordinary a manner.

It Is a mighty Satisfaction to reflect upon my Happy Performance; to find that
the most sharp-sighted Philosopher can never descry the least Flaw in my
Theory; See Theory of the Earth.
nor charge me with an ill^grounded Position, Inconsequent Deduction, or the
least Glimpse of Obscurity: to assure my self that the most Captious and
Cynical Critick^ can spy out no Failure in the Composition; the whole being
compiled with so natural a Coherency of its Parts, and enriched with such
Delicate Sentiments, Surprising Turns, Ravishing Antitheses; and these all
adorned with the most lively Beauty of the Brightest Phrase, and the Quaintest
Harmony of most Elaborate Cadence.

Of my notable Meekness in taking Advice. Of judicious Advisers. Dr. B -- y's
Head, my own Pillow, and some other Matters no less considerable.
AS to the few Pages that are still behind, you must excuse me if I suffer my
Pen to run a little more at Random. Thus I shall greatly ease my self, by
relaxing that Intention of thought which is a Posture too wearisom for Human
Mind to be long held in. And this I take to be the properest Season for taking
out my Freedom, and entering upon the said Enlargement; for which you shall have
my Reason immediately.

Be it known then, that after long consulting my Sagacious Pillow, and my
Learned Friend Dr. B -- y, I have at last come to a Resolution, that the
concluding Word of this Paragraph shall be accounted the End of my Preface, so
long as my Book and this Universal Frame of Things shall continue in Being; and
I do hereby charge and command all dutiful Readers and other Loving Persons,
wheresoever dispersed throughout the Face of the habitable Globe, that they so
acknowledge and respect it accordingly. Now this being declared, it is certain I
shall drop some of my chief Readers the next Moment; being Persons that fall
off, and prudently withdraw, as soon as the Preface is over. There are a Number
of Persons in Europe, who bearing an unaccountable Aversion to us learned
Authors, esteem the Entertainment of our Compositions no less insipid than that
of our Conversations; or if ever they grow a little reconciled to either of
them; yet still they will have it that We affect a ridiculous Singularity in
Both. This, say they, puts us upon that preposterous Method of serving up our
choicest Dainties in the first Course; which so palls the Appetite for any
thing less delicate, that few Guests have Patience to sit out the Bill of Fare,
or accompany the Author till he orders Finis to take away. This is Reason
sufficient why I should not be so curious in Cooking that plain, but
substantial Meat, which is still to come in* Wherefore in evidence of this, I
do earnestly entreat all my worthy and welldisposed Readers, to bear Witness
for me that this Instant, the First of April, Old Style, 1701, but of my own
Age 57, We Gabriel John, alias Timothy, do issue out Directions to our trusty
and wellbeloved Amanuensis Ezekiel Philodash, that in order to prevent all
future Dispute between our Book* and its respective Preface, as likewise all
erroneous Mistakes of the hasty and ill-advised Peruser; he, the said Ezekiel
Philodash, lawfully begotten Son to Ananias Philodash and Tabitha his
Concubine, of the same Name and Vocation, do instantly and carefully fix up an
Index, with a brief Inscription in Capitals, notifying that

HERE ENDS THE PREFACE SECT. XXXVIII.
The Best Section in the Book, concerning Seven Hundred Pounds a Year.
I Doubt not in the least but some Thousands of my Readers are even overjoyed
to see that the Preface has some End at last; having long since been quite
jaded in their Spirits, and vainly flattering themselves at every Section* they
were traveling through, that there would be no more to come. But if any one
should have Strength of Heart to hold out; if any Individual Person of
indefatigable Industry, innate Courage and undaunted Resolution, will still
press on, being smitten with sweet Love of Truth, and filled with glowing Zeal
to search, to comprehend, to digest; -- Siquis tamen haet quoque, siquis
Captus a more leget --
let him be assured that I can give him no manner of Encouragement; nor do I
any more know what is immediately to follow this Sentence, than L -- can tell
what shall be his next Throw at the Groom-Porters, than P -- can predict to
what Point the Wind will change, or than S -- can prognosticate what shall be
his next No-Religion

SECT. XXXIX.
The next best Section treating of Six Hundred Pounds a year.
HAving now thought of something to go on with, I require of my Reader that he
put himself in a Posture to believe it, whatever it shall prove; that he give
up his whole Understanding, Sense and Reason, entirely to my Disposal; for I am
now entered upon an Ideal Pontificate, and already got into an extraordinary
Humor of Infallibility* In Consequence* whereof* We Servus Servorum Animae
Mundanae Platonicae, have resolved, determined and made a Decree, that it is
safest Sailing in the Winter, provided always you don't trouble your self to
find whereabouts Rocks and Quicksands lie, as long as they are covered over
with Water; and therefore we do pronounce Ex Cathedra, that whoever offers to
speak, or so much as believe otherwise, is Schismatic Heretic, Enemy to the
Ideal Hierarchy, and ipso facto, becomes liable to Ecclesiastical Censure, and
all the Penalties thereunto annexed. For if my Lady FORTUNE should come Leering
and Simpering, and address her self to my -- in the Person of -- telling me
forsooth how mightily she is in Love with me, and bringing I don't know how
much -- or Forty Thousand Acres of Ploughed Ground in her Lilly-white Hand --
cry Here Tim, or Here Gabriel, take what thou will have -- a Thousand Pound --
nay thou art very welcome; take Two Pence more, or as much as you have a Mind
to -- Secretary of State -- will you be King of -- or have you a Fancy to be an
Alderman? De'e think now that I will take a Farthing of all this? No, that were
a good One indeed. Timothy knows better things, I thank ye; for you must not
think to put Tricks upon Travelers.

The Plot thickens. A Surprising Catastrophe. The whole unravel'd. My merry
Moments. How the self-enamour'd Youth died Ideally. My Warehouse and Garret.
Of Shadows, and their strange Agility in vanishing.
-- falsis datur exitus umbris.
-- porta emittuntur eburna.
-- manus effugit imago,
Par levibus ventis, voluerique simillima somno.
Invalidasque mihi tendens, heu, non mea, palmas.
TUrning, accidentally my internal Optics toward my Ideal Garret in New
Barbican, what should appear to me at the Window, but the Counterpart, or the
beautiful Idea, of my self. It was sitting as solitary as a Hermit, but in a
violent Fit of Mirth, and undoubtedly under the Operation of some pleasant
Conceit, which is a thing very familiar to me in my Retirements. And as it is
sung of the former Narcissus, that his Idea in the Water, as cruel as he found
it, never refused to smile, when it saw that he smiled in Return; I on the
other side, Narcissus alter, could not choose but rejoice to see my Idea so
joyful. But here indeed I fell into a fatal and deplorable Oversight -- here
was I seized with a rash Curiosity, which has proved the sad Occasion of so
much Regret, and such grievous Lamentation, to me and to my poor Reader. Hic
subito incautum Dementia cepit,
-- ibi omnis
Effusus labor --
for by endeavoring to stare hard upon my Idea, my Eyes burst open, and I saw
my self at that Instant, relapsed into the Sensible World. Thrice did I call
for Help to my Guide, and thrice I endeavored, but in vain, to clasp hold of
him. My Guide, the Ideal World, and my own beloved, and lovely, Idea were all
ravished from me, and vanished on the sudden; and, behold! I was sitting in the
Place Father Malebranche and my own Idea had appeared to me, even by my
Garret-Window in Barbican; where the Good Reader shall be very welcome to
Paper-Diet, and may be furnished at reasonable Rates with all sorts of Ballads,
Madrigals, Anagrams, Acrosticks, and Heroic Poems, either by Wholesale, or by
Retail; the Excellency of which I give him leave to judge by the following
Samples.

HERE BEGINS THE POSTSCRIPT. A Vow to Cupid, OR The Fair Sacrifice. SONG.
I.
CUPID, how often must I implore
Thy cruel Deity in vain?
Grant me one Boon; I Will ask no more --
I mean, till I Am in Love again.
II.
Thy Chains I wear, yet never repine;
Never pray to be released:
I Am Sylvia's; let the Nymph be mine;
Let both be Slaves, both pleased.
III.
Grant this, Kind Love, and hear my Vow
That Sylvia's self shall lie
Thy Lovely Victim. O do thou
Both give the Wound and Flames supply!
Virgil's Description of the Old Man's Garden at Tarentum, beginning

Namque sub Oebaliae --
Georg. 4. Dissolved into English according to Art.
AMong the Oebalian Fields, that owe their Pride
These are admirable Lines, and seem to have nothing of the Author's Sense;
upon which account, you know, it is so much the better Translation; as may be
learnt from Dryden's Virgil, and the Works of some other Expedite Versifiers.
To the kind Waterings of Galesus' 'Tide
A poor Corician Villager had found
See Boileau's Epigrams.
One little Plat, and that Unhappy Ground. Pish!
Nor Pan nor Ceres had a Harvest there,
T'invite or recompense the Tillers Care;
No Cluster smiled, no Vintage crowned the Year.
Puh!
Yet this obdurate Soil the Swain compelled
Some thin-set Herbs and poppy Flowers to yield.
Helas!
The springing Vervain did his Garden grace,
And Lillies flourished in the Brambles place
Thus, late at Even, his daily Labors past,
Returning he enjoys an unbought Feast;
Rich with content, and more than Monarch's blessed.
He saw his forward Buds and opening Rose
The dawning Beauty of the Spring disclose.
Pox on it!
The Original might perhaps be thus rendered more tolerably.

Nor fails each Spring to crop the earliest Rose,
Each Autumn earliest Fruit from loaded Boughs.
And when bleak Winter-Months, with Scythian Wind.
Burst the hard Stones, the rapid Torrents bind;
Whether either of the following Dissolutions would be worse than this I cannot
tell; they are all as bad as I would wish.

The 2d Dissolution.
And when the barren Winter's piercing Cold
Could split hard Rocks, and rapid Torrents Hold.
The Third.
See Dryden's Virgil.
But when the Winter's penetrating Force
Now bursts the Rock and stops the Rivers Course,
Sad indeed.
Three Versions of the same thing may excuse me from translating the next Line
at all; which consisting of Terms above my Understanding, viz.

Ille comam mollis jam tum ten ton
debat Acanthi; I desire Mr. London and Mr. Wise to English it between them,
being abundantly better able to do it than I am.

Then would he wish the envious Winter gone
Winter again.
Worse and worse!
And beg the tardy Spring to hasten on.
His Bees the first their flowing Combs prepare,
Clouding with early Swarms the Vernal Air.
The Words

-- spumantia pressis
Mella favis --
are well rendered by Mr. Addison, in this manner,

-- his Vessels foam
With the rich Squeezings of the juicy Comb.
His sapless Earth made hardy Pear Trees bloom,
Oh!
And Thorns were taught to bear the adopted Plumb.
Very well.
On faithful Boughs each growing Burden hung,
And Autumn finished all the Spring begun.
Which I take to be Fustian, as indeed every thing should be that designs to be
admired. The Meaning is only, that all his young Apples hung till they were
ripe.

He had his Lindens too and thriving Pines,
And knew to range his Elms in nicest Lines.
Excellent!
His Plane-tree flourished and began to spread
For cheerful Hours a Sociable Shade.
Ravishing!
It Is true, Composing is the Nobler Part,
But Good Translation is no easy Art.
How many Ages since has Virgil writ?
How few are they that can translate him yet?
Approach his Altars with Religious Fear;
No Whining, Canting, Riming Devil can inhabit there.
I lose my Patience when with saucy Pride,
In Barbarous Rimes I see his Numbers tied.
The Genuine Sense, intelligibly told,
Shows a Translator both Discreet and Bold.
Excursions are inexpiably bad,
And it is much safer to leave out than Add.
My Lord Roscommon's Essay.
O Had He lived to hail the Glorious Day,
And sing loud Paeans through the crowded way.
When in Triumphant State the British Muse,
True to her self, refuses Barbarous Aid,
Appearing in the Roman Majesty,
Which none know better, and none come so near.
-- Talis nostri est Farrago libelli.
Phoebus's Oration.
Canto IV.
The Argument.
The Sun kept some West-country Cows upon Houndslough-Heath, some time before
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, according to the best Chronology, having had a
particular Fancy for that Employment ever since he grew up from a According to
Ptolomy.
Little Star. Now it happened one Day, when the Sun's Back was turned, that
half a Dozen Watermen, belonging to Ulysses's Barge, made bold with as many of
the Sun's fattest Kine, and likewise Ravished his Milk-maid, Susanna
Skimmington of Cheesewick, who would not have been ravished for Any Thing. Upon
which Phoebus unharnessing one of his Horses, leaves his Coach to its own
Discretion, and trots away full Speed to tell his Father Jupiter how these
naughty Men had abused him.

HAVE I for this kept such a Pother
To let you all see one another,
And often been upon the Road,
When one would scarce send Dog abroad?
For not the very Sirian Cur
In a Cold Morning will ever stir,
But leaves me, like a surly Elf,
To open all the Gates my self.
What if a Wheel should fall a Blazing?
'Twould put me a Consumed 'Maze in;
For I Have no Engine to throw Cloud-water:
Vslid, I Would as lieve drive Stage to Loud-water.
Is it my Wages for Day-Labour
To lose the Cattle that I pay for?
When though I drove in worst of Weather,
A Mighty Comfort to me they were.
The Fates, forsooth, must take 'em from me
Those Gypsies always strove to undo me.
And now the Bull-Dogs that have ar^e 'em,
Would put me off with Temples; Rat 'em!
We'll take no Temple ('it is below us)
'Twere something if they would build m'a Cow-House.
For sure when ever Occasion urges,
Apollo need not want for Churches.
But it is at least full one to ten
^^^e'er shall get such Cows again.
The Raskals even may keep their Temples,
Or build my Calves one, if it Them plea^^
They have already (thank 'em finely)
Bestowed some Altars on 'em kindly;
And should they raise another Shrine,
Who knows but they would steal more Kine?
So Faith, unless you will bid the Men
Spew all my Cattle up again;
And drown Ulysses in the Main,
With all his damned Beef-eating Train;
Or send the Villain into Bridewel,
To teach him not to live so idle;
I Will leave your Godships (de^e all Mark?)
Every Mother's Child in the Dark,
To run your Noses against Post,
Or shift with Candlelight at most.
I Will Put out all your Stars, and, you know,
Joan will be then as good as June:
And Happy he can buy a Link
For Love, or Money (now called Chink.)
Before George, ye'd best to use me well,
Or I Will go shine to the Devil in Hell.
And Devil a God of all your Crew
But should even Troop to Old Nick too,
If you would but Give the Devil his Due.
The way to become a Philosopher. How many Rare Philosophers have been quite
spoiled by Dr. Tyson. -- pol me occidistis, Amici.
DIsappointed as I was, in coming to my self again so unexpectedly, yet I
cannot but rejoice and triumph in this, that my Mind is now become Illuminated,
the Dimness of my Understanding cleared up, all the Film that Mortales hebetat
visus, -- wiped away, and the Essence of all things grown Intelligible. The
subtle Philosophy of F. Malebranch, the seraphick Speculations of Mr. Norris,
and the irrefragable Argumentations of Mr. Dodwel's Epistle; which (I must
confess with Shame) appeared formerly to my weak and dull Brain, in the Shape
of visionary Imaginations, double-minded Sophisms, Shadows of Echo; and
Sick-men's Dreams, do now put on another Form, and show themselves in the
clearest Light, to be as finely deduced, and as strongly coherent as if Truth
her self had joined them together by way of Demonstration, as no doubt She has
taken that Pains in some Cases.

From this strange Effect and admirable Elucidation of my Intellectual Powers,
it is a reasonable Conclusion that whoever makes a Visit to the Ideal World, is
as sure to return a Philosopher, as he that Dreams upon Parnassus to awake a
Poet.

The great Reason I have to rejoice for the Death of Mr. Scarron. That He would
have been the most likely Person to have made a Jest of my Theory, or Travested
it into some whimsical Burlesque, as soon as ever Mr. Boyer shall have finished
his French Translation.
I know the Malice of the World, and therefore can well enough foresee that the
Honor I shall gain by this elaborate Work, will provoke a great many envious
Persons to set upon me, with pretended Answers and real Abuses. This indeed I
am little concerned at, See Theory of the Intelligible W. P. 1. ^. 149.
being satisfied that no part of my Theory lies open to the least Objection;
and therefore the only Adversaries I greatly apprehend are your unlucky Drolls,
to whom these re^ined Speculations may appear like Unintelligible Iargon. These
Persons being endued with sufficient Ill Nature, and abundant Leisure-Time from
their Business, See abundance of Places in the Sacred, and the Ideal, Theories.
will probably endeavor, instead of answering my Theory, to turn the most
Weighty Parts of it into Comical Conceits, or expose them in some Odd and
Humourous Disguise; thereby to Banter Mankind into an Opinion, that it is all no
more than a mere Fancy, or a kind of Philosophical Romance. I am sorely afraid
if an Angel should write such a Theory as this, these Men of Parts would pass
the same Judgment upon it, by reason of the Narrowness of their Spirit and
Understanding. It Is certain, that a pleasant Vein of Raillery may sport it self
with the noblest Composition, and make the most sublime Truths a Subject of
Laughter; and there are a Crew of Little Wits, the very Pest of a
Commonwealth, that will be nibling at every thing that is great; and by these I
expect to be Digni^ied with the Title of Visionist, or Enthusiast; only because
the Truths I deliver are above their Comprehension. Be it known to them, that
whether these, or whatever other Names, they shall choose in their Great Wisdom,
to sit me withal, I shall not think them worth a serious Answer; and to write
in their trifling manner is below If any Learned Person shall make an Attempt
upon my Book, in a Logical, or a Metaphysical way, he shall be considered; but
this, as was said, I don't at all apprehend. If I here express my self with
some Assurance, See Preface to the First Volume of Mr. Norris's Theory.
it is not that I prefer my Rational Abilities before those of other Men, but it
must be considered, that I have been long Conversant in this kind of Studies,
and therefore may see things in a better Light than they do, though not with
better Eyes. Nay, so many thoughtful and solitary Hours, so many nightly Lamps
and Lucubrations, have these Studies cost me, that indeed my poor Eyes, what
with Age, and what with assiduous Poring, have the one departed this World, and
the other almost worn it self out with incessant Grief for the Loss of its
Fellow. By this I am accidentally reduced very near to that State of
Illuminating Blindness, which F. Malebranch had at first recommended to me; and
I think therefore it is very hard, if by this Time, and with all these
Advantages, I may not be allowed to know something of the matter.

Another Panegyric upon my own Performance. An Epitaph upon some of my
Abortive Works. The Causes of their Abortion. My Grief and Weepings thereupon.
Polyuhemi lata Acies. The Beauty of an Excrescence.
It Is with Tears in my Eye, and great Anguish of Mind, that I am going to
mention how many Witty Things I have Iudiciously blotted out; how many Dainty
Thoughts and Curious Strokes, I have either cramped, or quite erazed, though it
went grievously against my Will, and I could not be so cruel to my own dear
Conceptions without a very tender Reluctance of my Bowels. All this I was
forced to in Deference to the Authority of Milbourn, Dennis, Rymer, etc.
Tyrannical as it is; because though the Sentences were extremely fine and
beautiful, it happenned that they were not much to the Purpose. The Reader will
see that my Book as now it stands, is remarkable for the same Precise Justness
with the Writings of Virgil; there being nothing that can be taken from either
without maiming the whole; nothing that can be added to either without the
Deformity of an Excresence. This is the chief Point, and a very rare Piece of
Mastery, Never to say too little, nor too much; and yet it makes good Mr.
Waller's Saying of us Poets, that we

-- lose half the Praise we should have got
Could it be known what we Discreetly blot.
This is my Case, and to satisfy you that it is, any Gentleman who will please
to buy Six of my Books, shall command a Sight of my foul Copy and my
Adversaria; both to see the Truth of what I am asserting, and to enjoy the
Pleasure of those lively Sketches which must now be for ever lost to the World,
and for the Loss of which, the World owes but small Thanks to those Cynical
Critics above-noted.

Among other Remarkables, you may see a Panegyric upon Whip-stitch, Slapdash,
and Collier's Essays; another -- touching -- L -- R -- s Council during his
Intowerment, and the -- of -- his Political Apostasy from G -- B -- 's
Religious Principles. You may see also a smart Saying upon Wise-acres, and a
charming Phrase for opening an Oyster, both Fire-new; besides two various
Lection of great Importance to History, upon the famous Garismachides, a lost
Author who is thought to have written nothing. Not one of these shall ever be
seen but upon the Conditions proposed, and I am not a Man to be Wheedled out of
a Purpose once settled in my Mind; though it were to translate Hickeringil's or
Toland's Works into Latin Verses; any more than to be persuaded out of an
Opinion I have once embraced, though it were that Toland and Hickeringil are both
Saints, or either of them a Philosopher.

Why the Author is so Desirous of being thought a Wit, now in his Old Age. An
Humble Request that the Reader would Humor him therein.
I Am well aware that among Persons who Canvas matters Nicely, and are very
Circumspect in putting Things and Things together, it may seem a Problem, how
this Edition should so unexpectedly happen to be the Second. And because Wise
Philosophers are backward to believe what they are unable to comprehend, (as I
have frequently found in my own Disputes with the Socinians, Atheists, and
other Great Wits) they will probably imagine, that either the Bookseller, or
the Printer, has made some Mistake in the Title Page as to the Number of
Editions; Nay, it is not impossible but some unlucky Surmise may fall upon the
Author himself, as if he had designed to impose upon the Professors of
Title-Page-Learning, upon whose good Opinion he has so great Dependence. And
this would ruin his Credit for a Philosopher, by bringing into Question the
Truth of his Narration, and those very Positions that are the Hinges upon which
his whole Theory turns. Now in such a case, it is evident the Theory could be of
no Benefit to the Commonwealth of Philosophy, nor work its desired Effect upon
the Understandings and Opinions of Mankind. It doubtless lies upon me to
obviate so grievous a Calamity as this by all Ways and Means that my present
Circumstances will bear. Accordingly I declare upon Honor, that had such a
Mistake happened either by the Printer's Neglect, or Librarii Incuria, it
should have been acknowledged in ample Form as the Principal Erratum, viz.

In the Title Page, instead of Second Edition, lege Tityre, tu Patulae --
-- potitur que sua puer Iphis lanthe.
For your farther Satisfaction in the present case, you are to consider that
Second, Third, or Fourth Edition, etc. among us Authors and our Respective
Publishers, are no more than so many Terms of Art, which every one has the
Liberty of applying to what Meaning, or Idea he shall see convenient; provided
he freely explain himself, and make known what that Meaning or Idea is, either
by a just Definition, or sufficient Description. In Compliance with which Rule,
I shall endeavor to Define, as concisely as may be, that Notion of a Second
Edition which in my own Mind I have affixed to the said Term. A Second Edition
then is.

Qualitas quaedam Sensibilis, Occulta, Instrumentalis, Bipes, Subjecti sui per
Hysteron-Proteron, quodammodo Perfectiva, quae Subjecto ejus Qualitatis capaci,
ita super veniens, and inhaerens, ut sit veluti Praemissarum Altera, facit ut
cui ejus rei, quae hujusmodi subjectum est, naturalis and antecedens inerat
Appetentia, in eo generetur Duplum hujus Appetentiae versus idem Objectum, and
cui nulla fuerat hujus objecti antecedens Appetentia in illo generetur aliqua,
it a ut plerumque consequatur Rei cujusdam contentae ex continente desumptio,
quo fiat ut Objectum illud praedictum in eandem rem aptam natam aliquid
continere, demitti possit naturali lege motus praeter and propter Fugam vacui.

This Definition being laid down, there will remain little Difficulty in the
Sequel of our Argument; for though some Editions never disown themselves for the
First, as if they were fond of Primogeniture; yet it is evident from the Terms
Duplum and Appetentiae, that for a Book to make its first Appearance in the
Shape of a Second Edition, is a method far more Auspicious. This will also save
me, or my Publisher the Expense of a new Title Page to the same Edition, which
is commonly found a necessary Expedient for bringing these Affairs to a good
Issue.

I am not a going to deny that Messieurs Gronovius and Le Clerk were very
importunate to Have this Be rather the Twentieth Edition than the Second, and
so to have run down by the Nineteenth, etc. in a direct Line to the First: an
Advice which notwithstanding all the Reasons they urged, I resolved to reject.
I very well saw that it was a Proceeding so much out of the Way, and seemingly
Extravagant, as would very ill become a Treatise of this nature; besides that,
after the repeated Editions should have exceeded the Compass prescribed, and
exhausted the Lower or Single Numbers, they must at last either have come to
Nothing, or divided Unity it self into Innumerable Fractions to have reckoned
by; as we see that though a Multitude of straight Lines, all from a single
Point, may be produced in Infinitum, yet whenever such Lines are contracted
into a Point, from any Indefinite Distances, if their Occasions Require them to
go farther, they are obliged to separate again, and expatiate on the other side
in Proportion to their former Contraction. And thus, I think, we have cleared
the Controversy by a plain Demonstration.

N. B. The Reader must not take it ill, if I once again put him in mind of his
Old Engagements to Secresy; for though this Doctrine touching Editions be
imparted to him as a Friend, I would not have it go any further for twice the
worth of my Copy-money. I, fuge, sed poter as tutior esse domi.
-- Monstror digito praetereuntium,
-- quod statua taciturnius erro,
Et risu populum quatio, risurus and ipse;
Quem bis terque bonum cum risu forte stupebunt
Lectorum chorus omnis, inexpletum Lecturi.
Humano capiti cervicem Pictor equinam
Iungere si velit, and varias inducere plumas,
Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici?


Variantes quaedam Lectiones.
The following Various Readings could not conveniently be disposed in their
proper Pages, because the Margin would have been too much crowded, and also
because we did not receive them till the Book was Printed off.

P. 24. Instead of all of a sudden, the Alex. MS. reads all on a suddain^ Grut.
all on the sudden. Gembl. and Bruil. and Pal. of the sudden. Gulielm. (prave ut
videtur) soding. Vict. and Manutio placet All so done.

P. 28. Stanza 1. Bodl. reads* And listen to this merry Song,
A mere Round O of Lovers.


St. 11. Id. Bodl. And fain would travail Bed-ward.

St. 22. Bodl. and Pemb. But Nan grew wroth,
And claiming both,
Kissed Duke as much as Aaron.


St. 24. Ascon. Paed. and Cujac. Where Is my Nic led?

Lamb. Where Is my Nic led?

Hot. and Steph. O Nicolas, Nicolas, where is my Niking!
Quo' Kate the Taylor's Dafter;
And kissed so mainly to her liking,
She scarce could hold her Wafter.


St. Camb. -- so wistful
Fired with his Charms and Graces;
It Is said that, if she were a Pistol,
She would go off in Face his.


Cujac. and Alex. and all the lost MSS. read Fly off in Phys his.

St. 33. Codices Impressi fere omnes habent.

And tore her Coif to rags. Bemb. legit

And tore her Pinner off. Quod placuit etiam Hotomano, sed nobis videtur non
admittendum.

35. Alb.

But kissed like old Queen Dido.
Quod videtur durum and parum probabile.
39. Multi MSS

In all Our Town. Page 75. Bodl. Jove was just then at Even and Odd, as is
The Sport amongst Gods and their Fine Goddesses.


79. Turneb. legit The Goddess-ship of her Virginity,
Or Maidenhead of her Divinity.


Idem in the Kentish Petition, P. 127. leg. When Venus I invoked with Tears,
Venus was DUNNY to my Prayers.


Idem, P. 113. For Vatum Graecorum, leg. Vatum Grajugenum.

ERRATA.
Not withstanding the great Care that has been used in Correction, the
following Errata have escaped the Press; which you are therefore desired to
rectify with your Pen.

IN the Table of Contents, N. XXVII. r. as apparently tending. N. XXXII.
instead of Haecceity, r. Humility. N. XXXVI. instead of the Emperors, r. Caesar
of H -- and Aug -- s of S --. N. XXXVII. instead of Mr. Wotton, r. the very
Learned Mr. Wootton.

Page 1. instead of the Ground of a Satirical Fable, r. The Subject of an Epick
Poem, or any thing else that you shall think better. For an Intelligible, r. an
Unintelligible manner. P. 2. System of Things -- supply i. e. Ideas. I might
say the Shadows -- Add -- as a Man's Face is the Shadow of its Representative
in the Looking-Glass. P. 4. For whosoever is Simple let him turn in hither, r.
Whosoever is VERY SIMPLE, etc. For we should lose even Sense it self, r. lose our
Senses. To not feeling those we touch, add, nor understanding what we talk of.
P. 8. To the Idea of a Thing is intelligibly that Thing, add, as the Idea of an
Idea is Intelligibly that Idea; and so likewise vice versa a Thing or Object is
Sensibly its own Idea. P. 9. To so hard to understand, add, except what ought
to be Unintelligible for the sake of explaining something else. P. 19. For
Learned Reader, lege, Gentle Reader. P. 27. For my Brother Touchin, read,
Tutchin. P. 33. St. r. Good sooth it would
Have done one Good, etc.
P. 73. The Words What we have been discoursing of being Equivocal, and
therefore very Fine, you are desired to Read them in Italick Letters, though
not Printed so.

P. 97. The Translation of Damnosae quid non, etc.

is thus to be supplied, Our Grandsires they were Papists,
Our Fathers Oliverians;
Their Bearns, it is said, are Atheists,
Ours must be Cursed Queer ones!
P. 117. r. pushing him forward sometimes out of Ideal Eagerness, and sometimes
treading upon his Intelligible Heels. P. 142. After Exert his whole Eloquence,
add, Quote all the Fathers. P. 148. r. Insanos inter. P. 114. In the Margin,
For If we had not an Innate Idea of a Circle, r. If the eternal Idea of a
Circle were not presented to our Minds by and in God, so as to be inwardly seen
by us, etc.

I am obliged to retract the word Innate, or at least to Advertise my Reader
that it is not to be strictly understood in this, and other Places where it
recurs, having found since my writing those Passages, that Mr. Norris rejects
it. Nevertheless the Absurdity of his Notions will easily fall in with that of
Innate Ideas, and bear the Representation I have here made of the Ideal World.

Valete and Plaudite.

(...)

FINIS.

