PROLOGUE TO A Commonwealth of Women, Spoke by Mr. HAYNES, Habited like a WHIG,
Captain of the Scyth-men in the West, a Scythe in his Hand.
FROM the West, as Champion in defense of Wit,
I come, to mow the Critticks of the Pit,
Who think we have not improved what Fletcher Writ.
This Godly Weapon first invented was
By Whigs, to cut down Monarchy like Grass;
But I know better how to use these Tools,
And have reserved my Scythe to mow down Fools:
Yet of my Conscience they would sprout again,
And the Herculean Labor were in vain.
The Pit, like Hydra's, still would yield supplies,
From one lop't Block-head, twenty more would rise.
A sort of paltry Critticks yonder sit,
For this destroying Engine not unfit,
Cuckolds were always Enemies to Wit;
For Wit often draws the Wife to leave her Spouse,
To take a small refreshing bit with us.
Fantastic Tastes how hard it is to please!
Critticks, like Flies, have several Species.
There Is one that just has paid his grutch'd half-Crown,
Cries, Rot the Play, Pox on it, let us cry it down.
The censuring Spark would fain seem Great and Witty,
Yet Whispers Politics with Orange Betty;
She cracks his Philberds, whilst he, in her Ear,
Is Fighting over again the Western War,
Bragging what numbers his sole Arm has killed,
Though the vain Fop perhaps was never in the Field.
Thus Worm that snugs in Shell where it was bred,
Is nothing to the Maggot in his head,
For Harmless Insect that those Nuts create
Is nothing to the Maggot of the Pate,
Now such a Fop as this would I be at.
Another to complete his daily Task,
Fluster'd with Claret, seizes on a Mask,
Hisses the Play, steals off with Punk in the dark,
He Damns the Poet, but she Claps the Spark.
I wonder if the Law could doom one dead,
That now should lop off such a Fellow's Head!
It cannot be found Murder. -- And to share
This dreadful Fate, You Critticks all prepare.
For besides all my Scythians yet unseen,
We Have yet a Female Commonwealth within,
Who strongly Armed, like Furies venture on,
And if y'approach their Trenches once, you are gone.
EPILOGUE.
HOW silly it is for one, not yet Thirteen,
To hope her first Essay should please you Men:
You cannot taste what such a Creature speaks;
Would she were three years older for your sakes;
Two handfuls taller, a Plump pretty Lass,
I doubt not then my Epilogue would pass.
But, as I am, for your Applause I sue,
Pray spare me for the Good that I may do.
Gallants, I better shall perform e're long,
Despise not a poor thing because she is young.
Twigs may be bent, Trees are too stubborn grown;
And the Roses Bud is sweet as Roses blown.
In China (as I often have been told)
The Women marry at eleven years old:
Our Playhouse is a kind of China too,
And nothing like the Stage to make me grow;
For, though not Power, I have the Will to please,
And Will's a mighty help in such a Case.
We on this fruitful Soil have Women seen,
That in few Months have grown as big again.
Oh Iemminy! what is the Cause of that?
I wonder what they Eat to grow so Fat?
We young ones know not how that business is;
But for all that we may be allowed to guess;
And I beginning now to chatter Sense,
Encouraged, may divert a Twelvemonth hence:
And therefore humbly thus I make Address,
Excuse Faults, and accept my Will to please;
But if you fail me, may you nevermore
Kiss Woman under (at the least) fourscore.
FINIS.
This may be Printed.

Aug. 20. 1685. R. L. S.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley in Covent Garden, and are to be sold by R.
Baldwin in Old Bailey Corner. 1685.


