Trick for Trick: OR, The Debauched Hypocrite.

A COMEDY, As it is ACTED at the Theater Royal, By His MAJESTY'S Servants.

Written by Tho. Durfey, Gent.

Licensed, April 30th. 1678.

Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed for Langley Curtiss, in Goat-Court upon Ludgate Hill, 1678.

PROLOGUE,
Spoken by Mr. Haines in a Red Coat like a Common Soldier. SInce there is a
Dearth of Wit, and that to Play,
Is hardly worth one poor Brown George a Day;
I from the Poet, and our Friends within,
Am sent t'intreat, and your last Favors win,
E're we go hence and shall no more be seen.
For my part, --
I Will to the French Campaigne, where one may get
A certain Wholesome though a Homely Treat;
Good Oil and Cooling Sallads, though no meat:
Good Campany, good honest Lowste Currs.
There Is Honor to be got too -- Honor, Sirs;
Honor that makes the General's Voice sound loud,
And serves instead of Brandy to the Crowd.
My Spirits are revived; Methinks I hear
A Crew of Fire-fac'd Rogues embattled there,
Whose Motly Noses carry Hope and Fear:
Cry out, Fall on, we shall be Kings, Great Men,
Nay Emperors, the Devil knows how, and when.
Then Shouting all, advance they to the Siege,
And to the Plunder fall with Privilege.
Pray tell me then, is it not better far,
To live abroad when other Nations Iarr,
Then amongst our selves to make a Civil War?
Are not these Bandaliers, this Sword, this Coat,
Better than Tipstaves, or a Baily's Note?
To day we Play Great Kings, strutt, bounce and fly,
But e're next Morn the Shop's shut up -- God buy.
This by your great Unkindness is our Lot,
We share and share, it is true -- but nothing's got.
Like laboring Bees we toil for Wit, though poor,
Which you like Drones suck up, and hum for more,
But bring in nothing to the Winter-Store.
Wit is forgot; for with you Men of Miss,
Sense is unnatural as Marriage is --
Knowledge of this has made me what you see,
And if your tempers change not instantly,
Comedian Haines a man of Sword shall be.
It Is true, my Loyalty is not preserved,
But that in many has for Profit swerved;
Besides, it is better to be hanged than starved.
Dramatis Personae.
SIR Wilding Frollick Major Mohun. Monsieur Thomas Mr. Heart. Valentine Mr.
Griffin. Franck Mr. Clark. Hylas Mr. Goodman. Sir Peregreen Mr. Powell. Lance
Mr. Haynes. 3 Physicians. Mr. Watson. Mr. Coysh. Mr. Perin. Servants Cellida
Mrs. Bowtell. Sabina Mrs. Corbett. Lucilla. Mrs. Merchant. A Whore Mrs. Farlee.
Mrs. Dorothy Mrs. Knepp. 4 Women.
Trick for Trick: OR, The Debauched Hypocrite.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter Valentine and Franck. Val. COme prithee leave this Melancholic humor,
Franck; Don't disguise thy temper: For if it be Love that causes it, as I
shrewdly guess it is -- thou do so richly deserve to be laughed at.


Fra. I am not of your mind, Sir, but I wish you would tell me why.


Val. Why, suppose it be for a Beautiful Woman -- a smiling Rosy Charming
melting Woman; one that kisses with Art, but uses none -- that often sighs to
add more grace to her speech; and speaks never, but to show the perfection of
her Mind; that Sings with Skill, and Prays with Zeal; And never Jilts a Man
but to prove her own Innocence. In fine, One that is indeed the Jewel among
Women. Do thou not know, O Man, O Mortal, do thou not perceive that she
has all this only for Men -- shows all her Beauties only to please Men --
ha! do thou not know this?


Fra. Not I 'faith; but I find my self very willing to be Instructed.


Val. Well said, and 'faith thou shall be instructed to some purpose before I
leave thee.


Fra. But prithee how shall I know when a Woman loves me, that does, and will not
tell it me? my greatest Ignorance lies in that.


Val. Oh -- well remembered 'faith -- why Franck -- if she loves thee, when thou
art in company with her, thou shall see her leer upon thee -- like a crafty
Shopkeeper after a fellow that has bid him money.


Enter a Servant. Servant. Sir, Mr. Hylas is below, and come to visit ye.


Val. Hylas? Is he returned to England so soon? Well, desire him to walk up.


Fra. Hylas! I believe I know him -- if it be he I mean, he is a shallow fellow,
much pleased with his own Inconstancy.


Val. You have hit him, Sir -- he now were a fitter Person to give thee a
Lecture about Women than I; he has been the most Inconstant, and the most
adventurous Fool in the Town, been abused by all sorts of Women -- and yet
dares love a fresh.


Fra. A very modish Character.


Val. I believe Mad Tom's come back with him, Monsieur Thomas as we call him
here, for they two have ever yet been Inseparable; but here he comes.


Enter Hylas. Ah Jack! welcome home 'faith -- I am glad to see thee with all my
heart; how do thou, ha?

Hyl. 'Faith, very well, the better to see my dear Val in so good a humor --
well, and prithee how fare all our Friends, and among the rest, all the Bona
Roba's of the Age, ha? Any new faces of late worth a man's observance? Come, I
know thou art generally acquainted, and thou art sure thou can not oblige me
more, than by such a relation, what say thou?


Val. Why only this, That to thy boundless comfort, the Town's full of them;
But, for my part, thou know I want the faculty of Address -- I am no Woman's
Man, Jack.


Hyl. How? no Woman's Man -- ye lie Val. do you hear? (and give me thy hand) I
cannot oblige thee more than to tell thee so: But hark ye, is not that Frank
Wellbred, there?


Val. The same; one that I can assure you, will be proud to be listed among
your Friends.


Hyl. Will he? and 'faith -- I Will do him that honor instantly. Franck, thy
humble Servant, -- 'faith -- I hardly knew thee at first -- why sure, thou art
plaguily altered, or else I am: Thou look quite another Man, than thou were
formerly.


Fra. Sir -- Time blots the nearest Friends out of our Memories, And that is the
reason that makes you think I am altered: But, though I am so, I see you hold
your old humor still, You are the same. That is, as much a fool as ever. Aside.


Hyl. 'Faith thou art in the right, I am so, I am as mad an Inconstant
Debauched Son of a Whore as ever I was. Why what a Pox should a man do poreing,
and dreaming out his time for, when he can spend it to better advantage, I am
for a short life, and a merry, I.


Val. 'Faith, I believe thee, thou art a Latitudinarian in Debauchery; and for
Hectring, Bilking, Drinking, and for Wenching, let thee alone.


Hyl. Ah Rogue, for Wenching let me alone, as thou say; For, if any Female
scapes me, she must be a copy of my Grandame Eve; for from Fifteen to Five and
fifty, I have tried already.


Fra. Why, well said -- what an impudent damned lying Rogue is this? Aside.


Hyl. But now we are talking of Debauchees -- Prithee Val, Who do thou think
is come over with me?


Val. Why, it may be, he that went with thee, the Bully of Covent Garden, Mad
Tom of Covent Garden.


Hyl. Why, what a Plaguey guess have thou? -- 'faith, thou art in the right, Mad
Tom, Mounsieur Thomas is returned, 'gad I believe thou art a Conjurer.


Val. No, no, I have only a small Familiar -- well -- I hope he has brought the
same Virtues home with him, that he carried out?


Hyl. Ah, more, Val, more -- he was but a Puny before he went, But now he is
grown Arts Master -- it is strange he has not been here; told me the first thing
he did, should be to Visit thee.


Val. I have not seen him yet, but I hear he has a Father in Town, I suppose,
duty carries him thither first.


Hyl. He has so; why do thou not know him? Sir Wilding Frollick his own
Father to a hair; did thou never hear his Character?


Val. No; prithee, what is it?


Hyl. 'Faith, a pleasant one -- why Sir, the Old Knight is three times more
debauched than he, encourages him in it, and provides him Tutors, to teach him
the Arts of Playing, Drinking, and Wenching, sent him to Travel, to learn
Experience, he had like to have dis inherited him the other day, for breaking his
assignation with -- an Old Whore, that was rotten seven years before, and was
then under the Surgeon's hands; ha, ha.


Fra. A very hopeful Family.


Enter Sabina, and Cellide. Hyl. By St. Christopher, rare Creatures! ah! ye
little fleering Queen you -- Pox on her, what an Eye she has.


Sabin. Brother, pray let me desire you to receive my Cousin, Sir Peregrine
Goodall's Daughter, a worthy person, and one that is pleased to give me the
honor of her Love, and Acquaintance.


Val. She shall command here as my self -- Madam, your humble Servant. Salutes
her.


Hyl. I must have a touch too -- fair Saint your most -- devoted -- ah, how it
hangs about my Lips.


Aside. Val. I hope your Father's well, Madam.


Cell. He was three days since -- I have his Letter for ye, will give you full
satisfaction.


Val. This Favor makes me much his Debtor. Reads. Lor'd, Madam -- what does
Sir Peregreene mean by all these Ceremonies, he desires you may lodge here with
my Sister, till he comes to Town; and does it here with so many reiterated
expressions of Obligations received, that it far exceeds the poorness of the
courtesy -- I thought he had known, Madam, that his Commands, rather than
Entreaties, had been honors to me -- Sister, pray see all things provided for
my Cousin, and once more welcome to my house.


Cell. You Will find me a bold Guest, Sir -- but I am no stranger to your generous
temper.


Sabin. For my part, I am glad for my own sake, for now I shall have some
Company to go and see a Play now and then.


Fra. Your Friend Val. is struck dumb, prithee speak to him, he is in a fit sure.


Val. Hark ye Jack -- Prithee what think thou of this Lady, Is she not
tight, cleanly shaped, and well rigged, ha?


Hyl. Ay, ay, -- would I had her in a Sack at my Lodging, I desire no better
Company.


Val. But which of them do like best? deal faithfully.


Hyl. Why 'faith, to be free with thee, I like them both best; I tell ye, I Am a
right Rover, I never bestow all my passion upon one: Woman, if there be another
in the Company; I don't hold it for good manners.


Val. Why merry be thy heart -- what now, Sirrah?


Enter Servant. Servant. Sir, Monsieur Thomas is below, and desires to kiss
your hands.


Val. Wait on him up; so, now for the Entertainment.


Sabin. Hark there, Madam, does not that Sound rejoice your heart? Monsieur
Thomas, your old Gallant -- that used to Court ye with Songs; Serenades,
Masks, Fiddles, Fa-la's, and the Devil and all, is returned from Travel, full
of the same Virtues he carried with him, and has found you out already.


Cell. I know it -- for I unluckily met him, just as I was coming out of the
Coach, and he would not let me go till I told him where I was to lodge; I know
I shall be troubled with his former Impertinencies; but if I do not fit him --


Sabin. Hark! he is coming up -- if you have not a mind to see him, It Is but
stepping here to this Closet, and you may, unknown to him, hear what he says.


Cell. With all my heart.


Hyl. Madam, will my company breed your diversion, 'faith I Am in Earnest,
desire to appear serviceable to your Ladyship.


Cell. Your Wit, Sir, will be better employed another way; Come Cousin, let us
go listen to the Gentleman, no doubt, we shall find a great reformation.


Hyl. Why, look ye Gentlemen, this is always my damned luck, Pox on it, they
will not allow me so much as a Leere; but hush -- here comes the Monsieur.


Enter Monsieur Thomas and Lance. Tho. Dear Val, let me have thee in my arms,
and there give me leave to tell thee, thou art my best of Friends -- What Jack,
my Noble Friend, and fellow-Traveller, art thou here too? and my dear Franck?
nay then, let us incorporate and make one body, our hearts I know are united
already -- and let me boldly now confess I Am proud to mingle with such worth
and honor.


Val. Here Is your Courtier, Gentlemen -- but prithee Friend, let us have no more
of this; Ceremony among Friends, betrays as little Love, as Jesting among 'em
-- thou know I love thee.


Tho. 'Faith, I believe thou do -- Well Gentlemen, what news then, You that
live here in this free thriving Climate, I Am sure you can never want that.


Fra. I hear, the King of Poland has received a considerable loss in a Pitched
Battle -- but new Succors lately coming in, it is thought he will adventure
once more.


Hyl. The Grand Signior, they say, is sick too.


Tho. Is he? why, let him be damned too -- prithee, what a Devil have thou and
I to do with the Grand Signior, or with the King of Poland's fighting. Why
Gentlemen, you mistake me; when I spoke of News, I did not mean what Accidents,
or what Battles have been fought; but what Wine, what merry Songs, what good
Company, what Women are abroad? there lies my Province; The Other is fitter for a
Grocer, and stinks so of a Coffee-house I hate it.


Val. Mad Tom still I see -- hark ye, Jack Hylas there can help thee to Twenty
Women, he is one of their Counsel.


Hyl. I saw two not long ago that --


Val. Hush -- Pox on thee thou will discover all -- but my dear mad Rogue,
prithee, what exploits have thou performed since thou have been absent -- I Am
sure that story must needs be divertive -- come, impart.


Tho. Not In Faith, I have more modesty than to speak things so much in my own
praise, I thank ye-but if thou knew'st all Val -- Could I but infuse into thee,
the Intrigues, the Rambles, the Serenades, the Quarrels -- and the punishment
attending 'em, which most valiantly -- and 'faith I think much like a
Gentleman, I have undergone, and attempted, 'twere enough to put thee into a
Fever; therefore, in pity to thee I Will desist.


Val. Nay, prithee, if thou do not care to speak it thy self, Let thy Man
relate it for thee.


Tho. My Man -- why he is the dullest Rogue in the World; We shall have it from
him, in a Gallamafry of Languages; prithee observe him, See, how he looks, he is
the most Impudent, and withal, the most Ignorant Son of a Whore, that ever I
met with. A pox on him, he sticks on me like a Burr, not to be shaken off.


Lance. Vat is dis -- Vat is de Matra dat they stare upon me, Begar, he be
telling some dam Lie now.


Fra. Come, prithee, let us hear it from him however, It must needs be very
divertive.


Tho. Well, for your sake, I Will try him -- You shall hear one of my last
Frollicks at Paris. -- Come Sirrah, you sneaking Dog, advance before me, put
your face in a Posture, And then tell it.


Lance. Yes, -- with all my heart -- Serviteur Gentlemen.


Tho. Come, Sirrah, begin.


Lance. Vell, Vell -- presantly, presantly -- hum -- but what must me tell --
it is requisite I should know dat.


Tho. Sirrah, Declare, and with rhetoric, tropes, figures, and such like; for
if you pronounce it in your every days language, I will make your face plainer
by a Nose, Rascal -- I say, Declare to my Friends here my last Frollick at
Paris.


Lance. Oh -- de Frollick at Par^^ -- well -- now I know what to tell, Let me
alone -- hum -- Gentlemen, the Noble Monsieur my Matra here, going out of his
Lodging one Moonshine Night, with intent to diverta himself, with the various
Object, he very fortunately met in the Street -- Who was it you met in the
Street -- Jernie I have forgot that.


Tho. A Whore, ye Dog; who should a man meet at that time of Night; I told ye
what a dull Rogue he was.


Lance. A Whore; right, a Whore -- my Membra be a little short, but that is all
one -- Vel, dis Whore give him the Jogg -- as the damned Bitch did to me here
in Covent Garden -- the other Night. He, as a well-bred Gentleman should --
follows her, and to say truth, the Woman had a great many divertive,
Inscrutable, unintelligable, abominable, Intrinsickable postures with her.


Tho. What, what is that, Sirrah -- Inscrutable, Intrinsickable; bless me, what
stuff's this ye Dog?


Lance. Vat is it -- why do you not know -- why, it is Rhetoric as you bid me
speak; Jernie -- you do not know tropes, and figure, when you hear 'em.


Tho. What think you now -- was there ever such an Insipid Rogue-? you will
speak more to the purpose, Rascal, will you not?


Fra. Prithee speak it in another language, or in English, if thou can, that
we may understand the better.


Lance. Speak it in an odra Language?


Hyl. Ay, Plainer, in English.


Lance. Why, so I can Sir, as plain as you if you go to that. Whoo, what a
Pox, dee think I cannot speak English?


Tho. Why, ye Impertinent Dog, must I be played with all this while, speak
quickly, or I will so --


Lance. Well, well, Lord you are very Choleric; so as I was saying Gentlemen,
my Master going along with this Gentlewoman --


Tho. This Gentlewoman -- what Gentlewoman --? this Whore -- Rogue, this Whore
-- Sirrah, let me have no corruption of Notions -- But speak every thing in its
Nature -- by this Light, Gentlemen, a scurvy Suburb Whore, that smelt of
nothing but Tobacco, and Brandy.


Lance. Well, to be short, going farther, we met a Company of fellows
attended by a blind Harper, and a Taber and Pipe, they were bringing along 3 or
4 Bears that were the next day to be baited, my Master presently bargains with
'em for a Pistol to carry this Gentlewoman -- this Whore I mean, in triumph
home to her Lodging upon one of the Bears, ha, ha -- she was easily persuaded;
for the truth is, she was a little too Maudlin to be refractory; my Office was
to be Marshal, to keep the Boys from throwing Eggs, and Tirnups, and he was
the Orator to declare her quality -- and Virtues -- but had you seen the Rabble
shouting, the noise that the blind Harper, and Taber and Pipe made, my Master
bawling, the Whore singing, and I quarelling among the Boys, you would have
blessed your self. Hark ye Sir, shall I tell now how you were beaten, and thrown
into a Ditch coming home too?


Val. Ha! what is that, thrown into a Ditch?


Tho. Ay, ay -- a saucy fellow. I threw him into a Ditch, for taking the Wall
of me -- Sirrah, not a word more of that, as you expect to eat again -- Aside.


Lance. Mum, I have done -- O Lord, not eat again?


Sabin. Dee hear this Cousin? here is your reformed Gentleman.


Cell. He has Traveled to fine purpose, if this be all he has learnt; I Am glad
I Have heard this, I might have been mistaken else.


Tho. Sirrah, go you instantly to my Father, and tell him I Am returned, And
sift his Inclination handsomely, that I may know whether his old humor hold,
or no; away, by that time you have prepared him a little, I ll come, and
prosecute; I must have a trick upon him, or I shall get no money.


Lance. I am gone Sir -- his Father if he be not changed since I saw him last,
is ten times madder than he; it is a strange World this! in a Young Man it is
Natural, but that an Old Fellow should be so debauched -- mercy on us, how can
he hope to be saved? Exit Lance.


Tho. Well Gentlemen, what think you of my Frollick?


Fran. 'Faith, 'twas very extravagant, yet gave occasion for Mirth enough.


Tho. Ah, I have a thousand of 'em, and as many Mistresses to play upon; but
now I talk of Mistresses, I thought I should have seen one of 'em here before
now, my Old Love, Val. Madam Cellide, I met her yesterday, and she told me, she
was to lodge here.


Val. She will not be long from hence, Sir.


Enter Cellide and Sabina. Cell. They have my name in question, and I Will hear
what he says of me a little nearer.


Hyl. I have the honor to have some little knowledge of her; But prithee Tom,
how has she entertained thee since thy return? for I remember you were always
quarrelling together formerly.


Tho. Ay, that is true, but let me tell you Friend, the case is altered now;
Why, though we were fallen out, and I have not seen her these six Months, yet
I prevailed with her yesterday to go to the Tavern with me.


Val. How, to the Tavern?


Cell. Heaven! what a ly's this! was ever such Impudence!


Sabin. Hush, hear more.


Tho. To the Tavern? Ay, to the Tavern -- and 'faith, between you and I, took
off her Bumper as roundly and heartily as one of us could; And believe me, I
had a great deal of Joy to see it.


Val. Ha, ha, ha -- why then I see she could dispense with her Modesty, to give
compliance to your Love.


Tho. Modesty, what is that, prithee?


Val. Why a Virtue that is as necessary for young Ladies as their Beauty.


Tho. Is it, well, I thank Fortune, and her Education, she understands nothing
of it -- No, no, she is all free and charming -- ah! had thou but seen her
Eyes sparkling, her Breast panting, her Sighs flowing, her Body trembling, and
her Arms twining about me -- Ah Rogue -- what a Pox, that is not she I hope!
Throws his Arms upon Val, sees Cellide, and starts.


Val. By my faith it is, now I think on it, the very she, the same Obliging,
Loving, Flexible Creature you spoke of.


Tho. Umph -- I am in a fine Condition. Plays with his Hat.


Cell. Impudent Detractor! how dare you blast a Ladies Reputation thus! I at
the Tavern? I Kiss ye, and Clasp ye in my Arms? No, I Would sooner do it to my
Footman; and were I not certain that these Gentlemen know me better, than to
believe a word thou have said, I would not sleep, till I were revenged.


Tho. So, -- will the Devil never leave these tricks?


Cell. It seems, it is now your custom to abuse Ladies, but let me tell ye Sir,
and with an anger just, and warranted, I am none of those easy Creatures that
will suffer such affronts, My Education and Modesty are both proofs against
that, I assure ye.


Sabin. She carries it well -- but if he knew how well she loved him, We should
have better sport.


Tho. Why, Hang me, Madam, if I meant any hurt, It Is only a damned way of
expressing my self, which I have got.


Cell. Curse on your debauched Phrases -- must my defamation be your way to
express your self, you Impudent, base fellow?


Tho. Why faith, the truth is, I am a very Impudent fellow, This debauched
World leads us all astray.


Cell. This was certainly a very new way of Courtship, or could you Imagine I
would be taken with the Wit on it, when I should happen to hear your Character
of me? whatever you think, I know my own mind, and it is a question, whether any
of your future services will ever be strong enough to blot this affront out of
my memory. Exeunt Cellide and Sabina.


Tho. Bounce -- there goes the Cannon -- ha, ha -- She was in a plaguey heat
Gentlemen, ha, was she not?


Val. It seems so -- but what a damned lying Rogue art thou, To say thou had
her at a Tavern?


Hyl. Ay, and that she kissed him -- and claspt him in her Arms, and drank a
Bumper to his health at her first coming in.


Fra. 'Twas well she came in, and hindered ye before you could go further,
Certainly you must needs have been foundered, else your lie would have been
discovered.


Tho. No 'faith, all on it was no lie -- but I must confess to you, under the Rose
here, I did stretch a little, as a good teller of a Story should; -- for a man
can no more tell a good Story; without enlarging upon his Jest -- than a Poet
can make a good Play, without enlarging upon his Plot.


Val. Nay, let thee alone to bring it off, be it what it will; But come, if
thou will go in with me, I Will give thee thy Welcome to Town.


Tho. No, I have business elsewhere; Nor must this angry Beauty sleep in her
displeasure -- but first to my Father -- and whatever you hear of my Actions,
Gentlemen, Not a word of my Humor; for though to you I appear a Mad, Wild,
Monsieur; To him I must be Ananias -- Walk thus -- Look thus -- Spit thus -- I
have a Plot in it, and you will find it your diversion, if you think it worth your
patience; for the present, Adieu.


Val. Farewell Wild Oats.


Tho. Now to my Sober Look; thus often we see, The Plodding Fool's the greatest
Debauchee. Exit.


The End of the First Act.
ACT II. SCENE I.
Enter Sir Wilding and Lance. Sir Wild. SIrrah, no more of your French
shruggs, I advise you. If you are Lousy, shift your self.


Lance. Loosie -- Vat a diable -- me Loosie -- why Monsieur -- do you
understand who you speak too -- me Loosie? Jernie, that is fine indeed.


Sir Wild. Let me have no more of your French Grimaces, Rogue, But fetch your
Master, your Master, and my Son, body of me Sir, No money, No more money,
Monsieur Lance, not a deneer Sweet, Signior, but bring me instantly my Boy, my
mad Tom, Monsieur Thomas, or get you gone again; Du gat a Whee Sir, Basa mi cu,
good Lancelot, Valetote, my Boy, or Nothing.


Lance. Why so you shall, Sir -- but you won'not hear me, because you speak
all your self -- what a damned dull Old fellow this is!


Sir Wild. Why then Sirrah be facetious, and speak quickly, and do not mop, nor
mow, nor draw your mouth into a damned Posture; Sirrah, I hate all postures; I
say be facetious, and quick.


Lance. Jernie, why so I will be facetious and quick, if you would holda your
Tongue; begar Monsieur, you have the most Eternal Clack -- You will let no body
speaka but your self.


Sir Wild. Be brief Rogue, be brief.


Lance. Why then -- because your Worships Vulgar Judgment shall meeta me at
the nearest -- Your Son, my Matra, or Mounsieur Thomas, is at last arrived to
ask your (as the worthy French man call it) Benediction de jour en jour.


Sir Wild. Sirrah, do not conjure me with your French Furies.


Lance. Che dit a vou, Monsieur.


Sir Wild. Che doga vou rascal, leave your damned rotten language, and tell me
plainly where your Master is, and why he does not come -- or -- shall I crack
your French Crown? Sirrah -- I have maintained you and your Monsieur these two
years at your Ditty vous, your Iours, Jour me no more; for not another penny
shall pass my purse till Thomas comes himself; then, if I find him profited,
the Wild, the Wanton, the Mad Tom I wish him -- he shall not want the means,
whilst I have any; do not answer me, unless in English, Sirrah.


Lance. English -- Well, and so I will, and let me tell ye, that 'faith he will
fit you to a hair -- Sir, he was the most debauched Fellow in Paris when he was
there such Rearing, such Revelling, such Serenading, and such Whoring; Oh he is
a fine man.


Sir Wild. Why this is comfort now -- there is for thy News; why now I like thee
-- but Sirrah, is he such a mad Rogue still? Is he my blood, and bones, ha?


Lance. I and other Peoples blood and bones too Sir, let me tell you, that --
hark ye Sir -- give me a Crown to make my self drunk With drinking your health
to Night, and I Will tell you -- something of him shall make you merry at heart,


Sir Wild. Will thou? by Bacchus I Will do it then -- there -- Come, I stand on
thorns to hear it, what is it, what is it?


Lance. Why Sir -- he has had since we left England by Citizens Wives, and
their Daughters, private Ladies, and Night Adventurers -- Another half Crown
Sir -- or I cannot in conscience tell it else.


Sir Wild. Nay, prithee Lance -- 'faith, now you are too hard --


Lance. Too hard -- why, it is worth a Pound Sir; 'Faith you should not have it
so cheap, but that ye are my Friend.


Sir Wild. Pox on thee for a Rogue -- there it is -- come be brief now, What new
Prank has the Rogue played, ha?


Lance. Why Sir -- by these Women, which I have already mentioned to you, he
has had since you saw him last -- 4 Bastards, ha, ha.


Sir Wild. Four? has he 'faith? ha, ha, ha; by Bacchus, a brave Boy. Four? ha,
ha -- I am overjoyed to hear this; But how Lance, how?


Lance. Why Sir, one of 'em was begot in a Cobler's Stall, Which he broke open
for the purpose.


Sir Wild. Ha, ha, ha -- So --


Lance. Another Sir, upon the Back-Stairs at the Louvre, And the other two in
a Church.


Sir Wild. Ha, ha, ha -- better and better -- I am grown young again at this
News -- four? -- Cock of four -- ha, ha, -- a Rascal in faith. Iumps about.


Lance. Hush Sir, here he comes -- Mum, not a word of this I have told ye.


Enter Monsieur Thomas. Sir Wild. What, my Boy -- mad Tom -- Monsieur Thomas, I
am glad in faith to see thee, I have wished for thee, Tom, for you wild Thomas --
Tom, I thank thee heartily for coming home.


Tho. Be pleased to give me your Blessing Sir -- Sighs.


Sir Wild. Thou have it, Tom, may thou live, and multiply till thou art a
hundred and ten; and as thou art now Cock of four, may thou be Cock of
Fifty, and sound ones.

I have prayed for thee, and hope thou art the better for it.


Tho. Sir, I do find your Prayers have much prevailed above my Sins.


Sir Wild. How Is this, Sins! -- what Sins, Tom?


Tho. Else surely I had perished with my rudeness.


Sir Wild. Ha. --


Tho. E're I had won my self to that discretion, I hope you shall hereafter
find --


Sir Wild. What -- discretion, oons is it come to that, Sirrah? Lance -- Dog
-- is this the reformation, is this your Cock of four?


Lance. Lord Sir, what dee mean, why you mistake your Father clearly; Why,
he is as debauched as you Sir, he likes it in ye, and will cherish it, good Sir,
unmask, unmask.


Tho. Sirrah you Rogue -- look for it, for I will make thee ten times more
miserable than thou thought thy self before thy Travel; Thou have told my
Father, I know it, and I find it, all my Rogueries by mere way of prevention,
to undo me.


Lance. Sir, as I speak Eight Languages, I only told him you came to ask his
Benediction -- de jour en jour.


Tho. But that it is my duty to be civil now -- I would beat thee like a Dog.


Lance. The Devil's in him -- this is another Whim now, but I Will be gone, for
I Am sure the Old Man's Fingers itch at me, and I think, it is not fit that
Learning should be beaten. Exit.


Tho. However, Sir, the time I have misspent, may make you doubtful, Nay
harden your belief against my Conversion.


Sir Wild. Forgive me! -- Conversion! -- this is worst of all -- O Pox on
Travel, I say.


Tho. Yet, dear Father, your own experience in my after-courses, and
observation of my Life and Carriage, may yield some satisfaction; for I Will
reform my self in every thing: I won'not be drunk, nor swear, nor Wench, Pray
forgive me Sir, Indeed I will no more be so forgetful, hah. Sighs.


Sir Wild. Ha -- the Devil ha ye, and the Pox too -- spoiled, quite spoiled,
for ever lost; a Plague of Travel, If this be the fruits on it.


Tho. Let not your Ears be open to my Enemies, he leads an ill life Sir, that
never mends -- there are a sort of sober Men in the Town, which the Rabble call
Phanaticks; these I will follow to instruct my self -- and you shall see me
mount the losty Hogshead, and teach, and preach, and sing, and say, and pray,
--


Sir Wild. And ha, and Yea, and Nay, and Fool, and Ass, and Coxcomb. Mocks him.


Tho. Ay, ay Sir -- you have reason to be angry, but let Religion tell ye I am
your Son, Sir.


Sir Wild. Ye lie Sir, and get you out of my doors -- I disclaim ye; Undone,
without redemption! hang him, he will drink by Thimbles full -- like a sneaking
Rascal -- how the Devil have I sinned, that this affliction should light so
heavy on me? Well, I Will go seek an Heir -- I am resolved on it, for my
Inheritance must not turn Secretary; my Name and Quality has kept my Land three
hundred years in Madness -- and if it slip now, may it sink for ever -- But
first, I Will find out this lying Rogue, this Dog, this Lance, that took my
money, and then fooled me -- I Will find him, and I Will cudgel him to Mummy. Exit.


Tho. Ha ha ha, this verifies the Old Proverb, No Impudence like that hid under
the Vizor of Zeal. A sudden compliance will now make him part from his Estate
more willingly, but the time is not come yet -- I must amuse him a little
longer -- my dear Sister -- I am glad to to see thee, did thou meet my
Father?


Enter Mrs. Dorothy. Dor. Yes, but very angry to my thinking.


Tho. 'Faith, he does ill in it, for I was uttering a handsome speech or two --
I have been studying e're since I come from Paris; but how do thou, ha?


Doro. Very well, and gladder to see you, and with more Love, I dare affirm it,
than my Father's sorry, to see, as he supposes, your Conversion; I am sure he
is vexed to'th' Heart.


Tho. Pish.


Doro. Nay, I know it, He has prayed against it strongly.


Tho. I warrant thee, let me alone -- I can bring all off when I list, and yet
be mad too; ah Doll, ever take a Traveller for a Plot -- but hark ye, I have a
little business for thee.


Doro. Yours, is my business, speak, and be obeyed; You know I can deny you
nothing.


Tho. Ah poor Soul! 'Faith, thou art a dear Rogue to me; Well, you partly may
guess this; it is concerning my Old Mistress, Madam Cellide.


Doro. Oh Sir, are you there already -- what, some small affront to her I Will
lay my life -- and I Am to be Arbitrator.


Tho. 'Faith thou art in the right -- and it is but a small matter -- but you
know she is so pettish --


Doro. Some lie -- or defamation of her, I Will lay my life.


Tho. No, faith, no, a petty business, a flight matter; but however, to make
all well again -- I have writ her a Letter here, and my Suit to thee, is to be
Emissary -- thou can hit her humor right, and I Am sure will put in a Word or
two (by the by) for me, for old acquaintance sake.


Doro. Well Sir, I Will do what I can, but I assure ye, she has heard of all your
mad Tricks, the Gambols you have played since your departure, in every Town you
came, your several Mischiefs, your Rowses, and your Wenches; all your Quarrels
too, and the no causes of 'em -- Your fame came over before ye.


Tho. Whoo Pox -- lies, damned lies -- prithee tell her I am converted now; Not
like the man I was: Thou had a pretty faculty of swearing once, Prithee try
-- Pox, what is an Oath or two to oblige a Brother -- Pshaw, pshaw, it is nothing
-- I Will swear an hour together for thee at any time.


Doro. A very friendly offer; Well Sir, though I will not promise ye to swear
as you request -- yet perhaps I may do your business as well.


Tho. Will thou? -- why a blessing on thy heart, and 'faith to requite thee, if
there be e're a tall, handsome, Well set brisk Fellow -- better than ordinary
about Town, I Will get him for thee, that thy business may be done too.


Enter Boy. How now Sirrah, what News?

Boy. Madam, there is two Ladies below come to Visit ye.


Doro. Ten to one it is they, and my trouble of going is saved; Tell her I Will
come.


Tho. I Will not be seen -- 'twill look like modesty in me, and play but thy part
now dear Rogue, and command me for ever. Exit.


Enter Cellide and Sabina. Cellid. What, still this mopeing alone my dear --
why sure you have forgot what diversion or good Company means, or do ye intend
to turn Nun, and exclude your self from the World, and now practicing Austerity?


Doro. Neither of these assure your self; for first, I love Company too well,
to take my self from 'em, that am or desire to be a Considerable Subject; and
secondly, I love my self too well to exclude it from pleasing Society, through
any aversion I have for the World, or any passion for the Nunnery you speak of.


Cellide. I am very glad I am mistaken; but hearkee, do thou want e're a
Trick, a Design, a Plott, to bubble thy Servant, or so?


Doro. Not I indeed -- but how dee mean to Bubble him?


Cell. Why, cause him to stand in the Snow at thy Chamber Window all Night
long, to make him temperate -- or make him Jump over thy Turkey Chairs in the
Parlour, and break his Shins, to try his Activity -- or tie his hands behind
him, and then break his head with the Hilt of his own Sword, to try his Valor,
and Patience; -- or have thou occasion for a Lie -- a Woman's Lie? that is, a
loud, malicious -- swinging lie -- a lie that has stuff enough, and is not
spoiled in the making -- if thou have, speak, and if I do not fit thee.


Dor. Well, when I want, I Will not fail to make use of your offer. But I am now
employed upon a business -- and though you think me so retired a Person, to say
truth, I was just going out before you came, and coming to you, I have a Letter
for ye.


Cell. A Letter?


Sabin. A Billet Doux -- from some unknown Gallant I warrant that was surpised
in the Country.


Doro. No, he was surpised in Town, I can assure you that, and he is a Relation
of mine.


Cell. Oh, are ye thereabouts -- nay then I begin to smell the Jest, There is a
Wild Monsieur, a Brother of yours -- that is newly returned from Travel, one
that I confess has a better faculty at lying, than I have; and for defaming
Ladies, debauching their Women, beating Constables, breaking Glass Windows --
the most accomplished that ever came from Paris.


Doro. For what he has done, I have nothing to say, but only for what he is
now; and though I am his Sister, I dare assure you, never was man so much
altered in so short a time; he is grown the most sober, civil, well behaved,
courteous Man you ever saw -- Prithee read the Letter, there you will find more of
him.


Sabin. It Is a riddle to me he should be so, he was yesterday quite another
thing to my knowledge; and to leap in an instant from an excess of Wildness, to
the extreme of Temperance, is to me a Miracle.


Cell. Ha, ha, ha, I thought as much -- his Letter speaks a very civil,
reformed Creature indeed; read it, ha, ha.


Sabin. What, Complement, I warrant, some Wretched piece of Poetry.


Cell. Oh, an Excellent piece -- ha, ha, ha.


Mrs. Dor. Reads. Dammee Madam -- If I were a Poet, I would be more Elegant;
But confound me, you know I am not; Was ever such a thing writ? -- is this his
modesly in the devils name?


Cell. Well, what think ye now, is not the Gentleman a great Convert? -- ha,
ha, ha, -- there is an Old Proverb, What is bred in the Bone, will never -- you
understand me, and therefore prithee trouble thy self with no more Embassies,
but next time, let him make his Address himself -- Come, put on thy Scarf, and
let us take a pair of Oars to Fox-Hall, It Is a fine Evening, and I know we
shall be merry.


Sabin. Well, what you please -- but in my opinion the Park is the better place
of the two: What think thou, my Dear? -- hey day, why thou art not grown
Melancholic about this simple Letter, art? -- Come, prithee sing us a Scotch
Song, I know thou art good at it.


Scotch Song.
ABroad as I was walking upon a Summer Day,
There I met with a Beggar-woman clothed all in gray;
Her Clothes they were so torn, you might have seen her skin.
She was the first that taught me to see the Golin.
Ah see the Golin, my Io, see the Golin.
2.
You Youngsters of delight, pray take it not in scorn,
She came of Adam's Seed, though she was basely born:
And though her Clothes were torn, yet she had a Milk-white skin,
She was the first, etc.
3.
She had a pretty little Foot, and a moist Hand,
With which she might compare to any Lady in the Land;
Ruby Lips, Cherry Cheeks, and a Dimpled Chin,
She was the, etc.
4.
When that ay had wooed her, and wad her two my will,
Ay could not then devise the way to keep her Baby still.
She bid me be at quiet, for she valued it not a Pin,
She was, etc.
5.
Then she takes her Bearn up, and wraps it weel in Clothes,
And then she takes a Golin and stuck between her Toes;
And ever as the Lurden cried, or made any Din,
She shook her Foot and cried my Jo, see the Golin.
Ah see the Golin my Jo, see the Golin.
Cell. Hark! what is the matter? A noise within.


Sir Wild. Rogue -- Dog, Lying Rascal. within.


Dor. It Is my Father's voice, he is angry with some body, Come, let us be gone;
for if he sees me, I shall not get out these two hours. Exit.


Enter Sir Wilding, beating Lance. Sir Wild. Sirrah, am I to be baffled? --
must I give Money to give your Dogship occasion to laugh at me in a Corner:
What, I am a Fool, am I? fit to be bubbled? -- no Rogue, Instead of tutoring
your Master, I find you have spoiled him.


Lance. Ay, spoila him -- make a dat out -- Jernie, I can bring sufficient
Evidence, he did spoila me the first week I came to him -- You don't remember
when he made the Ten Whores in Whetstones Park stand every one on their heads
upon Quart-Pots, you are Ignorant of that, but I Am sure I remember it; for I
got a damned clap dat time, which I could never claw off since: besides, how
could I spoila him?


Sir Wild. Oh, I Will tell you how, Sirrah -- first, thou have taught him, like
an Insipid Rascal, to read perfectly, which, on my blessing I warned him from;
for I knew, if he came to read once, he was a lost Man. Secondly, Sir
Lancelot, Sir Lousy Lancelot -- You have suffered him against my power,
first then -- against my Precept -- to keep that sort of People company, which
sober Men call civil, mark ye that Sir.


Lance. Why then, the Divla fetch me, if to my knowledge he does not hate all
Civil Company; he never was civil in his life, nor never will be -- Oons I saw
him break a Parson's head the other day but for praying him to be Civil to his
Wife, whom he was going to be uncivil to before his face.


Sir Wild. Nay, nay, I know you have your come offs and your lies, But it shant
do, this is like your Cock of Four, Sirrah, I remember that your Cock -- but
I Will make you Cock of Five before we part; I Will teach you to play your Tricks
with me.


Lance. Vat trick? -- me play no trick -- begar it is he dat do play all the
trick -- is dear no hole, or Corner?


Sir Wild. Thirdly, and lastly Sirrah -- which if the Law were here I Would hang
thee for -- (however I will lame thee) Like a Rascal thou have wrought him --
clean to forget what it is to do a mischief -- a handsome mischief, and such as
thou know I love well; my Servants are all sound now, my Drink sower'd, not
a Horse pawned, or played away; no Warrants come for the breach of Peace; Men
Travel with their Money, Nothing meets 'em: I was accursed to send thee with
him, thou were ever leaning to Laziness, and loss of spirits, and sleep'st
still like a Cork upon the Water.


Lance. O Lord, O Lord, I sleep -- why Sir, all the Town knows that next to
him -- there is not such a debauched -- Lewd Fellow in Christendom as I am --
I may thank him for it, if I am damned. Why Sir, did you never hear of my
Astrology?


Sir Wild. Thy Astrology? -- dull Rogue, thou would make a rare Astrologer!


Lance. Vat -- you mock me then -- a cursed simple old fellow this, Yes Sir, I
tell ye I am famed for Astrology -- I can tell any Woman her fortune, and her
constitution too, whether hot, or dry; or cold, or moist; or whether she is
honest, or dishonest -- Jernie, if I can get her alone with me, I Will quickly
tell her, whether she is a Whore, or no.


Sir Wild. I tell ye, I know you can prate well enough, but that she-shan't
save ye -- ha -- is that Tom -- No, that -- Enter Thomas. sneaking, snivelling
Puppy can never be Monsieur Thomas, sure: Turn you yonder, Sirrah -- and see
who is there; there is your Reformer -- does he look like a Cock of four, ye Dog?


Tho. What sweet content dwells here?


Lance. Oons, put up your Book Sir! What, what is this Baxters Call? Baxter's
Coxcomb -- here, here -- give't me, and here is Aratine's Book of Postures for
ye -- take it, We are all Undone else.


Tho. Oh profane Rogue -- there Sirrah, for ye. Strikes him.


Lance. Oh! what shall I do, I shall be murdered at this rate.


Sir Wild. Tom, When is the Horse-Race?


Tho. I know not, Sir.


Sir Wild. No -- why, you will be there I hope?


Tho. Not I -- I have forgot those Journeys, thank my Fortune:


Sir Wild. Undone, without redemption -- the Cocking holds at Derby too, Tom,
and there will be Jack Hylas, and Will. Purser.


Tho. Hah -- I am sorry, Sir, They should employ their precious time so vainly,
Their Understandings will bear better courses.


Sir Wild. Yes, I will marry again, I am resolved on it; but Son Thomas, what say
ye to the Gentleman that challenged ye before ye went about your Mistress?


Tho. Oh good Sir -- remember not those Follies where I have done wrong -- so
much I now have learned to discern my Self, my Means, and my Repentance shall
make even Sir; Nor do I think it any Imputation to let the Law persuade me.


Sir Wild. Very well, Sir, the Law? the Law's an Ass as thou art; Did ever such
affliction light on Man? Well, any Woman, I care not of what color or
constitution, if she can but bear Children, 'faith I Will have her. Exit Sir Wild.


Lance. Oh I am glad he is gone -- I have had such an Ague upon me -- but good
Sir, what dee mean by this? You have utterly undone me, I shall be for the
Ragged Regiment within these two days.


Tho. Ha, ha, ha, he fiets to some purpose; but art thou such an Insipid Rascal
to mind it? What, Eight Languages, and tremble at an Old Man's Threats?


Lance. Not at his Threats, but his Blows, Sir, I know them too well to be
mistaken; it is not Eight, nor Eightscore can keep me from beating, if not
killing; I Will give him leave to break a Leg, and thank him, pull off my Hatt,
and cry, God bless his Worship. You might have saved all this, and but sworn a
little -- What a Pox had an Oath or two been to you when your hand was in, or a
head broke -- though it had been mine, to have satisfied the Old Gent. a little.


Tho. Come, faith, to do thee a kindness, I Will break it yet.


Lance. Phoo, Pox now it is too late -- but Sir, will you do me one favor,
will you be drunk to night? -- a less entreaty has served your turn to my
knowledge -- do it, and save all yet: Yet do not be maddrunk, for then you are
the Devil; Yet the Drunker, the better for your Father still. Your State is
desperate Sir, and with a desperate Cure we must recover it -- good Sir, do
something, some debauched drunken thing, some mad thing, or some any thing to
help us.


Tho. Well, go, for a Fiddler then -- the blind Old Fiddler, under the Church
Wall -- he that saves his Songs -- and dee hear, get me a Whore or two -- a
good, full, fat Whore, One that is fleshy; let her be an Old Bawd, so she be
fat enough -- I care not.


Lance. Why I -- this is well sed now, Sir I thank ye heartily, and I Will about
it presently. Knock within.


Tho. Ha! Somebody knocks -- go, let 'em in, who ere it be, and then make
haste. Exit Lance. My Father's mad now -- and ten to one, will dis-inherit me;
I Will put him to plunge once more, and by that time my Design will be full ripe
-- how now, how do thou Jack?


Enter Hylas and Valentine. Hyl. Why 'faith, at the same pitch still -- I
neither wane not thrive.


Enter a Boy of Valentines. Boy. O Sir, I have been with the Physicians, and
they are all ready below here. To Valentine.


Val. Go, direct 'em to my house, and desire 'em to take all possible Care in
the Recovery of the Gentleman.


Tho. Physicians! for what prithee -- whose Dog lies sick of the Mulligrubs?


Val. Whoo, prithee, leave thy vile Phrases, -- it is a Friend of yours, I
assure you, Franck Welbred -- he was taken extremely ill of a Fever yesterday,
and lies very weak at my house.


Tho. Who young Franck? the only tempered, Spirit, Scholar, Soldier,
Courtier, and all in one piece, it is impossible.


Val. You Will find it true -- but who is this?


Enter Mrs. Dorothy. Dor. Hark ye, Sir, a word wee'.


Tho. Oh, Dear Rogue, art thou come already -- well, of all Women, thou for
dispatch shall be most famed; and what success, prithee? -- how did she like my
Letter?


Dor. Like it, infamous Man! -- do you not blush at your Ingratitude? had you
no one to abuse with the carriage of your debauched Epistle, but your Sister?
must I be your Property? because you found my easy Nature, willing to oblige
-- would you affront me so? this baseness is hardly to be paralleled.


Val. By her vehemence in action, this should be something of Moment, Jack.


Hyl. I know not what her action is -- but she has a fine Buttock I Am sure, I
have been looking at that.


Tho. Hey-day, I affront thee? prithee what do thou mean, Sister?


Doro. You would be told, would you? You have forgot, I warrant. But come, to
refresh your memory, I Will read your worthy piece to you, Your Letter of Address
to a Lady, whom you have abused -- Your sweet Ticket of Repentance, and
Reconciliation -- Pray observe, Sir.


Tho. Ay, with all my heart,

( Doro. Reads.) Zoux Madam, if I were a Poet, the Devil take me if I would not
be more Elegant. A very fine beginning, Is it not?


Tho. 'Faith I think so -- without I should have begun with -- After my hearty
Commendations; or, Surely; and, By my truly Mrs. -- but go on --


Doro. But, Confound me, You know I am none; and by the Beard of Jupiter, I am
the less able to pen my excuse. 'S' Death, Madam, You know like a Devil as you
are, I love you dearly. There, there, what occasion for that Oath, that
Culverin there?


Tho. Why, to tell thee the truth* I swore in that place, because I would have
her su^e to believe me.


Doro. Very well; and by the Sun, the Moon, the Planets, the Stars, the Meteors
-- and such like, I am sorry for my last fault -- And sinck me, am thy Devoted
Servant both in this World -- and in the other. Oh horrible, is not that now
monstrous lewd and wicked?


Tho. No 'faith -- Methinks it is very pretty -- I have given her occasion there
to see my Wit, and Learning.

Therefore, by the Eternal Blazing-Starr, that is to Convert the whole World
into a Snuff Box, either instantly pardon me, or expect to be hourly molested,
by the most passionate, and most resolute of his Sex; and so I leave ye to
enter into consideration, and retire my self to my place of residence, the
Devil-Tavern.


Doro. What think you now? speak, In your Conscience, Is not this a Rare Piece?


Tho. Ay, the Devil take me if it be not the fairest, noblest and most lofty
style that ever was writ -- Well -- Doll -- I will pardon thy Ignorance, and
hers too; but in troth you are both very silly Creatures.


Dor. What you please Sir, let me have no more such Messages, and then you will
favor me -- I Will instantly to my Father, and tell him to his great Joy of
heart -- You are his true Son still -- the same for lying, Swearing, Drinking,
Wenching, you ever was: And now I talk of Wenching -- give me leave to inform
ye -- Your Young Rear-Admiral -- I mean your last Bastard, Don John, ye had by
Lady Blanch, the Dairy-Maid -- is by an Academy of Learned Gypsies stolen from
the Nurse, and wanders with these Prophets. This in conclusion, I thought good
to tell ye, and so your humble Servant, Sir. Exit Dorothy.


Tho. A Plaguey smart Jilt -- but this is her Minute, the next is mine, and I
have a design in my head, if followed well, shall bring all about yet. Come
Jack.


Hyl. Where, where is the Lady? -- what, thou have not let her go, have?


Tho. Let her go? why 'twas my Sister.


Hyl. Ah, is she thy Sister? nay then even let her go.


Val. Well, Gentlemen -- I must beg your pardon -- I must go see Franck.


Tho. Stay Val, a word first; hark ye -- I Will go with thee; To Visit him, will
be an excellent pretense of Introducing me into my Mistresses sight -- and if I
can but once more see her. --


Val. Nay 'faith, I am so much thy Friend, I Will hinder thee nothing -- Come
then we will all go.


Hyl. With all my heart.


Tho. You shall see me cut upon her Heart, like a Diamond on Glass -- I know
her humor to a thought.

With brisk behavior, loud Impertinence
I Will Court her, her own way, much noise, small sense;
For I Have observed it is not the Man of Parts,
But your fine Talker, gets the Ladies hearts.

The End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
Franck Sick in a Chair, a Bed standing by. Enter 3 Physicians with a Urinal.
1. Phys. A Pleurisy, I see it.


2. Phys. I rather hold it for Tremor Cordis.


3. Phys. Dee' mark the Foeces? it is a most pestilent Contagious Fever -- a
Surfeit, a Plaguey Surfeit, he must bleed.


1. Phys. By no means --


3. Phys. I say Bleed.


1. Phys. I say it is dangerous, the person being so much spent beforehand,
Hypocondriaque humors being now in full Power, and Nature drawn so low -- No,
I rather think Clysters, cool Clysters.


2. Phys. Now, with your favors -- I should think a Vomit; for, take away the
Cause, the Effect will follow; his Stomach's foul, and the Intellect inflamed.


3. Phys. No, no, we will rectify that part by milder means.


1. Phys. Come Sir, you must have patience; Brother, I think we had best first
clap on the Cataplasme.


Fra. Good Gentlemen, good Learned Gentlemen.


2. Phys. And see those Broaths made ready within this hour; Come Sir, pray be
ruled.


Fra. Pray Sir will you leave me; I beseech you leave me: Convey your
Cataplasmes to those that need 'em, your Vomits, and your Clysters.


3. Phys. Bring in the Lettuce Caps -- You must be shaved Sir, and then we will
make you sleep.


Fra. Ay, till Doomsday -- What unnecessary Nothings are these?


2. Phys. How do ye Sir?


Fra. What Questions they propound too -- how do you Sir, I Am glad to see you
well.


1. Phys. Open your Mouth, I pray Sir.


Fra. Aw -- well, can you tell me now how old I am? -- There Is my hand, pray
show how many broken shins I shall have within these two year -- 'S'Death, who
would be thus in Fetters, good Mr. Doctor, and you Dear Doctor, and the third
sweet Doctor, and precious Master Pothecary, I beseech ye to give me leave to
live a little longer -- You stand before me like my Mourners.


3. Phys. A great Distemper, his fancy now begins to turn too. Enter Monsieur
Thomas, Valentine, and Hylas Kew. Pish, what more hindrance still? -- Sir --
it is not our Custom to be rude -- but dismiss your Company with what haste you
can; for we must minister within this half hour. Exeunt.


Fra. Oh, -- a fair riddance, my learned Horse-leeches.


Val. Be not uncivil, Tom, -- and use your pleasure -- I know she will be here
to visit him within this half hour: Do what you can to win her, but use no
violence.


Tho. I will not 'faith.


Val. Where, where is this Sick Man?


Hyl. Where are the Women, Man? there is my Province. Methinks these Women --


Tho. Thou think nothing else. --


Val. See Franck -- here is two of thy Friends come to visit thee; Prithee look
up -- and bid 'em welcome -- I Will go and see if they have got any thing for
thee to eat -- Come, sit up, and be merry, Man.


Exit Val. Tho. How do thou, Franck, ha?

Come, give me thy hand, and bear up boldly -- what, shrinck in the Sinews for a
little Sickness? a petty, puny, paultry Fever -- Pox upon it, sing it away, Man.


Fra. I am on the mending hand, I thank ye.


Tho. How like a Flute thou speak, on the mending hand? Gogs boars I Am well
-- Speak like a Man of honor.


Fra. Thou art a Mad Fellow; what, never staid. Tom?


Tho. Let Rogues be stayed that have no habitation, a Gentleman may wander --
turn thee round, Franck -- and see what I have brought thee -- Sirrah, open the
Scene and let the Work appear -- Francis, a Friend at need is worth a Million.
Boy discovers a Bottle.


Fra. What have thou there, a Julip?


Hyl. He must not touch it, it is present Death.


Tho. Ye are an Ass --

Thou minister? thou mend a Pack-Saddle-You must pardon him -- my Friend Franck
-- but a plaguey simple Fellow.

Do thou see this Bottle? -- Prithee view it well; Again observe it.


Fra. Well, I do, Tom.


Tho. There are as many Lives in it as a Cat carries; It refines the Spirit,
revives the Person, removes the Disease, Restores the blood; heats, nourishes,
fills the Veins, Cures, comforts, warms, purges -- hey -- in fine, it is
everlasting Liquor -- and should be spoken of with reverence.


Fra. Prithee what is it?


Tho. Why 'faith -- Old Sack.

Old Spirit stirring Oily, reverend Sack -- which, maugre any thing I can read
yet, was the Philosopher's Stone The Wife King Ptolomy did all his Wonders by.


Fra. Nay, I see no harm Sir -- if drunk with moderation.


Tho. Moderation! -- Drink with Walnuts, Man, which I have ready here, and a
Glass too; take me Sits down on the Stage, and pulls out Walnuts -- and a
Glass. without my tools, and hang me.


Hyl. Pray, Sir, use temperance, You know your own state best.


Tho. Temperance! -- ugh, ugh -- Pox on him, I had like to bin choked with a
Wall-nut-shell -- by giving ear to his damned temperance.


Fra. I thank thee, Jack -- I shall be careful -- Yet a Glass or two can do no
harm, your Friend Tom is grown very sober.


Tho. A fool, a fool, he minds nothing now Speaks this as he is Cracking the
Nuts. but Jelly-broth a mornings, and Bulking Whores at Night -- Never cares
for good Company, Fiddles, nor Glasses now -- a very Coxcomb, that is the truth
on it.


Hyl. Where the Devil are these Women all this while?


Tho. No, no, take my Counsel, Franck,
Hang up your Julips, and your Portugal Possets, Your Barley Broths -- and
Sorrel Sops; I hate 'em -- they are mangy and breed the scratches only -- I
wonder she does not come all this while -- Come Franck, here is to thee.


Fra. With all my heart -- and methinks I feel a strange alteration on the
sudden -- my pulse beats quick, and lively.


Hyl. So long, and yet no bolting. Peeping about.


Tho. Ay, I knew 'twou'd come to that -- my presence is a Never-failing Cordial
to both Sexes; here, take this off thrice, and then cry Heigh, like a Huntsman,
with a clear heart, and no more fits I warrant thee.


Enter Physicians, and Servants. 1. Phys. Are the things ready? and is the
Barber come?


Servant. An hour ago, Sir?


2. Phys. Bring out the Oils, then.


Fra. God's Death -- here again! -- Now, or never, Tom, do me a kindness, and
deliver me.


Tho. Deliver thee, -- from whom?


Fra. From these things that talk there, Physicians, Tom, Scouring-sticks, they
mean to read upon me.


Tho. I Will do it, -- Come hither, Jack.


1 Phys. We desire all to depart the Room, and no longer disturb the Patient.


Tho. Strike in with me for your part, and let us play upon these Rogues a
little -- for Look ye Doctor, suppose the Devil were sick now -- his horns
sawed off, and his head bound with a Biggen -- sick of a Calenture taken by a
Surfeit of stinking Souls at his Nephews, and St. Dunstans, what would you
minister upon the sudden? Your Judgment short, and sound.


1. Phys. A Fool's head.


Tho. No, Sir, -- it must be a Physician, for three causes; the first, because
it is a ball'd head likely -- which will down easily without Apple pap.


3. Phys. A main cause.


Tho. So it is, and well considered,

The second Cause, it is filled with broken Greek, Sir,

Which will so tumble in his stomach, Doctor, and Jumble and work upon the
Crudities, the Faeces, and the Fiddle-strings, conceive me Doctor, that of mere
reason they must dis-imbogue.


Hyl. Or meeting with the Stygian humor.


Tho. Right, Sir.


Hyl. Forced with a Cataplasme of Crackers.


Tho. Ever.


Hyl. Scour all before him, like a Scavenger.


Tho. Satis fecisti Domine -- my last Cause.

My last, and not my least, most Learned Doctors,

Because in most Physicians heads -- I mean those that are most excellent --
and Old withal -- and angry; I say, because in most Doctors heads, there is a
kind of Toadstone Bread and Crust, Sir, -- whose virtue -- the Doctor being
stripped and laid upon a Grid-iron


2. Phys. What Is that, Sir! -- a Grid-iron?


Tho. A Grid-iron, Sir! the Learned hold it necessary, then by an Instrument of
his own Barber, his Nose being slit, incis'd, his Mouth gagged open, and his
most bawdy excremental Tongue -- brayed in a Mortar -- to Powder -- the Cure's
infallible, Not to be questioned.


3. Phys. Bless me! what stuff's here? Mad Sir! what mean you?


Tho. Only a Question -- Nothing else -- for say the belly ache caused by an
Inundation of Pease Porridge.


1. Phys. This is not civil.


Tho. I think not -- that is all one: Or grant the Diaphragma by a Rupture --


Hyl. The Sign being then in the head of Capricorn.


Tho. Meet with the Passion Hypocondriaca, and so cause a Carnosity in the
Kidneys, must not the Brains being buttered with this humor cause a
Cathartique Motion? answer me that.


3. Phys. What shall we answer ye? what shall I say? Ye are an Ass, will that
satisfy ye?


Tho. Out still -- for the Ass is yours by your long Ears, your Nose too which
I will pull thus into form, and take possession of a Satin Cap to give your
thick Skull, and your Brains more air.


2. Phys. Come, come, let us be gone Sirs, we are abused.


Tho. No 'faith, not yet, but shall be in good time -- then if my Ladies Dog be
laxative, troubled with qualms, grumblings, Windy Cholicks, Doctor; are ye
therefore to open the Port Vein, or the Port Esquiline? your answer quickly.


3. Phys. I Will answer no more -- farewell, Sir, the next Fit you have, Bedlam
shall find a Salve for; we came to do you good, But these young Roarers it
seems have bored our Noses.


1. Phys. Drink hard, and get unwholesome Wenches, it is ten to one then we shall
hear further from your note altered. Exeunt.


Tho. And will thou be gone, says one?


Hyl. And will thou be gone, says the other?


Tho. Then take the odd Crown, to mend thy old Gown, And we will be all gone
together.


Fra. Ha, ha, ha, -- most excellent Rogue, I love thee heartily for this.


Enter a Servant. Servant. Sir, the Young Lady -- sent me to see what Company
ye had with ye -- and whether they may make a Visit?


Fra. Pray tell 'em, with all my heart -- they will much honor me in it -- You see
my Company.


Tho. Come hither Crab -- is not my Mistress one of 'em?


Servant. Yes Sir.


Hyl. And who else?


Servant. Madam Sabina*


Tho. Oh -- hark Sirrah, not a word of my being here; Take that, and Mum.


Servant. You have tied my Tongue up, Sir.


Enter Valentine. Val. Ah -- nay if you look so brisk, farewell the Fever,
Friend.


Fra. Nay, I am much better, thank my Dear Tom here.


Val. The Game is ready to begin, your Mistress is coming.


Tho. I know it, therefore sit still good Franck, and not a word of me till you
hear from me -- then as you find my humor, follow it. You two come with me,
and let us stand close, unseen -- I warrant thee I catch her. Exeunt.


Enter Cellide and Sabina. Sab. How dee' Sir?


Fra. The favor of this Visit from you, Madam, gives me strength to tell ye,
That my Enemy has done his worst; I am growing well again.


Cell. I am glad to hear it -- Were you ever sick before, Sir?


Fra. Of Love, Madam, not else.


Cell. Of Love? Alas! for ye -- but you had good hopes of your side* You know
'twas no Epidemick distemper; for it is as impossible, a man should dye by Love,
as that he should live by it -- and either of these are Miracles this Climate
never produces.


Tho. within. No, no -- I have no hope, nor is it fit Friend -- my life has
been so lewd, my loose condition, which I repent too late, so abominable, That
nothing but despair stands now before me.


Cell. Who Is that, Sir -- another Sick Man?


Tho. In all my Courses shameless -- disobedience.


Sabin. Sure, I should know his voice -- Pray, Sir, who is it?


Fra. One that you little thought to have seen in such a condition; It Is the
Wild Monsieur.


Cell. Who my Monsieur? -- Monsieur Thomas? ha, ha, ha, this is some trick.


Fra. You Will think better, when you see him -- he was seized yesterday with a
strange distraction -- a perfect madness.


Cell. That Is like enough -- he has been seized with that, ever since I knew
him.


Fra. Not in this Nature, Madam; he is now, since he came to himself, much
afflicted in's mind -- he came hither to ask pardon of me for some things done
long since, which his distemper made to appear like wrongs; but 'twas not so.


Cell. Sure that is not possible.


Fra. Here he comes -- Pray observe him.


Enter Thomas as distracted, Valentine, Hylas. Hyl. Come, Sir, be comforted.


Tho. To what end, Gentlemen -- when all is perish't upon a wrack. Is there a
hope remaining, the Sea, that never knew sorrow should be pitiful -- my
Comfort's gone, my Life has made me Wretched -- Nor is it possible, were I to
live Ten Ages, Ever to recall the least part of my Follies.


Val. Oh you despair too much. Madam, you see his condition, One word from you
may yet recover him.


Cell. I know not what to do, nor what to think -- I am amazed 'twixt pity and
admiration.


Sabin. If it be real, it is no Jesting matter; a Man is not so soon made,
Cousin.


Tho. What are these Ladies? -- I had a Sister once, a Virtuous Sister, But I
abused her -- poor Soul, I wronged her -- a Mistress too, a Kind sweet
Beauteous Mistress.


Val. Now, Madam, now is your time; now he is talking of ye.


Cell. I Will do any thing, rather than see him thus.


Tho. I wronged her too -- I sent her a damned Letter full of Oaths, Wrack't
her poor Innocent Ears with Damms and Devils, Woe worth the time I did so.


Val. Now, Madam, speak, or never.


Cell. By Heaven, I will; ah little do you know how my heart bleeds for him.


Hyl. Ha, ha, ha -- she comes apace -- the Rogue counterfeits rarely.


Tho. Oh my fortune. But it is but Just I be despised and hated.


Val. Despair not, it is not Manly -- Now Madam.


Cell. How dee' Sir? pray be comforted -- give me your hand -- you used to meet
this kindness with more haste; I swear I pity ye.


Tho. By Heaven it is she -- oh goodness! not to be equaled -- let me thus low
implore thy pardon; I have been wild and wicked, I confess it, but ah dear
Saint, consider on our frailties; Youth often wanders from the way, and --


Cell. Indeed Sir, you shan' not kneel.


Tho. Not kneel? oh name it not, my Crimes are many, and nothing but
repentance, low repentance -- Jack.


Hyl. I, I mind ye -- proceed and she is thy own, Boy.


Cell. Nay then I Will kneel too -- for I have faults too many, I should beg your
pardon too, all things considered.


Tho. Precious -- Dearest, Lovely -- Charming -- Ah, Kisses her. all my whole
life's service -- cannot merit half, half this blessing.


Enter Lance, running. Lance. Where, where is my Master? -- oh Sir -- the
Fiddler, Sir, is not at leisure yet, but he will be about half an hour hence.
But I have got Sir, according to your order, a couple of the finest Black fat
Whores yonder -- 'gad the Jades do so tumble about -- ha, ha -- both start.


Tho. Damned Dog -- Kicks him.


Cell. How Is this?


Hyl. 'S'death -- this damned dull Rogue will spoil all -- what, what is that
you say, Sirrah? who would you speak with, ha?


Tho. Ay, an Impudent Dog, who would he speak with? -- here is no body here
knows him -- Kick him out of doors there.


Lance. What, not know Lance? -- I am Lance, Sir, and a Pox take me, if I
have not two of as fine fat Whores as a man would desire to lay his Leg over.


Cell. Oh Heaven! I Am betrayed! and this was only a design upon me. I find it
now it is so, Cousin -- oh I could curse my self now for being so credulous --
this was a Plot betwixt 'em, and now by chance discovered; stand off, and touch
me not, Base Fellow -- Come, let us away -- Farewell Sir, and when you are mad
next -- let your fat Whores administer.


Sab. Ha, ha, ha -- this was a pleasant Jest. Exeunt.


Tho. Come ye hither, Sirrah, and lay your head down on this Chair, I Will be
merciful to ye -- I Will only cut your Ears and Nose off; Your head shall escape
-- do it quickly, Rogue, or I will hew thee into Mammocks.


Lance. Oh for Heavens sake, Sir, what mean ye? You know I did nothing but
what you bid me.


Tho. Ah -- Insipid Whelp.


Fra. Hang him, let him wear his Nose a little longer -- 'Twill spoil the
fashion of his face else.


Val. Though 'twas unluckily, 'twas Ignorantly done, and let him live to make
amends.


Tho. Pox on it -- when I had bent her like a twigg -- brought her to my hand --
made her quite sure, my own, with art and Industry, and to be bubbled of her in
the very last moment, by the negligence of a Dog, a Hound, a Son of a Whore, a
plague -- Prithee Val, let me have but one pass through his Guts, and I Will
forgive him.


Lance. Oh Gentlemen, for heavens sake hold him -- for my guts are so empty,
that he may easily rip 'em open.


Hyl. Come forgive him -- the Rogue I dare swear did it out of mere Kindness.


Lance. By my Eight Languages, and so I did -- I was so overjoyed to bring him
the good News, that I never minded who was with him*


Tho. A Devil on it -- this is always my damned fortune, and I have still
observed if a Fool be in a Family -- where any Person has a design -- if his
Ignorance does not discover it, his ill fortune will -- and that is as bad --
Well, I am resolved she shan'not escape thus -- I will have one more bout with
her. You will not leave me, Gentlemen?


Val. Not I 'faith; I will not miss the sport.


Hyl. Nor I -- but when shall it be?


Tho. To Night at her Window in a Serenade.


Val. With all our hearts -- Franck, would thou were well to go too.


Fra. I know not, it is as I feel my self -- but it may be I may venture, For I
can walk I find.


Tho. Go Dog, get you to my Father, and tell him my last Nights Ramble, I Will
come and second ye; away -- I shall get the Rogue this way a beating at the
second hand.


Lance. Yes, Sir. I am glad I Am got off so well; for I was damnably afraid of
losing my Ears, and Nose. Well Sir, I Will go and carry the Whores to the same
Bulk, where I found 'em, and then let 'em seek their fortune. Exit.


Tho. Sirrah, that shall be my task.

Come Friends, let us prepare for the business; till Night I am employed -- but
then I am for ye. Exeunt.


SCENE II.
Enter Sir Wilding with a Whore, Boy with a Candle. Sir Wild. Now to the
business of Matrimony -- I think I have got one here will fit me -- I picked her
up in the Piazza's, what she is I know not, nor do I care -- so she be fruitful
and sound -- Set down the Candle, Sirrah, and get you gone -- Come hither
Mistress -- Let me see your Face -- those Eyebrows are your own, I hope?


Whore. Yes, I assure you, Sir -- I counterfeit nothing.


Sir Wild. Very well -- now walk before me -- let me see you pace a little. ah
-- trip -- trip -- thus, thus -- I would have my Woman do so.


Whore. Sir, I shall quickly learn to please ye, there shall be nothing wanting
in my duty, to act, or to observe.


Sir Wild. Prettily said -- as to your age, Madam, I guess you to be about Five
and twenty -- something over -- a good ripe age, I like that well enough --
Pray open your Mouth; I think you have all your teeth.


Whore. I hope so, Sir -- they have had easy service.


Sir Wild. And will thou sing?


Whore. Pleasantly, Sir.


Sir Wild. And drink?


Whore. Profoundly.


Sir Wild. And swear -- and tell a Story after Supper?


Whore. As you think fit, Sir -- by the way of relish, or so.


Sir Wild. Give me thy hand then, she is honest, I know by that; for she that
simpers, and talks of Religion always, proves to be the greatest Jilt -- who
waits there?


Enter Servant. Servant. Your pleasure, Sir?


Sir Wild. Bid my Daughter come hither -- now I think I shall be even with my
Monsieur -- my sneaking Ananias: For I will get upon her Body* Demi-Gyant that
shall play the Hector at his Nurses Breast, and beat a Constable in his
swaddling Clothes. Enter Mrs Dorothy. Come hither Mistress -- pray respect the
Lady whom I intend to make my Wife, your Mother.


Doro. How Sir!


Sir Wild. Now you shall find me so then -- what a pox, do you think I Will leave
my Inheritance to Pins, and Bodkins, to Towers, Jesamine Gloves, and Trimmings
-- to a leaky Vessel -- that cannot keep my name up when I dye to thee?


Doro. You have a Son, Sir.


Sir Wild. Who? -- where is he? who is he like?


Doro. Your self.


Sir Wild. Thou lie -- thou have spoiled him, Thou, and thy Prayer-Books; --
he my Son? No, I disclaim him, And all that speaks of him. Why, did not I catch
him singing yesterday a godly Ballad, to a godly tune too, and in one of his
Pockets a Catachisme with the Creed in great Letters at the beginning? -- No,
Damsel of the dark -- I know he is one of your Disciples, he would be ruled else.


Doro. Mine? -- it is a sign then you know little of his humor, That can
believe I have power to turn him any way.


Sir Wild. Huswife I know it, and expect to be rewarded, what Tavern has he
used since he came over? what things done, that shows a Man and Mettle? when
was my house at such a shame before, to creep to bed at ten and twelve for want
of Company? No singing, nor no dancing, nor no drinking? -- thou think not
of these scandals -- thou can snore, and sleep, and Chatter bawdy in thy
Dreams, -- and the next morning wake and go to breakfast, and nothing else --
but his life should be otherwise.


Doro. So it is, Sir -- believe me, for I speak it to my knowledge, he is as mad
as heart can wish; as debauched a Fellow as any in the Suburbs.


Whore. Women, Sir, will talk, but you know we must bear with that sometimes.


Sir Wild. Well, now I think on it, I will try the Boy once more, it may be he
does but counterfeit, and then I Am happy -- go, get you in, I Will keep you close
enough, lest you break loose, and do more mischief to him -- Within there. Exit
Dorothy.


Enter a Servant. Servant. Dee' call, Sir?


Sir Wild. Go presently, and seek the Boy, and bid him wait my pleasure in the
morning -- do you hear, Mark what house he is in, and what he does -- and tell me
truth.


Servant. I will not fail, Sir. Exit Servant.


Sir Wild. If ye do, I Will hang ye. Come, Madam -- I must desire you to stay
here, till he comes, and then we will settle all -- there is your apartment, there
you will find all necessaries -- Now if he prove but right, he has all yet; If
not, this other way shall make an end on it.

Youth may delight to boast of Act or Skill,
But the pleasure of an Old Man -- is his Will.

Exeunt. The End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Enter Sir Wilding and Servant. Sir Wild. AT Valentine's house so merry?


Servant. As a Lark, Sir.


Sir Wild. So frollicksome, do say?


Servant. I Am sure I heard it.


Sir Wild. Ballads, and Fiddles too?


Servant. No, but one Fiddle, but twenty noises.


Sir Wild. Did he do Tricks?


Servant. Ah, the rarest Tricks, Sir -- here is my Fellow Lance, he can Inform
ye all, he was among 'em, and as mad as any there; I stood up in a Corner.


Enter Lance. Sir Wild. Come, Sir -- what can you say? -- Is there any hope
yet your Master may return?


Lance. Put your hand into your Purse -- and give me an Angel, Then perhaps I
may tell you more.


Sir Wild. How, how? an Angel?


Lance. An Angel, Sir -- 'Faith not a Farthing under, such things, such
roaring things -- an Angel, Sir, quickly, come.


Sir Wild. There it is, damned Rogue, thou have found my blind side.


Lance. Ay, ay, Sir, that is all one -- so -- well now Sir, by the Virtue of 8:
Languages, by the Faith of a Traveller and a Gentleman, Your Son is found again,
the Son -- the Tom.


Sir Wild. Is he the Old Tom?


Lance. The Old Tom.


Sir Wild. Proceed then.


Lance. Next to consider how he is the Old Tom.


Sir Wild. Ay, handle me that.


Lance. I would you had seen it handled last night, as we handled it --
Cap-a-pe, in faith -- oh the noise, the noise we made!


Sir Wild. Good, good, in faith, ha, ha, ha.


Lance. The house beset around -- the Windows Clatt'ring, and all the
Chamber-Maids in such a hurrey, one with her Smock half off, Another in haste
with a Hose upon her head.


Sir Wild. Ha, ha, ha.


Lance. A Fellow railing there out of a Loupe-hole, and his Mouth stopped with
dirt.


Sir Wild. Ha, hah, ye Rogue. Strikes him.


Lance. Another peeping out with his greasy Nightcap on, and a Torch popt
in's face to clear his eyesight.


Sir Wild. Ha, ha, ha -- Dog. Beats Lance, and is so -- eager at laughing, he
minds it not.


Lance. The Gentleman himself, young Monsieur Thomas, environed with his
furious Mermydons, the fiery Fiddler and my self, Now singing, now beating at
the Door, there parlying -- Courting at the Window, at the other, scaling.


Sir Wild. Ha, ha, ha.


Lance. And all these several Noises to two Trenchers strung with a Clew of
Brown Thread -- which showed rarely.


Sir Wild. Ha, ha, ha, -- rarely well -- rarely well. Beats him still.


Lance. Well, well -- what do you mean, Sir -- Your blows are not well I Am
sure, nor will my shoulders long, if you hold on at this rate.


Sir Wild. In Faith I beg thy pardon -- I was so transported, I did not know
what I did -- there is money for thee to make thee amends -- eat, and grow fat
again.


Lance. Nor here, Sir, gave we the Frollick over.


Sir Wild. What, more yet? why this is admirable.


Lance. More, ay, and the best too, Sir -- for at last we quit the Ladies
house on composition -- and to the silent Street turned all our furies. A
sleeping Watchman here we stole the shoes from; there make a noise, at which
he wakes and follows -- then cries out Thieves, and throws his Bilboe at us
-- and Wades the Kennel in no footed stockings.


Sir Wild. Oons -- this is the rarest Boy, ha, ha --


Lance. Windows and Signs we sent to Erebus -- a cry of Butchers Currs we
entertained last, and having let the Pigs loose in out-Parishes, made every
Street look like a Bear-Garden.


Sir Wild. Instead of Bears, and Bulls, a Rogue, a Rogue.


Lance. Down -- comes a Constable -- and the Sow his Sister, most villainously
tramples upon authority -- there a whole Stand of Rug Gowns routed Manly, and
the King's Peace put to flight -- the Constable rallyes again -- when, Sir, a
Purblind Pigg -- runs me his dirty Snout into his Lanthorn -- out goes the
light, and all turns to confusion.


Sir Wild. Ha, ha, ha.


Lance. But, Sir, the best Jest was, a foolish Potter needs would know the
matter -- opens his door, when, mark the Fate of Cuckolds, a Boar imbost takes
sanctuary in his Shop, and Twenty Dogs rush after -- We still cheering, down
goes the Pots, and Pipkins -- down the Pudding-Paus -- the Cream-Bowles cry
revenge here; There the Candlesticks; oh such a noise.


Sir Wild. Ha, ha, ha, --
If this be true, thou little Tyny Page,
This tale thou tell to me,
Then on thy Back will i presently hang.
A handsome new Livery.

Enter Servant. Sir Wild. How now, where is my Son?


Servant, He Is here, Sir.


Enter Monsieur Thomas. Lance. Now Sir -- you shall hear all -- and laugh
abundantly, he has such a grace in telling it, Sir.


Sir Wild. Son Thomas -- I am glad to see ye, and to hear of ye; You may be now
my Son again, if you please, and enjoy the blessings attending it -- but come,
because I feel a scruple in my Conscience, concerning your late carriage -- and
therefore like Father would be satisfied; To clear all, Thomas, get you upon
this Table.


Tho. This Table, Sir? Lord, how you are misled! -- what strange fancies are
these? fitter for Fools and Madmen.


Sir Wild. What, what? -- come, come, I say, get you on this Table. and
Instantly, I Will have it so.


Tho. Well, Sir, you must be obeyed. Gets on the Table.


Sir Wild. So -- now Thomas, like a most complete Gentleman come from Tripoly
-- relate your last Night's Frollicks, mince at nothing -- but let me have it
freely as 'twas acted -- 'twill please me best.


Tho. Verily, Sir -- though Age and Youth, and Youth and Age are different,
different I mean divided 'twixt themselves in point of reason; Nay, though our
eyes are blinded, that is, though we cannot see. I say -- yet I say again -- or
it is no matter whether I say it again or no, That Reason, and Religion, should
Instruct Age to better courses than Blindness guides them to. Reason, and
Religion are two worthy persons, and should Instruct a wandering Mortal -- Ah,
Sir, remember -- remember, I say, Take notice, place it in your Bosom -- in
your Heart, in your -- I say, remember -- that is, do not forget -- but
remember.


Sir Wild. Hey day, he is preaching -- you Rogue Lance, You lying Rascal.


Lance. Gad forgive me, will ye spoil all again, Sir? -- What a Devil do you mean?


Tho. Away, Sirrah, and summon the rest of the Family hither, that I may edify
them all. Sir, you keep a Company of saucy Fellows, debauched, and daily
Drunkards, that devour ye. Things, whose Souls tend to the Cellar only.


Sir Wild. Sirrah, give me my Money again, or --


Lance. Why Sir, let me never eat again -- or feel the Blessing of another new
Livery, if he be not the very Devil in Debauchery, Sir: And what I have told
you of him is all true; ask Robin here.


Servant. Nay Sir, the truth is, I did see my Young Master pick up two Whores,
and put 'em into Pudding-Lane.


Tho. It Is strange these Rascals -- but Sir, when Folly and Idleness take the
upper hand of Reason, and permit when they meet and Inhabit the Heart, the
Mind, the Soul, the Faculties, the -- It Is a hard matter -- it is, I say, a --
matter of difficulty, of difficulty -- a matter of moment -- and all that, Sir,
to reform or conform, or direct, or dispute, or dissuade -- or divine, or
dispose, or --


Sir Wild. Or the Devil and all; come down, I say. Bless me! what stuffs here?


Lance. Sir, are ye mad? stark mad? did not I see ye beat a Constable last
Night?


Tho. I touch authority, ye Rascal? I violate the Law?


Sir Wild. No, no, he had rather preach to him -- Lancelot du Lake, Get ye upon
adventures -- cast your Coat, and make your Exit.


Lance. Pur l'amour de Dieu.


Sir Wild. Pur me no purs -- but get you out at that Door there; Out ye Eight
Languages.


Lance. My blood upon your head Sir -- Did not I tell you 'twou'd come to
this? What shall I do to live now? if I beg, I shall be Whip't; and if I steal,
I shall be hanged. What shall I do?


Tho. Hark ye, Sirrah; I Will provide for ye -- go instantly and get the Fiddler
I ordered ye -- let him be sure to be ready -- and then go and tell Vall and
Jack I Will meet 'em within this half hour in the Rounds.


Lance. Now, now, Sir, dee hear him now?


Tho. Sirrah, a word, and I Will cut your Throat -- away.


Sir Wild. Out of my doors, Sirrah. Exit Lance.


Tho. Ay, ay, purge 'em all Sir.


Sir Wild. I shall Sir -- and you too presently. Go Sirrah, bid my Maids that
stand without -- come in -- I will have one shall please me.


Tho. It Is most fit Sir.


Sir Wild. Bring in the Money there -- here Mr. Thomas.


Enter Servant with two Bags. You are no more my Son, now good Gentleman be
covered. Tho. What you please Sir.


Sir Wild. This money I give you, because heretofore you have been thought my
Son -- and by my self too -- and some things done like me; Ye are now another
-- here is two hundred pounds, a civil sum Sir, for a young Civil Man: Much
Land and Money would (I suppose) now only prove temptations, to take you from
your settled and sweet carriage.


Tho. How Is this? but Sir, I hope --


Sir Wild. Nay, I beseech ye, cover Sir; ye owe me no respect -- I have nothing
to do with ye; nor have you with my Estate Sir; Nor with this money neither,
now I think on it -- you can preach well Sir -- Pray get a Tub -- and deal about
your Hums and Has with reverence; some of the Rabble perhaps may have
farthings.


Tho. 'S'death, I shall be finely bubbled if this hold -- lose all my Fortune
for a Frollick -- I must wheel about again, there is no remedy.


Enter four Maids. Sir Wild. I have one thing more to say before we part Sir.
Behold those females there, pray view 'em well: I want a right Heir to Inherit
me, not my Estate alone, but my conditions, from which you are revolted --
therefore dead -- And I will break my back, but I will get one.


Tho. Will you choose there, Sir?


Sir Wild. There, among those Damsels -- in my own Tribe, I know their
qualities -- which cannot fail to please me, for their Beauties -- a matter of
three farthings makes all perfect. A little Beer, and Beef-broth -- they are
sound too -- stand all abreast -- Now Mr. Thomas, before I choose -- You having
lived long with me, and happily, sometimes with some of these too, which fault
I never frowned on -- Pray show me (for fear we confound our Genealogies) which
you have laid abroad: Speak your mind freely, Have you had Copulation with that
Damsel?


Tho. I have. Sighs.


Sir Wild. Say ye so? Pray how?


Tho. How, is not seemly here to say, Sir.


Sir Wild. Stand you aside then -- What say you to'th' second, Thomas?


Tho. With her too, Sir.


Sir Wild. With her too? ha, ha -- the Rogue wins upon me strangely.


Tho. So, so, he is coming again. Aside.


Sir Wild. Retire you two -- speak forward Mr. Thomas.


Tho. I will, and to the purpose -- even with all Sir.


Sir Wild. How? with all? that is somewhat large, with all Thomas?


Tho. All, surely Sir.


Enter Whore. Sir Wild. A sign thou art my own yet -- in again all, and to your
several Functions -- Mrs. I pray come hither -- Exeunt Maids. Tom, here is a
Lady -- that I found my self, to the Whore. What think ye of her? she I Am
sure's a stranger to ye.


Whore. Mercy upon me, He here! nay then, I shall be murdered.


Sir Wild. What, what is that? do know her Tom?


Tho. Know her? Why Sir, every Bulk about Town knows her; I met her drunk
in the Strand the other Night, with twenty Boys about her -- I have thrown her
into the Fleet Ditch -- three several times for my share.


Sir Wild. Go, get you gone too -- and to your Bulk again, my Marriage fit is
over.


Whore. And thank ye too, rather than stay where He is.


Sir Wild. Well, but what say ye to Luce, the Merchant's Daughter? she was too
young -- I think, when you traveled some twelve years old.


Tho. Her will was Fifteen, Sir.


Sir Wild. Ha, ha, ha -- 'Faith well answered to cut off long discourse,
Thomas, for I have many yet to ask ye of, Where I may choose, and nobly -- hold
up one finger; -- where I may not, two -- or more; What think ye of Valeria?
whose husband lies a dying now -- why two and in that form. Holds up his 2
fingers.


Tho. Her husband is recovered, Sir.


Sir Wild. A Witty Moral -- have at ye once more, Thomas -- the Sisters of St.
Albans -- what all five? -- ha, ha, that Boy, that is my own Boy -- Holds up his
hand.


Tho. Still hoping for your pardon.


Sir Wild. Pshaw, there needs none -- a pox on pardon -- I am pleased with thy
confession, Nor will I think of Marriage any longer; for of my Conscience I
shall be thy Cuckold -- there, there is Twenty Guinneys for ye, Sir. Go, and be
merry -- I see some sparkles which may flame again; and if they do, you are mine
yet -- farewell Monsieur. Exit.


Tho. So -- it is better thus, than the other way however -- but now to my
Serenade -- I have such a kind of a Mungril Love for this Woman -- that I must,
and will enjoy her, come what will on it -- Oh Sirrah -- well, have got him?


Enter Lancelot and Fiddler. Lance. I Sir, I have been here -- a rare Rogue --
he will Fiddle and make a noise, but the Devil a stop he knows, or when he
fiddles in Tune. Good Sir -- do something now -- some roaring thing, that we
may live and eat again -- By my 8. Languages I have had but one poor moldy
Crust this two days.


Tho. A Pox on thee for an eating Rogue, Nothing but Famine frights thee --
Come hither, Sirrah, what Ballads are you seen in best? -- ha? let us hear.


Fiddler. Under your Masterships Correction, I can sing the Merry Ballad of
Diverus and Lazarus. The Rose of England. In Creete when Dedimus first began.
Jonas his Crying out against Coventry -- and a merry Song, how Blind Toby and
his Dog fell in Love with a Fair Lady, by seeing her play upon a Cymbal.


Tho. Very well. What else?


Fiddler. Maudlin the Merchant's Daughter. The Devil, and the Dainty Dames.


Tho. Rare still!


Fiddler. The Landing of the Spaniards at Bow; With the Bloody Battle at
Mile-End.


Tho. Excellent! Well Sirrah, go, and put him to his Stand, and let my Friends
be ready -- I Will follow ye. Exeunt. I have heard, that sometimes Importunity
gets more than Love: And 'Faith, I Will haunt her like a Ghost, but I Will have
her. ha, ha, ha -- It makes me laugh too, to think how I have Bobb'd my Father
-- had I been wild at first, he would have been weary by this time; but now
all is sure and settled.

All you that would your good Old Fathers Cheat,
And e're his Death, do Covet his Estate;
To all his humors strict Compliance give,
For Age that doates once, has not long to live.

Exit. SCENE II. A Chamber.
Enter Franck, Sabina, and Cellide. Franck. Whatever your Nice humor, Madam,
seems to declare now, I am sure you must needs sometimes be of a contrary
temper -- he is my Friend I acknowledge; and the least thing I can do in his
absence, is to speak well of him.


Cellid. Sir, that freedom is of necessity allowed, and whatever his Merit is,
your Generosity could not do less -- but my knowledge of him and his temper, is
proof against all your assertions; I will allow him for a general Man, and good
Company; but let me tell ye -- such a one though he makes the best Servant --
certainly makes the worst Husband in the World.


Sabin. Ay, that is, Madam, according as you order him. If you give him
liberty, it is true, Men are apt to follow the Dictates of their own humors --
but when you have the Bridle in your hand, methinks it is easy stopping the
course.


Fra. That, Madam, does not so much depend on your own power, as on your
husband's temper; for if he be rough and passionate, you have so much Judgment
to know your bounds. But, if mild, and soft natured -- Your Province is the
larger. And there are two things which ruin such a man -- Fondness and Folly;
for a man that is too fond of his Wife, is as certain to be made a Cuckold by
her -- as that she would if she could do it -- were he never so ugly, or Jealous.


Cellid. If good Phrases, and Reason might pass for Jests, I swear you are the
merriest man I know.


Fra. I should be glad, Madam, I could breed your Diversion any way; though to
the rest of the World, it is my ambition they should relish me more in the
Philosopher, than the Buffoon.


Sabin. Fie, fie, a better word than that, Sir, -- Call a Witty brisk Fellow,
that breaks a Jest only for the sake of good Company, or so, a Buffoon? --
Fie, I swear 'twas ill said.


Cellid. Ay, it is a sign he has been sick lately.


Sabin. I do but think how you would look, if Monsieur Thomas should hear of this
-- you had best call Him Buffoon too.


Fra. No, He Is the General of 'em, -- and the only Person that I know can be
allowed of in that nature; for he has Wit in his Buffoonry -- and a graceful
action, gives an excellence to his Jest. -- If he tells a Lie, he will be sure
it shall be a pleasant one: And he never tells a bawdy story for its own sake,
but the Companies, and the Mirth that follows after.


Sabin. What think ye of this, Cousin?


Cellid. Pish -- Prithee what should I think of it? -- hark! what noise is
this? Noise of singing and shouting within.


Fra. But I have seen some dull Rogues Mangle a good Story so barbarously --
how now? what is that?


Enter Lucilla. Lucill. Was ever the like known? -- there is such a rout at
your Window yonder -- such shouting, such singing, and such a dismal noise --


Sabin. Noise? what noise? who is it?


Lucill. The mad Gentleman that used to ask for Madam Cellide, and twenty more,
fidling, singing like Madmen.


Cellid. It Is he -- shall I never be at rest? who can endure this?


Fra. He Is as good as his word I see. Aside.


Cellid. Hark ye, Cousin -- now if you love me, let us put a trick upon him --
I have a rare device in my head.


Sabin. I know this is against the grain, but come, I Will second ye. Exeunt.


Fra. It Is a mad Rogue -- but I know she loves him; I Will go up to my
Closet-Window and see the sport. Exit.


Scene, the Street. Enter Monsieur Thomas, Hylas, Lance, Fiddler, Valentine,
and Linck-Boyes. Tho. Stand close now, and every one mind his business, Jack
keep you that door there -- and be sure none of her Servants enter, or go out
-- if any Woman pass, she is lawful Prize -- Cut off all Convoyes.


Val. It Is not fit I am seen -- I Will therefore stand at distance and observe ye.


Hyl. Ay, but hark ye Tom -- who shall answer this?


Tho. Why, I shall answer it, Sir; -- You fearful Puppy I shall appear to the
Action.


Hyl. Well, well, I have done -- we may talk too, may we not?


Tho. With any Woman freely.


Hyl. And sing too, ha? -- for there is my Masterpiece.


Tho. No, Sir, by no means. I am the Man reserved for Air -- it is my talent,
and the Devil's in it if my voice don't charm her; hark ye, You may Record a
little -- Whistle, or so -- to show you are good at something -- but for main
singing -- let me alone; away, be careful.


Hyl. But there is another thing; we may be beaten.


Tho. 'Faith, so thou may -- and well too -- for thou deserve it richly --
Why, what Bug-bears are in thy Brains? Beaten? -- why who should beat thee?


Hyl. Why she may have men enough.


Tho. Ay, art not thou man enough too?


Hyl. I warrant thee -- there is a low Window -- I Will peep in and see what they
are doing.


Tho. Come Sirrah, let us hear some of your Art now -- Nay, nay, No tuneing as
ye love me -- let thy Fiddle speak Welsh, or any thing that is out of all tune
-- the Viler, still the better -- like thy self -- for I presume thy voice will
make no Trees dance.


Fiddler. Nay, truly you shall have it even as homely.


Tho. With all my heart, keep it to that Key still -- I think they are all abed.


Lance. I think so too, Sir -- I can hear no stirring any where, No light in
any Window, it is a Night for the purpose, Sir.


Tho. Come, strike up a flourish -- and Sirrah, do you sing the Serenading Song
I taught ye the other Night; We Will bear the Chorus.


SONG. And Dance. Enter Servant above. Servant. Who Is there? what noise is
this? -- what Rogue at these hours -- dares disturb us thus?


Tho. Sings. Oh what is that to you ye Fool?
Oh what is that to you?
Pluck in your face -- ye bawling Ass,
Or I will break your Nose.
With a hey down, down, down, downa.

Exit Servant. Hyl. Tom -- here is rare sport -- here is one of the Women washing
her Legs -- Ah Rogue! -- 'Faith she has a fine plump Calf -- ha, ha, -- now she
is come to her Knee -- oh -- murder, murder -- I Am killed.


Tho. Hah! -- his face all bloody? Maid within shoots a squirt of blood in's
face, and lets off a Pistol. Hold still Jack, let me see, Where Is the Wound?
this is no jesting matter.


Hyl. I know not, I feel none -- cannot you see it?


Tho. Ha, ha -- I find it now -- this was only a trick, a squirt of blood and a
Pistol fired off -- are they so frollicksome? have at 'em once more.


Hyl. 'Troth I Am glad I Am alive for all that -- I Will go and get my face washed,
and come again. Exit.


Tho. Come Sirrah, now sing the English Ballad.


Fiddler. There was a Noble Merchant
That lived in a Town,
He had an only Daughter,
That was both fair and brown;
Sing hey trangdillo, dillo down.
A Noble Knight likewise,
On whom Fortune did frown,
He got her Maidenhead once in thrice,
Sing hey trangdillo down, down, derry down.

Tho. No stirring yet? -- I believe the Devil has charmed 'em asleep. Come,
flourish again, and the the other Song --


Fiddler. The Twelfth of April on May Day,
My House, and Goods were stolen away.

Tho. Hold, hold -- she comes -- Sirrah, give me the Address I gave you in
writing the other day.


Enter Cellide and Sabina above. Lance. O Lord, Sir, the Mice eat it in my
Pocket one Night, but I have the Complement here that you took out of the Book
of Common Places.


Tho. That then, Sirrah, quickly -- holdup the light -- Madam. Were there no
other light but your eyes -- the World would need no Sun -- And -- Conf --
conserve me, Madam, if, like a Fly, I can forbear buzzing about that light --
though I have burnt my Wings -- ha? what think ye of that, Sirrah? To Lance.


Sabin. Who would forbear loving a Man that has such several ways of Gallantry?


Cellid. Hush -- you shall hear a Dialogue between us.
My Man Thomas did me promise
He would Visit me this Night.

Tho. What? Musical? -- nay, let me alone for answering that.
I am here Love, tell me dear Love,
How I may obtain thy sight.

Cellid. Come up to the Window my Love,
Come up to the Window my Dear;
Here Is a Ladder of Rope,
That will help to guide thee up, Throws down a Ladder of Ropes.
And thou shall be lodged here.

Tho. sings. And 'Faith, I Will be with thee strait, she is very kind of the
sudden, ha Sirrah? -- go, all be gone, there is money.


Exeunt Lights. Lance. Ay Sir, so she is; you will have good sport anon, ha?


Cellid. Now Cousin -- the Scuttle quickly.


SONG. Tho. Sir Eglamore that Valiant Knight, Sings going up.
Hey down, down a down;
So bruised was with grievous frights,
Hey down, down, downa down.
For he had been Cuffing so long with the Dragon,
That nothing could quench his thirst but a whole flaggon,
With a hey down, down, downa, etc.

Tho. How now? what a Devil -- is this? Sabina throws down a Scuttle upon him.
Sirrah, Lance? -- what is the matter I Am Enchanted, I cannot stir -- bound
hand and foot.


Cellid. Nay, my Dear -- why are you so slow? Prithee make haste.


Tho. A pox on ye -- Lance -- what a Devil is this?


Lance. Come down, Sir, come down -- they have played some trick or other with
ye -- ha, ha -- I thought so. He comes down.


Sabin. Fie, fie, so slow Sir; is this like a Mercurian?


Tho. 'Faith I Will be even w'you presently -- 'S'death, a Basket! What Witches
are these? -- but I Will storm once more, and it is not Baskets, nor Chamber-pots,
shall hinder me now; Sirrah, now sing.


Cellid. Lucilla.


Lucill. I Am ready, Madam.


Fiddler. The Duke, he was a Noble Man, as any in the Town,

Tho. Phoo, phoo -- what is this? oh! He climbs up, and Lucilla with a Devil's
Vizard frights him.


Fiddler. But climbing to promotion, he suddenly fell down. She offers to Kiss
him, and he falls down.


Lucill. Ha, ha, ha.


Tho. Death! this was another Trick upon me, I find by the Queans Mirth.


Cellid. What have thou done? -- not thrown him down I hope.


Lucill. Only a little way, Madam.


Cellid. A little way? -- Oh heaven I Am undone! she has broke his Neck.


Tho. Ha! is she so pitiful? -- I may have a Trick then to recover all yet --
oh my leg, my leg -- I am spoiled for ever; both my Legs. Sits down on the
Stage, and holds his Legs.


Cellid. Hark, hark, do you not hear him?


Tho. Shattered in twenty pieces, I Am undone! oh barbarous Woman! howl Sirrah,
howl.


Lance. Oh, his back too! his back! -- the bone is out of Joint.


Cellid. Do You hear ye Devil? run to the Surgeon quickly, fly: Or see my face no
more. O horrid mischance! I come, I come.


Tho. Take heed of Women, Friends, take heed of Women; They Will put ye out of
Joint -- they will shake your Souls out. Oh, ha, my Leg! my Leg!


Lance. Your head, your head too, Sir -- for your Skull being cracked, Your
Brains may happen to catch cold. Ha, ha, ha! The Light's taken away, I believe
she is coming.


Tho. And cry out still -- Men believe falsely that think Age makes 'em
decrepid -- No, it is Women, it is Women, oh --


Lance. She comes -- she comes, Sir.


Tho. Sirrah, squeeze out a tear, or two -- Now for a swouning fit -- ah! --
Lies as in a swoon.


Enter Cellide. Cellid. Where, where are ye, Sir?


Lance. He Is gone -- he is gone. Master -- sweet Master, here is Lance that
calls -- oh! -- what shall I do?


Cellid. Oh I am miserable! Sir, Sir -- Dear Sir -- Oh cursed Accident! help!
help to hold up his head!


Lance. Ah it is stiff, Madam -- every part of him is stiff; rub him, rub him.


Cellid, Here, hold this Bottle of Amber to his Nose -- Sir, Dear Sir, Open
your eyes, and see my sorrow for ye; it is I that speak Sir. For Heavens sake
open your Eyes -- I am here. Holds him in her Arms.


Tho. Ay -- and -- I am here too -- and well -- thank my Activity; Your Bottle
of Amber will be unnecessary, And if thou scap'st me now -- Catches hold of her.


Cellid. What, caught again! oh this subtle Devil!


Tho. However, I am bound in Conscience to thank you for your kindness -- and
since it is only Trick for Trick, Madam, we have the more reason to be friends
-- I must needs own my self obliged to you; for the Devil take me if I have been
kissed so heartily this great while.


Lance. Ha, ha, ha -- it is strange your Legs should be cured already Sir; But,
Madam -- he is such a Wagg -- ha, ha --


Cellid. Well -- I have no other way, but seeming to comply.


Tho. Come 'faith be kind now -- I have a convenient Lodging here hard by --
and one reconciling here now, will be worth Ages.


Cellid. Fie! What baseness is this?


Tho. Ay, that is all one -- If I leave my self to a doubt again -- May I be
Jilted as I have been -- Come Sirrah, and help --


Cellid. Hold Sir -- well, now I see you love me; and believe Sir, this
Impatiency has taken me far more than all your Addresses: Violence, will now be
unnecessary.


Tho. Ah, no Tricks, Madam -- to be plain with ye, if you will marry me -- so
-- if not, I am resolved to enjoy ye before I part, and then marry who you
please.


Cellid. Nay, that shall not need, I swear, if you have a Priest ready -- I
have tried thee long enough; and though you are a little Wild -- I know you can
love truly -- ah my Dear Sweet! Embraces.


Tho. Why Ay. this is like something now, -- Sirrah, have I not wrought her
rarely?


Lance. Ay, ay, but to her, to her Sir, don't let her cool.


Tho. Come my Dear, shall we go in here, or to my Lodging?


Cellid. Your Lodging, no indeed -- I Will have the confirmation made here,
follow me; but hold, it is convenient the Candle be out, for if my Cousin sees
me, she will so laugh at me.


Tho. 'Faith, well considered; besides, light in such a case is a little
unnecessary -- Sirrah, turn the Lantern -- so.


Cellid. And will you always love me?


Tho. This kiss shall confirm it.


Cellid. What ye Clown -- with your Hat on? and to your Mistress too? You could
do no more if I were your Wife. Throws his Hat away, and whilst he gropes to
find it, falls. She runs in; and locks the Door. So, I am once more Conqueress,
Now let him catch me if he can.


Tho. Who the Devil would have thought, you should expect Ceremony in the dark?
-- Where, where is it Sirrah? -- Oh here, Come, now let us go -- I Am impatient
till -- God's Death what is that? Runs and stumbles over Lance.


Lance. Ha! She Is gone Sir.


Tho. How! gone!


Cellide above. Cellid. I have only leisure now to bid you good night Sir, and
wish your leg well cured -- to morrow perhaps, you may hear more. Exit.


Tho. A Pox fetch thee -- that is but the preamble. Still thus bubbled? --
Sirrah help me to curse her. May she fall in love with an old man that is
bedridden, Afterward, consider of it, despair, and then poison her self with her
own Mercury.


Lance. May she be proud to that degree to scorn all her Sex, Then get the
small Pox, and look like a Witch, that all her Sex may scorn her.


Tho. Well sed; or may --.


Lance. May she get a great Belly by imagination -- and when she hopes to see
the precious Offspring -- may it prove Fire and Brimstone.


Tho. Well sed again -- Gad thou have a pretty gift at it -- but come, now let us
be gone -- and plot how to plague her to morrow, for if I leave her thus, may I
lose all my Fame and turn Civilian.

Men rail at Whores for Luxury and cost,
But believe me, all you that Judgment boast,
It Is your damned honest Women Iilt ye most.

Exeunt. The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
SCNE I.
Sir Peregreene, Valentine and Franck. Val. NOble Sir Peregreene, this
unexpected favor of honoring my house with your Company is so far above my
hopes -- that I want words to express my sentiments of it.


Sir Per. Sir, your complements put me in mind of the Debt of gratitude I owe
ye -- for my Daughters kind Entertainment: -- I fear I have too much trespassed
upon your patience.


Val. Fie Sir Peregreene, I thought you had known me better than to Imagine so
poorly of me -- your Daughter I assure ye has been a grace to my Family.


Fra. Any one Sir that has the good fortune to be in her Company will rather
think it a blessing, then a trouble, especially if he be of my opinion.


Sir Per. Sir I thank ye, and 'twas a business of Moment that brought me
hither; for yesterday in the afternoon I had a Letter from Sir Wilding Frollick
-- proposing a Marriage between his Son and my Daughter.


Val. What, with Monsieur Thomas?


Sir Per. The same -- I am so vexed I forgot to bring it with me, 'twou'd have
made you laugh heartily -- for in my life I never saw so extravagant a style;
-- now Cousin my business in Town is, to put a stop to this Match, for I hear
he comes often to her, and against her Will too, -- does he so Cousin?


Val. Sometimes Sir -- by way of visit, or so -- but not against her consent,
that ever I heard of, and you know Sir, 'twou'd not be civil in me to deny her
visitants.


Sir Per. Cousin, you say well -- but we Fathers perhaps have better eyes to
pry into these matters -- then your Youngsters have; she is a good Girl Sir, and
I think a Fathers Indulgence should be carefully employed in bestowing a good
Girl upon a good Man.


Fra. Oh all the reason in the World Sir.


Sir Per. Why very well -- then to be plain, his fame is none of the cleerest
-- for in troth we hear in the Country, he is ten times more mad, and debauched
since he came from Paris, then he was before -- they say, he never says his
Prayers.


Val. Not publicly I think Sir -- but he may be the better for that.


Sir Per. Oh no -- and between you and I, I don't relish him -- not like him I
mean, and my Judgment* and good liking have gone hand in hand these 50 years --
and think I am not crazy now Sir; there is an Imposition laid upon us Fathers
-- by the Law of Nature -- to be Elaborate, and Zealous in our care for our
Children; and though I profess to you Cousin, I entertain no ill sentiments as
to matter of his estate, I do as to the matter of his manners; mark me, I say
his manners, for, believe me, however corrupt affections -- put a false gloss
upon a Fathers charge, yet it is certainly required of him to be very
circumspect in his consideration, when it tends to the disposal of his
Children; -- but come, pray let me see her.


Val. Sir, Im afraid she is hardly stirring yet -- but she will soon be ready --
I Will wait on ye Sir.


Sir Per. Cousin, your very Servant. Exeunt.


Fra. This Knight is as much affected with his formal Oratory as a Judge at the
Sessions House, and if his humor hold, I fear may lose* his Mistress in spite
of all his Intrigues.


Enter Hylas. Jack. how do thou?


Hylas 'Faith, better to see thee so well again Franck, but prithee have thou
seen Tom today?


Fra. No -- what mad Rogues you were last night to make such a noise.


Hyl. Did thou hear us? we were very frollicksome, that is the truth on it --
for my part I thought he was mad.


Fra. Ay, but here is one come to Town, that will spoil his mad frollicks (her
Father, Jack) he came early this Morning -- and with intent to stop all
proceedings.


Hyl. Her Father! God's Death what luck's this -- where is he?


Fra. Gone in with Val. to see her -- come, go with me, I Will help thee to the
sight of him.


Hyl. With all my heart, it may be I may do him a kindness by it -- Pox on him,
has he smelt the business out already? Exit.


Enter Monsieur Thomas, Lucilla, and Lance. Tho. Sirrah, stay you there and
watch -- Exit Lance. Her Father in Town say thou?


Lucill. Yes Sir, he came this morning; and since your bounty Sir has made me
your Creature -- I cannot but inform you that he is much incensed against you
-- and if he sees you -- he may perhaps fly into more Passion.


Tho. I Will be gone then. Damned Rogue, that he did not give me warning!


Lucill. Sir, There Is no going out there, if you do you will meet him, You must
have a little patience -- come hither -- here is a standing Press -- that my
Master uses to hang Clothes in, Get in here and you are safe, I Am sure they
will not stay long.


Tho. Pox, mewed like a Cat in a Cupboard -- what damned luck's this! Gets into
the Press.


Enter Sir Peregreene, Valentine, Franck, Hylas, Cellide, and Sabina. Sir Per.
Cousin, it has been longer my study -- therefore I should know more of Men and
Manners than you -- Mum, mum -- I say to you once more she shall not have him.


Val. Sir, I am sorry he has the ill fortune to be no better known to ye; but
it is fit your Judgment should have precedence, especially, as to this affair.


Cellid. Ha, ha, ha -- there in that Press say thou?


Lucill. Yes, Madam, and I warrant in an Ague by this time.


Cellid. Hush, not a word on it -- I Will plague him for his last nights work; Sir
I hope you know my Obedience is so settled, to believe my Youth shall never
make me throw my self away upon a Man -- you dislike -- and one that I confess
is the General of all mischief -- and the lewdest, and most debauched person in
Town.


Tho. So -- she has hit me to a hair -- Peeping out.


Sabin. Her mind is very suddenly altered, or else this must be Cunning.


Sir Per. Child, remember my Caution, my blessing shall follow; and observe
this as a Maxim, (which though not in Epithetus, yet is in Aratine -- or some
such merry Book, which in troth I have forgot) That the Marriage Bed is never
happy, except the Father eats part of the Posset -- it is somewhat familiar, but
the sense is strong.


Hyl. Very strong Sir, and in my Judgment extends to many things.


Sir Per. It does so. Do ye know this Man we speak of Sir?


Hyl. Some small acquaintance, Sir -- his Person, not his humor.


Sir Per. Your name good Sir.


Hyl. Hylas -- at your Service -- Sir Robert Hylas Son of Essex.


Sir Per. Indeed? let me embrace ye -- your Father was my Intimate and good
Friend; are you Sir Robert Hylas Son, say ye? By my faith, I am glad to see
you. Your Father was the best Man of Land we had in Essex, when I knew him.


Hyl. I think he had enough to keep him warm Sir.


Sir Per. And you I think are his Heir -- let me embrace ye once more --
'faith, I should think my Daughter better bestowed, if -- but I Will not begin.


Hyl. Hum! -- his Daughter -- Sir I have 15 hundred or so; this would be rare
-- and she is a delicate Girl -- Well -- sit fast Monsieur Thomas -- I never
refuse blessings, I.


Sir. Per. A man of no Principles; no, I will not have you think of him.


Cellid. I will not Sir -- but as of a Madman.


Sir Per. A Whirligigg.


Cellid. A Monster -- that on my Conscience -- has more Wenches -- that take
pay of him, than the Grand Signior has.


Tho. That Is a lie, for I never paid a Whore in my life. Peeps out.


Cellid. What think ye Sir? -- I Am sure you cannot but be more my Friend than
his -- Pray speak.


Hyl. 'Faith she seems willing too -- well, I begin to be damnably in Love --
this must be the Twentieth, I find it.


Cellid. Will you be so unkind to be silent, Sir? -- I Am sure this Aside. galls
him. Is he not the basest fellow in Town?


Hyl. In Town? nay in Christendom -- I think he is the greatest Corrupter of
Youth, and Debaucher of Women in the whole World.


Tho. A Rare Rogue!


Cellid. I marry him? what, a Fellow that makes it his business to be wicked?


Hyl. That never considers on his latter end, but Wenches on to perpetuity.


Cellid. Ay, and that never is out of a course of Physic, but to gain time to
get in again.


Hyl. Right, Madam -- that never will be found -- nor I think hardly ever was.


Tho. Very well, the Rascall's witty now he thinks me absent, But I shall make
you smart for this my damned Friend, I shall.


Val. Is this done like a Friend, Jack?


Hyl. No 'faith; but it is like a man in Love, and that hopes to bubble his
Friend tho.


Fra. Be not too confident of your success -- there will be some danger in it;
for you know he dares fight.


Hyl. Ay, but he is absent now -- why when I see him Man, I Will forswear all
again.


Tho. The Rogue has a tender Conscience however. Aside.


Sir Per. Mr. Hylas -- in troth I like your humor, and Company so well, That I
desire to have you acquainted with my Daughter; she is a good Girl Sir -- Pray
be familiar with her.


Cellide, Prithee, look on this Gentleman -- 'faith he pleases me well.


Cellid. Sir, I cannot doubt but in a little time his Merit, and Witty
conversation -- will give me the content you receive in him -- Now he frets
rarely. Aside.


Sabin. Still more strange! -- sure it is not possible she can be thus flexible.


Sir Per. Prithee go, and address -- I believe she has a mind to thee.


Hyl. Your humble Servant, Sir -- it is a happiness too great; 'S'death, this is
the Civill'st Old Fellow -- I ever met with -- Madam, be pleased to enroll me
among your Vassals.


Cellid. My Father's pleasure prefers ye Sir -- you may command me.


Tho. Very fine -- Faith I have been debauched to fine purpose if this last; --
but the worst is, that this dull Rogue should bubble me -- 'S'death I shan'not
have patience.


Hyl. The Devil take me Val. if I can help this, it is a Fortune thrown upon me
-- and you know if it were your own case --


Val. I Will not be concerned in it Sir -- if you will venture a Beating, You may do
what you please.


Enter Servants, bringing in Lance. Serve. Sir, here is a suspicious Fellow, has
been prying up and down the house for above this hour; I believe h'has stole
something.


Lance. Jernie, stole something! -- I Will be Judged by all dis Company, who
look most like a the Thief, you or I.


Cellid. O Rascal, are you here? examine him Sir, here is one Plot or other
contriving.


Hyl. Sir -- this is his Rascal, his Procurer -- one that he employes to set
his Whores for him.


Sir Per. Oh -- is he so -- I thought there was more in it than ordinary, Bring
him before me.


Val. Sirrah, bear up boldly, and fear nothing, I Will stand thy Friend.


Lance. Well, well -- and what have you to say to me you Son of a -- I say Sir
-- what have you to say to me?


Hyl. I say, you are his Pimp, Sir -- and by the leave of this Company shall be
whipped, and tossed in a Blanket.


Lance. Ah no! -- a Jirk or so, if you please -- but no Blanket, That is a
little too ungentile -- Jernie, when did you ever see a Frenchman tossed in a
Blanket? -- Where the Devil is my Master gone now?


Sir Per. Stand by, Let me examine him; Friend, it agrees not with the
reserv'dness, and solidity of your Countenance, to be so far forgetful of your
self, as to embroile, Or rather Incumber your Wit, about this Criminal Affair.


Lance. Your Servant, Sir.


Sir Per. Come, be genuine with me -- here is a Protector's half Crown for thee
-- two shillings five pence sterling -- and let it be a Key to unlock thy heart
-- Do thou come upon any Sinister Design?


Lance. Sir, upon my faith -- I stood there only to watch, that was all.


Sir Per. To watch us -- oh --


Cellid. Placed as a Spy Sir -- come deal freely, and I Will entertain thee; What
new Pranck is your Master about?


Sir Per. Tell that, I Have another Protector for thee.


Lance. Why then Sir, to say the truth, my Master is a plaguey -- Debauched
Fellow -- he never goes to Church -- he says there is no good Company there;
and my business here was to give him warning -- if any came to disturb him when
he was with this Lady.


Sir Per. It Is plain now he would have ravished her -- go fetch me a Cudgel,
I Will make you an Example.


Lance. O Lord, Sir, what do you mean? Opens the Door of the Press, and Tho, is
discovered.


Tho. There Is for your Commendations, Dog.


Omnes. How! -- in the Press?


Cellid. Ay, it is evident -- he came to rob the house.


Tho. Nothing but confidence can bring me off, therefore have at 'em -- well,
Gentlemen -- have you looked your fill? -- pray observe me once again; it is I, I
assure ye.


Hyl. How! -- has he heard all then? -- what will become of me?


Val. This is a little uncivil, by your favor, to hide your self in my house
without my knowledge.


Sir Per. Hold Cousin -- let me speak -- Sir -- to lay the Law to you, would
perhaps be insignificant, you not understanding it; Reason too is lost upon ye,
because you are a Madman -- Yet, though these two fail -- anger -- has its
full power; Nor shall my Daughter want a Champion -- whilst she has a Father
-- You conceive me Sir -- Prepare your self.


Hyl. Take him at his word -- I Will be thy Second.


Tho. What, in a Game at Tennis? -- but now I think on it, thou art too dull for
that too -- for thy Wit and Courage have been much of a stamp ever since I knew
thee. Hush, not a word more -- I Will talk with you anon, Sir.


Hyl. I shall be swing'd -- I see there is no remedy.


Tho. Now for my faculty, I Am resolved this Jilt shall not carry it off so --
Sir, since I see you are a Man of Honor, and Jealous, and mindful of Injuries,
and for some reason best known to my self, being now resolved that all shall
out -- know, 'twas by your Daughters contrivance -- that I was shut up here.


Sir Per. My Daughters?


Cellid. Very well, he is fetching it off with a lie, but that shall not do; --
heark'ee, Sir, what do you mean by that?


Tho. Nay, Madam -- what did you mean by it. Sir, for me to say she is honest


Sabin. Is a lie?


Cellid. Oh Heavens!


Tho. Would not be, I confess, so like a Gentleman, but that she is given to
subtlety, and wantonness -- give me leave to confirm it; For to be faithful
with you, this was the day appointed for a certain business 'twixt she and I.
You understand me, to which purpose I was shut up there -- 'faith I must needs
say much against my own good humor and Inclinations.


Sir Per. Umph -- I begin to discern it now, this was a Plot -- Huswife -- see
my face no more.


Cellid. Oh horrid Impudence! Pray hear me speak, Sir.


Val. Sir, this must not pass, upon this Lady without better grounds.


Tho. Sir, you shall have what ground you please, and Where. What Madam, I
warrant you are amazed at this?


Cellid. I do confess I am.


Tho. Hark ye, Sir -- do you hear that? -- she confesses it -- after this --
sure there is nothing remains to prove the truth of my Story: Madam, I am
heartily sorry, it should be my ill fortune to relate this -- but you must
pardon me -- I do it for the discharge of my Conscience, and so your most
devoted -- hark ye, shall I lie with ye to night? -- Be kind -- I Will recover
all yet -- I Will stay half an hour for your answer at the next Tavern; consider
on it -- Gentlemen your Servant -- and You Sir -- To Hylas. A part of whose Nose
I desire to be obliged with as a remedy against my Cold -- my kind good natured
civil. Son of a Whore -- Your Servant, Sir.


Hyl. Pox on him -- what a plaguey twitch he gave me.


Lance. I hope he has forgot me, but I must follow him, and if he will be
contented with a Limb -- I Am happy. Exit.


Sir Per. My rage has almost suffocated me -- but I Will instantly go and cut off
the Intail of my Estate, and leave her as despicable as she has left her honor.


Fra. Sir, let reason mitigate your passion, this may be all false.


Val. May be, upon my life it is -- Pray Sir, let me speak a word with ye in
private. Exeunt.


Sir Per. Infamous Creature!


Cellid. Was ever such an Impudent lie carried so prosperously? By Heaven I was
so confounded, I had no power to speak a word: I must have this recovered, and
suddenly, I Am undone else. -- He told me when he went -- he would stay for my
answer at the next Tavern -- go you instantly, and tell him I have considered,
and desire to speak with him privately in my Chamber.


Lucill. Yes, Madam, and I Will warrant I Will bring him back.


Exit. Cellid. I have one Trick more in my head, that if it prospers, is
certain to recover all yet; for the Love I had for him is so turned in a desire
of Revenge -- that I cannot rest till it be done. Enter Mrs. Dorothy. How, his
Sister? she must know nothing.


Doro. What, always in Contemplation? shall I never find thee otherwise? --
Why, thou have quite deserted thy merry humor; Prithee Cellide, what ayl'st
thou?


Cellid. Now I think on it, her Company may be advantageous to me, If made use
of rightly -- Come -- thou shall know all, and I must therefore confess the
subject of my thoughts was thy mad Brother.


Doro. What, are ye reconciled? I am glad of that.


Cellid. In a fair way to it -- he will be here within this hour, to confirm the
bargain -- and if I could, I would have his Father be by, and overhear it.


Doro. I Am sure he will come willingly, for he is very much pleased with the
Match, though our Father be against it.


Cellid. Do, and I Will Order my Woman to place him conveniently.


Doro. Ha, ha, ha, we shall have rare sport. Exit.


Cellid. Rare sport indeed -- as I will order it -- for his Father, and Sister
to be by -- when I put the Trick upon, will be a rare venture -- hark, I think
he is coming, I Will to my Chamber, and prepare for him.


Enter Lance. Lucill. What, Sir, do you think I tell ye a lie? -- I hope you see
more grace in my Physiognomy -- than to believe that.


Tho. Ay gad, if Deformity be a grace in a Woman -- thou I confess have a
considerable share on it.


Lucill. Come, good Sir, spare your Expressions till ye come to my Lady.


Tho. Away then -- Sirrah, for the last business I forgive ye. But if you fail
in your charge again.


Lance. No Sir, Ill be doubly careful now -- I understand my Trade. What a
Devil, I have not been a Pimp so long for nothing.


Exeunt. SCENE II. A Chamber.
Enter Cellide, and Servants. Cellid. You shall find me bountiful -- but be
sure to do as I bid ye, and be all ready when I give the Sign, then leave the
rest to me.


Servants. Madam, we will not fail.


Cellid. Away then, and watch your time.


Enter Lucilla. Lucill. Madam, he is come.


Cellid. So. Is he alone?


Lucill. No Madam, his Man is with him.


Cell. Then it is as I would have it; for I am resolved that Rascal shall
partake in my revenge -- be sure you are ready with a Rope when I give the word.


Lucill. Yes, Madam, I warrant ye.


Cellid. But first, go to my Father, and tell him my Design to prove my
Innocence -- and when his Father comes, place both the Old Men in that Window
there, where they may see all; Away, I hear him coming. Exit Lucilla.


Enter Thomas and Lance. Tho. Ha, ha, ha -- have you considered then, Madam?
Will you allow me a Man of Wit now? ha, ha, ha.


Cellid. Nay, I confess I deserve you should laugh at me for sending to ye --
but I swear I was not able to let you go, till you had ask't my pardon for the
affront you put upon me.


Tho. An affront? not in the least 'faith -- a little harmless rallery, that
was all -- why thou art not such a Fool to think my Father believed me, Do?
No, no, he knew I was in Jest.


Lance. Now is he going about another Swinger -- well, I believe I have the
lying'st Son of a Whore to my Master that ever was born-fifty an hour is
nothing to him. --


Cell. A Jest? -- what your swearing that I shut ye into the Press with Intent
to have you lie with me? a Jest?


Tho. Nothing else upon my Faith. -- Come, let all be forgot; and since we have
given proof of one another's Wit -- let us now come to the trial of our Persons
-- Come my Dear -- your promise -- Pox, must Enter Lucilla. This Creature
molest us now? -- Prithee send the Bawd of an errand.


Cellid. Promise, or not Sir -- you are like to stay till we are married, I Will
assure ye -- Well, are they come? and have you placed 'em as I ordered ye?


Lucill. Yes, Madam, there in that Window -- look up, you may see 'em.


Sir Wilding and Sir Peregreene above in a disguise. Sir Wild. Ha, ha, ha, --
the Rogue has her there. -- Now I shall see if he behaves himself like a Cock
of Four, or no.


Sir Per. And I shall see how she behaves her self -- but Mum --


Tho. Come, prithee leave whispering; These Young Bawds are never good for any
thing but mischief.


Cellid. She shall be gone immediately -- but first for the safety of my
Honor, confess before her -- that what you sed in the Hall before my Father,
was a lie.


Tho. Well, I confess it was -- now begone Mistress, be gone I say; and do you,
Sirrah, hide your self below till I come, and be sure you are not seen.


Cellid. Hold, I must have a word with him first -- be gone, and get the Rope
ready. To Lucilla.


Tho. With Him? -- Pox, prithee lose none of thy breath with Him, let Him go.


Cellid. It Is for your safety, Sir.


Sir Wild. So, now the Old Woman's gone -- now Cock of Four.


Cellid. Friend, there is a weighty business imposed upon you, for your
Master's good; for Sir Ferdinand had never pulled him by the Ears -- if
Pomgranats had been in season. Now you being a Scholar, and Homer you know
loving Paremains -- sent all the Lobsters in the Levant to Massinello the
Fisherman -- You understand me?


Lance. Yes, yes -- gads noons not a word -- not I -- You say, Madam, that I
being a Scholar, proceed -- pray.


Cellid. You, I say, having read Aristotle -- and knowing Mice to be very
destructive to the Commonwealth, cannot but consider what your Master may
suffer; for there is as much difference in Perrukes, as in Bucklers, and the
Cardinal Bobinello loosing one of his Teeth with a Skirmish 'twixt him, and the
Pigmies -- Your Master's Interest will be left in the hand of Sir Ieoffry, or
the Here Hander van Dander Scopen; Do You conceive me?


Lance. Yes, yes, I think I do. Madam, I speak 8. Languages; I assure ye
therefore, I think I understand ye.


Enter Lucilla above with a Rope. Tho. Come, come, Madam -- what business can
she have with this dull Rogue?


Cellid. Oh she is ready I see -- Now Sir, I come to ye.


Servant. Nay Sir, no struggling, Stamps, and they all come in, and disarm and
bind him. our Power shall master ye.


Tho. Damned, Cowardly Dogs -- and damned dull Rogue as I was to venture my
self here, knowing her so well.


Cellid. What, you are running away, Sirrah, are ye? come, the Rope, the Rope
quickly. Lucilla throws a Rope down, and they tie it about Lance his Neck.


Lance. O mercy, mercy! Why you will not be guilty of such barbarity, will
you? to hang up 8 Languages?


Sir Wild. How, how, Tom? beset, and bound -- then it is time to discover my
self -- Courage, Tom -- Courage, I am here -- I Am here.


Sir Per. Ay, and I am here too, Sir -- nay, sit still -- for here is no getting
out.


Sir Wild. How Sir Peregreene -- 'S'bud, this was a Plot, Discovers himself. I
find it now.


Cellid. So, this Service has obliged me -- but now begone all, and leave him
to me. Exeunt Servants.


Tho. My Father here too! Pox, this is worst of all -- Oh I could curse now!
well, he that loves a Woman, loves his Torment -- and he that Courts her --


Cellid. Ha, ha, ha, have you considered yet, Sir? -- will ye allow me a Woman
of Wit now? Ha, ha, ha.


Sir Per. Ha, ha, ha -- a Rare Girl I profess.


Tho. Ha, ha, ha; well, I was a damned Insipid Rogue, that is the truth on it --
but Madam, little did I think you could have been thus ungrateful.


Cell. Ungrateful! why thou shallow inconsiderate unthinking fool, Could thou
Imagine I could sleep -- and leave thy last affront unpunish't? No, all my
Faculties were turned to Thought and Revenge. Nor get ye your Liberty, till I
have it thoroughly.


Lance. But what harm did I do, Madam? You know I took your part -- oh --


Lucill. What, Sirrah, are you prating? I Will stop your noise.


Tho. Well, I shall get loose again -- and then if you persist in this usage, I
shall then be implacable -- You know, Madam, I have Wit.


Cellid. What, do you threaten me? -- I know you have Wit; Where, where is it?
for my part, I am blind to it; but I can give ye some, Sir -- thus -- and thus
-- Strikes him.


Tho. Who' Pox -- Prithee forbear -- 'S'death, this is barbarous.


Cellid. O, it is a blessing you want, Sir -- and pray let me infuse it into ye
-- You cheated me, I remember, with your broken Leg, last Night Sir, and
roared, and howled, and laugh't and fooled me Sir.


Tho. Oh Devil, this is past sufferance.


Cellid. Told a swinging lie this morning to prove me a Whore, Sir, to my
Father; for which there is a swinging cuff, Sir.


Tho. Umph -- nay enough, enough -- come -- I Will reform.


Lance. And so will I too -- I Will never Pimp for him, no -- oh --


Lucill. Still prating, Rascal?


Sir Wild. Oh that plaguey Queen -- that brought me hither.


Sir Per. You must have patience, Sir -- a sweet Girl I profess.


Enter Sabina. Sabin. What, is the Monsieur caught? -- the plotting Monsieur?
Ha, ha, ha -- this is strange I swear Sir -- where was all your Wit?


Tho. Dam her, Is she come too?


Cellid. Ay, where indeed -- ah Cousin, he is so cruel to me, here have I lain
languishing this hour, Throws her self on a Chair. and not so much as a kind
word from him.


Tho. Ah Devil!


Sabin. Ha, ha, ha -- what, and his Spaniel here too? What, Sirrah, Cannot your
8 Languages free ye from that Rope?


Lance. Ah, would they could.


Cellid. Now I think on it -- I should bestow a little Wit on you, Sirrah -- my
Lying -- Pimping -- Ugly Impudent Varlet -- There Is for ye Sir.


Lance. Oh! would my Master had been hanged seven years ago, rather than I had
come to this -- oh --


Lucill. Again Rogue, again; ah it is gone. Goes to pull him, and; lets fall the
Rope.


Lance. Oones I am delivered by Miracle; Look up, Sir, look up -- I am free --
Nay, 'faith Madam, I beg your pardon, I must be Porter now. Runs, and stands in
the Door.


Tho. How? free? nay then, Fate is mine again, Sirrah, lock the Door, and take
out the Key.


Lance. It Is done, Sir.


Tho. Come then, unbind me quickly.


Cellid. Cur'st Accident -- Caught again? -- help, help.


Sabin. Help, help.


Tho. Ay, Faith -- I Will help ye presently, Your humble Servant, and Devoted
Lover, Madam, is making what haste he can.


Sir Per. How! at Liberty? -- Nay then it is time to help indeed.


Sir Wild. By Bacchus, Sir, but you shall not -- now it is my turn to be Porter;
Now Son Thomas -- now Cock of Four -- now Rogue, now.


Tho. Sirrah, for this piece of Service -- there is a Lady for ye; Sabina. Take
her, be thankful, and multiply.


Lance. Ha, ha -- with all my heart 'faith -- come Madam, 'gad I have not had
a touch a great while.


Tho. Ha, ha, ha, -- ha, ha, ha, what think ye now, Madam? Where Is your Wit now?
-- Did I not tell you what a stubborn denial must come to? 'gad if thou scap'st
me now -- let me be recorded an Ass, and my Story put into a Ballad. Goes to
undress her.


Cellid. Nay, do not dishonor me good Sir; if you love me -- I Am sure you will
not -- I confess I have wronged ye.


Tho. Dam Confessions, Madam -- do that when the business is done, and then
I Will confess with ye.


Lance. And I must confess too.


Cellid. Kind, Dear Sweet Sir, help, help!


Sir Wild. Well sed Tom, Well sed Tom, to her again Son Thomas, to her again Boy
-- ha, ha, ha.


Sir Per. Rascal, Villain, Debauched Villain, thou will not ravish her, will thou?


Tho. No, no, Sir, upon my Faith not I; I*ll only lie with her, that is all.


Sir Per. Why, thou will not lie with her before my face?


Tho. Yes but I will though -- and before my own Father's face too; But for your
sake, Sir, I ll use her as kindly as I can.


Lance. 'Gads noones, this is sport. Knock at the Door.


Sabin. Savage, Barbarous Villain -- oh Heaven! what sin have I committed, to
undergo this punishment? help, help; help --


Cellid. Rather kill me Sir, than do it. Help, help. Knock within.


Tho. Apox on 'em -- they have taken the Alarm -- I see -- 'gad I must dispatch
-- I find I shall be hindered else. Takes her in his Arms, and carries her to
the Closet.


Cellid. Help, help, -- I Am undone else -- help, help.


Enter Valentine. Val. 'S'death! What Barbarity is this? -- what were you going
to do with the Lady, Sir? ha?


Tho. Why, I was going to teach her a new Dance, Val.


Val. Ay, I believe 'twas a Dance indeed.


Enter Sir Peregreene, Sir Wilding, Franck, Hylas. Sir Per, Kill him, kill him
-- let him be murdered -- let me come to him.


Val. Hold, hold Sir -- this must not be in my house.


Sir Per. I ll lay the Statute of Ravishment against him, I Will have him hanged,
I Will take the Law on him.


Sir Wild. You take a Coxcomb, will you? -- Tom, give me thy hand, Fifteen
hundred a year is thy own for this days work; And now talk of the Law, Sir, if
you dare -- Tom and I will swinge ye.


Tho. Now, Madam, could not you have saved all this, and been willing?


Cellid. Impudent Man! could no entreaty prevail with ye? Well, from this
instant I Will shun thee as I would the Plague; and if I do speak of thee, it
shall be with Scorn, and Derision -- to curse thy ill Nature -- and Ingratitude
-- to which purpose I this Moment banish all sparks of Love -- and do here
solemnly vow -- Never to see thee more.


Sabin. Nor I, unless it be to revenge this baseness. Exeunt.


Tho. A Pox on it, this comes of Interruption, if they had but stayed a little
longer, that I might have had earnest of her, all had been sure; -- but one
Weeks humble Address shall make all well again, shall it not, Sir?


Sir Per. No Sir, Not believe I Will put up this affront so tamely: You shall
hear from me, assure your self. Exit.


Sir Wild. Ah, let him go, Tom -- the Old Fool frets -- ha, ha.


Lance. A Pox on it, I have had the greatest Loss -- for methought my Nymph
began to be willing.


Sir Wild. Thou will?


Tho. I warrant ye, Sir, And now to you my Friends -- first Val. I beg thy
pardon for offering this in thy house -- Prithee forget all -- and from this
Minute -- assure thy self -- I am thy Friend indeed.


Val. Well Sir -- having some Interest in the rest of your Frollicks, I have
the more reason to bear with this -- especially since 'twas only a Design --
But had you gone through with your Dance -- You and I should have made but a
kind of a scurvy Salutation.


Tho. For thy sake only, I am glad it happened otherwise -- Dear Franck, give me
thy hand too.


Fra. With all my heart -- and believe I share a great deal of content in
seeing you two friends; for when I came in first -- I guest it would be
otherwise --


Tho. I believe thou did. -- What Jack art thou behind? here come forth, and
give me thy hand too -- Come, all is forgot; Thou art a damned Inconstant
Rogue, I believe thou will confess it: but let that pass. We have all our
failings.


Hyl. We have so -- but this Kindness in thee has so obliged me -- that I am
resolved to desert my Roaring Humor, and turn all into Friendship for thee.


Sir Wild. Well sed Cock of Four -- 'gad I like it well -- Come Gentlemen --
Pray let me Invite ye to my house -- I Will provide a Collation, and we will be
heartily merry.


Tho. Come, you shall go 'faith -- for I am resolved to give my farewell to
Intrigues, with a free and merry heart; and it is fit that you that are my
Friends, should be now my Witnesses, as you shall be when I go through the
the other Gate, Marriage. And though this kind of life is least troublesome;
the other is certainly most safe: especially, if a Man can change his Temper,
else it is a Plague to him. For Marriage to a Debauchee, is a second Purgatory;
It gives him only a Prospect of Joy, or Torment, without knowing which he
shall arrive to. But I hope I know my self better, than to venture without
great Consideration to such Uncertainties.

Loose Love like a thin Garment serves us ill,
And though wee'r pleased with it, we shiver still;
But I Am confirmed, let the Age be what it will,
What ever Nature in a Miss designed,
Wives only are the Blessing of Mankind.

EPILOGUE, By Mr. Mohun.
THat I have been a Mad Old Fool to Night,
I need not tell you; but to set all right,
The Poet now makes me a Parasite.
Sends me to flatter ye, and beg Excuse,
For the Insipid Errors of his Muse:
He bids me say, the less to show his Guilt,
On the Foundation Fletcher laid, he built;
New dressed his Modish Spark fit to be shown,
And made him more Debauched, to oblige the Town.
Drink, Rant and Sing, he now takes pains to be
A perf^^t and accomplished Debauchee.
But Critics, you that never yet were known
To think there could be Sense above your own;
You that do surfeit on the Spoils of Wit,
And still have less to show, the more you get.
Like barren Ground that swallows up the Rain,
Yet is by the Industrious Hand Manured in vain,
Will in your Censures your Ill Natures show,
And with your Weeds choke up the Grain we sow.
I know you will cry, Confound this tedious Stuff,
He has not made the Spark half mad enough;
He should have been all Air, and the Mode pursue,
That is, keep Miss, kick Wise, and Run Men through:
Ashore you give good proofs of this each day;
Pray Heaven you hold and prove as mad at Sea.
But that I think there is none can doubt or fear;
No, -- Witt's a greater Plague to you than War.
Wit that is now used like a Common slave,
Both by those have none, as well as those that have.
Therefore against such to procure defense,
Not doubting the Aid of all the Men of Sense,
The Poet now the Ladies help does Crave,
That with a frown or smile can damn or save.
And as the Mighty God of Wit shines clear,
And shines upon his Favorites once a Year;
From them that Sacred Influence let him find,
That he may say he Once found Beauty kind.
FINIS.

