The DUTCH Nebuchadnezzar; Or, A Strange DREAM OF THE States General: With the
Interpretation thereof,

And a famous Prophecy of Mr. Powel, Writ in the first Year of the Reign of
Queen ELIZABETH of ever blessed Memory; Fore relling the great Wars betwixt
England, France, and Holland, this present Year, 1666. And the displaying of
the English Ensigns upon the French Coast; with a great Battle to be fought on
the Tenth Day of June next, wherein the English shall become Victorio^^, and
twelve French Lords, and many thousands of their men to be killed in this
Engagem^nt.

Printed for George Roberts. in the Year, 1666.

The Dutch Nebuchadnezzar.
I Nebuchadnezzar, was at rest in my House, and flourishing in my Palace, I saw
a Dream which did very much affright me, and the Visions of my Head troubled
me; I saw a Star of an extraordinary Magnitude coming forth out of the Southern
Meridian, which appeared first in the Constellation of VIRGO, and there
continued some time; its Face was as that of the Flaming Fire in the Burning
Bush, which belched forth its angry Rays in great Fury, as far as the Tail of
the DRAGON, above Thirty One Degrees, which contains many Thousand miles; it
was encompassed with many smaller Stars, having its Beams sometimes divided,
sometimes obscured by dark and gloomy Clouds, its Influence seemed to be upon
Me and Our Provinces, which, as it was horrible, and dismal in it self, so was
it rendered much more ominous by these sad and dreadful Clouds which always
encompassed it. After this there appeared another Star of a far more pleasant
and delightful Countenance; but this disdainfully turning its Face from Me,
cast its more benign Rays toward the East. This is the Vision which (...)
De-wit, Hollands Nebuchadnezzar, saw in the last Month of the Year, 166^.

The English Daniel's Interpreration.
THE Dream be to them that hate Thee, and the Interpretation thereof to Thine
Enemies, High and Mighty Provinces, Thou were at rest in thy House, and
flourishing in thy Palace: The Star appeared first in the Constellation of
Virgo, because the Heavens hitherto have been propitious to Thee, and
favorably smiled upon all thy Undertakings: But now because thou have been as
a wanton Heffer swerving from the way of the Lord, and because thy Pride has
ascended up to Heaven it self, designing to e like the Most Highest, Thou alone
intrenching upon Divine Omnipotency, in that baughty Title, (which other
Princes blush to assume) High and Mighty. Therefore know, thy Impiety ^ ^ now
at the height, and the Face of that Star which Thou saw as the Flames of
^ire which came from the Burning Bush, (for the Anger of the Lord is kindled
against thee) shall humble and crush Thee in pieces; That thou ma^^st know that
the most High rules over all the arth, whose Laws and Precepts Thou have so
contumaciously despised Moreover, that Thou saw the Rays of that Star extend
themselves to the utmost of Thy ^ominions, Thou have well soon; for the Lord
shall show^ down his Vengeance upon Thee, by the Force of all the Princes of
the Universe, whom Thou have too often provoked; They shall put a Ring in thy
Nostrils, bring Thee back by the way the which thou came; their strength
shall be Lord over thee.

The English Cross shall fall upon thee, because thou were a President for the
shedding of that Royal Blood, which to this day calls to Heaven for Vengeance
and afterward refused to protect his innocent Offspring, when flying from the
Cruelty of an Usurping Sword, thou banishedst out of thy Territories.

The Hesperian Lion, viz. the Spaniard, shall also whet his Teeth upon Thee and
once more repossess himself of that Right and Dominion, which by the Sword of
Rebellion Thou have so long detained from him; God shall put the Yoke of
Bondage upon thy Neck, and make void that Treaty of Peace, which neither thy
worth nor Gratitude, can longer m^rit.

Those Li^^ies which so long have been both pleasant and profitable to Thee,
shall now wax pale and wither before thine Eyes; they have had too long
Experience of thy Fraud and Arrogance, and now shall prove Th^rus in thy side,
that all men may cl^p their hands and hiss at Thee, saying, Where are thy Gods
and Naval Foroes in whom thou did put thy trust.

The German Ea^le shall gripe Thee in his Talons, and take thee for his prey
dividing thy whole Dominious to his Princes and Allies, because thou have
contemned His Majesty, divided his strength, and unjustly refusedst to restore
what was violently taken from Him. Remember how ready Thou have been to assist
the Assyrians, all those that have opposed Him; how did thou help the
Bazarian, incite the Saxon, and force Count Manifield into thy Service. In
fine, Thy power and riches have been always ready to encourage and assist His
greatest Enemies,

The Northern Kings will not be more propitious to Thee, for that Thou have
always sown Seeds of Discord amongst them, and by thy wicked Policies and
Con^rivances, have been the cause that so much innocent blood has been shed on
eithe side.

The Duke of Brandenburgh with his Fellow-Electors, shall sit heavy upon Thee,
and take this occasion to revenge themselves upon that Fraud and Hypocrisy,
that Pride and Covetousness which now shall be laid open to all the World. The
Bishop of Colen, and Duke of Bavaria, will now make bold not only to recover
their own, but divest thee of all those borrowed Plumes, which Thou by Force
and Injustice have taken from others.

The West phalian Courser shall praunce over thy Fields, and feed in thy
Pastures, because thou did incite his Subjects against their Liege Lord, and
counseled them to tread in those steps of Treason and Rebellion, wherein Thou
have gone before: And not regarding his Function, which is a Bishop anointed
with Holy Oil, and consecrated unto the Lord, thy Malevolent Tongue has
aspersed His Person with opprobrious Names, and inhumane Calumnies, and such
like Provocations, for which thou must expect to be called to an account, but
most of all for lifting up thy Hand against Him, and thirsting after His
Innocent Blood. And as thou did see the Rays of the Star divided by diverse
thick and dark Clouds, behold, so shall thy Dominions be divided, and given to
thy Enemies; and because thou trustedst in thy Sword, and in thy Armor, in the
strength of thine own Hands, and in the ^bundance of thy Riches; therefore
behold, thy Territories shall be destroyed and brought to nothing; and as thou
art become a^earing Lion, and has learnt to take thy Prey as a devonring Wolf,
so shall thou become a Prey to others.

Remember what Evils thou have brought upon Jerusalem, the Church of God, by
making Religion it self a gross piece of Hypocrisy, all thy Devotion being as
a to Masque conceal the Pharisaisme of thy Heart thy Ambition, Covetousness, or
some such impious Design; and the Charity of other People, intended to Holy
Purposes, have been by thee t^ansfer^^d to Worldly and Sacrilegie us Uses.

And as Thou did see the Star (...) (...) dark and gloomy Cloud, behold,
Tho^^h ^ made others to lament, and Lamentation shall be thy end thou shall
mourn, none shall pity thee.

And as Thou did see another Star more beautiful and higher then the former,
which turned her Face and Rays from Thee toward the East; behold, the Lord
shall forsake thee, and turn away the Face of his Countenance, and make thy
Enemies to rejoice over thee, because in the pride of thy Heart thou have said,
I am comely, and pridest thy self in the beauty of thy Palaces, and in the
abundance of thy wealth, and there is no end of thy Arrogance; herefore the
Beauty of thy Countenance shall fail, and the Lord shall curse the comeliness
of thy Face; thy Dominions shall be laid wast before thine Eyes, and another
shall take possession thereof; therefore thou shall be left desolate, as a
Shade in the Vineyard, and as a Tyle upon the Housetop, and as a City which is
laid wase.

All these Evils shall come upon Thee O proud Holland because thus says the
Lord, I have begun, and I will persect any Work. A famous Prophecy, touching
the downfall of Great Br^ttain's Enemies, having some Coherence with the
precedent Interpretation, I shall here recire considering the great Concern it
has in these times, and the memorable effect's and insl^ences impend^ug on
this cars Revolution, As first, a great Overthrow to be given o^be French,
about the tenth of June next, and three great Battle, to be fou h^ before
Christmas betuixt the French and English: Together with a great Overthrow to
the Dutch, Prophetic^lly foretold by Jeremiah Powel in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, and now presented to public view, according to the Original, in
these words following.

WHen One and three times Six do meet,
To reckon for the Year;
The Bloody English Colors shall
On the French Coast appear.
When Sol in Cancer enters first, June 10.

On that same very Day,
The Ensigns of these mighty Foes
Shall in the Field display.
Twelve Noble Lords that day shall fall.
With thousands by their side;
And then the Fates end and begin
Th French and English Pride.
Three Battles more ei^ Christmas Eve,
The Lillies fight and lose:
Then Pe^ce ensues, and puts an End
Unto the Subjects Woes.
Then High and Mighty look about,
Your Wooden and Stone-Wall
Shall not defend you; But shall then
Begin to sink and fall.
FINIS.

