THE EARNEST BREATHINGS OF Foreign Protestants, DIVINES and Others: TO THE
Ministers and other able Christians of these three NATIONS, FOR A COMPLETE BODY
OF Practical Divinity,

And CASES, wherein the Grace of God has more Eminently appeared amongst us in
these Islands, then in the rest of the World besides.

Which Work has been long in the Heads and Hearts of many Worthy Men to be
undertaken, as appears by a Letter written to Dr Usher, who much approved the
same.

And an Essay of a Model of the said Body of Divinity, by J. D. Highly
approved by Dr George Horn, Professor of the University of LEYDEN.

Together with an Expedient tendered for the entertainment of Strangers, who
are Protestants, and by their means to advance the Gospel unto their several
Nations and Quarters.

Humbly tendered to his Highness, the next Parliament, and the good People of
the Land.

London, Printed for T. Underhill, at the Anchor in Paul's Churchyard. 1658.

To the GODLY and LEARNED Professors and Heads of Colleges In the two Famous
UNIVERSITIES OF THE Commonwealth of England.
BEfore ever this Request was made by Foreign Protestants to our Worthies in
England, and when I was at the University of Cambridge many years ago, the
Necessity of such a Work as is here implored, was made apparent unto me, and my
wishes and earnest endeavors were made awake toward it; but then there was no
appearance that ever any such thing could, or should be brought to pass: yet
since we have seen greater and more unexpected matters accomplished, both in
reference to Religion, and to the Civil Government, I hope we are in a fair way
to see yet greater things brought forth, and things of Peace and Comfort to all
the Churches, which may prove to be the foundations of many Generations. For as
the hope of the Hypocrite shall perish, and be like unto the giving up of the
ghost; so the desire of the Righteous shall be fulfilled, and he shall not be
ashamed of his hopes, because the Promise is, that he who hungers and thirsts
for Righteousness, shall be satisfied.

Now the Work which is here sued for by the Foreign Ministers, is nothing else
but the knowledge of that way of Righteousness which God has prepared for his
Saints to walk in, that they may have Communion with him in his Kingdom.
Therefore I am very confident that i^ will be so fully revealed and made known,
that a man (as the Prophet says) though a fool shall not err therein. And
because the Lord has given unto you vour the accomplishment of their request;
I think my self bound in Conscience at this seasonable time, to offer it to
your pious thoughts, in the express words of their own Petition, and in some
Considerations which I have annexed unto the matter thereof.

Therefore in the first place, you shall find here a Copy of their Petition in
Latin, with the several subscriptions, whereof the Original writings are in my
hand, which I have put in English to satisfy Vulgar Capacities: Then in the
second place, you will find three considerable matters concerning this suit
represented unto you.

1. What is meant by a Body of Practical Divinity.

2. What the Reasons are, for which it ought to be published.

3. How the Work may be effected, and imparted unto those that have sued for it
at our hands.

Which having endeavored to make you sensible of, as a Work most acceptable
unto God, most suitable to the Gospel, most profitable unto the Godly, very
useful unto all, very honorable unto these our Churches, and not difficult in
it self to be effected, if it receive but a little Countenance, I shall by the
further prosecution thereof, as God shall give me addresses and opportunities,
rest satisfied in this (whatever the success and event may be) that I have not
been wanting to the discharge of my duty, nor to the desires of the faithful,
so far as God has enabled me to proceed toward the accomplishing of the
same. And thus commending to the grace of God thy sense of this business, I
shall subscribe my self thy Servant therein

John Dury.

Ecclesiarum Magnae Britanniae atque Hyberniae patronis and Antistibus
Primariis, Eximiis Dei servis, atque Ecclesiae Laborantis in Germania
fautoribus Colendissimis, sit Gratia and Pax a Deo Patre, and Domino nostro
Jesu Christo per Spiritus sancti Communionem, AMEN.
DIversa Spiritus Dei dona membris Ecclesiae diversis esse concessa, and sacra
oracula testantur, and res ipsa loquitur; finem tamen eundem Communis
Aedificationis mutuaeque utilitatis liquet Patri luminum, datori omnis doni
perfecti, propositum esse in omnium donorum largitione. Apostolus enim dicit,
Unicuique datam esse Spiritus declarationem (...): and alib^ jubemur, Ut
quisque accepit donum, ita alius in alium illud subministrer, ut decet bonos
gratiae Dei diversae (...). Talentum enim quod a Deo singuli accepimus, fidei
nostrae commissum est, ut illius dispensatores facti, non illud defodiamus, ut
nequam ille servus, in terram; sed ad Domini emolumentum impendamus, ut cum
fidelibus ejus servis, plura tam Domino quam nobis ipsis lucrifacere talenta
possimus.

Haec co spectant, Illustres, Clarissimique Viri, Reverendissimique, atque
Reverendiin Christo Patres and Fratres, ut cum nobis certo innotuerit inter
Ecclesias magnae Britanniae, Doctrinam Theologiae Practicae multorum pie
Doctorum Ecclesiae vestrae Antistitum publicis scriptis egregie excultam esse,
atque ad usum Popularem insigniter accomodatam, atque eam solummodo linguae
vestrae Cancellis tanquam reconditum ab exteris Nationibus thesaurum contineri,
and asservari, maximamque utilitatem ad omnes Ecclesias Christianas, praesertim
autem Evangelicas redundaturam, si quae vobis in hoc genere peculiaria sunt,
publicentur, ita ut ab its quoque legi and intelligi possint, ut (inquam, cum
haec ita se habeant) Illustritatibus atque Reverentiis Vestris votum nostrum ac
desiderium aperiamus, atque per sanctae Communionis in Christo vinculum,
fraternaeque libertatis Parrhesiam rogemus, vos praesertim quotquot inter
Ecclesiarum Rectores, Protectores, and Fautares estis aedificationis Publicae
vere studiosi, ne permittatis hoc Talentum tam pretiosum ulterijis abscondi and
occultari ab Exoticorum manibus and oculis, sed velitis pro prudentia vestra,
pro ferventis erga fraternas Ecclesias Charitatis, ac liberalis studii erga Dei
gloriam in Evangelii propagatione, pio zelo and affectu vestro rationem aliquam
inire commodam, qua Medulla Authorum in illo genere apud vos extantium and
eminentium ex omnibus collecta in volumen aliquod conjiciatur, sive Locorum
Communium, sive Systematis Theologiae practicae, quod publici juris sit, and
omnium manibus teri possit lingua nota and doctioribus communi: Audivimus pauca
quaedam in Belgicum sermonem esse translata, quae magno usui sunt illis
Ecclesiis and Theologiae studiosis.

Nuper etiam inter nos Germanico idiomate editus libellus ex Anglico versus de
Prax Pietatis ita omnes afficit Pietatis Cultores, ut inde religioni quae in
pura modestaque veritatis coelestis professione consistit, accessionem
permagnam sieri constet. Ideoque sperare nobis licet, si huic nostre vota
accedat per vos favor requisitus, ut facile inter vestrates (quibus ad haec and
similia beneficia Ecclesiae suae praestanda prae aliis tranquillitatem in hisce
turbis, and facultates concessisse videtur divina clementia) inveniantur
aliqui, qui coll^gendis, transferendis, digerendis, atque evulgandis Authorum
praecipuis scriptis and meditationibus practicis non gravate suas impendant
operas, suumque talentum si id suadebitis; unde futurum confidimus, ut insigne
Regnum Dei incrementum accipiat, si corpus absolutum talis doctrinae existet ex
vestris scriptoribus, in quo tam in Theologia Tyrones studi sui, quam
Ecclesiarum varii Pastores Concionum suarum materiam invenire possint,
aedificationi multo utiliorem quam illa est quae hodie in scriptis Polemicis
occurrit: ita a studio contentionis ad Charitatis non fictae affectus revocari
poterunt multorum animi, ex quo tandem futurum sit, ut ad Deum imprimis gloria
and gratiarum actio, ad Evangelii professores cum Sanctitatis and Pietatis
studio, Pax and Concordia, ad Ecclesias puplica aedificatio, ad simpliciores
pia Eruditio, ad pios afflictos, solida Spiritus Consolatio; ad errantes and
devios, salutaris Conversio; ad securos and carnales, vivida conscientiae
exuscitatio; ad Hypocritas and obstinatos, clara perversitatis suae convictio;
ad omnes etiam posteros, major lux veritatis perveniat; and ad illos denique
qui suum in hoc studio Talentum collocabunt ad Regni Dci Promotionem, accedat
illa vox quondam gloriosa and beata a Domino, qui rationem accepti Talenti
conferet nobiscum, Been est, Serve bone and Fidelis, in exiguo fuisti fidelis,
super multa te constituam: Ingredere in Gaudium Domini tui.

Quod gaudium omnibus iis quibus postulatum hoc nostrum pa^^fi^^, and gratum
erit, cum omni corporali faelicitate ex animo vovemus. Valete in Domino Viri
Excellentes, atque omni honor nobis colendi.

Dabantur Hanoviae 24. Febr. Anno 1633. Joannes Daniel Wildius, Verbi Divin.
Min. and Ecclesiae Hanovicae Inspector. Theodorus Leurelius, Ecclesiae
Hanovicae Minist. Conradus Ammonius, Concionator Aulicus, ibid. Paulus
Tossanus, S. Theolog. D. and Senatus Ecclesiastici in inferiori Palatinatu
Electorali Assessor. Clemens Boesius, Ecclesiae Gallicae Neo-Hanovicae Pastor.
Isaacus Boots, Pastor Ecclesiae Flandricae, quae Christo colligitur Hanoviae.
Matthaeus Rowyer, Ecclesiae Gallicae Neo-Han. Pastor. M. Philippus Pareus
Davidis Filius, Illustris Gymnasii Hanoviensis Rector and Professor.



Besides these, who had a meeting in the City of Hanaw (whereunto I was called
at the time above written, purposely to offer this Petition unto me, and to
engage me to follow it for them) others there were, who having been made
acquainted with this desire of the forenamed Divines, did also join in the same
suit by putting their hands to another Paper of the same Tenor at Herborn, and
in some other places in March and April the same year 1633. Their names are
these following: Petrus Streithagen, Sereniss. Regis Bohemiae beatae memoriae
Concionator. Aulicus. Joh. Moriaen, V. Div. quondam apud Ubios Min. subscripsi
Francofurt, 23 April 1633. Philippus Suabelius, Hoingae Solmensis Ecclesiae
Patriae Pastor. Johan. Conradus Hopifius, V. D. Minist. in Comitatu Hanov. in
Marchabel. Exul. Palatin. Perutile hoe Propositum and commune fratrum
Germanorum votum, mea quoque subscriptione confirmare volui ego Henricus
Meerbottius P. F. Pastor Stresbeomi Ladenburgicus, in Elect. Palatinatu. Johan.
Irlin, Theol. Doct. Scholae Herbonensis Rector and Professor, Ecclesiae ejusdem
Pastor, and Vicinarum Nassovicarum Inspector. Mr Casparus Stippius, Ecclesiae
Siegenensis Archidiaconus; qui suo and reliquorum fratrum in Comitatu Nassovico
Sieginensi, nomine subscripsit. Johannes Arcularius, Ecclesiae Beilsteinsis
Pastor, qui suo and reliquorum fratrum in Comitatu Nassovico Beilstemensi and
Orzensi subscripsit. Thomas Dern, Pastor Altenkirchensis nomine Ecclesiarum
Comitatus Sainensis.


This Letter in English speaks thus: To the chief Patrons and Rulers of the
Churches of Great Britain and Ireland, the eminent servants of God, and most
respected favorers of the distressed Church in Germany, be Grace and Peace
from God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ, through the Communion of the
Holy Ghost, Amen.
ALthough it is attested by the Holy Oracles, and the thing it self does speak
it that to the several Members of the Church, several gifts of Gods Spirit
are bestowed; yet it is evident, that the Father of Lights, the giver of every
perfect gift, does in the distribution of all his gifts, propose unto himself
but one and the same end, which is the common edification and mutual usefulness
of all unto each other. For the Apostle says, That the manifestation of the
Spirit is given to every one to profit withal; and elsewhere we are commanded,
As every one has received the gift, even so to minister the same unto one
another, as good Stewards of the manifold grace of God: For the Talent which
every one of us have received of God, is committed to our trust, that we being
made distributers thereof, should not hide it in the ground, as that
unprofitable servant did, but employ it to the advantage of our Lord, that with
such servants as are faithful unto him we may gain more Talents, both to our
Masters use, and to our selves.

These things, Illustrious and Renowned Gentlemen, Most Reverend and Reverenced
Fathers and Brethren, are alleged, to the end that we may acquaint you with
our wishes and desires, that seeing we are certainly informed, that in the
Churches of Great Britain, the Doctrine of Practical Divinity, by the
public Writings of many godly wise Ministers of your Churches, is brought to
a great perfection, and that it is excellently fitted for the use of the Common
people, but yet kept up as an hidden Treasure from the eyes of Foreign Nations,
within the bounds of your own language alone; and that a very great benefit
would accrue unto all Christian Churches, and chiefly to those that profess
the purity of the Gospel, if so be those things which are peculiar unto you
were published, so as by them they might also be read and understood: Seeing
(we say) these things are so, our purpose is to acquaint your Honors and
Worships with our wishes and desires; and by the bond of holy Communion in
Christ, and with that confidence of speech which our brotherly freedom does
suggest, to entreat you (you chiefly who being Rulers, Protectors and Favorers
of the Churches, and are truly desirous to edify the public) that ye would
not suffer so precious a Talent to be hid and concealed any longer from the
hands and eyes of Forreiners; but that ye would, according to the pious zeal
and affection of fervent Charity which ye have toward your Brother-Churches,
and the bountiful care which ye have for the Glory of God in the propagation
of the Gospel, take some convenient course, by which the Marrow of these
Authors, which in that kind are exstant amongst you, and are of chief Note, may
be gathered out of all into one Volume, either of Common places, or of a body
of Practical Divinity, which may be published and made use of by all in a
tongue known and common to the learned.

We have heard that some few things have been translated into the low Dutch
language, which are of great use unto those Churches, and their Scholars of
Divinity.

Of late also there is a little Book of the Practice of Piety, translated out
of English into our Germane tongue, which has taken so much with many godly
souls, that we find thereby wrought in them a very great growth of that
Religious disposition, which does consist in a pure and modest Profession of
heavenly truth; for which cause we do hope, that if our wishes may obtain by
your means the favor which is desired, that some of your Men (to whom God
seems mercifully to have given in the midst of these troubles, both
quietness and means to confer these and such like benefits unto his Church)
will easily be found, who without difficulty will at your persuasion, bestow
their pains and their Talents, to Collect, to Translate, to Digest, and to
publish the chief practical Writings and Meditations of your Authors. Whence we
are confident this will come to pass, that the Kingdom of God will receive a
notable enlargement, if a complete Body of such Doctrine out of your Writers
were put forth; wherein, as well the young Scholars of Divinity for their
Studies, as many Pastors of the Churches for their Sermons, might find matter
far more useful unto edification, then that is, which now adays is met
withal in Controversal Writings. So that by this means, the minds of many men
may be drawn back from the endeavors of strife, unto the affections of
unfeigned Charity; whence afterward this will follow, that unto God in the first
place, Glory and thanksgiving will redound; and then unto the Professors of the
Gospel, with the care of holiness and piety, peace and concord, to the
Churches, public Edification; to the simple sort, pious learning; to the
godly and afflicted, sound spiritual comfort; to the erring, and such as go
astray, saving Conversion; to such as are secure and carnal, a lively wakening
of their Conscience; to the Hypocrites and stubborn sinners, a clear discovery
of their perverseness; and to all the Generations to come, a greater light of
truth will be advanced: and lastly, unto those that shall bestow their Talent
toward this endeavor for the advancement of Gods Kingdom, when he shall call
us to an account of the Talent which we have received from him, that glorious
and blessed voice shall then come from the Lord unto them, Well done thou good
and faithful servant, thou have been faithful in a few things, I will make
thee Ruler over many things; enter into the joy of thy Lord: which joy we wish
from our heart, together with all temporal happiness to all those to whom our
request shall be made known, and with whom it shall find acceptance.

Farewell in the Lord excellent Gentlemen, whom with all respect we are bound
to worship.

Given at Hanaw 24. Febr. Anno 1633. By John Daniel Wildius, Minister of Gods
Word, and Inspector of the Churches of Hanaw. Theodorus Leurelius, Preacher of
the Church of Hanaw. Conradus Ammonius, Preacher to the Court of the same
place. Paulus Tossanus, Doctor in Divinity, and an Assessor of the
Ecclesiastical Senate in the lower Electoral Palatinat. Clemens Boesius, Pastor
of the French Church in New Hanaw. Isaacus Boots, Pastor of the Flanders
Church, which is gathered unto Christ in Hanaw. Matthew Rowyer, Pastor of the
French Church at New Hanaw. M. Philippus Pareus, Son to David, Rector and
Professor of the famous College of Hanaw.



At Herborne in March, and elsewhere in April, in the same year 1633. the same
suit was renewed by these:
Petrus Streithagen, Preacher to the Court of the most Illustrious King of
Bohemia of blessed Memory. John Moriaen, formerly Preacher of Gods Word amongst
those of Collen. I did underwrite this at Francofurt, 23 April, Anno 1633.
Philip Suabelius, of Hoing, in the County of Solms, Preacher to his Native
Church. John Conradus Hopisius, Minister of the Word of God in the County of
Hanaw in Mercabel an exiled Palatin. I Henry Mecrobottius, for the present time
Pastor of Schesheim Ladenburg in the Electoral Palatinat, am willing to confirm
also with my Subscription, this most profitable intention and common wish of
our Brethren of Germany. John Irlin, Doctor of Divinity, Rector and Professor
of the School of Herbon, Pastor of the Church of the same place, and Inspector
of the neighboring Churches of Nassaw. Mr Casparus Stippius Archdeacon of the
Church of Siegen, who subscribed in his own name, and in the name of the rest
of his Brethren, in the County of Siegen in Nassaw. John Arcularius, Pastor of
the Church of Beilstein, who subscribed in his own name, and in the name of the
rest of his Brethren in the Counties of Beilstein and Ozen in Nassaw. Thomas
Dern. Pastor of Altenkirch, in the name of the Churches of the County of
Sainen.
THis Letter does sufficiently speak for it self; and the persons who did offer
it, were in those parts none of the least considerable Protestants, nor is
their number small, if you take notice of the Churches in whose name some have
subscribed: and although the time since it was offered, may seem somewhat long
yet because that which hitherto could be done to obtain their desire, has not
been neglected, though by several invincible impediments obstructed, because
the expectation of obtaining it, is not vanished, but at this time raised: and
because such a suit as this can never be out of date till it be fulfilled; nay
although the first Petitioners should all be dead, it ought not the less
conscienably to be regarded by those to whom it is made, because it does not at
all concern any temporal, or so much the particular convenience of those that
make it, as the spiritual edification, and general benefit of all the Churches
of God, and of the ages to come in the Gospel. I say, because of all these
considerations, and more that might be added, therefore I am willing to second
their request, as I am many ways bound to do; and to that effect, I shall
first show my sense of the Body of Divinity, which I conceive will satisfy
their demand; and then the Reasons why it ought to be, and manner how it may be
made up.

Of the First.
What is meant by a Body of Practical Divinity.
BY Practical Divinity, is meant the revealed truths of God, concerning the
obedience of the faith which is to be yielded unto his will.

There is a twofold Divine Truth; the one is to be contemplated, which is the
Object of the Understanding and Remembrance; the other is to be practiced,
which is the Object of the Will and Affections. The first, as we partake of it,
is the Conformity of our Intellectual faculty to the testimony of Gods Word,
when we conceive aright of his meaning therein. The second, as we partake 2
Pet. 1. 22. and 3. 1. 1 John 1. 16. Romans 12. 1, 2.
of it, is the Conformity of the purposes of our heart, to that which is known
to be Gods will, when we prove how good, perfect and acceptable it is. That
first, is in the Notions of the Mind to beget Knowledge: This other, is in the
Conviction of the Conscience, to beget Resolutions and obediential Performance.
Of the first sort of truth, Christ says, If ye continue in my Word, ye shall
know the truth, Joh. 8. 31, 32. Of the second, he says, He that does truth,
comes to the light, Joh. 3. 21. So then as there is a contemplative and
intelligible, so there is a Practicable truth, that is a truth to be done,
which is the action of Virtue: for Christ in Joh. 3. v 20 21. does oppose the
doing of evil, and the doing of truth; that is Vice and Virtue to one another:
He says, every one that does evil (that is, who is vicious in his life) hates
the light; but he that does truth, (that is, whose life is virtuous and
upright) comes to the light. As darkness is to light, so truth is opposite
to all falsehood; not only to that of ignorance and error, but especially to
that of lying and deceitfulness, which are no less inseparable companions of
vice, then sincerity and uprightness are of virtue in the souls of men.

Now both the Intellectual and Practical truth, is originally exist^nt in the
living word, as in the principle and fountain; and from thence by the testimony
of Jesus, which is the Spirit of Prophecy in the Scriptures, it is derived
unto us, as to a receptacle and vessel, when by it we are sanctified, according
to Christ's Prayer, John 17 17. Sanctify them in thy truth, thy Word is truth;
the Word preached by the Apostles and Prophets, is both exhorting and
testifying; that is, both Practical and Theoretical concerning that truth which
in God is essential; but as it is manifested to us, it is the Grace of God
which brings salvation, Tit. 2. 11. Hence it is, that nothing ought, or may
be called Theology, but that which is taught by the Divine Oracles: (...) can
only furnish us with that knowledge which is true Theology; and whether it be
in the Theoretical or Practical matters, nothing is true Divinity, but that
which is Divine truth; nor is any thing a Divine truth, but that which is
manifested by the Word of God: the Word then to us, is the Standard of Truth.

Now although the Action of the understanding, must of necessity be Antecedent
to all our Acts of truth, because the will is a knowing faculty, and cannot act
orderly without the Understanding; yet the Theoretical truths notionally
apprehended, bring the soul to no perfection of happiness, except they become
fruitful in the actions of virtue. The Notional Science of all Gods truth, and
of his whole will, as it may be in the brain alone, and without the practice
whereunto that Science does oblige the heart, is more hurtful then profitable
to our felicity; It had been better (says Peter) not to have known the way of
righteousness, then 2 Pet. 2. 21. John 3. 17.
after they have known it, to turn from the holy Commandment. If ye know these
things (says Christ) happy are ye if ye do them: whence it follows, that if
ye do them not, you are not happy, although you know them. And the Apostle
James, does place the blessedness of a man in his Deed, as distinct from his
bare knowledge, when he says, He that is not a Jam. 1. 21, 25.
hearer of the Word only, but a doer of the Work, this man shall be blessed in
his ^eed: The happiness of his condition is made perfect in his Deed. Whence it
is evident, that Practical truths import us and reach our happiness more
nearly then Theoreticall; because that which we know, although it be a truth,
is no part of our felicity, nor a true blessing of God unto us, except it
either bring forth an enjoyment of the life of God in us, or else result from
that enjoyment to us: for the substance of all our felicity unto all eternity,
is nothing else but our union with God, which is the enjoyment of his life; and
this life is only enjoyed then when by his truth he lives in us, and we in
him.) His life in us, is spiritual light and power: Light is in the
understanding; and power is to move conformably to Gods will in the whole
inward Man: The Light shows him to us, the Power makes us and him one; we
may know him at a distance, but we cannot feel his life, and move in him,
except he be in us, and we one with him. The knowledge therefore has less of
the enjoyment then the power of life but there is a twofold knowledge of Gods
truth; The one goes before the enjoyment of his life, and the other follows
upon it. The knowledge which goes before the enjoyment of Gods life, is the
true light which lights every man that comes into the world Joh. 1. 9. and
this light is that which may be known of God, which he does manifest in Men,
and shows unto them: He does manifest in Men, both that which does make them
clearly see his eternal power and Godhead, so that they are without excuse;
and that also which makes them show the work of Romans 1. 19, 20. Romans 2. 15.
his Law written in their hearts. All this is manifested in them, and showed
unto them, partly by the Creation of the World, partly by their own Conscience;
but yet all this, and much more then this, revealed both in the Law given to
the Jews, and in the Gospel, given both to Jews and Gentiles: I say, all this
both natural which is common, and supernatural, which is specially revealed
knowledge; nay although it might be in such a high degree, as to manifest all
Mysteries unto them, may be fruitless: and he that has it without
blessedness, and destitute of the life of God: for the truth which is both
manifested in the natural man's heart, and showed unto him by the Creation, is
held up by him in unrighteousness, Romans 1. 18. And although he does know God,
yet he glorifieth him not as God, verse. 21. And the Jews which had the form of
knowledge in the Law, and could teach others, did not practice that which they
taught; but by their transgression of the Law, they did dishonor God, Romans 2.
21, 22, 23. And the Gentiles to whom, together with the Jews, the light of the
Gospel was and is revealed, shall be condemned because they loved darkness
rather then light, Joh. 3. 19. And he that may know all Mysteries, may yet want
Charity, and be nothing as to the happiness and life of God. But although all
this knowledge of Truth, which is Antecedent to the enjoyment of the life of
God, may be void of the practice of Truth, and so come short of happiness; yet
it may also, through the practice of Truth, become effectual unto happiness,
if God make it fruitful, which he does according to his own pleasure, in
giving saving faith; whereby the heart is purified, that it may become obedient
to all his will, by which means the soul partaketh of the life of God, and
becomes truly happy: This knowledge then does not otherwise make us happy, but
as it brings us unto this estate.

As for the other knowledge of Gods Truth, which follows upon our union with
him; it is nothing else but a further confirmation of the soul, in the truth
which it has received unto life, and an enlargement thereof by the enjoyment
of God in his power; for Christ does give us two promises to that effect: The
first is, that by the truth of obedience, we shall come to the clearing of
doubts, concerning intellectual matters, for Joh 7 v. 17. he says, If any man
will do the will of him that sent me, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it
be of God, or whether I speak of my self. And the second is, that upon the
keeping of the Commandments, both the Father and the Son will manifest unto
the soul which loves them, their presence in love. For Christ says, Joh. 14.
21, 23. He that has my Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves
me; and he that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him,
and manifest my love unto him: and if any man love me, he will keep my words:
and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with
him. Here the manifestation of Gods presence, which is both the light and power
of life unto the soul, is the consequent of the obedience of faith: and so it
is in that of St John, 1 Epist. Chap. 5. 20. And we know that the Son of God is
come, and has given us an understanding, that we may know him that is true,
and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ; this is the true
God and eternal life. This is a reflexive knowledge from God upon our selves,
in the enjoyment of him as our happiness; and so is that, 1 John 3. 14. We know
that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren. So then
we see, that all truth, as it is the object of contemplation, is nothing else
but a Preparative to, or a consequent of the Truth, which is the object of
Action. The Practical truth then is the main thing to be heeded, for to it the
Theoretical is either subservient and subordinate, or a necessary and
infallible effect. The Apostle makes this evident by the nature of his
Ministry, which Tit. 1. 1. (he says) Is to be an Apostle according to the
faith of Gods Elect, and the acknowledgment of the truth which is after
Godliness: Intimating clearly, that as his Apostle-ship was appointed by God
to beget faith in the Elect, by their acknowledgment of the truth; so the
acknowledgment of the truth and faith, is appointed to beget the life of
Godliness in Believers. Therefore as the end and perfection of his Apostleship
was the begetting of faith by the acknowledgment of the truth; nor was he
warranted to teach or do any thing, which did not tend to that end and effect:
So the end and perfection of all true knowledge, is the life of Godliness; nor
is any knowledge in spiritual things warrantable, or any thing to be accounted
a truth, which does not tend to this end and effect. Godliness therefore, which
is the practice of divine Truth, is the measure of all intellectual truths;
for whatsoever matter of knowledge is not proportionate, subordinate, and
subservient unto the production of the life of God in the soul of a Believer,
is not to be received as a divine Truth; for the faith of Gods Elect, is in the
acknowledgement of none other truth, but of that which is after Godliness.

From all which we shall infer this Conclusion; That the study of Practical
Divinity, is of far greater concernment unto all, and far more to be heeded,
esteemed, and entertained in the Schools of the Prophets; then the study of
contemplative Mysteries and notions of Divinity; whereupon Controversal matters
are ordinarily attendants. And seeing there are so many bodies and Systemes of
Theoretical and Controversal matters, that it would be no easy task to any man
to reckon them all up; and yet there is not so much as one complete body or
Systeme of Practical Divinity found in all the Churches; whereunto we see
nevertheless, that all Theoretical Truths ought to be referred, and directed as
to their end; it is evident that therein there is a manifest defect, and that
much is wanting hereby, to the increase of public Edification, to the supply
of spiritual Consolation, and to the settlement of a sound Reformation in all
the Churches, which may be remedied by a Body of this nature.

Now by this which we call a Body of Divinity, is meant a full Collection, and
an orderly disposition of all divine Truths which are after godliness, under
several distinct heads and matters; to the end that from the holy Scriptures,
the man of God may be perfectly instructed, and thoroughly furnished with
sufficient helps and directions, which by the Spirit of Faith, may not only
make him wise unto salvation, but able also to work all his works in God.

And concerning this Body, Seeing I am entrusted and conscionably obliged, as
in the presence of God, to solicit the same toward those that are able to
contribute their Talents to make it up; I conceive it may be an advantage to
the Work, to offer up the parts thereof unto their consideration, that the
number of tasks being distinguished and known, such as God shall enable and
stir up to manifest his truth, and to join with others in completing this work
may know what tasks to choose, and how to concur with each other in
elaborating the same.

I shall therefore with due respect unto better judgments, offer these
following thoughts unto such as shall be undertakers in this Work.

First, I lay this Fundamental Rule to be observed in the contrivance of the
whole, and of every part of the Work, viz. That the Number and Measure of the
Parts of this Body should be made suitable and proportionate to the end
thereof: that as nothing should be brought into it, which is not proper and
useful to the attainment of the end, so nothing should be left out which may be
requisite and subservient thereunto.

We shall therefore look upon the end and use of the Work, that we may find the
parts thereof without defect, and without superfluity.

The truth of Godliness, which is the Object of Practical Divinitie^; is the
manifestation of the life of God. The aim for which this Truth is to be
attested unto the world, and practiced by such as know and believe it; is that
we may enjoy God by partaking of his life in the divine nature, having escaped
the corruption which is in the world through lust, 2 Pet. 1. 4.

This life of God in the divine nature, is communicable unto us by none other
means, but by the knowledge of Christ, and the truth which is in him, Joh. 14.
6, 7, 8, 9. and 7. 3. Ephesians 4. 18, 19, 20, 21. Colos. 3. 10. and 2 Pet. 1. 2, 3.

And that which Christ does communicate unto us of this life, is made
perceptible unto us by two properties of Life wrought in us, the one is the
Light, the other is the power of life: By the light of life, we are made wise
unto salvation: and by the power of life, we are enabled to work out our
salvation, that is, to do all our works in God. This then is the complete end
of practical Divinity, to teach men the wisdom which is profitable unto the
salvation of their souls, and the direction of the whole conversation to Gods
will, that they may be enabled whatever they do, to do all in God by walking in
his light: and what Doctrine soever does not directly tend unto this end, is no
part of this Body, and ought not to be mentioned in it, but whatsoever does
thus tend thereunto, ought not to be omitted.

To deliver then all, and neither more nor less, then all the Doctrines and
truths which may directly be helpful to advance a man unto the attainement of
this end; I conceive that this body of Divinity should be made up of two
General parts. The first, containing the positive and undeniable Truths. The
second, the doubtful cases of Conscience concerning the practice of Godliness.
That part which is positive, should contain concerning the life of Godliness,
three things.

First, The Precognitions to prepare the mind to think of that life.

Secondly, The Principles by which that life is begotten.

Thirdly, The Parts or Acts, wherein that life does consist.

By the Precognitions, I mean such truths as must be taken notice of, and
acknowledged, or at least not contradicted and doubted of, before the Doctrine
of Godliness can be taught, and without the acknowledgement of which, no man
can be rationally dealt withal, or induced to intend to live unto God
according to his revealed will.

By the Principles of the life of Godliness, I mean the Fundamental Doctrines
of divine Truth, which begets love unto God, and thereby obliges the
conscience unto all dutifulness of obedience toward him.

By the Parts and acts, wherein the life of Godliness does consist, I mean all
things which either substantially or circumstantially belong thereunto to make
it up, as the state of the Perfect man in God.

By the Substantials of this life, I mean two things. First, All truths which
discover the inward frame and regeneration of the soul which lives the life of
God. Secondly, All truths which hold forth the outward frame; the way of
walking and the work of the Profession which is proper to that life, and
inseparable from the ends thereof.

By the Circumstantials of the life of Godliness, I understand all the
different outward states and particular callings of Professors, wherein God
does set people in this life; as of Husband and Wife, Father and Child, Master
and Servant; of Magistrate and Subject, of Pastor and flock, and such like; To
all which several duties belong, and thereunto several directions are
accordingly to be given, to show how every one should walk in all truth with a
good Conscience before God and Man. In this discovery of truths we may find,
concerning the Tree of life, as it were the foyl prepared before it be Planted,
in the Precognitions; the Root, which is to be Planted in the Principles; the
Stem, when it is grown up in the Substantials; and the branches, after the
full growth in the Circumstantials of the way of Godliness; so that in this
Body of Divinity, the man of God should be completed and set forth. First, As
it were in his Head and Intellectuals, by the Recognitions and Principles.
Secondly, In his heart and vital Motions, by the Substantials: And lastly, In
his Limbs and outward Members, without which he is not a complete man, by the
Circumstantials of his life: and as none of these parts, or of the things
necessary to make up the same should be wanting in this Body; so the matters
belonging to each of these heads ought to be delivered fully, yet not
superfluously; that is to say, so as they should not only contain the Marrow,
but the flesh and full substance of all profitable truths; yet without
needless Repetitions, large Amplifications, Retorical Digressions and
enlargements, which to move men's affections, rather then to convince their
Conscience, and inlighten their understandings, are frequently used by writers
of Practical Matters.

And as these General parts of the whole Body ought thus to follow one
another, in respect of their natural dependence upon each other; so the
matters subordinate unto every one of these, ought to be set in a method, which
is positive and proper to their nature, that there may be a coherence of all
the parcels in the whole, without any redundancy.

And although such a Body of truths fully and clearly delivered, might suffice
to Men that are free from all prejudice and of able parts, to direct them in
all Cases of Practice, which may be incident to the Course of their life; yet
because the work is not to be compiled for them alone, but for others also; and
because many doubts and scruples of Conscience are and will be raised, partly
by the weakness of some, partly by the malice of others, which every ordinary
capacity is not, and will not be able readily to resolve by it self, although
it be helped with the undoubted Principles, with the standing Truths, and with
the rules of practice, which such a complete Body of Divinity may contain:
therefore to supply this defect of knowledge, (which although but accidental,
yet is unavoidable) an appendix or Supplement of special doubts and cases of
conscience (for I suppose the common doubts, viz. such as are incident to mere
natural men, will be cleared by the Doctrine of the Body it self) should be
added unto the Body in a method relating the order of Matters, delivered in
each part where the ground of the decision of the doubtful case is to be found:
And if this be done, I cannot see what could be desired, or further wished for
in this kind; only to make this Appendix of case-Divinity complete (because
cases according to the differences of Men's capacities and apprehensions of
matters, may be as to us innumerable,) therefore some general Rules before the
particular cases be set down, should be given, to direct the wavering mind of
what degree of proficiencie soever, how to order it self in seeking out by the
testimonies of the Scripture, and the undoubted tenor of the Covenant within
its own heart; a determination of any question whatsoever, at least so far,
that it should not be able to perplex the spirit with any unsettlement in the
grounds of Faith, Hope, and Love, which are the Pillars of our whole profession
in this life. For by the confidence of Faith, we stand and rest in respect of
God; by the joyfulness of Hope, in respect 2 Cor. 1. 24. Heb. 3. 6. 1 John 3.
14. and Romans 13. 8, 9.
of our selves; and by the sincerity of Love, in respect of our Neighbor;
These general Directions then should first be delivered with an example, in a
case or two, how to use them, and then the particular cases which have some
difficulty more then ordinary should be brought in and resolved.

Thus we have the many Heads of the whole; but this will not suffice for a
distribuon of particular Tasks, because each Head is too comprehensive; there
must be a subdivision of every part by it self, into its parcels, set in order
like unto the Anatomy or Sceleton of a man's body, wherein all the bones do hang
one upon another; so that besides the number of parts, the talness of each
part, and the place thereof in the body may be discerned: And although such a
delineation as this of bare bones, will have no life in it, and be only like
the rude draught of a Painter before he puts colors to his work; yet it may be
not only useful, but will be even necessary to make the features of the body
appear, which afterward may have life put to it.

Concerning the Precognitions.
GOd having made man a rational Creature, does still rule him, and in all his
ways toward him, does walk with him according to the grounds of that Reason
which he at first gave him; and although through his defection from God (in
whose light alone he could see light) by his own default and free choice of
earthly-mindedness, he has darkened the eye of his understanding, and made
himself blind both in the things which are supernatural, and also in very many
things which are natural; so that in respect of these he has not any true
Notions at all, till they be renewed in him; and in respect of these, the
Notions which he has, he cannot improve so, as to apply them by himself
toward their right ends, without some special directory and help: yet it
cannot be truly said, that God has left Man destitute of all light, and
without all Testimony of the being of things supernatural, and of the right
improvement of things natural; for he does still maintain some general
Principles and Instincts, as glimmerings of his truth within him, to the end
that he may not only be without excuse in respect of his backsliding, but
that he may be made a subject capable of Grace through the second Adam, to be
restored to his original integrity, when he shall be rationally dealt withal,
both by the remainder of the light which he has, and in that which is to be
super-added thereunto; for I shall freely acknowledge (yet without any
advantage to Socinian Principles) that God does oblige no man to entertain any
thought, either of spiritual or natural things, or of his own dealings with
mankind in the one or the other way, which is contrary to found Reason; but
that every one who will either conceive of God rightly, or live unto him
justly, is obliged to do it in a rational way, both in reference to God, and
toward Men, because we are commanded to be ready to give a reason of the hope
which is in us, to every one that asks it of us, 1 Pet. 3. 15. and to present
our body a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God, by our reasonable
service, Romans 12. 1. And although in this place (...) may be rendered a service
according to his Word, as (...), 1 Pet. 2. 2. is well rendered the sincere Milk
of the Word; yet because the Word of God did by Wisdom create all things at
first, and still does uphold all things as they were created, it must needs be
rational in it self, and to all intellectual Creatures, the original cause of
all Reason, because every Truth and Precept of duty revealed to man therein, is
by the Scriptures rationally offered to the Conscience of those that are taught
of God thereby; and because they that are taught, are bound to take notice of
the reasons why they believe and do every thing, so as to be able to give a
rational account thereof unto other reasonable Men, therefore (...) in the one,
and (...) in the other place, are to be understood in the fullness of their
signification, as they comprehend both the Notions of Rationality, and of the
Word of God, which indeed are inseparable; for as it cannot be imagined, that
Gods Word should have been separate from his Wisdom, so we ought to conceive,
that his Wisdom and Will expressed in his Word concerning every thing, is that
truth of being and reality of reason which is extant in it; and that which in
our mind is by any thing found a truth, and found reason convincing our
Conscience, is his Word by that thing toward us.

And this observation I have premised to that which I am about to offer,
concerning the Precognitions of the life of Godliness; lest I might seem to
desire without a just cause and sufficient motive, that which I shall propose
as a task to the workmen to be completed, before any thing else can be
fruitfully and by a rational man (to whom our addresses must be made in this
undertaking) convincingly entertained.

For before any man's understanding can be dealt withal, to induce him to live
unto God according to his will he must be brought to acknowledge that God is,
and that the life of man may have some reference unto him by the knowledge of
his will. Therefore these things before all others must be rationally made out
unto him: and to this effect, four Heads of truth ought to be handled
satisfactorily, which are these.

First, That there is a God.

Secondly, That God is to be feared, worshipped, and glorified by Man; and that
he is a rewarder of those that fear, worship and glorify him.

Thirdly, That the Scriptures given to the Jewish Church of old by the
Prophets, and to the Churches of the Gentiles and Jews by the Evangelists and
Apostles, are undoubtedly Gods Word.

Fourthly, That the Scriptures were given by those Men, to teach all men the
true way of fearing, worshipping and glorifying God.

These truths ought to be cleared upon the ground of common Reason, which all
men are supposed to be made capable of; and to this effect, I suppose it will
be necessary to handle these following, or such like Positions.

Of the First, That there is a God.
TO Demonstrate unto a Rational man that there is a God, he must be made to
acknowledge these following truths.

1. That in this World, besides the things which are visible, there be other
things invisible; which though concealed from sense, have a being, and may be
understood to be.

2. That the Heavens, the Earth, and the things visible therein, have not their
being from themselves, but from something else which is not seen, but may be
understood to be over all, as the Governor and supreme power thereof, which is
called God.

3. That this supreme power is before all things, without beginning and ending;
infinite in all perfections, most wise, good and bountiful in giving all things
unto all.

4. That amongst all visible things, as Man is the most perfect; so he can
least of all have his Being from inferior Creatures, or from himself: but
having it from the supreme cause, more remarkably then other Creatures, he is
more enabled then they to know God and respect him.

Of the Second.
When upon these grounds a man is Convicted that there is a God; then to
demonstrate unto him rationally, that this God ought to be feared, worshipped,
and glorified by Mankind; these following, or such like Positions, are to be
made out unto him.

1. That Man has a soul endowed with a Reasoning faculty, whereby he is able
to judge of his own actions, and know his own aims, though secret and hidden
from others.

2. That in this judging faculty, there is something which universally in all
ages Men have called Conscience, which secretly accuses, or else excuses Men
concerning their actions and aims, chiefly when others judge of them otherwise
then they meant them.

3. That this Conscience does bear witness unto all men (in whom it is awake)
from their own reason, that they are under the power of God, and that they
ought to be thankful to God.

4. That the reason which convicteth men's Conscience that they are under God,
will also convict them, that they ought to show their thankfulness unto God,
suitably unto the nature and properties of Gods being, and not otherwise.

5. That the nature and property of Gods being, seeing in all things it is the
first and supreme, is in it self infinitely perfect, and to all other things
the alone Author of all good; and that therefore it ought to have the glory of
this supremacy, perfection and goodness, given unto it by man in his use of
all things.

6. That in case he does not show himself thankful by respecting the glory
due to God in all things, he does then deserve to be cast off by God, and
deprived of the fruit of his goodness in all things.

7. That it a man does give unto God the glory which is due to his Name, by
being thankful unto him; he may assure himself, that God, as he is wise and
allknowing, will take notice of him; and as he is just and good, will be
merciful and beneficial unto him.

Of the Third.
WHen a Man has acknowledged these truths, that there is a God, and that he is
to be glorified by Man answerably to the properties of his nature; then we must
rationally induce him to believe, that the Scriptures written to Jews and
Gentiles, by the Prophets, Evangelists and Apostles, are the Word of God: And
this may be done by the demonstration of these or the like Positions.

1. That no Books in the World have greater evidences and arguments of truth,
in respect of their History, then these have: two things must be made out. 1.
That they were written by those Men, by whom they are said to be written. 2.
That the Matters of fact recorded in them, are as rationally credible, as any
other humane Records whatsoever.

2. That the Writers of those Books (whatsoever they were) were undoubtedly the
true servants of God, inspired by him in writing the same.

3. That all the Doctrines and Precepts of divine fear and worship contained
therein, are most suitable to the nature and property of Gods Supremacy,
Perfection and goodness; and that they are more answerable unto the true
Notions of duty written in the heart of Mankind toward God, then the Doctrines
and Precepts of any other Book and Religion whatsoever extant any where in all
the World.

Of the Fourth.
When a Man is rationally Convicted, or at least induced to believe that there
is no cause to contradict this truth, that the Scriptures are the Word of God;
it will be no difficult matter to let him see by the substance of the matters
contained therein, and the ends for which they were written and given both to
the Jews and Gentiles; that they were written and given to no other end, but to
teach all Men the true way of fearing, worshipping, and glorifying God: And to
this effect, these or such like Positions may be made out.

1. That the whole sum and substance of the History of the Bible does
directly tend to this scope.

2. That the Authors of the Holy Scriptures, do expressly declare this to be the
purpose of their writing.

3. That the natural Properties and effects of the things taught by them, and
their manner of teaching the same, are wholly fitted to work upon the spirits
of men, those impressions and affections which lead them to fear, worship, and
glorify God.

To all which, this Position at last should be added.

That there shall be a time wherein God will judge men according to the works
wherein they have, or have not feared, worshipped, and glorified God: which is
to be made out upon three Grounds, which may be rationally evinced.

1. Because God having made all things under a Law, and Ruling all Men by a Law
of Reason; must needs also be acknowledged as a Judge over the observers and
transgressors of his Laws, and consequently have a time to exercise his
judgment.

2. That the rational Souls of Men are immortal, and live when they are
separated from the body, and consequently can undergo a judgment after this
life.

3. That the Consciences of Men bearing witness to them of their wicked deeds,
even against their wills, though they live in outward prosperity, put them in
fear; and bearing witness also of the virtuous deeds of good Men, though they
are in outward adversity, yet comfort and support them; which inward
testimonies of the Consciences of Men are not vain notions, but undeniable
Evidences of a Judgment to come, which the Soul within it self is sensible of.

When these things are thoroughly handled, and all Scruples which may be raised
concerning the same are taken away, so that a Rational man, who is without
prejudice, shall have no cause for want of the discovery of truths of this
nature to make any further doubt thereof; I suppose the ground is prepared upon
which the Fundamentals of Divine Faith, that is, the Doctrine of Revealed
Truths (which by natural Reasoning no man can reach unto) may be offered. For
as God does make a man first by a living soul to be a natural man, and
afterward he becomes by grace a new creature and spiritual man: so I suppose
he does 1 Cor. 15. 46.
cause the Truths of Rationality concerning himself, first to become effectual
upon the conscience, before the understanding is obliged conscionably to
entertain Revealed Truths. For he who is not capable of that measure of Faith
which common Reason it self does beget upon the natural apprehensions of God
and his Truths written in the heart; how can he be thought susceptible of the
other measure which depends only upon Revelation and Divine Tradition? We
conclude therefore, that these Precognitions are first to be handled as matters
requisite, to fit the mind of a natural man to receive that which is to follow
after, because I conceive, not that the Principles of the life of Godliness
which are to follow, are to be delivered as the products of these foregoing
Truths; but only as matters subsequent unto the same, in respect of the order
of things to be taught. These Praecognita, are Praesupponenda, but not
Principia, because I take a Principle of Godliness to be such a Truth, from
which a Conclusion of divine faith and love may flow: But that cannot flow from
any truth which is entertained upon mere natural Grounds, as I suppose, without
spiritual Revelation and Illumination: for divine Faith, as it is the gift of
God, and not the product of humane Reasoning; so it must needs have a higher
Principle then these Precognitions, namely some truth, as revealed immediately
by God unto the Conscience to convince it, that he does offer himself unto it
to be a Savior. And this is the reason, why I would have the Precognitions,
and the Principles of Godliness distinguished; namely, because they are truths
of a different nature; yet they are subordinate, but so, that the latter cannot
follow the former, without some special work of God upon the mind.

Concerning the Principles.
THe Principles of the life of Godliness, are such Truths as set the mind upon
the apprehension of supernatural Objects, and beget thereby the acts of divine
Faith therein, which works through love in the whole Man; all which is
acceptable unto God.

Now all the Truths which beget divine Faith and Love, proceed from one Root,
which is the Tenor of the Covenant, which God has appointed to be offered from
the Scriptures, by the Preaching of the Gospel in his name, to be believed and
entertained by all: for all that God does aim at in his dealing with Mankind,
next unto the manifestation of the glory of his goodness over all his
Creatures, is chiefly this, to show himself a Savior, in uniting man by a
Covenant Psalm. 73. 24. 2 Timothy 4. 7.
of Grace unto himself, that he being guided by his Counsel, and having kept
the faith therein, may afterward be received into glory.

The Covenant of Grace then is, the great and fundamental Principle of all the
Principles of the life of Godliness: for as there is none other way appointed
to unite man unto God, and restore us again from our fall to integrity, but
this way of a Covenant: so there is nothing which we can do acceptably toward
God, or profitably for our own salvation; but that which is done in order to
the Tenor thereof. Whence follows also, that all our knowledge is not
otherwise useful, nor to be sought after upon any other ground, but as it
leads to the observation of the Covenant; nor to be entertained for any other
aim, but as it is subordinate unto the Tenor thereof: for as no man ever was,
is, or can be saved, but he that is faithful in the Covenant of Grace with God;
so no matter of knowledge can be saving to any man, but that which inableth him
to keep the Tenor thereof. Hereunto then all truths, both Theoretical and
Practical, are finally to be referred; and therefore in the Doctrine of the
life of Godliness, the Covenant must be made the ground of all the principles
of Faith, from which the duties of obedience must flow: And I am fully
persuaded, both upon the grounds of found reason, which a natural moral man is
capable of; and upon the grounds of divine Testimony and spiritual experience,
that all doubtful matters in Divinity, whether they concern the points of
Knowledge, or of Practice, may not only be resolved by the right understanding
of Gods aim toward us, and of our duty toward him in the Covenant; but that
the Resolutions thereof (of what kind soever) must be examined by, and applied
unto the Analogy of Faith concerning the Covenant, before ever they can bring
true peace to the Conscience of any man; and therefore my advice shall be unto
those who will undertake any part of this Work, that they keep always the
Covenant in their eye, as Mariners do the North point of the Compass, to steer
their Course by it in all their Meditations; for it is mainly for want of this
Directory, that both in our Notions and Actions concerning Religion, we run
such wild courses: nor is it possible (as I conceive) ever to unite the
Professors of Christianity to each other, to heal their Breaches and Divisions
in Doctrine and Practice, and to make them live together as brethren in one
Spirit ought to do, without the same sense of the Covenant, by which they may
be made to perceive the terms upon which God does unite all those that are his
Children unto himself, and upon which every one that is in Covenant with God,
is bound in Conscience, through love unto God, to maintain the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace with those that are his Children, who all alike,
and by the same very way, are in Covenant with him.

The knowledge of the Covenant then, being the fundamental Principle, whereunto
all other Truths are to be reduced, that they may be received unto the end for
which they are revealed, we shall endeavor to show what the Doctrines of
divine Faith are, which are subordinate thereunto; and which by virtue of that
subordination, are able to beget love toward God in a believing soul; for no
doctrine of Faith does otherwise oblige any man to love and obedience toward
God, then as it is revealed to manifest Gods love unto us, as he is become our
Savior, and to make us faithful toward him in the Covenant.

I conceive then, that all the Doctrines of divine Faith, tend either to the
erecting and settling of the Covenant of Grace with us, or to the confirmation
of our Faith in the truth thereof.

To Erect and settle the Covenant with us, we must needs know, 1. The true
Instrument of the Covenant wherein it is revealed. 2. The things belonging to
the true Tenor thereof, as they are offered to us in that Instrument. 3. The
Motives for which we should embrace and entertain the same: for if any of
these three points be wanting, we cannot be sound in the observation thereof.

Concerning the true Instrument of the Covenant, we believe the same to be the
Canonical Scriptures; whereof two things must be known: First, What the proper
Character of Canonical Scripture is. Secondly, How the truth of God for the
knowledge of the Covenant, is therein offered unto us.

Concerning the first; this is to be believed,

That no Books are to be accounted Canonical Scripture, that is, the Word of
God revealing his Covenant to Mankind; but such as are written in the Hebrew
Tongue, and were given to the Jewish Church to be a Rule of their profession in
order to the Covenant; or were written in the Greek tongue, and were given to
the first Churches of Christianity, as well Jews as Gentiles for the same end.

Concerning the second; this is to be believed,

That these Books offer the Covenant unto our Consideration, and all divine
Truths belonging to the knowledge thereof, with infallible and uncontrolable
authority, most perfectly and very clearly, to such as have an upright desire
to know it.

And concerning these three Matters of Infallibility, Perfection and Evidence,
which we believe to be in the Scripture, this is further more distinctly to be
believed.

1. Concerning the infallibility of the Scripture, we believe that the truth of
God revealed in the Canonical Scriptures, is so highly and incontrolably
credible, that no man, no not an Apostle himself, nor an Angel from Heaven is
to be believed, who should contradict the same: but all Men, Churches,
Councels, Fathers, Schools, and their Writings, Sayings, Actions, and Thoughts
concerning divine Matters, are to be examined thereby, as by the only rule of
truth and righteousness, and if they agree not therewith, they are to be
rejected.

2. Concerning, the perfection of the Canon we believe; That the Word of God
revealed therein, is so complete, both for the matter and manner of expression,
that neither any thing unprofitable is therein delivered; nor any thing
profitable or needful to be known, therein omitted; but all things of Doctrine
and Reproof, of Correction and Instruction in Righteousness and for Comfort,
whether to be believed or hoped for, or to be done or left undone unto
salvation, are more then sufficiently laid open, and prescribed in a form of
sound words, which ought not to be altered; so that all heathenish Philosophy
in Divine matters, and all humane Traditions, and will worship in the service
of God, are to be utterly rejected: nor is it lawful for any to conceive, that
they can speak of matters of Faith more exactly and properly, in respect of the
things themselves; or more conveniently and fitly, in respect of the Capacities
of men, then the Holy Ghost has done in those Writings.

3. Concerning their clearness this is to be believed;

That the word of God revealed therein, is so evident and easy to be
understood, that the meanest Capacity of those that are come to the years of
discretion, if they be godly and desirous to do Gods will, searching the
Scriptures diligently may without difficulty comprehend all things necessary to
be known unto salvation; so that none ought, by reason of any supposed darkness
to be therein, to abstain from reading the Scriptures, which is a duty most
suitable and necessary to all.

Of the things belonging to the Tenor of the Covenant.
COncerning the Tenor of the Covenant, as it is revealed in the Canonical
Scriptures, three things must be opened.

First, Who the Parties are, which are concerned therein, and what their
Relation is to one another.

Secondly, What the form of the contract is, according to which the Covenant is
made with those that are concerned therein.

Thirdly, What the way is, by which it is established amongst men, that they
may embrace it, and have the benefit thereof.

Of the parties.
THe Parties concerned in the Covenant, are, God and Man, at a distance by
reason of sin; and Jesus Christ the Mediator of God and man, who reconcileth
them by his satisfaction and righteousness.

Of God.
GOd is to be taken notice of, as he has revealed himself in his Word, to be
the Savior, and our God by a Covenant; so that nothing is either necessary or
profitable to be known of him further then what serves for this end; and to
this effect, he has revealed himself in his Being, in his Will, and in his
Works.

His Being is revealed in the Properties of his nature, and the subsistence
thereof which we call Personalitie.

The Properties of his Nature, are revealed to show what he is, and who he is.

The Properties showing what he is, That he is a Spirit living of himself, Joh.
4. 24. and 5. 26.

The Properties showing who he is, are these,

That he is the only true God alone; in Being infinite, eternal,
incomprehensible, every where present, simple, unchangeable, all-knowing, all
wise, all-free, alljust, all-holy, all-mighty, all-happy, all-good, all-true,
all-faithfull, and full of all mercy and compassion.

His subsistence is in three, who bear witness in Heaven: the Father, the Word,
and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one and the same God, 1 John 5. 7. The
Father unbegotten; the Son only begotten; and the Holy Ghost proceeding from
the Father and the Son.

His Will is revealed in the properties of his Counsels which are wise, good,
free and established for ever.

His Works are revealed in the Creation, Preservation and Government of the
World, and especially of Mankind therein, over whom he delights to exercise
Loving kindness, Judgment and Righteousness in the Earth, for his own Jer. 9.
24.
Glory, and according to the tenor of the Covenant.

Of Man.
MAn is to be taken notice of as he is spoken of in the Word, to be of God, to
belong unto God, and obliged to depend upon God by a Covenant in his Threefold
state. 1. In the state of Innocence. 2. In the state of Guilt and Misery. 3.
In the state of Grace and Reconciliation unto God.

Of the Mediator Jesus Christ.
JEsus Christ the Mediator of the new Covenant between God and Man, is revealed
in the Word to relate unto both. 1. In respect of his twofold Nature in one
person. 2. In respect of his threefold Office, of Prophet, Priest, and King,
whereunto he was anointed. 3. In respect of the performance of all Duties
belonging to those Offices in his twofold state, the one of Humiliation by his
life and death on earth, the other of exaltation by his power and glory in
heaven.

In all which, as the fitness which is in Christ's Person, Natures and offices,
to work out redemption for us, and to settle the Covenant of Grace between God
and us, is to be taken notice of, so the Work, First of Reconciliation between
God and us, as this was effected according to the purpose of God in the
Covenant: Secondly, Of the Restitution of our nature to a state of Union and
Communion with God, as this does enable us to observe the Covenant on our part:
and Thirdly, Of Christ's Mediation and Intercession in heaven for us, as he does
continue us in that state of Grace which is the effect of the Covenant, is also
to be acknowledged; that not only the Relation which is between God and us in
Christ, may be believed; but the Tenor of the Covenant, as it is offered to us
in the Word by him, may be embraced.

Of the Form of the Contract.
IN the form of the contract, two Things must be acknowledged. 1. With whom the
contract is made properly and directly, and with whom indirectly. 2. What the
terms of the agreement are, by which it is made with each of them.

The contract of the Covenant, is properly and directly made only with Christ
Jesus; and indirectly with those that believe in him, and make profession of
his name; for Christ is given as the Covenant of God unto them, Isai. 42. 6.
and 49. 8. and they are received only for his sake, and not for any thing in
themselves.

The Terms of the Agreement by which the Covenant is made with Christ, are
these: That whosoever shall be redeemed by him, and be found in him, not having
their own righteousness, but the righteousness of God Isai. 59. 21.
through faith, to be made conformable unto the image of the Son of God, shall
become Children of God, and Heirs of eternal glory, Romans 3. 24. Justified
freely by his Grace through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, Phil. 3. 9.
be found in him, etc. Rom 8. 29. Predestinate to be conformed to the Image of
his Son, Romans 5. per totum.
that he might be the first born amongst many Brethren, Joh. 1. 12. He gave
them power to become the Sons of God; and Joh. 6. 39. I should lose nothing of
all which he has given me, but raise it up again at the last day.

The terms of the Agreement by which the Covenant is made in Christ with the
Believers, are; That God will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and
remember their iniquities no more; that he will write his laws in their hearts,
and put them in their minds: that he will be to them a God, and they shall be
to him a People; and that they shall all be taught of God from the least unto
the greatest. Heb. 8 10, 11, 12. The terms of the agreement by which the
Covenant is made in Christ, with those that make profession of his Name, are,
That every one who names the name of Christ, should depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2. 19. That such as separate themselves (...) the Lord, and touch not
(...) shall (...) by him; that he will dwell amongst them, and walk (...) they
shall be his people: that h^ ^^ll be a Father unto them, and they shall be his
Sons and Daughters, 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17, 18. And that every one who does suffer
with Christ, shall also reign with him, 2 Timothy 2. 12. Romans 8. 17.

Hitherto we have mentioned the heads of matters, which show what the Tenor of
the Covenant is: now follow those things which show the way, how amongst men it
is established, that they may embrace it, and have the benefit of it.

Of the establishment of the Contract with Men for Christ's sake.
THat this contract might be ratified and inalterably confirmed, to the benefit
of Mankind, Jesus Christ died, and made these promises his Testament unto
those that believe and make profession of his Name; and rising again from the
Dead by the power of his God head, he is gone into heaven to administer from
thence this Testament unto these unto whom he did bequeath it.

To this effect the Gospel was preached, and is to be published unto the end of
the World, by the gifts of the holy Ghost which Christ did send down, and will
send down from heaven upon Men: for this is a part of the Covenant which the
Father has made with those that are in Christ for his sake, that his Spirit
which is upon Christ, and his Words which he did put in his mouth, shall not
depart out of his mouth, nor out of the mouth of his Seed, nor out of the mouth
of his Seeds Seed, from henceforth and forever; Isai. 59. 20. 21.

In this Administration of the Testament for the establishment of the Covenant,
two things are to be acknowledged.

1. What the general offer of Grace is on Gods part, calling all men to Christ
to partake of the Covenant.

2. How the particular Terms of the contract are made good with Believers, and
with the Professors of Christ's name.

Of the general offer of Grace.
IN the general Call of all Men unto Grace, three things are to be
acknowledged. 1. What state they are in who are called unto Christ. 2. What
they are called unto in him. 3. By what way they come to him.

Concerning the first, we believe; That God has appointed the Gospel to be
preached to Men dead in sins and trespasses, who have no ability of themselves
at all to will any thing which is spiritually good; far less to convert
themselves, or to prepare themselves thereunto.

Concerning the second, we believe; That they are called to receive the pardon
of their sins, rest and ease to their souls, and the light of life, according
to that of Christ and the Apostles. Come unto me all ye that labor and are
heavy-laden, and I will give you rest, Mat. 11. 28. And be it known unto you,
that through this Man is preached unto you forgiveness of sins; and by him all
that believe are justified from all things, from which ye could not be
justified by the Law of Moses, Act. ^3. 38. 39. And awake thou that sleep,
and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light, Ephe. 5. 14. And he
that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of
life, Joh. 8. 12.

Concerning the third, we believe, that the way by which M^n come to Christ and
follow him, is Repentance from dead Works, and Faith toward God, according to
that of Christ and his Apostles, The Kingdom of God is at hand: Repent ye, and
believe the Gospel, Mar. 1. 15. Testifying both to the Jews, and also to the
Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, Act.
20. 21.

How the particular Terms of the Covenant are made good to Believers.
IN the Particular Call of Believers, three things should be acknowledged. 1.
How they are made to believe and entertain the offer of the Covenant. 2. How
God does make good the Tenor of his Covenant in Christ toward them. 3. How
they are made sensible of their happy condition in Grace, to apprehend their
right to Glory.

Concerning the first, we believe, that such as hear the Word, and are moved to
answer the Call given them therein, and to embrace effectually the Promises of
the Covenant through the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ, are moved and
enabled so to do by a free and special grace of God conferred upon them, who of
his own good pleasure does work in them by the gift of Faith, both to will
their conversion, and to perform the same, so that they are brought
Free-willingly unto Christ, and desire above all things to be found in him to
partake of the merits of his death.

Concerning the Second. We believe that God does make good unto all such as by
Faith are found in Christ, the Tenor of his Covenant, when by his grace they
are justified and adopted to be his children, and sanctified by the Spirit of
regeneration, whereby they are also sealed unto the day of their final
Redemption, and enabled to walk and persevere in the obedience of Faith and in
the enjoyment of grace unto the end.

Concerning the Third, We believe that all true Believers may have a
comfortable assurance of their blessed estate in grace, by the testimony of the
Spirit of Adoption unto their conscience, given them in the sincerity of their
walking with God in the Covenant, according to that which the Apostle says,
Romans 8. 15, 16. The Spirit of adoption whereby we cry Abba Father, the Spirit
it self bears witness with our spirit that we are the Children of God: and a
Cor. 1. 12. Our rejoicing is this: the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity and godly sincerity by the grace of God we have had our conversation
in the World.

How the Particular Terms of the Covenant are made good to Professors.
IN the particular Call of Professors to entertain professedly the duties, and
therein to receive the Graces of the Covenant, Two things are to be
acknowledged, wherein the Communion of Saints do consist.

First, That such as profess the name of Jesus Christ are to be gathered
together, and bound to join themselves in one body as members one of another in
Christ.

Secondly, That they are to be perfected and built up by the work of the
Ministry, toward the effect of the Covenant.

Concerning The gathering of Professors together into one Body.

First, We believe that to effect this, the Lord has given gifts unto men; At
first Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists, to lay the foundation of his Church,
and now Pastors and Teachers to build thereupon, who have continued and shall
continue by a lawful Ordinary Calling unto the End of the World.

Secondly, We believe also that the gathering together of Professors into one
body, is lawfully performed, when they professedly give up themselves unto God
through the Ministry of the Testament which Christ has instituted, and by
their professed subjecting of themselves to all the Ordinances of Gods house,
which make the Believers as one in the Covenant with God, so one with each
other before the World in the profession thereof to Gods glory.

Concerning the perfecting and building up of the Professors as one man, till
they come to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ in the
Covenant. We believe that the Lord has appointed several administrations of
the gifts of his Spirit to be used amongst them in the household of Faith, some
relating principally to the inward man, and some to the outward man: and all to
be performed as the services of Love in the communion of Saints.

The administration of gifts relating principally to the inward man, is in the
duties of public worship, whereunto Professors are obliged to apply themselves
by attending to the word of Prophecy, and by joining in the ordinary
Sacrifices of Prayers and Praises to be offered up unto God in his house, and
in the extraordinary and lawful use of an Oath and of a Lot, wherein Gods
presence is to be attested and petitioned, when necessary matters cannot
otherwise be determined.

The administration of gifts relating principally to the outward man, is in the
duties of Love belonging to the communion of Saints, wherein Professors are
obliged to watch over one another, observing each others conversation, and to
supply each others wants in all things. And although in some respect, all are
bound alike to administer their gifts to each other by themselves, yet We
believe that the Eldership is more especially bound to over-see the ways of
their Flocks, and to make use of the Keys of the kingdom of heaven toward
them, to open and shut the door of comfort unto them as they shall find cause:
and that the Deaconship is more particularly obliged to consider the bodily
necessities of the Saints, and to distribute the Contributions of Professors to
such as stand in need thereof.

Hitherto, We have spoken of the ways by which the Covenant is established:
that is to say, whereby God does offer it, the Elect do embrace it, and the
Professors do entertain it before the World. Now follows the Reason wherefore
all men are bound thus to entertain it and keep it.

Of the Third.
Wherefore all men are bound to entertain the Offer, and keep the Tenor of the
Covenant.
THe Ground and Motive wherefore all men should receive the Offer, and observe
the Tenor of the Covenant which God does make with them, is Twofold.

First, because God has now commanded all men everywhere to Repent, and
believe the Gospel. Act. 17. 30. Luke 24. 57.

Secondly, because God has appointed a Day wherein the Dead shall be raised,
and the World judged in righteousness by the man Jesus Christ (Acts 17. 31.)
who will receive none into Glory, but such as have kept his Covenant by
Repentance and Faith, and by making profession thereof before the World.

Hitherto, We have mentioned the fundamental Heads of Faith which concern the
Revealing and the establishing of the Covenant. Now follows that which
concerns the confirmation of the same.

Matters of Truth to be known to confirm us in the Covenant.
COncerning the confirmation of the Covenant, two things are to be acknowledged.

First, What God on his part does offer to assure us of the truth of his
meaning and the Reality of his purpose in the Covenant.

Secondly, What the Believers on their part are bound to do in accepting that
which God does offer for their confirmation in the promises of the Covenant.

Concerning the First, We believe,

First, That God has given unto such as he has received into his Covenant,
certain Signs to represent the Reality of his Purpose, to confirm the things
promised in the Word, and to conveigh the assurance thereof unto them thereby,
as badges of his special Love to them in the Profession.

Secondly, We believe further, That these Signs are appointed for three
several uses in the house of God:

First, for the Reception of Professors into Gods house, to oblige them to
entertain the Covenant professedly; and to this effect, Baptism is appointed.

Secondly, for the maintenance and continuance of Professors in the unity of
the Covenant with God, and one with another; to which End the Lords Supper is
instituted: and

Thirdly, for the settlement of orderly Courses and the due observation and
administration of all Gods Ordinances in the house wherewith he is in Covenant:
and for this use the Imposition of the hands of the Presbytery is appointed;
viz. to give lawful authority to those that are Public persons in the
Profession of the Covenant.

Concerning the Second, We believe;

First, That the Faithful are bound to make use of these Signs for the Ends
for which God has given them, by taking them up and applying them to those to
whom he has ordained them, as Evidences of their dependence upon him, and of
their owning of his Covenant, and of their Profession thereof before the World.

Secondly, We believe that the Sign of Baptism is to be applied unto all whom
God has received into his Covenant, and belong unto his household; that the
Sign of the Lords Supper is to be applied unto all that have embraced, and do
entertain professedly the Covenant; And that the Sign of the Imposition of
hands is to be applied unto all that are called and to be set apart for any
Public Office in the Church.

Hitherto We have reckoned up the Heads of the Principles of the life of
Godliness, as they rise from and relate to the Covenant, which is the ground of
all Spiritual Relations between God and Us. Now follows that which is to be
known concerning the substance of that life which God does work in Us by the
Covenant.

Concerning the Substantials of the Life of Godliness.
THe Substantials of the life of Godliness are nothing else but the power and
practice of that state and life whereby we are made one with God; and walking
with Christ in the Covenant, we enjoy God in him both outwardly and inwardly.

The enjoyment of God in the Inward man, is by the New creature and his life of
communion with God.

Concerning the New creature these things should be known;

1. What that change is whereby a man becomes from an Old, a New creature, and
is born again.

2. How that change is wrought in the Soul by the knowledge of Christ in the
Covenant; and how the conscience is quickened therein by him, and raised to a
new life.

3. How that change is discerned to be real and sincere; and the deceitfulness
of a pretended or imaginary change discovered.

Concerning the Life of inward communion with God, these things should be
acknowledged.

1. What it is to know and worship God in Spirit and truth.

2. How the Spiritual man does walk with God by faith, by hope, by love,
according to the Covenant.

3. What that virtue is, whereby he is enabled to have God always before his
eyes, and to do all things in the name of Jesus Christ, giving glory to God the
Father through him.

4. What Tentations are opposite unto this Life, both from the corruption of
our nature, and from Satan; and how they are resisted.

The enjoyment of God in the Outward man, is by the open profession and
practice of Obedience unto the will and ways of God in all things: which has
two chief parts.

The first is, To deny the practice and profession of ungodliness, and of all
worldly Lusts. Tit. 2. 11, 12.

The second is, To offer up our bodies as a living sacrifice unto God, by our
reasonable serving of him in the Covenant. Romans 12. 1.

Concerning the denying of ungodliness and worldly Lusts, these things should
be known.

1. What the Practice and Profession of Impiety is; as it proceeds

First, from Natural Atheism.

Secondly, from vain Philosophy, the Traditions of men, and the Rudiments of
the World.

Thirdly, from the strong Delusions and the deceitfullness of unrighteousness,
which Satan is permitted to make use of in the end of the World.

2. How the Consciences of Natural men are to be dealt withal and convicted
concerning the wickedness of their Practices in this kind.

3. What the nature and the original is of Actual sins, and how they proceed
from the power of inbred Lust.

4. How the motions of Actual sins are to be resisted; not only by the inward
purification of the heart, but also by the outward exercises of a Mortified
life, wherein the body is kept under and brought into subjection. 1 Cor. 9. 27.

Concerning the offering our bo^ies a living Sacrifice unto God by the
Covenant. Three things must be known, for the ordering of our conversation
aright in respect of our selves, in respect of our Neighbor, and in respect of
God: for hereunto the Apostle, Tit. 2. 12. does refer all men's virtuous
actions in this World, by Sobriety, Justice, and Religiousness.

Sobriety does comprehend all the way of our conversation with our selves;
Justice all our conversation with our Neighbor; and Religiousnes all our
conversation toward God.

And these Heads of our outward conversation ought to be handled and taken up
in this order; because the duties of the First kind are such a groundwork for
the Second and Third, that without Sobriety in respect of our selves, nothing
can be done rightly toward God or Man; And the Duties of the Second kind are
in Gods own esteem preferred to the Duties of the Third; because he does
require Mercy of us, and not Sacrifice; that is, the Works of Justice and Mat.
5. 23. Mat. 12. 7, 8. Isa. 1. 11. to 19.
Charity toward our Neighbor, more then the Works of outward Worship toward
himself.

Of the Ordering our way toward our selves by Sobriety.
TO be able to order our selves and all our ways in Sobriety, we must know;

1. What the nature of Sobriety is, as it is a Rule of restraint to moderate
our selves in all our Undertakings as they are ours.

2. What the nature of our Intemperance and inclination to Excess is, and
whence it comes; viz. from Self-love; where we must know what Self-love and
self pleasing is, and how all manner of Excess proceeds from thence.

3. How Sobriety does proceed from the Grace of Self-denial, accompanied with
Contentation, Meekness, and Lowliness, which Christ upon the Ground of the
Covenant and Promise of Rest does invite us to learn of himself, Mat. 11. 29.

4. What the proper work of Sobriety is, in reference to the natural acts of
Affections; where is to be noted that our natural affections may be two ways
vicious; either as they discompose and wrong us within our-selves, or as they
tend to discompose and wrong our Neighbor. In the first Respect, they are to
be regulated by Sobriety; in the second by Justice: so that the proper work of
Sobriety will be to keep the acts of our natural Affections within the bounds
of that lawful and necessary use whereunto God has appointed them. And to
discover these bounds, the natural Desires and Actions of Christ in the flesh
as he did subordinate them unto the life of God in the Spirit, according to the
Covenant, are to be taken notice of as a Rule.

5. What the Rules of Sobriety are in particular, in respect of the lusts of
the flesh, as meat and drink, ease and softness, the conjugal bed, and all
other delightful actions inherent to the body.

6. What the Rules of Sobriety are in respect of the lusts of the eye, as
outward sights for pleasure and curiosity, the covetousness of Riches, and
whatsoever else may be a purchase, or from without an Object of the eye to lust
after.

7. What the Rules of Sobriety are in respect of the pride of life, as the
affectation of Glory and Honor, the vanity of Worldly Pomp and appearance; the
flattery of our-selves in the way of our Passions, Emulation, Anger, Strife,
Envy, and such like, which are the fruits or companions of Pride.

8. What the rules of Sobriety are for the ordering of our behavior as well in
speeches as in actions, as at all times, so especially in times of c^o^^^s and
adversities, or of prosperity and joy, wherein there may be a provocation to
exceed, and misbehave our selves in gestures, if not in speeches and actions
contrary to Sobriety.

Of the Ordering of our way toward our Neighbors by Justice.
TO be able to order our way justly toward our Neighbor, we must know, 1.
What the nature of Justice is in reference to a Society, as it is a Rule to
direct every one to pay that which they owe to one another in their Society.

2. What the nature of Injustice is, and what does incline men to deprive
others of that which is their due; namely the spirit of men which lusts to
envy. Here then we should know what envy is, and how the spirit thereof
supported with Pride and covetousness does set men upon all manner of Injustice.

3. How the Acts and way of Justice proceed from the grace of brotherly love,
and especially from these Fundamental Rules thereof; As ye would that men
should do to you, do ye also to them likewise, Luke 6. 31. And, Ye have been
called (viz. by God in the Covenant) unto Liberty: only use not Liberty for an
occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another. Let every one please his
Gal. 5. 13. 14.
Neighbor for his good to edification as Christ pleased not himself, but came
to serve us for our good. Romans 15. 2, 3, 7. Phil. 2. 3. till 9. Love one
another as I loved you. Joh. 13. 34.

4. What the proper work of Justice is, in reference to that which is good, and
by Love due unto others: namely to observe all inoffensiveness and
communicativeness toward every one.

5. What inoffensiveness is, and by what Rules our ways may be made void of
offense: and of what importance the observation of those Rules are to the
Professors of the Covenant of Divine Love in Christ, whether their ways relate
to those that are within, or without the Church.

6. What communicativeness is, and by what Rules all good things are to be
imparted unto others, either as they stand in need thereof, or otherwise they
may be profitable unto them* whether it be the Communication of Mercifulness by
which we relieve them of their Miseries; or of Bountifulness, by which we
provoke them to Love and good Works.

7. How all Dutiful actions which we owe to others in word or deed concerning
their persons, or that which does belong unto them, ought duly and obligeingly
to be performed, that just things may be done justly.

8. What Rules of Justice are to be observed concerning the offices of Love
comparatively due to Enemies, to persons indifferently affected, and to Friends
in several degrees of neerness.

Of the Ordering of our way toward God by Religiousness.
TO be able to order our way toward God Religiously, we must know,

First, What Religiousness is, or what the nature of that tie and obligation
is, by which those that are in Covenant with God are bound in all their outward
carriages to show that they depend upon him and regard him.

Secondly, What does incline us naturally to Irreligiousness, that is, not to
refer our selves unto God, nor respect him as we are bound to do by the
tenor of the Covenant, in all our ways; and whether it be not this that we
easily forget his Omnipresence, and the Supremacy of his Influence over all
Creatures, and regard too attentively the properties of Secondary Causes as
they may have, and the thoughts of men as they have an Influence upon us.

Thirdly, how this obligation does proceed from the conscionable apprehension
of these following, and such like laws and Rules of Justice and Equity.

1. You are bought with a price; Glorify therefore the Lord in your Soul and
in your Body, which are the Lords. 1 Cor. 6. 2.

2. He that is ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful
generation, the Son of man shall be ashamed of him, when he comes into the
Glory of his Father with the holy Angels. Mar. 8. 38. Matthew. 10. 32, 33. Luke
12. 8, 9.

3. We should walk worthy of God who has called us to his glory and kingdom. 1
These. 2. 12.

4. As Children of God in the World without blame, we should shine as Lights,
and hold forth the Word of life. Phil. 2. 15, 16. and such like in 1 Pet. 1.
15, 16, 17, 18. and Ephesians. 5. 1* 2, 8. and 1 Pet. 2. 9. 10, 11, 12. and 1 John
1. 2, 3. and elsewhere.

Fourthly, What the proper work of Religiousness is and whether it be not to
walk always in the light of a good conscience toward God and men, Acts 23. 1.
and 24 16.

Fifthly, Whether the proper Rule of a good conscience in this walking, is not
to follow the grace of God which brings Salvation, in sincerity, and not
according to worldly wisdom, 2 Cor. 1. 12. Tit. 2, 11, 12. And whether the
parts of this walking are not chiefly or summarily these; 1. To confess and
profess openly the truth. 2. To worship God privately and publicly, observing
all his Ordinances.

Sixthly, What the Rules are of a Religious open confession of the truth by
word of mouth.

Seventhly, What the Rules are of a Religious profession of the truth in deed
and conversation.

Eighthly, What the Rules are of a Religious suffering for the confession and
profession of the truth.

Ninthly, What the Rules are of a Religious worshipping of God in private, by
Prayer, by Reading and Meditating the Word, and by private conference.

Tenthly, What the Rules are of a Religious worshipping of God in public, by
Hearing the word, and Joining with the Professors of the name of Christ in
Prayer and praises, and in the fellowship of all the public Ordinances,
whereby the Covenant is established or confirmed amongst men.

HItherto we have mentioned the Substantials of the life of Godliness in
respect of the distinct parts thereof as well inward as outward:

But because a Thing is neither in it self complete, which has not all the
parts joined in such a way as is suitable to the proper End thereof, nor in
respect of us completely known, except we understand both what the property of
each part is distinctly; and also what the joint frame of all is, which makes
up that whole, which is the Result of their union: therefore unto the former
consideration another must be added, wherein the union of all these parts is to
be discovered, that we may see the entire frame of the whole course which is
conformable unto the will of God in all things, as well inwardly as outwardly,
in all Duties at once which will make up the substance of the parts of a Godly
life.

And to bring us unto this Perfection, God has given a peculiar Rule whereunto
he does oblige all men to be so fully conformable, that whosoever transgresses
in any one Point thereof, is guilty of all, Jam. 2. 10. because the true and
perfect observation of any one Duty, does import a full confirmity of our Wills
to the Will of him who does command all the rest; and the transgression of Gods
will in any one particular, does bewray an inconformity of our wills from the
will of him who does command all the rest; and this is to be a transgressor of
the whole Law; because the whole Law is nothing else but the will of God; and
the substance of the whole Obedience is nothing else but a total subjection of
our wills unto his will, as it is revealed in the Law, Romans 2 20. for God has
given the form of knowledge and of the truth in the Law, to this end that we
should not displease him, but to s^udy to please him in all things; for the
whole substance of our Religious fear and love is con^racted unto this aim,
that we should do nothing that is displeasing, but every thing as it is
acceptable unto him. Our performance (...) of all Duties in order to the
fulfilling of Gods will, and observance of the Law, is the substance of the
whole life of godliness. For the Ten Commandments given in Mount Sinai, which
God wrote (...) in Tables of St^ne, are the Universal Rule of Righteousness, as
they contain the nature of all Duties which are generally obliging unto every
one, and as they comprehend in one expression, both the Spiritual and Bodily
perfection of every Humane Action.

The Doctrine then of the Ten Commandments should be delivered to this effect,
in Four distinct Heads.

The First should contain the Rules of interpreting the Commandments.

The Second should let us see the Abstract of all the Duties commanded, and
sins forbidden therein.

The Third should let us know the Definition or Description of all these Duties
and Sins, with the Means and Helps subordinate unto the duties, and the causes
which beget, and the signs which manifest the sins; and although perhaps some
of the things formerly mentioned in some of the parts of the life of godliness,
may come to be named here again, yet this is not to be counted any Tautologie
or superfluity, because the same thing may be more then once handled, under
different notions and respects in several places; Here then all duties
whatsoever, and every thing opposite thereunto, are only to be handled, as they
are commanded and forbidden in the Law, which is the universal rule of
Righteousness, to show the perfection of the Law, and the nature of every
action, as it agrees or disagreeth with the rule, and the quality of every
virtue and vice, as it is ranked by God in the whole frame of that life which
the Law does require or condemn: all which are material points of knowledge,
and can no where be properly handled but in this consideration of the Law.

The fourth and last head, should describe the watch which all men should have,
as well over themselves, as over others for the observation of the Law; for as
all particular virtues make up but one perfection of obedience, by their
conformity, unto the Rule of the Law; so all men's observation of the Law in
their several ways, does make up but one submission to the will of God in them
all, their joint care of each others conformity unto the Law; for all
Professors as they are members of each other in Christ, make up but one body
and spiritual man in him; and this is the substance of the whole life of
godliness, when by the grace and truth which is in Jesus Christ, the
righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but
after the spirit; for the Law of the spirit of life, which is in Christ, being
through Faith effectual in us, to free us from the Law of sin and death, which
is in our nature, does make us conformable unto all that is well-pleasing unto
God, so that in every thing we are enabled to prove what is that holy, perfect,
and acceptable will of God.

Which things being laid open, I suppose all that justly may be desired
concerning the substantials of the life of godliness, in the whole and parts,
will be sufficiently discovered; and so the second part of this body of
Practical Divinity will be made up.

Of the Circumstantials of the Life of Godliness.
ALthough the former rules of Piety, which are common to all Believers and
Professors, may well suffice to direct every one upon all occasions what to do,
not only because they contain the grounds of all duties, and the properties of
all virtues; but because God in the Covenant has expressly promised, that he
himself will teach all his children; and Christ has engaged himself to send
unto his Disciples, a spirit which shall lead them in all truth: yet seeing the
Scripture does lay open, not only the substantial rules of the whole
Profession, in the general nature of virtue and vice by the precepts of the
Law, but does mention in particular terms, the circumstantial duties also
which are considerable in order to the Profession; therefore these ought
distinctly to be opened, and made the third part of this body.

Where again I shall desire that it may be observed, that the things here to be
handled, should be distinguished from the same things handled before, in this
respect that in the foregoing part, all actions are to be considered in order
to that which is their perpetual nature, and substantial property never to be
altered; but in this part, all actions are to considered in order to that which
is alterable in them according to the circumstances; therefore in the former
part, although the heads of all things which are to be mentioned here, may be
brought in and named in their own places, yet the handling of them ought not to
go any further, then to define the universal nature and properties thereof, as
it is common to all times, places, cases, and circumstances; but in this part
the particular cases and circumstances, which are ordinarily incident to
persons of several conditions, are to be taken into consideration, to show them
the rule of their walking therein, to observe that which is righteous and
answerable to the Law: Here then we presuppose the knowledge of the definition,
and true notion of all virtues and vices (which is the proper work of the
substantial Doctrine, for under that respect all things are handled there) and
we reflect upon the various subjects, objects, relations, and occasions of
putting forth these actions which are discovered to be virtuous or vicious,
that the way of maintaining our course in virtue, and declining vice, may be
known in matters circumstantiall, as well as substantial.

These Circumstantiall duties are of three sorts, some regulate the natural,
some the spiritual circumstances of the (...) of the Professors, some relate
unto both.

The natural circumstances concern either the Sex in respect of the difference
which God has made therein; or the societies which arise amongst men from the
conjunctions thereof.

Concerning the difference which God has put between the Male and the Female,
we should know this.

1. What the preheminency of the Male is above the Female, in respect of right,
to manage domestic and public concernments.

2. What the proper work of each Sex is, which we may call the natural
calling thereof; that is, what the employment is whereunto God has created
each Sex, that they should advance his glory in their several kinds.

3. What the rules are, by which each Sex should order it self, within those
bounds and limits of employment whereunto God has appointed it.

Concerning the natural Societies which arise amongst men from their
conjunctions, we observe that

The first natural Conjunction and Society is of the Male and Female, of one
with one, for the propagation of Mankind, which is Matrimonial, of which we
should know,

First, What Gods appointment is concerning marriage; in respect

1. Of the ends for which it is to be intended lawfully, and for which it ought
not to be intended.

2. Of the persons who may or may not join together in that state.

3. Of the manner how it ought to be settled between these who may lawfully join
therein.

4. Of the duties which married persons owe to one another, by which they may
obtain the lawful ends of their Conjunction, by Gods blessing.

5. Of the causes for which marriage may lawfully be dissolved.

6. Of the manner and way how it ought to be, when needs it must be dissolved.

Secondly, What the inclinations of men are to abuse marriage, and what
corruptions are become customary therein, even amongst Professors.

Thirdly, How prejudicial the abuse of the ordinance of marriage is, not only
to the holy Profession, but even to the Society of Mankind.

Fourthly, How far both Ministers and Magistrates are bound to endeavor each
in their own way, to rectify the abuses of this Ordinance, by repressing all
Whoredoms, Adultery, Incests, and other unlawful Conjunctions, as Concubinate
and Polygamy, and whatsoever in this kind is contrary to the will of God, and
to the right use of nature.

The second natural Conjunction and Society is of Parents and Children, where
we must know;

1. What the duty is of Parents toward their Children jointly; in respect of
their education, and of their settlement in a course of life in the world.

2. What the duty of the Mother is toward the child whiles it is an Infant;
how far she is obliged to give it suck and attend it her self, and in what
cases she may be dispensed withal in reference to these duties.

3. What the duty of the Father is toward the Child after it is past the state
of Infancy, and how far he is obliged to look to the education thereof
himself; and in what cases he may be dispensed withal to commit it unto a
Deputy.

4. How the peculiar care of the Daughters belongs to the Mother, and the
peculiar care of the Sons to the Father, chiefly, when they are past
childe-hood.

5. What the duty of Children when they come to years of discretion is toward
their Parents, and how they ought to yield unto them not only honor and
obedience, but a requital in their old age.

6. How far the law of Marriage, by which a man is appointed to leave Father
and Mother, and cleave to his wife, does emancipate him from subjection and
dependency upon his Parents.

7. How family duties ought to be observed in the Societies of Parents and
Children; and what obligation does lie upon Parents to worship God with those
of their family.

The third natural Conjunction and Society is of brethren and sisters, and of
kinsfolks, where we must know;

1. What the nature and extent of the relation is, and how it differs from the
foregoing of Man and Wife, and parent and child.

2. What the duties of kinsfolks are toward each other.

3. What the proper care and affection is, which is more due unto kinsfolks
respectively, then unto others; though these in all respects be as commendable,
and perhaps far more commendable for grace and virtue then they.

The fourth natural Conjunction and Society, is of Alliance, where we must
know;

1. What the nature and extent of this relation is, and how far it is inferior
unto that of kindred.

2. What the proper duties thereof are more to each other, then to mere
strangers.

All these Conjunctions and Societies are properly natural, and unavoydably
necessary, if we suppose the propagation of Mankind by Marriage; there are
other conjunctions and societies which are more voluntary and freely taken up,
or left off, as there is cause sound; and these are again either of one with
one, or of many together in a Society.

The voluntary conjunction and society of one with one, is of Master and
servant, where must be known;

1. For what ends, and in what employments, men ought to seek for others to
serve them; and in what things they ought to serve themselves.

2. What the duties are of Masters toward their Servants.

3. What lawful services and employments are in humane Societies, and for what
ends men ought to offer themselves to be servants unto others.

4. What the duties are which servants owe unto their Masters, and how they
ought as Christians to perform the same.

The Voluntary Conjunction and Society of many together in one Body, is either
of many Families to make a City, or of Cities to make Provinces, or of
Provinces to make Nations and Kingdoms: all which are settled in their Relations
by Laws, and maintained therein by Officers endued with Authority and Power to
administer the same; whence does arise the Office of Magistrates and Subjects:
where we must know,

Concerning Magistrates;
1. What a Magistrate is in the Societies of Christians.

2. Whence Magistrates have their Authority.

3. What the proper work of their Employment is for the good of the Public
Society; And whether it be not to procure the observation of Both the Tables of
the Mosaical Law in the Commonwealth over which they are Rulers.

4. How the Sword is committed unto them, and to be used by them for Vengeance
against evil Doers, and for the Reward of those that are good.

5. For what End Taxes and Customs are to be laid upon Subjects.

6. What Offices are necessary and lawful to be constituted for the Peace and
Safety of Humane Societies.

7. What makes War lawful in a Christian Magistrate, and what unlawful.

8. What Power he has to administer Oaths, and for what Ends.

Concerning Subjects we must know;
1. What the Duty of a Christian Subject is toward the Supreme and
Subordinate Magistrates.

2. How they ought to be subject not only for wrath, but for Conscience sake.

3. Wherein a Christian ought not to be in subjection, or a Servant unto men.

HItherto we have mentioned the Heads of Matters which relate unto the
Circumstances of the Natural life; now follow the Circumstances of the
Spiritual Life of Professors.

THe Spiritual Life of Professors does Relate to the Church, either as it is
made up of Members to make one Body; or as in it are Offices and Officers with
several Charges.

Concerning the Members of the Church, we must know;
1. What Right and Relation a true Professor of Christianity has to any, or
all the Churches of Christ.

2. What use he ought to make of that Right and Relation; and how he should
apply himself to some particular Congregation, where his convenience of
Edification is greatest.

3. How the Common Profession and the Duties of holy Communion with all the
Members of Christ are to be maintained notwithstanding the application may be
ordinarily made unto one particular Congregation.

4. What the Care is which Members owe to one another in the Communion of
Saints, to build up each other in the Common Profession.

5. What the peculiar Duty and Respect is which all Professors owe unto those
that are the Leaders of others in the Profession, for their works sake.

6. How all Members and Professors ought to walk toward those that are
without, as to adorn the Doctrine of the Gospel in all things.

Concerning those that bear Office in the Church of God We, must know;
1. What the Office of a Pastor is, and how he ought to discharge it.

2. What the Office of the Teacher is, and how he ought to discharge it.

3. How the Duties of the Pastor and Teacher are conjoynt, and how distinct and
separate.

4. What the Office of a Ruling Elder is, and how he ought to discharge it.

5. What the Office of a Deacon is, and how he ought to discharge it.

6. What Correspondence and Communion these Officers ought to have one with
another, for the strengthening of each others hands in their Duties toward the
Flock.

7. What Correspondence and Communion the Officers of several Congregations
ought to have one with another, for the maintaining of the unity of the Spirit
in the bond of peace amongst themselves, to prevent or remedy Differences, and
for the propagating of the truth unto others that have not as yet received it.

Of all these states and Relations, the Duties should be laid open as they are
prescribed in the Word distinctly.

Then the state and Calling which has a respect to all sorts of Societies
jointly, as being the Seed-plot and Seminary of all Virtues to be exercised
therein, is the state of Schools: where ought to be delivered;

1. What kinds of Schools ought to be constituted, suitable to the Principles
and Life of Christianity.

2. To whom the Care of erecting and reforming of Schools does belong: and what
necessity there is of this work.

3. What the peculiar Duties are of Schoolmasters and Mistresses, and of
Scholars of both Sexes.

Hitherto, I have reckoned up summarily the Heads of those Truths which will
make a full Body of Practical Divinity, if they be thoroughly handled, and if
the particulars which may be referred thereunto be fitly brought in.

As concerning the Supplement of Cases of Conscience, I shall say nothing for
the present: hoping that if the Positive Truths be Completely handled, and a
General Rule showed how to draw from the Tenor of the Covenant, a resolution of
Conscionable Difficulties, there will be no great need of any large Treatise in
this kind. Yet I will not deny but that a full Body of Case-Divinity may be
useful, if well ordered and published by it self: but I would not have the
Body of Positive Truths overburdened with Cases: because our main Study ought
to be about the knowledge of the Rules, and our exercise about the application
of the same to our ways: therefore we need not to propose a body of
Difficulties to be resolved, but our wisdom will be, either to avoid them so
far as may be by a clear direction preventing them, or to overcome them when
they cannot be avoided, by such a method as may be easy, and followed by all
that understand the Truth of Gods meaning, and their own duty in the Covenant.

Thus I have adventured to cut out Work, and offer Tasks to those that shall be
willing to join in completing this pious Undertaking: not that I presume to
precribe or limit any within these bounds, or to follow this Method, but that I
would give occasion unto such General hints as these are. For unto these three
Heads of Principles, Substantials, and Circumstantials of Practice, I suppose
all the Collections which may be made out of our Authors, may be referred; and
if this Effect can be obtained in any competent measure, I shall have what I
intended by these Proposals.

Hitherto I have spoken of the Body of Practical Divinity, which I conceive
will answer the request of Foreign Protestant Divines made unto us. Now I shall
come to the Reasons why it ought to be compiled and imparted unto them.

Of the Second.
What the Reasons and Motives are, which should induce us to make up this Body
of Divinity, and Communicate it to Foreign Protestant Churches.
IF to advance this Gospel-work, there were nothing else to move us, but the
excellency of the thing it self, and the Call which we have thereunto by
foreign Churches, with those Arguments which in their Letter they have
alleged: Truly these inducements alone might abundantly suffice, and ought
to engage us most effectually thereunto: for if we have any true zeal to the
glory of God, by the Propagation of the Gospel; if there is any sincere
inclination to entertain the Communion of the Spirit, by the Communication of
spiritual Gifts and Graces: and if there is any fervency of love toward the
Brother hood, or affections of serviceableness toward the fellow members of
Jesus Christ; all others reasons besides those which they offer unto us, will
be found superfluous, and of little use to persuade; because the heart that is
rightly set in heavenly places, and raised unto the true Objects which unite
the same with God, is not acted by earthly Motives, although it may reflect
sometimes not unprofitably upon matters of particular concernment.

But we find too often (and that to our great grief) when we have to deal even
with men that are accounted emninent in the Profession of Religion, and that
are of good abilities to judge of all things else, that yet those Reasons which
in their own nature are best, most spiritual, and most universal, are not
toward them most effectual to persuade; but the motives which are more
particular, more outward and of lesser worth, does rather work, and take more
powerfully with them. Whether this does fall out, either because good Men do
not always thoroughly understand the best Reasons; or because the matter
thereof though understood, yet is not always mainly and directly intended: or
because the Reasons which are of less worth, are always more level to all
men's natural Capacities; Or lastly, because outward and particular matters are
most suitable to close with humane affections; I will not now stand to
discourse. What ever the cause of this may be, I shall endeavor at this time
to prevent it, by taking into consideration both sorts of Reasons; that both
such who (being truly Spiritual) are in love with Christianity for it self,
and such also who (walking in a lower Spheere) regard more directly humane and
outward relations, may find in this undertaking, that where with they ought to
be affected.

If we look then before other things upon God, and upon our selves as in his
hand; we may perceive that he does highly honor us above our reformed
Brethren: Chiefly herein, that having received with them the truth of the
Gospel in the purity thereof, we are made partakers above them of this most
eminent gift of practical knowledge, and enjoy the means thereof more abundantly
then any other Church whatsoever: Yet the enjoyment of the most eminent of his
gifts is not all the Honor which God has conferred upon us, but he has
caused the Excellency of this blessing to become apparent unto all the
Churches: So that they not only respect, love and esteem us for the same, but
they heartily wish and desire for themselves the same favor at Gods hands, and
they are moved without envy, to make their application unto us in a friendly
manner, that we in love to Gods glory would impart unto them the fruit of that
kindness which he has bestowed upon us. Thus we see that he has not only
(...) ^eference to himself, put Ornaments upon us, to beautify us with
salvation, but in reference to our Brethren, he is pleased by this means to
make us honorable amongst them; for he does set us forth in their eyes as
vessels which contain the Richest of his graces, and by whom he seems to be
willing to make unto all people his feast of the things, full of marrow, Isa.
25. 6. and a feast of wines on the lees well refined; and least we should not
take notice that we are fitted to be serviceable in this kind unto the whole
household of faith, he has moved some of the chief members thereof (who are
brands plucked out of the fire of persecution) to put us in mind of this part
of our duty, by ^^ing toward us, and calling upon us for the improvement of
this peculiar Talent, unto the end for which the Lord has given the same unto
us; for they tell us in their Letter; God has given all his Gifts to every one
to profit withal: That to profit with his Gifts is to administer unto others;
That we are not the direct owners of his Gift, nor are they our propriety to
use them as we please, but all our Title to them is only this, that we are
Stewards thereof to use them as he has appointed us; and as by the right use
thereof we may expect a great reward and increase of Glory to our selves; so by
the abuse of our trust, that is, the not using of our Talent to benefit others
thereby; we shall be found unprofitable servants, and deserve both to be
deprived of the Grace we have received, and to be cast off into utter darkness
where weeping is and gnashing of teeth for ever. Thus we see they put us to the
trial of our love toward, God, by the discovery of our willingness to please
him in fulfilling the ^nown purpose of his will* They put us to the trial of
our love toward our Brethren, by the manifestation of our Resolution to
furnish them with that which may benefit them to their Edification; They put us
to the trial of our faithfulness both toward God and Man, by our behavior in
our Stewardship and obedience to him that does employ us, and our forwardness
to dispense his Gifts unto our Brethren, to whom by his appointment we are
bound to bestow them; And they put us unto the trial of our sincerity in
believing the Promises, and ^earing the Threatenings, by the sense we have of
the rewards that shall be given to those that use rightly, and that abuse their
Talent: And for all this they not only (...) before our eyes the thankfulness
which we owe unto God for the honor he has conferred upon us more then upon
others; but they put us in mind of the ways by which only we are enabled to
Glorify God here on Earth amongst men: by which we are made capable of being
glorified with himself in heaven hereafter; and by which the Justice is
maintained, which makes all the Subjects of his Kingdom through the Holiness
of their Communion, ^^^^ptible and sensible of their own and each others
happiness, and without which there w^^^^ b^ little difference between the State
of Christ, Kingdom and the Kingdom of the World. (...) concerning our
thankfulness toward God for the honor done to us by him, seeing our goodness
cannot be extended unto him. Psa. 16. 2. (for no man can be profitable unto
God, as he that is wise may be profitable unto himself, Job. 22. 2.) but only
unto the Saints that are in the Earth, and to the excellent ones in whom is all
our delight: What other or less acknowledgement can we render unto him, then
affectionately to endeavor, that the fruits of his kindness toward us may
have some reflection back again toward him, by redounding to the comfort of his
own dearest Children.

And concerning the only way by which we are enabled to glorify God on Earth,
our Savior tells us that herein his Father is glorified, that we bear much
fruit and so become his Disciples; No man can show forth the Fathers Joh. 15. 8.
Glory otherwise, then as it and he is in the Son, nor can any man be in the
Son, otherwise then by becoming his Disciple; nor can any man become his
Disciple otherwise but by following him in the way wherein he did glorify his
Father: Whence it is that the Apostle teaching us to glorify God with one mind
and mouth, Romans 15. 6, 7. does set Christ's example before us as the only rule,
bidding us receive one another as Christ also received us to the glory of God:
Now the way by which Christ received us to the glory of his Father, was no
other but by the imparting of his Fathers Graces, and the free propagation of
his goodness unto Mankind; by this means he has (as the true Vine) born much
fruit, and by this means we also shall bear much fruit, if herein we become his
Disciples; nor is there any other way on Earth opened but this to glorify God
amongst men; for all good works, without which no Glory can be given unto God,
of what kind soever, glorify him only in this, that they show forth his
virtues, and cause men to take notice of the excellency of his Nature, that
they may have cause to admire and love, and praise him in the same; and if we
do nor set our hearts entirely to work all our works in God, that he may thus
be glorified thereby we have renounced in our heart the great end of our
Creation, which is nothing else but his glory; and the only means by which that
end is attainable, are good works showed forth unto men, Mat. 5. 16. for we are
Gods workmanship created in Jesus Christ unto Good Works, which God has before
ordained that we should walk in them, that in the ages to come he might show
the exceeding Riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ
Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 7, 10. Thus then the only way to glorify God the Author of
this Talent is to improve it, by imparting unto others freely that which Christ
has freely given unto us.

Nor is there a readier way by which we are made capable of being glorified
with God hereafter, then thus to glorify him on Earth; we see the slothful
servant was deprived of glory, because he was slothful; and others were made
partakers thereof, because they were diligent and faithful in using their
Talents; and the promise is that such as are wise shall shine as the brightness
of the Firmament; and they that turn many unto Righteousness, as the Stars for
ever and ever. This then is our wisdom to win souls unto God, and turn many
unto Righteousness, and this will prove the greatest folly, and the greatest
unthankfulness that we can be guilty of, that having so great a Talent in our
hand, and so fit for such a service, we should not thereby Honor God by making
it useful to the enlargement of his Kingdom.

But above all this, there is a Law of Justice which does require this duty of
us as a debt to be paid unto all that are susceptible of the benefit thereof;
but chiefly unto those that challenge is as having a right thereunto; all that
belong to the household of Faith, have a right to all the privileges of the
house, and all the gifts and treasures pertaining to it are theirs; all things
are yours says the Apostle. 1 Cor. 3. 21. 22. because every member of the Body
has an interest in all the graces which flow from the head as conferred upon
the Body, nor does any member possess any thing for it self, but for the
whole; nor is any thing in it self, but as it stands in its place to serve
the whole, and as it belongs unto other members; for we are said to be
members one of another. So that we have a right to challenge for our use, as
our own, all the graces which another has, if we stand in need thereof, nor is
it lawful for any to refuse the Communication of any spiritual gift wherewith
he is possessed, to any that craveth it of him in the name of Christ, except he
will make himself guilty of the breach of the great and Fundamental law of the
Kingdom of Heaven, upon which the happiness of that whole State is settled; for
the happiness of the State of Christianity above all the States of the world is
this, that all the Subjects thereof are but one new Creature and Spiritual man
in Christ, that they are made and called to serve one another in Love, as he
served us, and to enjoy him in each other, as he is the same light of Truth,
and light of God in all; for the enjoyments and possessions of all other men in
all other States and Kingdoms of this World are distinct and peculiar to every
one, because some things are incommunicably proper to some more then to others,
as their lot is fallen amongst men (and except this Law in natural things were
observed, there would be nothing but endless and inextricable confusion and
strife, yea much more then now is amongst the Sons of men) But it is not so in
Spiritual things; the Spiritual man his joy is this, that others partake of all
his blessings, that others have a right in him and interest, and he in them for
all their Grace, and that he is a debtor of all that he has unto every one,
and every one are debtors of all that they have unto him; So that none can
count himself happy or complete in any thing, or ought to rest contented
within himself, without the Happiness, Perfection and contentedness of others:
Thus none can want what another has; and what God has given unto any, it is
to be offered unto all; and he that does not live by this Rule in the Church of
God, does exclude his own soul from the Communion of Saints, and makes himself
incapable of all the Felicities of Christ's Kingdom. We see then how many and
how strong the obligations are, which bind us unto this duty of Spiritual
Communication of the graces which we have received to profit withal; for if we
should not intend this, we shall discover our selves to be of all men the most
ungrateful toward God, and most unworthy of all the Honors which he has cast
upon us; We shall show our selves destitute of all love, both to God and man,
and of all faithfulness in the trust committed unto us, of all sincerity in our
Profession, and of all care either to advance Gods glory as becomes the
Disciples of Christ, or to be advanced unto glory by him, or to maintain the
happiness of our own Estate by fellowship with his members, or finally to
discharge the debt of Righteousness which we owe unto others on Gods behalf;
for God has assigned the payment of all the debts which we owe unto him, which
are the fruits of his Graces toward us, to be laid out upon the members of
Jesus Christ, that much joy and many thanksgivings from many hearts and mouths,
may redound to the glory of the Father through him. If then we should hold this
truth of God in unrighteousness, we should not only be found enemies to God
and our selves, so far as in us lies to frustrate him of his intent, and our
selves of all the honor whereunto he does design us, but opposite unto all
goodness, to suppress the brightness of his glory, to darken the comforts of
his Children, to defraud our Brethren of their just claim and expectation, and
to deprive all sorts of men of that wherein we are indebted unto them; for it
is not only our Brethren (that challenge that which is their right, of us, on
Gods behalf) to whom we owe this duty as a debt, but we owe it unto all men;
that either now, or in after ages may profit thereby, toward the advancement
of Christ's Kingdom; and that is the thing which our Brethren in the conclusion
of their Letter, press (though briefly yet thoroughly) upon us: for having
proposed Gods intention in giving his Gifts, our duty answerable thereunto, and
their demand grounded upon both they present unto us the benefits which ensue
our performance of their request, which are all the effects of the truth which
is in the Gospel, as by it self it is useful unto all sorts of persons, young
and old, Teachers and those that are taught, Godly and ungodly, Peaceable and
contentious: True Professors and those that err from the Truth, whether by
Hypocrisy, or Security, or Obstinacy; and in a word to all men, as well of this
age as of that which shall arise hereafter, all the advantages of Instruction,
Direction, correction, comfort, Reproof and conviction, tending to set forward
peace and joy, through Righteousness and Holiness in the souls of men, or
whatsoever blessing else, any shall stand in need of in their several
conditions: all this I say, we are Debtors to procure unto them, by the means
which are put in our hands to that effect; for at this time both God and Men do
call upon us to make this use of our Peculiar Talent of the word of life, in
holding it forth unto them.

If therefore we should hide our Talent, and put this candle which the Lord
has lighted among us to give light unto all that are in the house, under a
bushel, that is, if we condescend not to this their desire, we shall wrong all
the Churches; we shall rob these in particular that sue for it of what is their
due: and as much as in us lies we shall make the word of Truth ineffectual,
and show our selves adversaries to his virtue and the manifestation thereof:
which how the Lord will in the End take at our hands, I shall not need to
mention. But I shall heartily rather pray that in love to himself and to his
Truth, our spirits may be stirred up to behave our selves in the opportunity of
doing this service as shall be most answerable unto our own happiness, and the
glory and the kingdom of Christ whereunto we are called.

These are the considerations which from the nature of the Duty it self should
induce us to the performance thereof, which our Brethren in their Letter having
only touched and pointed at, I have thought good a little further thus to
enlarge, that whatever shall be undertaken in this kind, may proceed from the
right Principle and frame of heart, which will make the work acceptable unto
God and profitable unto those that go about it. For if the work be not intended
upon these grounds, and upon these alone, directly and principally without
worldly considerations and humane Respects as leading Motives, it will find but
small success, and little conduct from the Spirit of grace to give it a
furtherance, because no enterprise can have more strength then its chief Aim
and Object can give it.

And although some other Arguments of this nature and to the same effect might
be alleged, or the same might be further insisted upon, perhaps not
unprofitably; yet because these Motives are the chief to which all others may
be referred, and so evident that they cannot (as I conceive) be denied, and of
such efficacy (if laid to heart) that where they take not, none other in this
kind are like to persuade; therefore I shall not insist any further upon them,
but come to the second sort of Persuasions, which in order unto these foregoing
may perhaps add something to our zeal and resolution as it proceeds from a
mixed affection; which even good men are inclinable sometime to entertain rather
as they are men, then as they are the Children of the most High, depending
immediately upon his Will.

If we look then in the second place upon our selves as we are amongst the
Professors of the Gospel, engaged not only to maintain the credit of the
Profession, but to advance the Reformation of the Churches both at home and
abroad, and to concur with Foreign Protestants to assist the Common Cause of
Religion against the Enemies thereof, we shall find nothing more suitable to the
credit of our Profession, or more advantageous to our own and others
reformation, or more effectual in our concurrence to assist Forrainers in the
Common Cause, then the Completing of this Body of Practical Divinity will be.

The Credit of our Profession does include a twofold Notion: the one does look
at the Profession in it self, the other at us as Professors: in both these,
there is some matter of Credit to be upheld as to men. In reference to the
Profession, we are bound in conscience (seeing we believe it to be the saving
Truth of God) to make it Creditable and Honorable before all men, approving it
unto the conscience to be such as we believe it to be. And in reference to
our-selves, the good opinion others have of our sincerity, zeal and ability in
the way of the Profession, does oblige us in honesty to endeavor to the utmost
to answer their expectation, and maintain the Honor of our good name in
relation to our Religion. In these respects I say, the completing of this
Practical Body of Divinity will be of special use, as well for the honor of
the Profession, as for our credit in upholding it.

For whereas nothing does so much either scandalize the weak, or stagger the
ignorant, at the profession of the Protestant Religion, or give advantage on
the one hand unto the Papists to seduce silly souls to a superstitious worship,
as this reproach, That we are all broken to pieces among our-selves, and
divided in our sense about Religion, having no certainty in any thing: on the
other hand unto the self-conceited Libertines, to entice high minded Zelots to
the pride of singular Saintship, as this other Reproach; That we rest in
practice of forms; and being destitute of the power of Godliness, have nothing
that is spiritual in our Profession: Whereas (I say) both these Adversaries
labor different ways, and upon colorable pretenses (taken from particular
misdemeanors wrongfully applied unto the whole substance of Religion) to
discredit and blemish the profession of the truth (which we Ministers are
chiefly bound to uphold) there can be no course either more answerable to the
nature of our Calling, or so proper to stop the mouths of these Adversaries, or
so fit to settle the wavering thoughts of unstable souls, or more effectual to
vindicate the credit of the Profession from the aspersions of division, of
uncertainty, of formality, and of the want of spiritual power, then to make up
this Practical Body of Divinity. For it being composed of those many Positive
doctrines which are undeniably evident in the Scriptures, which being
understood will be clear to the conscience by their own light, which will
manifest all the true grounds of spiritual knowledge, not fantastically but
with real demonstrations, and which unanimously all Protestants will fully
acknowledge to be the substance of their Profession and Religion: I say, those
Doctrines being gathered into a full body, will stand as an uncontrollable
witness for the credit of the Truth against all these injurious reproaches.

Nor can it be imagined that in the great multitude and variety of particular
Opinions, in the manifold disputes, and inconsiderate heats of men about
matters extra-fundamental, and in the different practices of things which are
but circumstantial, a way of Peace and Unity should either be found for our
selves, or showed unto others, by any other means then by a demonstration of
our agreement in all truths and duties which are necessary for Salvation in
respect of God, and profitable for edification in respect of one another: And
this is that which our Brethren in the Latter part of their letter hint at,
when they tell us that such a body of Divinity will not only be serviceable
for Scholars, but even for Teachers, to furnish them with more useful matter
in their Sermons then now they are able to find in the books of controversy,
whereunto almost all their Learning is reduced, representing unto us the evil
which befalls most of their Churches: viz. that they are overwhelmed with
matters of Controversy: that their controversal writings are void of Piety,
full of bitterness, and no ways tending to edification: And that their young
Scholars of Divinity being trained up to this way of contentious Learning, for
want of better Teaching, prove in the course of their Ministry very often void
of all Charitableness, and strangers to peaceable Affections. Which evils by
our Pious assistance and endeavors they hope may be remedied, if we would
gather out of our Authors who handle matters of Divinity in a Practical way as
they relate to conscience; a full and sound body of saving and savory truths,
which may be put into their hands to waken them unto Righteousness. For they
conceive not amiss that by Gods blessing such an Instrument of knowledge and
way of Teaching which it will produce, may not only season their spirits with
meek and humble thoughts concerning themselves, and with loving, kind and
merciful affections toward their Neighbors (which will make them peaceable)
but may work upon them the power of Godliness, when they shall perceive how the
Theoretical and necessary Truths of Faith which they make now matters of
strife, and have disregarded as to their true usefulness, ought to be applied
unto their own and other men's consciences, to teach them to walk with God in
all their ways.

And indeed this is a sad matter, which not only those Churches groan under,
but all the rest more or less, have cause to bemoan: That because many in the
Ministry do spend their strength and wit upon needless and curious
dispensations about matters of private opinion, rather then upon the
application of known and necessary Doctrines unto conscience, because these
disputations are agitated with more provocation to heat and animosity, then to
regular and modest searches after the way to resolve doubts impartially; and
because the smallest differences of opinions beget ordinarily the extremest
differences of affections, when men study no Rules of moderation in respect of
Passions, or of being wise to Sobriety in respect of contemplations, or of
mutual forbearance in respect of actions (all which are things if not hated,
yet suspected, slighted and neglected almost every where in this age) I say
because these disorders (which like weeds in a Garden not weeded, overgrow the
Church) have taken place almost every where; it is very doleful to see, that
the main and great truths of the Profession are extremely neglected and not at
all Cultivated; and that by this means, the adversaries (who lie in wait to
deceive the simple, and watch to discredit our Religion) do get all the
advantages which almost they can desire, to bring their ends to pass upon us,
and disrespect upon our Profession; for when the frames of matters are
discomposed, as now they are in all the Churches (by reason of the alterations
which are brought upon the States of the world:) it is no great difficulty for
cunning men, to work Sinister impressions, and thoughts of contempt against our
Profession, upon weak Spirits, who know not the substance and true grounds of
our Religion; but look only (as most men do) superficially upon the outward
appearance, and the worst side of other men's behaviors and failings.

For these causes, if we have any sense of Honor for the Truth, and if we have
any desire as in conscience we are bound to have, to maintain the Credit of our
Religion, and to free it from the occasions of all these prejudices, we should
set our selves earnestly to hold forth, upon the Common and undeniable grounds
of Truth, the substantial Excellency of the Doctrine of Piety, which by the
making up of this Practical Body of Divinity may be done, and by none other way
so effectually.

As for our own credit amongst our brethren in reference to the Profession, if
we study not to maintain it in Gods way, by the Propagation of the Truth
wherewith we are entrusted, certainly God will blast it more then ever it has
been raised; Nor can we expect that any thing will uphold our Reputation in
Gods way, amongst our Brethren, so much, as the satisfaction which they expect,
and we ought to give unto them in this their desire; for herein they put us
unto the real proof of our sincerity, whether or no we are willing to do any
thing for the Faith, and for them; and if in this we fail them, we shall
deserve to lose our Credit with them, and that most justly.

The Ministers of the Churches of Great Brittane have always been esteemed by
the rest of the reformed Protestants, to be sound in judgment, learned in the
way of Piety, and zealous in the practice thereof, moderate in their
affections, and discreet in their writings against Dissentors: Therefore in the
work of reconciliation between the Lutherans and the Reformed Churches, they
were never excepted against by either side, but rather accepted as Mediators of
the difference by both sides, but chiefly by the side which is best reformed,
whose confidence toward us, and esteem of us is clearly manifested by the
tenor of this letter which has been written to us about the body of Practical
Divinity; for therein with a great deal of modesty and humility, they not only
defer a great deal of respect unto the worth that God has put upon us, but
they invite us to receive the Honor of being their leaders to Godliness, and
their Teachers unto after ages; and although we may not without presumption,
think the better of our selves, because others prefer us in Honor to
themselves, or have any high thoughts of our own sufficiency (for who is
sufficient for such things? and Christ we know is the only leader and teacher)
because our Brethren esteem highly of us by submission unto the Grace of God in
us; yet if there be any truth of generosity in our Spirits, or any resentment
of duty toward such as love us in the Lord, we cannot be insensible of so
mighty a provocation as this unto love and good works, but with all zeal, in
true Humility, giving glory unto God, we are bound to the utmost of our
abilities to impart our selves unto them: not so much that they may not seem
deceived in us, and we found unworthy of the Honor given to us; but that the
free gift of Grace may be exalted in the Communion of Saints, and God alone
glorified thereby. Even amongst moral men it is true, that Commendations add
life unto virtue; and that as the best things in their nature are most
Communicable; so it is one of the chiefest delights of the best natures to
Communicate the same, not so much to gain praise, as to do that which is good
in it self, and praiseworthy; which is the contentment of a virtuous
disposition; and if this is true in moral dispositions, how much more ought it
to be in those that are Spiritual: if therefore there be any virtue, if there
be any praise, let us think not only how to make good the esteem which they
have of us, but rather to do that which is good and commendable, as it is
acceptable unto God and approved of men; for upon this ground the Apostle,
Phil. 4. 8. does recommend unto our care and study, all things that are true,
all things that are honest, all things that are just, all things that are pure,
all things that are lovely, and all things that are of good report; and that in
respect of virtue, and in respect of praise: And if in this work which we are
now exhorting to be undertaken, all these Motives concur at once, so fully and
so eminently as in nothing more; and that not in a private but in a public
respect; then it follows, that if there be any virtue or sense of praise to
be regarded in order to the holy profession, which only is our glory, that we
will not suffer our Reputation to fall to the ground by a careless neglect of
so manifest a duty, wherein our credit not only is so deeply engaged, but our
Religion it self extremely concerned: So that if upon these motives and
considerations, this business should not at all be effected, it would not only
be an Argument of a most brutish insensibility and stupidity in us toward that
which is true honor; but it would clearly evince the unsoundnesse of our
hearts in the Profession it self, when we should appear so careless of
maintaining and propagating the truth thereof, that even with the loss of our
reputation, and the loss of the love of those that have sued to us for this
duty, we should suffer it to be blasted and lie under contempt, when it is in
our power to Vindicate, both it and our selves from reproaches.

And thus much concerning the point of reputation; The next Motive in this kind
is the advancement of the Reformation of the Churches, both at home and abroad;
a thing which does mainly concern us, a thing whereunto we are deeply engaged,
and a thing whereunto this work will be very conducible; for as concerning the
Churches abroad; that it will be a profitable instrument in their hand, to set
forward the Reformation which they stand in need of, we can have no greater
proof then their own Confession in their Letter; For this is the very ground
why they make it their suite unto us, that such a Body of Divinity may be
compiled, because they expect from it and by it; an effectual means to take
away the chief causes of their Distractions and Disorders in Spiritual things.
And because our own Disorders in some kind here at home, in stead of being
Reformed, have increased of late, and do proceed from the same diseases which
have begotten theirs; therefore in procuring a Remedy for our selves, we may
hope to become helpful unto them also.

Now that this Body of Practical Divinity will be very useful to this purpose,
may be gathered from the nature of our disease, and the property of the cure to
Remedy the same.

The diseases which afflict us, proceed from the ignorance and distempers of
our mind in things pertaining to God, and from the unrulinesse of walking in
things pertaing to Men: This ignorance in the understanding, and distemper in
the will, and unrulinesse in the outward man, is fomented by the slight and
cunning craftiness of some men of corrupt minds, who being reprobate concerning
the Faith (as not adhereing to the Testimony of Jesus in the Word, which is the
rule thereof) and having taken up either a Superstitious and Traditional
formality, or a singular and self-conceited Spirituality of worship and of
godliness, they deny the power and resist the truth of both, by taking away
the grounds, and making void the Common Profession of Christianity.

These men both superstitiously and singularly affected, seeking to get
followers unto their several ways and opinions, agree to wast the Churches,
and to blast with a pestilent breath all that is not conformable to their
practice, if they can find any small color for raising Calumnies against it;
and thus they fill the Churches with disputes, and the heads of ignorant people
with profane and vain bablings, which daily increase unto more ungodliness:
For by this means scandals are multiplied, the unity of the Spirit dissolved,
the bonds of peace neglected, factions set on foot and continued with
animosity, wherein the weaker sort as Children are tossed too and fro, and
carried about with every wind of Doctrine, till they lose their hold of all
Principles, and then give themselves over to Atheism.

This is the nature of our diseases both at home and abroad; therefore the
Remedy for both will be the same, which can be none other but to this effect.

First, that the faithful Ministers and Professors of the Gospel, both there
and here, should stand fast together in one Spirit and one mind; striving
together in one way for the faith of the Gospel, and in nothing terrified by
their adversaries.

Secondly, that they should both with one consent agree upon some profitable
way of handling necessary and useful Controversies, and of shunning profane and
vain bablings, and the contradiction of Science falsely so called.

Thirdly, that we and they should endeavor by all possible means to fight
against our spiritual adversaries with the sword of the Spirit, which is the
Word of God: holding out unto the World the same form of sound words, and
dividing the Doctrine of Truth rightly in one and the same way of preaching and
handling the Scriptures to advance godliness, as it becomes workmen that need
not to be ashamed.

And to enable us all jointly to endeavor these things; I am very confident
that next unto the graces of the Spirit, and the infallible word of truth,
delivered unto us in the Scriptures (which are the two things which God has
Covenanted to continue with the Ministry unto the end of the World, Isai. 49.
21.) I say next unto these two, I am confident that no means can be used to
enable us unto that endeavor more fitly, and with Gods ordinary blessing more
successfully, then this Body of Practical Divinity, if it were compiled and
communicated in English to our men at home, and in Latin to those that are
abroad.

For the three parts of this Body, if they were thoroughly and fully handled (as
from our Authors they may be) will meet directly and in a right order with the
three main and Original causes of our disorderlinesse and distracted condition,
to show the Spiritual ways of Reforming the same, wherein if we shall agree to
walk unanimously, as no doubt we will, we may undoubtedly also believe, thar by
this Union we shall to all our adversaries become not only invincible but
irresistible to work the overthrow of Satan's Kingdom. And this shall suffice
also concerning this point of Reformation, which is to be advanced by this
means: and which the faithful Ministry of this Land is bound to endeavor by
the Tenor of their solemn League and Covenant in the presence of God, who has
put the means of this in our hand to be effected, and now calls upon us to
make use of the same.

The last thing which I mentioned, whereunto we are engaged, and whereunto this
Body of Divinity will be effectual, is to concur with Foreign Protestants in
the Common cause of Religion, and to assist them against the Common Enemies
thereof. This Concurrence and assistance is an engagement that does lie closer
to us then I find it apprehended by many: Therefore I shall endeavor to
represent unto those that are Conscionable in matters of public concernment,
not so much what help may be given to the cause by this means, for that may be
clearly seen by what is said already, but what the obligation is which should
make us Concur with Foreign Protestants to uphold the profession of the cause.

As con cerning the assistance which this work will yield unto the Cause, if we
will add any thing to that which has been said already concerning the Credit
of the Profession, which it will help to uphold, and concerning the Reformation
of Disorders, which it will help to take away, we may consider two things.

First, What properly the common Cause is.

Secondly, What it is that weakens our hands in prosecuting of it.

If the Common Cause of Protestants be made any thing else then the Propagating
of the light of the Gospel, which is attested in the Scriptures, that the
Kingdom and life of Jesus Christ may take place in the souls of all men, to the
Glory of God the Father, by the graces of his Spirit, it is foully mistaken.

For all that we have protested for in former time against Popery, is this,
that we will not be led by the dictates of other men, to believe and practice
upon implicit faith and blind obedience what they prescribe to us in matters of
Religion, but that in such matters we will knowingly rely only upon the Word
of God revealed in the holy Scriptures, to follow the dictates thereof.

And as we are bound still to continue this Profession against Popery on the
one hand; so in these distracted times especially, we are obliged to add a
further Protestation to clear the truth of our profession on the other hand,
which is this, that as we think it not lawful for us to give up our faith to
other men, so we conceive it neither acceptable to God, nor safe for us to be
led by the dictates of our own imaginations alone to believe and practice
singularly and by our selves, whatever in matters of Religion we shall in our
own private conceit fancy to be right; but that we will rationally entertain
and handle the word of God in the holy Scriptures, for the understanding and
practicing of all Religious Truths offered and duties prescribed unto us
therein: that is to say, that we will not interpret the Scriptures in matter of
outward duty and performance, contrary to the Common grounds of reason and
righteous order amongst men; and in matters of inward relation toward God,
that we will be wise unto Sobriety, conceiving that to be the truth of the
Spirit, which is most answerable to the common Principles of the Faith of all
ages, and to the Spiritual state of holy Communion which Jesus Christ has
settled in the new Covenant between God and all his Members.

The common Cause of Protestants has these four main interests in
Christianity, by which it upholdeth the truth thereof, and thereby is
distinguishable from all other Professions.

The First is, The interest of Scripture knowledge.

The Second is, The interest of the life of the Spirit.

The Third is, The interest of orderly walking in all Gods Ordinances, Natural
and Spiritual.

The Fourth is, The interest of the Communion of Churches in reference to
mutual edification in these forenamed matters.

These interests being all joined and professedly followed (that is, openly
owned without offense as it becomes the Disciples of Christ) make up the true
Protestant Cause, that is, the profession of Christianity: And if any one of
these be not followed, the Cause is so far deserted, as it is neglected.

By Scripture knowledge (which is the Fundamental Rule and Seed of the
Profession of Christianity) Protestants were begotten and are distinguished
from Papists.

By the life of the Spirit (which is the heart and soul of the profession of
Christianity) Protestants do grow up in Christ who is their head, till they
shall come to a perfect man: and are distinguished from Socinians and all such
as turn Christianity into a Moral profession of a new kind of Philosophy, which
is refined and entertained upon revealed Principles, but in effect nothing
besides or above humane Reasoning.

By the orderly walking in all Gods Ordinances (which is the visible body of
the profession of Christianity) Protestants stand firm in the truth, to bear
witness thereof unto the world, and are distinguished from all Libertines that
pretend to be so spiritual as to be above all Ordinances.

And by the Communion of Churches (which is the activity of this visible body)
Protestants are strengthened in their growth and testimony, made invincible
against their adversaries, made helpful to each other, and the cause, and
distinguished from all those that pretend to the singularity of Saintship in
their several ways by themselves alone, with the condemnation of such as go not
along with them.

These being the true interests of this Cause as it is subordinate unto
Christianity, and Christianity being taken up upon none other ground but as it
is revealed in the holy Scriptures, nor maintained to any other End, but to
manifest the life of Jesus Christ by his kingdom unto the world, it is clear
that the whole observation of outward Ordinances and the practice of mutual
Communion, which are the two latter interests of the Cause, must rise from the
first, and rest in the second of those which are the former: and whatsoever
designs, practices, negotiations and undertakings are said to be for
Christianity or the Protestant Religion (which are all one) and do not attend
to advance directly, either Scripture, knowledge or the life of the Spirit, or
the walking under Ordinances, or the Communion of Churches, or do tend
seemingly to advance any one of these without a reference to all the rest, they
are to be judged false, deceitful and destructive to the cause and truth of
Christianity.

Therefore we ought to acknowledge none to be a servant to the Cause of Christ
(that is a true Protestant) but he who walks by this Rule of the new
creature; and upon such be peace and upon the Israel of God.

As for me; I shall by Gods grace never entertain any designs and practices,
or favor any motions and pretenses which are undertaken and prosecuted with
subtilty or with a strong hand against the persons of a party disagreeing from
judgment, upon this ground because they favor not my way; but I shall make
the prosecution of their forenamed interests, as by spiritual means and ways
they are approveable to the conscience of every rational man, the open and
only rule of my walking in this Cause. And if any man shall find me straying
from this path, and show me that I am not in it, he will oblige me to thank him
for converting a Sinner from the error of his Way.

Hitherto I have given you my sense of the Common Cause of Protestants; Now I
shall add a word or two concerning that which I suppose does weaken our hands
in prosecuting of it: And that is partly an ordinary mistake; partly an
universal neglect of Duty in the Actors for it.

The mistake is in two things.

First, That most meaning well to the Protestant Cause, as they do understand
it, act all rather against the adversaries thereof then for the Cause it self.

Secondly, That when they act so, they take up no rule of Reason and Moderation
in dealing with adversaries for their good, or upon grounds of Justice, but
give way to Passion and Hatred; and all that is imagined to be hurtful to them,
is supposed to be advantageous to themselves: both which are courses altogether
preposterous unto Christianity. For the true way of advancing Christianity is
not destructive but edificative: that is, does not intend to overthrow and
build at leisure afterward, as the Method of some is: but it does intend to
build first Christ's kingdom, that thereby it may overthrow the frame of Satan's
Policy: for it holds forth the word of life and truth, that by the
manifestation of light it may dispell error and darkness; And when this is
done, then it proceeds to the condemnation of the ways of unrighteousness:
first it brings our thoughts unto the obedience of Christ, that then every
strong Hold of Satan, and every imagination and high thing which exalts it
self against the knowledge of God may be cast down: for except we bring Christ
with us, and set him a working upon the Spirits of men that are in the snares
of Satan, and led captive at his pleasure, we shall never be able to bind the
strong man that has possession of their souls: and far less shall we be able
to spoil him of his goods, which are the lusts and the inclinations of the
flesh, whereby he does act self will in them, that they may not be subject to
the will of God.

The way then of Christianity is more directly Positive then Negative; and
therefore it is a mistake to think that the refuting and opposing of
adversaries is the main business which ought to be prosecuted in these times:
but a far greater mistake it is, to think that by making the ways of our
adversaries odious, or by vexing their persons, and prejudging them any way,
(by hook or crook as we use to say) in the freedom and conveniences of
professing their Tenets, we shall profit our Cause, or gain much upon or
against them. No surely: for this is a far greater Mistake then the other; and
yet this is the ordinary practice which is most commonly followed by those who
are zealous for the Cause. But this way cannot porsibly prove successful,
because it does quite mistake the interest of Christianity, which is nothing
else but by the knowledge of the Scriptures and the life of the Spirit to bring
men to walk orderly before God and men, and live in the Communion which the
Members of Christ owe to each other. And if we aim not at this even toward our
Adversaries to bring them hereunto, we deal not with them as Christians ought
to do, but forsake our profession. Now it is neither the convincing them of
their particular Errors without further instruction, nor the laying open of
their shame, nor the vexing of their Spirits by troubling their persons, or
stoping their professions that will bring them to any of these holy duties
which uphold the truth of Christianity, but this way of dealing will rather set
them further off in their Affections, both from the love of the truth and from
us: so that when we shall offer them means tending directly to that which is
truly their way to life, they will reject the same, only because they come
from that hand which has made it self utterly hateful unto them.

These mistakes weaken the Cause greatly; but the universal neglect which is in
Two main things, does it far more.

The First is, The neglect of duty in using spiritual means, and in a spiritual
way toward Dissenters.

The Second is, The neglect of brotherly Communion in spiritual things, which
is the last point of the main interest of the Cause.

The first neglect which is of the means suitable to the prosecution of the
Cause does proceed from the forenamed mistakes, which indeed make some
Professors manage Protestancy as a State Religion, rather then a true
profession of Christianity: and so they take their strength (chiefly against
Dissenters) from State-Authority and practices subordinate thereunto in a
worldly way of Policy rather then from the work of God and the work of the
Spirit. And because many of the active men who have parts, and so love to
appear in the Front and to take matters upon them, have been biased this way,
some for one, some for another interest of State, making themselves and all
matters of Religion subservient thereunto: therefore it has pleased God to
befool them in their Counsels, and to suffer Statan to set Instruments awork
who have out acted them in all these ways: but if they had walked by Faith in
simplicity and godly sincerity, according to the Rules of the Gospel within
their own Sphere, and not according to worldly wisdom; if they had in a cause
of Christianity made use of none other means but of those which Christ has
used and sanctified unto them, and in that way by which he and his Apostles
have showed us they should be used, they should not have miscarried as they
have done, by trusting to the arm of flesh, nor could Satan either have
overreached them in their Counsels, or stopped them in their proceedings which
now he has been able to do, because he is of old Master of the Trade of policy
and power, which they of late as young Prentices were beginning to take up; and
this is so undeniably evident to any that will trace Public proceedings in
some actors, and compare them with the Rules of Christianity, that I am (for my
Brethrens sake) ashamed to speak of it any more: and shall therefore turn my
back upon particulars to cover them with silence as my fathers nakedness, nor
shall I mention any more of this neglect in the general, lest I should seem
either to reproach those with their failings, who by admonition may be
reclaimed from the error of their way, or to furnish the adversaries with
matter of contempt against the Cause, by reason of our frailties who manage
the same.

The other neglect which is of Brotherly Communion in Spiritual matters, both
amongst our selves at home and toward the Churches abroad, is of all others the
greatest hinderance to the Cause, and obstruction to the ways of
Gospel-edification. For if brotherly Communion were not neglected, all the
former mistakes and neglects might be remedied by common advice: but because it
is not at all laid to heart, no remedy can either be applied, or being offered
become effectual. For now although some can discern the causes of our miseries,
and know where the Remedy thereof is to be found, and how to be made use of;
yet because our spiritual gifts are like dead men's bones scattered at the
graves mouth, dis-joynted, withered, buried within every man's particular breast,
without life and without coherence for the actions of life: therefore we are
unserviceable one to another, nor can there be any common Cure applied to
common Diseases. For as the body of the Church cannot otherwise be edisied then
by it self through love, when every joint supplyeth according to the effectual
working in the measure of every part, that which makes the increase of the
body: so the evils and distempers of the parts, which are destructive to the
whole, cannot otherwise be taken away, but by the spiritual communion of gifts,
and the supply of Graces from one member to another. For which cause I have
made it my work for these many years to solicit the performance of this duty,
and continue still in so doing where ever I can get any opportunity to
represent the necessity thereof. And although my earnest and constant
Solicitations have not been so effectual as I could wish, yet I must bless God
that they have not been altogether without effect; for although there is not
much appearing outwardly, yet some grounds are laid which I am confident the
gates of hell will never be able to shake.

It cannot be denied but that most men are yet full of their own counsels, and
therefore consider not what is suggested or may be suggested by others; most
men are full of their own strength; and many of those that preach self-denial
unto others, practice in spiritual matters least of it themselves, and
therefore they look not out for mutual supply of strength from the brotherly
communion of Graces; but all men almost do please themselves in their own way,
so that they regard no man furtherthen he does come up and follow the way of
their particular choosing, because the Apostolical Rule and practice that being
free from all, we should become servants unto all, 1 Cor. 9. 19. is for the
most part not at all regarded. I say it cannot be denied, but that for the most
part as yet things are so; But when he who is now in action, shall have
accomplished to scatter the Holy People, Dan. 12. 17. so that none of that
strength which Worldly-wise men have hitherto put their confidence in, shall be
either shut up or left any more with them; Deuteronomy. 32. 36. then their care will
be opened to believe these Suggestions, and acknowledge this to be a truth,
that Christ is their Rock so far as they depend upon him, and act jointly in
his way, and no further. And if once this principle be entertained and made a
Maxim to walk by in every thing, they will find that the Lord will suddenly
appear as Judge for his People, and speedily repent him for his Servants. But
till we leave all the confidences which by our own devices we have chosen to
our selves, and till we have freed our spirits from the delusions and the
jealousies which we have framed unto our selves, to sanctify the Lord alone in
our hearts, and to make him our confidence and our fear by walking in his way,
we cannot look for any prosperity, or expect that he should appear amongst us.

Now his way is the way of brotherly and holy Communion, to maintain the
knowledge of his truth in the Scriptures, the life of his Spirit in the
Covenant, and the observation of his Ordinances in the Church; And whatsoever
Counsel we follow, or course we take which does not lead us to the one End in
this way, will never bring any comfort with it; And I may freely say, Because
this Counsel and course has not only been neglected by all, but flighted and
despised by some, therefore the Lord has not as yet appeared amongst us.

Thus we have seen what properly the Pro^^stant Cause is, and what it is that
weakens our hands in prosecuting the same. Now if we look back upon the Body of
Practical Divinity which has been delineated, to consider what assistance and
help we may give thereby unto the Protestant Cause, in case we shall desire to
concur with the foreign Churches of Christ therein, we shall find that it shall
prove one of the most profitable instruments that can be made use of, to
maintain all the parts and interests of the Cause, and that hardly any thing
can be set on foot, that will be more serviceable both to certify the mistakes
which make us miscarry in our undertakings for Christianity, and to set us upon
the duties, without which the way of our Profession cannot successfully be
prosecuted.

For if you reflect upon the interests of the Cause, and take notice what
fitness this Engine will have to maintain the same; you shall perceive, that
both by the properties of the matter and form thereof, and by the application
of the whole to the use of holy Communion, it will be most advantageous to
uphold the Profession of our Religion:

For first, The matter thereof will be nothing else but the complete and full
substance of all those Doctrines which are substantial unto Christianity, as
being necessary and useful to advance Scripture knowledge, to hold forth the
life of the Spirit, and to direct all men in the observation of divine
Ordinances, and in the ways of their several Vocations to walk worthy of God,
which are the only things to be intended in our Profession, if we do mind
Christanity for it self.

Secondly, The form of this Engin^ ^^y be made such a disposition of those
Doctrines, as will show forth the true (...) of handling Scriptural Truths
Positively, which is to infer from known and undoubted Principles, by the
Evidence and Demonstration of the Spirit in matters known to the conscience,
clear and undeniably conclusions, avoiding all the proposterious ways of
School and Philosophical Disputations, which for the most part proceeding from
the pride and affectation of wit and learning, be get vain janglings and humane
passions, multiply mistakes, and propagate impicty in the minds of those that
are mainly taken therewith, and addicted thereunto.

Thirdly, This whole Body of Divinity being made up as it ought to be, and for
the end for which it is desired, will not only be a witness of the union of
the Spirits of all Protestant Ministers in the same saving Truth, against the
reproach of a Fundamental Division which is said to be amongst them; but it
will be a Center of Concurrence, a subject of brotherly Correspondency, and a
means of mutual Communion in the work of the Gospel, by which all hands will be
strengthened, and the hearts of those that faint now by reason of their
solitary walking, will be encouraged them to proceed with cheerfulness, by
reason of the conjunction of so great a help from all their brethren.

And truly besides the assistance and support which the truth it self will
receive from, this Work, by being published and held forth in that wherein all
the witnesses thereof do agree, (which is one of the greatest helps that can be
given to it in these times, of disagreement, and therefore should most
effectually oblige our consciences to intend it) the design of endeavoring a
concurrence by this means with our Brethren, to give them encouragement to
stand last in the defense of the Cause, is extremely necessary, and therefore
also to our consciences every way binding and obligatory, so far as we desire
them prosperity in the Cause?

And here I mean not our brethren only that are abroad, but even those that are
at home also, whose ca^^ is not yet set^^^^; and who knows how full of
Distraction and Desolation it may be hereafter, (...) God in mercy prevent it
not.

For if any will observe into how many pieces we are fallen; what the changes,
breaches, and Dissolutions are which are fallen and may fall upon us; what the
effects are which this has brought forth amongst us, and how a liberty to all,
to do without control whatsoever every one pleases, though never so
offensive, is sprung up; and what the way of force (if there be a necessity
still to stand under it) may further bring to pass; If I say we will observe
this, which is apparent to all, we may easily gather, that nothing will be more
useful and serviceable to give a testimony of the truth unto the World, and to
strengthen each others hearts and hands by the unity of the Spirit in that
testimony, then this Work will be. For in the time of our Dissipation this may
hopefully become a pillar to uphold the Truth, and therein a monument of our
conjunction, an instrument of our concurrence in the Gospel, and by Gods
blessing in the End, a means to revive and restore the witnesses to their
heavenly splendour and authority: And if there were nothing else but this (which
is clearly our own special Interest) yet this alone should waken up to a full
Resolution to undertake this business with all speed and diligence; chiefly
because the adversaries make no delay to accomplish their Designs against the
ways of Righteousness, which we are bound withal our might to maintain. But
besides this necessity of joining our spirits to a corresponding in the Truth
amongst our selves against common adversaries, and the unlikelihood to be able
to do it any other way, or any way so effectually and so easily as by this
means: there is another strong Obligation lying upon us in respect of Foreign
Protestants t^ ^^^cur with them in the same Cause.

I said in the beginning of the last parc^^ this Discourse that our engagement
to a concurrence with Foreign Protestants in the common Cause of Religion, does
lie closer upon us then I find it apprehended by many: I shall now endeavor
to make this apparent by representing two things which ought sadly to be laid
to heart, and are undenyably manifest in the eyes of all the world.

The one is concerning Gods judgments against those that have neglected the
common Cause of Protestants.

The other is concerning our own Declarations and Oaths strictly obliging us
to mind the same.

For look we upon the heavy hand of God how it has overtaken those that have
neglected the state of Foreign Churches, we shall see that because the late
King and his persecuting Prelates did not mind the true interest of the
Protestant Cause, which is the Gospel, because they did not endeavor to help
the Lord against the mighty, that is, to protect the Churches abroad by those
means which they had in their hands, and were answerable to the light of the
truth whereof they made profession, and because the way of their Policy did
lead them rather to fide with the common adversaries for Self ends to betray
the Cause, rather then to uphold it, therefore these public Calamities have
justly overtaken them and executed the vengeance of God upon them, that they
who sought themselves only, without respect unto God and their brethren, should
utterly lose themselves without recovery, whiles God did find out a way to
rescue his Churches (which they deserted) from the destruction which the
Enemies designed against them.

I allege this concerning the late King and his violent Prelates, as to me one
of the main visible causes of the Judgments of God upon them, for which I
conceive they have been principally cast off; namely because their betraying of
the truth of the Protestant Cause was the great sin for which Christ had a
quarrel with them; both as Hypocrites, who pretending to stand for the
Protestant Cause did undermine it, and despised the low condition of the
Churches abroad; and as Enemies to the Gospel, who to suppress the light
thereof then breaking forth, did persecute those most who did most sincerely
profess and practice Godliness at home. These sins have cause Christ to fall
with his iron Rod upon them to dash them to pieces, as we have seen before our
eyes, because herein their way was Diametrically opposite unto his kingdom, and
therefore their sin immediately committed against himself, whereas their others
sins and designs might have a more direct Relation unto the state of the
Nation, for which also the power of the Nation has been justly made use of to
overthrow them. For seeing in the great battle which now is a fighting between
Christ and his Saints on the one side, and the Beast and the Kings of the Earth
on the other side, the powers both of Heaven and Earth, that is, both of the
spirits of men, and of the frames of States must be set a work to oppose each
other respectively in their contradictory Properties: it is not possible that
any visible power amongst men can remain unshaken, And whatever is not
subordinate unto the power which is given unto Christ both in Heaven and Earth,
must be so shaken, as to be removed and abolished for ever both out of Heaven
and earth; hence it is that their power which they employed not for Christ, but
against him, is justly brought to naught, and brought to naught before all
others; because it did strike more at the root of the Churches standing, and
did more deceitfully oppose the breaking forth of the Light of the Truth then
any other Enemies whatsoever.

Now they did strike at the root and did more deceitfully oppose then others,
because they were entrusted with more Fundamental truth and more light then
others were, and had more abilities every way to uphold the Cause better then
others had, and because the Churches did rely more confidently upon them and
their assistance then upon others: but the truth and the light wherewith they
were entrusted, they held in unrighteousness: and the confidence which was cast
upon them, and which they were willing to seem to answer, they betrayed utterly
into the Enemies hands: chiefly then when Signor Con and Banzani negotiated the
Papal designs with them amongst us.

This I observe with grief for the guilt which they brought upon themselves,
and not out of any personal hatred against the men: for none of them ever
disobliged me otherwise then in opposing the Protestant Cause, and by
neglecting the Opportunities which I was instrumental to offer unto some of
them, whereby the Gospel might have been advanced, if they had been so happy as
to have made use thereof. But they regarded not the affliction of Joseph, and
therefore now they are gone captive with the first that are gone into
captivity, Amos 6. 7. And the Justice of God upon them ought to be observed to
his Glory, that others may fear, and that we our selves may be ware of falling
under the same condemnation: for now the same duty is required of us which then
was incumbent upon them, and that as solemnly if not more strictly then ever,
they were obliged them unto: for we have condemned them for that which they did
neglect, and have bound our selves with solemn Remonstrance, and a sacred Oath
to mind the common Interests of Protestants which they so sinfully neglected;
we then having judged them to be unfaithful in the Cause of God, and engaged
our selves to mend their fault, if ever God should put us in a capacity so to
do, if now when we are in that capacity, we should neglect this duty, we shall
deserve a heavier judgment then they are fallen under, if we be found guilty
of the same neglect.

The solemn Remonstrance in the name of the state of the Kingdom published,
December. 1641 before the troubles began, does declare the whole state obliged,
and consequently every faithful subject therein, according to his place, to
labor by all offices of friendship to unite their foreign Churches with us in
the same cause, and to seek their liberty, and prosperity, as bound thereunto
by charity to them, and by wisdom for our own good, for by this means, our own
strength shall be increased, and by a mutual concurrence to the same common
End, we shall be able to procure the good of the whole Body of the Protestant
Profession. Here the State is engaged to mind the cause of the Churches abroad,
and to procure the good of the whole Protestant Profession. The cause of the
Churches is not a mere worldly interest, but a spiritual cause; and the main
good of the whole Protestant Profession, is not a worldly concernment, but a
Gospel perfection by the unity of the spirit to build up one another in love;
if this good can be procured to the whole Profession, nothing will be wanting
to their safety and prosperity: But if this good be not sought after and
endeavored, what every else may be intended, will not much avail the main of
their prosperity. Now to bring this to pass, and to unite them in a true
Gospel interest with us, nothing can be more directly subservient then this
design to gratify their desires of obtaining such a Body of Practical Divinity
from us. And to confirm this, and bind it strongly upon our conscience, the
solemn League and Covenant between God and the Nations, does engage deeply all
those that took that Oath, to desire affectionately and endeavor sincerely,
that the success of our proceedings may be deliverance and safty to all Gods
people, and an encouragement to other Christian Churches groaning under, or in
danger of the yoke of Antichristian Tyranny, to join with us in the same or
like Association and Covenant, to the glory of God, enlargement of the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ, and the Peace and Tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms and
Commonwealths. These are deep professions, as made in the presence of God, and
therefore ought to be so much the more conscionably minded.

Of the Third.
How the Work may be effected and imparted unto those that have sued for it.
TO procure the compilement of this Body of Practical Divinity, the way is
already chalked out unto us, and was agreed upon by some of our most able and
godly Ministers, who before these Troubles, did offer themselves unto the Work,
and engaged to take their Taks to be elaborated under the direction of Doctor
Usher, the Primate of Armach, who then was in a powerful and plentiful
condition, and likely to have undertaken the direction of the business. As for
the way, how the matter was deserred unto him, it may be seen by the adjoined
Letter, which in the year 1633. was sent him: nor did any thing stop the
proceeding of the Work, before our late troubles began in Ireland and England,
but the want of a complete Platform, and some other contrivances which were
referred to the Primat to effect: but since the troubles both here and in
Ireland have unsettled all men so, that although there had been a Platform
drawn up, yet few or none could have performed any thing in the Tasks which
they might have taken; therefore the Work has been hitherto interrupted. But
seeing now we are in some hope that the Lord will be merciful to us, and remove
the causes of future Distractions, we may also expect that there will be
faithful and able Agents found to undertake this Work, which will be so useful
for all the Churches; and to bring it about, the way may be this.

First, Let either this, or some other Platform be held forth, that such as
will choose Tasks, may know what to pitch upon.

Then let two hands be chosen as Directors, to whom all the Tasks when they
shall be perfected may be brought in; that they may according to the Platform
which they shall think fittest to be followed, set every piece in its own
place, and join every limme of the Body to its Neighbor, till it be completed
and fitted for the Press.

When the Directors of the Work are chosen, let everyone who does choose a
Task, be obliged to notify his Undertaking to one of them, that they may know
what the Tasks are which are in hand, and by whom undertaken, that if all which
is to be perfected has not found a peculiar Workman, some body may be sought
out and engaged to become the Undertaker for that which shall be wanting; and
in case two should take the same Work in hand unknown to one another, the
Directors may give them notice thereof, and move them to divide their Work
between them, that it may be done with more expedition, or incline one of them
to take some other Task in hand, which perhaps has no Undertaker.

An Agent also might be thought upon the residing in London, to whom from all
Parts, and by whom to all Parts, the Letters should be addressed, which must be
written to or from the Undertakers, or to and from the Directors; and his
charges should be born, and by him the Tasks when they are completed, should
be first sent, and then conveyed unto the Directors carefully that they may not
miscarry.

The Work being effected, the way to impart it unto Foreign Churches, is no
more but to get it Translated into Latin, and Printed, after that it is
Printed in English, which the Company of Stationers will greedily take in hand.
as a Book which will yield great and ready profit: and if there should be any
difficulty in the printing of the Latin Copy in these Parts, because our
Stationers perhaps will not readily venture upon a Book which will have no
great vent here (as it it not likely the Latin Copy will have, when the
English is already extant) then means may be used toward some Foreign
Stationer at Geneva, or elsewhere, who will not only Print it, but be induced
to contract with the Translators, to buy the Copy from them, because the Book
will sell no less abroad in Latin, then it will do at home in English; that
is, exceedingly.

The Copy of a Letter which was written by several Godly Ministers, Undertakers
in this Work of compiling a Body of Practical Divinity, to Doctor usher the
Primat of Armach in Ireland.
MOst Reverend Father in God, Grace and Peace, with all due and dutiful
Respects promised: If we shall seem bold in apprehending this opportunity of
writing by this worthy Knight; yet we are confident that the important Cause
moving us, will excuse us, and procure not only our pardon, but also its
approbation of your incomparable benignity and love to the Churches of Christ.
And although it were too great inconsiderateness in us to imagine, that either
your vigilant intelligence sitting in that high watch Tower should need our
information, or your great faculty, and no less facility, both of Grace and
Nature, of Place and Parts to do good, and chiefly to promote the Cause of the
Gospel, should require Arguments for incitation: yet we thought it our duty at
least, to signify our hearty desire for the welfare of Gods Church; and to
prom^se that your care and zeal for it, in the course that we here commend,
shall no sooner appear, but it shall find us ready pressed to attend it with our
best service. It is not unknown unto your Grace, that the Churches of Germany
are no less distressed and distracted within the^ without, the want of inward
peace molesting them more, then of outward: Yet as the Ancient Civil Roman
State, when often rent by intestine Wars, no sooner was invaded by a Forrame
Power, but still the breach was soadred up again: So the wiser taking occasion
by these Wars in Germany to strike while the Iron is hot, and to make a virtue
of necessity, have hoped and so endeavored to reduce the two grand dissenting
parts of these Churches to a wished Peace and Unity, while in the fire of
furious War, the two spiritual Swords of Luthers and Calvin's Party (too keenly
bent one against the other) being mollified, might with the more easy
hammering be wrought into one, and so become the more strong to fight against
the Common Adversary. And what do we know, whether the all-disposing wisdom of
our God, has not for this very purpose sent the Sword into those Parts, to
lance and assuage the swellings of such Aposthumes? Now what has been already
done hercia, and by whose auspicious setting on foot, and with what success
and greater hopes it still proceeds (the perfection whereof we daily pray
for) we need not now to relate. That which we here presume to propound, is a
Work which either may conduce to the begetting of the Child of peace; or being
brought forth to the nourishing of it up unto a perfect man in Christ. This
work is the framing of a Body of Practical Divinity; for the furnishing of
those Churches in special, as being most destitute of it, and very poor in the
life and power of Religion. Now for the furtherance of so good and great a
work, We who are Ministers of London, whose names are underwritten,
apprehending the excellent use of such a Work; but withal, the great
difficulty of effecting in any good degree, unless some such Noble, Able, and
active Instruments as your Grace is, give a good speed unto it: are bold in the
bowels of Christ, and in a Brotherly compassion of the same mystical Body, to
implore your Piety and wisdom, not only in giving Counsel and Direction, but
assistance also by your worthy Example, joining Head, Heart, and Hand together,
for the advancement and accomplishment of so Religious and desirable a Work:
And the rather are we emboldned to desire the engagement of your Grace herein,
since we are Credibly informed, that your Grace formerly has much desired such
a Work to be undertaken and effected. And who can better describe a Method,
manner, matter, and means for this then your self, whom the Lord has so
richly furnished with so excellent gifts of Wisdom, Learning, Charity and Zeal,
for the perfecting of the Saints, for the Ministry, for the Edifying of the
Body of Christ.

Thus recommending all this to your Christian Care and Piety, with our humblest
services and daily prayers for the increase of Gods Grace and blessing upon
your vigilance in keeping the stock of God from Ravenous wolves, and advancing
the Gospel in the power and purity of it, as well abroad as at home, we humbly
take our leave, attending what service your Grace will Command us, when once
your piety and Prudence has set us down an Ample and full Platform of the
whole Body of Divinity, so as we may be able to discern all the limbs and
lineaments of it; and so taking a full view of the entire Model, each may make
Choice of that piece in special which he finds himself fittest to frame and
polish, until by this means the whole Building shall be happily and the more
easily finished, many hands making light work.

Your Graces most humble Servants in the Lord, William Gouge John Stoughton
John Downam Henry Burton Geo. Walker Nicolas Morton Sidr. Simpson Adoniram
Byfield Rich Culverwell Obadiah Sedgwick Geo. Hughes Joseph Symonds.


For his loving Friend M. John Dury, These.
MR. Dury, I am glad that you are still willing to take some pains about the
procuring of a Body of Practical Divinity; a Work which I have long wished for;
and which formerly my heart was in, and my hand would have been in, if God had
been pleased to continue our Peace: for when you brought over the Letters from
the Foreign Churches, wherein they made it their Request unto us to gratify
their Churches with some Endeavors about the compilement of this Work: which
were seconded by a Letter from the Ministers in and about London unto me, when
I was in Ireland many years ago, I was very glad of the Motion, and laid it
very seriously to heart, and conferred with some of my Brethren about it, that
we might bring the Work to some perfection. Doctor Downam the then Bishop of
Londonderry, was a man whose studies were much bent that way: for which cause
it was referred to him; and he readily did undertake the Task to draw up a
Model or Platform, according to which that Systeme or Body might be compiled,
that the Ministers who had written to me might be able to choose their Tasks,
and set themselves awork about it.

This Model he promised to send unto me to revise it before it should be
imparted to the foresaid Ministers, that in our joint name it might be sent
unto them. But he either for want of health, or some other impediments, did not
expedite the work before his death, and when the Troubles of Scotland did
begin: which by reason of my Lord of Straffords intermedling had some Reflection
upon us in Ireland; and not long after I being come over hither, he the Bishop
of Derry being dead, the Troubles of Ireland taking fire, at the proceedings of
the then Parliament here, and the great distractions of this and the two
Nations increasing ever since, I could not do what was desired of me, and what
I heartily desired might have been done, and wish yet may be done; for it will
never be too late or unseasonable to set upon such an Enterprise.

If therefore by your Solicitation and pains you can oblige those that in the
Universities, or in and about this City are able and willing to undertake it, I
think you will do a work very acceptable to all that are Godly, and profitable
to all the Churches at home and abroad. Let me therefore entreat you to
proceed, that whiles there is any appearance of doing good to our Generation,
we may not neglect the Opportunity.

As for the Model of the Heads which you have showed unto me;

First, I shall advise this, that the Precognitions may not be insisted upon
largely, but as briefly and substantially as may be; and if some References be
made unto such Authors as handle the Heads of the Precognitions more at large,
it may give satisfaction to such as will be more curious and desirous to see
things amply handled.

Secondly, my advice is, that the work may be contracted to as few hands as may
be; who may meet and confer together about it when they are perfecting their
Tasks.

Thirdly, I would not have the Work too large and Voluminous for several
Reasons, yet as full of matter as it can be: and where Enlargement may be
thought useful, References may be made to such Author, as use them most
effectually.

Lastly, Concerning the Cases of Conscience which should be handled in this
Body, I think they may be brought in and inserted under every Head of matter
whereunto they belong.

This is for the present that which I would suggest. I pray God* direct and
assist you and all those that go about it; And what I shall be able to do
toward the encouragement of able Workmen therein, you may be confident shall
not be wanting from

Your loving friend Ja. Armachanus.
From my study, December. 14. 1653.
A Letter written diverse years ago by the Author of the foregoing Treatise to
M. Samuel Hartlib, concerning the difference of Practical and Case Divinity.
TO speak of the difficulty you propose concerning Case and Practical Divinity,
I do thus conceive of the matter, that if men would not be slack to do what
they ought, the difficulties would resolve themselves in the action; yet to
satisfy the Scruple, and answer the desire you have, I say thus, That in all
Actions Two things are to be considered. First, that which is Essential to it.
Secondly, that which is Circumstantial.

The Essential parts of all Actions are two: The proper End for which it ought
to be taken in hand, and the means of attaining that End, which is the Formal
way of proceeding in going about that which is intended to be done.

These Two, viz. the End and the Means are in all Actions certain and
determinate; But the Circumstantial part of the actions is infinite, according
to the variety of Accidental Circumstances.

Now from this division of the parts of all actions, which is so plain and
natural that nothing can seem to me more facile, distinct and orderly, we may
gather what is to be done in this matter, and what the Method both of
Practical and Case Divinity ought to be as well in themselves, as the one
toward the other. For Practical Divinity contains properly the determination
of the Ends of all our actions, to show how they are subordinate to Godliness
and the Rules whereby the actions are to be directed to their own proper ends.

These Two things so far as they are expressly set down in the Scriptures, ought
to be explained in that which we may call the Body of Practical Divinity (for
in the nature of the thing there is no proper distinction between Practical and
case Divinity) according to the general Idea which I once conceived and sent to
you; viz. that the First part of Practical Divinity be concerning the
Essentials of a Christian state; the Second concerning the Accidentals as he is
a Christian in this or that Calling. We see this is the ordinary Method of the
Apostles in all their Epistles: therefore the Practical Directions, should, as
in every particular, so in the whole state of a man's life be divided and
ordered, that whatsoever is plainly in the Scriptures determined, concerning
either the Essential Ends or Means of Christianity, or concerning the
Accidental Ends and Means of Christianity in a certain Calling, that should be
fully explained from the Texts wherein it is delivered, which should be
according to the order of the matters contained in them (viz. as they are
nearer or further subordinate to the main End of Gods glory and our own
Salvation) set down in their several Ranks, whereof as soon as ever I can, I
will labor to give you a more full and demonstrative Draught then that which I
have heretofore; so the whole Body of plain Rules and undoubted Truth,
sufficiently explained in the Ends and Means of all Essential and Accidential
parts of a Christian life is to be the matter of that which is properly in a
strict sense called here Practical Divinity: and then all the Circumstantials
and determinate Accidents which the Scripture has left to every man's
conscience to work upon in the several Occurrences of his life; wherein the
variety of his Circumstances, changes the nature of the action, and makes a man
doubtful what to do, or not to do, is to be the matter of that which you call
Case-Divinity.

Now who does not see that these two must be joined together either in one body
of Treatise, or else so, if they be two several Volumes and Treatises, yet in
the Method they may be all one, so that the cases must be referred every one to
his Action of which he is a Case; just as in Grammar the Exceptions must needs
be referred to the Rules and every Exception to his own Rule: otherwise all is
in a confusion; so it is here* the cases are as it were Exceptions of the
General Rule, which therefore must needs be first delivered; from whence you
see that I am not of your mind when you say that Case-Divinity must first be
ruled before Practical Divinity; for Case Divinity cannot be Ruled except you
have first a Rule to Rule it by. Now the Rule is that which I say is the matter
of Practical Divinity; viz. all such express Determinations as the Scripture
does deliver concerning all the parts and actions, either of the general and
substantial, or of the particular and accidental state of Christianity.

When these express determinations are set down in their natural order, then
we have a Rule of understanding and conscience by which every man is able to
direct himself afterward in the several Occurrences as his occasions may fall
out; for the spirit of Obedience dwelling in his conscience, and being informed
and strengthened by the Rule of the Word, will discern the duty which is most
requisite to be performed in the particular occasion wherein a man is; Neither
is it possible as I suppose, that all the incident cases of this nature can be
truly determined, so that they will satisfy every man's conscience. For the
different measures of knowledge and of the apprehensions of the Rule, make the
conscience doubtful; And therefore except the settled and infallible Rules be
first received and proposed, all particular decisions of doubtful cases will
become nothing else but a matter of inextricable dispute, by which means
instead of a Body of Practical Truths, we shall have a new kind of Polemical
Divinity in matters of Practice, because the preposterous course being taken to
begin at doubts, before the true Rules be known whereby to frame our life, we
shall hardly ever find the right way. For after that different opinions are
once taken up in matters of doubt, we see how hardly they are laid down; and
how that men before they will seem to have erred in the particular
determination of the doubt, will sometimes strain the sense of many Principles,
as in matters of Theory the Papists do plainly.

Therefore I think that to begin at cases is a preposterous course every way,
and to do as you say that these cases should first be sent into all Churches to
be allowed of and then published; I think is dangerous to cause much
contradiction, and a great deal more laborious then to make up the chief and
more profitable part of the Work: which if it be well done, may stand by it
self without contradiction or fear of opposition, being clearly the truth both
in the Word and in every man's Conscience: And then either when this is done, or
whiles it is a doing, if some be set a work to gather Cases as you say out of
all M. S. Letters, conferences, correspondences, etc. he ought to refer the
Cases to the Heads of the Practical part, so that all the Cases stand in the
same order wherein the Infallible Rules of Practical Directions were delivered
corresponding in the same matters, as more particularly and as it were
Individual Determinations of the same End and Means of an Action, or rather as
an application of the Rule delivered to a particular object wherein every body
might not hit the right way of proceeding.

FINIS.
An Extract of a Letter, written by George Horn Doctor in Divinity, and
public Professor of History in the University of Leyden;
To Samuel Hartlib. Esquire;
IDea illa Theologiae Practica Domini Duraei, it a me affecit, ut vix quicquam
a Te hactenus profectum magis. Creed mihi, nullum Divinius remedium sedandis
illis Polemicis inter Protestants affectibus rixosis, and verae pietati
propagandae etiam apud Atheos and Haereticos convenientius. Nunquam illud
ingens Irenicum Opus ad optatum and stabilem finem deducetur, nisi hoc effecto.
Incredibiliter mihi tota Dispositio and Scopus placent: Et quid quaeso remorae,
quo minus Vester Ille Joshua, Sua Authoritate id intra breve tempus Orbi
exhibere possit? Abundat Britannia Viris capacissimis, and ad hunc laborem
natis. Long profecto satius in ejusmodl Opere occupari curas and manus plurium
quam in consarcinandis Commentariis Scripturarum, quibus jam obrutus est Orbis
and Ecclesiae velut sub onere quodam gemunt. Legam autem and relegam totum Opus
attentius, and si quid incidat, quod aliquid ad Templi illius Hierosolymitani
structuram confer possit, studiose annotabo; quanquam profecto ea in part
Vestrates palmam obtinent, ut id Opus non aliunde quam ab Anglia exspectare
Christianus Orbis possit. Contulerunt tot pientissimae Animae, tot jam annis
copiosam materiam; quid restat, nisi ut Salomo aliquis, evocatis Artificibus,
Templum long illo Ceremoniali magnificentius, exstruat?

In English.
MR. Dury his Idea of Practical Divinity, has pleased me as much as any thing
that ever you sent me. Believe me, there is not a more Sovereign remedy then
this, for the Putting an end to the controversies and quarrels now between
Protestants; nor fitter for the Propagating of true piety, even amongst
Atheists and Heretics: That great Work of Pacification, will never be brought
to the desired end of settlement, but by this means. The whole Order and Scope
of this Work do please me exceedingly. And (I pray you) what can hinder, Your
Josua from imposing it on the World by his Authority within a short time?
England does abound with men, that are most fit for this Work, and as it were
born to perform it. It were certainly much better, to have the cares and hands
of many men employed about such a Work, as this, then in compiling of
Commentaries on Scripture, wherewith the world is already over whelmed, and the
Churches groan under them as under a burden. But I will read over this whole
Tract more heed fully, and if any thing come into my mind, which may conduce
toward the building of this Temple of Jerusalem, I will carefully set it down.
Although in this part, your English men do so excel, that the Christian World
needs not to have it done by any else; So many godly Souls having for these
many years been preparing abundant matter for it; What is now to be done, but
for some Solomon to call his Workmen together, and build up a Temple, far more
magnificent, then the Ceremonial one was?

The Expedient for a Correspondencie with Foreign Protestants.
THe complaint which the Prophet David made in his low condition, may now be
taken up in our days by all that favor the dust of Sion, and take pleasure in
her stones; namely that her bones are scattered at the graves mouth, as one
cleaves wood upon the ground, Psalm. 141. 7. for if we look upon the Churches
which make Profession of the same saving truth in opposition to Popery as now
they are divided and broken; we shall see them almost, if not altogether, as
useless one to another as dry bones, scattered up and down, ready to be cast
into the grave, or as chippes of wood lying on the ground only fit to be
gathered and burnt; therefore our resolution should be the same which the
Prophet took in the words following upon his complaint. But our eyes are to
thee O God the Lord; in thee is our trust leave not our souls destitute.

There is none other that can help but he in such a case Let then our eyes be
turned only toward him; because our expectation will not be in vain, if we
fly to him for refuge; for we have a word of promise giving us assurance that
he will help; for Moses has said. That the Lord shall judge his people and
repent him for his servants, when he sees that their power is gone, and there
is none Deuteronomy. 32. 36.
shut up or left: and the Prophet Isaiah has declared for our comfort, that
when the enemy shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift
up a standard against him. It is evident then, that we have a Isai. 59. 19.
ground to hope that the Lord in his own time will make our dry bones to stir,
and live and join together, and being clothed with flesh and skin to stand upon
their feet and become a great and mighty army: for there is no condition of the
Saints so weak and low, but God can; and when it is fit, will also raise them
out of it: because he has in a readiness means which he has appointed to that
effect; and when his spirit will breath upon them, to set them a work; the
business will be accomplished.

Now the means by which the Lord does execute his wonderful counsel, and by
which he will bring to pass his excellent work; is two fold; the one is the
manifestation of the Truth, by the armor of light; and the sword of the
Spirit, which is the word of God, to discover the hidden things of darkness,
and sweeping away the refuge of lies and Hypocrisy to stay the wicked one and
consume the man of sin; which part of his work is already well advanced in the
midst of all these distractions, and divisions of parties: and the other is by
the unity of the Spirit, in the Communion of Saints, to bring the whole Body
so to depend upon the head Jesus Christ; that it shall appear at last sitly
joined together and compacted by that which every joint supplyeth, according to
the effectual working in the measure of every part to make the increase of the
Body to the edifying of it self in love: and this part of the work although it
is very little advanced in appearance, yet there are Preparatives toward it,
which are not inconsiderable, if rightly weighed and taken notice of: and
whereof in due time a more full account may be given: but for the present we
shall only show some motives for which we should attend unto this part of Gods
Counsel, and suggest a way by which we may help forward the effect thereof,
and become instrumental toward others in furthering his work.

The Motives which should induce us to mind the design which God has of
uniting his Saints together are so many in the Holy Scriptures, and so clearly
set forth, that a Volum might be written thereof if we would be large: but it
shall suffice at present only, to point at the places where the Holy Ghost does
urge the duty upon us: if we look upon 1 Cor. 12. The scope of the Apostle is
there to demonstrate that all spiritual gifts are bestowed upon the Church
Militant on earth, to the end that they may be made use of to profit withal by
the several members of the mystical Body in the unity thereof: and in chap.
13. the grace of Charity is said to be so necessary for this effect; that
without it none other grace is profitable, either to our selves or toward
others; in the fourth of the Epistle to the Ephesians. ver. 1. till 17. the Apostle
shows that no man does walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith he is called to
the Profession of the Gospel, who does not intend and endeavor by humility,
meekness, long suffering and forbearance of others in love to keep the Unity
of the Spirit in the bond of Peace; and whatsoever throughout the Scripture is
commanded concerning love (which is the great and new Commandment) and
particularly in the 1 Epistle of John, it tendes all to oblige our conscience
to this main duty of seeking the Unity of the Spirit amongst Saints, and of
keeping it in the bond of Peace: and if the Apostles words, Phil. 2. 1, 2. be
laid to heart, they will convince any man that has any feeling of his duty in
this matter, If, says he, there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort
of Love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies; fulfill ye
my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of
one mind, etc. intimating that without the care of this duty; all the joy and
happiness which Saints ought to further in one another, is quite lost and
utterly made void; which in these our days we find experimentally to be too
true, by reason of our divisions and strivings, for which the name of God is
blasphemed amongst the adversaries, and the Profession of the truth amongst our
selves is dishonored.

Now to remedy this great evil, and to remove the scandals arising from thence,
for which a woe is denounced and in some measure executed against us, the easy
way which is suggested is, to set a foot a Religious Correspondencie with
Foreign Protestants to carry on a Gospel interest amongst Christians, not by
strength or might, but in a Gospel way, by a friendly Correspondencie and
concurrence in Counsels; to hold forth unanimously, the matters of Faith and
Doctrine wherein we all fully agree, and do own the same saving truths; and to
set a foot the Practice of the same Rules of duties by walking therein, to
oppose ignorance and profanness, to banish confusion and disorderliness in
worship, and be no more strangers to one another condition, but to entertain a
mutual Care for each others good and the progress of the Gospel in the world,
to which effect a settled correspondencie upon Religious grounds and Principles;
between us and our neighbor Protestants, will be both an easy and in Gods way
a powerful means; which Correspondencie may be thus contrived and brought
about, We forthwith intend a systeme or body of Divinity, wherein all the
English writings of Practical Divinity and Cases of Conscience shall be
digested in English and Latin, and we intend the intertainment of strangers in
a College here, from whence our Learning may be carried forth in most
Languages by such Students, and all good works advanced by the same hands, to
which we already find great forwardness in this Nation, not only to labor in
the work, but also to contribute in matter of charge; And of this Work in
instituting a College propagandis bonis operibus we shall give Advertisment to
our friends as occasion presents; not doubting but since the Lord has given us
in England such a measure of light and Peace, but there will appear a ready
heart amongst our Nations for the rolling away the reproach upon us, of having
much of faith, and little of Works; and from this College and Trustees about
this Work, we shall be ready to maintain such Correspondence with our Brethren
beyond the Seas, that they and we may have cause to rejoice, and our enemies to
mourn, and this charge of Correspondency fixed upon the Trustees for the Work
above said.

The encouragement of this Correspondency intended, rises much from the
unspeakable blessing has accompanied the Letter and Epistle of the Saints,
witness those in the New Testament, what Luther, Calvin, and others have done
that way, and what daily success therein of Epistoling, there are clouds of
witnesses.

For the present we judge it meet, that what any Foreign Divine has now to
Communicate, might come either to the Vice-Chancelour of the University, or the
Ministers sitting at White Hall weekly for approbation of Ministers. And these
things we desire may be remembered at home and abroad in the prayers of Gods
people, that we may not make forfeiture of our mercies by our sloth and
negligence, and sit down by the starving sluggard with non putarem.

FINIS.
Errata.
IN the names subscribed to the Latin Letter, read Hopsius. item P. T. pastor
Schresheimi. item. Belsteinensis and Beilsteinensi. In the subscription to the
English Letter read Hopsius, and Schresheim and Orzen.

IN the quotations of Scripture places, page 1. read in Margin. 1 Peter. page
2. in Margin read. John 13. ibid. Jam. 1. 22. page 4. lin. 39. read 17. 3. page
17. lin. 36. read Luke 24. 47. p. 21. l. 35. r. 1 Cor. 6. 20. p. 37. l. 11. r.
Isai. 59. p. 41. l. 37. r. Dan. 12. 7.

In the words of the discourse page 3. lin. 17. read manifest my self. page 5.
lin. 35. read Precognitions page 6. lin. 31. read main heads. ibid. lin. ult.
read. those page 34. lin. 21. read Disputations page 36. lin. 26. read
pertaining page 37. lin. 15. read from my judgment. page 42. lin. 4 read to
one end. ibid. lin. 15. read rectify page 44. lin. 35. read Panrani. page 45.
lin. 8. read the foreign p. 46. l. 26. read upon, residing.


