THE ROYALIST.

A COMEDY;

As it is Acted at The Duke's Theater.

By Thomas Durfey, Gent.

LONDON,

Printed for Ios. Hindmarsh at the Sign of the Black-Bull near the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill, Anno Dom. 1682.

THE PREFACE.
IN this Corrupted Age where Loyalty and Honesty are as frozen as Charity, and
where timorous and unsettled Hearts are so irresolute and wavering, that they
had rather side with Rebellion and Faction for the sake of Interest or fear of
Particular disquietude, than give a generous Vote or Assistance to a Cause
Noble and Honest, who can expect this Play, though written upon an excellent
and never to be forgotten Theme, should meet a favorable Reception; when there
are so few that feelingly remember the fatal Scene of Boscabell; and so many,
who though they do, yet resolve rather to look on it as an Exigence of Fortune
than the Effect of their own Villainy: However to those few do I Dedicate this
Comedy, graced with His Majesty's Royal Approbation and Presence, and second to
none in Loyal Candor and Honesty, tho modesty excusing its Defects, when
compared with some excellent Authors. And as the Moral Ancients, in the midst
of all their Feasts and Luxurious Entertainments placed a dead Man's Scull upon
the Table to qualify their Joy, and give a Contemplative Reflection of their
Mortality, so would I have every Impartial Royalist look on the first Act of
this Play as a Memento of past, or as a Caveat of future Mischiefs and
Diabolical Practices.

I have heard some Knights of the Geneva Order, otherwise dignified with the
Titles of Viceroys to the new Elected Warpt Monarch of Poland, often muttering
to this effect, That His Majesty having past his Royal Seal to the Writ of
Oblivion, should not in Justice suffer his Licentious Subjects to upbraid or
'twit 'em with the Crimes or Treasons of their Friends and Ancestors; to which
the King, according to his accustomed Goodness and Clemency, answers, With all
my heart. But says the good Subject, This Act of Oblivion is out of date and
cancelled, not only by the three years Expiration -- but by their new repeated
Associations and Treasons: Nor is it proper we should forget (though the King
can) offenses of that barbarous and unparalleled nature, but rather strive
with our utmost vigillance and power to oppose and detect 'em.

But then starts up an Old Stanch Whigg, that perhaps was a little before
Foreman of a Jury, and supposed to be more capable for that office, because he
formerly headed the Rabble down to White Hall, to demand Justice against that
Glorious Monarch and Father of his Country King CHARLES the first. I name no
Body, for fear of Ten Thousand Pound Actions, but the Gentleman may be easily
found out; for as a true bred Spaniel can know a Thief by the villainous scent
he carrys, so can a true bred Royalist, a stigmatized Rebel. But begging pardon
for my digression, this Whigg (I say) just reeking from the Amsterdam
Coffee-house, and fluster'd with Mundungus Tobacco, and the sower dregs of
Coffee, to oblige the Company, and show a sample of his Parts, bawls out,
Popery -- Popery -- down with it -- cut it off Root and Branch! Popery --
Powder Plot, Godfrey, King Killing in jest -- and the Devil and all. To which a
knavish Daw that sat Pearcht upon a bundle of Loyal Observators in the Window,
answers in the same dialect, Presbytery, Treason, Solemn League and Covenant,
Association, Remonstrance, Votes of Common Council, and King Killing in
earnest, abhor it, kaw kaw, down with it I say: Thus my Speech-maker is hushed,
and the business done for that time -- I speak this only by the way of Courant,
a certain extraordinary manner of writing, which an Ale and Brandy Author about
Town here is every week very famous for.

A Phanatick is a Miscellanie of Mischief, and has like a Hound a Clog about
his Neck, or else he would be perpetually running up and down, and invading
every ones Right and Prerogative; First, he has no Justice but what is forced
upon him, for the sake of the Cause (as he calls it) and his own sham Opinion:
Secondly, no Temperance or Chastity, unless at home with his Wife and Family:
Thirdly, I am sure he has no Religion, because in that Text of Scripture, viz.
Fear God and honor the King, he had rather renounce the first, than by
complying with the last bugbear words offend his tender Conscience.

This some call a Whigg Anatomized, but I call it rather a Whigg Bottomiz'd,
where the Cabinet is unlockt, and the Trumpery laid open; and in that Point I
am sure your Papist and Phanatick have an entire Union and agree to a hair, I
mean as to the Trumpery: For as in the first, we have Cowls, Hoods, Rags,
Relics, Beads, Indulgences, Dispensations, Pardons, Bulls and the like; so in
the last, they make use of sly sneering demure Faces, picked Beards, little
plain Bands, short bobtail'd Cloaks, with high and mighty Capes, Petitions,
Libels, Raree shows, Hatfield Maids, lying Intelligences, and a number more,
which they call their Engines of Democrcay, and very properly too, for since
they are out of love with Monarchy, and cannot dispense with lawful
Inheritance, Prerogative, Right, Justice, or any Privilege, unless it be their
own, to set up a sort of Government, where the Magistrate is chosen from out
and by the People, what better Engines could they possibly make use of than
those before recited?

And, to say truth, these Common-wealth-Mongers have for some years lately past
had a blessed time on it; their Arms and Hands that must do this mighty and
Soul-saving work (I mean the Mobile) have been a long time ripe for Mischief,
and when Ease, Luxury, and Idleness prompt their Flagitious and unthinking
Souls to Villainy, it is not my honest friend in the long black Canonical
Cassock, for all his Morals of Humanity, Loyalty or Religion, that can divert
or appease 'em.

Here ye shall see a Butcher, a great Commonwealths Man, bloated with Brewis,
and fatned with the grease of his own Tripes, railing against the Succession,
and swearing bloodily by all the Oxen, Calves, Hogs, Sheep and Lambs in his
slaughter house, the Duke shall never come to the Crown, vows he will fight for
the Established Religion till he is slic't into Cutlets, yet bid him make
Confession of his faith, and it is ten to one he mistakes the Lords Prayer for
the Creed. In another place you shall hear a Tailor, sitting Cross-leg'd upon
his Shopboard, railing at the Government with great animosity and fury, for not
calling a Parliament, and protesting by his Sheers, Bodkin and Thimble, that he
will make one in the next Petition; and that he is resolved not to permit
Religion and Property to be trampled under foot; yet ask him how many
Commandments there are, and it is an even wager he remembers only Nine, being
very willing to leave out the Eighth, because it tells him he shall not Steal.

Such as these it seems are to be the Reformers of the Nation, and when
Ignorance and Barbarity sit at the Helm, and give Laws and Orders, all must
needs imagine the Poets will have a hopeful Time on it: But that Card is not yet
played, nor by the leave of my good Republicans, I am of opinion never will,
though I cannot but imagine, their best endeavors are never wanting to play the
best of the Game, and make what advantage they can of the present disturbances:
But the famous black Gentleman, with the Square Chin having lost his Friend and
dear Brother Jurator, has produced so few Miracles lately, that the Cause
begins extremely to flag, and very little or nothing has happened that is worth
the believing; but we doubt not, but like a subtle Fencer he lies cunningly
upon his guard, and watches an opportunity to snap, like a Mastive for a
pudding in the dark; besides, we know that he is as sly and inveterate as
wronged Women are, and in some points agrees exactly with their humors; for as
they are bitter and revengeful, so is he -- and I am sure as mad for a
Parliament as the worst of 'em.

Things going thus, this Play must needs be in a fine condition, yet I have
this hope that the Royalists, for whom it was writ, will accept and defend it,
and then tho the wasps swarm round the hive, I shall not fear but the Loyal
Bees will keep their Station; for my own part, I am careless of my future
fortune in it, since I have already so well succeeded. -- And therefore leave
it to the wide and censorious World, to seek its fortune; which if good, I
shall be glad; if not, it has but the common fate: And therefore I have the
greater reason to have patience.

Vale.

The Prologue.
HOw! the House full! and at a Loyal Play!
That Is strange! I never hoped to see this day.
But sure this must some change of State foretell;
And the Pit (methinks) looks like a Commonweal;
Where Monarch Wit's bast'd by every Drudge,
And each pert Railing Brumigham's a Judge.
But know, ye Critics of unequaled Pride,
The Dice now give kind chances on our side;
Tories are upmost, and the Whigs defied.
Your Factious Iuries and Associations
Must never think to ruin twice, Three Nations;
No, there is one above you has too long had Patience.
Changing of sides is now not counted strange;
Some for Religion, some for Faction change:
And (left Examples should be too remote,)
A Reverend Clergyman of famous note
Has changed his Cassock for a Campaign-Co^^;
Amongst the Saints does now devoutly Stickle,
And holy Bag-pipe squeaks in Conventicle.
Another sort there are that rore and rant;
Are Loyal; but all other Virtues want:
Ask their Religion, they cry, What a Pox,
Damn me ye Dog, I Am stanch, I Am Orthodox.
These are as bad as the other every way,
And much unlike my part I act to day;
A Royalist by Nature, not by Art,
That loves his Prince and Country at his Heart;
Addresses loves, to all Mankind is civil;
But hates Petitions as he hates the Devil;
Perfect in Honor, constant to his Friend;
And only has one fault, he is wondrous kind.
Yet who here would refuse a kind Intrigue;
Faith none; who does it is a Ridgling Whig.
This is his Character, and is it not pity
But such as he bore Office in the City?
How would all honest Hearts their Fates esteem,
Were all our Common-Council-men like him?
How glad to be preserved from Factious Furies,
If such as he was Foreman of the Juries?
That point once gained, Sedition would want force,
Then equal Justice take it is proper Course;
To hang up those for an Exemplar show,
That have deserved it Twenty years ago.
Actors Names.
Sir Charles Kinglove, The Royalist, one of the King's Colonels at
Worcester-Fight, a Lover of Monarchy and Prerogative, Mr. Smith. Heartall, His
Friend, a Moderator, Mr. Williams. Broom, His Lieutenant, Mr. Bowman. Sir
Oliver Oldcut, Chairman to the Committee of Sequestrations, a busy Factious
fellow, Mr. Lee. Sir Paul Eitherside, A Justice of Peace, and Orator that takes
Bribes on both sides, Mr. Ievan. Captain Jonas, A Seditious Rascal that
disturbs the People with News and Lies, to Promote his own Interest, Mr.
Persival. Copyhold, Slouch, Two of Sir Charles's Tenants, afterward made
Evidences against him, Mr. Underhill. and Mr. Bright. Sir John Zounds, Sir
Peter Codshead, Alderman Thrum -- Committee Men* Dash, Clark to Oldcut.
Captain, Soldiers, Tenants and Servants, Men and Women. Camilla, Wife to
Oldcut, Virtuous, and secretly Loyal, Mrs. Betterton. Aurelia, Her Niece, Mrs.
Twyford. Philipa, A young Lady that follows Kinglove in Men's Cloths through all
his troubles, Mrs. Petty. Crape, Woman to Camilla. Footmen and Attendants.
SCENES, BOSCABELL and LONDON. THE ROYALIST.
ACT. I
SCENE I.
Discovers a Common-field near Boscobel, the Royal Oak standing in the middle
of it paled in. Copyhold, Slouch, and one or two of Kinglove's Tenants standing
about it. Copyh. SAd times! sad times! neighbor Slouch.


Slouch. Well, well, when it is at worst, 'twill mend, neighbor; as the saying
is: For my part, my heart shall never zink 'till the Spring's dry, and my good
Landlords Ale-Tubs out.


1. Ten. Ay, he s a brave man, God shield him. But Neighbor I can tell you
there is parlous news come down last night. They say the great Volk at
London-Town will have him to Coram Fobus for lending the Cavaliers money.


2. Ten. Ay, and for stowing two of 'em up the Chimney, when the house was
searched, and swearing they were only Flitches of bacon.


Copyh. He had best take care of himself, for that Coram Fobis is a plaguey
place, I can tell him that; if they once get him into Coram Fobis, I promise
'twill go hard with him.


Slouch. With reverence to you Neighbors -- I had rather ye were all fairly
hanged, I deal plainly with ye.


2. Ten. Why troth, Timothy, when he leaves us -- I believe a good strong
cartrope will be no false Latin to the best of us.


1. Ten. Ich have lived man and boy cham sure this five and vifty years, yet
never zee such doings: Why nothing is current now but zwaggering and tearing
and fighting and roaring.


Copyh. And stealing Neighbor. You may put in that too --


1. Ten. Stealing, why that is the business of the nation. The Roundhead party
make a Trade on it: The other-side I confess have some conscience in their
Dealings.


Copyh. Ay it is true, they have Conscience as you say, Neighbor, and yet two of
'em made a little bold with it this morning.


1. Ten. Stole nothing I hope Neighbor?


Copyh. Only a couple of Cheeses, Neighbor, and a piece of Brawn, my wife had
saved against her Crying out.


1. Ten. Alack the day. Some Welsh Officers I warrant, that were stinted ^n
diet. But, Neighbors, me thinks Sir Charles stays long this morning He used to
be at the Oak an hour before this!


Copyh. Neighbor Bulfinch, ever while you live speak proper. You are not now
to call this only the Oak, but the Royal Oak, do you see!


1. Ten. Umph, the Royal Oak Neighbor Cop?


2. Ten. Yes fool: And because it is a Tree of honor, you see our brave and
Loyal Landlord Sir Charles has pal'd it in, and ordered us to come three times
a week, and kneeling at the Foot of the Royal Oak to drink the Kings Health.


1. Ten. Right Neighbor, he has so indeed. -- But hold you, who comes here? --
who is this?


Copyh. Let it be who it will -- stand your ground all.


Enter Philippa in men's Clothes. Phil. Contemned by Fortune, and by Love
oppressed!
Was ever wretched maid like me distressed?
Forced by wild Passion to commit a fault
Against my sex, my Honor, and my Birth:
Would I had died within my Nurses arms,
Or in my Infant Cradle found a Tomb!
Then had I never seen this dear-lov'd Man,
Nor known the miseries that now pursue me!
But it is too late to wish -- for hi Im have lost my friends*
For him, my self; for him, a flourishing Fortune;
And in this strange Disguise, at which I blush,
Have followed him in these Tempestuous Times,
And equally embraced his Fate. It Is true, I have his friendship,
And covered in this shape his Company --
But to my heart this can no Cordial prove,
Whilst his is friendship; and whilst mine is Love.

Copyh. Be at peace now, and hold you contented -- Let me alone with 'un.


Phil. Good morrow t'e my friends!


2. and 3. Ten. Good morrow, good morrow!


Copyh. Good morrow to you friend!


Phil. Do you expect Sir Charles, the good Colonel there this Morning?


Copyh. Why look you friend! to speak like a Schollard, as they call it, no
good can be expected but in good, mark ye me. And therefore in this vile world
of lucky Knaves and wicked Fools, I think it is unreasonable to expect the good
Colonel.


3. Ten. Ha, ha, ha, -- by Coxbones Neighbor Cop will hold him tack, I can
tell him that.


Phil. That Is true indeed. It Is very incongruous for a good and wise man to
herd with knaves and fools, but sure here are no such, I dare affirm all hereto
be very honest fellows.


Copyh. Before your Worship came amongst us we could have taken one another
word; but now the case may be altered.


Phil. Why so?


Copyh. Because you are as much too fine to be honest, as we are too poor to be
fine.


Phil. Does Honesty consist then in the Clothes?


Copyh. No, but the Clothes of most of you Courtiers consist upon your honesty.


Phil. But is that Current, will that pass friend?


Copyh. It must pass, or nothing, amongst a great many of ye.


Phil. A bitter fellow -- I have often seen the picture of Honesty painted with
a sober Sheeps look, just like one of yours, and wearing a plain gray Coat.
Prithee can thou tell me the meaning of that?


Copyh. Oh very easily -- humh; why look you as to the sheep, that I believe
was designed a Bob for you Court-mutton-Eaters: but the sober wise look
deciphers that honesty has no pride; and then by the plain suit is infallibly
demonstrated, that honesty never runs in debt, but always pays his Tailor.


1. and 2. Ten. Hey -- well said Cop, well said Neighbor Cop --


3. Ten. Peace, peace Hoa! Sir Charles is coming.


Phil. It Is he indeed! -- I feel my panting heart knows that the Center of its
Joy is near.


Enter Sir Charles Kinglove, Ned Heartall, Footmen, etc. 1. Ten. Good morrow to
your Worship!


2. Ten. I hope your Honor's well.


3* Ten. Heaven bless you noble Colonel. --


Sir Charl. Good morning to you all. And thou great son of Earth,
Thou tall and spreading Monarch of the plain, Turning to the Oak.
That from the Barbarous rage of Regicides,
The swords of Bloody Rebels, impious Villains,
Within thy sacred Body did conceal
At once the precious Soul of three great Kingdoms,
Thus bowing glow -- Hail to thy reverend shade,
May thou for ever flourish, never decay,
Nor never may the Winter storms annoy thee;
But young and Towering be thy verdant head,
And be thy root fixed and Immovable:
Upon thee let no featherd Traitor perch,
Ravens and Dawes, the Emblems of the Times:
Harbor the Thrush that sings of Loyalty,
And Rebel Birds of prey shake from thy Branches.
Some Wine there I fill round and begin Caesar's Health with a Huzza --

Heart. Why merry be thy heart friend. I see I have not lost all my labor -- I
have heard a good speech for my pains.


Sir Charl. The mere effects of my zeal Ned. Thou art sure nothing can make me
an Orator but Loyalty and the Royal Cause.


all drink. Slouch. An't please your Worship may we not drink the Kings Health
now we have had Mr. Cesars.


Sir Charl. Caesar is the King, Sir! you have had it already.


Slouch. Is it so an't please you?


Copyh. Is it so? why do not thou know that Caesar is Latin for King, Fool:
Ah go thy ways, sbud I would not be such a dunce for 50 pound.


Sir Charl. Ha, ha, ha, what think thou Ned, is not Ignorance a staple
Commodity here in the Country? --


Heart. As the posture of our affairs stand we have reason to believe
otherwise; for in this age the most ignorant have wit enough to be rogues, and
get estates from those that are wiser.


Sir Charl. Ay, those are the saints of Reformation, the Rebel sneaking, yea
forsooth Achitophel. Tribe, villains that will have a greater fire in Hell than
the rich Glutton has, and their Tongues be hotter. What say thou my kind
partner of Fortune, will they not, hah*


Phil. I hope so, Sir.


Sir Charl. I know thou do my best, my dearest friend.


Phil. What e're you wish, you may be sure I do.


Sir Charl. Nay that is too much. Ned, do thou see this youth,
This tender smooth-skin'd Twig of Loyalty,
In whom fierce Mars, and Beautiful Adonis
Join to complete an excellence. This youth,
When we were most engaged at Worcester-fight,
And I revenging my great masters Fate
With all the fury Courage could Inspire
And loyalty give power to; this brave youth,
Though twice unhorst in the Crowd, still followed me:
It Is strange, he wink't and fought, yet still came on,
As at the first; at last his spirits fainting,
Lifting his eyes to heaven and to me,
He cried, Take dearest Sir, my last embrace,
And then I shall die pleased.

Heart. Kind noble youth.


Sir Charl. Something more he would have said, which seemed of moment -- but
speech was lost, and I with careful pains conveyed him thence, then got his
wounds well cured; and now I hold him here.


Phil. And here, Heaven knows, only I wish to be.


Enter a Footman. Footm. Sir, Capt. March, and Lieutenant Hazard, present their
humble service to you, and bid me tell you, they should be very glad to drink
your health this morning.


Sir Char. I understand 'em well. Good Heaven! to what strange Acts necessity
compels us: These two I have observed famous for Virtue, for Honesty and Loyal
Valor honored: Two that had rather give their Patrimonies to grateful merit,
than to know the shame of asking, though in their extremest Fortunes. Yet see
how want, the mould of humane Fate, stamps us for lowest Deeds, when e're he
pleases. Sirrah, Bid my Steward give 'em 40 Pieces, and be you sure that they
have Wine enough; see that they want not any thing I have; and tell 'em I begun
our Royal Master's Health.


All Drink. 1. and 2. Ten. Huzza! Come Neighbors, now the Dance, the Dance.


They dance. Coph. And now another Glass; Come, and remember Mandlin the
Millers Daughter by the by. --


Slouch. With all our Hearts! come --


Drink. Heart. Sir, My service to you: Confusion to the King's Enemies.


Phil. I Will pledge you Sir! but cannot drink so much.


Heart. Not drink so much; nay, then I must suspect thee: Drink, or thou will
be Damned; that is my Position; I hear thou can fight.


Phill A little, Sir.


Heart. A little Sir! and gad I never knew but those that could fight but
little Sir, could drink a great deal Sir: Do thou know the three great
qualities of a Town-Spark?


Phil. No!


Heart. I thought so: Observe then, First, thou art always to speak truth,
unless amongst the Factious: for there the Province is dissimulation. 2ly, Thou
art never to refuse thy Glass: Nor 3ly, thy Whore. Thy Whore, my Lad. Now which
will thou embrace? for two of these three thou must.


Phil. Well Sir, if I must, the first and last best suit my temper.


Heart. What speaking Truth, and Whoring? Well said true heart, I see the great
business of Generation will go forward however. A Whore Sir Charles will stick
fast to our party whatever Vice fails.


Phil. Aye Sir! Would I had your Mistress to make trial of, with all her
Dyings, Languishings, and Graces: gad if I had, I Would pepper her.


Sir Charles, Ha, ha, ha! well said my little Ganymed.


Heart. Nay, you have reason to be fond of him, if this be not a Slip of your
own Grafting I am mistaken: I fancy he is like you. -- He looks as if he were
begot in the Riot of Appetite. The Youth may come to preferment in time; for to
my knowledge there is many a Noble Peer in this Country would give 100 Guineys
for such a Page.


Sir Char. Let 'em be damned; I love him for his Virtues, besides another
reason. There was a Lady, Ned, young as the blushing morn, as beautiful, an
Heiress too, and wealthy in Possessions, so like this youth, -- only a finer
mould* -- that you could scarce distinguish one from the other, that loved me to
distraction.


Phil. Oh Heaven! How shall I hide my Blushes.


Aside. Heart. Very well Sir. I hope you were an able Physician to cure her! --
Oh there is nothing like madness in an Amor; for, as in such a Condition a man
has twice more strength than he used to have, so a Woman has twice more love;
and I suppose you were very grateful to her.


Sir Char. No: Thou will wonder at my Resolution;
She was the Daughter of a cursed Traitor,
A Rogue that sat upon the sacred life of Majesty,
Doomed so much Royal Virtue,
In the rich Blood of that Immortal Prince,
The Nation has been barren ever since;
She being his blood I hated and contemned her,
And sacrificed my Love to Loyalty.

Heart. And was she handsome?


Sir Char. So pretty, she was thought a Miracle;
She had a Body framed for excess of pleasure,
So plump, so white, so full of melting Youth --

Heart. 'Sdeath it makes me mad to hear it.


Sir Char. An Eye that influenced all Souls with passion,
And on her Cheek sat modest temperance,
Whose blushes seemed the Guardian to her Beauty.
She had a skin --

Heart. A plague, if you tell me all she had, I shall expire. Such another
Description, and I am no man of this world! And could thou leave her? oh*
thou confounded loyal Dog. Gad if it had been my case, I should have begged his
Majesty's Pardon; I should have had another Monarch to obey at that time? Ha!
what say thou my young Apostle of the small Tribe?


Phil. Why faith, as you say Captain, I should have asked her a Question or so,
that is the truth on it: A Roundhead's Daughter might have got a Cavalier, that
might have lived to take his Grandfather by the Beard.


Heart. Aye, and so have brought Loyalty again into the Right Line.


Phil. Now am I forced to echo his lewd sayings, lest silence and my blushing
should betray me.


Aside. Sir Char. No! I made a Royal Conquest over my Passions!


Phil. Oh I shall faint.


Aside. Sir Char. But come! no more of this. Let us be merry!
For Heaven knows how soon it may have end.
See, Ned, if yonder Bumkin be no got drunk,
Now we shall have good sport with him.
Well Sirrah, what think you of the world to come now -- hah!

Copyh. Nay, but hold you, honest Landlord, in the first place, Is the world to
come a Kingdom or a Commonwealth?


Sir Char. Heaven is a Kingdom, Sir rah?


Copyh. Is it? Why then I find the Devil is like to have a Bargain of me.


Sir Char. How Sirrah!


Copyh. Nay, Lookee Landlord, Kingdoms are so tottering in these times, that
gadzooks I am for the secure place, be it good or bad.


Sir Char. Why Rogue, is Hell a secure place?


Copyh. Aye, if it be a Commonwealth; for there if one Devil be your Enemy,
another may be your Friend, so that you need not trust your business with a
Court Favorite, that shall promise you fairly to show his breeding, and cheat
you damnably to show his Wit.


Slouch. There Boy. Oh brave Cop --.


Sir Char. Why Sirrah! Thou drunken Tossed, Thou dirty Root, Thou Radish! how
durst thou talk of Courts, and Favorites! look to your Plough, you Dog, and to
your Wife: See that her Shoes be clean, and mend her Stockings: But, sirrah, no
more of this, lest thou art damned; for remember I have given you fair warning.


Copyh. Damned! what and have the Religion to be Drunk? Do not I know that
Damnation has no power over a man when his Soul swims in liquor. If I were
sober, it is true I might be in danger; but drunk, Udsbores! I defy the Devil
and all his Rump-Parliament!


Heart. There Is nothing tries an unsound Intellect like Wine; for if you
observe, your Rogue of Interest then will certainly betray himself.


Sir Char. I have observed it.


Heartali Sings. It Is not the Silver nor gold for it self,
That makes men adore it, but it is for its Power.

Sir Char. Thy singing has put me in mind of a Song was given me this morning,
a thing very well humored, and most excellently set; and here I think comes
the Lieutenant opportunely to sing it.


Enter Lieutenant Broom. Broom. Oh Colonel! You Are undone!


Sir Charl. No matter, Sir, sing me that Song I gave you lately!


Broom Lord Sir sing! why I have the saddest news to tell you --


Sir Charl. No matter I say. Let me have the song, for nothing will I hear till
that be ended.


Broom. Death how do you think, I can have the heart to sing when --


Sir Charl. Do It or by heaven I Will spoil thy tuning hereafter -- Come on --


Broom. Was ever such a humor. I must obey him.


SONG.
THe great Augustus, like the glorious Sun,
Long on the Rabble Weeds with Splendour Shon;
Yet all the fruits of his bright influence
Was an Il Odor, Nauseous to the sense;
Long flighted they his grace and Love,
His mercy made them Rebels prove;
Nor would they be kept under,
Like the rude Ancients, that affronted Jove,
Because they never felt his lightning or his Thunder.
CHORUS.
Then let 'em be Confounded, Confounded, Confounded;
And so may every Roundhead
That stands not up for King and Laws;
And so may every Roundhead be wretched and Confounded,
That dares, that dares defend the good old Cause.


Sir Charl. Now Ned. what think thou?


Heart. It Is very well in the kind indeed Sir.


Sir Charl. Now Sir to your story, why what is the matter?


Broom. The matter! why Sir, your Estate is sequestre'd, and your house and
goods seized upon.


Sir Charl. By whom, Sir,


Broom. By Sir Oliver Oldcut, Chairman to the Committee of Sequestrations, and
there is with him one Justice Eitherside, a wicked Limb of the Law, a Damned
Orator, who has got more fees for bawling than others for speaking sense, and
they are attended with a whole Regiment of Redcoats Now Sir who shall sing now?


Sir Charl. Why thou inconsiderable Limb of the War, that will I like an April
Nightingal,

Sings -- A pox on all Traitors and private Caballs,
Confound all their Plots and Designs.

Slouch. How now sequestered -- By the mass then it is time to look to our selves
Neighbors.


Copyh. Here Is Monarchy for you now, this comes for standing so stiftly for
Monarchy! Ownds! I am for a Commonwealth.


Sir Charl. Why ye villain! such another word and I Will make more holes in your
guts than are in thy tattered Doublet.


Heart. Damn *em are they so sly, and sudden in their Executions -- all seized
on?


Broom. All Sir.


Sir Charl. Why farewell Acres! I hope my honorable Committee Rascal has
consigned me a Terse of my Claret, that I may drink my Royal Masters health at
parting.


Broom. Not a drop Sir.


Sir Charl. That Is somewhat hard, well, water shall suffice then, the
unsophisticated purling brook, from whom I Will drink large Brimmers every
morning thank Nature and defy adversity.


Phil. Oh noble temper! see yonder Sir, they come, fly Sir or I fear you will be
imprisoned?


Sir Charl. Then shall I have more leisure to contemplate. Let Them come on, I Will
stand it to the last.


Heart. Let the worst happen I have a friend at London will soon clear us My
Mistress is a secure Card, I am sure of a Trump to win for me. --

Aside. Come Gentlemen * let us have a little skirmish for it however -- we will
scorn to be taken basely. --


Draws. Enter Oldcut, Justice Eitherside, Dash, Soldiers for their Guard.
Oldcut. But three teirce of Claret and but one little Runlet of Sack to all
that Beef and Mutton. It Is very strange, hum -- Lawyer! is it not!


Eithers. Ay, it is strange, but these Cavaliers are such damnable soakers, one
of them shall make nothing of five Gallons for his mornings draught. I was
informed of a Dozen Barrels, besides a Cask of Tent that stood up in a Corner.


Oldcut. Tent! ay, where the Devil is that Tent too? if we could have but found
that we had done something; 'twould have been like the very marrow and
heart-blood of the cause -- but to find none at last, nay but one little Runlet
of Sack neither.


Dash. So please you this is the punctual place, and there amongst his Tenants
stands the sequestered Knight.


Oldcut. Ha! swords drawn too. Sir, Sir -- how dare you -- with what face I say
dare you -- but hold -- are we strong enough -- are the Redcoats come up! come
up Redcoats and be damned. How dare you Sir brandish a Sword in the very face
and front of Authority, ha -- know thou not who I am O man!


Sir Charl. Yes. Thou art one of the Dirty Cubs of Reformation, and has lickt
thy self into more deformity than any Brute can possibly Imitate; as to thy
honorable extraction, thy Mother, if my Memory fail me not, sold Turnips.


Eithers. That Is a ly; to my knowledge she sold Apples.


Oldcut. Well she did so, what then, the Woman was frugal, and what then? come,
what was my father? what was he.


Sir Charl. Why, he I think aspired to be a Corporal in the low Countries*


Oldcut. A Corporal! by the Lord a Colonel, and as brave a fellow as ever
carried a musket.


Heart. A Musket! oh, a worthy Officer indeed.


Sir Charl. As to thy self, by clandestine Rapine* Plebeian Tally-mans
Extortion, and cheating the Subject, thou art called Rich and Eminent in the
Devils name: Yet in thy Soul so poor, that thy Bounty would starve a mouse, did
not Bribe*pies now and then contribute to its maintenance. I remember when thou
were elected Sheriff of Worcester, thou never would Dine beyond a Ninepeny
Ordinary. Thy stately lodging was an unhang'd Garret, amongst Rats and Mice,
close in an old blind Ally, butting and bounding on Alehouses and staples.


Oldcut. Can my honor bear this? no it cannot. Seize him fellows.


Either. Now as I am a Justice I should say keep the peace. But as I am an
Orator and a Lawyer I say knock him down.


Fight here. The Tenants turn to Oldcuts party and Kinglove is disarmed. Copyh.
Oh well faught Monarchy, bravely done Monarchy.


Sir Charl. O sordid Dogs. The Snakes that I have warmed are now the first that
sting me.


Phil. Damned souless villains! ya're not hurt I hope?


Oldcut. So now lay his crime before him? give him a speech -- Sir Paul
confound him with thy Rhetoric.


Either. Hem, hem. It is I confess wonderful to me, and I believe no less
admirable to all here, that the sagacity, or to speak vulgarly the wisdom of
man should desert him at his greatest need: Art thou mad, oh thou
inconsiderable Animal! art thou infatuated, as the Schoolmen have it, to lift
thy fist against the mighty Elephant the Commonwealth, and have thy brains
beaten out by its Naso or Proboscys -- hoh, what shall I say, or indeed what
can I not say? well -- I will say no more till I have time and place, and so
bring him away, sirs.

Omnes Huzza.


Sir Charl. Lead on! I have yet left a Cask of Tent to comfort me by the way.


Oldcut. Ask him where Sir Paul? ask him where? and you that are his Tenants
petition to my honor, and I Will consider ye.


Ex. all but Kinglove, Heart. Phil. and Guar. Sir Charl. It Is base in any man
to rail at Fortune,
Since she is a Goddess whose Divinity
Instructs the wanton Clay to know it self;
No (if Adder like I dip my tongue in Venom,
It shall be against the Enemies of my Prince,
The trembling pale cursed Traitors of the Times:
The Plots of Foreign Foes, good Heaven reveal,
Free us from the Mischiefs of a Commonweal.
Let the great Senate Peace and Union sing,
And to complete our Joys long live the King.

Exeunt. Finis Act us Primi.
ACT. II.
Enter Camilla, Aurelia, Crape. Camilla. YOu have seen this Royalist then
Cousin?


Aur. Yes, and observed your eyes, Madam, and the luster that adorned your face
when you beheld his graceful Carriage, and heard him refuse to compound for
his Estate.


Came. It Is impossible I could grace my self with a languishing Air like what
you put on to oblige Mr. Heartal, Cousin: I hear you have got his freedom of
Sir Oliver, and methinks it is but reason that I should do the same for the
stranger.


Aur. But what if he should not accept it, when it is done; for I hear he is a
man of a strange nice critical humor, and scorns to be obliged to a Woman; no,
though 'twere for her Maiden head.


Came. I know not that, but one that looks in his face would imagine he valued a
Maidenhead at a greater rate than you speak of: If he balk his Bottle or his
Mistress I Am mistaken -- ah -- there is nothing like a Royalist at a fair Lady.


Aur. No, for like a Be he is perpetually Buzzing about, and sucking every
flower he comes near, till at last with tired Wings, and laden Thighs, he
returns home to his Winter Quarters, humming a melancholy complaint for his no
better success in his Rambles.


Came. Let him ramble: I know he has too much honor to wrong in any point a
kind young Lady that loved him -- besides, I am clearly for liberty in Love;
your dull low spirited constant Couple are like two Chickens in a Coop, they
are always either sleeping or pecking at one another.


Aur. Liberty; why it is like Air to a flame, Life would soon extinguish without
it. But to be Married, in my sense, is the best of Liberty! oh heaven! Marriage
is a heavenly thing sincerely.


Came. I would thou had my Husband to try!


Aur. Nay, there I must beg your pardon. Your Politician is the worst at
Love-matters of any: He is settling the Nation abroad, when he should be settling
himself at home with his Wife; and I must confess, I would not willingly marry
a Lump, a Stone, a Log; I would not have a Husband like a Schoolboys Top, that
should go no longer than just I was a whipping him on.


Came. Ah! Curse on that fatal Command that made the unlucky scourge to such a
Top: I know I was designed for nobler Fortune: But see the Engine comes, and
the whole nest of Insects. Crape go you to Sir Charles's Apartment, present my
service and tell him I design to visit him -- be secret: away.


Exit Crape* Enter Sir Oliver Oldcut in Boots, and Eitherside, with Three
Committee Men; Footman with Lights. Old. Not compound -- Gad -- I am gladon't *
I am glad on it, faith: The more stubborn he grows, the richer grow I: Oh soul,
wife, are you there? (how do you Cousin Aurelia?) Harke'e Soul! Dear heart! you
must wipe your mouth, and prepare to salute these Privy Members of the
honorable Committee, at parting -- Smack 'em heartily do you hear, -- it is cheap
enough: ye little Buttock, I*l tell you more anon -- soul, that is Mr. Alderman
Thrum -- Mr. Alderman! pray make use of my wife. And you Sir Peter Codshead.
Sir Timothy you! and my particular good Friend and Patron Sir John Zownds;
'sbud, I must have you more familiar with her.


Sir John Zow. I shall be too bold Sir Oliver.


Oldcut. Bold! peugh -- to her Sir John! lick her over the lips and kiss her
again if thou will boy -- she is fine tender flesh * so -- very well; and now I
wish your Honors good rest, with my unfeigned thanks for this days favor.
Sir, light before there I Will wait upon your Honors down.


A. Thrum. By no means good Mr. Chairman! you have your Boots -- on


Old. Good Mr. Alderman, it is my duty; faith I must.


Exeunt all but Camilla, Aur. Eitherside Either. But you must know that Law,
Madam, is the very Sheers, as it were the Cizzers of Love, and it is a together
impossible for a man to be a good Pleader and a Lover at the same time, Ah --
had I not been a profound Lawyer, I had positively made the most complete
Amorist in the whole world.


Came. Is it not natural to you to be dull now and then Sir Paul?


Either. Why yes truly! it is natural for us to be dull. The study requires it.
Your true Blockhead always comes sooner to the Bar than your brisk fellow. Why
that is the reason the people say I am no Lawyer, because I am a man of Wit, and
have the faculty of being dull --


Aur. Sir Paul, a man of Wit is a fine thing. Oh I love a well spoken man
sincerely.


Came. Or any man else that will but marry thee sincerely.


Aur. The^^ are lewd beastly Times, Sir Paul; Marriage is out of fashion too;
and the Brutish things had rather take a Tawdrey Creature in nasty Crape,
Colebertine Cornet, dirty Linen, and tattered shoes and slaps, than Marry an
unsullied longing Virgin of fifteen years with a good Fortune, Witty,
Beautiful -- and willing. -- Certainly there is no perfection so admired as
Rhetoric; besides it soonest gets a husband of any thing in the world.


Enter Sir Oliver Oldcut and Footman. Oldcut. Come Sirrah, come and pull off my
Boots. Coz. Aurelia, there is a Lady below desires to see you, Madam -- pish --
what de'e call her -- Madam -- the tall young Lady with the green face, that
us*d to come hither -- I Have forgot her name -- Come Sir -- make haste --


Aurel. Mr. Heartall's Sister! and ten to one sent to me with a Message from
him -- I must run to her -- your Servant, sweet Sir Paul.


Either. Sweet Sir Paul! the poor thing's in love with me! Aside.
Madam, *It Is death to miss the honor of waiting on you down.

Ex. Aur. Either. Oldc. Oh Soul! such news, such Fortune -- pull sirrah -- pull
harder -- *Sheart I am 2000 l. a year the better for this days work --


Footman is pulling off his Boots. Camil. The worse rather.


Oldc. The stubborn fellow would not compound, not he; 6000 l. a year Estate*
and would not take half; An unreasonable Dog! But the Committee for my sake
have nicked him in faith; for they have ordered me 2000 l. a year of it, and
have conscientiously divided the rest amongst themselves.


Came. So much the worse still.


Oldc. The worse! what for 2000 l. a year! Why Soul! Flesh! my bonny bouncing
Buttock, art thou mad, ha! Gad I am so overjoyed, I could dance a Jigg. Never
was such luck -- no -- never was -- such --


Footman pulls him off the Chair on the ground. Now Son of a Whore! now, now,
Dog; What, no feeling Rogue -- Could thou not have told me I was sliding off
-- hah -- give me my Slippers, sirrah! But Soul, as I was telling thee -- I am
the luckiest fellow! gad we will eat and drink like the Protector now -- we can
afford it -- I intend to have a whole Shoulder of Mutton to morrow Dinner, and
some Butter in my Cabbage -- what, I can afford it now.

Came. And shall the half Bottle of Ale be drunk off without grudging? Shall the
Pot of Warden-Pears be uncovered without a sigh to see how much it is wasted?
Shall the Turkey Pie have the privilege to be cut in the sides, and shall the
Parmazan Cheese escape notching too to morrow?


Oldc. Yes, that it shall you little Buttock; and Ralph shall be Steward, and
Chaplain, and Cook, and Butler, and Gardener, and Footman no longer; I Will take
another that shall draw the Yoke with him -- and I Will make me a new Plush Coat
too, and thou shall be so fine, thou shall out vye my Lady Mayoress -- what, we
can afford it now!


Came. And have my Train like her held up by a Catch-Pole instead of a Page? put
on my Ermin Scarff, and have my Gold Chain pinned round it, to show the
Grandeur of the City? lose my 100 Pieces a night at Lantraloo, and Cuckold my
Husband with a Cavalier? what, we can afford it now!


Oldc. Can you so! Cuckold! Cavalier -- humph -- why how now Soul! how now
Flesh! how now Member! What do you scoff, do you laugh? do you flout at my Wisdom,
and good Fortune? gad if I had not had a Brain I had lost it, I can tell ye
that! and good Friends too -- Sir John Zownds swore bloodily up to the point,
or else Counselor Blunder had carried it!


Came. But where is your Conscience all this while Sir Oliver.


Oldc. Conscience! whiew -- Ah Fool! wilt never be wiser? Conscience! when,
did thou ever know a thriving Statesman have a Conscience? Never, Turtle!
never, Crooked-rib, never!


Came. Nor Honesty neither, that ever I could hear.


Oldc. It Is needless, useless; we can make nothing on it.
How now, what is the matter?

Enter Dash. Dash. So please your Honor, the prudent Captain Jonas is at the
door, and desires Admittance --.


Came. Captain Jonas! What Is he in the name of wonder?


Oldc. What*s he*! by the Lord a most ingenious person, a profound Headpiece.
He is the Author of the Intelligences -- It Is he that invents all the Miracles,
The fiery Dragons, Armies in the Air, Commonwealth Comets, and so sorth, to
confound and disturb the People -- Oh! He Is a man of great use amongst us --
And one that claws the Tories off in faith -- Dash! Tell him he is welcome, and
admit him -- Go Wife! your Presence is not convenient when State-matters are
divulged --.


Came. Nor yours, when Love matters are performed, I Will swear --.


Ex. Came. Enter Jonas. Ion. Sir Oliver, Your entire Servant.


Oldc. Heartily Yours, good Brother Jonas. Well, you came I know from the
Caballists, and how go matters there?


Ion. In Troth, Sir Oliver, with great and singular Policy and Vigor; I have
not known the Nation in so good a posture of Affairs this many years as now:
The Weed Loyalty is (thanks to Providence) rooted out, and Interest planted in
its place; instead of Honesty we have Cunning, instead of Conscience a
Commonwealth, and instead of Religion, Money.


Oldc. Why truly and these are rare times; blessed times Brother Jonas -- Gad I
would not have the Nation grow honest again for a Million, not I.


Ion. Faith Sir, between you and me, you need not fear it will; for you know,
Sir Oliver, that we Brothers of the Brain, in troubled Waters always fish best:
It Is your unsettled Government that we must thrive in -- I rejoice particularly
about your good Fortune to day, Sir Oliver, I heard the O^der of the Committee
in your favor about the Cavalier Knight's Estate.


Oldc. Yes truly -- they were very civil, I thank 'em; besides, I had
Politickly made his Prison a back apartment of my own house, where he shall
stay t^ll all things are settled.


Ion. Carefully done Sir*


Oldc. Nay, if any one muzles a Tory*Bandog better than my self, I much wonder.
But Brother Jonas, 'prithee what News is stirring? I have seen this last Dragon
of the North, and it frighted the Fools rarely. But 'prithee tell me, have had
any thing new since?


Ion. Oh several Sir, every day produces 'em -- I was very hard put to it this
last week, finishing some Miracles for two or three Persons of Quality, my
particular Friends: But I hope, Sir, you have heard of my Mouse, my wonderful
Mouse, ha'nt you!


Oldc Mouse! no faith not I! Mouse -- ha ha ha! not I faith! But prithee. how?
what Mouse, Brother Jonas? I confess I heard of a Popish Mouse, that was
starved in a Protestant Cubboard lately, but that cannot be it sure!


Ion. No sir; this is a better fancy; and of a Mouse lately sent by the
Republic of Venice, a Present to a noble Peer in Town here! a Mouse, Sir, that
was inspired with Speech, and would speak to his Patron distinctly and lowdly,
Whig, Whig -- Commonwealth -- And then Whig again, three times together, Sir.


Oldc. Ha, ha, ha! And I warrant this took extremely.


Ion. Took! Oh strangely Sir. I assure you, several of the Court of Aldermen
were plaguily startled at it, and to my knowledge, two or three eminent Tory
Citizens have kept their Beds ever since.


Oldc. Whigg, whigg! But hark ye, Brother Jonas, prithee what is a Whigg --
faith I have forgot.


Ion. Why Sir? A Whigg is you, or I, or -- my Lord; In short Sir, it is a Title
of Honor for our Party.


Oldc. Oh! oh! hum -- is it so?


Ion. That Is all I know of it: and so, Sir, rest you merry. I Will go and sit an
hour with the Colonel; it may be I may pump something out of him to your
advantage, Sir Oliver.


Oldc. Faith, and that is true; Do so dear Brother Jonas.


Ion. I Will about it, Sir; The snare is laying -- but to another purpose my
Politic Coxcomb.


Ex. Oldc. I never could tell what to make of this fellow; he has been a
Quaker, Papist, Independent, Muggletonian, Fift-Monarchy-man, and all the Sects
under the Sun, and yet never fixed to any of 'em: Hang him, let him be what he
will, he does my Business. I make a very tool of him. Well, it is a rare thing
to be wise * a rare thing.


Ex. SCENE, II.
Kinglove, Philippa, sitting at a Table, a Bottle of Wine and Manchet on it.
Kingl. A Phanatick is the Devil's Forge, whereon he forms and fashions all his
Mischiefs. A parcel-Fiend, that I would have painted as the Satyrs were of old*
with Horns and Hoofs; Hoofs, to show his Honorable Descent from Lucifer; and
Horns, to blazon the eternal rest of his Tribe. Come! Thou art Melancholy, my
little Friend: Well, I Will release thee from this trouble; faith it is
unreasonable thy youth should share in my Misfortunes though thou art so kind
to offer it.


Phil. Dear Sir, If any Melancholy cloud my face, it is for your sake, not my
own; having your company, I can want nothing, since all the blessings I would
wish is there. Yet pardon, if a tear break from my Eye, when I reflect on your
past noble life; and see the man, whose bounty had no equal, reduced to make
his Dinner of a Morsel.


Sir Char. A Morsel! rather a Feast my Friend. Content has made it rich and
riotous. In my Prosperity I could observe how little sufficed Nature, and from
thence knew that all overplus was needless. Besides, is not this better than to
lie for a well-dress'd dish of wild-fowl, or pawn my soul to the Devil, or
forfeit my Honor and Loyalty for a Fricasee or a Ragoust? I have known a
Roundhead do it for a dish of buttered Eggs! Oh! may I feed on Grass, Roots,
Berries, Acorns; drink the green puddle of the standing Poole; any thing that
our appetite counts Nauseous, rather than for the Luxury of Emperors, do the
least Act dishonorable or disloyal.


Phil. That there is a Reward for Virtue, the Schoolmen aver to be Infallible:
But, Sir, Plato's Great Year will be so very long a coming, that it is but
reasonable one should expect Earnest-money here; it is fit we should have part
of payment in this World.


Sir Char. The World, sweet Youth! the World's an arrant Cheat, a very Rook
that never obliges you, but to undo you; And for my part, I am happy that I am
no man of it.


Phil. You live Sir, and are a man of it, 'till you come to a better.


Sir Char. No Child, You Are mistaken -- he that is honest, and has no money,
is no man of this world. And why the Devil should a man be Ambitious of the no
Favor, when the detected Clod is so vile in all its Qualities; I Will give thee
a short account of it. First, for your Courtier, if necessity pinch you, and
you make your suit known to him, He Is deaf -- and in return, tells you a Story
of his Miss, and what a new way of obliging she has. If you go to a Citizen, he
wants Security, the times are hard, yet cannot forbear telling you a lucky hit
he had that morning with a young Heir, which he calls a Bargain, but is indeed
a Cheat.


Phil. The Clergy however are more Charitable, without doubt there you may be
furnished.


Sir Char. Aye with Prayers! a hungry Benediction or two perhaps may attend
you, with hands claspt thus, and eyes up lifted. They shall pray heartily for
your soul, but to save it from the pit, not give ye a Penny. This is the World,
my Friend, and the World's Nature. It hates the Wise, the Virtuous, and the
Loyal, and only cherishes the Knave and Fool.


Phil. Let it then keep its Nature, you are above it, and shall be ever so. See
here, Dear Sir, what your poor Friend has got for your supply. This Purse of
Gold, the value of a Jewel, my tender Mother gave me when she died, I sold to
help your wants. Nay, pray accept it, else I shall think you do not love me.


Sir Charl. My best of Friends, I swear I will not rob thee.


Phil. Do You not love me then!


Sir Charl. I do; but must not wrong thee.


Phil. If you deny you will.


Sir Charl. How shall be grateful! what shall I do for thee?


Phil. Only grant me one small request.


Sir Charl. Any thing! I swear. What is it?


Phil. Promise me, you will never throw me from your Love, nor let me want your
Company.


Sir Charl. By thy kind self, and by Heaven, and all that is good, I swear.


Phil. Then I am truly happy.


Enter Crape. Crape, Sir, there is a young Lady below desires to give you a
visit.


Sir Char. A Lady!


Phil. Young, did thou say? Is she handsome too?


Crape, Yes, that she is young* Sir, and of Quality too.


Sir Charl And would visit me? Well, let her come up whoever she be; but of all
things a Woman was the farthest from my thoughts at this time: But I see the
Devil designs to play his old Game over with me, and when he can catch me with
nothing else, he baits his Hook with a Woman; and gad I snap at it as eagerly
as a Spaniel does at a thing thrown him, never considering whether it be good
or bad


Enter Camilla. Phil. I swear she is handsome. Oh how my heart beats!


Sir Char. Yes faith, honest Beelzebub has played his part; now will there be
within me a mutiny between the flesh and the spirit instantly.


Came. I do not doubt it, Sir, but being a stranger, you are surpised to see me


Sir Char. Beauty, Madam, always surprises me. But I confess I was never made
speechless so long till now --.


Came. That Is a sign, Sir, you were never acquainted with my influence: Oh I
have a wonderful faculty at making men dull --


Sir Char. It must be then either by opposing your Wit, or too nicely viewing
your Face; the one, like the Sun, I confess, dazles our eyes; and for the other,
Madam, I have manners enough to think it excellent; and then to outvy us with
it is no wonder at all.


Phil. How her Eyes dart at him! oh would they were out --


Aside. They sit down at Table. Came. Fie, Sir, this is like a Coward, what
yield before any blow is struck; nor will I own we out vy your Sex so much
neither; we have Female Wit at a pinch, it is true, when your Masculine Blunder
would spoil all. But it is for constancy and virtue we are most famous, for
those we are eternally renowned.


Sir Char. Alas! poor souls! and yet I never knew any Lady that broke her heart
with either of these.


Came. Did you ever know a man that broke his heart with over-loving a fair Lady?


Sir Charl. No Gad -- but I knew one that broke his back --


Came. Some resty Cavalier I warrant you -- such another moldy Royalist as your
self.


Sir Charl. Faith, Madam -- I am moldy, damnably moldy, as you say -- and
thou like an Angel Creature, art come just in the nick to help me, for I am a
kind of a Conserve, and must be used quickly, or all is spoiled --


Came. You Cavaliers are like stumps of Trees upon a hilly Desert, and meet with
so many nipping blasts that you hardly ever sprout up Bud or Blossom --


Sir Charl. But, Madam -- when I am planted in a low plashy and fertile meadow
at the foot of a fair Hill, where never Plough has dug, nor savage rifled,
the Case will be altered; the Devil's in me if I do not sprout up then.


Came. But in the mean time, Sir, you are planted here, like a Mellon under a
Glass* to keep you from the cold bleak North Wind; and to come nearer to the
Business -- for I love to time things; When did you see Sir Oliver?


Sir Char. Damn him Caterpiller; 'Prithee do not plague me with the thought of
such a Villain -- I have other business now; and as Raillery is often the Cause
of Love, but defers the effect, to come nearer to the matter, as you say,
Madam; Answer me this Queston? Are you Widow, Wife, or Maid?


Came. First, Which of these three do you wish me?


Phil. For my part, I wish thee hanged --


Aside. Sir Char. First, If thou art a Widow, by that Eagle-Eye of thine, I do
suspect thou have killed thy Husband, who might be such a Fool as you were
speaking of, and break his heart with over loving. Secondly, Thou have too much
wit to be a Maid I am sure; no, a Wife for my Money -- I am for a little
Adultery against the World, 'faith: -- Fornication is a sniveling sin; and, gad
I hate to stand sipping in a half* pint, when I may Carouse a Bottle --


Came. Well, Wife I am then! but to whom think you?


Sir Char. Why, 'faith I hope some old lame rich, very rich fellow.


Came. No Sir, -- he is neither old, nor lame, but the very Caterpiller that
plagues you so, Sir Oliver Oldcut.


Sir Char. The Devil, it cannot be!


Came. Very true upon my Honor.


Sir Char. Now though I hate the Tribe, yet gad she is handsome, and will lie
with her out of mere revenge: My dear Friend, 'prithee take a turn or two in
the next room a little --


To Phil. Phil. For what Sir?


Sir Char. Nay, prithee no Questions now! art thou so ignorant not to know how
matters go; Can thou not play the true friend, and hold a door upon occasion.


Phil. Not for the world, not I. Oh this cursed Creature.


Aside. Sir Char. Go, I say, or I shall be angry.


Phil. Well -- I Will watch ye narrowly -- I am resolved you shall do no mischief.


Aside, Exit. Came. And whither have you sent the youth now?


Sir Char. To read a Chapter.


Came. Nay, do not lock the door.


Sir Char. Why so? I know 'twas love that brought thee hither. Thou art so kind
to take pity of my sufferings, and intend'st to recompense the wrongs thy
Husband has done me.


Came. I do; nay, more I do love you, but it is Honorably thus sar, Heaven knows
what it may come to. But I have now so strong a Padlock upon my Conscience,
that to get at liberty, is the greatest difficulty in the world.


Sir Char. Do you but pull back the Bolt of your Affection from your Husband,
and for the Padlock of your Conscience let me alone --


Enter Crape. Crape, Madam, Sir Oliver is so near, you have hardly time to get
out.


Came. Take this Purse, Sir, an earnest of my Love, preserve my Honor, and in
any thing else Command me. The rest another time Farewell.


Ex. Came. and Crape. Sir Char. What can this mean? did she come hither only to
railly me? Ah plague of Women's Cunning; they have more subtle fetches and
tricks than a hunted Fox has. -- She loves me, but Honor forsooth opposes! And
who knows but this Money may be a trick, a design betwixt 'em; Gad I le not
trust her -- if she will revenge me upon her Husband so: If not as she is that
Bandog's Wife, I Am obliged to have no faith in her -- Oh Sir!

Enter Philippa. Are you come? Why sure thou were jealous of me just now, thou
were so loath to go.


Phil. Indeed Sir I thought she was a lewd Woman, and might do you some
mischief. But now she is gone, I Will take my leave too. It Is very late, and I
begin to grow sleepy.


Sir Char. A soft repose attend you -- Hey Swift, who waits there?

Enter Swift. Take a Light sirrah, and wait upon my Friend to his Chamber.


Swift. Sir! There Is no getting out, Sir Oliver I suppose, thinking he had been
in his Chamber already, has locked the Passage door.


Phil. Oh Heaven!


Sir Char. The Rascal makes very formal Prisoners of us. But he has obliged me
in this however, for now Sweetheart I shall have more of thy company; now thou
shall share a Bed with me.


Phil. Was ever such an Accident! what shall I do? This alteration in my Face
must needs discover me --


Aside. Sir Char. Go, sirrah, and undress him, take off his Peruke, and give
him a Cap. --


Cap's brought. Phil. Indeed, Sir, if you please to favor me, I had rather sit
up and watch by you.


Sir Char. Watch by me, that is a good one 'faith; Why Sir, I am not afraid of
being stolen away -- Sirrah, pull off his Stockings. --


Sir Char. undresses. Phil. But Sir I had forgot to tell you -- I have, I have
a strange --


Sir Char. Strange, what?


Phil. A strange Infirmity Sir, in the night time.


Sir Char. Infirmity! what -- Thou do not piss the Bed I hope.


Phil. No Sir, not that.


Sir Char. Gad I was afraid thou had lost thy retentive Faculty; What other
Infirmity?


Phil. Why Sir, I am -- I am apt to walk in the night time, and then Sir, I
snore extremely, and shall so sprawl and kick, Sir.


Sir Char. Kick Sir! What the Devil, do thou think I am made of glass, and
afraid of breaking? What Is the matter with the Boy? sure the young Rogue thinks
I have got the Itch. -- Sirrah, pull off his Breeches, and put him on a night
Shirt.


Phil. By no means, Sir, this shall serve; indeed I shall catch cold if I
change. -- It must be so, if I excuse it longer, he will certainly suspect me.


Aside. Sir Char. Come, are you ready?


Phil. Almost Sir. -- If he should chance to put out his hand in the night, or
lay his leg over me, oh, I am at my wits end!


Apart. Sir Char. Hark ye young Spark, pray let me have no Boys Tricks with you
now; Do not you wake me in the morning, by pulling me by the Nose, or
Great-Toe, do you hear --


Phil. Sir, I shall not lie so near ye, for I never could endure to touch any
one a Bed. -- Or if out of kindness he should hug me in his Arms, who knows
but it may discover all, and then I am undone.


Aside. Sir Char. Come, have thou done fumbling yet? Gad thou art the most
bashful young Whore-master that ever I met with, (go get the Bed warmed!) Leave
blushing ye shamfac'd Fool, and let me embrace thee: Gad I shall fancy thee
some fine Woman or other, and have a pleasant time on it.

The Drowsy God will heighten my Delight,
In pleasing Fancies I shall waste the Night:
Think though a Youth, thou have soft Female Charms,
And dream I have my Mistress in my Arms.

Ex. ACT. III.
Enter Philippa in a Nightgown. Phil. THe Morning's come, and with the shades
of Night are fled my fears; for I have not closed my Eyes since I lay down; but
like a wary Sentinel carefully watched the Fort, knowing it lay within shot of
the Enemy: The Enemy, what Enemy? 'Twas such a one, that had Honor been as
great a Traitor as Love, the Conqueror might have set up his Flag of Defiance
upon the Walls long ere this; Every time he turned himself, he frighted me
extremely, which made me creep as far to the Bedside as possibly I could; yet
once I could not forbear, but must put out my foot softly to his side to touch
him; me thought there was a kind of Consolation in that. Here he comes.


Enter Sir Charles and Footman. Sir Char. A stranger below would speak with me?


Foot. Yes, Sir.


Sir Char. Not another Lady, I hope!


Foot. No Sir, it is one I have seen often with Sir Oliver; he says his name is
Capt. Jonas.


Sir Char. Damn him! narrow-soul-Rebel: How dares he venture to look a Royalist
in the Face? Sirrah, go and complement him with half a score kicks, and tell
him I am busy.


Foot. Gad and so I will, for I confess I do not like his Face.


Sir Char. Yet hold; now I think on it, I may get something out of him that may
prove beneficial: Go, sirrah, admit him; and my little friend retire to the
next room, and leave us alone.


Ex. Phil. Enter Jonas and Footman. Foot. There Is my Master Sir.


Ion. Sir, not having the Fortune to converse with you before, I suppose you
know me not.


Sir Char. You suppose right Sir.


Ion. Sir, I am in the Town here, commonly dignified and distinguished by the
name of Captain Jonas; a man not altogether uninterested in the Affairs of
State.


Sir Char. So Sir.


Jon. I have heard of your hard Fortune Sir Charles, and being my self a man
whose depth is yet unsounded, and one that has carefully weighed your
Condition, I have obliged my self to propose a Remedy.


Sir Char. A Remedy for my hard Fortune! Faith Sir that would be a favor worth
communicating indeed! But I beseeth you Sir, what are you that have this power
over Fate: some holy Father in disguise, and intend to read Lectures of
patience to me!


Jon. A Holy Father; hum -- He should be a Papist by that gad I Will pretend my
self a Priest, and try him that way: Sir, when you shall know what I am, you will
say mine is a Title not at all grateful to the Age in these times.


Sir Char. If thou art a Phanatick, as by those sneaking Features, and that set
formal Habit, I do vehemently suspect thou art* thy Title is grateful to these
times I am sure.


Jon. Why then to undeceive you I am none. I am --


Sir Char. What in the name of wonder! it is very loath to come out.


Jon. Are we within our selves! are we private!


Sir Char. Oh very private!


Jon. Your Ear then Sir, I am -- A Jesuit.


Sir Char. starts. Sir Char. A Jesuit; faith that is a Quality not very
grateful to this Age -- I must confess.


Jon. And my right name is Pope.


Sir Char. Pope -- gad you are very unlucky both in Name and Quality, as times
go. But Master Pope, how comes it that you dare herd amongst Phanaticks? Can
you think your self safe there?


Jon. Most secure of all Sir. There are several of us amongst 'em. We converse
daily with 'em, talk Treaon with 'em, drink every night Politic Coffee, and
when the spirit moves, go to a whore with 'em!


Sir Char. A very conscientious manner of living, by my faith, Sir! But are
there several of ye amongst em, say you?


Jon. Diverse, Sir! And not only amongst them but other Sects; I was my self all
last year chief* Holder-forth amongst the Quakers?


Sir Char. How! the Quakers! what my plain-dealing Friends too! Do they adhere
to you?


Jon. They Sir are our Brethren, our intimate Bosom friends. Your Quaker is
the Anvil on which we forge our designs, and the Phanatick the person that uses
them. They are both the necessary Tools we work with, and indeed the chief
Implements of our Trade.


Sir Char. Your Trade?


Jon. Aye Sir, our Trade you know it is a spiritual Trade, we Merchandise Souls
as others do Goods; sell Heaven by Commission, and upon good consideration can
remit all manner of sins in our Transgressing Brethren: I hope you know this.


Sir Char. Faith Sir* I must beg your Pardon, I Will assure ye I know no such
matter.


Ion. What a Devil does he mean?


Aside. Sir Char. What if a Man's Constitution requires a Wench, can you allow
him that cordially, and without scruple of Conscience?


Ion. You may have a Dispensation for it; Lord Sir, that you should pretend
Ignorance in these Affairs! A Wench, alas! a Crime of a small moment, and may
be absolved for little or nothing. Sir, I at this time keep two my self.


Sir Char. Why well said Mr. Pope, faith; gad if all the sons of your Mother
Church are such Swingers, she has a very sanctified Brood of ye, I Will say that
for Her.


Ion. He confounds me more and more. -- Pray, Sir, if I may presume so far,
What Religion are you of?


Sir Char. The best you may be sure, Sir, by being a Royalist, but altogether
ignorant of your Trade, Mr. Pope.


Ion. Let me kiss your Hand Sir, I heartily rejoice at it; and now give me
leave to tell you, that my former words were only a Trial of your Virtue, and
to my content, I have found it fixed and unshaken for which I shall for ever
honor you Sir.


Sir Char. This is a subtle Rascal. Well! but to your Business with me good Mr.
Pope?


Ion. Sir Charles, you are a sequestered man, one that Fortune has dealt very
unkindly with; And that unnatural Villain, Sir Oliver, much worse; therefore if
you have Courage enough to revenge your wrongs, and flourish again; Hark in
your Ear, you a must remove him. You understand me.


Sir Char. Remove him! Whither?


Ion. To the Devil, that is the surest place: In short, Sir, you must knock out
his Brains.


Sir Char Let me consider a little -- This is a rare Rogue.


Aside. Ion. When he is gone, his places must of necessity fall to me. -- Very
good, this it is to be Politic, and it is ten to one but the Tory Knight does it
in a moment; for as I am informed, He Is not worth a Groat, and would do any
thing to get at Liberty.


Aside. Sir Char. But, Sir, to escape when it is done, will not that be difficult?


Ion. Not at all, there is a hundred of our party that hate the damned
Chairman, and will be ready to assist you: Then it is the easiest matter in the
world to be done; for it is but laying him cross the Noddle in a morning when he
comes to visit ye; I have an Instrument ready here, it is called a Protestant
Flayle, I invented it at Oxford for the good of the Cause; Hah! what think you?


Shows a Flayle. Sir Charl. Why, faith I think my knavish Canting Turn toat,
Friend Pope thou art a damned Rascal.


Ion. Sir?


Sir Char. A true Son of an Independent Whore, and art deceived in thy
Politics -- Why, thou Dog in a Doublet, were thou such an intolerable Coxcomb,
to believe any necessity could make me commit so execrable a Villainy! Me, a
Royalist, that profess Honor and Honesty? No, as you are Dogs, worry one
another. Let the Hangman be your Executioner. You are below a Gentleman's
revenge; but if a good wholesome swinging will do you any service --


Jon. Nay, Sir, if you wo' not, there is no harm done: it is well we are private.


Enter Phillipa. Phil. Not so private neither, as you imagine, good Mr. Pope --


Jon. Another Whelp unkennell'd.


Sir Char. Within there -- Bring three or four Cudgels out --


Jon. Cudgels Sir, I am a Gentleman, and wear a Sword.


Sir Char. A Flayle rather, as you were saying, Sir; but that is all one, I am
resolved to bestow an Arbitrary beating upon you Mr. Pope; it may happen to
make you loyal, and a lover of Monarchy. Hey, make haste there.


Jon. There Is no other way -- I must run for it --


Exit. Phil. He Is fled like lightning.


Sir Char. Ha, ha! Let him go, and be damned, for a Decoying Villain. Death
what a strange Age is this we live in; where no man is the man he seems, does
what he pretends to, nor speaks what he thinks. I have known a Whore argue
strongly on points of Religion, yet within three Minutes has done the Devil
considerable service. I have known a Statesman swear all Rebels against the
King were certainly damned; yet for the sake of Command, within two months
after, has shot his Pistol at him. I have known a Lover vow, what he never
meant to keep; and a Courtier positively promise, what he never could perform
But see, yonder I think is a Petticoat advancing this way -- Hoh! my Lady of
the Lake, is it you?

Enter Crape with a Letter. Well -- and what news from Hell! what project is
going forward now?


Crap. Aye, you had need talk. It Is the best project could have happened for
you, I am sure, if you had but grace to esteem it rightly.


Sir Char. Good Mouldy-box of Marmaled, let me have none of your Instructions:
for by that mortified face of thine, it will not edify. Gad I shall take it
worse from thee, than if an old Bawd should reprove me for my lewd life and
Conversation. Come, come, your Message, your Message --


Crap. Ods my life, I have a good mind not to tell you.


Sir Char. Oh fie! you must, you must: Come, there is half a Piece for you.


Crap. A shame on you, you are the strangest man: well, it is a lucky Project
for you, I can tell you that: why, you must know, Sir, that my good Lady. --


Sir Char. Which in the first place is non*sence.


Crap. Slife, but she is a good Lady, marry* and even too good for this world.
Well! she, I say, has with much ad^^^ procured your freedom of Sir Oliver, upon
condition you are forth coming at any time when she has occasion for you.


Sir Char. Why says tell her I Will do what I can to be always forth coming for
her occasions; but thou know Sweetheart, a man's but a man: we are all
mortal, and must sometimes have our failings.


Crap. We must indeed, and therefore should hear with 'em accordingly.


Phil. Should we so eternal Consumption! oh Heaven! that it should be in the
power of such an Insect to sting me.


Crap. Then Sir, here is a Letter for you worth a Broad-piece!


Sir Char. Is it so? and gad thou shall never say I undervalu'd it -- There
it is for thee.


Gives her Money. Crap. Oh dear! it is too much indeed: But you are such a noble
Gentleman, there is no returning, I know; Your Servant, Sir; You Have now your
liberty to go where you please; Your Servant, sweet Sir. Your Servant young
Gentlewoman --


Ex. Crape. Phil. The Devil take you old Bawd and your Service too; for no
other way have I hopes to be rid of thee.


Aside. Sir Charles reads. YOu are now at liberty; therefore fail not to meet
me an hour hence, at the Backdoor of our Garden: Have Gratitude enough to
think this a favor; and as you are a man of Honor, keep my Counsel.


Sir Char. Oh, I find She Is wheeling about: I knew 'twas impossible for flesh
and blood to hold out when the Devil and the Dear Sin plant their temptations.
Philip, You must excuse my absence for an hour or two; I have some private
business, but at seven I Will not fail to meet thee at the Fleece. Farewell.


Exit. Phil. This must be some affignation from that Devilish woman -- I know
that Letter could contain no other Business. Oh! I could curse my Fortune and
her Beauty -- Well, when a misfortune is not to be remedied, I must have
recourse to Patience, and watch some kind occasion to befriend me --


Exit. SCENE II. London.
Enter Copyhold and Slouch. Slouch. Lord bless us! what a vine place this
London is, neighbor Copyhold. There Is never a house here but's as big as our
Parish Church at home, and one can meet none as one goes along but Lords and
Ladies, and great volk.


Copyh. Why, there it is now; Instruct a Fool, and make his answer your self.
What great volk? what Lord did thou meet with, Fool, hah?


Slouch. Why, was not that a Lord that went by just now in the laced Coat, with
such an ocean of Ribbons in's hat, was not that a Lord, Fool?


Copyh. No, Fool, that was a Lord's Pimp. I confess the profession is thriving,
and he may come to honor in time* if he be but industrious* He Is not the first
Pimp has had preferment to my knowledge.


Enter a Footman hastily. Footm. Pox on you for a purblind Bumpkin. Damme cannot
you see you Dog.


Slouch. As gad sa' me my heart was at my mouth for fear he should have drawn
his Whinyard: Who is it, can tell; I am sure he must be some great person by
his Daming and Sinking.


Copyh. Why, this Damning sinking Person is a lousy Footboy to a more lousy
Brewer, that in former times was coupled with his Masters Horses in grinding
the Malt, but since happening into a drunken Aledrinking Parish, has cheated
enough to keep his Coach and Six, with a Pox to him!


Slouch. A Footboy, udslid, if chad known that, old Crab should have walked
about his ears, I Will tell him that.


Copyh. If these doings last* woe be to all merry Meetings in faith; why one
knows not now who is the Landlord, nor who is the Tenant; which is the King, and
which the Cobbler. They are both equal now as things are ordered. Well, well,
prithee let thee and I walk about our business.


Slouch. Aye, aye: Let Us find the Knight Sir Oliver out, that I may know who I
mun pay my Rent to.


Copyh. Why, are you mad neighbor Slouch: will you pay it to any body, till
you zee which is the strongest side.


Slouch. Nay, by'r Lady, that is almost out of doubt now; for the young Prince
that should be King, is banished: but however I am lawful Tenant to Sir Charles
Kinglove.


Copyh. Lawful! Prithee what is Law against the longest Sword! that'I cut all
Law in pieces, and make new ones: don't you see how the ancient* Laws are
turned topsey-turvy, and new ones call the old Kingdom a new Common Wealth.


Slouch. Why, an' the Law have made it zo, it is zo.


Copyh. Yes while the Protector has 40000 men to back the new Law, and the King
none to oppose 'em.


Slouch. Why neighbor, our Parliament told us, all Soldiers should be
Disbanded when the Law was settled; and so we need no more Taxes nor
free quarter, now we have a Law to depend upon.


Copyh. How like an Oase do thee Prate! Why, had not the King Law and Right
to depend upon, and yet it would not do against 40000 men.


Slouch. Well, I say the Law can do any thing.


Copyh. But make a Mon a Woman.


Slouch. It can make a Mon swear he is a Woman, or hang him.


Copyh. Yes with the help of Halberteers, and a Hangman.


Slouch. 'Sdiggers neighbor Copyhold, Thou have a plaguey Noddle! a parlous
pate of thy own; why, thou make the Law to signify nothing at this rate:
What side should a mon take?


Copyh. Take Law's side, whilst it is strongest.


Slouch. But how shall one know when that is?


Copyh. When It has the 40000 men of its side.


Slouch. But if they are against the Law.


Copyh. Then be thou against it too, Fool: Had not thou rather have 40000
men on thy side against the Law, than the Law of thy side against 40000 men!


Slouch. As the Song says, I perceive Law lies a bleeding.


Copyh. Aye, and the Head and Fountain of the Law too.


Slouch. Swounes, I intended to make a Lawyer of my Son, but I am off on it now.
--


Copyh. Off on it, why how came that into thy Noddle, what means have thou?


Slouch. Means, Why I breed en' at a Free School, and if I con raise 40 I. to
put 'en to a Torney* he may come to be Torney*General, and make Laws to settle
the Crown. --


Copyh. Come, come; be ruled by me Neighbor; my Advice is that you make an
Evidence of him, put en to one of the Protector's Plot-makers, and he may come
to witness against some of the Cavaliers at the High-court of Injustice; and
then he is made for ever; and in time may be able to keep his six Servants, or
six men for his Lifeguard.


Slouch. Peace, peace, Neighbor; here are Soldiers coming.


Enter six Soldiers. 1. Sold. Come, come; the times will turn Sirs, we have
good news comes every day. The Protector they say is sick, and if the Devil
takes him, as I am sure he will; and suddenly, we shall have good days again.
How now Vermin of the Country, what are you? who are you for Sirrah, the King,
or the Commonwealth, -- hah?


Slouch. Why, an't shall please you Gentlemen.


Copyh. Look! look! He Is at his shall please ye. Slouch, be at silence, and let
him speak that bears the Brain. Noble Gentlemen, and Fellow Soldiers, to speak
affirmatively to the matter, we are for the Commonwealth dee see.


1. Sold. Knock 'em down! swinge 'em, no more words on it, drub 'em
confoundedly. --


They beat him, and Exeunt. Copyh. O mercy good Gentlemen! mercy.


Slouch. Lookee Neighbor Copyhold, I shall desire the favor of you, that as
you bear all the Brain, you will hereafter bear all the beating too: for, for
you to be witty, and I to be bruifed for it, zooks I must tell you it is a little
unreasonable.


Copyh. It Is an ill time for Wit in a time of Civil War; for if they had been
as ready to break Jests as they are to break heads, I for my Wit had escaped a
Beating, and thou, because a Fool, had been beaten more. But for the future,
advance and take thy Fortune, and if thou have any wit I hope thou will be
Swing'd for it. It Is grown a Custom in this Age, and 'twould grieve me if thou
should miss it.


Slouch. Here comes more of 'em, now for me; Thou shall see what a Joke I Will
pass upon 'em.


Enter Dash, with Soldiers of another Party. Dash. Thomas!


1. Sold. Here Sir.


Dash. Go and found me those empty Casks, and try if they are not musty?


1. Sold. Now Badger of the largest size. Who are you for, Commonwealth, or
King? hah?


Slouch. Pox of the Commonwealth; it is the very Fundament of Governing; all
Tail, and no Head. No, Sir, we are resolved to be brave fellows, and for the
King, we.


1. Sold. It Is very well, my brace of rusty Plough shares.


Dash. Friends, it behooves your Discretion to beat them abundantly; Let their
Bones be, as it were, broken, and their Flesh bruised: for the feed of Contest
is in them, and must be thrashed thence by the Flayle of Reformation.


They beat 'em, and Exeunt. Slouch. Hold, hold, Gentlemen! I am for the Devil
and Money, as you are. I Will be for any thing. A pox of your Flayle of
Reformation.


Shrugs. Copyh. A pox of your Fundament, I say, and your jokes too, if this be
the fruit on*t. You may joke long enough before any one will laugh on your side.


Slouch. Ill times! barbarous times, as you said, Neighbor. No Wit will pass
now, that is the truth on it. How now! who is this? There Is no more of 'em coming
I hope!


Enter Captain Jonas. Ion. The Colonel I hear is at liberty, and so is the
other witness of my disgrace; therefore without a Plot to invalidate their
Evidence, the credit of our Party is ruined. A pox on my negligence, and
foolish security -- I shall raise a scandal on our* whole Tribe, by this cursed
want of Policy. Well -- there is no way but to decoy two or three easy Fools
to swear some notorious Crimes against them; by that means to make 'em not be
believed. Ah! and yonder methinks are two fellows very fit for such a Purpose.
One of 'em I met this morning, leading in his hand a pretty fresh Country
wench, and, if I mistake not, he must be a very fit Tool for me to work with.
-- How now, my honest Countrymen, what is the news with you? I warrant your
heart aches to see so many Troops of Soldiers abroad, and not a bone about you,
but is disordered at these Warlike Preparations! hah?


Copyh, Why, faith not to belie our selves, our Bones are a little out of order
at present, as you say.


Slouch Our hearts do ache about the Troopers, indeed. But it is because they are
not hanged, an't shall please ye.


Copyh. So now has this Fool hedged himself into another drubbing by the by. --


Aside. Ion. What, some of 'em have wronged you I warrant: In troth I am sorry
for it; and you seem to be such honest fellows, that if you will be ruled by me,
I will for the future defend you against all such injuries.


Slouch. Ruled -- aye, with all our hearts good faith.


Copyh. This man now has some Conscience in him, but the other were Babylonian
Infidels.


Ion. First, What are you? and what is your Business here in Town!


Copyh. We were lately Tenants to Sir Charles Kinglove, and I for my part have
born all Offices in our Parish, and kept as good a House, I can take my
corporal Oath, as any Farmer in Worcestershire: Neighbor Slouch there, has
kept House too; but I think will knock under the Table if compared with mine.


Ion. Sir Charles his Tenants! This is as lucky as I could wish. -- I see the
Devil remembers the good Offices I have done him* and will not leave me in
distress. --


Aside. Copyh. And we are going to find one Sir Oliver Oldcut, to renew our
Leases, and know to whom we must pay our Rent.


Ion. Sir Oliver Oldcut! why he is my intimate bosom Friend; he does nothing
without my advice: But he*s Sir Charles's mortal Enemy, and if you would oblige
him, you must think of Sir Charles. Well, it is strange to see some men's
Fortune -- I am the only person in the world that could do you this good office.


Copyh. Good Lord!


Ion. And if you would be trusty and secret, I Would raise ye to a better Fortune
than the renewing your Lease. Hark in your Ear, you can swear to a thing upon
occasion -- umph.


Slouch. Must the thing be true or false, I pray.


Ion. Oh fie, what a question is that in this Age! True or false? why, it is all
one, it is all one, man. If true, there is the more Honor; if false, there is the
more Money: it is all one, I tell thee. I see, Friend, your neighbor there has
no great store of wit. --


Copyh. Wit! hang him Dunce, Dolt, Cuckoo: oons such another word and I Will
thrash thee as I would a Sheaf of Barley. 'Sbud Sir, you seem to be so good a
Gentleman, that I Will swear any thing for you, and so shall my Wife and
Daughter. There Is my hand on it.


Slouch. Nay, nay, hold you; I Will not stand out neither if you go to that.


Ion. Follow me then; Be faithful, and be rich. So now will I get Sir Charles
and the other Youth apprehended; then baffle their Evidence against me, and by
my Wit secure my Reputation. Come my good Friends.


Aside. Copyh. An honest conscientious Gentleman, I warrant him!


Exeunt. SCENE, III.
Enter Heartall and Aurelia. Heart. How is it possible I should think you love
me, when you so often suspect my Fidelity.


Aur. What have you done! Oh I shall be ruined for ever.


Heart. So far from it, that I have done thee a considerable favor* for my
Dear it is impossible now thou should be imposed upon.


Aur. But how shall I get a Husband now! Oh that doubt distracts me: if I had
but been married, before you had done this, I had not so much cared.


Heart. I confess the dear pleasure had been so much the safer: but however you
need fear no danger, for a Maidenhead is of that obliging quality, that a dull
Husband can no more know when his Wife has lost it, by any experiment he can
make upon her, than a Gamester can be secure, the set Gold is his own whilst
the Dice are throwing: it is true, hope and a strong Conceit may do a great deal.


Aur. Aye, but we have done more than by strong Conceit certainly.


Heart. We have done nothing but what we should; nay, than what there was
absolute necessity for: I could not live without possession of thee, nor
could thou love me, and not grant me life.


Aur. Aye, but the Rules of Virtue, think of that Sir.


Heart. How that quick breath, that tender sigh became thee; thy panting heart
sent out its Amorous Summons to bring Loves Champion once more to the Field.


Aur. Could we love on virtuously, were we married or so, it were another
matter.


Heart. Aye, gad that would be a hopeful matter indeed;

Aside. Virtuously! why, thy Virtue is involved still in thy Love. Love, that
like a rich and potent Lord possesses, each close Apartment of this Charming
Body, retains thy Virtue for some fitter season, and therefore shuts it up in
some dark Closet, till the Riotous Soul has done its Revelling.


Aur. And when it has done, what then Sir?


Heart. Then? Why, then Virtue like some Grave Chaplain of a Family, stalks out
and Preaches Temperance to the Senses, until another Banquet be ordained;

And then Virtue, that would against Loves Heaven rebel,
Envies his Joy, and shrinks into his Cell.

Aur. But what if I should be sick, and consequently troubled with a scruple in
Conscience?


Heart. Why then your only way will be to call your Chaplain Virtue out of the
Closet, and ask him for a dram of the Bottle.


Aur. Oh fie, well indeed my Dear, you are a very lewd wicked person, sincerely.


Heart. Indeed, my Dear, I am a very mild, passionate, constant, modest Fool,
sincerely.


Aur. Nay, I must confess you would never talk more than you should do; ah!
would you had been as reserved in another point.


Heart. Rather wish me an Eunuch, faith; it is the more obliging Curse, and the
only one I would wish the man that is to be thy Husband.


Aur. My Husband! Alas, I shall never have one now.


Heart. Yes, a good one, before to morrow night, if thou will.


Aur. Shall I indeed; who prithee, yourself!


Heart. Me? No, I shall make a better Friend than a Husband a thousand times. I
am ready to saint at the name on it, as some are at the sight of a Breast of
Mutton. But what think you of Sir Paul Eitherside?


Aur. He Is a Fool!


Heart. The fitter to be a Husband always: your men of Wit will discern your
slips of Youth, and are often cross, and ill natured.


Aur. To be my Lady Eitherside, a Coach and Six; my Valet, and two Footmen:
Well, I swear it may do.


Heart. Do? It must do: I know he loves thee to extremity; and let me alone to
carry on the Plot, only observe this, that when we are together, you always
slight me, and prefer him. 'Twill catch the Goose with less trouble.


Aur. I warrant ye, and now I love ye more dearly than ever, for this
contrivance to marry me.


Heart. And will you always be kind to me?


Aur. What! wrong my Husband?


Heart. Pish! Prithee no hard words, rather wrong any man than me. Can thou
be so cruel to let me lose thee, to lose the rapting Blessings that waited on
the Heaven of thy Love? No, either swear still to be true to thy Intrigue, or
thou shall never marry I Am resolved on it. --


Aur. Well, you are the strangest man: What would you have me do? Marry me
first, and we I talk of these things afterward.


Heart. Promise the Earnest of your Love the Wedding-night; which I hope will
be to morrow -- or --


Aur. Pish -- well -- if I must promise --


Heart. You must -- come then -- Married thou shall be, because I believe it is
convenient. But I would not lose thee for the world -- Hark, there is some body
coming -- Let Us away --


Exeunt. Enter Camilla and Chloe. Came. I like the Tune extremely; Prithee sing
it again.


SCOTCH SONG.
Two bonny Lads were Sawney and Jockey,
Blithe Jockey was loved, but Sawney unluckie;
Yet Sawney was tall, well-favour'd and witty,
But Ise in my heart thought Jockey more pretty;
For when he viewed me, su'd me, wooed me,
Never was Lad so like to undo me;
Fie, I cried, yet almost died,
Lest Jockey should gang, and come no more to me.
2.
Jockey would Love, but he would not Marry,
And Ise had a dread lest I should miscarry;
For his cunning Tongue with Wit was so gilded,
Tnat I was afraid my heart would have yielded;
Daily he pressed me, blessed me, kissed me,
Lost was the hour methought when he missed me;
Crying, denying, and sighing, I Would woo him,
But ah! much ado had I to gang fro him.
3.
But cruel Fate robbed me of this Jewel,
For Sawney would make him fight in a Duel,
And down in a Dale with Cypress surrounded
Ah! there to his death poor Jockey was wounded;
But when he thrilled him, felled him, killed him,
Who can express my grief that beheld him!
Raging, I tore my Hair to bind him,
And vowed, and swore, I Would never stay behind him.


Enter Crape. Crap. The Collonel's come, Madam.


Came. Go, make haste and pick those Gilly-flowers, and see the Rosecakes do not
burn.


Ex. Chloe. Enter Kinglove. Sir Char. I was conceiting the narrow Wicket of
your Garden-door to be the Gate of Paradise; and that I was summoned hither by
an Angel that loved me. I hope, Madam, you will exalt the fancy, and not let it
fall for want of encouragement.


Came. That were a way to make you turn Reprobate, and Despair. No, Sir, you
shall have Angelical entertainment here: Fair looks, kind words, and a
comfortable exhortation.


Sir Char. So! 'Gad I never had any luck when I touched upon any thing of
Scripture, it always turns to my disadvantage. An Exhortation. I hope, Madam,
you don't intend to make a Saint of me, and treat me with Sacrifice and Prayer?


Came. As I am an Angel I must be punctual in my office.


Sir Char. But thou art an Angel of mortal race, and therefore thy office is
different. --


Came. And I warrant you will say my influence is rather over bodies than souls;
but I Will not believe it: And since my Dignity is so Divine, it is fit I have
decent applause. Come first -- What have you to say to my face?


Sir Char. There Is so much perfection in it, that it is as impossible for me to
commend it justly, as it would be for me to laugh in the midst of the
possession of thy love: Thy Beauty being as far beyond all applause, as the
raptures of thy enjoyment is beyond all mirth.


Came. Your Servant, Sir. -- Well -- my Neck!


Sir Char. The Alabaster Column that supports Wit's Palace.


Came. So -- my Breasts!


Sir Char. Two Milky Hills of Joy,

Where Cupids lie,
And Lovers dye,
Consumed in Ecstacy.

Came. What, Rhyme too! that could never be extempore, that was stolen I am
sure. -- But, come, proceed. My knee --


Sir Char. Your knee! what a Devil, we are not come to the end of the Chapter
already, sure? Nay, faith, Madam, I Will have no dodging; for as I have entered
upon the Text, I am resolved to go through with the Sermon: Therefore either
give me your Question, or y' Gad I Will proceed without my Cue. 'Sdeath this is
just like beginning the first line of a Prayer, and then crying, Amen.


Came. Sir, from the Forehead to the Breast is known land, which you as well as
another may have liberty to treat of: But from the Breast to the Knee is Terra
Incognita, and can be discovered by none but my self.


Sir Char. Yes, by me, Columbus the second, who knows the land of Canaan to a
hair, and affirm its situation to be sub Zona Temperata, the South-East part of
the Globe. And my best way to be sure, is to travel thither. But then, Madam,
you must be my Pilot in the Voyage.


Came. My want of skill will throw you on some Rock or other.


Sir Char. I Will bring the Ship off again, I warrant ye. But, come, this all
talking, and no performing, is so like an old crazy couple --


Came. What would you do? Sure you love me better than to think the open Garden
a fit place for any other business. --


Sir Char. As well as I love you, I find by these Delays you have none for me.


Came. Be ungrateful and think so -- I know not how to help it.


Sir Char. Will you not revenge me upon your Husband? Did you not promise me?


Came. I did, and will perform it, but cannot this way now; think on some other
and try.


Sir Char. A Pox of this place; No Alcove, no Cave, no Convenience; nor can I
imagine any other way.


Came. Study, your Wit did not use to be Barren; Study some pleasant thing.


Sir Char. Well -- I have it: three things faithfully performed -- I will have
patience -- But if failed in -- without enjoyment it is impossible for me to
think you love me.


Came. Come then, Fortune for me: What are they?


Sir Char. First, I will have thee pull out two of his soundest Teeth, and send
'em to me in a piece of paper. Kneel down and Vow to do it.


Came. I Vow.


Sir Char. Secondly, You must contrive some way or other that I may kiss and
embrace you before his face. Vow too, this shall be done.


Came. This too shall be done.


Sir Char. So: Thirdly and lastly, that I may give him three fair fillups on
the Nose; and that he may know it, yet bear it patiently. Vow this too, and I
am satisfied.


Came. I Vow.


Sir Char. Very well! these things carefully performed, I will believe you love
me perfectly; and will with patience wait your opportunity for the last dear
and only favor.


Came. They are difficult; but since I have vowed, I Will do it, whatever happens.


Enter Crape. Crape. Make haste away, Sir, if you love your liberty, for
Captain Jonas, yonder, has accused you to Sir Oliver for attempting to Fire the
City, and the Officers are now searching for you. Your young friend is
apprehended for a Rape (Lord bless us!) and is just carrying before Sir Paul
Eitherside.


Sir Char. Ah, Damn the Treacherous Villain! The Rogue yesterday would have
bribed me to Murder him. And now, for fear I should accuse him, has forged
this Fanatical lie.


Came. Come with me, and I Will secure you from the Officers, and find some way to
get off your friend. Be constant, Sir, and then you will be grateful; for
though I am fettered to this tainted Limb, this Canker of the festring
Commonwealth, yet I have Loyal blood within my veins.


Sir Char. Thou must, I know it. Thou soft lovely Creature. Those that have Wit
like thee, must needs be Loyal.


This Married Lump, this, Husband, is thy shame:
Came. My shame indeed, and Husband but in Name.
And tho in Name I must his Wife appear.

Sir. Char. And tho in Name thou must his Wife appear,
Thou art the Mistress of a Cavalier.

Exeunt. The End of the Third Act.
ACT. IV.
SCENE I.
Enter Sir P. Eitherside, Jonas, Oldcutt, Copyhold, Phebe, Aurelia, Camilla,
Constable, Officers, with Phillipa Prisoner. Either. IT would be a great stain
to my discretion, and I should very much unguild the Jewel of my judgment, if I
should not believe the Circumstances of this Rape.


Phill. A Rape! what Villains are these? Your Ear, Sir, by all that is good,
it is impossible for me to commit a Rape if I would.


Either. Impossible! Ay, that is a fine Wheedle indeed: Impossible! no, Sir, we
don't doubt but you are Compos mentis for such a business, as well as a bigger
man.


Phill. Accept of this, Sir --

Gives money. And afford me but one half hour in private,
And you your self shall own it is very impossible.

Either. Half an hour in private! 'Gad I believe this young Rogue has an evil
design upon me too: Else why in private with me? I don't like his Leer; He Is an
Arch-Dog, I warrant him. Let Us see what he has given me -- hum -- Five Guineys
-- no, it will not do, for Captain Jonas has just now given me Ten.


Ion. And, Sir, as I was going to ensnare him according to my promise about
your business: The complaint of this Rape was made me by this honest fellow,
and the Villain soon after was seized. The other that we found going to fire a
house, has made his escape. But I doubt we shall have him e're long.


Old. A rare business, I faith -- What, Sir, will no less Crimes than Burning
our Houses, and Ravishing our Daughters serve your turn -- hah, a fine Boy,
faith -- The Rogue would make an excellent -- (what do you call him!) What an Eye
and Nose is there? Gad it is a very fine Boy.


Cop. and Slouch brought in. Either. Call in your Evidence there: you are
willing to swear all this, my friends.


Slouch. Ay, ay, Sir, -- Ay.


Cop. We are willing to swear to it, and 't please you, if 'twere as much more.


Ion. Ah -- ignorant Dogs.


Aside. Eith. How, not so, friend, I hope. Give 'em their Oaths, Dash. Captain
Jonas, you will swear too about the other business?


Ion. Most zealously, Sir: And with as clear a Conscience, I thank Heaven, as
ever Martyr suffered for Religion --


Kiss the Book. Either. I believe ye, faith -- And to say truth, these ten
Guineys have strengthened my belief exceedingly --


Phill. Ah, Cursed, Perjured Villains: I know 'em now, they were Sir Charles's
Tenants. Well, I see I must discover my self at last. There can be no other way.


Aside. Eith. Stand forth, Sweetheart, and by the Oath you have taken answer
to what shall be demanded.


Old. Sweetheart, Turn up your Hood.


Either. In the first place, where was this Violence committed?


Pheb. In the little Parlour, forsooth.


Either. In the Parlour! Lord bless us, why, what a shift was there! Why this
might have been a Murder, as well as a Rape, all things considered.


Phill. I have no patience to hear this; Pray, Sir, let me speak.


Ion. Pray hear the Accuser, Sir Paul; I think it is not fit the Evidence be
brow-beaten or disturbed; for as you were saying, Sir -- This might have come
to have been a Murder.


Pheb. Nay indeed, forsooth, I was terribly afraid he would have Murdered me;
for he pulled a Pistol out of his Pocket, which did so scare me --


Either. A Pistol too -- why this is worse and worse: And Charged with White
Powder, I warrant, because it should make no noise.


Old. Turn up your Hood, I say, woman, and turn your face to the Jury.


Cop. And then he swore bloodily. Phebe, why don't you tell Mr. Justice's
Worship what he swore, child?


Phebe. First he swore Damn him and Confound him, he would have his Will, or --


Slouch. Loard bless us!


Phebe. And then he swore by G, O, D, forsooth; and another new Oath he had by
the, by the twelve Postles.


Either. The Apostles -- Mercy on us, what an invention was there? O Tempora! O
Mores!


Came. I Will lay my life there is a Trick in this; and that cunning Villain,
Jonas, has taught this Wench her lesson.


Aur. There must be something in it by their so often whispering --


Old. Come, come, let him speak: Let Us hear what he can say for himself. What a
Ruby-lip the young Rogue has too?


Phill. I say that this is a Villainous Plot contrived against me, and there is
not one word true that these have sworn; but it is only done in design to
invalidate my Evidence against Captain Jonas there, who yesterday would have
bribed the Colonel to have Murdered ye.


Ion. Ha, ha, ha; Alas, weak malice: you will do well to produce your witness,
Sir, and then let the Court judge.


Phill. Ah wicked wretch! you know you have disabled me of that; but I have yet
one way left to expose thee. Know then, Sir Oliver, that I am --


Old. Hold your peace, Sir: I know what you are well enough: and how dare you,
Sir, defame the worthy Captain, hah -- he Murder me! He that from his Cradle
has held forth against the ungodly. -- He, a Villain! Sir, Sir -- I must tell
you plainly that you are. -- 'Dsbud, it is a fine youth -- a smooth-faced Rogue;
he makes me smile in the very midst of my indignation.


Aside. Either. Besides, to make defense ('against one that swears for the
Protector) without Witness, what a Novice art thou? not to know that it is not
Truth and Justice that carries a Cause, but substantial Evidence --


Ion. Sir, I think there remains no more, but that you commit him to safe
custody, in order to his Trial.


Old. Let him not out, but upon good Bail, Sir Paul; I would have him secured,
that I might know where to find the young Dog.

Aside. Captain, a word with you.


Ex. Sir Oliver, etc. Ion. I Will follow you, Sir, -- Bravely done, friends, of
all hands, and your reward shall be accordingly. But now begone -- I Will meet you
half an hour hence! Away.


Pheb. Yes, Sir.


Cop. Come, come, let us begone; I long to be fing'ring the Money.


Exit. Came. Now* Cosen, is your time: you, I am sure, have an interest with
him; for it is certain the young Gentleman is wronged.


Phill. What shall I do! I dare not discover my self, lest the Colonel should
come to know it: But then to be Imprisoned, is a hated Penance too.


Either. Well, Sir, do you consider on your condition? have you ten thousand
pound Bail?


Phill. Not I, Heaven knows!


Aur. Sir Paul, -- If I have the Interest in you, that you have often affirmed
I have, you cannot declare it better than in taking my word for his appearance.


Either. Ah, sweet Madam, sooner than any Alderman's in London: Ay, or than my
Lord Mayor's himself, upon my Integrity. Mr. Constable, give him his liberty,
and go about your business.


Constable. Sir, he has committed a Rape.


Exit. Either. Ye saucy Rascal, let him go, I say.


Phill. Madam, though this favor be extraordinary, that it is impossible I
should be grateful, yet my Innocence shall soon inform you, it is not
altogether ill-bestow'd.


Aur. More of that another time, Sir. Sir Paul, this civility has obliged me at
all times to avow my self your unfeigned, humble Servant sincerely.


Either. Dear Madam, your words have so powerful an influence upon me, that I
fear my breast wants room for the excessive joy; is stuck round with the darts
of your Beauty, like an Orange that is stuck with Cloves.


Enter Crape. Crape. Sir Paul, Mr. Alderman Thrum is below, and desires your
advice in a Law business; and, Madam, Mr. Heartall privately waits for you in
the Drawing Room.


Aur. Hush, softly, Fool.


Either. A pox of his business, and Mr. Alderman too, it could not come in a
worse time. Well, dear Saint, I Will but just speak to him, and be with you again
in a moment. 'Gad my Intrigue, I see, goes on rarely -- for she is a swinging
Fortune, and I believe begins to be desperately in Love with me.


Aside. Exit. Aur. Now to my first Love Heartall. What e're becomes of thee, I
find I must keep touch with him.


Exit Aur. Came. Go Crape, and convey this young Gentleman privately to Sir
Charles: They must even lie together to night, for we can have no convenience
for getting 'em away till to morrow. Make haste, and see the Servants be all
ready for my design. Away -- I think I hear Sir Oliver coming --

Ex. Phill. and Crape. And now to my three Injunctions. If I should fail after
having so faithfully promised, he might have reason to doubt my Wit, as well as
my Love. Let me see: First to pull two of his soundest Teeth out: To be kissed
and embraced before his face: And to contrive him a beating, yet keep him
patient. -- Three fine frolicks indeed to do to a Husband, for the sake of a
Lover. But hanged, he deserves it, and I am resolved to try; I used to be lucky
at mischief.


Enter Oldcutt. Old. O Soul! I have had such sport yonder with the old Alderman
-- I have so firk't him with Wit; so flaug'd him with stinging Jokes, thou
would admire, had thou heard it. 'Gad I never talked better since I was a
man. My mouth was as full of Wit, as the Sea of Water: And I never spet, but
out came a Jest, that put the Table in a greater Roar than there is at
Guild Hall, when one of us is chosen Sheriff.


Came. Yet had less Wit in it than a Speech made to my Lord Mayor, Penned by the
City Poet, and spoke upon a Pageant.


Old. A Speech made to my Lord Mayor! 'Gad some of those are notable things, I
can tell you that: But as I was saying, we had such laughing: but at what
think thou?


Came. At you.


Old. Me! why how now, you crooked Rib? laugh at me? what at Mr. Chairman? 'Gad
I Would have had a Sergeant at Arms at his back, if I had found that. No, Soul, y'
are mistaken; you are out, I faith: The main Jest was about my laced Cloak.


Came. About your laced Cloak!


Old. Ay, and about his saying that Sir Peter Codshead looked more like a
Gentleman than I; though I proved my Cloak better Laced; my Coat better Velvet;
my Body better Shaped, and my Legs fuller in the Calf.


Came. Thrum, and all you mean, Sir.


Old. Thrum and all: What, do you grow pert, you little Buttock! hah! am I the
subject of your Jokes? Come, come hither and kiss me for that, and beg my
pardon: Come, Rogue, come, and smite me over the Lips: Look, I ll stand fair.


Came. Kiss you! not for a Million.


Turns her head away. Old. How! not kiss nown dear Husband for a Million:
That Is fine, I faith -- I Will try that.


Goes to her. Came. If you expect I should live an hour after, forbear, Sir.


Old. Hey day! what is the Devil in thee? why do thou turn away thy head so? I
am not infectious, am I?


Came. I know not that, Sir: but you are strangely altered of late.


Old. Altered! It Is unknown to me if I am: But how, prithee?


Enter Crape, Dash and Footman. A Letter. Crap. Now Is your time! Carry it
cunningly, and my Lady has promised to reward you bountifully.


Dash. I warrant you; let her not fear me.


Foot. Nor me!


Old. But, Soul! prithee how am I altered? in what nature? hah! I long to know
what the Devil ails me?


Dash. Sir, so please you, here is a Letter from Sir Joseph. Oh --


Stands off from him, and turns his head away. Old. What, has he got a wry Neck
too? Come hither, Sir.

Exit. From whom do you say -- he is gone -- what can be the meaning of this? Come
you hither, Sirrah.

To Footman. Hark in your Ear! take this Note and go to my Scrivners, and tell
him --

Turns away. How now, Sirrah; what are you looking on?

Turn your head this way, Sirrah.


Foot. O Lord -- I cannot! I cannot! Ugh, ugh.


Ex. Coughing. Enter Crape. Old. They are bewitched sure. Oh, Doll! prithee,
dear Doll, run after that Bufflehead, and pull him back again by the Ears.


Crape. Oh, fough: This is past all enduring.


Runs away. Old. What the Devil ails 'em all? They shun me as a Town-Rook does
a Sergeant in Term-time. Soul, -- prithee unriddle this Mystery: Are they all
mad, or am I? Udsooks, I Am sure I ail nothing.


Came. Ah, you perceive it not, Sir; and indeed I was loath to tell you, for fear
of making you angry. But since it must out, and that like a good Wife, I am
obliged in Conscience to discover and help your Imperfections. Know, Sir, that
you are extremely troubled with a most insufferable, nauseous, abominable,
stinking Breath.


Old. A stinking Breath!


Came. Most Pestilential Sir! enough to breed distempers in a family. It must of
necessity be occasioned by some ill Teeth. Pray open your mouth, Sir -- Ay,
it is so -- I see 'em now. -- Look, Crape -- Oh monstrous: they are as black as
Ink.


Crap. Ay, or Charcoal, upon my honesty, Sir: Get 'em pulled out quickly, or
you are undone.


Came. Let it be done immediately. Delay not a minute longer. Why, it is enough,
Sir, to poison all your Wit, and utterly ruin all your excellent Discourse of
State Policy.


Old. How! poison my Wit: Run Crape! run and call a Surgeon instantly: 'Gad
I Will not leave a Tooth in my head, rather than the least grain of my Wit should
be damnify'd: Run, run Crape; Ugh, ugh -- I think I begin to find it my self
now.


Came. Bid the Surgeon pull out two of the soundest, and be sure to bring two
hollow Teeth with him, to have ready, if he should ask to see 'em.


Old. I have observed that this imperfection is very natural to a Statesman. An
Orator sooner gets it than any other man; for I remember, I my self have often
turned my Ear to hear a famous Politician of this Age speak, when it was
impossible for me to turn my face to him. -- Oh, are you come, Sir; that is well.

Enter Surgeon. Why! here it seems I am like to be poisoned by a damned
confounded couple of Teeth. Pray look, do you see 'em?


Surg. See 'em! Ay, Sir* too plain: Stop, stop your breath, I beseech you, Sir,
-- Ods so -- it is well you sent for me in time: Pray, Sir, stop your breath.


Old. Stop my breath -- What a pox, would the fellow have me choke my self? Are
they then so dangerous, do you say?


Surg. Dangerous, Sir! I assure you, if the Acrimonious quality of this Aqueous
malignity had dilated it self through the nervous parts belonging to the Dentes
or Teeth, upon the Thorax or Jugular Vein, the Virulity or sharpness of it had
doubtless infected, or, as a man may say, penetrated --


Old. Or as a man may do as well as say. A pox, Sir, I am not at leisure to
hear out your Dispensatory at this time; prithee let thy Tongue wag no more
till my Teeth are out, and then --


Surg. Well, Sir, well, I stand corrected -- Sit still, I beseech you, and open
your mouth.


Old. Be sure you take care of my Tongue; I would not have that pinched for a
1000 l.


Surg. Good Sir, be patient, I warrant you.


Pulls it out and shows it. Old. Oh, the Devil go with it; is it gone?


Surg. Gone -- Ay, you need not fear, Sir, -- I am Master of my faculty -- Do You
see, Sir? was this fit to stick in the Jaws of a Politician?


Old. Ods-heart -- it looks like the Tooth of a Camel, rather than a Politician
-- Come, come, out with the other -- quickly -- I am impatient; It Is, it is gone:
'Gad if all the Committee had such Grinders, we should have a great many very
unsavory Votes amongst us -- Come, come -- aw --


Gapes. Surg. Shut your Eyes, Sir, and turn your Fauces or Jaw Bone toward the
North-East. --


Old. The North-East! Prithee which is the North-East? 'Sbud how do thou
think it is possible a man should know the points of the Compass that has such
Teeth in's head.


Surg. There, there, Sir, to that Corner: Wink, Sir, pray wink.


Old. Prithee make haste, and out with it.

I am to meet the Cabal to night at the Coffee-house about earnest business. --
Oh, oh my Jaws are torn in pieces.


He pulls, and Old. struggles. Surg. Pshaw, pshaw, you must have patience, Sir,
it is not yet out.


Old. It only hangs by a piece of skin, I can pull't out now my self -- Hah --
what is here? Ods-heart, the soundest Tooth in my head -- Oh, Dog, Villain, Son
of a Whore -- I am ruined, spoiled, undone, doomed never to bite any thing
harder than a Custard henceforward: Stand, stand out of my way -- I Will Murder
him.


Came. Bid the fellow begone, Crape.

Aside. How, my Dear, has the Rascal mistaken and drawn a sound Tooth? --
Prithee -- let us see it. --


Crape. How, a sound Tooth! now out upon him for a blind Villain.


Pushes him out. Old. Stand away, I say, and let me come to him; I Will not leave
a bone of him unbroken as big as a Capon's leg -- Oh damned Son of a Whore -- a
sound Tooth --


Ex. after him. Came. Ha, ha, ha; this was rarely performed, and one of my great
injunctions is prosperously concluded. But now if the Surgeon should play
false, through fear, and discover the trick; to prevent that, run Crape, and
give him his reward -- for money is as great an encouragement to a mercenary
fool, as a beautiful Mistress is to a man of Wit. There Is no danger to be
feared, where there is such recompense. Away, there is some body coming.


Exeunt. Enter Heartall, Aurelia. Heart. Was he so very fond, say thou, my
Dear?


Aur. Oh, to admiration; took my Bail for the Gentleman's appearance at first
word; and was so careful to be Rhetorical and Florid, as if his life lay
upon it, or his preferment sincerely.


Heart. Nay, the snare is so well laid, the Woodcock must of necessity be
caught.


Aur. And can you say we do not live in a very wicked age, where it is counted
so insufferable a piece of folly to Marry.


Heart. No, faith, not when we are so lucky to have the good effects of
Marriage without it.


Aur. Fie, you should be more generous than to insult.


Heart. You, methinks, should be more kind than to call this a wicked age, only
for being passionate and obliging; nay, only for giving you a brisk taste of a
Vessel of excellent Wine, when otherwise you might be condemned to the
Droppings of the Matrimonial Tap, as palled and insipid as a Vintner's Tub full
of dead Wine and Flies.


Aur. And is not this a sort of vanity? Nay, now I see it is not in your power
to forbear insulting, for you Men always love the Triumph above the Conquest.
Oh, what a malicious pleasure you take to enjoy her for a Mistress, that you
another -- as a Virgin for a Bride.


Heart. Ha, ha, ha: Why, faith, I confess there is a kind of a Tickling in it.


Aur. And then to boast of it at the Tavern to one of your friends -- as thus
-- Ah, Jack -- I have the pretty'st Rogue to my Mistress, so soft -- so kind,
and not above 18 at furthest: I lay with her all last night, you Dog -- (A pox,
some damned bulking Whore or other, says he.) A Whore cry you again, Damme, a
Person of Quality's daughter -- I have been intimate with her these two years,
and design now to Marry her off to one of my friends -- because I fear the poor
Rogue is breeding.


Heart. Ha, ha, ha; Faith I Will kiss thee for this, and will own some such
foolish vanity we men have; but it is with security, for we always take care of
Names and Places. But hark -- I think I hear Sir Paul coming: now to our set
Carriage: I with my Hat off, thus cringing; and as sneaking and demure as the
picture of a Whining Lover before a Novel.


Aur. And I as full of ridiculous scorn, as a Court-Lady that mistakes pride
and ill-breeding for becoming state and grandeur, that has the ambition to be
admired by every one, yet by her ill carriage gives every one occasion to hate
her.


Heart. Hist! he comes --

Enter Sir Paul and Boy. This is a cruelty, Madam, I little expected from you
--


Bowing. Either. Sirrah, tell their Worships I*ll meet 'em at the Coffee-house
presently.


Aur. I think I gave you little encouragement: Pray forbear this discourse,
Sir; indeed you are strangely troublesome --


Proudly. Heart. I love you faithfully.


Aur. Y' are the more unlucky, in my opinion: Dear, Sir Paul, your entire
Servant. Lord, I have been so plagued with Impertinencies since you went.


Either. Say you so, Madam: What had I best do now? -- Draw, Sir* Methinks
every Gentleman should have Wit enough to know when his discourse to a Lady is
grateful. Lord! how the poor fellow looks?


Aside. Heart. Yes, Sir -- I shall know when to speak: and to you, Sir, for
whose sake I perceive I am thus slighted.


Aur. Come, Sir Paul, I have some rarities in my Closet; Pray lend me your hand
a little.


Heart. Well -- I shall find an hour.


Eith. Find an hour, Sir!


Aur. Nay, prithee, Dear, Sir Paul, don't mind him, I warrant he mistakes me
for his Landladies Maid or his Sempstress.


Eith. 'Gad if he threatens me again, I Will take the Law of him; I know how to
deal with such Tories as himself; I Will hoist him into Westminster Hall with a
wet finger, and so drill him from Court to Court, till he is as poor as a
Church-Mouse, or an honest Attorney.


Exeunt. Heart. Sol. Ha, ha, ha -- give you, Sir, -- give you joy. Well, I
think I have by this business a little exposed the humor of the times, and
shown what uncertain Merchandise a Woman is, and what luck all young Traders in
Love are liable to -- But by the way of instruction to my Brethren; were I to
begin the World again -- I should sooner suspect an affected coyness, than a
careless gaiety; for a Cracked Virgin is as certainly known by her scornful
look, and over-acted modesty as a private Bawd is by her Lozenges and Practice
of Piety. Well -- if things hit luckily, I shall meet her to morrow night, till
when I leave her to her Coxcomb, -- How now, what is the matter?


Shreek within. Enter Phillipa, running cross the Stage with her Breeches in
her hand. Phill. Oh, I am undone! lost! ruined! whither shall I fly?


Ex. Enter Sir Charles in his Nightgown, with a Light. Sir Char. Nay, I am
resolved to know who thou art, though I follow thee to Sir Oliver's bedside --
Hah -- who is this? what, Ned?


Heart. Sir Charles, is it possible? Sure this house is Faiery-land. Why how in
the Name of Wonder came you hither? and what Nun is that you have made do such
Penance?


Sir Char. When I Have overtaken her, thou shall know more; till when, farewell
--


Heart. What c^n this mean? and how does he dare to venture thus into the house
of his enemy? nay, and like an eager Falcon, Chase his Quarry, even into the
very snare of the Fowler. It Is very strange; and if my Mistress were not secure
with her Fool in the Closet, I should be damnably suspicious of a
Counter-Intrigue: but since that is impossible, I am the less disquieted. Oh --
here they come again.


Enter Sir Charles and Phillipa. Sir Char. This is the oddest adventure, Ned, I
ever met with -- my little friend here; my Companion, Phillip, by being this
night my Bedfellow, I have found to be a Woman.


Heart. A Woman!


Sir Char. A Woman by this light, or else I have lost one of my senses.


Heart. Ha, ha, ha; this is the strangest chance: but, prithee, how came the
discovery?


Sir Char. Why, Sir, by the help of an especial friend we were secured here to
night from the Officers and Sir Oliver; and being forced to make shift with one
bed, we lay together, when a little while since my Bedfellow being fast asleep.
I had the good fortune to know my mistake, and found in my arms a young
Beautiful Woman, with little round swelling Breasts, white and fragrant Bosom;
and, in fine, all things thereunto belonging and appertaining.


Heart. Faith, y' are a very lucky man, Sir; for my part, I could never meet
with these surprising blessings.


Phill. Sir, if ever you would oblige a poor unhappy creature, that never meant
you any wrong. I beg you to let me go without making any further discovery.


Sir Char. Oh, to do that, is impossible for me.


Phill. When you know me, I fear you will hate me, and discard me your presence
for ever; which (if you do) I am sure will break my heart.


Sir Char. Thou can not think me sure so barbarous: What* my dear friend, the
faithful Partner of all my troubles, that in my greatest necessity supplied my
wants -- no -- I shall love thee better now than ever.


Phill. Oh, if I were but sure of this!


Kisses her. Sir Char. Thou art; let this confirm it. Come, speak boldly.


Phill. Since then it must be known, my Name, Sir, is Phillipa --


Sir Char. Ha.


Phill. D' ye start -- Nay, then my fears increase, and I am again undone.


Sir Char. Phillipa, what that beauteous Virgin that so much did love me; who,
though an Heiress, left a mighty Fortune to spend her days in discontented
Travel.


Phill. The very same, Sir.


Sir har. Phillipa, that disguised at Worcester Fight, so nearly lost her life
for me, that since in all my miseries kept by me, she that I slighted for her
Father's sake; and because he was a Rebel, scorned and laughed at.


Phill. She, Sir, the poor unhappy she.


Heart. I think I have some Loyalty; yet I should no more have lost the
possession of such a beauty, because her Father was a Rebel; than I should
desert the Mansion House of my family, because my Father died there.


Phill. I conjure you, Sir, by your Loyalty, and that I know is sacred; be not
angry with me; let me not lose you quite, though you cannot love me; all my
Estate is yours; I freely give it: so is my heart the dearest faithful Closet
of your Merit. Look not then on me as my Father's daughter, but a poor Maid
that loved, and was unhappy.


Sir Char. Let my arms seize my heart's divinest Joy, or it will break its
Breast to meet the blessing. But think not, dearest, of my life, thy wealth
could charge me thus? No, that is far below me; and thou art molded with so
many Virtues; so many splendid Graces shine about thee, that to desert thee,
were the worst of follies: besides, whatever thy Father was, thou art for the
King, I am sure: Hah, art thou not?


Phill. Yes from my Soul.


Sir Char. Then thou art mine for ever.

Embraces her. The rest of thy story -- I Will hear within, when thou art warmer
clothed. Come, Ned, thou shall go with us -- for I believe there is no getting
out for thee to night.


Heart. With all my heart, Sir: by this means I shall see my Mistress the
sooner.


Aside. Sir Char. I hope they are all asleep, and have not heard us -- Come my
bent life.


Phill. This was beyond my hopes. --


Exeunt. SCENE. A Coffee-house.
Eitherside and several Men sitting smoking at one Table, and Oldcutt and
Jonas seeming to be earnestly in dispute at another, etc. Enter Coppyhold,
Slouch in Tawdry fine Clothes. Copp. I have often wondered how a great many of
these Sparks of the Town lived so high, and went so fine: but I find now it may
be done without a miracle; for if they are owners of a good, tough, durable
Conscience, and can but be ingenious, it is evident there are such fine toys to
be had, as fine Clothes and Money.


Slouch. Ay, there are such Toys as Halters to be had too; I wish we are not
forced to play with them at last.


Copp. Halters! ay, prithee keep them to thy self like a shallow brained fool
as thou art; the word is much too low for my imagination; for I intend to swear
on till I am a Person of Quality, and then I know my fate will be different.


Slouch. Nay, we are pretty well dip't now; we are over boots, thanks to our
Stars, and may as well go forward now as be trapt, and so forced to swear back
again. But prithee what were those two that we saw hooted through the streets
just now? Romans do they call 'em?


Copp. Romans! no, nor Apostles neither, Fool: Why, what an Ignoramus is this!
he has no more wit now in his new Clothes, than he had in his old Gray Jacket
that he followed the Plough with: They were two men suspected to be Priests,
fool; and, faith, deserved the disgrace for ordering their business no better;
had I been in their cases, I would have got preferment instead of a punishment;
I would in a short time have risen to have been a Holy Friar after the Order of
St. Dominick.


Slouch. And so be Hanged, Drawn and Quartered after the Order of the House of
Commons.


Copp. Not a word more of Hanging, lest I prophecy on thy Fate. -- See, yonder is
the Captain and the Cabal; let us go and sit down.


Sit down. Enter Lieutenant Broom and a Merchant. Coffee-Boy. Coffee or Tea.
Gentlemen, do you want any Coffee?


Broom. This Coffee house is the Epitome of Hell, where all sorts of
male-contented Fiends are in office. Do thou see that fellow, Ned, there in
the Plush-Jacket?


Merch. That shakes his Noddle so?


Broom. The same; that Rogue was one of the Committee of Abjuration, and
without doubt is now speaking Treason to the Rascal that sits over against him.


Merch. For heavens sake what is he with the Spectacles?


Broom. Why, faith, I think, if it be possible, a worse Villain than the other.
One Sir Timothy Tiburn, that had an Estate given him by the last King of sacred
Memory, sold it lately to raise Forces to fight against this. Prithee look on
'em; Did thou ever see such a stigmatized Crew?


Merch. It Is ever so, your Coffee-house, I have observed the Mart of the
Mobile, and thronged by people of all sorts and qualities, where your Mechanic
may vent Sedition at an easy rate, and look as big as your Alderman or Grandee.


Broom. Let Us sit down and observe.


Oldcutt reading the News. Old. reading. Hum; what is here? Ordered that a Bill
be brought in for Naturalizing, and this Question be debated, Whether a
Presbyterian Dog's Son may not Marry an Independent Bitches Daughter, they
being Brother and Sisters Children. Why, what a mad Quaere is this -- Ha -- and
here again. Resolved by the Reverend the Judges of the Law, that it shall be
present Death for any Phanatick to hang himself. -- Tear it, tear it -- don't
let it be seen. -- Tear it, I say.


Broom. How, Sir! Five hundred Jesuits do you say?


Ion. More, Sir; near Six hundred, with Monks, Secular Priests and others.


1 Commit. And found in a Cave in a Garden at Lambeth?


Ion. So the Intelligence says, Sir; and you know that cannot lie: Besides, upon
occasion I can bring those will swear it.


Slouch. If he should bring us in again now for this, 'twere fine.


Copp. Peace, Fool: why if he should, we must do it.


Broom. Pray, Sir, what is supposed to be their design?


Ion. Why, Sir, as I am credibly informed, their design was to dig a way under
the Thames to White Hall.


Broom. Under the Thames, Sir!


Old. Ownds, Treason -- I smell Powder -- A second Powder Plot -- The whole
State's in danger. Under the Thames! why who the Devil would have thought it
had bin possible?


1 Com. This Plot was hatched in Rome, I warrant you.


Broom. These are rare Rogues now.


Merch. This lie well spread, is enough to raise a Rebellion.


Broom. And you say, Sir, there are several will affirm this to be true.


Ion. A great many, Sir; go but to Toby Papscull, at the Sign of the Rams-horn,
over against the Pillory in Cornhill, and you have it printed under their
hands. Hold, I think I have a List of their Names in my Pocket. Oh here it is.


Takes a paper out. Old. Hah, and I profess all worthy Persons -- I know 'em
intimately. Let me see -- here is Jeremy Rakehell, Sir John Bullyrock, John
Greasy and Sawny Scrubham; all good men and true.


Broom. Who is that* Rakehell, pray Sir?


Old. Jeremy Rakehell -- why, Sir, -- he is a Counselor at Law.


Broom. So.


Old. A very ingenious fellow; I faith, and has the best way of forging deeds,
and picking up Evidence of any in the Inns of Courts* -- Oh, the Rakehells were
all great Lawyers, and ever strong supporters of our Cause.


Broom. I believe no less, Sir. But, Sir John Bullyrock, what is he?


Old. He; why he is a pushing Captain, that will fight any thing under the Sun
upon any Cause, without fear, wit, conscience or honesty. Oliver Knighted him
for breaking his head at a Match at Football.


Ion. The Bullyrocks were ever brave fellows: the Protector himself was a
Bullyrock by the Mothers side.


Broom. Ay, and a Villain by the Fathers. -- Well, Sir, the next. -- What Is
that John Greazy?


Old. John Greazy; why, faith, a notable fellow too. A Tallow-Chandler, that
formerly kept a Melting-house, next door to Doctor Cluttergoods, the great
Orthodox Minister, and politickly placed there by our party with design to
stink the Doctor out of the Parish.


Broom. A very excellent design, I faith, Sir.


Merch. Yes, and deserves only hanging: But who is this last, Sawny Scrubham?
that is a name I never yet heard of.


Old, Why, Sir, he is a red-hair'd Scotchman, that will engage upon his honor
to give the Itch to a whole Army; and to that degree, that in a short time they
shall scratch themselves to Death: A very necessary fellow, faith, and will be
employed suddenly upon a great design.


Ion. He will so.


Broom. Ha, ha, ha; the Rascals make me laugh at what I hate.


Eitherside and a Tailer at another Table, quarrelling about State-politicks.
Eith. Sir, you are an impertinent fellow to pretend to talk about State Affairs.


Tail. Come, come, Sir, I know what I say, and will maintain it.


Eith. You pretend to talk of Chronology, and of Genealogy, of the policies of
Princes, and of the King of France. Come, what is the King of France? whose Son
was he?


Tail. The Son of his Father, Sir, otherwise called Lewis the 13th, and
Grandchild of Henry Burbon, surnamed the Great: He Is one that keeps a standing
Army of a 100000 Men; and I suppose will firk us, if we have not more care.


Eith. He firk us, 'Gad we have 400 Men in little England, that will snap him
up as a Crow does an Oyster.


Tail. They must open their Purses a little more then.


Eith. Sir, the Land is rich, and flourishes in security, and that it is good
policy to keep a standing Army -- I say it is nonsense.


Tail. Ask the Protector that, and hear what he says: Ah, would I might advise.


Eith. You advise! why, what are you, Sir, if you go to that, that you would
advise?


Tail. Sir, I am a Man as well as you, though my Profession be but mean.


Eith. Why, what is your Profession, Sir?


Tail. What I am not ashamed of Sir: I am a Woman's Tailer, Sir.


Either. A Tailer, Sir, and talk of Politics! 'Gad thou deserve to be run
through the Guts with thy own Bodkin. A Tailer! Sirrah, mind your business, and
Pad my crooked Ladies Gown on the right side, that her Bunch may not be seen --
But never exercise your Needle in stiching the Commonwealth, you Rascal.


Tail. Sir, this place is free for any one, and I Will have my penyworth of
Politics as well as the best of you. I know no reason why a Tailer should not
have the privilege to talk Treason as well as a Knight.


Eith. Sirrah, I am a Justice of Peace, and a Counselor at Law; and you are an
Impudent fellow to contend with a man of my Honor and Authority.


Tail. Sir, I have bin Scavenger, and am now a Constable, and care not this for
your Honor and Authority.


Eith. Sirrah, I will chastise thee with this Mug.


Tail. If you do, I shall show* you Moorfields play.


Eith. How, Sirrah; I Will try that.


Fight here. Broom. Hold, Valiant Knight and Tailer, cool your Choler: No
bloodshed, I beseech you; I Am come to qualify the business and divert you:
I Will show you a new Satyr.


Eith. A Lowzy shred, an empty Pin-cushion and affront me: 'Gad I Would have eaten
the Rogue up, but that I was afraid his Thimble and Sheers would stick in's
Throat.


Broom. No more, Sir, I beseech you; he is penitent; and pray have patience and
hear this* it is a new Song, was given me this morning -- I Will Sing it you --


Old. Well, come, prithee let us hear it. --


SONG.
NOw, now the Tories all must droop,
Religion and the Laws,
And Whiggs of Commonwealth get up
To Tap the Good Old Cause:
Tantivy-Boys must all go down,
And haughty Monarchy;
The Leather Cap must brave the Crown,
And Hey then up go We.
II.
The Name of Lord shall be Abhorred,
For every Man's a Brother;
What Reason then in Church or State
One Man should Rule another?
When we have Pill'd and Plundered all,
And Levelled each Degree,
We Will make their plump young Daughters fall,
And Hey then up go We.
III.
We Will down with all the Versities,
Where Learning is professed,
Because they Practice and Maintain
The Language of the Beast:
We Will Exercise within the Groves,
And Teach beneath a Tree;
We Will make a Pulpit of a Cask,
And Hey then up go We.
IV.
What tho the King and Parliament
Do not accord together,
We have most cause to be content;
This is our Sunshine weather:
For if good Reason should take place,
And they should once agree,
'Dzowns who'd be in a Round-head's Case,
For Hey then up go We.
V.
We Will break the Windows which the Where
Of Babylon has Painted;
And when the Bishops are run down,
Our Deacons shall be Sainted.
Thus having quite Enslaved the Town,
Pretending it is too free;
At last the Gallows claims her own,
And Hey then up go We.


Broom. Ha, what think you?


Ion. That you shall be beaten abundantly: Down with him, friends.


Broom. There goes more to the beating a Soldier than you imagine -- Have at
you.


All draw and fight off. The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT. V.
SCENE I. An Orchard.
Enter Sir Charles K. Heartall, Phillipa. Sir Char. NOw all my Joys are
Crowned, and nothing but the Bond, the sacred Bond of Marriage can have power
to make addition to my Blessings; which shall be done, and suddenly.


Phill. When you please, Sir.


Sir Char. Three days shall be the utmost time; till when, Madam, let me desire
you to keep this garb, and not discover your self to any one, till what I have
designed comes to perfection. -- I have had secret Intelligence of this
perjured Rascal, this Villain that swore the Rape against thee, and intend now
to expose him.


Hear. That was a precious Rogue.


Sir Char. I have bin with Council about it, and will by Proxy get him
apprehended; till when, my dear, let no one know your sex or quality, lest it
should prevent proceedings.


Phill. I am forewarned, Sir, and will in every thing obey you.


Sir Char. Thou kindest, dearest of thy sex -- how am I bound to thee! thou,
that like the Darling Genius of the Heavens, consigned by Divine Power to
reward Virtue too generously, have repaid Ingratitude with heaps of dazzling
Gold, and much more dazzling Beauty.


Hear. Forty thousand pound and a pretty Lady: 'Gad 'twould make me distracted
-- I should do nothing all day long, but tell my money, and kiss my wife, and
then be most insufferable insolent: but what would make another man proud, I
find makes you ashamed; which, faith, I think is the meaner folly of the two,
though it be more grateful.


Sir Char. However, of the two evils, I Am sure it is the best, though, I
confess, Ned, very unfit for thy constitution; for thou, like a factious
Statesman, would be no more contented with a mean folly, than with a mean
estate; so that the consequence might be dangerous, therefore it is high time
for thee to grow wise. But who comes here?

Enter Broom. What, my man of mickle might! It Is Spring always when
Nightingales appear. How do* thou, Lieutenant?


Broom. Noble Colonel, much the better to see you well; why, faith, I have bin
scowring your Coffee* house yonder; I have chastised some of the factious
Rogues for you --


Sir Char. Ha, ha, ha.


Heart. And prithee in what old stump or hollow Tree? have thou lived like a
Cuckoo since we parted -- hah.


Sir Char. What news from our great Master and the Royal Party?


Broom. The good news I hear is, that the Protector lies a dying.


Sir Char. 'Twould be better news if he were hanged.


Broom. And we are all in hopes to see good days again; my ill news is, that the
King wanting a Hundred thousand pounds, can by his Loyal Party be supplied but
with Fourscore; so that he is in extreme distress for the other Twenty to
dispatch an extraordinary affair. Ah; Colonel, did you flourish as formerly? I
know you would be the first to offer this.


Sir Char. So will I now the first. And thus low bend my knee -- with thanks to
the Divine Powers for giving me ability. Now my best Love, show thy self all
Divine; show the sordid World how thy Celestial soul surmounts 'em in an
unequalled Generosity; thou freely gav'st me Wealth, give me then leave as
freely to dispose it to this great advantage, and lay it at my gracious
Monarch's feet. -- Do this, and with a noble freedom do it; and all the
dearest motions of my soul are thine eternally, as firm and constant as the
Center is to the Earth, or the Sun to Heaven.


Phill. Sir, I have done it already; and now I hope you will think me a Royalist.


Sir Char. Have thou? that was an Angel's voice, and Millions of Blessings
Crown thee for the Deed. Oh my best Love, how can I e're requite thee?


Phill. I heard the news yesterday, and did it with the greatest haste and
secrecy imaginable.


Ex. Phill. and Broom. Sir Char. A thousand thanks to the most generous of her
sex: And once more humbly thus I thank the Heavens for giving me this means to
serve my Prince. Oh, did he want as many drops of blood from the dear Center of
my life, my heart, as he does pounds from my now happy store, should it not
freely bleed? Strong in my zeal beyond Mortality, with my own hands I Would crush
the trembling Lump, until the Noble Loyal Debt was paid.


Heart. But hark you, friend, laying these whimsical Transports aside; Are you
mad? what security do you expect for this money?


Sir Char. None, Sir, nor desire it: The Honor I shall gain outweighs all
Interest. --


Heart. Ay, and yet this is so damned an Age, that there is very few are
ambitious of that honor.


Sir Char. Security: Were thou not a Fool, whom I sometimes call my Friend --
I would quarrel with thee for that question* Why thou moderate Coxcomb, thou
Time-server, would thou have me deal with my King as with a Scrivener, or
change the Royal favor of his Countenance for a bargain and sale like a
Plebeian? No, it is my glory; I am a friend to the Nation, in being so to him;
Who loves the King, must love his Honor, Grandeur and Prerogative* His Regal
State, which Money must support. -- It Is the Nation's Honor and Magnificence,
a noble and becoming Royalty: And he that dares be so, abhorred a thing so
wretched, lost in all discerning eyes to see his Monarch want in such a
juncture, such a time as this; yet be so basely poor, to hoard up Wealth: His
very Soul is dirt, and should be swept hence with the Common Rubbish of the
World.


Heart. But it is fit the Subject be repaid* Colonel.


Sir Char. A Loyal Subject thinks himself repaid
By purchasing his Country Peace and Honor;
The only just return a King should make*
Who cannot pay each Subject as he would:
The zealous Ancients sacrificed to Heaven,
Raised Altars, built rich Temples to the Deity;
Yet who e're knew the Sacred Power return
One Penny back, but only in effects,
In show'ring grateful blessings for their Zeal;
And so the King does daily pay his People.

Heart. To you now this is plain; but there are a sort of men in this Age, that
say they can see better.


Sir Char. They lie --
Your factious busy Coxcombs never see;
Their treacherous fear still makes the object double:
Double their meanings are; their Actions double;
And more than ten times double their false Hearts:
These are the Rogues that look on Government
With as false eyes as thoughts; and gape for Rebellion
As stranded Fishes the return of the Wave,
That wafts 'em back to their own Element.

Heart. This plain dealing will hardly get your estate again; Sir Charles; and
for my part, I should be very loath to see such honesty as yours ill rewarded.


Sir Char. Honesty; Ned, in this Age, is a very scarce commodity, because it is
woven with Loyalty* and true Loyalty* expects no reward; for that,

Like Charity to the Poor,
Is repaid from the Eternal Store.

Heart. I think so, for the Devil a penny it will have from Earthy Coffe^ as
times go.


Sir Char. Yet that I have a little Honesty*
I know, because I ever hated Flattery;
I cannot bow the supple head and knee
To an unthinking heap of Wealth and Honor:
Nor tell the gaudy Rebel he does politickly,
To side with the Factious City against the King.
I cannot Countenance a wrong Title to be preferred.
Nor shake my head, nor rail at the ill Times,
When I am Conscious, I am one that makes 'em so.
I cannot Lie for Honor, Pimp for Profit,
Plot for Salvation, nor Preath up Commonwealths;
And therefore in my Conscience I am honest.

Heart. Faith -- I believe it; and what e're I have said, was only to extract
this Quintessence; this brave opinion from you. And so dear Colonel, your
humble Servant; I have a little business, and must beg your pardon.


Sir Char. Your time's your own, Sir.


Heart. Now to Aurelia -- I hope by this she is married.


Exit. Sir Char. I am very glad he is gone, for he might else have hindered my
assignation with Camilla, who appointed me here in this Orchard to come and
take my second revenge upon her Husband, which is to kiss and embrace her
before his face: The Scene must needs be pleasant, and therefore I Will not miss
it: I think it is now the time; and see the punctual fair one comes just to my
wish.


Enter Camilla, Dash and Crape. Came. Well, Sir, I have bin plotting for you;
and though it is a difficult business, yet to me you shall find all things are
easy.


Sir Char. If all things are so easy as you say, Madam, you may oblige me, and
change this for another favor that I shall name; Faith 'twill be all one now
your hand is in.


Came. No, Sir, you are so dangerous in your proposals, that I Will stick to my
first Injunction: Therefore begone to your Post behind you bush -- lest he come
and surprise you.


Sir Char. If he does, he will only think I came to rob the Orchard. --


Came. He Will make a shift to guess another sort of Felony.


Sir Char. What Is the Sign?


Came. This.


Shakes her Handkercheif. Sir Char. And then invade the Province --


Ex. behind. Came. Dash, -- you are sure you have your lesson right?


Dash. As you could wish, I beseech you, doubt me not.


Came. There Is your reward* Be ready then I think I hear him coming --

Enter Sir Oliver. Dash --


Dash. So please your Honor -- I attend.


Came. Get up into this Tree, and fetch me some of those Pears.


Dash gets up into the Tree. Old. Oh, Soul! here has bin plaguey news within;
damnable stratagems since you left us; my damned Captain Jonas has bin found by
the Constable and Officers in bed with a Whore; and what is more strange, is
accused and apprehended for hiring a fellow to murder me -- Bless us, who
would have thought a fellow should smile in one's face, yet have such a
Villainous design -- 'Gad I always took him to be as honest as the best of us
--


Came. And I too I assure you, Sir: But pray who has accused him?


Old. Counselor Quibble, I hear, and some others that have found out his
haunts: there is a whole Nest of 'em discovered, and they are now Examining
before the Committee.


Dash in the Tree. Fie, fie, Madam, what, this Indecency in an open Orchard? Sir
Oliver; Master -- Madam I say, for shame expose not your selves thus in open
view; have but patience till I can get down, and I Will retire and leave you
alone.


Old. Leave us alone! what a Devil does the fellow mean?


Came. He Is bewitched I believe.


Dash. What, not yet? why, Sir Oliver? Madam, the Servants will come and ketch
you -- Fie, it is a shame such things as these should be done so publicly.


Old. What things, Dunce! what things! the Devil's in the fellow, sure.


Came. And his Dam too, I think.


Dash. No Shame, no Decorum, no Modesty -- Well, I am resolved I Will be no
witness of this Slander to the Brethren; I Will leave you to your selves, and
then do what you will -- Hah -- bless me, what is the matter?


Old. What* art thou mad? what modesty? what Decorum should be used more than
there is? hah?


Came. Or what have we done that is a Slander to the Brethren?


Dash. What delusions have infatuated me? I do profess, if they be true, and
you have continued in this posture: The Pear Tree is enchanted.


Old. What, the Pear Tree enchanted?


Came. I confess I have heard so, but never could give credit to it.


Dash. Whilst I remained above, it seemed to me that there was Carnal
Copulation acted; and that now, Sir Oliver; and then another shape embraced you
by turns in such immodest manner, as forced my Integrity to exclaim against*


Old. This is strange; my Pear Tree enchanted, and I never heard of it before
-- Come, get me a Ladder, I Will see what Demon of the Dark inhabits there. This
must be some Liquorish Devil that loves fruit; and I Will Conjure him I warrant
you. Come, bring the Ladder, I say, I Will try what Miracles are here.


Dash brings a Ladder; he gets up. Came. Take away the Ladder now, Dash, whilst
I give the sign --


He take the Ladder, and she waves her Handkerch. Old. Carnal Copulation* I Would
fain see e're a Devil of 'em all pretend Copulation with my Wife -- hah.

Enter Sir Charles, who runs and embraces her. Now, who is that? 'dsheart the
Colonel, and Kissing her, and she Clasping him -- Why, Villain, Traitor, why
Wife, Strumpet, you lewd Buttock, you. What, this before my face?


Came. Alas, Sir, you rail in vain; you know the Pear Tree is enchanted.


Old. A pox upon you, what still cling'd? still locked together? why Colonel,
Goat, Stallion, how eagerly the strong-backt Dog gripes her? Why you Jade you;
no shame! no continency! Bring me the Ladder, Dash -- Pimp, Rogue, bring the
Ladder, I say -- How now, Sirrah; what, must you have a touch too? Here Is rare
Rampant-doings; but I Will be with you presently.


Kingl. leaves her, and Dash steps in and kisses her hand. Sir Char. This is
such a Masterpiece of Wit, that I shall for ever admire thee for.


Came. Go -- go in now, and leave the rest to me; but be ready half an hour
hence for the third and last experiment.


Sir Char. I Will not lose the pleasure on it for a Million.


Exit. Old. gets down as far as he can, and tumbles down the rest. Dash. An to
please your Honor, I was just bringing the Ladder.

Old. rushes on him, throws him down. I profess that was very unchristian-like
done.


Old. Where? where is this Monster? This Stallion, Kinglove; ha -- I Will firk
him, faith.


Came. Kinglove, what do you mean, Sir? are you mad?


Old. No Strumpet, no Buttock, no.


Came. I say you are, if you talk of Kinglove's being here, where no living
creature has bin but David there and I.


Old. O Lord, O Lord; why will thou? can thou? dare thou affirm this to my
face? hah? Oh thou incomprehensible --


Came. To your face* yes, and prove it too: Were you not told before, that the
Devil was in the Pear Tree? But I Will be slandered no more about it, for I Will
have it instantly felled, if I live.


Old. No, Gentlewoman, the Devil was under the Pear Tree, not in it; what,
shall I not believe my eyes? was not Kinglove here? did not I see him?


Came. How, dear Sir Oliver! what believe your eyes
Before the Wife that in your bosom lies?

Dash. On my Integrity here has bin no one but her Honor and my self.


Old. Your integrity, Rogue! why Sirrah, did not you too come in for a snack?
did not I see you kiss and gripe her by the hand -- you letcherous Dog?


Dash. O Lord, Sir; Alas, Sir, -- I profess I have not touched any part of
Woman's flesh this seven years.


Old. Why then the Devil is there indeed; and I was enchanted too; for I Will be
sworn, I think I saw all this; I Will vow, I think I saw kissing, and fumbling,
and towzing, and rowzing; but if I am mistaken, I beg your pardon: but the
Devil's in the Pear Tree; and as thou say, Soul, I Will have it felled
immediately.


Came. But could you think I could be so wanton, and to Kinglove too above all
men?


Old. Ay, to him too, above all men. No, no, I see I must be mistaken.


Came. He that you shall now know, I have most occasion to hate; for no longer
than this morning I received a Letter from him.


Old. A Letter! rare stuff in it I warrant.


Came. Oh, most delicious Lines; which I committed to the fire as soon as read.
But the insolent Contents were, He desired me in Recompense of the injuries you
had done him, to contrive, that by the way of frolic he might have three
fillups at your Nose.


Old. An Impudent Dog, three fillups at my Nose!


Came. Ay, and this I was to contrive by a Trick; but that you now may see the
unaltered Candor of your Wife, and know the value of the Jewel you posses; take
but my counsel, and we will turn this frolic of his a better way.


Old. With all my heart, faith: A Son of a Whore, three fillups at my Nose!
Come, let us about it, I Will take thy counsel to a scruple: A Dog, three fillups
at my Nose!


Exeunt. Dash. I have long attended the zealous, but have grown poor upon it;
but truly do now intend, instead of Preaching, to follow Pimping. I plainly
perceive it is the more thriving profession.


Shakes his money and Exit. Enter Eitherside and Aurelia. Either. Now dearest
Madam, I may boldly call you mine, since Marriage has confirmed it: Oh that
the night were come, that I might take possession.


Aur. Not to night, let me beg you, Sir: Come, you must deny me nothing,
therefore give my modesty this satisfaction: To morrow use your pleasure,
because I would not have my Uncle know of our Marriage yet -- Take this Key of
my Chamber, and be sure to come as private as you can: But not to night, Sir
Paul, if you love me.


Eith. Oh, Madam, I am impatient; I rage; I am as wild as an enclosed Stag in
rutting-time. But come, since you will have it so, I Will try what I can do, and
pass this night away with dreaming of to morrow.


Aur. Do, and I will of you too, and lie and hug my Pillow as if it were my
Husband.


Either. Poor heart! Well, till then farewell. To pass away the time, I Will go
and see that Rascal Jonas, who I hear is accused for Perjury.


Aur. So great a Villain could expect no less. Well, adieu.
Be you but kind, and I will still be true.

Exit. Either. Ay, go, poor innocent Fool, and I Will be with thee by and by for
all this; for I can no more have patience to lie alone, and gnaw the sheets to
night, than a young Wife can the next Month after her lying in: This key she
says opens her Chamber. Silly Rogue, to design to lie alone, and yet give me
the key to come to her: But I know she only denied, because she was ashamed to
consent so soon; and now I have this key. -- I Will surprise her; steal into bed,
and give satisfaction to her modesty the right way. --


Exit. Enter two or three Committee Men, Constable and Rabble, bringing in
Jonas, Coppyhold, Slouch and Phebe as to Trial. Constable. Make room: Keep off
there: Clear the way.


1 Commit. Officer, look to your Prisoner; he is accused of several notorious
Crimes, therefore take care of him.


Slouch. This is your way of thriving with a pox to ye, is it? Ah, would my
hands were at liberty that I might batter thee a little.


Cop. Peace, incorrigible Ass, I have known others thrive by it, and so might
I -- had I not coupled with such a Hound as thou: But the ill Weeds ever spoil
the good Corn; and when the Eagle condescends to mix with Crows and Daws, Ruin
is inevitable, and Desolation is near.


Enter Eitherside. Ion. If you confess any thing, you are damned: Therefore
take care, remember you have taken an Oath.


Eith. A precious Rogue -- He little thinks I hear him now.


Slouch. I care not; you made me take it against my Conscience, and therefore
for my part I Will confess all.


Cop. We are not the first that have broke an Oath upon a good account;
therefore hold your self contented.


1 Commit. Take away those Fellows, and that Woman, and let 'em be all Whipped
soundly: Away with 'em.


Slouch. So, what think you of Swearing now, Rogue, hah?


Cop. Even as well as thou think of hanging; which I hope will befall thee
e're long for presuming to keep me company; for on my Conscience it is that
Villainous look of thine has brought me to this: I am sure I was designed by
Nature for better Fortune.


Exeunt. 1 Commit. Come, Captain, discharge your Conscience of this great
weight. Confess.


Either. Ay, Captain; Come, confess; are not you a Rascal as one may say?


Ion. Sir, no man can boast of good Principles; therefore every man's a Rascal,
and you consequently as well as my self.


Either. But I am not such a Rascal to hire people to swear a Rape against a
Gentleman, that in my Conscience I knew to be innocent: I am not such a Rascal
good Domine Ionus.


Ion. But you are such a Rascal to take Bribes on both sides, and especially
against the Gentleman you knew to be so innocent: You are such a Rascal, good
Justice Eitherside.


Eith. A Damned cunning Dog this is: but hanged, nothing he says will be
believed now; therefore -- I am secure enough.


Aside. 1 Commit. However, Captain, you cannot deny but you were found in bed
with a Whore: you know this is positively sworn against you.


Ion. Heaven forgive 'em for it; I wish my Innocence be no plague hereafter to
their Consciences: It Is true (Lodging in the house) I might give the young
Woman an Exhortation or so.


Either. A pox of your Exhortations; they are very feeling ones to that sex.


1 Commit. Nor you never sought to corrupt Sir Charles when he was confined,
nor these two Fellows and the Girl, and afterward hired 'em to swear notorious
Crimes against the other Witnesses to invalidate their Evidence against you:
Nor you never gave 'em the Sacrament in Lambs-Wool and Plumb-Cake to be secret,
did you?


Ion. Not I, Sir.


1 Commit. Make way there: Officer, take care of your Prisoner.


Ion. Well, I thank Heaven, I obey cheerfully; and will only speak one word
before I go, that I may be charitable: Therefore good people, what ever you
think of me, I believe you to be good people; very good people; as good
Subjects; as true to the King and Kingly Prerogative; as unwilling to Rebel
and Mutiny; and as heartily Conscientious in your dealings as my self. And so
farewell to ye.


Shout. Exeunt. SCENE. Aurelia' s Chamber.
Enter Eitherside softly. Either. I have gone through all the Rooms, and found
not so much as a Cat-stirring; so that I need not fear being discovered -- Ugh,
ugh, she is gone to bed already I see -- She was resolved to make a long lone
night on it since 'twas to be her last, for I think it is hardly Sun set. Come
now, I Will softly pull off my Clothes -- steal in to her, and get her fast in my
arms before she wakes -- Let Us see which side does she lie on. Peeps in. Oh,
the Devil, what is here? two Heads in the Bed, and one of 'em a man's head with
a Cap on? Oh Jilt, Whore, Traitress -- Is this her modesty, with a pox to her?
Ay, it is so; here are a pair of Breeches too. 'Sdslife I Will kill 'em both. But
hold there, I shall injure my self: A pox on 'em, the Devils sleep as if they
had bin doing no harm in 'em at all; but I suppose they have taken a receipt
for sleep. Well, I Will instantly fetch the Constable and seize 'em: get her
portion by Law, then turn her out of doors to her Rascal -- whose Breeches here
I seize to disable him from denying it, and which I will show to all her
friends as the lewd Trophies of her dishonor.


Ex. with the Breeches. Enter Oldcutt and Camilla. Came. Come, Sir, sit down
here, and counterfeit your self asleep; and if he gives you a slight blow or
two, have patience, and bear it, that you may have some time to hear his
insolent talk.


Old. Is the Rascal come then?


Came. He Is hid in the Alcove in the next room: Sit still, and I Will go fetch
him; it may be to humor the Jest, I may at first say as he does, and rail at
you, but have patience and wink till I give the sign, and then we will hamper him.


Exit. Old. A plaguey cunning Baggage this; I have suspected her ever since the
business of the Pear Tree; but now I Will watch her narrowly; I am resolved she
shall put no trick upon me now, though the Devil himself give her assistance.
Here they come.


Enter Sir Charles and Camilla. Sir Char. This is a trial of thy Wit indeed,
for I thought the business almost impossible.


Came. Oh, Sir, there is few of you Men know how far a Woman's Wit extends. See,
yonder he sits --


Sir Char. Ha, ha, ha, -- I shall never contain my self, I must laugh.


Came. You may, and speak any thing. Come, let us go to him -- you shall hear me
begin -- who could endure, Sir, to lie by such a Lump as this? such a heavy,
dull, insipid Animal, one that is as old at Forty, as another man at Fourscore
-- One that has the unnatural Gout perpetually, and had a Breath would have
bred the Plague, had I not pulled out two of his Teeth the other day.


Old. Ay, a pox take you for it, I say --


Aside. Sir Char. Ha, ha, ha, an over-worn decrepid Rascal, that I believe has
not bin a man this 20 years.


Came. Heaven knows whether he has or no; I am sure he would never let me know
it.


Old. Very well, Buttock, very well.


Aside. Sir Char. But as a Revenge for some certain wrongs lately done me,
take, Sir, this swinging blow of the face --

Strikes him. And, Madam, to complete it, take you this Kiss: The truest Friend
of Love.


Old. So, so, so --


Came. And not to be behind hand, Sir, take that from me.


She strikes him. Old. From her too? Very good.


Aside. Sir Char. And that and that -- and that for a farewell, my good state
Caterpiller -- Ha, ha, ha. So now I think it is time to go, lest he grow out of
patience and hinder me.


Aside. Came. He dares not look up till I give the sign; till then we are secure.


Old. The Jade designs to get him away, I see by their standing so near the
door, -- But I Will prevent it --


Rises up and goes behind Kinglove. Sir Char. This dear embrace then, and so
adieu.

Whilst Kinglove embraces her, Oldcutt takes off his Girdle and Buckles 'em
hoth in. For though thou have performed thy difficult promise, and therein
shown thy true and passionate Love; yet such is my hard fortune, that being now
obliged by the rigorous Laws of gratitude and honor, I never must again perform
this kindness.


Old. O yes, yes; many, many times embrace your fill: I think you are close
enough now.


Sir Char. Hah -- Hell and the Devil, what is this?


Old. Hey, who is within there? Call all my Servants, my Coachman, Footman, and
Groom and my Gardener, Cook, Postilion and Butler. Carry the news about the
Town, that I, Mr. Chairman, am a Cuckold; A Cuckold, a notorious Cuckold.


Enter Eitherside with the Breeches mounted on a Staff, Heartall in a Gown,
Aurelia, Dash, Constable and Officers. Either. A Cuckold, a Cuckold; who dares
talk of a Cuckold before my face, that am Commander in chief? Witness my
Standard here: I am the head of the horned Flock, and bear the Bell before all
the Cuckolds in the Town.


Old. What, more Roguery still? How now, Sir Paul, what is the matter, Sir Paul?
It Is the very Eclipse of the Moon sure? And there is a General Cuckoldom in
nature.


Dash unbinds Kinglove. Eith. Why you must know, Sir, that being led by an
oblique, or rather inevitable destiny to perpetrate Acts of Ignominy to my
self: I chanced to Correspond, Convene or enter into a League of Conjugal
Quality with your Neice Aurelia there. But a pox on Tropes and Figures in such
a Cause as this: In short, Sir, I have this afternoon married her; am already
abused, and a Cuckold in Folio.


Old. Give me thy hand: not a word more on it: It Is the fashion I am a Cuckold
too.


Heart. What I have done, Sir, the Law shall answer; I hope, Sir, you will
require no other satisfaction.


Eith. No, Sir, no, I know you are for tilting; but I know a better way than
so, I thank you; I Will bring Cook and Littleton to Fence with you, Sir; I Will
firk you like a Tory as you are.


Aur. For my part I Will shut my self into my Closet, and never see the Face of
man again.


Ex. Aur. Eith. Ay, you may go, Madam: But as for your Money -- I Will take care
of that: Sir Oliver, I hope you will see this 5000 l. paid.


Old. Five thousand pound! for what, Boy?


Eith. For what? for your Neice's portion: Nay, 'Gad the Law shall firk you
too, if you grow refractory.


Old. Sir, she is not worth five groats; I have kept her this seven year upon
Charity: And now I think on it, there is a hundred pound due to me for Diet and
Necessaries. This must be paid, Sir, or the Law shall firk you if you go to
that.


Eith. Well, I see it is in vain to resist ill luck: The Devil did owe me an ill
turn, and he has paid it me with a vengeance: Therefore honest Sir Paul, you
must have patience, and bear your afflictions like a man.


Old. For you, Madam, you must even be sent packing after your Neice, and,
Officers, seize on that Ruffian there: I Will teach you, Sir, to make a Cuckold
of a Politician.


They seize him. Came. You cannot send me into worse company than your own,
where ever it is.


Sir Char. Sir, your Malice to me is as ridiculous as your Jest: But for her
sake I Will give you the satisfaction, to tell you, that upon my Honor, and by
all that is Sacred, she is truly virtuous, though I would have revenged my self
upon thee, I must confess; for I did design to get a Royalist upon thy Wife,
that should have lived to pull thee by the Nose.


Old. Very well, Tory, very well: Hold him fast, Officers.


Enter Captain and Phillipa. Cap. Officers, I command you in the Protector's
Name to discharge him. Sir Oliver, you are hereby also Commanded to re-deliver
to this Noble Gentleman all his Sequestered Lands.

A Warrant. And further, Sir, the Protector bid me tell you he had heard so
large a Character of your Fidelity and Virtue, that he would at any rate buy
your Friendship.


Sir Char. Sir, for my Estate I thank him: but for my Service and Loyal
Allegiance, they are Sacred to my Prince, and shall continue so.


Capt. Bravely resolved, Sir, though I could wish you of our side.


Old. Now I am resolved to hang my self; for I Would as leive lose my life as my
estate: A pox on Power, I say: A man can never thrive in an Age where there is
another Rogue that is of greater Quality than himself.


Sir Char. And now my fairest Love, we will both be happy.


Phill. Do You not forget me then?


Sir Char. Believe I never can: See, Gentlemen, another wonder here this
supposed youth. Companion of my Troubles, he that was charged by Villians for
committing a Rape, is a Woman.


Omnes. It Is wonderful!


Sir Char. And shall within these few hours be my Wife -- hah.

Enter Broom. Lieutenant, thou art come happily to be a Guest too; have thou
heard the News? My Estate is surrendered back, and all is as well as ever.


Broom. The Protector's very sick, and I suppose has done you this good office,
only as a greater help to his Salvation. Besides, there is a great Rumor that
the times will change.


Sir Char. Let 'em: They are not then like me.
That like a Rock have stood the Storms of State,
As well as Calms, and yet would never change.
My Actions still in this Plebeian Age,
Grounded on Justice, Honesty and Honor,
Shall teach the Erring Natives to be Loyal:
My Tongue never rail at Governments or Laws,
Nor my Sword wound but in the Royal Cause.
TO obey my Prince shall be my greatest Care,
Whom Heaven preserve secure as Angels are;
And to sum up all Blessings in a Prayer,
Good Heaven, that do the Fate of Kings foresee,
Save and defend Great England's Monarchy.

Ex. Omnes. FINIS.
THE EPILOGUE,
Spoken by Mr. UNDERHILL. WHat in my face could this strange Scribler see,
(Uds Heart) to make an Evidence of me?
That never could agree with Ignoramus,
But for a Tender Conscience have been famous.
For who are these among you here that have
Not in your Rambles heard of Tory Cave;
That rores in Coffee-house, and wastes his Wealth,
Toping the Gentleman in Scotland's Health.
This part should have been given some hardy Fool,
That had more sense for Interest than his Soul.
I never had the knack of Truth-denying,
Loving Sedition, Loyalty defying;
Nor could I take Ten Pound a week for Lying.
But since it is so, I must entreat the pity
Of you our (never-failing) Friends in the City.
For though I was not e're brought up to the Trade,
Like Setting-Dog I may with Art be made.
In time such wholesome Documents receive:
Uds Zooks, who knows but I may stand for Shrieve?
And faith, that thought has rowz'd up my ambition:
Well, Sirs, give me but House-room, and Provision;
Cry up the Play, and always let me find
My Benefactors Bountiful and Kind;
Then, if you want a Swinger at a word,
'Zounds I Will swear for you through a two-inch-Board.
FINIS.

