A MOTION TENDING TO THE PVBLICK GOOD OF This Age, and of Posterity.

OR The Coppies of certain Letters written by Mr. John Dury, to a worthy
Knight, at his earnest desire.

Showing briefly, What a Publik good is, and how by the best means of
Reformation in Learning and Religion it may be advanced to some perfection.

Published by Samuel Hartlib.

For the better Information of all those who are willing of themselves, or
entrusted by others to set forward Pious and Learned Works.

Life is Deaths seed's time, Death life's Harvest, as here we sow; so there we
reap, as here we set, so there we gather of a blessed life, a death as
blisfull.

Sir,
THe following discourse is not so fully and accurately expressed as I could
wish, for want of time, and by reason of manifold interruptions: but such as it
is, you will be pleased to make use of it. Perhaps to a pious soul that
looks to God, and his life, it may relish and work some effect. The grace of
God be with you, I rest,

Sir, Your truly respective and most affectionate servant in Christ. John Dury.
London, the 30 of December. 1641.
A MOTION TENDING TO the public good of this Age and of Posterity.
NO man can do good to Posterity, but he that does know how to serve his own
generation rightly. Nor can any man serve his own generation as he ought, that
knows not what his own felicity, and that of his generation is; and how it
may be attained unto. For he that is destitute of this knowledge, can neither
labor for himself to become truly happy, nor can he reach forth the means of
happiness unto others. For how can any impart unto another, that whereof he is
not himself participant? A man then that would set forward the Public Good,
must first know, what it is to be truly good? By what means goodness is
attained unto? and how it may be propagated unto his generation? Of these
there, I purpose to discourse a little, before I make the motion, which I
intend to propose unto you.

Of the first.
To be truly good, is to partake of the life of God, for none is good Mat. 19*
17.
truly save God alone, and of the fullness of his goodness we all partake
grace for grace; because we live, and move, and have our being in him, and so
much life, and motion, and being as we have in him, so much goodness we have*
and no more; for either goodness is denominated from God, or God from
goodness; so that either way to be good* is to have a being in God, or to be
in God, is to have a being in goodness: for what has no being in God, is
altogether evil; and what has no being in Goodness* is altogether separate
from God* Hence it is that the Apostle speaking of the corruption of (...)
which is radically in us says that we are alienated from the life of God.
^phes. 4. 18
And David describing the wicked says, Psalm. 58. 3. That they are estranged
from the womb, and go astray as soon as they be born speaking lies. Whence
are they estranged? is it not from God and his life? and whence go they astray?
Is not from his Truth? and is not this the cause they speak lies, even because
they give not way to the motions of his Truth, to do that which it suggesteth
unto them, and whereof they are convicted in their Conscience that it is their
duty. For God and his Truth is made manifest unto the Conscience of all men,
Romans 1. 18, 19. and 2. 14 15. and the wicked not taking notice of that which
they know of him, but detaining Gods Truth in unrighteousness; that is to say,
suppressing the motions of Gods life, and giving way unto the motions of their
own lust and sensual imagination; by this they are estranged from God, and
draw his wrath upon their souls. For the object of Gods wrath is nothing else
but the life of lust in nature, Ephesians. 2. 3. For there we are said to be by
nature the children of wrath, in respect that we have our conversation in the
lust of the flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the mind. Now we
know that our flesh and fleshly mind does embrace only this present world, of
which we are taught, that all that is in the world, is but the object of lust,
and of pride in lust. For John says, that all that is in the world is the lust
of 1 John 2. 16. 17.
the eyes, the lust of the flesh, and the pride of life* which things the
Apostle says, are not of the Father, but of the world. For which cause also he
disswadeth us from the love thereof, and consequently from the life which may
be had therein, for two Reasons. First, because if we love these things, and
live in them; the love and the life of the Father is not in us. Secondly,
because the world does pass away, and the lust thereof, but he that does the
will of God abides for ever. Now he does, and none but he does the will of
God, which abides in his love and life, according to Christ's exhortation, John
15. 4, 5, 6. Abide in me, and I in you* as the branch cannot bear fruit of it
self, except it abide in the Vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me: and
again John 6. 39. 40. This is the will of the Father, that of all which he
has given me, I should lose nothing; and that every one who sees the Son,
and believes on him, may have everlasting life; therefore all things which
are, and every one who is not in the love and life of the Father, shall perish;
because it is not according to the will of God, whichis only good, and
remains for ever. For nothing can be esteemed truly good, but that which does
remain for ever. For all goodness being the life of God in us, and he being
in himself everlasting and immutable; his life in us, must also be like unto
him, and what is not like to him and permanent with him in us, is none of his*
but whatsoever is truly like him, and according to his will, shall also be
permanent with him for ever. For he cannot destroy any thing wherein he takes
a liking, and he takes alikeing in nothing but in that which is truly good,
and like unto himself. And verily, the perfect estate of our felicity in the
life to come, is nothing else but to be like him. For John faith, It does not
yet appear* what we shall be, but we know when he does appear we shall be
like him, 1 John 3. 2.
Then to be like him, is to be truly happy, and to have a being in him, and to
partake of his life is to be good; and nothing is truly good, but only this.
Therefore when the worldlings say, Psalm. 4. 6, 7 Who will show us any good?
then the man of God answers, not unto them, but unto God, to himself, and to
us, saying; Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us; for thereby
thou have put more gladness in my heart, then when their Corn and Wine
increased. Now we know the cheerfulness of a man's life, by the brightness of
his countenance, and his good or ill will to us, by the clear or cloudy
appearance thereof toward sus. So then, the lightsome countenance of God, is
the evident appearance of his favorable life and good purpose toward us; and
if this be lift up upon us, that is, if we find this shining over our heads,
and round about us, or going before us, to direct us in our ways, then we know
that his life is in us; for none can perceive the countenance of God to be lift
up over him, but by the life of God which is in him; and when we find this
life to be in us, then, and never till then are we truly happy; because we
enjoy a true and permanent good, which is the life of Gods presence, wherein is
fullness of joy, Psalm. 16. 11. This then is that good, which every one should
seek to obtain for himself, and study to procure through the communion of
Saints unto others. And he that can serve his generation by the procurement and
furtherance of this unto it, he does truly advance the Public Good; but
whatsoever else any does seek to advance toward his generation, if it be not
directly subordinate hereunto, it is not worth his labor; for all what is done
Heb. 3. 13* 14.
besides this end, is but labor for the fire, and a wearying of themselves for
very vanity, as the Prophet terms it; who also gives this reason hereof,
because the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord,
as the waters cover the sea: intimating that when the knowledge of Gods glory
which begets in us the powers of his life shall be so abundant in the earth,
as the waters are abundant in the Sea; then all humane works and buildings not
agreeing with this life of God appearing in the knowledge of his glory shall be
over-flown and drowned and swept away, as with a flood ofspirituall waters; or
rather consumed, burnt up with fire, and destroyed as mere vanity. Therefore we
should take heed how we spend our time, and employ our selves, and bestow the
precious talents which God does give us to profit withal; lest we weary our
selves in the whole course of our life, for a thing of nothing, and bestow cost
and labor for that which will be lost, and do at all no profit, either to our
selves, or unto Posterity.

For if that which we do undertake be not lasting, and permanently leading unto
this life, which the knowledge of Gods glory does afford, it will not be at all
profitable, because it will not endure the fiery trial and judgment, which God
in his wrath will kindle in these latter days, before he raises up his own
Kingdom, wherein nothing shall be of use, but that which shall be built upon
the true foundation of life everlasting, which is Christ Jesus; and that which
shall be such for substance and matter, which will endure and escape the trial
of the fire. See 1 Cor. 3. 12, 13, 14, 15. From all which by way of
Recapitulation, I will gather these conclusions toward the purpose in hand.

1 That a Public good is nothing else but the universal private good of
every one in the life of God; for that which serves the turn of some only,
although they may be many, and even the greater part, is not to be counted
truly Public; but that is properly Public which is common, and reaches
alike unto all; and that reaches truly to all, wherein every one has alike
near interst, and whereof every one may be alike sensible, which is the life
of God in men; for God is the same to all, and is but one life in all, and all
may and should challenge alike interest in him.

2 That none can procure this good to others, far less to all, that does not
seek it for himself, and in some measure purchase it, at least by attaining
to the true love of it, and by a willingness to do any thing that lies in his
power, for the advancement of it, as well toward others, as toward himself.
For as it is an universal good, none can engrosse it for himself alone, but
every one must seek to partake of it with another. Hence it is that there is
no truer way to get it for our selves, then by endeavoring, that others also
may participate of that which we either have obtained, or may hopefully
obtain. For Gods meaning is not to be possessed as a peculiar to one; because
he does intend to show himself the God of all, and he, that seeks God in all
and for all, shell at last find him for himself, but he that thinks (as the
custom of some is who despise others as impure and unworthy of their society)
to have him only for himself shall loose him in all, and himself also.

3. From whence follows, that all self seeking and the affection of some
particular thing and way, whereby men desire to be taken notice off, amongst
other men for procuring a Public Good; which they imagine to be good; that (I
say) all such purposes are nothing but carnal Hypocrisy, which is
inconsistent with the life of God: so that except there be a single purpose to
seek this Good absolutely for it self, that it may become common to al; and to
seek nothing with it besides it self, least it be not entire, but mixed with
aims of another nature; and to seek all other things for it, least some other
thing be valued more then it, and it become in our mind subordinate unto
matters of a base nature; except (I say) all this be, the endeavor will never
reach the end for which it must be undertaken; nor receive a blessing from God
to come to any perfection, because it is impossible that God, or Gods work
should be made to serve any mins ends; or that he should suffer himself and
his work to be abused by men for private ends without discovering the deceit
of their practices by some manifest judgment or other. And this is the cause
why God does bring the fire trial upon the world, namely to make void and
without effect all by-ends and worldly imaginations in his work, in his great
work which he is about to perform: for we are taught Esa. 2. concerning the
Kingdom of God when it shall be raised; that the lofty looks of men shall be
humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and the Lord alone
shall be exalted in that day, that all height and high things shall stoop, and
all Idols (amongst which our self imaginations are to be reckoned) shall be
abolished at the presence of the glory of his Majesty, when he shall arise to
shake terriblely the earth. Therefore in aiming at this good we must cease from
all self; and cease from all men, whose breath is in his nostrils, for wherein
is he to be accounted in the work of God?

Thus having settled the aim which ought to be had in seeking a Public good:
let us consider the means that lead thereunto.

Of the Second.
The means to attain unto the life of God is none other but Christ, Colos. 2.
9. etc. 1. 19.
for in him alone is the fullness of the Godhead bodily, and it is the Fathers
pleasure that in him all fullness should dwell. Therefore the Father will be
scene no where, and cannot be scene any where, but in his Son, who is the
brightness of his glory, and the express Image of his person, now he has
revealed in the Scriptures, the manner how he is to be known in his Son,
and how by that knowledge 1. 3.
his life is conveyed unto us: and this we will endeavor to lay open. First
then the manner how the Father is known in the Son; is expressed 2 Cor. 4.
6. thus God commanded the light to shine out of darkness; does shine in our
hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ, where we must observe that the Apostle does speak of himself,
and the rest of the Apostles, to declare the manner, how God did make himself
known unto them: And as he made himself known to them; so he is this day to
be known to every one: For God is but one, and the manifestations of his life
is the same in all, to whom it is made manifest; although it may be differenced
according to the several degrees of height by which it is perceived. But here
we have the substance of this manifestation in these particulars.

First, That God is the author of it by the power which he has to command
light to shine out of darkness, whereby is intimated, that we are nothing but
darkness, till it please God to command light to shine in us.

Secondly, That the light whereby God is made manifest unto us, is the
brightness of God himself; for he says that God does shine: whereby is also
intimated, that it is of the mere free Grace of God, imparting himself unto
us that we come to know him; and not of any free willing choice or rational
parts in us that we should be able to chose out the objects of true knowledge,
or when they are proposed unto us by others, that we should be able to dive
into Gods nature thereby, or to make better use of the means, whereby God is
known, then others do. But all this is Gods free grace to us.

Thirdly, That the place where God does shine is a man's heart; that is the
prime Center and Seat of this living soul; where the spirits maintaining his
life are begotten. For as there be material spirits rising out of the blood,
in the material heart; So there are incorporeall spirits arising out of the
mindings of the soul in the heart of our spirits, which is conscience; for in
the conscience God has his Seat in all men, and there he does appear to all
converts at first; where he also does ever continue more or less shining unto
them, according as they deserve to see his bright or his cloudy countenance.
Therefore if any man will fit himself to see God, he must purify his
conscience, For blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. 1. 5. 8.


Fourthly, That the effect for which God does shine in our heart, is to give a
light to us. God is nothing but light, and in him is no darkness 1 John 1. ^ 1 Timothy 6. 1^.
at all; but he is in himself a light, which is inaccessible, which no man
has seen nor can see, except God give him eyes to see it. For Christ says,
Math. 11. 17. No man knows the Son but the Father, neither knows any man
the Father save the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him. Therefore
although God does shine both in himself and toward us, yet he may be
unperceptible and unperceived even by those that are his own, except he be
pleased to give the the light of perception. John.
For it is said, that not only the light shines in darkness, and that
darkness comprehended it not; but also that this true light came into the
world, and was not known by the world, and that it came unto his own, and was
not received by them, but to such as received it, the privilege of being the
Sons of God was given by it. Now then the ability of receiving or perceiving
the light when it shines, is also the gift of God; ibid. v. 9* 10, 11.
for he must open our eyes to perceive his light, and except this effect follow
upon his shining in our hearts. I say, except this reflexive Act of perceiving
this light be granted by God, and freely given to us, we cannot apprehend his
life and being in us, although he should shine otherwise never so brightly.
Whence again we see, that it is not of him, that runs or wills, but of God
that does show mercy. And that it is not one Act of grace that will serve our
turn, as to have once beginning, and then to be left unto our selves, but there
must be a continued Act of Grace; for Grace that is of one Grace, fitted to
embrace and make use of another Grace; namely, of a latter Grace to make use of
the former; for as we cannot will nor know any thing of the life and light of
God at first, so we cannot perform any thing answerable to that life and
light, Phil. 2. 13
except God also give the performance according to his own good pleasure.

Fifthly, That this light is the light of knowledge; now to know is the Act of a
man's understanding, and the understanding is the same faculty in the soul,
which the eye is in the body. As the eye then, when it is not blind does
perceive the visible appearance of a thing; that is, it receives the image of
the shape there of within it self as within a lookingglasse, and keeps every
image which it receives distinctly, separate from each other. So is it not
with the understanding when it is not dark and muddy; it also receives with
in it self, as in a spiritual looking glass, and keeps distinctly separate
the intellectual appearances of the images and shapes of spiritual things.
For although spiritual things cannot be said properly to have images and
shapes, yet became our understanding in conceiving of the same, does receive
intellectual notions and Ideas, wherein spiritual matters do appear to it,
and in respect that these notions or mindings have something in them like unto
the representation of an image, therefore we must speak thus. And so much the
rather, because the Scripture does continually express the Acts of the
understanding by the Analogy of the eye, as Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. the Apostle
prays That God nould give the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the
knowledge of Christ, the eyes of our understanding being enlightened that we may
know, etc. Thus then to be able to know that is, to receive and distinctly to
perceive things represented unto us, we must make use of the faculty of our
understanding in spiritual things, as men do of their eyes in bodily matters.
And what matters do essentially concur toward the apprehension of things in
their bodily shape within the eye; such like matters are intellectually also
concurrent toward the Act of knowledge in the understanding.

Sixthly, That the object of this knowledge is the glory of God. The glory of
God is the manifested excellency, and the evident appearance of his goodness
and of his nature. So when Moses Exodus 33. 18. desires that God would show him
his glory; God answers* verse 19. and says, I will make all my goodness
pass before thee, and I will preclaime the Name of the Lord before thee. By
which we see that the apparition of his goodness, and the apprehension and
knowledge of his name, (that is of his nature, for the nature of every thing is
known by the name thereof) is the manifestation of his Glory.

Seventhly, That this glory of God is to be seen in the face of Jesus Christ.
The face of Christ is the express appearance of his being and life, by which
he is distinguished from all other men; for men are to be discerned by their
faces one from another: now Christ is to be difcerned from all other men in
this, that he is a spiritual man, and did live in the flesh a spiritual life;
for the Apostle says, that God was in ^^r. 5. 19
Christ reconciling the world unto himself. And of his own knowledge of Christ
he speaks thus, Though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now
henceforth know we him no more; Therefore if any man be in (...). v. 16, 17.
Christ, let him be a new creature, old things are passed away, behold all
things are become new. The new Creature is the spiritual Creature; for he that
is in Christ, is one spirit with him; Because Christ is different ^^r. 6. 17.
from the old Adam in this, that the old Adam was made to be a living Soul,
but the new was made a quickening Spirit. Hence then we learn that the face of
Christ, which is the appearance of his life and being in ^^r. 15. 45.
the spiritual state, wherein he walked in the flesh as God (for he lived the
life of God in the flesh, 1 Ioh. 1. 2, 3.) is the proper Subject wherein all the
goodness and the nature of God does appear; So that if we can see and know
the fare of Christ; then we shall evidently also perceive the life of God in
his glory, because he that sees Christ; sees the Father. And Christ himself
desires us to believe him, that he is in the Father, and the Father in him;
nor will the Father be seen in any but John 14. 9; 10, 11.
in him, in whom only he is well pleased, and whom we should hear on his
behalf, Matthew. 17. and because he alone is the express image of his person
and the brightness of his glory, Heb. 1. 3. Therefore also he cannot be feene
in any but in him; for all which causes he is the only means to attain unto
the life of God, for he only can give the light of life to such as come to him
and follow him, Ioh. 8. 12. and Ephesians. 5. 14.

And thus we have understood the manner how the life of the Father is to be
known in the Son. Now follows the way, how by that knowledge the life of the
Father is conveyed through the Son unto us. This is expressed, 2 Cor. 3. 18.
thus: But we all with open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the
Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the
Spirit of the Lord. Where we must observe that the Apostle does not speak here
of himself alone, but of all Christians, to show the way and the manner how
they become parrakors of the life of God in Christ; which in all Christians is
but one and the same, although there be differences of degrees, in the
participation thereof. But here the substance of the matter is declared in
these particulars.

First, That all Christians are participant of this life; for he says we all,
meaning himself as a Christian, and all other believers; for seeing 2 Pet. 1.
^^
there is but one faith, and one hope, and one spirit: therefore the believers
are said to have obtained like precious Faith with the Apostles, 1 Cor. 12. 13.
and to be baptized with the same Spirit; for he says, that by one Spirit we
are all baptized into one body.

Secondly, That all believers have their faces uncovered; for he says, that
with an open face we behold. That is to say, that the face of our Soul, which
is our mind, is not now covered with a veil, as the face of Moses and of the
Jews was, least they should behold the end of that 2 Cor. 3. 13, 14.
which was to be abolished; for to this day the minds of the Iems are blinded,
and the veil remains untaken away in the reading of the old Testament, which
veil is done away in Christ. For the Lord is the ibid. v. 17.
Spirit which causes the veil to vanish, for where the spirit of the Lord is,
there is Liberty. That is to say, there is free access unto God; to take 1 Cor
2. 10, 11, 12.
notice of his whole life, for the spirit searches even the deep things of
God, and we have received the Spirit of God, that we should know the things
which are freely given to us of God. For now is the Prophecy fulfilled which
was spoken by the Prophet I saiah chap. 25. 6, 7. That God shall make in his
holy mountain (which is his Church) a feast of fat things unto all people, a
feast of wines on the Lees; of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the Lees
well refined. And that he would destroy in his mountain the face of the
covering cafl over all people, and the vail that is spread over all Nations.
This Prophecy I say, is now fulfilled. for in the Church of the Gospel the
feast of all wisdom, of all knowledge and understanding, and of all promises
and comforts unto the wearied souls, is largely set before us in the writing
of the Evangelists and Apostles, and that we should be able to make use of this
feast. God has also taken away the face of the covering, and the veil that
was spread over all Nations which kept them in blindness, so that now our
faces are opened and uncovered before the Lord, because he is well pleased with
us in Christ, whose Spirit he has sent forth in our hearts, to ^^r. 2. 11, 12.
give us the liberty of Children, that we should come to him, and call upon him
Abba Father.

Thirdly, All that have their faces thus uncovered behold the glory of Lord as
in a glass. The end wherefore God does uncover the faces of Believers, and
gives them his free Spirit, is that they should know the things which God has
freely given to them, as the Apostle faith; now those things cannot be known
but in the fountain and receptacle where they are which is Christ, for in him
is all fullness; and the Father has made him unto us* Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Therefore the Spirit by which our
faces are uncovered, does lead us unto him; for to know the things of God, he
must be known, and that he may be known, he must be seen and looked upon, for in
him all the treasures of life are to be seen and no where but in him. Therefore
the Prophet when he proposes the greatest of blessings says, that our eyes
shall see the King in his beauty: intimating, that in the (...) 3. 17.
sight of him, and his beauty, was our happiness. And verily those that once
have had a true sight of him cannot but continually seek to behold him. We may
see it in David how he stood affected toward him, One thing says he I
desired, and will feeks after, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire
in his Temple. and Psalm. 42, 1. 2. As the Heart pants after the water brooks;
so pants my soul after thee* O God. Oh, when shall I come and appear before
God? but chiefly Psalm. 63. 1, 2, 8. early will I seek thee; my soul thirsts
for thee; my flesh longs to see thy power and thy glory so, as I have seen
thee in the Sanctnary. Because thy loving kindness is better than life. If he
had never seen him in the Sanctuary of the Spirit, he could not have ^^^^
carnestly desired him; But having once seen him and tasted of his goodness,
he could not but long for the continuance and renewing of this sight and and
taste. This also may be gathered from the Apostle Peter, who exhorts 1 Per.
2. 3.
us to desire the ^in^^re milk of the Word, if so be we have tasted that the
Lord is gracious. The tasting of Gods graciousnesse will not be soon lost out
of the sanctified mind, but will leave a desire after it to look after him.
Now this glory of the Lord is beheld as in a lookingglasse his outward actions
which are regished in the Gospel, are the looking-glass wherein all the divine
properties of his goodness and loving kindness do appear to the full, when
they are spiritually considered.

Fourthly, Those that behold this glory, are changed into the same image. This
glory is so excellent in goodness, and lovely to all that behold it, that it
subdues the soul and draws it by a sympathy to become comfortable unto it
self, as it is said, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. The love of Christ constrains us, to
what? to be conformable unto his death. For when the soul sees his great love
to us, it cannot possibly but it must needs love him again; and where love is
there is a Symbolizing of affections, which is the change here mentioned; for
through love, the thing beloved does receive a being in him that loves it; and
thus our Souls are transformed into the same image which we perceive to be in
Christ. See concerning this these places, Phil. 3. 21. Ephesians. 5. 1, 2. and 1
John. 3. 2, 3. and 4. 10, 11.

Fifthly, This change is from glory to glory, that is from one step or degree of
glory to another. For Christ is the ladder which Jacob saw, Genesis 28. 12, 13.
wherein were steps reaching from earth unto heaven; that is to say, from the
lowest estate of a temporal, to the highest of an eternal being. And upon
these steps the Angels ascended and descended; these Angels are our spiritual
messengers sent up to God, and his gracious answers sent down upon us. The
steps and degrees are in the life which we live in Christ Jesus. the motions of
spiritual growth, whereby in the days of his flesh he was daily mortified in
respect of the outward man and quickened by the Spirit in the inward; to which
mortification and quickening, we become conformable; by proceeding from one
state* of glory to another; because he also in the days of his flesh, went by
the same progress always from earth to heaven, till he came again to his
Father, from whence he came forth.

Sixthly, This change is wrought by the Spirit of the Lord, in the soul that
beholds Christ. The Spirit of Christ is the Author of the change which is
wrought in us; for when we see and behold Christ's glory, the love of God is
shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost which is given to us, Romans 5. 5. So
the holy Ghost proceeding from Christ by the knowledge and faith which we have
of him, and of his life, Ephesians.^. 5. works love in us to him; by which we
Sympathi^e, with him, and are changed into the same state of life, wherein he
did live after the inward man; for the spirit which comes from him, taking
hold of our spirits, draws the same with it self up unto Christ, to whom it
goes back again by the manifestation of the life of Christ in us. For when it
prevails over the powers of our soul, to bring the same unto the obedience
of Gods will, then it brings us back to Christ; for this was the life of
Christ, not to do his own will, but the will of his Father, who who sent him
into the world, John 6. 38. Thus then, when our will is brought to yield it
self by the spirit wholly unto the will of God in all things as Christ did,
then we are changed, and by the Spirit led from one step of glorious conformity
to another. Then the soul being betrothed unto Christ, through love does
desire to be drawn, that she may run after him; and then the mystery of the
song of Solomon is begun in us, that it may also in due time be fulfilled
through all the degrees of love therein expressed: which mystery is not to be
understood by any, but ^nt. 1.
by such as proceed in the degrees of this change from glory to glory.

Thus then we see how the life of God is both made known and conveyed to us by
the means of Christ; from all which by way of Recapitulation, we will gather
these conclusions.

First, that as the life of God is the only good to be sought for and procured
unto all; so Christ, as he is a Spiritual man, is the only means to purchase
that life.

Secondly, That that life is purchased in Christ by none other way, but by the
free gift of God, through the illumination of our souls with knowledge.

Thirdly, That this knowledge does reflect immediately upon the glory of God,
as upon his proper object, which is to be manifested in the heart of man.

Fourthly, That to make this glory manifest in our heart, the face of Jesuc
Christ must be seen by us.

Fifthly, That to behold the face of Christ, we must have an open face free from
the veil; and then we must look upon the glorious excellencies of his
spiritual life, in the glass of his outward conversation amongst men.

Sixthly, That by this contemplation and apprehension of the life of Christ, a
new life is begotten in us conformable unto that which is in him, by which we
are changed into the same image of glory, and are led from one degree thereof,
unto another,

Seventhly, That this change is brought to pass by the Spirit of the Lord,
which works upon our spirits, the manifestation of the life of God, which is
the only good thing and happiness to be sought after, and propagated unto
posterity.

Thus having discovered the true aim of a public good, and the means by
which we must attain thereunto; let us proceed to the endeavors which may be
used toward the propagating of this, unto the men of this generation, that by
them it may be advanced unto posterity.

Of the third.
If we have tasted how gracious the Lord is, and are truly come unto him as
lively stones, to be built up a spiritual house, and a holy Priesthood, to
offer up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God, through Jesus 1 Pet. 2. 5
Christ; then we shall be fit to propagate this life unto others, and not else;
for the means by which it is propagated unto others, is none other but to
labor, that the light which is made manifest unto our souls, whereby we are
become partakers of the life of God; may shine also unto others, that they by
the grace of God, may partake in like manner of the same. This endeavor has
three chief parts. The first is the care of avoiding offenses. The second of
giving good example, by going before others in godliness. The third, of making
the Rule and doctrine by which we walk, to avoid the evil and do the good
known to every one.

These three parts of this endeavor, are expressed Phil. 2. 15, 16. thus. Be
blameless and harmles as the Sons os God, without rebuke, in the midst of a
crooked and perverse Nation, amongst whom shine ye as lights in the world,
holding forth the Word of life. Except we study to be in all things without
scandal and offense, as it becomes the Sons of God, amongst the Sons of men;
the good which we do shall be evil spoken of, and become unprofitable, See
Romans 14. 13, 14, 15, 16. And if we give no good example by our life in the
profession of the Gospel, all our Doctrine shall be blasted, and we justly
suspected, and not worthy to be heard or taken notice of for teachers of Truth,
See Math. 7. 16. 21. John 10. 3, 4, 5.

Thus then, the endeavor to be without offense, is a preparative to make way
for the good which is to be intended toward others in our practice, and the
good which is to be intended toward others by our practice; is a preparative
toward the proposal of the Doctrine of Truth, by which the knowledge of
Christ is advanced unto the World, that so many as God shall be pleased to
enlighten and call out of the world, by that knowledge may be joined to him,
and made participant of his life. These three endeavors comprehend all the
objects, which in the profession and preaching of the Gospel, are to be studied
by our selves, and insisted upon toward others. For in a word, it is by the
means of the Gospel, that Christ is to be made known unto the world; For the
Gospel is the power of God unto salvation, to every one that believes, Romans 1.
16. And seeing that in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God,
it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching, to save them that believe, 1
Cor. 1. 21. Now in the Gospel there be two things. First, there is the doing of
the Truth for ourselves, and then the publishing of the same for others. The
doing of the Truth, is the profession of the Gospel, and the publishing of it
unto others; is the preaching of the Doctrine, by which the profession is
regulated. As for the profession, we see it has two parts; The first is a care
to be blameless and harmless without offense and rebuke toward all men. The
second, is the practice of Piety to do good to all, and go before others, to
lead them on toward the life of God. Whence we must gather, that all manner of
endeavors and undertakings, which tend directly to advance and perfect any of
these three objects, should be counted truly good endeavors, and fit to be
supported in this Age, and transmitted to Posterity. And the more near any
endeavor or undertaking does come to reach any of these ends, the more
complete and perfect it is to be esteemed in goodness, as coming nearest unto
the life of God. Here then the endeavors tending to the advancement of the
Gospel, should be sought out and ranked according to the subordination and
relation, which these matters have one toward another; and all toward the
manifestation of the life of God in us, by the knowledge of Jesus Christ in the
Gospel. Unto the matter of harmlesnesse and blameless conversation, belongs
the endeavor of peaceablenesse, and of becoming all things unto all men in
that which is lawful, as the Apostle tells us he did, 1 Cor. 9. 19. 24.

The endeavor of Peaceablenesse, is a study whereby we are directed how to
avoid the occasions of strife, in respect of our selves, and to bring others
who are at variance unto a peaceable and harmless disposition. These
endeavors, are proper Characters of the Sons of God; for in the place
forementioned, the Apostle makes the in-offensivenesse of our conversation, to
be the property of the Sons of God. And Christ says, that the Peacemakers are
blessed, because they shall be called the Sons of God, Math. 5. 9. Thus then we
must conclude, that the endeavors tending to take away offenses and scandalls
from amongst Christians, and tending to cause them avoid strife and debates,
and tending to make peace amongst them, and to bring them to the unity of the
Spirit, by a reconcilement of differences in the Truth, are undertakings and
endeavors, immediately conducing to the furtherance of the Gospel, and
consequently to the settling forward of the life of God amongst men. For God, is
the God of peace, and has no fellowship with evil, but is harmless and good
unto all; for even unto those that are unworthy of his goodness, he causes
his Sun to shine. Therefore Christ exhorts all his Disciples to be like his
and their heavenly Father in this; That they should be peaceable, innocent, and
do good unto all, even unto their enemies and persecutors, Math, 5. 38. till
the end. Unto the second part of the profession, which is the practice of
Piety, belongs the zeal of advancing the Kingdom of God, and setting forth
the image of Christ unto the world, in Righteousness and holiness: This is
somewhat more then to be unblameable, by avoiding scandalls and strife; for it
does imply moreover a care tending to the edification of many, by way of
example, to lead others to perfection, in the duties belonging to our christian
calling; for we are bound to show others the life of the Spirit by our walking,
so that they may be able to discern in us, the powers of another life then
that is, whereby this world is upheld; for this world being led by lust and
selfe-conceited greatness, and wholly ignorant of the life of God, must be
convicted by the life of the Spirit; that there is a better state and more
perfect happiness which the Saints of God enjoye in the beauties of holiness,
and in their communion with the Father, and with the Son, then that State
wherein worldings take pleasure: when therefore we know, and earnestly study,
to walk so as it becomes the Citisens of Heaven in our private and public
conversation; doing all things as in the presence of God by virtue of the
Covenant made betwixt him and us in Jesus Christ; then we fulfill the second
part of our profession of the Gospel; and whatsoever undertakings may directly
tend to advance the knowledge and the practice of this kind of life amongst
men, is most answerable unto the aim of a public good, and ought by all
means to be set forward toward posterity.

The third thing belonging to the advancement of the Gospel of Christ, is the
setting forth of the Doctrine of Truth; wherein all the grounds of the holy
profession are to be laid open unto the world: That they may be taught what the
ground of our hope is for which we walk; and what the rule is by which we
walk in faith and love to avoid offenses and to do good. Hereunto belongs
fundamentally the Pastoral charge over a flock, by Preaching of the word in
season and out of season, by way of instruction and correction, by exhortation
and reproof, and by comfort and threatening, and more particularly: The
Doctrinall charge which tends to confirm, enlarge, and maintain the
knowledge of Divine Truth revealed in the Scriptures, the object of which
charge should not be so much (as now adays it is almost wholly) the Refutation
ofsome errors, and the handling of certain common places; but it should
rather tend toward the setting forth of the hidden wisdom of God, which is
revealed in the written word, not as it is the ministry of the letter, which
many do only attend and insist upon, but as it is the ministry of the Spirit
in the new Covenant, wherein spiritual things are with spiritual words
explained; and being compared with the things of their own nature and
property, they unfold the hidden mystery which God has prepared for our glory
before the world began, In the opening of this mystery according to the
Scriptures; the Doctrinall charge should chiefly be employed, and not in
agitating with voluminous disputations after a Scholasticall way, particular
controversies; for if this wisdom whereof the Apostle does speak, 1 Cor. 2.
and the Ministry of the spirit whereof he speaks; 2 Cor. 3. were really
attended and made known; all petty controversies wherein men spend their whole
life Scholastically in Philosophical notions without any profit to the Gospel,
would vanish away, and be decided at an instant; because the fundamental Truth
of the Covenant in the Spiritual and perfect wisdom of God which is hidden
in the Mystery of Godliness, is as a Sun in comparison of a dark Lantern
whereunto the particular strains and notions of learning followed now adays
are to be resembled. Whatsoever undertaking therefore may tend directly toward
the advancement of this kind of spiritual learning, and the manifestation of
the hidden wisdom of God in a mystery according to the testimony of the
Scriptures; that must be esteemed a real furtherance of the Gospel, and
consequently a public good through the manifestation of the glory of God in
the life of Jesus Christ.

From whence finally this conclusion is to be inferred. That to partake for our
selves, and to impart the life of Christ to others the profession and preaching
of the Gospel must be maintained and advanced unto this generation and to
posterity by the endeavors which tend, first to avoid and take away offenses,
by composing of scandalous differences in Religlon. Secondly to do good works
in an examplary way that others may be drawn on to walk after the spirit.
Thirdly, to make known by the true discharge of the pastoral and Doctorall
duties, the Ruies and grounds of our spiritual life and conversation both for
avoiding of evil and doing of good, and what is not directly subordinate to
some of these ends or to all of them, is no true good, nor a thing to be looked
after; because it helps us not unto any part of our happiness; which is to
partake of the life of God in the knowledge of Christ.

Having thus opened the grounds of that which I am to propose; now I will make
the motion which I suppose will commend it self, as tending directly unto this
most eminent public good of this age and of posterity.

First, then if we believe what has been said, and know that a man is first
natural, and then spiritual; I think it fit to move that assistance may be
given as well by way of council as by outward support, unto those that labor
for the rectifying of men's natural parts, by reforming and facilitating all
the means of humane learning for the schools as well of old as young
Scholars. For the great defects and errors in the manner of teaching, and in
the matters which are taught, which are inferior and superior Schools, breed
evil habits, and make the Souls of men unfit for the apprehension of the
mystery of Godliness in the profession of the Gospel. Therefore to help the
removeall of these, and to frame aright course for the education of children,
and for the perfection of humane Learning, is a most laudable public good
work as well for this age, as for posterity.

Secondly, I think it fit to move that assistance may be given toward the
endeavors of Ecclesiastical Pacification, and taking away of scandales and
differences amongst Protestants first, and then also if it be possible amongst
all other Christians, that the first part of our Evangelicall profession may be
set forward to some perfection: And the assistance to be given to this
endeavor, may be besides the Spiritual Council (which by men of Spiritual
parts should be suggested to the Agents;) and unblameable and peaceable
conversation toward all men (which every one is bound to intend for himself)
though different in judgment from each other, a supply of means to maintain
the correspondency and the Printing of treatises and letters; without which the
negotiation of this matter toward Divines will be wholly lame and imperfect.

Thirdly, I move for the erecting of a professorship of Practical Divinity in
every University; and one in London at Sion or Gresham College. That this
Professor might intend besides the reading of Practical matters, The compiling
of a complete body of Practical Divinity taken out of all the Practical
writers of this latter age: which is a thing much desired by foreign Divines,
as may appear by their requests to that effect subscribed with many hands and
sent to the learned Divines, and the Patrons of Godliness and learning in
England. By which means the second part of our Evangelicall profession will
be much advanced toward some perfection, chiefly in those that are desirous
to lead a godly life.

Lastly I move for the erecting of a Lecture in London which should intend to
teach the common people the way how to make use of Scripture by reading and
meditating in their ordinary course; and should show also unto the more learned
the Rules of a more exact Interpretation of the word, then is hitherto used;
that when a matter of doubt is moved which ought to be decided by the meaning
of the text; there may be a common and infallible method of interpretation
known; for the finding out of the true sense thereof.

This Lecture should at one time explain a whole or half a Chapter, to show
the way of meditating upon the text, andof interpreting the same, by a constant
Rule of Spiritual wisdom.

How much these things (if they could be advanced) might tend to the good of
this age, and of Posterity for the propagating of heavenly knowledge in the
Gospel; I suppose it is needless to declare at large: perhaps the former
discourse will suffice to make this apparent; yet if a more particular
deduction of the things belonging to each of these motions, should be required;
for to show the manner how every one of these propositions might be
accomplished. that can easily be done to give satisfaction to such as will
concur to favor these endeavors, and support the furtherance thereof. The
Lord grant us all his Grace, to make of all our Talents the best use, which may
most tend to his glory, and the felicity of our own Souls, and of our
generation; and suffer us not to be unfaithful Stewards of his manifold gifts
and graces.

Amen.
Sir C.
YOurs of the second of January comes now to my hand, if this afternoon I had
been free, I could perhaps have enlarged my self more then now I am able to
do. Yet to entertain so good a motion I hope time shall never be wanting
hereafter to supply what may be required further of me, toward the
advancement of the public good. You approve of the objects proposed, but you
desire a further relish and illustration of the scopes and means. The two
objects which you like most of all, the one for Humane, the other for Divine
learning, I will chiefly now insist upon. The means then to advance humane
learning, and the reformation of Schools; is to elaborate certain Treaties, and
to put them forth that they may be made use of by all.

The first of these Treaties should be a discovery of the defects and of the
disorders in teaching and educating children, with the intimation of the
remedies thereof, and of the manner of applying the same unto the discase,
which should be done briefly and substantially.

The second should be a direction for Parents, how to implant into their
children the seeds of virtue, and to beget in them a disposition toward
learning.

The third, should be a new Alphabetarie, to teach children of five or six
years, without any tediousness to read and write, as it were in a continual
course of play and pastime.

4 Then the Systeme of things obvious to the senses of children, is to be
insinuated unto their imaginations, with the proper names thereof; that they
may have a true conceit of the simplest and outward things of the world, as a
rude matter of that whereof afterward they are to receive instructions. These
are the first general preparatives toward learning: then the matters to be
taught are to be elaborated. Where first there is that which belongs unto the
principles of Religion. Secondly, that which belongs to the attainment of
languages. And lastly, that which belongs to the attainment of Sciences,
whereof the first, viz. concerning Religion three Treatises are to be put forth.

First the abridgement of the history of the Bible fitted to the capacity of
children. Secondly the use of the examples of the Bible, and of all things
according to the ends for which God created them. Thirdly, the marrow of the
Bible, containing briefly the substance of that which is to be believed, done
and hoped for, according to the clear doctrine of the Bible, fitted to
childish simplicity and yet not without depth, to be enlarged upon toward
those that are of riper judgment, then mere children. Whereunto a direction
is to be annexed, for the information of the teacher; that he may know how to
enlarge himself upon matters, and question those that are youths in a deeper
sense and way, then children use to be questioned.

Of the second, viz. of languages, these Treaties are requisite. First, a
direction for their own mother tongue, to know the true properties thereof; for
it is to be the rule of understanding all other tongues. Secondly for the
Latin tongue, or the Greek and Hebrew; four helps are to be afforded. First,
the introduction to the tongue, containing the primitives thereof; which are to
be proposed with their significations, and variations, and their Declensions
and Conjugations. Secondly, the body of the tongue, containig all the words
thereof in the derivations and compounds, together with an easy Grammar and
Dictionary. Thirdly, the periodicall doctrine of the language, containing the
sentences and ornat manner of expressions, together with the rules of elegant
speech. Lastly a direction for the Masters of the language, showing the manner
how these helps are to be rightly used.

Of Sciences there are three degrees, whereof every one is to be handled in a
several Treaty. The first containing the history of all things, which are the
subjects of humane learning. The second, the dogmaticall substance of Sciences,
which are the principles and fundamental truths of humane learning. And the
third, the body of Sciences, containing all the precepts and branches of humane
learning, and the deductions which are infallibly evident, and truly drawn
already by other men's labors from universal principles. To which three
degrees of Sciences, a fourth may be added; showing the universal method of
ordering the thoughts, to find out by our own industry any truth as yet
unknown, and to resolve any question which may be proposed in nature, as the
object of a rational meditation.

These are the Treaties to be elaborated in the ways of humane learning, for
to bring scholars from the first steps of knowledge, unto the perfection of
the use of reason: wherein they may be able to discover by themselves, all
things which can be found out in nature. And when by the right use of these
Treatises, and the prudent manuduction of a good Master, the Scholar is
brought thus far; Then another Treatise is to be superadded to shut up all; for
the perpetual increase and advancement of Sciences, which should contain a
full direction concerning the ways of ordering higher Schools, Colleges, and
Universities, and of regulating the exercises, which ought to be set a foot
therein; That men who have attained unto the former degree of perfection, may
improve their talents with advantage one toward another, and toward the
public, without vainglory, and strife, and superfluous repetitions of
matters already discovered; where the manner of writing books and Treatises,
either for the ripping up of the hidden secrets of nature, or for the examining
and rectifying or completing of the writings of other men is also to be
explained, when first the faults and defects of Colleges, and Universities are
laid open, and the abuses of writing books is made known, with the ways of
taking a speedy course of reformation in the one and the other.

Thus having given you an Idaea of the ways and means how to advance humane
learning; I will come to the other object which concerns divine knowledge to
be had from the holy Scripture, by way of interpretation of the Text. Here also
some matters are fully to be handled for instruction, and direction of those
that would come to divine knowledge, and some exercises of the spirit are to be
intended by the proficients. The matters to be handled are these.

1 A Treaty or discourse should be put forth, to show the necessity of
reading and meditating Scripture, more then men are accustomed to do, and what
use is to be made of the knowledge of the words of the Text, both for humane
and divine learning in all kinds; as well natural, tending to discover the
properties and true use of things created, as civil and politic, tending to
show the prudencie of men's carriage one toward another, in all states, namely
Domestical, Republic, Monarchical, and Military; so that it should be made
good that no man can be truly wise, either to salvation in spiritual things,
or to the right use of reason in outward things; whether it be to make use of
creatures, or to converse with men toward happiness, without the knowledge of
the holy Scriptures, which are given to be a general rule both of all wisdom
and reformation.

2 This being made good, that the Scripturall knowledge is thus necessary and
useful; a second Treaties must be set forth, wherein the way and manner of
making use of Scriptures to attain all these ends, is to be shown partly by
private meditation of one by himself alone, partly by exercises of more then
one together, either in a private, or in a more public way; where a full
Idaea of the heads of means, and of the degrees of progress in meditation and
exercises toward the infallible attainment of scripturall understanding is to
be laid open.

3 These two generals being made known, the particulars are to be insisted
upon; where beginning from the childish part of scripturall institution, and
proceeding to the highest degree of spiritual contemplation, certain periods
of doctrine for scripturall knowledge, are to be distinctly delivered. The
first period is that which belongs to children. The second to young men. The
third to such as are great proficients, and may be called Fathers. And the
fourth and last to Doctors and teachers of others. The children when they are
in the course of humane learning, and busied to understand their mother tongue,
and to read the historical doctrine of the Bible, may be initiated to read
the Text it felfe, as soon as they have past through the historical
abridgement, which I have mentioned heretofore. And when they come to make use
of their second and third help of sacred scripturall knowledge heretofore
mentioned, then they must be (after they have run them over, and in some sort
comprehended those Treatises) brought to the moral and doctrinall parts of the
Scripture it self, to learn to observe in the Text, that which in their books
they have learned. A direction therefore is to be set down in a brief
Treatise, how children should be made to see and observe in the Scripture it
self, that which formerly was gathered out unto them, and delivered in a
particular Treatise, and this should be done Catechetically; so that as in the
course of humane learning, there were three degrees of knowledge in several
Treatises to be imparted unto them: So also in the course of divine learning,
there must be three degrees of Catecheticall exercises, described in a
Treatise; to show how that in reading the history it self, they ought to be
examined, and brought to answer concerning the passages mentioned therein; and
in reading the dogmaticall part, they are to be questioned to make them answer
from the Text it self, unto things therein morrally and doctrinally observeable
by their capacity; so that the Text it self must be made their Catechism from
whence they should learn all doctrine of Religion. Young men or children of
riper age, when they are learning the languages which are to be instruments of
learning; they must be all at once initiated into the historical Science of
things that are in the world, and into some principles of Arts and Sciences,
which afterward are more fully to be delivered. And when they are at this task
in humane matters, then in divine matters (which at their own times must
always go along.) A further period of scripturall knowledge is to be suggested
unto them, which is a kind of Analyticall way, of considering the principal
sentences of the Text, and in learning to distinguish the periods thereof one
from another, and in a single sentence to know what the subjectum and
praedicatum thereof is, and what the connexive and rationative particles of a
discourse mean, and to what use they serve. In which period, there be again
several degrees of matters to be taught; whereof a particular Treatise must be
composed, for the direction of those that are to teach youths this part of
divine knowledge.

When young men are become proficients, and have gotten strength of judgment,
then they must be brought further, to the full doctrine of Analyticall
meditation, wherein are three degrees. First, there is the literal Analysis.
Secondly, the material. Thirdly, the spiritual Analysis. The literal
Analysis, is the division of all the sentences of the Text, according to the
true relation wherein they stand in the bare letter, which is to be considered
in all the properties thereof; whereof a particular Treatise is to be made,
because this is the ground of all true interpretation; and if an error fall out
in this part of the interpretation, it may mar all the rest which follows.
The material Analysis, is the division of the things which are mentioned in
the sentences and words of the Text. Here the way to find out the true matter
and the scope of a whole discourse, and to observe the parts thereof (as they
stand subordinat to the scope, in the matter to make up the whole, and the
coherence of these parts one to another) with the grounds of their material
relation, and other things belonging thereunto; for to take notice of the
substance of things delivered, and of their order, will require another
Treatise to direct those that are proficients in the former degree of
Analytical knowledge, to advance unto deeper thoughts.

The spiritual Analysis, is the division of the Mystery according to the parts
of the matters. For in every material substantial truth of Gods Word, there
is some part of the Mystery of Spiritual Wisdom, and how to discern this
according to the rule of the Analogy of faith. And how to make use of this
rule, to dive into the depth and riches of Gods wisdom; and to know thereby
what his working is toward our inward and Spiritual man; and how the
material truth is to be applied and exalted with a reflection of the Spirit
upon Christ unto a more heavenly use, then the bare rational consideration
thereof does afford unto a natural man; I say, how to do all this for our own
instruction, and the enlargement of the soul in communion with God? is the
third degree of Analyticall doctrine and meditation, whereof a particular
Treatise should be elaborated for those that are to be counted Experienced,
and in some respect Fathers in Christianity. For none should be initiated into
this Doctrine, but such as have experience of Gods dealing with themselves and
others, and are consequently able from their own observations of Gods working,
to bear witness to the truth, which the Scripture does mention in a Mystery;
and which cannot be understood by any, but by such as can discern the work of
the Spirit in themselves, and perceive the degrees of the work thereof in
others, and consequently can judge betwixt the true and false motions of the
Spirit, and begun clearly to learn and understand the intention of God, in
particular proceedings, as they are subordinate unto the main intention of God
toward Mankind in the work of salvation through Christ, as he is the Head of
his Church. Such I say, as in the study of Christianity are come this far,
may be called Fathers, and none but they are capable of this third degree of
Analyticall Doctrine. And therefore this Treatise is not to be made common, but
only should be imparted unto them alone; and that also by some degrees
according to the measure of their capacity in this, because here does lie the
danger of Spiritual pride and selfe-conceitednesse, which draws most men of
knowledge headlong into errors and extravagancies, whereby they confound
themselves and others; and draw many sometimes into endless perdition, when
they are stubbornly bent to flatter themselves in the deceitful apprehension
of Spiritual Mysteries.

Thus far all common Christians should be led and taught to attain unto divine
wisdom, by way of Scripturall Meditation. And besides these directions to be
given by way of Treaties; certain Exercises of the mind, as well in private
solitarily, as in company with others, and publicly should be made use of, and
might be described if there were any appearance of hope; that in these
troublesome and unsettled times, a foundation could be laid for the practice and
training up of Christian souls in such away of Learning. For if a Lecture were
founded in some convenient place, wherein the Doctrinall part of this Science
might be delivered in public Lectures, and further beaten out in private
conferences; then also such as would addict themselves unto this kind of
study, and give up their Children to be instructed by those degrees of Humane
and Divine Learning might be not only taught, but actually exercised and inured
by some practical ways, into the Method of knowledge; for without some
exercise fitted to the capacity of him that is taught, wherein he may be
brought to apply the rule which he has been taught to the use wherefore it is
given, all instruction in Divine matters, is either unusefull or hurtful. For
unless divine instruction end in the fruit of the Spirit, which is
righteousness and holiness (which without some real exercise cannot be
received or entertained, when God has given them in any measure) all
instructions and theoreticall directions, are but to none effect, and rather
hurtful then profitable, because they tend to a greater judgment over him
that knows the way of truth and does not follow it. Therefore it is expedient
to make many discourses and treatises of those things, and to publish the
doctrine thereof at adventures, before trial be made of the practice and
before it may be known that those to whom the Doctrine is to be imparted are
not dogs and swine, that is to say, carnal, beastly minded men, that will
tear the truth by self conceited contradictions into pieces, or if they are
led not to contradict so much as to assent that then they will not drown it in
the mire of sensual lust and swinish worldly mindedness. Therefore these
pearls must not be cast before the world, but ought to be dispensed unto the
children of the Kingdom and that with a great deal of discretion and
spiritual prudency, because we have experience, that even the true children of
God are not capeable of al things, but that if matters be not suggested to them
by degrees, they either get a spiritual surfeit thereof, so that their stomach
is spoiled and unable to digest necessary food when it is proposed to them, or
else become drunken with them, and so in the heat of their brain they are as
it were foolish and mad in using them without sobriety and disorderly, neither
to their own nor other men's edification. As for the Doctrine and exercises
belonging to teachers, to bring them to a demonstrative way of interpreting of
Scriptures, they are of two sorts. The first is for the enlarging of knowledge
and for the discovery of the Mystery of Gods Kingdom in a Doctrinall or
Hortatorie or consolatorie way to infuse knowledge into others. The second is
for deciding of doubts, either arising from the words or from the matter of the
Text. Of each of these ways as they are to be fitted to higher or meaner
capacities, some Treatises should be compiled to show Ministers both how to
divide the words aright unto their hearers, according to the difference of
their Auditories disposition, and how to deal one with another in matters of
doubts and disputes to come to a full and satisfactorie decision of their
controversies. These two Treaties are of great concernement and not to be put
forth till men's ears be opened by affliction, and the pride of learning be put
down in the conceit of the worldly wise, and of the disputers of this age,
which God will bring to pass, partly by outward afflictions, partly by the
great variety or opinions, and the (...) of received principles which will be
shaken on all sides. The men that are ingenuous and call upon God for light and
direction will find deeper* principles of truth to rest their souls upon then
hitherto they have received: And by these God will abolish the wisdom of the
wise and the learning and the disputer of this age, and bring those that seek
wisdom in the simplicity of the word, to understand the depths of Gods
counsel which are hid from the great Rabbis of the world, and men rather
addicted to bookish learning (to tell us what this or that Author says) then
to search after the wisdom and demonstration of the spirit of and power, by
which the Apostles in preaching the Gospel were able to bring the spirits of
all men captive unto the obedience of Christ. And because we neither know the
Rules of true spiritual meditation, to dive into the things belonging unto the
Ministerially Doctorall and Pastoral charge: neither do we sincerely seek
after the rules by which our minds should be led unto knowledge, nor do we
exercise our selves one with another through the communion of Saints without
partiality and unblameably in the ways which we know, but we rather adhere to
humane doctrines and opinionating disputes found in Authors whom we through
curiosity seek after and take up Rules at adventure, or by partial squares,
and never impart unto others in spiritual simplicity the truth that God makes
manifest unto us: but hug our selves in a self conceited flattery with it,
through the vain immagination of a more secret knowledge, wherein we should be
thought to excel others. Therefore we that are Ministers are become
unprofitable, and to us God has made his word, as a book that is sealed so
that no man can read in it, nor knows what to make of the sense thereof,
which to a simple godly capacity is most clear and evident, and may be
clearly explained also by such as will not suffer their minds to run after
their own conceits.

Thus I have endeavored to let you see some more light concerning the two
objects which you chiefly pitch upon: whereof the one is Mr. Comenius proper
task, and the other is mine, although we are bound not to do in public or
to bring to perfection, either of these Methods without one another advice and
consent. Because in very deed his task is no less in my aim, then in his
own and mine is reciprocally in his aim a thing whereunto he does subordinate
his endeavors: so that the means of perfecting both were to have us both set
apart for our taskes and settled together, in a course of elaborating the same
by mutual communication one with another, and with others that are fit to
partake of these thoughts, and by teaching and exercising both our selves and
others in these Methods, till God show us the full period of time, when they
should be brought forth to the world.

I will not mention, as I did intend at first any thing concerning the other
two taskes viz. the matter of correspondency for Union with Foreign Churches,
and the matter of Practical Divinity, nor will I discribe here the manner of
our setlement, which may be wished rather then hoped, for the elaborating of
these taskes to some good purpose. These things I think needelesse to lay open
at this time, yet if it should be found requisite to show the feaseablenesse of
what we aim at, and I have here in some kind specified, let me know thereof
by your next, and God willing you shall receive satisfaction. The grace of God
be with you and direct you in all things unto the manifestation of his glory,
through Jesus Christ in whom I remain,

London this sixth of Ian. 1642. Your worship his most faithful and willing
servant, JOHN DVRYE.

Sir C.
BY your last of the ninth of this Month I am glad to understand that the
motions which have been made unto you, have given some content. The chief
thing which I aimed at, was to give you some real satisfaction to so equitable
a demand, and so answerable to the ay me of my studies. I must confess that
the universality of that good which is to be sought for, in the Kingdom of
God, whereof I labor to approve my self a true member; is so disproportionate
to the capacity and affections of most men, that I have hitherto dealt withal
(who are ordinarily bent to a particular of their own, more then to a real
public good) that I could never yet meet with any affectionate Patron, who
was willing and ready to undertake the advancement of such matters for
themselves, and to the ends for which God does put them in our hearts, who in
the midst of straights and infirmities cannot leave the prosecuting thereof,
although for love to such objects through neglect of our selves we are put to a
non-subsistance, I mean Master Comenius* Mr. Har^lib, and my self: For though
our taskes be different, yet we are all three in a knot sharers of one another
labors, and can hardly be without one another help and assistance. But it
is no new thing to such as serve God without respect to private ends, to spend
and be spent and receive no encouragement from the world. Therefore also we can
have patience, and wait upon Gods providence till he show what use he will
make of our talents, which we have dedicated unto his service, to be i mployed
and set a work in any place where we shall perceive the overture to be made
by him, only our end must always be answerable unto the gift bestowed upon
us, viz. public and universal, because we know that Gods intention is, that
his goodness and glory should not be concealed nor engrossed by any, but made
common to all that can partake thereof, who are not dogs and swine, whose
custom is to tear and trample good things under their feet. Now the overture
which you have made, if it be from him, I make no doubt but he will make it
apparent to us, and then you may be sure, that on our part nothing shall be
wanting wherewith God has enabled us, to further the public good. For as we
profess not to seek our selves in any thing, and diswade others from such an
aim, so we shall be found no ways difficill to comply to others in any
reasonable motions which shall not prejudg the liberty of public
communication of the best things, which in the kingdom of God must always be
inviolably observed. But how these things wherein we think we could be
serviceable unto the public might be made use of, is not yet apparent unto
you partly because you have not as it seems to me fully conceived the means
of propagating the good which we aim at, partly because you are not assined of
the inclination of those that would contribute their assistance unto the
furthering of the same. I then must tell you that which you seem not rightly
to apprehend, concerning the Means, which is, that besides the elaborating of
certain Teatises (which indeed is but a transent action, and if that were all
to be done, then a transient contribution for the elaborating of these
Treatises might suffice the exercitation of the minds of those that are to make
use of the treaties, and the breeding of Scholars in our way of knowiedge is
no less, if not more effectual for the scope intended, then the elaborating
and penning of the Treaties. The Treaties contain but the material part of the
work, but the excercises of the minds of Scholars and the framing of Schools
in humane learning, and the actual introduction and manuduction of the Spirits
of Christians, to scripturall wisdom and meditation is the form and
principal part of the business to be intended. Books though never so well
penned are but dead instruments by themselves (witness the holy Scriptures,
whichfew make good use of now adays) but if those instruments be in the hand
of an understanding workman, and apply to a fit subject, then some good
effect may be wrought by them. Therefore if a settled foundation would be had
for the one and the other work, both to elaborate the Treaties, and to apply
them to use, by training up Scholars by them, then the means would be fully
answerable to the attainement of the ends, which you allow and we have
proposed. From whence you may gather an answer to that which you propose
concerning the use of the means by public authority, upon all foundations
already made. First, the foundations already made, have their own orders and
constitutions, which are not well alterable. Secondly, men that are habituated
to a custom of their own, and think themselves to be Doctors and Masters of
Sciences, are not easily brought by the sight of any book, though never so
well penned, to alter their course of teaching. And lastly, Christ's rule is
also observable, that new wine should be put into new bottels. And therefore if
a new foundation could be had, it would be a great deal more answerable to
the scope and when the frame of that foundation should appear, and the
usefulness of that way of educating Scholars, and training up of Christians
unto heavenly wisdom should be approved; then other foundations might be
induced to follow, and King and State moved to introduce the same in other
places. Or if upon this motion which you have received the Parliament at this
time should be moved to apply a foundation which has no cure, and when it
falls void unto themaintenance of these endeavors: This would be all one as
if a new foundation were raised, and perhaps this might be done with no great
difficulty at this season, if those that have power with Parliament men would
show their zeal for the public good in this kind, to further the
maintenance of such undertakings by allowances from foundations formerly made
for the public good, and now perverted to private ends.

From all which you may see that an answer to your doubt concerning actions
transient, and of their own nature not reiterable should be this, that indeed
there is something in this work transient which needs not to be reiterated,
but that is not the principal by which the scope is attained. But some other
thing also there is which is not transient, and must be reiterated continually,
which is the chief part of the work, and therefore requires some congant
foundation, that the Agents of the work may set themselves apart to attend it
without distraction, unto which now for want of setlement they are continually
subject, which is a hindrance to both parts of the work at once. As for him
that is to part with the money, I conceive that he should judge with himself,
what he is able to do, and whether he thinks a present help or a foundation
of perpetuity to be things of an equal indifferency. As for me I think them
not of an equal in differency, for the reasons now alleged; yet if he that
will part with the money, should be more willing to give a present help, or
more able to do it then to settle a perpetual foundation: And if that help
would reach so far as to maintain the Agents till they can elaborate the
Treaties and make all things fully ready for to be applied to use, I conceive
that this might be well done, and I will propose the matter to Master Comenius
and Master Hartlib, to whom I have not as yet spoken of this particular: For
we are bound to do things with mutual advice. As for that which in the
latter end of the letter you say of foundations, that in them there is a
temptation of the Authors living in them, I do not well know what you mean
thereby, nor do I conceive any inconvenience in the living of any man with us,
if we be but set apart and upheld to intend our business cherefully without
distraction. Thus you see what I thought good to impart further toward your
information in this business. I beseech the Lord to direct both you and us in
all our deliberations and intentions, to advance the service which we owe unto
him and his Church in Jesus Christ, for whose sake I am

Sir, Your assured friend and faithful servant, JOHN DURY.
London, this 13. Jan. 1641.
The Copy of a Letter to S. H.
Loving friend,
HEre you have the Appendix of that Analysis of the Epistle to the Galathians,
which once at Elbing I put to paper: I pray you let Sir C. see it upon
occasion, or others also, that they may judge what the usefulness of this kind
of Study may be, and why that I have affected and loved so much the Scripturall
Meditation and Preaching of this nature, which takes hold of large Texts, as
whole or half Chapters at a time. I hope if he or others will try the way
which I have followed, that they will find the same benefit, whereunto I could
wish to be an instrument to bring all men as well as any one or two. The Lord
enlighten all our eyes in his knowledge, and direct us in the right use
thereof. I rest

Your affectionate friend, I. DURYE.

THe Appendix to the Galathians, as the occasion of Resolving this Epistle thus
at the first was my sincere purpose and endeavor to stir up my Auditory to the
Reading and Meditation of the Scriptures, so now my sincere affection and wish
is to beseech the Lord that this may be an occasion to others who intend to
edify their hearers to take the like course in hand: For I have found and do
find daily by experience that there is no truly and absolutely grounded
knowledge of the Mysteries of Salvation but in the Scriptures, and that to
apprehend it in them, there is no other means but Prayer and constant
Meditation, and that to meditate rightly, there is no sure way, but first to
lay aside all prejudicate opinions in giving over ones self to be captived by
the evident sense of plain places. Secondly, to lay hold of a quiet mind in
suspending and captivating ones self from rash resolutions till it please the
Lord to reveal the sense in doubtful and obscure places: And thirdly never to
settle fully and infallibly the mind to rest in any thing till it be evident
that all the parts of the discourse in the scopes and matters of every one of
them, answer directly in all respects to establish that truth which is
apprehended to be absolutely infallible, when it is found that a place is so
confirmed by the joint coherence and reference of all places of the same
treaty unto it, with a mutual harmony and agreement of altogether to the
analogy of faith; Then a man may infallibly conclude of the meaning of a
place, (and as I suppose) not before then; Now to comprehend the joint
coherence and harmonically dissonant references of all the parts and particles
of a treaty, me thinks it is very necessary to go exceeding warily and
orderly to work, for we are easily deceived either by Philosophical or
Rhetorical conceits of humane wisdom, or else by incident imaginations of
our own to which readily we are bent to force all to agree, wracking it and
wresting it to our purpose, so that if we once give way to our own fancy, our
preconceived opinion becomes as a torture whereupon we bind the places of
Scripture and racking them with violence we make them confess and speak what
we will and not what they mean, therefore a safe and well grounded course must
be taken first of all in sanctifying and purifying the heart and intentions
from all by respects before a man undertake this meditation, by prayer craving
grace, and by grace aiming only through the love and fear of God to attain to
the true knowledge of the testimony of Jesus Christ, that he may be served and
glorified according to a good conscience in the obedience of faith. Secondly in
proceeding in the work it self by degrees not casting, first a Mould of thine
own, and then framing it afterward with the tool as Aaron did his golden
calfe, but framing first all the particulars severally according to the Pattern
which thou shall see in the mount of the Analogy of faithful and sound
doctrine, and then joynting and connecting all those together every one in its
own place, and so rearing it up to be one body as Moses did his tabernacle of
the Lord, and to frame these particulars conveniently (if I were to give this
my advice how it must be done til the Lord enable me more fully for present I
only can say thus much, me thinks our best course is to follow the type, as I
take it of knowledge, set forth in Ezekiel 47. where it is said, that waters
did flow from the house of God by degrees of depth, which I think may be
Allegorized thus* There be four degrees of Ezekiels passage through the
waters, the first is up to the Ancles, the second is up to the knees, the third
is up to the loins, and the fourth is up to the head and ears, and above so,
that there was no way to pass over but by swimming, let us also wade in the
waters of life contained in the Scriptures by the same degrees, and I doubt not
but we shall go safely without danger: First, let us go with our understandings
but up to the ancles, where the waters are shallow, that is let us comprehend
the true and plain literal sense and phrase-ology of the text first, then
afterward let us wade in to the knees, that is, let us intend to conceive the
several and evidently distinct sentences, and clear points of instruction, or
exhortation or correction, or reproof, etc. openly offering themselves unto
us, taking them as we find them, plainly distinguished by themselves.
Thirdly, let us go from these material points and sentences after that they
are all conceived to things more material which bind up all the distinct
parts in one body, and knit them together as it were in the place of
conjunction, where superior and inferior parts meet together, as in the
loins of a man, and that is done, when we conceive aright of all the rational
connections of these several sentences in joining as the words themselves do
require one sentence to another to make up of two one conception, and so going
on to all the joints and knots of the several matters, we must join one to
one, and two to two by degrees, till we conceive fully of the whole lump of the
matter handled throughout the whole treaty, and of the contrall scope and
maine intention to which all does at least in a general manner aim, When now
this is done, it is permitted to a man to go so far, as to stretch forth his
arms and to swim, then you may come to the waters, which cannot be passed
over, because they shall in your mind rise to be a river, and that is, when you
shall in the fear of God seek to comprehend the whole drift of the spirit of
knowledge, in the whole treaty, and in all the parts of it as they are both
separately and conjoyntly disposed in a mutual course of subordination or
coordination, when you shall comprehend in the only matter and scope both the
maine, the direct, and the collateral respects, as well of sentences and words
for the matter, as of fashions of proposing them and confirming them, and
concluding them for the manner, when finally, you shall be able, by the
perpetual collation of all things proposed to see a stream and river of
wisdom flowing continually in such a breadth and depth, that none can pass
over it, from one beginning to one end by continual consequences of infinite
drops and respects of knowledge which all make up but one body of waters, and
thus you must go (in every passage, whosoever thou art) not of thine own
motion so much, as by the leading of the man that has the line in his hand (of
whom look Isa. 28. 16. 17. and elsewhere) and thus thou must go betwixt every
passage, leaving a convenient distance and not hastily nor rashly, and thus
thou must go* not coming to the fourth degree till thou be brought through the
three first degrees, for Ezekiel was brought through them first, and then he
tells us by experience what depth they were of, but when he comes to the last,
he confesses that neither he himself, nor any man else could pass over the
waters, teaching us by that experience the rule which Saint Peter sets down
clearly, 2. Pet. 1. 20. No prophecy of the Scripture is of any private
interpretation, (...), of proper resolution, so then thou must never be so
confident and full in thine own sense but thou must always in the fear of God
be ready to hear others also, for perhaps thy neighbor has swimmed as far as
thou, Now the Lord of his mercy send unto us the Spirit of direction and
knowledge, of mecknesse and love to bear one with another, and to learn
willingly of him one by another, that so we may become trees of life, planted
by the rivers of these waters, to bring forth our fruits in due season, Amen.
And as for me, beloved, as I have wished at the beginning so do I now wish and
pray again, that it would please the Lord to move the hearts of teachers to
propose unto their flocks the body of the Scripture it self, as it were in a
lump, furnishing unto them sufficient directions and ability to study and
meditate in it diligently for themselves, and to propose to others their
hearers in lively practice and clear institutions, both evident examples, and
manifest rules how to exercise their hearts understandingly in it, to the
growth of knowledge and the unity of faith, which now a days is so greatly
requisite, for all men are now for the most part drunken with their own
opinions, reeling to and fro in uncertainties, and the more ignorant sort,
which is often times such as think themselves the wisest, are so incapeable of
true heavenly wisdom that all things delivered unto them out of the
Scriptures, must be delivered as unto little babes, line upon line, precept
upon precept, here a little and there a little, and so we always stay in the
very elements of knowledge, and never go forward to perfection, because we
cannot bear one with another, and hear one another with patience, because we
pray not one for another, that things unknown may be revealed, but we blame one
another, and suspect one another, and envy one another to our mutual
destruction, now the Lord of his mercy mend these things both in the teachers
and in the hearers, that by the faithful prayers and endeavors of Gods
people, once at last the divine order of the holy wisdom of God revealed in
the Scriptures, may be made manifest: for me thinks, that Babylon which is the
confusion of the whole world in all things, but chiefly in the original
language of Canaan, which is the true sense of the Scriptures, will never be
overthrown till this general order of the text in the uniforme sense of all
the distinct parts of it be raised up by God, and brought forth as a true
Zorubbabell to confound this confusion of uncertain senses, and when this
shall be effectuated by the Lord of Hosts, who is wonderful in counsels* and
excellent in working, then I am sure that the question shall be determined who
ought to be judge of controversies, the Pope or the Scriptures, then Atheists
mouths who acknowledge not the divinity of it shall be stopped, and all those
that seek the Lord, shall find him, and be fedd with understanding, for there
is such an incomprehensible extent of knowledge in a little parcel or book of
the Scriptures, and so uniforme a sense and light through the manifold parts of
it, that I cannot compare the parts of it more fitly then unto the body of the
Sun in our worldly firmament, which though in appearance it seems but a hand
breadth, yet it fills the whole world with the glory of one light by the means
of infinite beams, making up but one stream of resplendencie on every side
alike defused, so is it with one epistle even with every one of the epistles,
they are but as a hand breadth in substance, but in light of knowledge, through
the infinite respects and references of diverse parts as of great beams, they
are able to fill the whole church, and the heart of every living soul with the
resplendencie of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, and as Idiots
that wot not what optike or opticall demonstrations mean, cannot believe or
perceive although it be told them, that there is an orderly dispositions of the
beams of the Sun amongst themselves, and a subordinate proceeding of their
parts from the body of the Sun, and that there is an unspeakably and
incomprehensibly exact order in the disposition of all the parts of light, so
the spiritual Idiots that have no optike Organs, it is no marvel that they
never believe nor see any order to be in the body of the Scriptures, but so
many of you as can make evident demonstrations, or experimental trials, in
gathering the beams of the light together in your looking glasses, to do by
the means of refraction, or reflection, some wonderful effect, either of
representation or of burning in the hearts, and before the eyes of godly
souls, you (I say) may know and can see, that in this light is not only an
excellent order and disposition of all the parts of it, but also the very cause
of all order that is or ever shall be in this world for even as darkness is the
mother of all confusion and disorder, because it bears under its wings as it
were the shadow of destruction, and the nature of a Chaos, and as light is the
mother of comeliness and order, setting forth and making manifest by the only
presence of it self, the whole decency, distinction, variety, unity, and
symmetricall disposition, of every thing in heaven and earth, and of the whole
world, so also ignorance has been hitherto the mother of Babel, and knowledge
shall beget Zorubbabell, now no knowledge is certain but that which is in the
word of God, even as no light is pure light but that which comes from heaven by
the same, therefore that light can only and shall bring all order and
righteous disposition of all things in the church and world, for in it only is
the true weight, measure, proportion, and situation of every thing, and by it
only the disposition of the Creator who has framed every thing most orderly
and decently can be made manifest unto mankind, and can any now be so
sencelesle as to think, that that word and light, which is and must be the
only cause of order in every thing should want order and be confused in it
self? can any be so confused in judgment, and drowned in foolish and
disorderly imaginations, as to think that Gods spirit (who by wisdom has in
the first creation of this temporary world ordered all things in so admirable a
manner, that whosoever beholds it cannot but acknowledge the infinite
providence of the workman of so strange a frame) should not in the second
creation of an eternal world (which is his church) order and express in the
Scriptures, the very decrees and precepts of wisdom it self orderly? If the
kingdom of nature which shall perish is established by so wonderful an effect
of wisdom, and stands only by it (for heaven and earth are naturally
subsistant by no other thing but by the pillars and foundation of order) shall
the kingdom of grace, and of the word of God which lasts eternally be less
wonderful in the same effect of that same wisdom? No surely for if order be
one of the most certain and chief effects and consequents of wisdom, then
wheresoever wisdom is expressed, there order must be also, and where wisdom
is most eminently and highly expressed, there also order must be found in the
most eminent and high degree of prudencie, righteousness, decency, and
comeliness, and for this cause I hold for certain, that in the text of the
Scripture a divine order and disposition not only of matter but also of words
and manner of expressing that matter is to be found, which being perceived and
found, will bring a new light to all men's eyes, and will discover hidden things
more evidently hereafter, then ever known things have been known heretofore,
which I beseech the Lord in his mercy to perform, and to make manifest by his
spirit of propheste in the testimony of Jesus Christ, that in the revelation of
his dear son, all those that love him may be filled with joy, and that the
glory of his wisdom and goodness may be known in the truth of his word to
the praise of his holy and glorious ame both now and evermore, Amen, Even so
come Lord Jesus, and let him that hear it say come. Rev. 22. and 20. and 17.

Finis

