The Scotch Lasses Constancy: OR IENNY's Lamentation for the Death of IOCKEY,
Who for her sake was Unfortunately Killed by SAWNY in a Duel. Being a most
pleasant New Song,
to a New Tune.


Two Bonny Ladds were Sawny and Jockey,
But Jock^y was Lo'd and Sawny unlucky;
Yet Sawny was tall, well-favour'd and witty,
But I's in my heart thought Jockey more pretty:
For when he viewed me su'd me, wooed me,
Never was Ladd so like to undo me,
Fie I cried, and almost died,
Least Jockey would gang and come no mere to me,
Jockey would Love, but he would not Marry,
And I was afraid that I should miscarry;
For his cunning tongue with wit was so gilded,
^
Daily he pressed me, blessed me, kissed me,
Lost was the hour methought when he mist we,
Crying, denying, and sighing, I wooed him,
And mickle ado I had to get from him.
But unlucky fate robbed me of my jewel,
For Sawney would make him Fight in a Duel;
Then town in a dale with with Cyprus surrounded,
Oh! there in my sight poor Jockey was wounded:
But when he thrilled him, felled him, killed him,
Who can express my grief that beheld him;
Raging, I tore my hair to bind him,
^
I Will shrieked and I Will cried, wae's me so unhappy,
For I Will now have lost mine nene sweet Jockey;
Sawny I cursed, and bid him to fly me,
I vowed and I swore he should never come nigh me:
But I Would spite him, hate him, fight him,
And never again would Jenny like him:
Though he did sigh and almost dye,
He cried fie on me, cause I did slight him.
And from me I Will bid him straight way be ganging,
When with arms a cross, and head down hanging;
Whilst that my poor Jockey was a dying
He to the Woods then departed sighing*
And his breath wanted, panted, fainted,
Whilst that for him many tears were not scanted:
I Will beat my breast, and my grief expressed,
Wae's me that Death my joy had suppressed.
At which my Jockey a little reviving.
And with his death as it were he lay then striving,
Opened his eyes and looked upon me:
And faintly sighed, Ah! Death has undon me:
Jenny my Honey, I Will must part from thee,
But when I Am dead, sure there is none will wrong thee,
I did love thee, and that did move me,
To Fight, that so a man I Will might prove me,
But ah cruel Fate to death I am wounded,
Oh! and with that again he swounded;
Whilst for to dress his wound I applied me,
But wae alas his life was denied me:
Death had appaul'd him gaul'd him, thrall'd him,
So that he died, with grief I beheld him;
And left poor Jenny all a mourning,
And cruel Sawny cursing and scorning.
From Jockies cold Lips I often stole kisses,
The which whilst he lived were still my blisses:
A thousand times I did sob, sigh it,
And mickle ado I Will had to be quiet:
For as I eyed him, spied him, plied him,
Never a thought could then pass beside him:
I Will bann the Fates that Life denying,
Had robbed me of Jockey, and long I sat sighing.
Till I Will at last with Cyprus crowned him,
And with my tears I Will almost had drowned him;
The Turtles about us then came flying,
And mourning, coo'd, to seem a sighing:
I Will viewed him, ru'd him, with Flowers strewn him,
And with my Love to the last persu'd him:
Resolving that I Will not stay behind him,
But sighing, do, and seek for to find him.
FINIS.
Printed for P. Bro^ksby, at the Golden Ba^lia Pye-Corner.


