A Pindarick POEM On the ROYAL NAVY.

Most humbly Dedicated to Their August Majesty's, K. William, and Q. Mary.

Written by Mr. D'urfey.

Devisum Imperium cum Jove Caesar habet.

In vita Virgil. Alta petunt, Pelago credas innare Revulsas Cycladas, aut
montes concurrere montibus altos.

Virgil lib. 8. LONDON: Printed, and are to be sold by Randall Tailor, near
Stationers' Hall. 1691.

A Pindarick POEM.
I.
CALM was the Ocean, as when first the Sun
Blessing the new Creation, had begun,
To prove the Makers power, and disperse
Indulgent Beams arround the Infant Universe:
Triumphant Neptune cleared his stormy Brow,
Curled his green dropping Locks, and now
His Aged face with wanton smiling seemed
As if his present Joy, had his past years redeemed
About him thronged in every place,
Naereids and Trytons, all the Finny Race
That many a Century of years had strove;
TO express their dutious Zeal and Love,
Where-e're the Watery God his Chariot drove,
Hushed in the Calm of soft contentment lay,
Some Danced, whilst others with the Sea Nymphs play,
All pleased to see their Monarch smile, and the propitious day.
II.
For now Great Britains Glory 'gan to appear,
The Royal Navy here,
Predestined blessed, its glorious Course did Steer:
Castles Impregnable, not made to yield,
As when of old the hands of Gods did build;
Glide on the rolling Billows and make sport
With each oposing surge, a Monarchs Court
Is every Vessel, and in every Room
Caesar might think himself at home,
The Amorous Sails swell with the Winds that blow,
And Woods of English Oak upon the Ocean grow,
The Flower de Luce, and Type of English tame,
When they the French did lame:
Guilds every Flag, and in each Lions eyes
The Rage of our wronged Nation seems to rise;
To see what now they are,
And heretofore we were;
When Martial Henry drove 'em to their Walls,
And Royally revenged the mock of their proud Tennis-Balls.
III.
Britannia first the Empress of the Fleet,
In awful pomp rides on each humble Wave;
Who forward Crowd with joy as pleased to meet:
Her glorious Stern and mighty sides to Lave;
The Jocund Dolphins round about her Keel,
Whene're the Martial Trumpets Sound;
The Charming Influence of Music feel,
And Dance an Antic Round;
Whilst on the Deck a Thousand Heroes are;
Valiant and young, true Natives, scorning fear,
That Englands Ancient Blood, and Honor bear:
And at their feet a hundred Brazen fates;
That kill as fast as Jove Creates:
When their hot Balls of Death are flying on,
TO Eclipse the great false Light of the proud Gallick Sun.
IV.
With Bloody Streamers Waving in the Wind,
The Sovereign next does steer her graceful Course,
Raising her Royal head, nor is behind
Britannia for her bravery or Force;
Imperial State, Majestic like her Name,
Reigns in each Motion, and does nobly show,
Her just disdain of an Invading Foe;
That dares affront her Country or her Fame.
Next her the Phoenix London Booms along,
The Lofty Theme of a famed Laureats Song:
That like great Maro, best could treat of Kings;
And write in mighty numbers mighty things.
The Great St. Andrew too in equal Rank;
Exalts her Glittering Prow;
Proud of her Walls of Oak, and Death defying Plank;
Although they never did in Scotland grow;
And lastly, to fill up the glorious Line,
The blessed St. Michael, like her Name Divine;
Crowned with auspicious Fortune comes,
Gallia's inveterate Foe and Rome's.
For as the Conquering Archangel fought,
And the Hellish Dragon to confusion brought;
That over Mankind so prosperously prevails,
So is she doomed to rout and quell the Dragon of Versailles.
V.
And after these with spreading Sails appear,
More wonders moving in a lower sphere,
A noble Fleet of second and third Rates,
Our Causes Bulwark and the States;
That our best brood of English bear,
Heroes that hold their Honor as a Jem,
Of rich, and of unpriz'd esteem;
And weigh each Vessel that for Empire strives,
Dear as their darling Lives.
The glorious Neptune, and the Vanguard bold
The Sandwich famed for bravery of old;
The Royal Duke, and Valiant Ossory,
The Beauteous Duchess, Mistress of the Sea:
The Dreadnought, and the Restoration,
The Resolution, sworn to right the Nation;
And next as good as e're did Sayls unfurle,
The great restorer of a Crown, the Loyal Albermarle.
VI.
With many more, sacred in deathless fame,
And in their brave Commanders blessed;
That scorn to play the last years wretched Game,
Or fell their Honor for base Interest;
A noble courage swells each Martial heart,
Whilst even each Coward Charmed with secret shame,
Grows stout in spite of fear, and acts a Heroes part;
To right his Country and redeem his fame,
The hated thought of Gallick Tyranny.
In every freeborn English Soul,
Will just resentment raise to a degree,
That all such baseness must control;
And as we of a Noble Roman read,
Who that his Country might be freed;
Bravely adventured, tho without reward,
To stab a Tyrant amongst all his Guard.
So rather than the French command our Sea,
Or in sweet Albion Plant their hated Colony,
From out our Navy, or our Power at Land,
Some Son of Fame, some glorious Hand,
No doubt the sacred Steel will draw,
And gloriously acquire the Name of English Scaevola.
VII.
Thus in an Intellectual Vision lost,
My senses charmed with the enchanting view,
A Scene, to equal which Apelles never could boast,
And mighty Titian never drew;
Whilst long with Pleasure sated I surveyed
The dazzling Glory of the Sea,
Where Naval Pomp in splendor lay,
And Englands Grandeur was at large displayed,
Methought the Watery God in state,
Drew near the Royal Fleet,
And with a Grace Majestic seemed to greet,
Her The Neptune 2d. Rate.
that was honored with his Name, and we have mentioned late.
His numerous train of lesser Deities,
Around his shelly Chariot rolled,
The Winds were hushed, and not a Breeze
Durst be so bold,
To move the silent Waves; but now, as if his Power
Had doomed the Marine World to rest that happy hour,
No sound was heard through all his Scaly Guard du Ceur.
VIII.
On a high Rock that dashed with Waves had stood,
E're since the Almighty* Fiat made the Sea,
And stemmed the shock of the tempestuous flood,
At whose deep root old Father Ocean lay,
And to a hollow Cell had carved his wondrous way.
Neptune advances, and to the Aged Sire,
(Whom Joy uncommon did inspire,
To see the Seas triumphant God,
Honor the place of his abode)
Waving his sacred Trident, the Father graced,
And on the Rocks least Craggy part upon his right hand placed.
Then full of Oracle the profound silence broke,
And thus of his Loved Albion with Divine fury spoke.
IX.
Oh thou, the Garden of the Universe,
Whose fame the Songs of Angels might disperse;
And Bards Divine, where Wit is most extreme,
And merit Wreaths of Laurel from the mighty Theme.
Thou lovely Park, where Herds of Kings may dwell
Pal'd in with Sea, and be Invincible
Thou blissful seat, which the Eternal made
(Untir'd with the Creating Trade)
Before the courser Mould had its decree,
To form the common Herb, or Flower, or Tree.
How often from my profound recess below,
Did I my sorrow show?
Sorrow as great as possible could be,
When Pity moves a Deity,
To see my Darling Britain, my Loved Isle,
Grow so Degenerate and Vile;
Sickning with Sloth, and baneful Luxury;
Her Credit lost to a degree
Of Cowardice, and gross Stupidity:
Whilst her insulting Neighbor Potent grows,
And her once petty Foes,
That some few Ages past,
Gladly a Peace with her embraced:
Whom her Immortal Kings, in former times,
Have Conquered in their Native Climes;
Took Royal Prisoners in the Field,
And to their own Conditions made them yield,
And from the glittering Banner of their Crown,
Taken the Impress to adorn her own.
Now by her sloth undone, and treachery,
Her Schism, Rebellion, and Impiety;
And by neglect in War so long remiss,
Have given her Foes hope to possess,
And her substantial Lions win for the Titular Fleu de Lice.
X.
Redeem, redeem, thy wretched loss of time,
Redeem thy honor, mouldring as the Grave;
No longer doze and hug thy sluggish crime,
But rouse, and sinking credit save.
The Destinies are kind, the Book of Fate is fair,
No blotted Omen does appear,
But Influence benevolent crowns the auspicious year.
Thy Wealth is mighty, and thy Navy great,
And blushing Victory seems to wait,
As Pre-ordain'd by Fate.
The Powers too of my Empire all agree,
From the vast Caverns of unfathomed Sea,
To assist Britains Cause espoused by me.
The Waves shall mount, and Winds shall rage,
Rough Boreas shall the Foe engage;
Who tossed in fatal storms shall scatter far,
Or blindly on themselves make War,
Whilst Zephyrus, and every gentle Wind,
Still to thy Fleet propitious are and kind,
And on my watery Plain shall safely ride,
Untroubled with a ruffling storm, or with a rolling tide.
XI.
And as the Natives on thy chalky shore,
Behold with Joy thy Naval Power,
Greater than Britain e're could boast before.
Who if they Loyal service pay,
And take no Bribes their Country to betray,
Are strong enough to gain a universal sway.
So Fame through thy Perspective let them see,
Albions Felicity,
Fixed in her present Monarchs Bravery.
Royal Nassaw, of whom to write is vain,
'Twould blunt the ablest Pen, and crack the soundest Brain.
The extreme of thought, adorned with nicest Wit,
His character has never writ,
Describe all good they can, they must leave something yet.
Call him Deliverer, let Church.
Eusebia kneel,
And show the Wounds she did so lately feel,
Unveil the bleeding breast his sovereign balm did heal.
And then in Prayer her grateful homage show,
Still it is a sacrifice too low.
Or style him Pious, Generous, Valiant, Wise,
Who beyond Virgil's Muse, or soaring Pindar flies,
Will reach his Fame no more than Mole hills do the Skies.
Strict Moral Virtue does his breast control,
And there reigns in him a true Kingly Soul.
Not swayed by Avarice or Luxury,
Tyrannick Lust, nor poor Dogmatick Bigottry,
But firm to Honor, true to his great trust,
And to the meanest of his subjects Just^
In time of War none readier than he,
To hazard life in the Field, or launch to Sea;
The Hunt of Glory is his chief delight,
But careful that his cause is right,
Upon French Principles Great Nassaw will not fight,
But on just motives, with the first go on,
And face the worst of dangers, like each private man;
His Royal heart mix with the common File;
Nor will he wear the Wreath, unless he share the toil.
But to retrieve the glory of his Nation,
Still pushes forward on each brave occasion,
And his successful Valor proves Divine Predestination.
XII.
Next Reverend Father, lift thy Eyes;
And if the aged Optics of thy sight,
Can bear a Ray so bright,
As never yet was rivall'd in the skies,
See Gloriana sighting on the Throne;
Her Royal Lord the Faiths Defender gone.
Observe how filial Piety,
Loaded with State, and sovereign Dignity,
The weighty pressure of a Crown;
The Peoples satisfaction not her own,
Disturbs her sacred rest; and anxious Care,
Inveterate Foe to all the Fair,
In th midst of her feigned smiles still (...) as chief,
And shows true Beauty in a shroud of grief.
See how the scale of Justice wisely she commands,
And holds the sword with guiltless hands:
A perfect Angel in a double kind,
For outward Grace and Virtues of her Mind.
Her heart with Care of her great charge oppressed,
Still throbs within her heavenly breast.
She wishes Peace, but ah! it will not be,
The Lands Contagion spreads to that degree,
It Is only War can cure the hated Malady
Yet in the midst of Wars alarms,
Its hourly terrors, and impending harms,
That discompose her mighty soul,
And over all delights control,
Her Influencing eyes are still the same,
And with their usual luster flame;
Her face is all serene and fair,
And tho Bellona may appear,
Warring within her troubled heart, Love keeps his Revels there.
XIII.
Her Sister in the next bright sphere does move,
Twin-like, in Virtue, Piety and Love;
The happy Mother to a brood of Kings,
That shall in future times do wondrous things:
And as like Heaven-born Sisters they agree,
In all the points of sacred amity.
So choicest blessings Providence bestows,
And tho in different gifts, an equal bounty shows.
To one a glorious Diadem,
To the other an unvalued Jem,
A Happy Son, a young Illustrious Prince,
That when the Gallick Insolence
Shall cool, and Mighty Williams Annals fill,
With Histories of Conquests there, as I presage they will,
Shall march with his brave Sire, the Royal Dane,
To summon Normandy, Poictieu and Main,
And as our once known ancient right, Anjou and Aquitayne;
From such an Uncle, such a Father too,
That Glorys brightest prize pursue.
What may we not expect,
When they our Arms direct?
What from their Conduct may not Albion do?
The first his Royal Word esteems beyond a Crown,
And by their Words good Monarchs best are known.
Nor can a Kings Divinity be true,
Unless Word be not sacred too.
This, this, is Caesar's Maxim, he who now commands.
The boldest Sons of Fame in Foreign Lands,
Whilst Denmarks noble Prince as bravely here,
Offers his blood; and rather than not bear,
In Britains danger, or its fame, a share,
Resolves to Engage at Sea a Royal Volunteer.
XIV.
Thus spoke the Marine God, and all around,
From the Rocks hollow Cells and Deeps profound,
The listening Tritons rise, and shelly Trumpets sound,
Attended with a numerous train
Of scaly Mobble of the Main,
Who swam in crowds to see that pompous show,
A glorious City made of Castles, flow
Then bloated with the News,
Down to their Mansion Ooze,
And distant fry, with Joy return again
But amongst all that Neptunes speech had heard,
And in attention had revered,
Hoary Oceanus sat with most regard;
His awful Counselor and Friend,
That long since had his favor gained,
For grateful service in his Love,
When Ampitrite first did his hearts passion move.
Who as she at the foot of Allas fate,
Priding her self in her free Virgin state,
Was by her Grandfire snatched away,
And on a Dolphin forced to ride,
Through the vast Empire of the Sea,
To be deboachd into a Bribe^
He, till the Marine Deity had done
His late admired Oration,
Withheld his smothering griefs; but now
Sighs taking vent, his bosom large did grow
With sorrows, that he could no longer tame;
Which from his swelling breast at last, thus broke into a flame.
XV.
Great King of boundless floods, to whom was given
Not only the great Empire of the Sea,
But as a more peculiar Lot from Heaven,
A Wisdom large as thy Imperial sway.
Tho happy Albion in thy favor blessed,
Above all Nations may Exalt her head,
A secret Pang torments my breast,
To see how spiritless and dead
The Natives are that throng her chalky shore,
And how unlike their brood of Heroes heretofore.
Glory was once the subject of their Arms,
But now for Interest each faction swarms;
And Honor which each noble bosom swayed,
For Gold is bartered, and become a Trade.
Nay, even Religion grows sophisticate,
And base dissenting schism of late,
With errors jarring, set em all at strife;
They Preach up the other, but they love this life.
Even the most Reverend of the sacred Mystery,
The weakest eyes may plainly see,
Not proof against the luscious bait of tempting dignity.
Why since their Soul and Flocks should be their care,
Should worldly accidents their bosoms share,
And sordid Lucre take possession there?
At least whilst sacred Providence,
Allows a proper competence,
Why should their obstinate and stubborn will
Occasion to their Country so much ill,
As in their Cause, to make vile fewds increase,
And they themselves renounce the Type of Apostolic peace.
XVI.
In Court too it is the same,
Few there by Virtue purchase Fame,
But he that best can overreach, best plays the Courtiers game.
The Politician tires his brains
But for his own peculiar gains,
His Countries Cause might sink, lost be the state,
Had he not some by-ends of being great^
Or should we search the Lawyers honesty,
In knavish Courts of Common Pleas, or couzning Chancery,
You Would find Integrity appear
The worst of all the Causes there.
Rich Mammons business shall not go amiss,
But poor Phillemon sues in forma pauperis;
And tho his worth be great, shall seldom draw
To aid him, the compassion of the Law.
In Love too we the same defects behold,
Hearts now are bought and sold;
The Man of sense, alas! in vain does Woo,
Dull Ignorance with Gold, can Virtue far outdo,
Be Merit never so great, or Passion never so true.
Cinthia still chooses wealthiest Men,
The ill fated fair one never looks within,
Never asks how worthy, but how great?
What qualities, but what Estate?
And tho of gifts of fortune she is possessed,
Enough to make some man of merit blessed,
Who would in grateful service waste his life
TO oblige so generous a Wife;
And happiness that way secure,
Which the Rich Husbands Gold can never assure.
Yet land and titles bear the sway,
Cinthia does Avarice obey;
And in her eye, how poorly does appear
A thousand Virtues, when compared to a thousand pounds a year.
XVII.
In all degrees of frail Humanity
There must great Errors be;
But ah my aged sight in tears is lost,
To think that Albion bears the most:
The quality of every strange offense
So much enrages Providence,
That Mercy after Crimes so base
Seems Imposition upon heavenly Grace.
Observe what Jarrs, the bane of all content,
Amongst themselves her Sons foment:
Discord, that ushers doubts and fears,
Is all the harmony she hears;
And hated broyls 'twixt friend and friend
Brings each successive day to its sad end.
Cursed Bigottry began the Play,
Then Revolution changed the scene,
And brought a happy freedom in,
Till stubborn Pride turned it a tragic way,
And proved the humor of each Native there,
Just like the nature of the Clime and Air.
For as the Weather instantly
Can change from hot to cold, from moist to dry,
So they from Rebels can turn Loyal men,
Set up a King and prove his Right,
And for him Vote, and for him Fight,
And at the least disgust can Rebels turn again.
XVIII.
Mean time whilst schisms possess our frantic brains,
His ends the Gallick tyrant gains:
He the rich Prize away does bear,
For which we one another tear.
What can this Mighty Navy do,
If only opulent in show?
If Treason sculking lies within,
And they forget the Name of English Men,
A scene of Glory they may idly boast,
But see with shame their Country lost
In The contrary, if Loyal Virtue warms
Their Valiant hearts, and they dare use their Arms,
If they the difference can see
'Twixt freeborn right and slavery;
The French may well repent their Insolence once more,
And never hope to adorn their brows with Laurels from our shore.
XIX.
Thus spoke the Reverend Father, to whom strait
The awful God replied,
Well has thy tongue described poor Albion's state,
And Cause of Gallick Pride;
But now in great Nassaws Illustrious Reign,
The Martial Genius does return again;
Her Sons no longer Lazy Peace esteem,
The souls of Edward and great Henry live in him.
Henry and William fated are the same;
There Is a Prophetic force even in the Name,
Which does Mysteriously show,
The latter like the first shall Conquer too.
Time lately was when sloth and ease,
The Poison to their English Blood,
And cursed destroyer of their good,
Worse than the Plague, was their disease.
But now their Fortune rises to a nobler height,
Under great William prosperously they fight;
Bigoted Rulers their disgrace still brings,
The dull and tame,
Never reach to fame;
A Martial Race thrive best with Martial Kings.
So, as in Numa's sluggish Reign,
Forgetful Rome dissolved in ease,
The valiant Ancus did her fame regain,
And War succeeded drowsy Peace:
Their brave new Monarch a fresh game began,
And boldly led the Latins on:
Glory renewed, the haughty Gauls did bow,
So armed with strong fidelity,
Their troops on shore, and power at Sea;
Courage that shall in fight renew,
And my auspicious blessing too,
As powerful Rome did then, shall mighty Albion now.
XX.
Thus ending with an air divinely great,
The Deity rose up and blessed the Fleet;
At which the Sea-Gods from the shore,
The blessing twice repeating over,
With shouts confirmed, and the Chariot strait prepare;
For now the soultry Air,
Began to offend the scaly Fry,
And Naereids gasping fret, for fear their Fins should dry,
Their Monarch plunging through the Sea,
Down to his Palace, drives a long mysterious way,
Through watery Provinces where Nature lies
Amongst undiscovered Rarities.
Oceanus too, on his Sea Pacer placed,
To his low home made haste;
Who whilst the attending Train each to his Mansion dives,
Full forty thousand Fathom deep, the Sire at last arrives.
FINIS.

