NEW POEMS, Consisting of SATYRS, ELEGIES, AND ODES: Together with a Choice
COLLECTION Of the Newest Court Songs, Set to MUSIC by the best Masters of the
Age.

All Written by Mr. D'VRFEY.

-- Si me Lyricis vatibus Inseres,
Sublimi feriam sidera vertice.
Horace Ode I. LONDON, Printed for I. Bullord, at the Old Black Bear in St.
Paul's Churchyard, and A. Roper, at the Bell near Temple Bar, 1690.

To the Right Honorable ALGERNON, Earl of Essex, Viscount Malden, Baron Capell
of Hadham, and Lord Lieutenant of Hertford.
MY LORD,
I Should be very ungrateful for the many extraordinary Favors, which Your
Lordship has often shower'd upon me, if I omitted studying all manner of ways
to lay my Faithful Acknowledgments at Your Feet, who have so often been pleased
to honor me with Your Conversation, and several of the following Poems with
Your Allowance, and Applause: And since a POET can no better way express his
Gratitude, than by an humble Address and Dedication of his Endeavors, be
pleased, My Lord, to accept this Book, as a Tribute due to uncommon Merit; and
as an Offering of Thanks, for the Value Your Lordship is pleased to set on
POETRY in General.

My Lord, You not only Grace and Dignifie my unworthy Poems by Your Noble
Patronage, but are an Honor to the Age You live in, by showing such an Example;
the Love and Inclination You have to Wit and Ingenuity, sufficiently
demonstrating your Own Worth, for since nothing can more Illustrate a Young
Nobleman, than Arts and Sciences; You have taken the securest way by
Encouraging them to declare your Heart is not set upon the Vanities of the
World, so much, as to slight or neglect the more solid Treasures of the Soul,
Knowledge and Learning.

Your Observations also in your Travels, have given you a greater Estimate than
others have acquired of the same Rank, you have brought home more than your
Self again, Embellishments of Languages, together with a Survey of the Manners
and Customs of the People, and not like that raw empty-headed Tribe, of whom a
famous Antique Author Writes thus, -- A Sordid Crew,
Who when they Travail to become rare Men,
Return Improved with a new foppish Suit,
Their Brains lie with their Taylor's, and get fancies
To play the Fool next day in; he is sole Heir,
To all the moral Virtues, that first greets
The light with a new Fashion, which becomes 'em
Like Monkies, covered with the Garbs of Men.


Your Lordship has likewise been at Rome, without daubing your Self with her
Rag of Superstition, or letting your Judgment be imposed upon by the
Adulterated Sophistry of Priests and Jesuits: In a Word, My Lord, you have
begun your Race so well, that it would appear direct Malice or Stupidity in any
one to doubt proceedings answerable through your Course of Life to come.

I must beseech your Lordship not to let a decent Encomium sound harshly in
your Ear, nor think these Assertions flattery, and only natural to Dedications,
which are really the just effect of your own Merit, and of my Observation of
you, your obliging and easy Temper, affable and unaffected Behavior, endearing
all that have the honor to know ye as well as my self, the Continuance of which
Happiness, and the speedy crowning of your Years to come with blessings, in the
possession of a Noble and Beautiful Partner, shall be the greatest Joy and
Satisfaction imaginable to,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most obliged, most entirely devoted humble Servant,
T. D'urfey.

PREFACE.
NOT being able to Excuse my self from the Importunity of some Persons of
Quality, and others of my best Friends, whose obliging Requests, as well as
generous Subscriptions, have been the chiefest Reasons of my publishing the
following Sheets; it would be an unpardonable Fault, and indeed a Presumption
in me not to beg the unbiass^d and Impartial Reader, to favor them with his
good Nature, and wink at the many Errors and loose Writing in several of them,
some having been written many Years ago, and upon low Subjects, especially the
two Burlesque Letters, which were written for a Friend in haste, and upon a
Subject given me. The Ladies too I must beg to Pardon me for a loose Copy or
two, particularly, Phillidor's Tale of a True Intrigue, Page 40. which was
turned into Verse from the Story which the Gentleman himself told me, and
though the Freedom of it may disoblige some of the Nicest of the Fair Sex, who
will be noted to understand more than they should, yet it is my hope, that the
more Judicious will only look upon it as it is, a piece of Mirth, and a natural
Description of a Comical Accident, or else, which is much better, forbear
looking on it at all, and so be accounted extraordinary for suppressing a
Curiosity, which it was never known a Woman was Capable of doing before. In
Collections of this Nature, both good and bad, wanton and serious, generally
mix, though not with the Author's liking, yet for the Stationer's advantage of
swelling the Book, in which, I hope, there are some others that will make
amends, viz. The Essay in Defense of Verse, The Elegy on the Duke of Ormond;
The Dream; The Ode to the King, Page 180, etc. which have had the good Fortune
to be approved of and commended by some of the best Judges of Poetry these
latter Ages have produced; and will, I hope, find the same success with the
Ingenious Reader; Though I must confess the first is a Theme of that Value,
that it were fitter to employ the Inimitable Pen of Mr. Dryden, than any Poet
of a meaner Class, the Sordid Enemies of this Noble Art being so numerous, and
consequently the defense of it so much the more difficult; This has given me
occasion to recount in the aforesaid Essay the nature of the Critics and
Judges of the former Golden Age, and compare them with our present Iron one,
viz. The Sober Critics were all Judges then,
And what they cavill'd at, could well maintain:
Instruction, and not Envy filled their Minds;
The Wits, and would be Wits, were different kinds:
Reason and Judgment founded their Disputes,
And Orpheus there was safe amongst the Brutes;
But here where Routs of Bachanals do throng;
Alas, what Orpheus can defend his Song! etc.
most of our Town Wits Criticizing upon Poetry, not through any solid
Understanding they have of the matter, but to insinuate a Value of their
Eminent Parts into some unheeding Auditor, that easily could, but thinks it
loss of time to contradict them.

Thus has dejected Poetry, in this Age, very few or no real Friends; Those that
judicially can correct Errors, being modestly unwilling to expose them, and
those that cannot, most impudently too forward in pretending to it; like a
Country Clown at Cudgels with a Master of Defense, still striking without Fear
or Wit, though at every blow the Blood runs about his own Ears, through his
want of Skill, and ridiculous Rashness.

The Odes and Songs that I have here published, have, I thank my Fortune, as
well as those formerly printed, generally pleased the Town, and though some may
appear a little rough and unpolished in the Reading, the amends is made when
they are Sung, for I have still taken care to put some Fancy and Thought in
them, and the Judicious are sensible that it is no easy matter, nor is it every
one's Talent to confine Sense and smooth Verse to Notes, the quality of
performing it well, being as particular as difficult.

It does not, thank my Stars, afflict me much to know, that a certain very
unweildy Author of this Age, has been this Ten Years pecking at me about this
matter, though with as little Success as he had Reason to do so, I having no
Correspondency with him, nor to the best of my Memory, have any of our Brethern
ever given him any occasion to show the scurrility of his Satyr, in expressing
himself in such Tropes as these, Fellows of no Genius, yelping Curs, Parasites,
Knaves, etc. nor does it concern us at all to know whether Poetitto or
Poetdungus, be the best name for a comical Author, we have, I think, two ways
to expound him, and I suppose he is pleased to new baptize us, either, for
diminutive Wits, or Persons: if for the first we must comfort our selves, and
be instructed as well as we can; but for my own part if he lashes me for want
of shape, that I confess from him troubles me extremely.

I am not very uneasy neither to have if judged whether my Grubstreet Songs,
as he hints at them, or his late Grubstreet Anniversary Ode be the most
notorious, or in his own Phrase, most like the Style of Tom Farthing: I know
what the Town says. And since it has sufficiently exposed its own defects, I
shall think my Injury revenged to the full, and therefore rest satisfied till
farther Provocation.

There is no Passion incident to Humanity of so low and base a degree as
Malice, which I could lash to the quick; nor would the Title of Poet Laureate,
and Historiographer Royal, at all deter me from a just Resentment, if I had not
an awful Veneration for that noble Patron of Wit and Poetry, whose Indulgence
and excellent Nature has been the occasion of bestowing so great a Bounty where
it is, and I shall rather believe it the just reward of Merit and Loyalty, as
some would fain have it thought, than doubt in the least the Justice or
Judgment of a Noble Man, beloved, reverenced, and admired, by all that ever had
any true Pretenses to Wit or Learning.

And now, I think, it is time to beg the Reader^s Pardon for this Prolixity,
which I could not avoid having been so often affronted without any cause given,
and once more desire his Favor on the following Sheets, with a faithful
Promise, that when next I trouble the Press it shall be on a Subject that shall
less ti^e his Patience, and give him much more Diversion.

Vale.
ERRATA.
PAge 23. l. 12. for adsurd read absurd: p. 31. l. 2. because no praise* read
since no just praise: page 36. l. 7. fatal strife, read fate at strife: p. 129.
l. 13. may, read much: p. 130. l. 5. may, read much: p. 137. l. 13. Ears, read
Years: p. 145. l. 14. is, read are: p. 149. l. 9. solely, read vilely: p. 166.
l. 11. fawned, read fanned.

THE TABLE.
A New Essay in defense of Verse, with a Satyr upon the Enemies of Poetry, Page
1. An Ode to the Queen, excellently set to Music; by M. H. Purcel. p. 19. The
Author answers his Friend who blames him for not singing when desired, he
contradicts the Third Satyr of Horace, beginning with Omnibus hoc vitium est
Cantoribus inter Amicos, etc. He defends Tigellius, and proves that Horace had
no actual Skill in vocal Music, p. 22. To the Right Honorable the Earl of
Radnor on his Marriage. p. 28. To a Lady twitting him with his being peevish,
and having ill Humors. p. 32. A Parallel. p. 35. To the Right Honorable the
Lady E. R. upon her finding a Spider in her Bed. p. 37. Phillidor's Tale of a
true Intrigue. p. 40. A Lash at Atheists; the Poet Speaking as the Ghost of a
Quondam Libertine, supposed to be the late E. of R. reflects on that part of
Seneca's Troas, beginning at Post mortem nihil est ipsaque Mors nihil, etc. p.
54. To Cynthia. p. 59. Prologue by way of Satyr spoken before King Charles II.
at New Market. p. 60. Epithalamium on the Marriage of the Right Honorable the
Lady Essex Roberts. p. 63. Paid for Peeping; a Poem occasioned by a Peeping
hole into a Chamber where a beautiful young Lady lodged, through which,
undiscovered, I could observe all her Actions. p. 67. Song. p. 74. Against Free
Will. p. 76. A Song. p. 77. A Song b^ way of Dialogue between a Town Spark and
his Miss. p. 78. To Cynthia, a Song. p. 79. A Mock Song to, when first Amintor
Su'd for a Kiss, etc. p. 80. Epilogue to the Opera of D^do and Aeneas,
performed at Mrs. Priests Boarding-School at Chelsey spoken by the Lady Dor.
Burke. p. 82. Loves Revenge; a Song admirably set by Dr. John Blow. p. 84.
Epsom Wells; a Satyr by way of Dialogue between Critic and Fame. p. 86.
Prologue spoken by M. Haines to Trapolin, or a Duke and no Duke. p* 88. An
Elegy on the Death of that true Perfection of Beauty and Goodness the Lady
Essex Speccot, who died of the Smallpox after her Marriage. p. 91 An Ode to my
much honored friend Sir Thomas Garrard, Baronet, upon his Climacterical Year.
p. 97. The King's Health; a Catch sung in parts. p. 98. A Letter written for a
Friend to one in Town, being a Satyr on Dingboy, and a Rampant widow, 1685. p.
100. To the Right Honorable the Lady Olympia R. on her Genius in Poetry. p.
110. An Epilogue intended for the 3 Dukes of Dunstable, and to be spoken by M.
Monford, in a long Presbyterian Cloak. p. 112 Another intended for the same. p.
115. The Dream, or Celladon's Complaint of Morpheus to the Assembly of the
Gods. p. 116. To Cinthia. p. 129. A Letter written for a Lady in answer to a
Friend. p. 130. The Farmer's Daughter, a Song set to a Pleasant Scotch Time. p.
132. Epithalamium on the Marriage of the Lord Morpeth with the Lady Ann Capel.
136. A Song. 138. Another set to a pleasant Scotch Time p. 139. The Moralist, a
Song. p. 141. The old Fumbler; a Song set by Mr. Henry Purcel. p. 142. A
Dialogue between Philander and Silvia, set to an excellent Scotch Time p. 143.
Second Burlesque Letter. p. 145. p. 159. An Ode translated from Anacreon p 160.
To Chloris, a Song. p. 162. To pretty Mrs. H. D. An Ode upon the sight of her
Picture standing amongst others at Mr. Knellers; and excellently set to Music
by Mr. Henry Purcel. p. 162. To Chloris, An Ode set to the new Riggadon. p.
164. An Elegy on the death of the great Duke of Ormond. p. 165. Eppigram on the
Sacred Memory of that glorious Patron of Poets, greatest and best of Monarchs
King Charles II. written 1686. p. 175. An Elegy on the late Holy Father Pope
Innocent the 11th. p. 177. To the King, an Ode on his Birth day. p. 180. The
Scotch Virago; a Song sung to the Queen at Kensington, the words made to a
pretty Scotch Tune. p. 183. To Chloris, a Song, the words made to the Time. p.
185. A Catch in 3 parts set by Mr. Henry Purcel, and taken from the Latin of
Buchanan. p. 186. A Poem Panegyrical on his Grace the D. of Albemarle. p. 187.
Mr. Haine's second Recantation, a Prologue. p. 204.
A NEW ESSAY In Defense of VERSE, With a SATYR Upon the Enemies of POETRY.
WHat time was ever blessed to that degree
As that famed golden Age of Poetry?
When the Oaken Garland, and the Laurel Crown
Flourished, as equal Trophies of Renown.
When Great Augustus did the Scepter weild,
And glittering Arts the Imperial Crown did guild,
Poets and Heroes alike honored were,
The one to do great deeds, the other to declare.
Horace, and Ovid, charmed the Courtly throng;
Majestic Maro sung his lofty Song,
And by the Worlds great Monarch Snetonius writes of Augustus, that he was not
only an extraordinary lover of the ingenious Authors of that Age, but also an
excellent Poet himself: he once writ a bitter Satyr against a Poet, who durst
return no answer, only saying, Periculosum est in e^m scribere, qui potest
proscribere.
was so graced,
The awful Bard he on his right Hand placed.
Nay even the lesser Genius was not scorned,
But each to his desert with praise adorned;
From Pindar's height, to Cinna's low degree,
Some Honor still was done to Poetry.
The Nation cherished each Harmonious strain,
And Tuneful Numbers charmed each Infant Brain:
Whilst jocond Muses Danced about their Spring,
And Caesar's glories did to Caesar Sing.
Momus his malice was ashamed to use;
Nor durst discountenance a bashful Muse.
The sober Critics were all Judges then,
And what they cavill'd at, could well maintain.
Instruction, and not Envy, filled their minds;
The Wits, and would be Wits, were different kinds.
Reason and Judgment founded their Disputes,
And Orpheus there was safe amongst the Brutes;
But here where Routs of Bachanals do throng,
Alas, What Orpheus can defend his Song!
In this lewd Age, ea^h raw pert callow Chit,
Drunk with the sumes of undigested Wit;
As much by Wine inspired to play the Fool:
One that a month before was whipped at School
For grovelling Dullness, with inervate force
Shall dare to back the Muses soaring Horse.
So Maggots bred by the Suns Genial Eye,
In The Morning Crawl, and before Evening Fly.
How, Sacred Art, shall thy fame disperse!
How shall I sing the dignity of Verse!
From whence the sweetness of each Language springs,
By which of Heavenly Gods, and Conquering Kings,
Are writ, in mighty Numbers, mighty things,
Extracted from the Flowers of every Tongue,
The Artful Poet frames his pleasing Song.
Like Bees, by Heaven inspired to in^luence
The World, with Works unknown to vulgar sense,
And does from Powers Divine a gift receive,
The Crowd may Emulate, but never atcheive.
It Is this that does their sordid Spleens Alarm,
Unskilled in th'Magick, tho they feel the Charm.
Tho Tuneful Verse delights each clodded Brain;
Poet, and Science both, all Fools disdain.
Fools ever hate an Art they cannot attain.
With black reproach they a famed Work defile,
Despise the Virtue, and abhor the Style,
And Books adorned with Jems of Learning Spoil.
So have I seen a Brute tread down and tear
A Laurel, he could never deserve to wear.
Thus is Instruction lost, for to what end
Is found Reproof to such as cannot mend.
Ignorance, in Ages past, a Curse has bin,
But in our time it is grown a wilful sin.
Now Fortune, not Desert, acquires Men's fame:
He that best knows to A Cant amongst Gamesters, signifying a Cheat.
Crimp shall win the Game
Time serving Parisites preferred shall be,
Of any Nation, Notion, or Degree,
But the Poetic Loyal Fool like me.
In vain is Study, useless is the School,
Since every Art's abused by every Fool.
Where Verse has not the power to Influence,
What method ever can reform the Sense?
What would a Cato, or a Virgil be,
Johnson, or Shakespeare, to the Mobile?
Or how would Iuvenal appear at Court,
That writing Truth had his Bones broken for it?
When times are so corrupt they cannot bear
Reproof, it is a sign Confusion's near:
And when harmonious Poetry designed
To calm wild griefs, and still the stormy mind;
And by a soft and pleasing Elegance,
The sweets of Artful Rhetoric to advance,
Is by the Town decry'd, it does declare
Folly, and not Philosophy Rules there.
Yet though good Writing be a gift sublime;
How do the Poetasters of the time;
Debauch the Science still with Dogril Rhyme.
Never heeding what degrees of Nonsense swell;
The guilty Lines, if they but Jingle well.
It Is Rhyme the Readers reason must control,
Rhyme is the Sense, the Substance, and the Soul.
In a whole Poem let no Wit be found.
If every Couplet end the with same sound.
Poets, that justly would their fame advance,
Should make Rhimes fall as if they came by chance.
A Tuneful word the Verse more sweet to make,
And not as studied for the Meeters sake.
Such chiming still from solid dullness springs,
Rhimers and Poets are vast different things.
Verses with Rhyme, are proper several ways,
In great Heroicks, Satyrs, and Essays,
But most ridiculous when ^ag'd in Plays.
First from the Siege of Rhodes that method sprung,
And there most fitly since the Verse was sung.
But your stiff Herod's, or Cambises strains,
Your Maximins, or hot Almanzors veins,
Show rather than the Wit, the heat of Brains.
Since Nature bears chief Rule in Poetry,
Than this, what more unnatural can be?
To hear a King, in Rhyme express his Rage,
Or for his Cloak, in Verse to ask his Page.
A Lady too in sounding Numbers tell,
How often she took a Glister, and how well.
Such stuff the Reader every day may meet,
Too silly, and too tedious to repeat.
Verse without Rhyme delightful may appear,
Where Sense in equal Measures charms the Ear.
This first to use Seraphick Milton brought:
And great Roscommon since has better taught,
Who more Correct than any of our times,
Often showed, true Reason had no use of Rhimes:
Patron of Verse, thy soul on Earth did move,
In the same glory now it shines above.
Kindle in me, oh mighty Bard, thy fire,
And with thy powerful Art my Muse inspire.
So the wronged Sisters shall their griefs disperse,
And the Age reform by my Satyrick Verse:
Whilst the wise few, do in this mirror see
The sordid enemies of Poetry.
First the Town Fop, in modern Style, the Beau,
Inspired by learned Pontack, or wise Grilleau:
Dressed like a Wax-Work-Baby in a Glass,
That wastes the Morn consulting his odd Face.
Studies his Stockins with a pensive Head,
To know which best becomes, the Green or Red;
And Patches cuts, sented with Amber-Greise,
To hide the Rubies in his pudled Phiz:
Is one that does to Poetry worst spite,
By the pretenses that he has to write,
Flush to Wills Coffee House he comes each night.
Confirmed those Wits are all charmed with his parts,
As with his Beau Visage the Ladies Hearts.
To prove this, straight some Poem is inspected,
And by this Farrier barb'rously dissected:
The mirth goes round, the Paper they condemn,
Some at the Verses laugh, and more at him;
But that is not heeded by his grinning Crew,
Fools always laugh, when ever their fellows do:
And when a Jest is put, each has a pride
To think whoever laughs it is on their side.
Thus it is not known which Verse is good or bad,
Because this Fop the Criticism made:
For all the Wise owe Poetry a grudge,
When such as he pretend to Write, or Judge.
His praise is fatal still, and if he Reads,
The Martyred Poem still the worse succeeds.
So Rats, that build in Country Barns their Nest,
Part of the Corn devour, and spoil the rest.
Such Fops as this the Poet's fame expose;
This still is one of their invet'rate Foes:
His managing the state of Verse so ill,
On the whole Science brings a scandal still.
In vain, alas, toils the aspiring Drudge:
It Is only Wit, that Wit can Write, or Judge.
A Jewel rated at a price so high,
That few have stock of Brains enough to buy,
Yet all aim at the Jem to make'em fine;
Nay, rather than they will not be thought to shine:
Decked with dull Pebbles, not true Warts of Rocks,
The appear like Mrs. H -- ton in a Box.
Tho Wit, within it self, a Beauty be,
It Is still more charming dressed in Poetry:
A Robe, which is by Heavens peculiar care,
Designed for very, very few to wear.
For as an awkard, ill bred, Country Clown,
From his dull Parents newly come to Town:
Though his Court Tailor racks his Brain to dress
The Booby, and set off his silly Face,
Yet all find out the brutish soul within,
The Ass is seen for all the Lions skin.
So the noisie Bully that often plagues the Pit,
Tho dressed in the cast Robes of antic Wit,
The braying Momus is not hid from view,
For the dull Ears will still be peeping through.
The next ill Tribe that Poetry disgrace,
Is, to their shame, amongst the Female race:
A Wanton sort of Town Coquets there are,
That Poets hate, because they Poets fear.
Wholesome Reproof, like Age, still comes too soon,
And worse than the Smallpox, is a Lampoon.
For tell but Lais there is Satyr writ,
Struck with a conscious guilt she leaves Basset.
Tears each Alpieu, hates even dear Sonica,
And against Poets does with rage inveigh.
Rogues, to expose her faults to all the Town,
And make the intreigue with the dear Coachman known.
What though to wanton Plays she will railing come,
Yet Act each night far lewder Scenes at home?
What though her fame is known so well abroad,
The Court and Town can prove her Whore and Bawd?
Yet if she Prim and swear she is very Chaste,
Shall homely Satyr dare to spoil the jest?
When she has bosom Friends, to prove untrue
Each Amorous slip, though done in open view.
For whether she is a Devil, or a Saint,
As Womankind, she can no Party want.
Virtue on single Innocence depends,
But favorite Vice is stored with many Friends.
Howe'r of these, a numerous Tribe there are,
We have (thank Heaven) some for desert as rare:
Though Lais does the Poets Art abuse,
Divine Asteria dignifies a Muse.
Souls most Divine, inspiring Verse approve,
Verse that improves the Saints in Songs above,
Of charming Honor, and more charming Love.
And as she, sweetest of that lovely kind,
An Angels Body, with an Angels mind,
In Beauties Synod takes the foremost place,
Excelling all in Feature, as in Grace:
So does her Wit each fond admirer warm,
And with her killing Eyes has equal Charm.
In her dear Breast, the Arts will flourish still,
There lies no Malice, nor there wants no Skill;
Her Divine Soul enjoys a blessed Repose,
And, except gentle Love, no Passion knows:
Nor that, but in so awful a degree,
'Twere fitter styled a Heavenly Charity.
In vain her Virtue, Envy seeks to stain:
The horny Satyr lifts his Scourge in vain.
Instead of finding Vice he might reprove,
The Monster kneels, and sighs, and falls in Love.
Like her, each Soul embellished with desert,
That Sacred Learning loves, applaud^ this Art.
But besides these I have exposed to view,
There are a third, dull, dosing, canting Crew;
That Noble Sciences so little heed,
Their Clodpate Offspring scarce are bred to Read.
Hence it is that by the curse of vacant Brains,
So many whimsies in the Nation raigns:
Hence Pipe and Tabor, Hum and Buz, are prized,
And each inspiring Muse as much despised.
With little Band, and piqued Beard, new pruned,
Their Brains unsettled, and their Souls untuned:
They sordidly the generous Art decry,
And from Tub Pulpits knock down Poetry.
The Swordman, yet unmarked with honored Scar,
Routs Poets too, with Criticisms of War:
I mean the Spark that Whores, Drinks, Games, and Swears,
Whose Valor more in Scarf, than Man appears:
One whose hot Brain, believes, that if he be
Inclined to Wit, Religion, Modesty,
A Scholar, and a friend to Poetry;
It Is the next way, his Credit to abuse,
His Honor and Commission both to lose.
Ah, Dunce, look back on glorious ancient times,
And see how Arts the Martial Soul sublimes.
See there a Race of Conquering Emperors,
With Sciences improve their idle hours:
Wise Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, was Surnamed Philosophus, not only for his
knowledge, but also practice of Philosophy; and was observed to have often in
his Mouth that speech of Plato, Tunc florent Respublicae quando Philosophus
Regit, vel Rex Philosophatur.
Antoninus, This Emperor was also very Eloquent, and a good Poet, as Martial
testifies of him, vid. his Epigram of him, lib. 11. Epig. 6.

Quanta quies placidi tanta est facundia Nervae,
Nerva, Adrian,
Great Julius, and Adored Vespasian,
Thought it a luster to their dignity,
TO advance, and be well skilled in Poetry.
How brutish then must be that grovelling Race,
That to bright knowledge never erect their Face,
But with the down-look'd Herd unminded Graze.
And how secure are Arts, and Sciences,
Though darted at by such weak foes as these.
What though the name of Poet, in the vogue
Of The Mobile, is full as bad as Rogue,
As wretched, and as scandalous to them,
As if he were for some vile Theft Condemned.
Desert should smile, rather than take offense,
They act according to their Dole of Sense.
Wit will be still a Jem, though slighted by a Clown,
As Roses will be sweet, tho Asses tread 'em down:
Or if, which is their greatest infamy,
A Poet's general state is Poverty.
As those that slight the World, t'inrich the Mind,
From thence small favor can expect to find:
Suppose no Sun shines on him from the Court,
His Labors to reward, or Life support;
Suppose he is deceived in some redress,
As if he is honest, ten to one he is;
Philosophy does his ill Stars control,
And far above the vulgar seats his Soul.
Besides, Mecaenas will be still alive,
And bountious Caesar every Age survive.
Some Albem -- le, or Dor -- tt, will be found;
Ess -- x, or Car -- le, with true merit Crowned;
By grateful Poets deathless Verse renowned:
That o'r the bladder'd Crowd will make 'em swim,
And lift their sinking Heads above the stream.
Hail, therefore, Patrons of the Muses all,
Low at your Feet the Nine do humbly fall.
You that their Works with generous pleasure see,
And shine upon the Flowers of Poetry,
Encourage Satyr, that exposes Crimes,
And Version praise for Wit, and not for Rhimes:
To you, with them, I dedicate my part,
A weak defender of a Noble Art:
Glad of applause from Judges, but not grieved
If by the Crowd my Lines are not received.
Heaven does Mankind to different Wits condemn;
The Vulgar hate me, and I pity them:
But when I with a Man of Judgment meet,
Or with a virtuous Lady, that has Wit,
My Breast entire, between 'em both they part,
He has my faithful Service, she my Heart.
For blasted be my Muse, when it shall dare
To wrong a worthy Friend, or hurt the Fair.
An ODE TO THE QUEEN.
I.
HIGH on a Throne of Glittering Ore
Exalted by Almighty Fate,
Out-shining the bright Jem she wore;
The gracious Gloriana sat.
II.
The dazzling Beams of Majesty
Too ^ierce for mortal Eyes to see,
She veiled, and with a smiling Brow,
Thus taught the admiring World below.
III.
Virtue is still the chiefest good,
And power, should only be her dress,
State, is a Fever to the Blood;
Free Conscience is the solid Bliss:
IV.
Glory is but a flattering Dream
Of Wealth, that is not, though it seem:
False vision, whose vain Joys do make
Poor Mortals poorer, when they wake.
V.
The fawning Crowd of Slaves, that bow
With Praise, could never my Sense control;
Vast Pyramids of State seem low,
So much above it sits my Soul.
VI.
She spoke, whilst Gods unseen that stood,
Admiring one so great so good,
Flew straight to Heaven, and all along,
Bright Gloriana was their Song.
Returnel.
Bright Gloriana all along,
Bright Gloriana was their Song.
The Author answers his Friend, who blames him for not singing, when desired,
he contradict the Third Satyr of Horace, beginning with Omnibus hoc vitium est
Cantoribus inter Amicos, etc. He defends Tigellius, and proves that Horace had
no actual Skill in Vocal Music.
IF this strange Vice in all good Singers were,
As the admired Horace does declare,
That when desired, tho blessed with Health and Eas^
Their choicest Friends they still deny to please,
Yet if unasked shall rudely Sing so long,
To tire 'em quite with each repeated Song:
I strongly then should take his Satyr's part,
Lash the Performers, and despise their Art.
But having studied long enough to be
A little knowing in that quality:
I soon perceived when I his Version met
'Twas more from Prejudice, than Judgment writ.
And Horace was in his Reproof more free,
Because Tigellius was his Enemy,
Whose resty Vice must bear this fierce Assault
Whilst all the rest are lashed for one man's Fault.
Satyr should never take from Malice aid,
For with due Reverence to Horace paid,
Who rails at Faults through personal prejudice,
Shows more his own, than shames another's Vice;
Tigellius, as his Character is plain,
Was of a Humor most adsurd and vain,
Fantastic in his Garb, unsettled in his Brain.
And if (as once great It Is reported of him, that Augustus once earnestly
desiring him to sing, was denied.
Caesar he denied
When asked to Sing) 'twere the effect of Pride:
Lictors and Fasces should have bluntly taught
The Fool to know the Obedience that he ought.
But if Augustus his Commands did lay
When the Genius was not able to obey;
As often with Singers it will happen so,
According as their Joys or Troubles grow;
'Twas no Offense then to excuse his Art,
The Soul untuned makes discord in each part.
And Monarchs can no more give vocal Breath
Than they can hinder when Fate summons, death:
Though kind Compliance Singers ought to use,
They often have just Reasons to refuse;
A pleasure loved by one, is liked by more,
Suppose, Sir, I have Sung too much before,
Made my self hoarse, and even racked my Throat
To please some Friend, with some fine treble Note;
Chance does me then to you and others bring,
The second Complement, is prithee sing;
I swear I -- Cannot, cannot say you, that is find sport;
But all good Singers are so hard to Court:
Come, come, you must, here is Ladies beg, not I
What Soul so dull as Beauty can deny?
To make excuse then, modestly I tell
How hoarse I am, with what that day befell,
It Is all in vain, you rail, I Am thought a Clown,
And Omnibus hoc victium knocks me down.
I often have, ('it is true) to sing denied,
But not through resty Vanity, or Pride;
But that perhaps I had been tired before,
Untuned and ill, not able to sing more,
Or that an hour of Infelicity
Has robbed my Soul of usual Harmony;
Yet all is the same the old Saw is still repeated,
You Singers long to be so much entreated,
Though at that time to me no Joy could fall
Greater, than not to have been asked at all;
The Harmonious Soul must have her Humor free,
Consent of parts still makes best Harmony.
We read the Jewish Captives could not Sing
In a strange Land, ruled by a Foreign King;
Contentment the melodious Chord controuls,
And Tunes the Diapason of our Souls:
What makes a Cobbler Chirp a pleasant part
At his hard Labor, but a merry Heart;
He sings when asked, or bluntly else denies,
According to his share of Grief or Joys.
Thus the same Accidents to us befall,
And that which tuned the Cobbler tunes us all;
But if against our Will we thrash out Songs,
For singing then is Thrashing to the Lungs;
The blast of airy Praise we dearer get,
Than Peasants do their Bread, with toil and sweat
To sleep at your command is the same thing,
As when you are ill or vexed in mind to sing,
And though Performance never so easy show,
As it has Charms it has Vexations too,
And the Singers Plague it is none but Singers know.
How often have I heard the unskilful say,
Had I a Voice by Heaven I Would sing all day;
But with that Science had he been endowed,
And was to sing, when asked, or be thought proud,
When weary, hoarse, or vexed, not to deny,
But at all Seasons with all Friends comply,
He Would then blame Horace full as much as I;
Whose want of Knowledge in the Vocal Art
Made him lash all, for one man's mean desert:
For had he the Fatigue of Songsters known,
And judged their Inconvenience by his own;
Tigellius only had Correction met,
And Omnibus hoc vitium never been writ.
TO THE Right HONORABLE THE* Earl of RADNOR ON HIS MARRIAGE.
IF my faint Genius does not reach that height
It ought, your Fortune to congratulate,
Be pleased, my Lord, to take this for excuse,
That it is the Inter-regnum of a Muse.
Apollo frowns upon each drooping Son,
And Sadness crowns the Bowls of Hellicon,
The Mounting Pegasus, that late could fly,
Trap'd with gay Thought, and fancy through the Sky,
In her swift Course now the bold Soldier dares
To stop, and back, and manage for the Wars.
Strange turns of State disturb the peaceful Nine,
And with the rest of the sad Muses, mine;
Such sollid Grief does all Parnassus sway,
There scarce was Joy the Coronation day,
Pardon a Homely Genius then ill dressed,
That dares approach without a Nuptial Vest
To wish you Joy, which though not pollish'd here,
Nor mirthfully, adorned is yet sincere;
Poets, like Plants, flourish when shined upon,
But wither and decay without the Sun.
Son Renowned Ovid, when in Court preferred,
For lofty Verse was by all Rome revered;
But when disgraced he did to Pontus go,
His Fate was humble, and his Style was low:
Like him undone, forgotten and distressed,
I wandered when your Theme my Muse possessed;
But then, like Attoms, thought did sollid grow,
And Sparks of the old fire began to glow.
Your new-gain'd Happiness inspired my Pen
In spite of all resolves to write again;
Your Virtues next informed my Memory,
Your Noble Nature, Love to Poetry,
That dares encourage Verse you find sublime,
Unsway'd by the Opinion of the time,
And own, like Athens once, in Wit are Charms,
And Arts should Grace a State as well as Arms*
There honored with a part of public sway,
Poets were by the Senate held in pay;
But here in our Reformed wise warlike Isle,
Their choicest Labors are not worth a Smile:
Another Herd have rushed into our Fold,
And our new brood of Wits devoured the old,
A decent Praise to mighty worth is due,
And only such, my Lord, I pay to you.
To the few Patrons of true Sense I fly,
And beg a Genius at their Feet may lie,
More used to Satyr than to Flattery:
That slavish Vice I yet never understood,
Nor can we flatter Merit if we would,
Because no Praise can ever be too good.
When once Great Virgil by Augustus sat
To read the Work he was to dedicate,
Though Praises even extravagant did seem
Yet Caesar did not think he flattered him.
My Muse, though to his height it ought to soar,
Does only greet your Joy, and wish you more:
With grateful thanks for Honors done before,
Be pleased to take what Tribute I can pay,
And think, my Lord, this is my only way.
TO A LADY, Twitting him with his being Peevish, and having Ill Humors.
I.
TEll, tell me no more that my Humors are bad
And peevishly ever displease,
If one had the Plague you would think he were mad,
Should he rail at another Disease,
The Errors that to your own Questions belong,
You still to my Answers apply,
And though I have Manners to be in the wrong,
I have Reason enough to deny.
II.
But speaking offends, and to play a new part,
I Will learn of some favorite Fool,
Fools often saying nothing, by signs win a Heart,
It Is a fortunate thing to be dull;
Yet, Madam, how poor is the Conquest you gain,
When this shall your Reason convince
On one that has such a defect in his brain,
How vainly you lavish your Sense.
III.
From all but Loves Passions I swear I am free,
My Soul is serene as the Air,
With Pride, Envy, Hatred, I never could agree;
And that I Am good natured I swear.
But, ah, what are these when my Humors offend,
And we wrangle where ever we come,
To give my self ease, and your trouble an end
'Twere better for me I were dumb.
IV.
And now take this secret, you know me not yet,
I am and can be what I please,
Now merry, now sad, now a Fool, now a Wit,
Brisk, dull, gay, and peevish with ease,
Let Coxcombs supinely all Injuries bear,
Dull Asses for Burdens were meant,
And he that is still in one Humor I swea^
Has not Courage, nor Wit to resent.
A PARALLEL.
IN old Italian Prose, we read,
A youth by Riot and fond Love undone,
Had yet a Faulcon left of famous breed,
His chief diversion in his fatal Need,
And sole Companion when he left the Town.
The Saint that did his Soul possess,
Touched with a generous Sense of his distress
Made him a Visit at his poor retreat,
Whom his Heart nobly feasted, but, alas,
His empty Purse could get,
Nothing was good enough for her to eat:
Till racked with Shame, and a long fruitless search,
He more to make his Love appear,
His darling Hawk snatched from the Perch,
And dressed it for his Dear,
Which generous Act did so entirely gain her,
She gave him all her Love and Wealth,
And nobly paid her Entertainer.
So when my Love with fatal strife
Had spent its whole Estate,
And Natures short-wing'd Hawk my Life
Was doomed a Dish for Fate;
Divine Olympia changed the sad decree,
And with infallible Divinity,
Gave A new Being to my Soul and me.
TO THE Right HONORABLE THE LADY E. R. Upon her finding a Spider in her BED.
SEE what Revenge great Love does still prepare
To fright and punish the relentless Fair;
Into that Bed, where by your cruel doom,
No passionate Admirer ever might come;
Where Heaven on Earth no Eye but Heaven sees,
And cold Virginity alone does freeze;
Where Beauty blossoms, and in folded sweets,
A Body whiter than the snowy Sheets:
This black detested crawling thing was sent
From angry Venus for your punishment;
This is, she cried, her that profaned my Rites,
Laughed at my Laws, neglected my Delights,
Flushed with a Pride of Virtue durst withstand
Loves fiercest Darts, and Natures great Command,
Is now condemned by the avenging Fates,
TO a Bedfellow, which above all she hates.
Thus Andromeda flourished in her Prime;
Thus laughed at Love, and thus still lost her time,
Whilst bounteous Pity her fair Breast did warm,
The Powers above protected her from harm,
But when her Rigor to contempt presumed
Her blooming Beauties to a Monster doomed;
And though the Cries of an afflicted Maid,
Brought the renowned Perseus to her aid;
Had not her Will been tuned to another strain
The Warrior never had loosed her from the Chain,
Love's Harmony in well tuned Hearts appears
Alike their hopes, and still alike their fears.
No jarring Sounds the Consort can molest
The charming Music fills each happy Breast,
Their Wills unite, and their charmed Souls agree*
Like two soft Flutes, when sounding in one key,
When honorable Love with humble Grace,
And Merit pleads to fill the happy space,
By your sweet side shall Spiders claim a place,
Shall Rival Insects own a Love-like ours,
And lay their sprawling filthy Limbs by yours:
Ah, Madam, then must all Mankind proclaim
It Is punishment to you, to them a shame.
No more Adorers then of Hopes bereave,
But to your Bed some generous Love receive,
Marriage, like Irish Wood has such a Charm,
No Venom dares approach to do you harm:
If you would have no hated Spiders come
To Bed, let Love and Honor fill the Room.
A TRUE TALE OF A True INTRIGUE.
DARK was the Night, and not a Star
Was seen over all the Hemisphere,
When lately musing all alone
I rambled to a Country Town,
To heal with Balmy Love my Breast,
That had with Grief been long oppressed;
For there two Beauteous Sisters shone,
As bright as the rejoicing Moon,
When she with full Contentment cloyed,
Endimion in Eclipse enjoyed.
Young as the Spring, as sweet they smelt,
And soft as down of Swans they felt;
And I transported with delight,
Could boast my self chief Favorite.
Oh Happiness! too fierce to taste,
Oh Pleasure! too refined to last;
It Is by the Change, we always see
The Curse of our Mortallity:
The one was fair as the first Maid,
That once for Fruit the World betrayed,
A Rosy Cheek, and such a Skin,
As well might give excuse for Sin;
If Sin were possible to be
Enclosed in such Divinity;
The other was of browner hew,
Yet the more charming of the two;
A shape Divine, and sparkling Eye,
Her Foot, her Leg, her taper Thigh,
Her Breasts, where Kings would wish to lie,
Showed the soft path to killing Joy:
A solid Beauty, that would last,
Smooth, plump, and fit to be embraced;
Full of Delight, as Beauties Queen
In Pleasure blooming at eighteen;
Down her soft Neck her flowing Hair,
The best adornment of the Fair,
With lavish Bounty reached her Knee,
Discovering Nature's Luxury.
All Graces which Historians find,
In Books adorning VVomankind,
In these two charming Creatures shone,
Admired by all, excelled by none.
Forgive me, if for Beauties sake,
I this prolix digression make;
Since those that of its power have proof,
Can never speak its praise enough.
Know then, Olinda, and Cephise
Were named these lovely Goddesses,
A Treasure dearer than the Fleece,
Locked in the old Hesperides;
And by as strange a Dragon kept,
A moldy Aunt that never ^^ept.
But Love that sound out a device
To blind the Giants hundred Eyes,
When Jove in Io's snare did fall,
Cloyed with Embraces Conjugal;
Soon sent a Hermes to my Aid,
Who taught me how to bribe her Maid.
She having in that happy Town
A constant Roger of her own,
Kept our Intrigue the more unknown.
And oftener opened Paradise,
Than ever St. Peter with his Keys,
Such power has praise with profit joined
To charm a Mercinary Mind.
Suppose me then close by the door,
Through which I often went before,
Giving a sign to let 'em know
A faithful Lover was below;
For both were of my Heart possessed,
And had by Turns chief Interest,
The Brown, when to other was not there,
And when Brown absent was, the Fair,
Thus great, thus Turk-like did I rove
In my Seraglio of Love.
Scarce I the sign had thoroughly made,
But word was brought they were in bed,
And the old Aunt locked up at Prayers
For blessings on her House Affairs.
Then whilst I softly scaled the Stairs,
The trusty Wench with busy Broom
Below, was scrubbing round the Room,
Singing the old Song of Troy betrayed,
To hide the creeking noise I made,
Darkness over all the World did sway,
Yet led by Love I found the way
To the side where sweet Olinda lay:
Whose charming Eyes in spite of Night,
Like Diamonds shone with glittering light,
And ere she could my welcome speak
Her Arms were twisted round my Neck,
Whilst I a thousand Kisses stole,
And every Kiss was worth a Soul,
Nor did her Sister less employ
Her Love, but with a grumbling Joy,
Child me for my undecent Crime
Of vent'ring thither at that time.
I, modestly Excuses made,
With all the moving Words I had,
Telling her 'twas a greater Crime
To let my Love be slave to time,
All times for Lovers are most fit,
When ever they can admission get;
And thus with some few fallacies,
And tenders that I thought would please,
All Scruples thoroughly satisfied,
I laid me by Olinda's side.
But first my durty Shoes from feet
I pulled, lest they should daub the Sheet,
And that it never should be said
A Man in's Breeches went to bed,
I stole 'em off without offense
To Dear Olinda's Innocence:
Who struggling betwixt Shame and Love
To make a faint resistance strove,
Then like an eager loving Fop,
No Petruke on nor ever a Cap,
I clung to that soft Angels side,
Close as a Bridegroom to his Bride.
Great Ovid in his mighty Verse
Of Hermes, a strange Tale declares,
How he to Aphrodite inclined,
So fervently their Bodies joined.
Howe'r that Fancy might be false,
As there is no certain Truth in Tales;
It Is here confirmed, for we that Night
Made out the true Hermaphrodite.
Here I could wish the Reader's Thought
Would not proceed into a Fault,
By censuring this Extravagance,
As far as the extreme offense,
Love does a thousand Follies own,
That may be proper to be shown,
And yet the greatest not be done.
Nor would I have him seek what past
Between us more, but think the best;
Whilst I to write my Muse employ
What discontents ensued this Joy.
The Morning rose as fair as when
In flowery Eden, Spring began
To bless the first Created Man:
Aurora blushed to be outdone
By the gay splendour of the Sun,
And coily his Embrace did shun;
Whilst he a hot and vigorous Woer
Mounts his bright Chariot to pursue her:
When I from sleep my Senses drew,
And blessed as he my self I view,
For I had my Aurora too;
Who whispering softly as she could,
Her Story in my Bosom told,
And blushing, my desires reproved
With all the tende^ness of Love;
I rapt with such a Load of Charms,
Took the dear Trembler in my Arms,
And swore no storm of Fate should move
The Rock of my Eternal Love:
A thousand times her Eyes I kissed,
Ten thousand more her snowy Breast;
And so unruly were our Joys,
Her Sister wak'ned with the Noise;
Who with her Wit our pleasure graced
In rallying on adventures past.
But see what mutability
Attends on tra^^^ory Joy,
And what a slender Film does grow
Between extremes of Mirth and Woe,
As we of past Intrigues conferred
Uncheck'd, and as we thought unheard.
Old Satan ready to devour,
Stood listening at the Chamber Door;
The Aunt had in her early Head
Some nice occasions for her Maid,
And fearing she should wake my Dears
To call her softly crept up Stairs;
Where soon she heard their tatling noise,
Mixed with my loud Bass-Viol Voice.
Not more amazed lame Vulcan stood
When he beheld his Wife was lewd;
Nor Caesar, who as Story shows
Saw his fond Girl her Fame expose
To the Poet with the Roman Nose.
Then was Old Grannum at that sound,
That through her Ears her Heart did wound;
Stung with a Rage from wonder bred,
With speed she hobbles to the Bed;
But not so soon, but first I slipped
From the outside between 'em crept,
Where close the panting Lover lies,
Half smothered with soft Legs and Thighs;
The Curtains straight she open threw
Exposing the poor Girls to view,
And there not finding what she looked,
Under the Bed with Broomstick pok'd,
Then ghastly round the Room she rowls
Peeping in all the Chinks and Holes.
Olinda trembling at her sight,
And almost murdered with the fright,
Raises herself in Bed upright,
And boldly on my Reeking Face
Sets without Complement her A --
Pressing me down so close beneath,
That I had much ado to breath;
So warm a place had cased my Nose,
No Mask sat ever on so close,
Nor did my Mouth at that time miss
In corner a dear Friend to kiss,
Whilst round me nothing seemed to be,
But Regions of Obscurity.
Bless me, thought I, sure I am now
Descending to the Shades below,
But cannot want the Golden Bough,
My bold advent'ring steps to guide,
As once the Great Aenea^ did;
For there the Sybil stands again,
And here is the Grove just by my Chin,
A Copps with fine thick Bushes dressed,
Where fluttering Loves do build their Nests;
Nor need I Styx or Cerb^rus fear,
When that my Pasport is so near.
My Fancy with these Thoughts grown big,
I reached my Hand to pull a Twig,
When by some Angry Demons spite
I found my self brought back to light,
For that old Hag with Rage o'er-come,
Discovering nothing in the Room;
And knowing too too well the Voice,
To think the Devil made that noise,
Not heeding what her Neices said,
Pulls all the Cloths from off the Bed,
And showed three pair of Legs as bare,
As first they to the Midwife were.
Have you not in a Quarry seen
A Peasant that with Culter keen
Has dug beneath some hollow Stone,
And found a Nest of Snakes well grown,
Crawling and twisting all in one:
So clustering in a Knot we lay
Broadly exposed to open day.
Imagine now you view the Scene,
Two plump white Bums my Nose between,
That from the Motions of their Fear
Had sent out an ungrateful Air,
The Aunt with Patience not endowed,
Ready to baul for Aid a loud,
When in my Shirt from both I slipped,
And to the stunned old Woman leapt,
Swearing, if from the place she stirred,
She should not live to speak a word;
Then did like Man of Honor try
To face it with a ready Lie,
Swearing like any Popish Monk,
That I last Night came thither Drunk,
And that her Neices were as free
From Guilt, as at there Infancy,
Confirming this with Vows and Oaths,
Still hastening to slip on my Cloths,
Which done, I scamper'd out of Door,
Where I could never enter more.
A LASH AT ATHEISTS: The POET speaking, as the Ghost of a Quondam Libertine,
supposed to be the late E. of R. Reflects on that part of Seneca's Troas,
beginning at Post Mortem nihil est, Ipsaque Mors nihil
Velocis spatii meta Novissima:
Spem ponant avidi seliciti metum.
Quaeris quo Ia^^as post Obitum loco
Quo non Nata Iacent.

Encumbered with vile Flesh, to Earth inclined,
Profane Tragaedian, once I wore thy Mind,
Born on the Wings of soaring Wit so high,
I thought my Soul no farther pitch could fly
Than the gay Regions of Philosophy.
The hot-brained Stag'rite in my Breast did reign,
And Sacred Prophets preached the Truth in vain,
Nourished by Logic Arts so well I knew
To vent false Reason and disguise the true:
Around my Beams the Athiests of the Times,
Like Attoms, danced and wantoned in my Crimes,
Strong Vice Opinion of my Wisdom bred,
Which round the World, those false Apostles led,
Whilst scandal hourly I on Virtue threw,
Nor would be witty, unless wicked too;
All thy pernicious Tenets then I owned,
And Wit profane with circling Bays I crowned,
Proud of short-sighted Reason, my design
Was still to blast the Mysteries Divine;
Defame Religion with unhallowed wit,
And ridicule the Laws of Sacred Writ:
But Oh, you foolish, fond, and apish Crew,
Ye Learned Idiots that my Tracts pursue,
Ye crawling Worms that bask in the Suns Ray,
And yet the Suns great Maker disobey.
Pernicious Snakes that by Celestial Fire,
Relieved from frozen Ignorance, conspire
Against your God, and think frail Eyes can see
Through the Arcana of the Trinity,
Reflect how false your Notions are, by me.
And thou, poor Heathen, that had wit to write,
Yet not the Truth, had Eyes, and yet no sight,
That were in the dawn of our Redemption driven
Through moral Mists to grope the way to Heaven,
Thou that with one poor glimpse of Reason blessed,
Given only as distinction from the Beast;
Profanely dare affirm there nothing is
Beyond the Grave, of Misery or Bliss:
But that the Soul and Body, like a Tree,
Rest undisturbed in Earth's Obscurity.
With me art now severely undeceived
In those damned Tenets which we once believed,
Yet not believed, for in each vile Harrangue
The Atheist speaks he feels a secret Pang:
Poor tortured Conscience peeps through his disguise,
And tells the noisie hot brained Fool he lies;
Thus Man more sordid than a Brute must be,
That plagued with the Salt Itch of Sophistry,
Forfeits his Soul, prophanes all Sacred Laws,
For the vain blast of Popular Applause.
Had Reverend Hobbs this Revelation marked
Before his dubious leap into the dark;
Had he sound Faith, before false Sense approved,
Moses, instead of Aristotle loved,
Eternal Vengeance had not found him then,
Nor gorged him with his own Leviathan;
Like him, or worse, once madly did I Rave
Till I had got on* Foot into the Grave:
But there, as if Eternal Power had pleased
To show in me that Wonders were not ceased;
My Guardian Angel snatched my Soul from Night
To the clear Paths of Everlasting Light:
Then banished Wisdom reassumed my Brain,
Religious Reason took her Seat again;
I sighed, and trembled at the horrid view
Of my past Crimes, and scarcely could renew
Forgotten Prayer, so little good I knew,
Till heavenly Mercy down like Manna fell,
And true Repentance lifted me from Hell:
Thus Sickness which my Mourning Friends condole
When Art could not restore my Body whole,
Proved the Divine Physician of my Soul.
How deeply then my long lost Reason pris'd
The Balmy Scriptures I so late despised!
How poorly Tinsel-rob'd Philosophy
Appeared when Rich Divinity was by!
And how the Evangelists and Prophets shone
Amongst Heathen Poets, that my Heart had won
Gone was my doubt, the Resurrection plain,
And if there be a Fool, so vile, so vain,
That in his Head that Scruple does retain:
Let him but think what first Created Man,
Then let him be an Athiest if he can.
To CYNTHIA.
I.
IF Beauty by Enjoyment can
Reward a Love that is true,
To bless our Patience or our Pain,
All I deserve from you.
II.
But oh, to Love too well's a Curse
Of such a strange degree,
Were my Fidelity far worse
Much happier should I be.
III.
Sad Recompense, relentless Fate
To faithful Love does give;
You Are pleased in being obstinate,
Whilst I in Tortures live.
III.
Like wretches gulled to Foreign Shores,
I cruelly am served,
Instead of Loves dear promised Stores
Am made a Slave and starved
A PROLOGUE, By way of SATYR, spoke before King CHARLES II. at New Market.
EXpect no more the old fawning Prologue way,
For the rash spleenful Poet writes to day
Something of you, Gallants, and not the Play.
Since freedom's given to each man here resorts,
He takes the privilege to abuse your sports;
Then thus begins, this Court's a Theater,
And every Jockey is an Actor here,
From the dull Knight up to the bawling Peer.
New Market is in general a Place,
Made of Crimp and Chouse of Cocks and Race,
Much Noise, much Nonsense, little Wit, or Grace,
Where Men all seem as Nature had designed 'em,
To lose their Wits, then Gallop hard to find 'em:
Pray where is the Jest, for Faith I fain would know
In Yap, hoh, pugh, they start, they come, they go,
Chattering one's Teeth the while in Frost and Snow.
This and Fox-Hunting, the Ancients did detest,
Where you Ride ten or twenty Miles at least,
Following the eager Chase in busy Swarms,
O'r Hedge and Ditch, ventring Legs, Necks and Arms
To kill, when at the Journeys end you come
A stinking Creature not worth bringing home:
This may be your Delight, but it is to me,
As the Monsieur says, Diable de Plasire;
Yet one thing we must own, no Sport us foun^
In the World like that, to try if Men are sound;
Therefore all you that carry tender Fleeces,
S^un this rude Sport, or gad you will shake to pieces;
Another thing I know is worth your Care,
Claps are all fatal in New Market Air:
This caused an Amorous Groom that knew the danger
Lately to Hang himself over a Manger,
And though a Vassal suffered this Disaster,
My Friends, it is Ominous to every Master.
Drink Brimmers then, Wine makes your bliss complete,
Locket's a Loyal Fellow, let him Cheat,
Though stum'd Wine at three shillings be too dear,
Bacchus has safer Joys than Venus here,
Especially for you who to your cost
Kept Running Nags all the late bitter Frost.
Jesting's in fashion, it is the Modish way
And for Example, if you please you may
At the King's Dinner, hear 'em every day:
^ests show a Wit, if Modestly they come,
But such as bluntly and too high presume,
Make Learning and good Manners quit the Room.
Yet you all laugh, and in as pleased a Fit,
As if your Panegyric had been writ.
So in a Village have I seen a Clown
With broken Noddle lay the Cudgels down,
And Sneer to feel his bloody mangled Scull,
As if the Blow had dignified the Fool.
Iockeys, Joke on then, without fear or awe,
Cheat on, be Friends, do any thing but draw,
Crimp is no Treason, by New Market Law.
Epithalamy on the Marriage of the Right Honorable the Lady Essex Roberts.
I.
RUN Lovers, run before her,
Kneel once more and adore her,
The hour is posting on
When all your Joy
Below the Sky,
Will be for ever gone.
Though Sighs inflame the Air,
And thousand Eyes are Raining,
No Art nor no Complaining
Can now retrieve the Fair;
She Is gone, alas, she is gone,
Then welcome sad Despair.
II.
See, Hymen there attending,
The God of Love descending
In Sylvias Fetters lies,
Not all his Art,
Could guard his Heart
From her victorious Eyes:
Whose fair, but cruel Breast,
Refused each Shepherd's Passion,
A Torment like Damnation,
To make Philander blessed,
Whilst he the happy he,
Of Heaven is sole possessed.
VI.
Hayl then beloved Philander,
Thou blessed, thou glad Commander
Of all the World holds rare,
Innobled Blood,
The Wise the Good,
The Virtuous and the Fair.
The Choice of Heavens store
Is thrown to thy Embraces;
Such Beauty, Wit, and Graces,
Never decked our Plains before,
Nor could Fate study how
To bless a Mortal more.
The HEALTH.
A Second Movement.
ADIEU to Virginity,
That silly strange nothing, that Maids are so fond of,
Room, Room, for the Bridegroom, he,
All Beauty's dear Trophies has now the command of:
Banish all thoughts of resty Diana,
Crown the full Bowl, a Health to Lucina.
Who ere the Year be run,
Gives the fair Bride a Son,
Able, able, to pledge his own.
Paid for Peeping: A POEM, Occasioned by a Peeping hole into a Chamber where a
Beautiful and Virtuous young Lady Lodged, through which undiscovered, I could
observe all her Actions.
I.
ACTAEON thus admiring stood,
To see bright Cynthia bless the Flood
With her Soul charming naked Limbs:
He sighed, and wished for such a Wife,
Till Peeping cost the Fool his Life,
Not getting further off betimes.
II.
Though no such dreadful Fate I had,
Nor yet so dear for Peeping paid;
Nor felt such strange and fatal smart,
Though all my Stars propitious stood,
To save the shedding of my Blood,
Insensibly I lost my Heart.
III.
Sweet Innocence well guarded lay
To Charm my Peeping Soul away,
With Beauties penetrating Rays;
My wanton Thoughts that hoped to see,
Something well worthy Raillery,
Were wholly taken up with Praise.
IV.
Sometimes I found her close at Prayer,
And sometimes Combing of her Hair,
Which on her Back did curling lie;
Sometimes with Neck and Breasts all bare
She stood as she was planted there,
My Heart to Murder through my Eye.
V.
Yet shy of every Nudity,
So Modest that she seemed to me
Of such a timorous bashful Soul,
As if she had discovered been,
Or that she really had seen
Me fondly peeping through the hole.
VI.
The Satyr, as old Tales recount,
Gazed on Diana in the Fount,
Besotted with a brutish Passion:
But mine was dashed from that degree,
For all the brutal part in me,
Was turned to humble Adoration.
VII.
Even I, was to Devotion bent,
Seeing that dear, that pretty Saint
With Providence so often confer;
Yet when to Heaven I sent my Prayer,
Before it had got half way there,
My wandering Thoughts flew down to her.
VIII.
Then sometimes smothered Zeal would fire,
Bursting to flashes of desire,
I envied Heaven the time she prayed;
Methought that Face, that blooming Youth,
Those lovely Eyes, that pretty Mouth,
Were for Eternal Kisses made.
IX.
Sometimes she would laugh and talk of Love,
Sometimes on graver Matters prove,
That she well-skill'd in Books had been;
Sometimes she would Read, and sometimes Write,
Her little Hands no Snow so white,
Nor any River-Swan so clean.
X.
Boldly, not knowing her Abuse,
She Would put her Stockings on and Shoes,
Then Roll a Gartar above Knee,
Her Foot and Leg, and tempting Thigh,
And every Beauty that was by,
All carelessly exposed to me.
XI.
And many a Sacred Sunday Morn,
Naked as ever she was born,
Ere she was ready to be dressed,
I Have seen her put clean Linen on,
Whilst to my greedy Eye was shown
More Beauty than can be expressed.
XII.
Children are told that Maids are free
From Nature's Liquid Quality,
Imposing thus on Childish Wit;
And Faith, had I not seen the Pot,
She was so Neat I should have thought,
She had done nothing else but spet.
XIII.
To free my self from all dispute,
This Scruple better to confute,
I once resolved to press more near;
But ah, here ended all my Joys,
She found my Cranny, heard my Noise,
And stood half dead 'twixt Shame and Fear.
XIV.
As in some fat and plashy Ground,
A Fowler has a Covey found,
All feeding at the Noon of day;
By his Robust and blund'ring Noise,
The Game has raised, they mount the Skies,
And frighted, post with speed away:
XV.
So from that hour no Game was seen,
No Fairy Land, nor Fairy Queen,
Did ever since that time appear;
Closestool was in the Closet shut,
The Night-shift gone, and the dear Pot,
Barb'rously hid the Lord knows where.
XVI.
No Wonders now were seen in Bed,
Before my Chink a Screen was spread,
Scarce any Light the Room adorns;
And now the finest sight I had
Was Squinty Fegue, the dirty Maid,
In the Chimney cutting of her Corns.
XVII.
Who such a Change did ever know,
Who but the Devil ever fell so low,
That in such state of bliss had been:
For though my Eyes from Heaven must part,
The hole damned up, yet my poor^Heart
Was still close Prisoner kept within.
XVIII.
But when I heard she would be gone,
Low as her Feet I threw me down,
And begged her not to leave the place;
But now, alas, too well she knew
My Heart Strings after her she drew,
And thus reviled me to my face.
XIX.
Rather my Glass of Life shall run,
In Caves that never saw the Sun,
Than here with thee, thou worst of Men:
Thee Traitor to despair I doom,
He that has oagled once my B --
Shall never see my Face again.
XX.
Like Bolts sent from the sultry South,
This Thunder from her heavenly Mouth,
On my unguarded Heart did fall
So fierce, that in my tortured mind,
Possessed with Rage, I once designed
To knock my Head against the Wall.
XXI.
Then Adam the first Man I cursed,
That brought the Mischief in at first
To traffic with forbidden Joys;
Else Beauty's World had naked been,
Nor had I for my peeping Sin,
Like him been banished Paradise.
SONG.
I.
A Pelles told the Painters famed in Greece,
To draw true Beauty was the hardest piece,
And now, alas, the same defect we see
Descend, from Painting into Poetry;
Divine Olimpia's Face no Skill can take
Each Feature does the feeble Artist blind,
And ah, what Muse a just Applause can make
Of all the Charms in that Angellick kind.
II.
Some are for pleasing Features far renowned,
Others with Wit, or charming Voices wound,
Many for mein and shape fond Lovers prize,
And many make vast Conquests with their Eyes:
But never were these Perfections found in one,
But in the fair Olympia alone;
The fair Olympia Phenix-like appears,
A Wonder seen once in a thousand years.
Second Movement.
THEN show thy Power, great God of Love,
That laughst at Women's Craft,
Make all her Charms less strongly move,
And make her Heart more soft;
Ah, why should Beauty first ordained to please,
Consume and Kill,
And do such fatal Ill,
Since only she can cure which causes the desease.
Against Free Will. A SONG.
I.
GO silly Mortal, and ask thy Creator,
Why thy short Life is tormented with care,
Why thou art slave to the follies of Nature,
Why for thy Plague he made Women so fair?
If Cloes Glances
Can charm thy Senses,
And Beauty force thee into her snare;
What Is this Free Will of which Gownmen so prate,
When none, none, have power to control their Fate.
II.
If Man be Monarch of all the Creation,
Women in Reason should stoop to his sway;
Fair, Rich, or Witty, by free Inclination
Owning his Privilege, calmly obey:
Else every Brute is
More blessed with Beauties.
The Horse or Stag each can seize his Prey,
Who ever in the Grove saw the Lordly Bull,
Sigh to the fair, She like a loving Fool.
A SONG.
I.
I Followed Fame and got Renown,
I ranged all over the Park and Town,
I haunted Plays, and there grew wise,
Observing my own modish Vice;
Friends and Wine I next did try,
Yet I found no solid Joy,
Greatest Pleasures seem too small,
Till Sylvia made amends for all.
II.
But see the state of humane Bliss,
How vain our best Contentment is,
As of my Joy she was the Chief,
So was she too my greatest Grief,
Fate, that I might be undone,
Dooms this Angel but for one,
And, alas, too plain I see,
That I am not the happy he.
A Dialogue between a Town Spark and his Miss.
She. DID you not promise me when you lay by me,
That you would Marry me, can you deny me?

He. If I did promise thee, 'twas but to try thee,
Call up your Witnesses, else I defy thee.

She. Ah, who would trust you Men, that Swear and Vow so,
Born only to deceive, how can you do so?

He. If we can Swear and Lie, you can Dissemble,
And then to hear the Lie, would make one Tremble.

She. Had I not loved, you had found a denial
My tender Heart, alas, was but too real;

He, Real I know you were, I Have often tried ye,
Real to forty more Lovers besides me.

She. If thousands loved me, where was my Transgression,
You we were the only He, ever got Possession?

He. Thou could talk prettily ere thou could go, Child;
But I Am too old and wise, to be shamed so, Child.

She. Tho you are so Cruel you will never believe me,
Yet do but take the Child, all I forgive thee.

He. Send your Kid home to me, I will take care on it,
If It has the Mothers gifts, 'twill prove a rare one.

To Cynthia. A SONG.
I.
BORN with the Vices of my kind
I were Inconstant too;
Dear Cynthia, could I rambling find
More Beauty than in you:
II.
The rolling Surges of my Blood,
By virtue now ebbed low;
Should a new Shower increase the Flood,
Too soon would over flow.
III.
But frailty when thy Face I see,
Does modestly retire;
Uncommon must her Graces be,
Whose look can bound desire.
IV.
Not to my Virtue, but thy Power
This Constancy is due,
When change it self can give no more,
It Is easy to be true.
A Mock SONG to, When first AMINTOR su'd for a Kiss, etc.
I.
A Minta one Night had occasion to p --
Joan reached her the Pot that stood by her,
I in the next Chamber could hear it to hiss;
The Sluice was small, but Stream was strong,
My Soul was melting, thinking of bliss,
And raving I lay with desire;
But naught could be done,
For alas she p -- d on,
Nor cared for Pangs I suffered long,
Joan next made have
In th'self same Case,
To fix the Pot close to her own A --
Then Floods did come,
One might have swom,
And Puff, a Whirlwind flew from her B --
II.
Says Joan, by these strange Blasts that do rise,
I guess that the Night will grow windy,
For when such Showers do fall from the Skies,
To clear the Air the North Wind blows.
Ye nasty Queen, her Lady replies,
That Tempest broke out from behind ye;
And though it was decently kept from my Eyes,
The troubled Air offends my Nose.
Says Joan, 'ods heart,
You have p -- d a Quart,
And now you make ado for a F -- t
It Is still your mind
To squeeze behind;
But never fell Shower from me without wind.
Epilogue to the Opera of DIDO and AENEAS,
performed at Mr. Preist's Boarding-School at Chelsey; Spoken by the Lady
Dorothy Burk.
ALL that we know the Angels do above,
I Have read, is that they Sing and that they Love,
The Vocal part we have to night performed,
And if by Love ou^ Hearts not yet are warned,
Great Providence has still more bountious been
To save us from those grand Deceivers Men,
Here blessed with Innocence, and peace of Mind
Not only bred to Virtue, but inclined;
We flowrish, and defy all human kind.
Arts curious Garden thus we learn to know,
And here secure from nipping Blasts we grow,
Let the vain Fop range over yon vile lewd Town,
Learn Playhouse Wit, and vow it is all his own;
Let him Cock, Huff, Strut, Ogle, Lie and Swear,
How he is admired by such and such a Player;
All Is one to us, his Charms have here no power,
Our Hearts have just the Temper as before;
Besides to show we live with strictest Rules,
Our Nunnery-Door, is charmed to shut out Fools;
No Love-toy here can pass to private view,
Nor China Orange crammed with Billet dew,
Rome may allow strange Tricks to please her Sons,
But we are Protestants and English Nuns,
Like nimble Fawns, and Birds that bless the Spring
Unscar'd by turning Times we dance and sing;
We in hope to please, but if some Critic here
Fond of his Wit, designs to be severe,
Let not his Patience, be worn out too soon,
And in few years we shall be all in Tune.
Loves Revenge. A SONG.
I.
THE World was hushed, and Nature lay
Lulled in a soft Repose,
As I in Tears reflecting lay
On Chloes faithless Vows,
The God of Love all gay appeared
To heal my wounded Heart,
New pangs of Joy my Soul indear'd,
And Pleasure charmed each part.
Fond Man, said he, here end thy Woe,
Till they my Power and Justice know,
The foolish Sex will all do so.
II.
And for thy Ease believe, no bliss
Is perfect without pain,
The fairest Summer hurtful is
Without some Showers of Rain;
The Joys of Heaven, who would prize
If Men too cheaply bought,
The dearest part of Mortal Joys
Most charming is when sought;
And though with Dross true Love they pay
Those that know finest Metals say,
No Gold will Coin without allay.
III.
But that the Generous Lover may,
Not always sigh in vain,
The Cruel Nymph that kills to day,
To morrow shall be slain.
The little God no sooner spoke,
But from my sight he slew,
And I that groaned with Chloes yoke
Found Love's Revenge was true;
Her proud hard Heart too late did turn
With fiercer Flames than mine did burn,
Whilst I as much began to scorn.
EPSOM-WELLS: A Satyr by way of Dialogue, between Critic and Fame.
I.
Crit. FAME, that do over the Universe scatter
Satyrs and Libels, and Politics tell
Say who is in the Country drinking the Water;
And first begin with Epsom Well.

II.
Crit. Who is that Lad there puffing and sweating?
And who those Rake hells that buz in his Ears?

Fame. It Is the mad Lord that loves the Bul-baiting,
With all his Brethren Dogs and Bears.

III.
Crit. Who are those two lank Tallow faced Doxies,
That look as just they from sweating did crawl?

Fame. Two London Whores would wash off their Poxes,
Dreading their Dooms when Leaves do fall.

IV.
Cr. What City Wife's there on the Downs rolling,
Who with young Bully to Box-Hill repairs,

Fa. One, who whilst Husband loses at Bowling,
Takes the right way to get him Heirs.

V.
Cr. But amongst all these, prithee dear Rumor
What Jack in the Box is that with Coach and four?

Fa. A Pox upon him, it is a Perfumer,
That makes a stink all Fleet Street over.

VI.
Cr. What Lady bright comes yonder a Tuning,
To whom the Wits and the Wittals so throng?

Fa. One that for all the Rooks is too cunning,
And Plays and Sings all Summer long.

VII.
Cr. What bonny Blade sits there above fifty,
Chewing the Cud amongst Elmor's Calves?

Fa. It Is an old Bachelor, that to be thrifty,
Purchases Land by fulls and halfs.

VIII.
Cr. The Vicar here loves Wine above Water,
Chearing his Heart against wofuller Times;

Fa. Then coaks the Justice, and kiss his Daughter,
There no more subject left for Rhyme.

Prologue spoken by Mr. HAINS to TRAPOLIN, or a Duke and no Duke.
TRapolin supposed a Prince, this humor shows
Strange Matters do depend upon suppose,
You wh -- res To the Eighteen penny Gallery.
may be thought Chaste,
You Critics witty To the Pit.

And I that have been kept for being pretty,
Supposed a Beau, through the well governed City;
Fancy digested into strong Supposes,
Makes Cheeks fair, where no Lillies grow nor Roses,
And Women beautiful that want their Noses:
It Is that and Nature all the World inspires,
Fancy's the Bellows, kindling up new Fires
When the Fuel's gone, that should supply desires;
And Nature is the Parent we all know,
By whom like Plants, we fructify and grow.
The Reverend Citizen sixty and above,
That by poor Inch of Candle barters Love;
Supposes, that his Son and Heir he got,
But ask his Wife, and she supposes not.
The Trees by Rosamonds Pond her Sins have known,
And the dear Leaves still stick upon her Gown;
Whilst the dull Sot, that is just a C -- old made,
Supposes she is at Church, and praying for a Trade.
The Country Novice newly come to Town,
Doomed by his Parents to a dagled Gown;
That wanting Grace, in Love most lewdly falls
With some hot Nymph in these unhallowed Walls,
Supposes some bright Angel he has gotten,
Till finding by sad signs the Wh -- re was rotten;
His sweating Study's changed to sweating Tubs,
And Doctor Littleton, for Doctor Hobs,
Pray tell me, who would marry here among ye,
(For Whoring ye all hate, I scorn to wrong ye,)
That did not first suppose his Wife a Maid,
And Virgin Pleasures blessed the Marriage Bed;
Yet it is Opinion must your Peace secure,
For no Experiment can do it I Am sure;
In Paths of Love, no footsteps ever were traced,
All you can do is to suppose her Chaste;
For Women are of that deep subtle kind
The more you dive to know, the less you find,
Ah, Ladies, what strange Fate attends us Men,
For when we prudently would escape your gin,
Sweet Supposition draws the Woodcocks in:
In all Affairs it is so, the Lawyer bawls,
And with damned Noise and Nonsense plagues the Halls,
Supposing after seven years being a Drudge,
'Twill be his Fortune to be made a Judge:
The Parson too that prays against Ill Weathers,
That thumps the Cushion till he leaves no Feathers,
Would let his Flock, I fear, grow very lean,
Without a fat Suppose of being a Dean:
In every thing is some by End, but Wit,
And that has too much Virtue in it, to get;
Then for our sakes that want a lucky Hit,
Let kind Suppose, for once possess your Mind,
Think in that Charm all Pleasures are confined,
Tho you mislike the Farce, pray don't disclose it;
But if you are not satisfied, -- Suppose it.
An ELEGY On the Death of that true Perfection of Beauty and Goodness, the Lady
ESSEX SPICKET, who dyed of the Smallpox, immediately after her Marriage.
Written by way of Dialogue betwixt Mors and Hymen.

Mors. GReat Second Cause, of Man's Original,
Why does thy Head upon thy Bosom fall?
Why are thy active Spirits all dispersed?
Why thy Robe torn, and genial Torch reversed,
As if the end of Nature now were come,
And general Dissolution filled one Tomb.
Since Mortals all by our disposes move,
I point their date of Time, and thou their Love
Since Death is natural to all are born,
Why do thou languish thus, why do thou mourn?

Hymen. Thou bloodless Tyrant of Mortality;
Pale King of Charnels, can thou ask me why?
Ah, that I could reverse Heavens great Decree,
And in thy Place fix any Fate but thee!
Thou that thus rudely dare my Rights invade,
And cloud Love's brighest Luster with thy shade,
With barbarous Power act a lawless Guest,
And Rape a Virgin from her Nuptial Feast;
The sharpest Bolt in Heaven with fatal speed,
My eager Rage should dart upon thy head,

Mo. Raging in vain, -- thou idly spendst thy breath,
Do thou not know reward for Sin is Death?
Since Primitive offense, Hymen, for Sin I own,
But ah, why should she Perish that had none?
The sweet Aspatia was all purity.

Mors. Was not the sweet Aspatia born to dye?

Him. Tho Nature's Tribute once she were to pay
Could it be due upon her Wedding Day;
A time when Rapture the pleased Sense controuls,
And spritely Joy kept Revels in their Souls.
When Vesta fond of her dear Charge to me,
Had just given up her beauteous Votary,
A sacred Mould for a blessed Progeny:
At such a time when Love did brightest shine,
When Life was dear, to force her to resign
Was cruelty fit for no Breast but thine.

Mo. These Arguments how vainly you employ!
You are a Friend, but I sworn Foe to Joy;
At the wide door of Luxury I wait,
And summon there the least prepared to fate;
An envious Pleasure does my Breast overflow
To dash their sweetest draughts of Life with woe;
So when the haughty Syrian Monarch crowned
His swelling Bowls in Gulphs of Pleasure drowned;
When Consecrated Vessels were not free
From the wild Law of his Impiety;
When thoughtless Epicures swollen with excess,
And wanton Women charmed his Soul with bliss,
The fatal Hand upon the Wall was placed,
Subscribing that short moment for his last.

Him. Why nam'st thou tha^, or Syria's Monarch here
Death, as reward of Sin was proper there;
His ill spent days obtained to long a date,
Spotted with Crimes and mellow'd for his fate;
But sweet Aspatia guiltless from her birth,
Divinely lived an Angel upon Earth.

Mors. Merit extreme, but with a Mortal date,

Him. All worth is Mortal with remorseless fate;
A charming Grace did all her Actions guide,
A sacred Virtue never soiled with Pride;
A saint-like Piety, a pitying Heart,
An uncorrupted Beauty without Art,
Humble as Cottage Girls, yet awful too,
Kidn to distress, and to all Merit true;
Devout as Angels, singing Hymns on high,
Yet spite of all their Graces:

Mo. Born to dye:

Him. If these could not thy Avarice o'er-come,
Thou might take more to swell the mighty sum,
Her graceful Modesty, her mighty Wit,
The one delightful, as the other great;
And then for Patience, and blessed Charity,
None ever her equal knew:

Mo. Yet born to dye,

Him. Not only dye, but in her blooming Age,
To feel the Curse of thy extremest Rage,
A double Death did her dear Life pursue,
Of Beauty first, and then of Nature too,
Vile Schelliton that would not Pity show,
But where no Flesh is, how should Pity grow?
Were thy Soul formed of any thing but spite,
Or all the contra^ies of soft delight:
Those Eyes late blinded with disease so foul
With pointed Beams had shot thee to the Soul,

Mo. That was one Reason why I quenched their fire,
Her Wit and Beauty did so far aspire,
Even Death had else been fooled into desire,
Pity had warmed my Breast to let her live,
And Female Charms had purchased a Reprieve,
Had not resenting Ghosts over whom I Reign,
All murmuring at a thought so strange, so vain,
Declared in the Grand Council of my State,
Pity was fit for any thing but Fate.

Him. And Fate more fit for any thing than Love,
Henceforth aloud in every-shady Grove,
Where harmless Lovers pretty Garlands wove.
The Swains and Nymphs Aspatia's Obsequies,
Shall sing with heavy Hearts and weeping Eyes;
Aspatia's hapless Fate each Breast shall sway,
Aspatia's story shall wear out the day,
Satyrs shall range from their obscure Abode,
Vice shall grow ^amous, Marriage out of mode,
And till by warrant from the Deity
Hymen has power to alter Fate's decree,
Of this great wrong he will never cease to complain,
Nor ever tie the genial Knot again.

An ODE.
To my much honored Friend Sir THOMAS GARRARD, Baronet, upon his Climacterical
YEAR.
I.
THE famous old Prophet that twenty years toiled,
To write us the Psalms that dunce Hopkins has spoiled,
In giving account of the Ages of Men;
Has strangely confined us to Threescore and Ten*
He tells us, to scare us, his last hour is near,
That enters the sad Climacterical Year.
II.
Then welfare the Man that inspired by good Wine,
Cares neither for Seventy nor seven times Nine;
Whose jolly brisk Humor adds sands to his Glass,
And standing upright can look Fate in the ^ace;
That makes much of Life, but when Nature is due
Declines like a Flower, as sweet as he grew.
To his fair Example and Grandeur of Soul,
Let each in his order Carouse a full Bowl;
Whatever dull Gown men or Sages may think,
There Is no Man grows old till he ceases to drink;
Then Health to Sir Thomas, and that he may be,
As well as sixscore as at sixty and thre^^
The KING'S Health: A CATCH Sung in Parts.
I.
NOW Second Hannibal is come,
Over frozen Lakes and mounts of Snow,
To found our Faith on conquered Rome,
And give Proud France a fatal Blow.
II.
Well may our Phoebus disappear,
And set his Glory in the Sea;
If Planets of a lower Sphere,
Can give us greater light than he.
III.
Friars and Monks, and all those bald-pate Fools,
With Wafers, Ointments, Beads and Shams,
Pardons and Antichristian Bulls.
Must yield to Belgic battering Rams*
IV.
Infallibility is gone,
And Judges of Dispensing Powers,
That had their Country quite undone,
Was ever known such Sons of Whores?
V.
Drink all around, then by consent,
Health to the Monarch of the Land,
The Queen, and healing Parliament;
Pledge me six Bumpers in a hand,
And when the Jesuits you see,
Dangling upon the Triple Tree,
Fill up six more, and sing with me,
A Plague on senseless Popery.
A Letter written by the Author for a Friend, to one in Town; being a SATYR, on
DINGBOY and a Rampant WIDOW. 1685.
ABroad when Dingboy's Verses came,
And in the Scrowl you read my Name,
Too well my dearest Friend I know
You blushed as much as I do now,
Not that you thought my scanty Crimes
Had not deserved Satyrick Rhimes;
But that I should a Subject be,
For the Pen of such a Dunce as he,
Whose empty Noddle still takes pains
Without a dram of Sense of Brains,
To make my Fame about the Town,
As black and ugly as his own.
Nature a signal shame has meant,
To the Obstinate and Ignorant,
And Dingboy above all Mankind
The Curse of his own Vice does find;
It Is plague enough to be a Fool,
Wretchedly Poor, and Proud, as Dull,
To aim at Wit and Writing well,
And yet not have the sense to spell,
To give the Noble Art abuse,
By daring to invoke a Muse.
This, one would think, were shame enough,
If Block-heads ever could taste Reproof;
But he, as if the Genius fled
From the barren Soil of such a Head;
Still plunges on, and with strange flights
Of new invented Nonsense writes;
Fame gives it out, the unthinking Beast
Once set up for a Romish Priest,
With goggling Eyes, and supple Hams,
Trained up to all their Tricks and Shams;
But never was wise enough to know,
Whether the Rat was damned or no,
That eat the consecrated Dough:
Things past his reach he never durst hope,
But after got into a Troop,
Where now he Lurks, Roars, Huffs, and Fights,
With the same Genius that he writes.
Don Quixot-like plays pranks in vain,
Plagued by the Wind-mills in his brain;
Now rails, now writes, but such a Style,
So filthy Dogril and so Vile,
He dipped his Pen we well might think
In Excrement instead of Ink,
Such Rhimes on Wall of common Jakes,
Which every Bum for Easement takes:
I many times have seen ill writ
With Finger and a Thumb be --
Yet they appear to this dull Sot,
As fine as ever Cowley wrote,
Such shameful Madness still we see
In Impudent stupidity;
But here lets leave him for a while
In the Jakes, which can his Fame defile,
And turn to jerk the Female Friend,
He does so wretchedly defend;
Oh Women, born for Man's Delight,
His Ease by Day, his Joy by Night,
Ye useful Mischiefs which we keep
To procreate, eat, drink, and sleep;
Ye Ladles which we Fools require,
To cool the Broth of our desire,
Designed, no doubt, for our relief,
Though often converted to our Grief:
Listen to one obliged to rail,
And mark the Justice of my Tale;
And you, who to our cost we find,
The worst of all that baneful Kind,
Widows I mean, who lose your Senses,
When wanting due Benevolences.
With solid Confidence prepare,
And hearken to the Character
Of the most lewd and rampant Whore,
That ever -- in a Bandore;
From Taplash froth of Nappy Ale,
She had her great Original;
Her Father in a Drunken fit,
The she clest Monster did beget,
And brought a Pattern of new Crimes
To plague the World in after Times;
Unfortunate the Man, and Cursed,
That did the sin to wed her first,
But the Dunce that second Wedlock named
Is beyond all Redemption damned,
No flesh on Earth so wretched made,
Nor Hell hereafter half so bad;
The Rogue that Robs to buy him Bread,
When hanged attones for the ill deed,
Who Acts all other deadly Sins,
With his own blood clears each offense.
His Punishment does pain release,
Nor does his Crimes retard his Peace;
But he that does a Widow wed,
In Lust and rank Contagion bred,
Fomenter of Revengeful Fewd,
And beyond Messalina lewd,
One that has still infected been,
With all the Plagues of Female Sin,
And like the Grave or greedy Sea,
Swallowed up all came in her way;
Who yokes with her is doomed for slaughter,
And worse Hell here than that hereafter:
And now to let the Reader see
The Curse of weak Humanity;
Amongst the greatest that appears,
To vex my late Ill managed Years,
Led by the blind Efforts of Nature;
'Twas my ill Fate to love this Creature,
And what from Charity begun,
To her, her Husband, and her Son,
By Passion was so hurried on,
Her Family and mine were one;
About my Neck the Snake I hung,
Not thinking I should ere be stung;
And still to love (made Resolution)
A Feind that studied my Confusion;
This Jilt whom my misguided Powers,
Have fed in her salacious hours,
And gorged her Mercenary Lust
With Love unfeigned, though unjust;
Pardon me, oh thou better part,
That have deserved, and have my Heart;
Pardon me, Virtue, that do know
What Folly's wild desire will do,
And let my Shame and Penitence
Atone for my confessed Offense;
But let fermented Spleen swell high,
When I relate her Infamy,
Who like the Furies is indu'd
With baseness and Ingratitude;
Often when the black Intrigue was framed
By Witchcraft and desire inflamed,
Has the perfidious Strumpet swore,
Still to love me, and no one more;
But Gifts did all this kindness buy,
For still so fond, so blind was I,
That I pursued the guilty Curse,
And proved my Passion by my Purse;
As often I have by Wine inspired,
But never so often as she desired:
This were a Secret, I confess,
If the Nature of her Fault were less;
But Crimes, like hers, nor can, nor may,
Be punished any other way.
Oh that my Pen were filled with Gall,
To write this next, this worst of all,
And that her Rage and Letchery,
Were proved to Nations as to me;
Know then, this Creature scandal proof,
This very Widow that is enough,
Forgetting all the numerous Scrowls,
She sent me when we mingled Souls;
The Oaths and Vows, and all the Damned,
Deceits through all her Letters crammed,
Which that the World the Truth may know
Under her hand I keep to show:
This Prostitute, this Fiend in Crape,
Dares now accuse me for a Rape,
And swear I forced her Chastity,
That was more like to Ravish me;
Such Flames there are, such scorching Fire,
In Women's uncontrolled desire,
It Is this that does my Soul perplex,
This moves my Hatred to the Sex,
Swells my full Spleen, and makes me prove
My Anger far above my Love,
For never was a Woman better used,
Nor never Man so much abused;
And though the Champion of this Trull,
In Dogril Rhimes still plays the Fool,
Nonsense maliciously expressed,
It Is but the Nature of the Beast;
He only shows his little spite,
And snarles and grins, but never could bite;
He means no ill what ever he says,
But Cats will Mew, Dogs have their Days;
Bullies, and Curs, run open mouthed;
But Oaken Cudgel frights 'em both.
And now a word or two let us spare,
To descant on the Husband's Care,
The Husband that new Joys has tried,
And found the Indies in a Bride;
An easy passage through the Straights,
Where Lucifer and Charon waits,
To carry the next comer over,
Where many a Man has gone before*
Had he no way to shun this Fate,
No warning of his future State?
Were there no Halters, no kind hand
To tip him into some deep Pond?
No Drug nor Rats-bane to be bought,
To rid him from his dreadful Lot?
It Is hard, but wretched Man never knows
Till it is too late his cure of woes;
For it is beyond all doubt it ever
His Wife's Salt Freaks had reached his Ear,
Which all the Country round can tell,
And her first C -- old knew too well.
He would some friendly Razor choose,
Or happy Cord on Rafter use,
Ere slipped into damned Widows Noose.
But there I leave him to be merry,
And now the Satyr growing weary,
Thinks fit, dear Friend, to bid adue.
And Pardon ask for tiring you;
As for Sallacious and her Men,
Especially the Champion Pen,
As he likes this, I hope he will write again.
To the Right Honorable the Lady Olympia R. on her Genius in POETRY.
NINE Muses celebrate the Poets Art,
And you a ^oth shall teach the noblest part
Virtue and Beauty so divinely known
In you, I thought, would be enough for one;
Yet Heaven, that more admired its work should be,
Has gilt your Mind with glittering Poetry;
With Gifts uncommon has inspired your Soul,
Nor thought a part sufficient, but the whole.
Well may that happy Sex the World subdue,
That Conquer Men with Wit and Beauty too;
What foreign Force is proper for our Aid,
When Powers like these Great Britain does invade,
Our selves against our selves, we must divide,
And to secure us run off to your side,
With such a double Force when you assail,
Alas, what single Armor can prevail!
So famed Thalestris in the Trojan War,
Like Pallas Valiant, and like Venus Fair,
With double Weapons always gained the Prize,
Who missed her Sword, fell Prisoner to her Eyes.
Those who can with bright Beauties Charms dispense,
And think they are free, are captived by your Sense,
And ah, what Force so strong that it should dare
TO oppose the Good, the Witty, and the Fair;
Warm me then, Madam, by your Muses fire,
And let me see the Works I shall admire,
My Genius by your Influence shall breath,
And proudly bind your Bays into a wreath.
An Epilogue intended for a late COMEDY, and to be spoke by Mr. MONFORD, in a
long Presbyterian Cloak.
FRom a strange Miracle which none can prove,
For sure no fool could ever run mad for Love,
From antic whim, composed of Song and Rant,
Our hot-brained Scribler now will make me cant,
He says this Carb and a right Tone will fit
Most of the City Wives that here are met,
Which if it happen is a fair occasion
To bring us all the Non^cons of the Nation:
Things now, thank Heaven, are at a better pass,
Than late they were before the Act of Grace;
And if this Project is but managed right,
Gad we shall strip the Conventicles quite,
If so, who values how your sensure falls,
There Is many a Playhouse full within the Walls:
Sharp Judges with short Hair and little Bands,
Will tear their Cuffs with clapping of their Hands:
I Will try for once.
Dear Sisters that t^ ^rayers in Pattins go,
And all the force of Bowel yernings know;
Let not your Breasts for Sinners pant and heave,
But seek the Truth, and to my Bosom cleave;
Lewd frothy Bullies only can provoke,
There Is something worth your while under the Cloak,
I this will do.
This will my Female Friends from W^pping call,
A Tone with Women brings the Devil and all:
But Sirs, methinks, you mala^cholly grow,
To teach you then what virtue is in show;
Look ye, this Puts on a great Peruke.
Wig translates me to a Bow:
Now let me hear the proudest of ye say
Amongst you all, that he dislikes the Play.
If ye are Envious, vent it all at home,
Wit pardons Faults, since every one has some;
And that how few correctly use their Pen,
I leave to the Judgment of all witty Men,
And so I Will be a Pulls of a Peruke and claps on a broad Hatt.
Canting Rogue again.
Friends, I would fain adapt to these our Times,
Religious Use of reasoning in Rhimes;
Sincerely use the Laborer to day,
W' are now united and may see a Play;
Affinit^o of Works our liking calls,
For all our Labors are a kind of Drolls.
Amongst all the Females here that want conducting
For I Have a great desire to be instructing,
Hor to convince I do entreat alone,
To come up to my Room and rub me down;
And if she be not thoroughly satisfied,
Let her from me my choicest Gifts divide,
Make me a Scoff amongst the Sons of Men,
As never able to hold forth again.
Another EPILOGUE Intended for the same.
REflection on the different Brains of Men,
Has suddenly restored me mine again*
Yet not so perfectly, but that perhaps,
There may be still some fear of a Relapfe,
Your kindness, noble Friends, my Wi^s may (...),
But if the Sparks grow mutinous* I rave.
Since it is not wholly from their Judgments done*
But some dear Female Punt, that sets 'em on:
The Poets Cause and mine are one to night,
I do my best to act, as he to write;
If after this you our Endeavors ^^ight,
Then I must fall into my former ^it,
And though to all true Judgments we submit,
Rail at the barbarous Dragons of the Pit.
For to be hissed by such as scar^^ can read,
Faith it is enough to make one mad indeed.
The DREAM: Or, C^LADON's Complaint of MORPHEUS to the Assembly of the GODS.
TO thee, Supreme Almighty Jove,
And all the Parliament above,
My just Complaint I here address,
Griefs by complaining are made less;
Whilst those that silence trys to tame
Break soonest out into a Flame,
The spiteful Morpheus I accuse,
That in our Midnight Slumbers shows
False Scenes of Pleasure to molest
The tortured Lover from that Rest;
Which Heaven and Nature does prepare,
As Cordial for all Mortal Care.
Relieved by five succeeding years,
My sighs dispersed, and dry my Tears,
Which daily had my Eyes bedewed,
Through Cynthia's strange Ingratitude:
As in my Bed I sleeping* lay,
Tired with the Troubles of the Day;
Prepared that Ease to have enjoyed,
Which restless Love had long denied,
The God from whom all slumbers fall,
Decre'd I should have none at all;
But with strange Visions wracked my Brain,
And Dreams ridiculous and vain:
Methought, with wings fixed on to fly,
I strangely soared up to the Sky;
Where on a Lucid Cloud in State,
A Reverend h^ary Elder sat,
Bearing a Shield, that styled him Fate;
His Head and Beard as white as when
The Winter Snow does Sheet the Plain;
His Brow austere, his Eye as bright
As Venus in a starry Night:
And though some Furrows did appear,
Dig'd by the Cares of many a year,
The awful Wrinkles did presage
The effects of Wisdom more than Age:
On his left hand were lesser fates,
Employed in ordering Crowns and States,
And on huge Iron Wheels enjoined
To spin the Lives of Humankind;
And in his Lap large Bundles were,
The Dooms of many a forespent year,
Long scrowls containing wondrous things,
The downfals of unlucky Kings;
Swift turns of Nobles into slaves,
The Luck of Fools and Rise of Knaves;
And Man's inevitable hour
Of Good or Ill was in his power;
Thus whilst I trembling fixed my Eye
Upon this more than Deity:
Methought I saw a numerous Crowd
All thronging up, and crying loud,
For an immediate redress
Of all their several Grievances;
Emperial Heads with Crown and Ball,
Prelates in Robes Episcopal;
Traders, Physicians, Lawyers come,
All crowching to revoke their Doom,
The Muses also thither pressed,
And mine, methought, amongst the rest;
Nay, Beauty too her Interest tried,
But was as sullenly denied;
In vain a Monarch here disclosed
His Suit whom fate had late deposed,
As vainly Priests large Sums prepare,
Aspiring to the Papal Chair;
Or sordid Clowns infest our Schools,
Born and predestined to be Fools,
Who dully Rich, would Statesmen grow,
By Nature molded for the Plow;
As vainly too he seeks for Ore,
Damned to the Curse of being Poor.
As Travelers in Forests stray,
He ever takes the Erring way;
Thus Good or Evil destiny,
Waits on Fates absolute decree.
As to my Eyes these Wonders came,
Methought a burst of dreadful Flame
Cracked the vast Cloud, and to my sight
Showed the dark Cave of endless Night,
Di^mal as Chaos when all Nature lay
Confused in one huge Lump of Clay,
When Earth's prodigious bulk was seen
To quake with Air enclosed within,
And muddy Floods foamed with desire,
To combat their old Foe the Fire,
From its wide Mouth breathed forth a Yell,
That soon confirmed this place was Hell;
And by some ^^akes of bluish Flame,
That from a glowing Furnace came,
Unseen I could discern with ease,
'Twas the Devils Court of Common^ Pleas,
Where Souls in different Causes drudge,
And where Fate also sits as Judge:
Here Princes, Plowmen, Lords and Slaves,
Panders and Statesmen, Fools and Knaves,
Maids that never blessed with Men would be,
And Widows damned for having three
Made their Appeals -- some Poets too,
But very fat and very few,
The noted dullest of the Crew,
Broiled their next neighbors, these more cursed,
Than all the Fiends were hated worst;
Who knowing Hell so hot a Place,
Came to augment it with their Grease;
Vast crowds of Pimps and Noseless Whores,
Rich Epicures and bloated Boors,
With Shoals of Baldpate Priests and Friars,
Even clogged the fiercest of the Fires.
Deaf with the Cries of those that mourned,
(...) I gazed on, the Court adjourned;
Huge Gates of Jet methought were shut,
Nor knew I which way to get out,
Till from a secret dismal Room,
A hollow Voice methought did come,
That cried for forty Peter Pence,
I will (rash Mortal) lead thee hence:
Agreed, quoth I, with all my Soul,
Then straight one started from the hole,
That by his Robe and Stature Tall,
I knew to be a Cardinal,
That here on Earth loved Coin so well,
His Palm was itching for it in Hell;
But I no sooner had begun
To drive this hopeful bargain on,
When one of Fate's great Family
Came up and seized me for a Spy,
Swearing I came by Fame's report
To learn the Practice of that Court;
Resolved to teach their Methods all,
To the Attournies of Guild Hall:
Fearing the Lash for taking Bribes,
My faithful Guide my Doom proscribes,
And like a through-pass'd Prelate swore,
He was attaching me before,
To bring me to the Throne of Fate,
Before whom I was hurried straight,
Through Regions vast of drery Night:
At last ascending up to Light,
The Judge his Reason did unlock,
And thus methought divinely spoke;
By Woman's frailty, though undone,
Yet art thou still Apollo's Son,
Beauty may grieve thy Heart with pain,
But it shall never hurt thy Brain;
Thy D^om's revoked, she not possessed,
Go hence and slumber, and be blessed.
As when some Wretch that chained does lie,
Expecting every hour to dye,
Hears the glad sound of a Reprieve,
And Royal Grant to let him live;
His Heart that vast Content does cloy,
Faints at the blaze of sudden Joy,
Such Passion did my Soul possess,
Reflecting on approaching Bliss;
And now methought by Sacred Power
I was transported to a Bower,
Where the Indian Jessamine and Rose
Of Syria, lasting Sweets disclose,
Clear Rivolets that took their Vents
From flowery Mounts, made their descents,
And with small Pebbles troll'd along,
Making a pretty purling Song;
And thence in wild Meander's flow,
To bless the Verdant Meads below:
Tall Sons of Earth the leavy Trees,
All shook to make refreshing Breeze;
The lo^ty Pine, the Maple strong,
The Laurel ever Green and Young;
The Oak, the Monarch of the Wood,
That had two hundred Winters stood*
The fatal Ash, that wanting Alluding to an old erroneous Opinion of the
Ancients, that the Ash not bearing her yearly Keys, as accustomed, boded
Revolutions of State, or the distress or death of some great Prince or Monarch.
Keys,
To Kingdoms bodes Calamities,
With the Elm that high his Front does raise,
Long flourished in that heavenly Place;
Nor did the mirthful Birds forbear
To keep their Evening Consort there;
The barbarous Rape that had too long
Been Philomela's lonely Song;
The Thrush and Linnet skilled in Arts,
Set to their Flutes, and sung in parts,
Whilst the wronged Porgne the Wife of Tereus, turned into a Swallow.
Swallow half the year.
Still hovers round their Heads to hear;
And the sad I^ys her Son, turned into a Pheasant.
Pheasant takes no bliss
In his gay part colored dress;
As all my Cares here sleep did chase,
Who could have Cares in such a place?
To add to my excess of Joy,
This second Vision blessed my Eye:
Methought into this charming Grove,
Attired like the Queen of Love,
Cynthia approached, her Rosy Face
Might to the blushing Morn add grace,
And in her Shape and Mien was all
That Poets ever could Beauty call,
Her fatal Eyes that used to kill,
Two kind repentant drops now fill,
Where Pity in warm Bubbles shone,
To cheer the Heart she had undone,
As Venus looked when first she found
Her Darling bleeding on the Ground;
So Eloquent her Love appears
In the soft Language of her Tears.
Rapt with this vissionary Bliss,
This Scene of Perfect Happiness,
My throbbing Heart, and swelling Veins,
Scarcely the flood of Joy contains;
Whilst like Diana in her Chase,
Spreading her Arms with lovely Grace,
Language at last a Passage broke,
And thus methought the Charmer spoke;
Oh too much wronged, for too much Love,
Thou blessing sent me from above;
Thou Treasure which my Erring Eyes,
Had never Light enough to prize;
Accept these Tears that hourly flow,
TO atone for my cursed breach of Vow,
And take -- Repenting Love as Fee,
For thy' admired Fidelity.
Scarce she these Words had thoroughly spoke,
When sighing as my Heart had broke,
With eager Joy my Arms I stretched,
But naught, alas, but Air I cetch'd;
The God of sleep, as false as she,
Had with a Dream deluded me,
And caused fresh Pangs of lasting Pain,
And new closed Wounds to bleed again.
Revenge then all ye Powers above,
Revenge my Wrongs and injured Love,
Let hated Morpheus Reign no more,
Nor over my peaceful sleeps have power,
My Soul henceforth let knowledge find,
Without one thought of Womankind;
Whose Heart's as wavering as the Wind;
Falsehood may with Success pursue,
But none ever prosper'd that was true.
To CYNTHIA.
BY all the Sacred Powers I love ye so
There Is nothing else so dear to me below;
And when your Cruel Scorn I would forsake,
Shunning the Rock that threatens me with wrack,
Some Angel stops my speed, and bri^gs the Rover back.
Madam, my Heart no blemish yet has stained,
And never has deserved to be disdained,
Nor is it to be fooled with ease,
But you may break it when you please,
Like melting Ore, your kindness makes it run.
But rigor turns it to a Stone,
And I had rather dye then see you frown:
So may your Influence you prove,
So much so tenderly I love,
And think not, dearest Saint, I can deceive,
But as you hope to be believed, believe;
By Heaven and you my Life blooms or decays,
You point my wane or my increase of days;
Fain, I confess, I would despair forget,
I would be blessed if you thought fit,
Yet I too may your self-willed Rigor fear,
For ah, what hopes is there of Love from her,
Whose very Soul is Love, and yet the word disdains to hear.
A Letter Written for a LADY in Answer to a Friend.
HAd you not known your Merit was so great*
That my Laurinda I could never forget;
Dullness, you might have want of Friendship thought*
And my neglect in writing call a Fault:
But though I want your Genius to express,
Believe me, dearest Friend, my Love's not less;
I would accost your Muse with equal Skill,
For though I want the Wit, I have the Will,
Did not my Reason whisper like a friend,
That I should wrong my self, should I pretend;
But for my friendship I must boldly own
It Is firm and Constant, and shall stoop to none;
Nor is my Heart (which you I thought had known)
So changed or frozen since I came to Town;
That it by any Object could be moved
To slight my dear Laurinda whom I loved:
Alas, sweet friend, you know not our distress,
You never dream upon our Grievances;
Though pestilential Blasts all round us blow,
And many a beauteous darling face undo:
Though Bells do toll, and all to fears incline;
Fears, that would spoil a better Muse than mine,
You careless in the Silver Grove are seen,
(I wish for your sake I could call it Green)
Courting the Places Genius to inspire,
And strength of Fancy warms instead of Fire;
But I benumbed with all this Frost and Snow,
Begin now to believe my Muse is so.
(...) like a Linnet, wishing for the Spring,
^Linnet I say) because I learn to sing;
Hop up and down all day my lonely Cage,
And find that Cold's as bad as fumbling Age,
Nothing can stir up my Poetic Rage;
My Verses dare not yet their worth expose,
For well their Feet may halt when they are froze;
But when the Summer clothes the naked Trees,
And Balmy Winds refresh with gentle breeze:
When Flowers their gay Wedding Robes put on,
To please and welcome in the vigorous Sun;
Then Silvia sitting by Laurinda's side,
Shall prove this Truth, and shall not be denied,
That none on Earth can ever more faithful be,
Or her dear Friend can value more than she.
Silvia. The Farmers Daughter, a SONG, set to a Pleasant Scotch Tune.
I.
COld and raw the North did blow,
Bleak in the Morning early,
All the Trees were hid in Snow,
Dagl'd by Winter yearly;
When come riding over a Knough,
I met with a Farmer's Daughter,
Rosy Cheeks and bonny Brow,
Good faith made my Mouth to water.
II.
Down I veiled my Bonnet low,
Meaning to show my breeding,
She returned a graceful bow,
A Village far exceeding:
I asked her where she went so soon,
And longed to begin a Parley,
She told me to the next Market Town
A purpose to sell her Barley.
III.
In this purse, sweet Soul, said I,
Twenty pounds lie fairly,
Seek no farther one to buy,
For I'se take all thy Barley;
Twenty more shall buy Delight
Thy Person I love so dearly
If thou would stay with me all Night,
And go home in the Morning early.
IV.
If twenty pound could buy the Globe,
Quoth she, this I Would not do, Sir,
Or were my Kin as poor as Job,
I would not raise 'em so, Sir,
For should I be to Night your friend,
We'st get a young Kid together,
And you would be gone ere the nine Months end,
And where should I find a Father?
V.
I told her I had wedded been
Fourteen years and longer,
Or else I choose her for my Queen,
And tie the Knot much stronger;
She bid me then no farther rome,
But manage my Wedlock fairly,
And keep Purse for poor Spouse at home,
For some other shall have her Barley.
A CATCH set by Docter BLOW.
IN a Seller at Sodom at the sign of the T --
Two buxum young Harlots were drinking with L --
Some say they were his Daughters
No matter for that,
They Are resolved they would souse their old Dad with a Pot;
All fluster'd and bousie
The doting old Sot,
As great as a Monarch between 'em was got,
Till the eldest and wisest thus opened the Plot
Pray show us dear Daddy how we were begot.
God zoukes, you young Jades, 'twas the first Oath I wot
The Devil of a Serpent this Humor has taught,
No matter, they cried, you shall pawn for the shot,
Unless you will show us how we were begot.
An EPITHALAMIUM on the Marriage of the Lord MORPETH with the Lady ANN CAPELL.
I.
WHen Heaven first framed a second Cause;
And Nature spread her dictates round,
All Hearts with Joy obeyed her Laws,
And nothing sad but Man was found;
Adam in shades long pensive sat,
And took no comfort in his Life,
Till he that did the Soul Create,
Gave him the Soul's best Joy, a Wife.
II.
Then over the face of Paradise
Was seen a most unusual Joy,
Flowers were more sweet, more green the Trees,
Pleased with her Master's smiling Eye:
If he were so, how are you blessed,
Brave Damon, with an Eve to day,
Who all her Beauty does possess,
Without her Mischief to betray.
III.
Gold is a pleasant useful Slave,
A flattering Dream is loose desire,
Fame is the frenzy of the Brave,
Love only is the good entire;
There Is naught worth living for beside,
Time's hasty Sands in vain would run;
A noble chaste, and beauteous Bride,
Are all Earth's Joys sum'd up in one.
IV.
Damon, tho Silvies tender Ears,
Defer your blessing for a time;
The tract of distant Joy appears
More full of Rapture, more Sublime:
Pluck not a Bud, but let it grow
Till time disclose its sweets to thee,
Who from a Plant will tear a Bough,
Destroys his hopes, and spoils the Tree.
V.
Often have I seen two harmless Doves,
Venting their Passions, Kiss and Cooe,
In imitation of their Loves;
Impatient Damon so must you.
But joy to know her Heart is yours,
And hopes to meet her in her prime,
Will post away the lazy hours,
And make more swift the wings of Time.
A SONG.
I.
Forced by a Cruel lawless Fate,
I loved a Nymph with Passion,
But found alas, I came too late
To sway her Inclination;
Her Heart was given a Coxcomb's Fee,
Whose face had introduced him,
Though not one grain of Sense had he,
To know how well she used him.
II.
I tried if worth could make her kind,
And hourly made advances;
But who can ever the Charm unbind,
In Women's stubborn Fancies:
I calmly did her foible show,
Where ever he came, abused him:
I called him Fool, I proved him so,
Yet she the better used him.
III.
I hate, she cried, your God of Wit,
Our Sex should all oppose him;
It Is he that Charms my Appetite,
Shall sleep upon my Bosom:
This senseless stuff my love withdrew,
And cured my Melancholy;
I kicked her brute, then bid adieu
To every Female folly.
A SONG
set to a pleasant Scotch Tune.
I.
A Lad of the Town thus made his moan
One Winter Morning early,
Alas, that I must lie alone,
And Moggey's Bed so near me:
All Night I toss, I turn and sigh,
Nor ever can I close my Eye,
For thinking that I lig so nigh,
The Lass I Love so dearly.
II.
She Is all Delight from foot to crown,
And just Eighteen her Age is,
And that she still must lie alone,
My Heart and Soul inrages;
I Would give the World I might put on
Each Morn her Stocking or her Shoon,
If I were but her Serving Loon
I Would never ask for Wages.
III.
If Moggey would but be my Bride
I Would take no Parents warning;
Nor value all the World beside,
Nor any Lasses scorning:
My Love is grown to such a height,
I prize so much my own delight,
I care not, had I her one Night
If I were hanged ^' the Morning.
The MORALIST. A Song.
I.
What Is the worth of Health or Living,
If we stint our selves of Bliss,
Grief is but a self-deceiving,
Choosing may be for what is;
Doz'd all Night, and daily weeping,
Zealots think to Heaven to climb,
Thus with Canting and with Sleeping,
The poor Sots lose all their Time.
II.
Give me Love and give me Wine too,
For Life's Cares to make amends,
Wit and Poetry Divine too,
And a charming Female Friend.
In a Moral honest Station,
To my Grave in Peace I Will go,
Let the bug Predestination,
Fright the Fools no better know.
The Old Fumbler. A SONG: Set by Mr. Hen. Purcell.
I.
SMug, rich and fantastic old Fumbler was known,
That wedded a Juicy brisk (...) of the Town,
Her Face like an Angel, Fair, Plump, and a Maid,
Her Lute well in tune too, could he but have played;
But lost was his Skill let him do what he can,
She finds him in Bed a weak silly old Man,
He Coughs in her Ear, it is in vain to come on,
Forgive me, my Dear, I Am a silly old man.
II.
She laid his dry hand on her snowy soft Breast,
And from those white Hills gave a glimpse of the Best;
But ah! what is Age when our Youth's but a Span,
She found him an Infant instead of a Man:
Ah! Pardon, he would cry, that I Am weary so soon,
You have let down my Base, I Am no longer in tune,
Lay by the dear Instrument, prithee lie still,
I can play but one Lesson and that I play Ill.
A Dialogue between PHILANDER and SILVIA, set to an excellent new Scotch Tune.
I.
Ph. IN a Desert in Greenland, where the Sun never cast an Eye,
In contempt of all the World I could live with thee my Joy.

Si. On the Sands of scorcht India, where the Sunburned Natives fry,
Blessed with thee, my dear Philander, I do choose to live and dye,

Ph. No Nymph with her sly charming art,
Ere shall have power to steal my Heart;
Thou art all and all in every part,
Each Vein of me shall ever be,
Panting with Love of thee.

Si. No Swain with his Wealth, Wit or Art,
Ever shall have power to storm my Hear^,
Thou art all and all in every part,
Each Vein of me will ever be,
Panting with Love of thee.

II.
Ph. Let the Monarch's Ambition seek new Empire to obtain,
Let the Miser sell his Soul to increase his slavish gain,

Si. Let the politic Gown-man tread the Mazes of the State,
Let the Reverend Divine teach Mankind decrees (...) Fate.

Ph. Give me the dear Nymph I adore,
Happy or unlucky, Rich or Poor,
Of bounteous Heaven I Would ask no more,
Nor ever care who is rich or fair,
There Is all the World in her.

Si. Let no Cloud of Ill Fortune rise,
To shade me from Philander's Eyes,
Farewell ye World deluding's Joys,
No Charm would seem worth my esteem
I have all I wish in him.

A Second Burlesque LETTER written for a Friend, supposed to be a CUCKOLD'S
GHOST, coming from Hell, and answering a Satyr of STUM CLARET his Brother
Vintner; With a Conjugal Reprimand to SALACIA his late Mournful WIDOW.
IN Limbo where there loudly howls
Cuckolds, and Cuckold makers Souls,
Where Courtiers with their Wealth and Wits
Is damned as well as snivelling Cits;
And Lady fair, with shape Divine,
Are ranked with Joan that milk'd the Kine.
Where Country Knight, and Country Clown,
Esquire and Plowmen are all one;
To show all Fools whom Pride does seize,
Hell and the Grave know no degrees;
There is a dismal smoaky hole,
The Cell of many a wretched Soul,
Whose sin of Marriage was occasion
Of his remediless Damnation.
A Crew of Ghosts infest this place,
Pale Monsters of so strange a Race,
That tortured Imps this Cavern shun,
As far more dreadful than their own,
Round a blew fire composed of Souls,
Of Rampant Wives instead of Coals,
Poor Cockolds come, and fry by turns,
And thump each other with their Horns,
Like Rutting Deer, with Antlets large,
Or Rams they vigorously charge,
Doomed to this kind of Punishment,
For giving an ill President;
And changing blessed single Life,
For that perpetual Plague a Wife,
From this forlorn Eternal Grave,
Which Beelzebub calls Cuckolds Cave,
This Melancholy Brimstone Bed,
I come to answer Tory Ned,
And school a Woman that Surprises,
Nay quite out-does all Hell with vices:
But first, Dull Ghost, how can it be,
That thou should dare to lash at me,
With thy late senceless Poetry.
Thou have in Hell, I Am sure, thy share,
If Devils can show Justice there,
For every deadly Sin of thine,
Millions against thy head Combine
Whom thou have poisoned with damned Wine,
And though I Am with these Horns made rich,
For marrying a Salacious B --
Shake thine and mine in Bag together,
You Will find there is Chastity in neither;
Thine would have feared no Tongues reproach,
For setting of her Cask a broach,
Had not Age cooled her by degrees,
And sunk the Liquor to the Lees,
Then what a Plague make thee a roaring,
And scribbling on my Fubses whoring;
For were she in her Fame as Odious,
As the lewd Wife of Caesar Claudius,
That twenty five one Morning tried,
Yet went away unsatisfi'd;
Or posed the World in these lewd times
With a new Catalogue of Crimes,
She in the vicious Mystery
Could never outdo thy Wife and thee;
The cause of all her Crimes have been,
Because to thee she is near of Kin,
She might have proved a hopeful piece
Had she not chanced to be thy Neice;
For as in Cocks of Game there is
A Metal which can never miss,
Where if the Breed be true, not one,
Shall ever leave the Pit and Run:
So it is in Kindred understood,
Virtue and Vices run in the Blood,
And Whores and Rogues from each Relation,
Descend to the twentieth Generation;
If this be true, thou wretched Ghost,
How did thou dare to leave thy Post,
When thou were bottling Molten Lead,
Which is in Hell thy daily Trade,
As punishment for many a Cheat,
Done in thy Transitory State,
To Dam thy self by Poetry
Upon Agario and me?
Thy haggard Genius solely spends
Her Heat, for know, as Fate intends
Cuckolds are always made by friends,
It Is your friend still that tops your Spouse,
For strangers come not to your House,
At least to have acquaintance there,
Like friends familiarly and near,
And I with him am satisfied,
In all things that concerns my Bride,
For whether Husbands are or no,
If their Wives itch, it will be so;
Therefore leave off, Good Ned, in time,
And tempt no more my Rage in Rhyme,
For I Agario's Muse inherit,
And double portion of his Spirit;
And shall so thump thy clodded Brain,
If thou do dare to write again,
The Devil shall think it an Abuse,
To have in Hell so damned a Muse,
And send thee back to mortal Life,
Condemned to a worse Plague thy Wife.
And now I talk of Wives, I groan
To think how I must maul my own,
Though ill, I will not let thee use her,
I have a Title to abuse her;
And must long smothered silence break,
Losers have always leave to speak,
And if that common Rule prevail,
Sure Cuckolds may have leave to rail*
* Oh thou sworn Foe to all my Ease,
Thou cursed disturber of my Peace,
When living I no rest could have,
Nor now can find it in the Grave,
Thy mischiefs are so manifold,
They have pierced through the crumbling Mould,
And raised me from the shades again
To be divulger of thy Sin,
Wast not enough, oh thou Obsceen*
Proud, Salt, Lascivious, Rampant Queen;
That I Have endured the Countries scorns,
And drawn within my Hat my Horns;
And when I Have broached some Hogshead new,
Have seen some other Tapping you;
Yet small account of the Object made,
Believing 'twas to force a Trade:
Have I not hid my Patient Noddle,
When Bully Rock has called for Bottle,
And took you to some inner Room,
To beat a March upon your Drum?
Nay, to complete thy nauseous Crimes,
When friend Agario came sometimes;
When thou with flattering Smiles have met him,
And thy Mouth watered to be at him;
I like a Man that knew good breeding,
Have slipped away no matters heeding,
Because a Friend of him we made,
And for each kiss he soundly paid,
And can thou be a base Detractor,
Of one so much thy benefactor,
And with damned Female spite decry,
One that knew all as often as I,
That did our Family such good,
And was so free to amend our Blood;
To us and to our Son, Pox Rot him,
Was full as kind as if he got him,
Though a true Rogue as ever twang'd,
And will in all due time be hanged,
For to what end can he be brought,
That by thy Morals has been taught;
And can thou, worse than Fiend of Hell,
Thou Jilt incomprehensible;
Can thou forswear things plain as light,
Nay things unquestionably right,
And does not Pillory plague thy Mind
With loss of Ears which wretches find,
That are in spite of Conscience blind;
Plain is thy Sexes vice by thee,
Made obvious to Posterity:
That when a Woman once grows Lewd,
No Art can turn her back to good,
The spreading Seed has taken root,
And spite of Industry will shoot,
Our wholesome grain we vainly sow,
Spite of our Art the Tares will grow,
And gay and flourishing appear,
As if the Devil had sowed 'em there;
No Women of the former times
Arrived to know thy height of Crimes,
Thy falsehood, baseness, Perjury,
Ingratitude and Villainy,
Were never known in this degree;
For had the Scripture ever expressed,
A Woman with thy Devils possessed,
Our Savior would have been in doubt
Whether his Power could cast'em out,
The Herd of Swine had been too small,
And never have contained 'em all;
How happy then is that good Man,
That Cloaks thy Sins now I am gone,
That at the Mark still widely shoots,
And wears with pleasure my old Boots,
Or if the truth were plainly found,
The Boots of all the Country round?
Faith if a Cuckold ever behaved
Himself with Merit to be saved,
Thy Case, poor Fool, is singular,
For thou have so much Hell from her,
It Is even pity thou should know
A second Penance here below.
Could thou not find, ^gregious Sot,
Why thou were married, or for what?
Could thou be Ignorant of all
The Vermin in her Trap did fall?
And never know 'til 'twas too late,
Thy morsel was but for a Bait;
Or that it was thy noble place
To Father all her spurious Race,
That if she whelp'd a squauling Lad,
The Todpole Imp might call thee Dad;
Although by Men of all degrees*
Compounded like a Chetworth Cheese;
Or was it really thy want,
Brought thee to wed this Widow Saint,
As no one knows a wretches Case,
Except he feels the same distress,
If so, you are fallen from bad to worse,
No Poverty is half the Curse
Of him that has to dam his Life,
A Rampant Strumpet for his Wife,
Thus say the Fates, and lastly tell
(...) precious Mate, that I from Hell,
And Fiends that fill each gloomy Room,
Where she at last must surely come,
Ascend to purge each vile Offense,
And urge her to repent her Sins,
With Tears deny what late she swore,
And never henceforth play the Whore;
Else from my melancholy Tomb,
With Troops of Ghosts again I Will come,
And fiercely drag her hence to slaughter,
Where all her Priests and Holy Water,
With all the Aid and Fopperies they can make,
Shall never have the power to bring her back.
The Law of Nature; A SONG set to an Excellent new Tune.
I.
WHilst their Flocks were feeding,
Near the foot of a flowery Hill,
^elladon complaining of his Fate,
Thus to Astrea Cried:
Hear my gentle pleading,
Ah cruel Nymph forbear to kill
Shepherd with disdain and hate,
Whom you have once enjoyed:
here is a sacred power in Love,
beyond all Moral Rules,
^llow the Laws of Nature,
(...) the Divine Creator
Did produce,
(...) for Humane Use
Did Beauty choose,
Who deny themselves are Fools.
Every Heart is paired above,
And Ingratitude's a Sin
To all the Saints so hateful,
She that is found ungrateful,
May too late,
In a wretched State,
Knock at Heavens Gate,
But shall never enter in.
II.
Had our first made Father,
Lord of the whole Creation,
Done such a Crime as could have damned us all,
In trespassing on his Wife,
Heaven, no doubt, had rather,
When it the ill Design had known,
Have placed his Angel ere the Fall,
Guarding the Tree of Life;
But he that well knew Adam's Breast,
Whom Nature learnt to woo,
Never intended Damming,
Nor did the Serpents shamming Edify:
For the Bone of his Side,
That was made his Bride,
Taught him what he was to do:
Nor was the Maker ever possessed
With Rage that he did enjoy;
But the Reflection hated
What he with Pains Created,
Should be thought,
Such a cowardly Sot
To be poorly caught
In such a sneaking Lie.
SONG. II.
To a young LADY Affronted by an Envious old Woman.
I.
IN vain, in vain, fantastic Age,
Thou seek'st such Virtue to abuse,
Ophelia does Mankind engage;
Each valiant Sword, each noble Muse,
Frantic with Spite, let crazy Time
Take pleasure to engender strife,
Whilst blooming Beauty in her Prime,
Takes with Gust the Joys of Life.
II.
Each shameful word that Malice speaks,
Adds, dearest Charmer, to your Fame;
Each hallowed Grove loud Echo makes,
Resounding fair Ophelia's Name,
Old age does Beauty still profane,
Age ever did good Nature want;
By Scandal you more Glory gain,
It Is Persecution makes the Saint.
An ODE, From the Greek of ANACREON.
I.
IF Gold could lengthen Life, I swear,
It then should be my chiefest Care,
To get a heap, that I may say,
When Death came to demand his pay,
Thou Slave, take this and go thy way.
II.
But since Life is not to be bought,
Why should I plague my self for naught,
Or foolishly disturb the Skies,
With vain Complaints, or fruitless Cries,
For if the fatal Destinies
Have all decreed it shall be so,
What good will Gold or Crying do^
III.
Give me to ease my thirsty Soul,
The Joys and Comforts of the Bowl;
Freedom and Health, and whilst I live
Let me not want what Love can give:
Then shall I die in peace, and have
This Consolation in the Grave,
That once I had the World my slave.
To Chloris: A SONG.
IF my Addresses are grateful,
Show it in granting my Suit,
Or if my Passion be hateful,
Leave me and end the dispute:
I hate your doubling and turning,
Like a cours'd Hare in a Morning,
Either comply as you should,
Or leave me to others that would.
To pretty Mrs. H. D. upon the sight of her Picture standing amongst other at
Mr. Knellers.
I.
COrrinna when you left the Town,
My Heart secure I thought to find,
But found alas-new Chains put on,
By your bright Image left behind.
II.
Your Picture now the Conquest has,
To my fond Soul new flame returns,
Like Rays contracted in a Glass,
Though distant your Reflection burns.
III.
Had Paradise for you been lost,
Like Adam I had suffered too,
What must that Fruit be to the Taste,
That is so tempting to the view?
IV.
Your Graces shining at full length,
Subdue each Souls devoutest skill,
When Beauty Charms beyond our strength,
Where is the use of our free Will?
V.
Like that Astronomer I gaze,
That his propitious Star had found,
Fixing my Eyes upon your Face,
I slight the glittering Planets round.
VI.
And as to Shrines when Pilgrims go,
Such awful Reverence I feel,
That though I Am sure it is only show,
I scarcely can forbear to kneel.
To CLORIS: An ODE set to the New RIGGADON.
I Love thee well,
But not so well to wed thee,
Lest blood rebel,
And Appetite should cloy;
Whilst free and kind,
Each hour I long to bed thee:
But if consigned,
Should scarce believed a Joy.
Second Movement.
In Earth and Air
All Creatures else possess
Their pleasing Liberty;
Then why should Man,
The Lord of all the Universe
Less happy be.
Third Movement.
Bring Music then and Wine still,
And every one his Dear,
That friendship most Divine still,
That treats with Cher entier.
Fourth Movement.
The wise think all those very dull,
To marriage yoaks incline;
But if ever I do play the Fool,
Dear Cloris I am thine.
An ELEGY on the Death of the Great Duke of ORMOND.
LAte in a lonely Melancholy Shatle,
Whilst all my Cares victorious Sleep obeyed;
A Vision suddenly possessed my Brain,
And tortured Nature labored with the pain.
My trembling Soul forgot her wonted trade,
Nor could she call the Senses to her aid,
Oppressed with wonder and uncommon awe,
At the Celestial Miracles she saw.
Methought upon a Lucid Cloud in State,
As on a Throne an awful Monarch sat,
Mysterious Glories shone around his face,
And soon I knew by each Angellick Grace,
And the Indulgence of a pitying Smile,
'Twas that loved Prince K. Charles II.
that lately ruled this Isle,
Attending Cherubs sawn'd him with their wings;
Whilst on each side a row of British Kings
All met in Council for some grand Intent,
Made up in pomp the Glorious Parliament.
Great Edward, Henry, deathless in their Fames,
Two Henrys more, and Learned Pious James,
With that blessed Martyr by his own betrayed,
Sat mute to hear what their great Offspring said,
Who with a solemn Voice and awful brow,
And the same Grace with which he charmed below;
Whilst crowding Angels their Attentions lent,
Thus made Oration to the Omnipotent.
Great Sire of Angels as of Humane Race,
All copied from thy own Celestial face,
Who with a Breath can Life and Death control
This hour Create, the next recall the Soul;
Inspire a Clod, and from Earths common dust
Winnow the Brave and Good from the unjust;
Receive another Hero to thy store,
And to thy Heaven add one Glory more,
Ormond, the best of all Earths noble brood,
Ormond, the Wise the Virtuous and the Good;
The noblest Theme of each famed Poets Song,
Tired with frail Nature he has worn so long,
Implores to crown his Souls triumphant Fame
In that Eternal Peace from whence it came,
Through all the Mazes of ambiguous Life,
Through foreign Battles and domestic Strife,
Through Traitors Swords and Plots contrived in Hell,
Through inmate Fiends that pray and yet Rebel;
Ormond, undaunted has like Gideon passed,
Preserving Faith and Honor to the last,
Loyal as Brave, and Brave as Mortals were,
Ere the first damning Sin begot base Fear,
Nay, what is a Rarity we find in few,
He was a Saint and yet a Soldier too.
To what a pitch must Fame his Glory raise,
That all degrees of Heaven and Earth do praise,
For his Youths Judgment by the wise admired,
As much for Beauty by the Fair desired;
For as each word would move a stander by,
So every look could Charm a Ladies Eye;
Cherubs and Seraphins his value know,
And chant above what we repeat below,
Tyrannick Time, that even does ravenous seem,
To prey on others, did no hurt to him,
But seemed afraid a Fabric to destroy,
So long propp'd up by Sacred Geometry,
In which all People took such general Joy;
And that true Justice on my part appear,
For where should it inhabit if not here.
I when Intestine Foes my Crown besieged,
Stood to his Virtue and his Faith obliged;
He traced my Exile with unwearied Love,
And to assuage my boundless Sorrows strove;
Brave man that never failed my Cause to fight,
Nor valued his when I had lost my right,
Oppressed with pinching Grief yet still so good,
He Would murmur not, though almost wanting food;
But when his Coffers were exhausted dry,
Fed on the Manna of his Loyalty:
At last when by thy blessed decree I came,
To be restored, his duty was the same
His Soul still wore the same unaltered dress,
Not swelled with Power, nor less'ned by distress
But modeled by thy own Divinity,
It still retains some perfect-Seeds of thee,
Which now extract him to so pure a state,
'Twill cost but little trouble to translate:
Admit then oh Eternal All in All,
And to our state of Bliss, loved Ormond call,
^Reward his Zeal and Piety below
With blessings here too good for Earth to know:
No Star can better grace the Court Divine,
Nor of his Magnitude can brighter shine.
Thus spoke the Godlike Monarch, and a grant
From Heaven's dread Sovereign published a consen^
The Saints in waiting hum'd aloud for Joy,
And Halelujahs filled the echoing Sky;
When strait a glorious Light, methought was see^
Just as another Sun had rising been,
The dazzling Splendour made Eternal day,
And Ormond's Name Rung over the milky way,
^traight the Majestic^ ^oul was seated high,
^eck'd in the Robes of new Divinity;
Through all the Sacred Host was Joy expressed,
^t the Instalment of this Glorious Guest,
^n the left hand of Gracious Charles he sat,
His mortal Cares crowned with immortal State.
This joyful Scene scarce did my Vision show,
^ut I was wakened with their Cries below;
And to my grief as well as theirs I knew
Their mournful sounds had proved this wonder true,
His Friends in Tears all made a loud Complaint,
The World had lost, though Heaven had gained a Saint,
And amongst all the numerous selfish Train,
My self had not least Reason to complain;
^ut wished with them a worthy held so dear,
Had been less happy, and stayed longer here.
and here my Muse make thy peculiar moan,
The best inspirer of thy Art is gone,
Thy noble Patron that first plumed thy wing.
Informed and dipped thee in Apollo's Spring,
And in Poetic numbers made thee sing,
By Angels courted to his sacred home,
Leaves thee to sigh thy Sorrows on his Tomb.
In wisest Rules of moral Learning bred,
He never thought it a disgrace to read,
Nor true Applause to a just Merit grudge,
Though not a Poet yet a Poets Judge,
Could well instruct a Pegasus to fly,
Show where he flagg'd or where he soared too hig^
Mourn, mou^n, ye Sons of Phoebus, burn yo^ Books,
And let your hearts be sad as are your Looks;
Forsake your Lyrick strains and let each Eye
Drown in salt Floods your Patrons Elegy;
Who? now the Muses luster shall advance
Above the scorn of sordid Ignorance,
Who? shall their want of generous Friends supp^
Or raise the drooping head of Poetry:
(...) gone, he is gone, his Aid you ask in vain,
(...) and the Grave never refund again.
(...) late the mighty Loss is understood,
(...) know the value till they lose the Good;
(...) eighty rolling Years he still was known
(...) brightest Jewel in the British Crow^
(...) with unblemished luster graced our Isle,
(...) value true, nor needed any foil;
(...) Virtue made his Dignity more great,
(...) Mein was graceful and his Language sweet,
(...) none his noble Actions lived to see,
(...) wished him greater than he wished to be.
(...) early Cares to serve his Prince did tend,
^^ithful Subject, Counselor and Friend,
^^th' Royal Line, when Faction high did rise,
(...) Arm gave succor and his Heart advise;
once to Saul did the great Prophet do,
(...) Counsel gave, and fought his Battles too.
^appy those Heroes were that understood,
(...) Virtues made 'em nobler than their Blood,
That 'twas the intrinsic Value of the Ore,
And not the stamp that made the Merit more;
With vain Ambition some themselves deceive,
But to be brave and honest is to live;
To be an Ormond is the Life sublime,
The noblest Pattern of precedent Time,
Whose Saint-like Pity, God-like Gentleness
TO encourage Merit, and relieve Distress,
No Wit can praise enough, nor Tongue express.
Henceforth, vile Age, thy ill spent time redeem,
Grow good, and let Great Ormond be thy Theme
Let each vain Courtier break his flattering Glass,
And in his Pious Mirror learn to dress;
Whilst all the Muses with dejected Eyes,
Offer whole Volumes of sad Elgies;
A mournful Train with Cypress Garlands on,
Methinks I see forsake their Hellicon,
To sing the solemn Dirges of this day;
But ah, bright Soul, what Tribute shall I pay!
My Heart no respite to her Woes shall have,
For when remembering thee, I idly rave,
To think no Worth can charm, no Virtue escape the Grave.
EPIGRAM On the Sacred Memory of that glorious Patron of POETS, greatest and
best of Monarchs, KING CHARLES the Second.
Written 1686.
IF Sacred Worth, which high as Heaven does raise
His Fame, were low enough for mortal Praise,
The mighty Theme would crack each studious Brain,
No Tongue be still, nor unimploy'd no Pen;
But since no Planet can for Phoebus shine,
And all Applause is vain of things Divine,
To Court a Tomb let every Muse be taught,
And perish with the sad extremes of Thought;
The impoverished Land is by his loss undone,
As each Muse dulled now its Inspirer's gone:
Blessed by his Beams the learned in Crowds would throng,
To (...) the Oraculous Wisdom of his Tongue;
Mute as the Grave, when he a Story told,
England was then as Athens was of old,
Or Rome, where Arms with Science flourished long,
Augustus smiled at honored Virgil's Song,
But now our Harps are on the Willows hung:
For since the Sovereign of all Arts could die,
There is no farther use of Poetry;
Hot Pegasus no middle Tract will go,
Charles, is a Theme too high, and all besides too low.
An ELEGY On the late Holy Father Pope INNOCENT the Eleventh.
STrange power of Piety when Virtue is
So strong it can disarm our prejudice:
When Luther's Sons Romes prizeless loss bemoan,
Less than a Miracle can there be shown;
Yet see they mourn, and those our Doctrine bred,
Hating the Body, yet adore the Head.
This Truth, tho Ages past scarce understood,
Ours boldly may affirm, one Pope was good;
Not partial, nor to private Interest sold,
Nay, what is more strange than all, not fond of Gold;
But durst against the stream of Avarice swim,
St. Peter's Keys were never gilt by him,
Nor did the Churches Biggots, till his sway
Ever, so little for Salvation pay.
His mellow'd Wisdom prop'd Romes tottering State,
His moderate Judgment stemmed the Clergies hate,
Willing the Churches variance to atone,
Railed not at ours, nor less'ned not his own.
When Heathens did in swarming Numbers list,
And War began 'twixt Mahomet and Christ;
The imprisoned Treasure which he then set free,
Showed him refined from former Papacy.
The Gold which to that Holy War he threw,
Declared him more than Pope, a Christian too.
When France observed him scourge the Infidels,
Quite different from his Pagan Principles;
His Mother Church the Apostate durst condemn,
And slight her power to make his own Supreme,
Nor longer owned Romes Doctrine his Soul's guide,
When its Ambition was unsatisfied;
This faultless Prelate, if ever Pope was so,
Sounded his Wiles, and Plots did overthrow,
Lent the golden Mattock to this pious work,
And balk'd both Pagan, and the Christian Turk,
Who slily did like snarling Blood-hound lurk,
To snap the Prey, and gorge himself alone,
When the rest were tired with fighting for the bone.
Mourn all ye neighboring Princes, sigh and mourn,
Old Rome will now to her old Sins return;
Her Scarlet Robe has for a time been clean,
But with new Errors, will new Spots be seen:
Now each ambitious Cardinal bribes high,
To fill the Conclave for the Prelacy,
Which gained, the enchanted Purse strait shuts as close,
As if the strings were never to unloose.
The Fish is caught, farewell Hypocrisy,
The Vizor banished, and the Net laid by.
Religion late was beyond Gold preferred,
But profit now is the only sound is heard.
Vile Sores over Romes corrupted Body grow,
Her Trunk is filthy, now her Head lies low:
For when as some rich honest Farmer dies,
Leaving behind him Lands, and Legacies,
His brainless Off^Spring by their Vice allured,
Destroy the Crop, which he with care manured;
His Garden's fruitless, and his Vineyard bleeds,
The one yields no Grapes, the other only weeds:
So Rome, her pious Farmer being gone,
Is left to her lewd Race to be undone.
To the KING: An ODE on his Birth Day.
CLowdy Saturnia drives her Steeds apace,
Heaven-born Aurora presses to her place;
And all the new dressed Planets of the Night,
Dance their gay Measures with unusual grace,
To usher in the happy Morning's Light,
To usher in, etc.
Now blessed, Britannia, let thy Head be crowned,
Now let thy joyful Trumpets sound,
Into the late enslaved London.
Augusta's Ears,
The Triumphs of a Day renowned,
Beyond the Glories of all former years,
A Day when eastern Kings to kneel forbore,
And end the Worship they begun,
Dazzled with rising Glories from the British shore,
No longer they adored the Sun,
Chorus. A Day when, etc.
Second Movement.
The Belgic Sages saw from far,
The glittering Regal Star,
That blessed the happy Morn,
When Great Nassau was born;
They heard besides a Cherub sing,
Haste, Haste, without delay,
To Albion haste away,
Revenge their Wrongs, and be a King,
Before thy Sword, and awful frown;
Rome Pagan Gods shall tumble down:
Haste to oppose, Britannia's Foes,
And then to wear her Crown.
And now the day is come,
So dreadful to Proud Rome,
The day when Gallia shakes,
And Englands Genius wakes,
To call her Sons to fight,
And guard The Church.
Eusebia's Right:
Hark, hark, I heat their loud Alarms,
And what was sold, for tempting Gold,
Retrieved again by Arms.
Chorus. Guard, Guard Eusebia's Right,
Call, call, her Sons to fight. Hark, hark, etc.
Third Movement.
Go on, admired Nassau, go on,
To Fame and Victory go on,
Recover Britains long lost Glory,
Reflect on former Battles won,
And what by English Monarchs done,
In Edward's, and Great Henry's Story;
Whilst we in lofty Song, and tuneful Mirth,
Each year sing loud to celebrate his Birth,
Whom bounteous Heaven, with Paternal hand,
Sent as a second Savior to this groaning Land.
Chorus of all.
Glad Albion, let thy Joy appear,
Restored is now thy happy State,
The greatest blessings are most dear,
When we atchieve 'em late.
And whilst in a Jubilee Triumph we sing,
All Hail, Great Nassau, all Joy to the King,
Let a Chorus of Thunder in the loud Consort play,
To inform the vast Globe this is Cesar's Birth day.
The Scotch VIRAGO. A SONG Sung to the Queen at Kensington.
The Words made to a pretty New Scotch Tune.
I.
Valliant Iockey's marched away,
To fight the Foe with brave Mackay,
Leaving me, poor Soul, forlorn,
To Curse the hour when I was born;
But, I Have sworn Ise follow too,
And dearest Iockey's Fate pursue,
Near him be to guard his precious Life,
Never Scot had such a Loyal Wife;
Sword Ise wear,
Ise cut my Hair,
Tan my Cheeks, that once were thought so fair,
In Soldiers Weed,
To him I Will speed,
Never sike a Trooper crossed the Tweed.
II.
Trumpet sound to Victory,
Ise kill (my self) the next Dundee;
Love, and Fate, and Rage, do all agree,
To do some glorious Deed by me.
Great Bellona, take my part,
Fame and Glory, charm my Heart,
That for Love, and bonny Scotlands good,
Some brave Action may deserve my Blood;
Naught shall appear,
Of Female fear,
Fighting by his Side, I love so dear;
All the North shall own,
There never was known
Such a spritely Lass this thousand years.
TO CHLORIS: A SONG.
I.
CHloris, for fear you should think to deceive me,
Know all my Life I have studied your kind,
Learned in your Grammar, I Would have you believe me,
And all your Tricks in my Practice you will find;
Ogling and Glances,
Sighs and Advances,
Poor Country Cully no more shall ensnare:
Pantings and Tremblings,
Fits and Dissemblings,
Now you must leave, and Intrigue on the Square.
II.
Give me the Girl that is good natured and Witty,
Whose pleasant Talk can her Friend entertain,
One who is not Proud, if you tell her she is Pretty;
And yet enough to be Honest and Clean.
Pox on Town Cheatings,
Jilts and Cognettings;
I my Dear Chloris, will bring up by hand:
Tears and Complainings,
Breed but Disdainings,
Those still Love best that are under Command.
A Catch in Three Parts, set by Mr. Hen. Purcel, and taken from the Latin of
BUCHANAN.
I.
YOung Collin cleaving of a Beam,
At every thumping Blow, cried Hem;
And told his Wife, who the Cause would know,
'Twas Hem, made the Wedge much farther go.
II.
Plump Joan, at Night when to Bed she came,
And both were playing at that same;
Cried, Hem, Hem, Hem, prithee Collin do,
If ever thou lov'dst me Hem, Hem now.
III.
No, no, no, no, sweet Wife, no no,
Some Wood will split with half a blow;
Besides I Bore, now, now, I Bore,
I Hem when I Cleave, but now I Bore.
A POEM Panegyrical On His GRACE THE D. of ALBEMARLE; With Remarks on His
Voyage for JAMAICA, and the late Treasure brought Home in the JAMES and MARY.

Written Anno Dom. 1686.

Epistle Dedicatory to Her Grace the DVCHESS.
WHen Brutus with the rest did Caesar doom,
And by his Death gave liberty to Rome:
Great Cato's Daughter Porcia.
his dear faithful Wife,
That knew the Secret of that fatal Strife,
From her loved Husband's side would never part,
Both had one Will, one Courage, and one Heart,
Her generous Virtue thought it (...) to share
Part of his Joy, and nothing of his Care;
And therefore all his Harms with Patience bore,
And when he died she likewise was no more:
Her Virtues, Madam, flourish now in you,
A second Porcia, Faithful, Chaste and True,
With Heavens divinest Gifts your Heart is stored,
And Wove into the Merits of your Lord;
So fast, and with Affection so sublime,
You can look down with Scorn on Death and Time:
Since then Great Albemarle inspires my Muse,
Upon a Theme it is fit the World peruse;
Who should I beg to Consecrate my Lines,
But you, who know how bright his Virtue shines,
You, who have made the business of your Life,
To show the World, a Pattern of a Wi^e,
Joyed at your Lord's good Chance, grieved at his Ill,
Kind, Wise, and what is most Rare Obedient, to his Will:
More I could say, nay so much might be said,
These swelling Lines would tire ye to Read.
If I could boast of a Poetic Art,
To speak your Praise, lavish as your Desert,
No Flight could be too high, no Thought too strong,
Nor could the Poem ever be too long.
But modest Pens, that dare not be too bold,
Know Truth, the shortest way is wisest told.
A POEM Panegyric on His Grace the DUKE of ALBEMARLE, etc.
I.
HAPPY those Islands where no sullen Sky.
Debars with Clouds the Prospect of the Eye,
Where the glad Sun with Joy performs his Race,
And sullies with no Fogs his glorious Face,
Where change of Weather makes no Native mourn,
No Agues freeze ye, nor no Fevers burn;
But genuine Heat, Nature for Health designs,
And through respiring Pores your Blood refines.
II.
But above all most happy is that Land,
Which you, my Lord, are going to Command,
Their darling Genius Claps her joyful Wings,
And your Approach in lofty numbers sings;
The Sun's atractive force they knew before,
Exhaling Dews from every Plant and Flower.
But this new Influence they learn from you,
That to a point he can draw Virtue too.
III.
It Is said indeed this generative Heat,
In parching Climes most Worthies does beget;
And that no Northern Nation can inspire
Her sickly Sons, with such Heroic fire;
But I could never credit this till now,
The Sympathy is verified in you:
That still your liking for those parts have shown,
Where the hot glittering God attracts his own.
IV.
As some fond Mother, that with tender Care
Sees her young Darling posting to the War,
Oppressed with Sorrow, does the Parting view;
Hates he should go, yet loves his Glory too:
Such Grief (my Lord) Your mourning Friends all share,
When of your Voyage the sad News they hear,
And jointly wish America could know,
The Jem she gains without their loss in you.
V.
But still to have you, were too great a Grace,
Perfection never continues in one place;
So Angels did in former time appear,
Gave us true Joy, but staid but little here.
To cheer the World, your Virtues Heaven designed,
And could not in one Island be confined;
Worth like the Sun, so universal known,
It Is fit should bless more Countries than your own.
VI.
Well may those happy Isles serene appear,
But we, I fear, shall find it Clowdy here,
If Comets are obliged to infest the Skies,
At a States Change, or when a Monarch dies;
Methinks they should their f^tal Fears infuse,
Into our Hearts, when we a Worthy lose;
Did not wise Heaven think it vain to show
A Prodigy, for Plagues too well we know.
VII.
In taking you, Fate leaves us poor and bare,
The mighty Sum is more than we can spare;
For common Losses common Tears we shower,
But, Sir, your Merit will command much more:
The aching Hearts of all your Countrymen,
When Woes are deepest, fewest Tears are seen;
And when Grief burns within, where none can spy,
The bubbling Fountains of the Head are dry.
VIII.
To thy own safety England have regard,
The Loyal and the Brave are rarely spared;
In props of Virtue we are not so rich,
But such a Pillar gone will will make a Breach,
Crowds may drop off like Hair of no Esteem,
But when one Hero goes we lose a Limb;
Well Britain may thy Arms the World over come;
When thou can spare an Albemarle from Home.
IX.
He, that when late Rebellious Seeds grew high,
And proud Sedition trod on Loyalty,
Encompassed round with Dangers, and with Foes,
Numerous as Dust, when the wild Tempest blows,
With Fortitude undaunted durst defy
The Force and Favors of the Enemy,
From his loved Country should Affection claim,
Dear as his own, and lasting as his Fame.
X.
All good Men know that then he nobly served,
And to his utmost power the Throne preserved,
James found his Vigilance and Conduct right,
Tho upstart Davus snarl'd and durst not bite;
Nor can a Royal Heart unmindful be
Of stanch Hereditary Loyalty;
For none should Monarchs of Remissness charge,
Their Memories are like their Glories large.
XI.
A steadfast Duty, and a Faith entire,
We know the Jem is right that past the fire,
So good, our Nations Genius was afraid
To lose a Prize so proper for her Aid,
And lest light Coffers by true Bounty drein'd,
A Mighty Prince should Merchandising send;
Neptune, A Spanish Wreck found, and a vast Treasure taken up from the bottom
of the Sea; and lately brought home.
as if he bribed him not to go,
Sent him a Present from his hoar'd below.
XII.
Seven Wonders Ancient Chronicles relate,
Now change the Scene, and make the number Eight,
It Is well Renowned Britain, that with thee
No Land can vie for Wit or Industry;
If Honor could the Argumen^ maintain,
As well as politic Designs for Gain,
The World would then thy wondrous Merit know,
And Heaven above, as the Salt Deeps below.
XIII.
Gigantick Rocks ravished the wealthy Ore,
A Peoples Ruin the Rich Vessel bore;
And Providence for Ends, now known confined
In Coral Groves the Mistress of Mankind,
Full forty Years the pensive Beauty lay,
Low in a Sea-Gods Cell, to which-none found the Way,
Till Phip's inspired arrived, and Heaven thought well
To bless our Hero by a Miracle.
XIV.
'Twere wondrous well if Fate would order so,
That Monarchs every Subjects Heart could know,
They then the difference of Men might see,
That serve for Interest or for Loyalty;
To build their Fortunes many plow the Main,
Their Duty is encouraged by their Gain;
But he that leaves a Greatness so well known
Merely to serve his Prince, is Loyal Monk alone.
XV.
For who but he would leave the Bowers of Peace
Of blessed Contentment and delightful Ease;
To war with Blasts and Fevers of the Skies,
Half buz'd to death by Buccaneering Flies,
Who would the tiresome Voyage undergo,
When Profit has no Golden face to show?
Or who but he the hot Fatigue would bear,
And leave New-Hall to be a Viceroy there?
XVI.
A short Character of New-Hall, his Grace's House in Essex.
New-Hall, the true Elysium of the Eye,
The glorious Seat of ancient Royalty,
Where Art and Nature seem by Heaven designed
To strive, which shall be Master of their kin^;
And as the precious Ore in Golden Mines,
Nature produces, but it is Art that coins;
So she by Paradise this Model drew,
And Art improved the Beauties as they grew.
XVII.
The curious Gardens that delight the Eye,
Show the gay Scene of blessed Variety;
Sweet as a Virgin that has never known
The scorching passions of the vicious Town
Ceres and Flora here their Bounty show,
And Fruits and Flowers so Luxurious grow;
As Adam here had used his primitive Spade,
And from his Marke^ has just learnt the Trade.
XVIII.
Next take the Park and prospect in your view,
Apelles never such a Landshape drew,
Tall Sons of ^^rth three quarters of a Mile
Weaving their Branches, frame a wondrous Isle:
Here the poor Traveller relief to gain
From the oppressing Storms of Wind and Rain,
Tired with his tedious Journey slacks his pace,
Sits down, looks round, and wonders at the Place.
XIX.
The Nightingal^ in every Grove impart,
By Nature, Airs that need no help of Art;
No Artist sent from Italy comes there,
And yet no Eunuch ever sung so rare,
Curse your ill Stars, ye poor disgender'd crew,
Each Linnet has a better Fate than you,
For they can in the charming Chorus join,
And yet enjoy the Pleasures of their kind.
XX.
The happy Herds of Dear then Feasting see
Emblems of Innocence and Amity,
That feed and love together, couch and rise,
Never debauched with strife or mortal Vice,
But silently their great Creator praise;
And if they chance to see a human Face,
With eager speed, they from the Object run,
And gaze and wonder at the Monster, Man.
XXI.
Reflect, vain Creature, with errected Face,
That claim'st command over the four-footed Race;
How much thy lazy Virtue they would out do,
If they were blessed with sacred Reason too;
Proud of thy Gifts, yet Heaven in them do find
More truth, nay more Religion in their kind,
From Schisms, false Doctrine, and Ambition free,
And pride the darling Sin of poor Mortality.
XXII.
Here ere the Lawns with Summer blessings crowned,
Pleased with their lusty Health they nimbly bound'
Free from the Weathers wild ungrateful storms
The trembling Hares sit quiet in their Forms:
Sweet smelling Panthers of whose Spots we read
In modern Pamphlet, here may welcome feed,
But yet no Baptist Boar, nor foaming Bear can graze,
Nor one Immortal Hind in all the Place.
XXIII.
When the great General with Victorious Sword,
Thrice happy Englands best of Kings restored;
When Crowds were to Obedience forced to bow,
And old Rebellions Giant-head lay low:
The mighty Genius of this God of War,
Big with his Merit, did this Place prepare;
And smiling on him with an awful Grace,
Spoke thus, Thou wondrous Man rest here in Peace.
XXIV.
Here let thy glass of Life in quiet run,
And let the World admire what thou have done,
Thou, that from Chaos did to order bring,
Dissenting Crowds, that shuffled out the King,
And when black gathering Clouds of Mischief grew
Too dark, for any but thy Eyes to view,
That all the jarring parts thy power might know,
Spak'st loud, let there be Light, and it was so.
XXV.
This said, the Genius bowed his awful head,
And at his Feet the conquered Trophies laid;
From hence a Series of new Years ran on
Till thronged with Time this great triumphant Man,
Like some tall lofty Pine with blessings crowned,
Sunk with his mellow Glories to the ground,
Leaving behind a Theme far more sublime
Than ever again will grace succeeding Time.
XXVII.
Sir, still in you we the old Hero see
The same true Courage, and true Loyalty,
The Father of his Country does return
You in a Phoenix rising from his Urn,
Whose steadfast Faith no Interest could sway,
So well his Heart had taught him to obey;
To serve his Prince all Dangers would run over,
Dreading to stormy Sea, nor no inhospitable shore.
XXVII.
Yet tho this Sir, on Duties score you do,
Reason advises to be cautious too;
When from high Towers you see the dazzling height,
'Twere direct madness to precipitate.
Hard is the Game you long have had to play,
Many would have you go, and more to stay,
To keep you here, still wish your faithful Friends;
But Og, would have you gone for his own ends.
XXVIII.
Projecting Og, by you like Taper snuft,
Like Spider now with innate Venom puffed,
A Bulk sincere, but there is no Faith in that,
For all Men are not honest that are fat.
This Age by a new juggling Fallacy,
Fattens those most who best can Cheat and Lie;
Who with next Heir at Law would trust his health,
Or who a bloated Bancrupt with his wealth?
XXIX.
To Fame and Truth your Soul did ever bend,
The bravest Man is still the truest Friend:
Heaven its best Graces to your Heart disclosed,
There all the Elements so well composed,
That no unruly Passion dares aspire,
Not too much Earth, nor yet too little Fire;
But in your Bosom formed, all gently move,
You show at once the Eagle and the Dove.
XXX.
Forgive me Sir, that I these Truths relate,
And believe Flattery is a thing I hate;
The Courtier's Gloss to varnish his dull Speech,
Could I have flattered well I had been Rich;
A well formed Parasite's an Art so dear,
I might have got three hundred Pound a year,
That now can boast no greater Wealth my due,
Than a good Character from such as You.
XXXI.
And rich I am in that, may then your years,
Roll on with Joy, and may you know no Cares,
May bounteous Plenty bless you with her Store,
And all the teeming Western Mines with Ore,
May Spicy Breezes cool the parching Air,
That no hot Ray presume to offend the Fair,
And in a happy hour may England boast,
She can win back the Treasure she has lost.
Mr. HAINE^'s Second Recantation: A PROLOGUE intended to be spoken by him
dressed in a Turkish habit.
MY Reconversion, Sirs, you heard of late,
I told you I was turned, but not to what,
The truth disguised for Cause best known to me;
But now what really I am, Stroking his Mustaches.
-- you see;
In vain did English Education work,
My Faith was sixth, I always was a Turk;
Besides my rambling Steps ere I came home,
Constantinople reached as well as Rome,
And by the Mufti, who nice Virtue prized,
For being so Circumspect, was Circumcised;
It Is true, I did endeavor to refuse,
That damned old silly Custom of the Jews,
Because I was ashamed of being shown,
I was too plump a Babe, an Infant too well grown;
But they would finish what they had begun,
So between Turk and Jew my Jobb was done;
I wish the promised blessing may appear,
I Am sure, I bought Religion plaguey dear;
For to be free, I greater Danger ran
Of being an Eunuch, than a Musselman;
But Constancy takes strangly in that Place,
My manly Suffering won the Peoples Grace,
I gained their Hearts, their chiefest Secrets saw,
We whor'd and got Drunk contrary to Law:
I had five Wives, thank the dear Prophet for it,
A Black, a Blew, a Brown, a Fair, a Carrot,
And by the way, it is worth your Observation
To note, the sollid Wisdom of that Nation:
Wives, are like Spannels there, and when ye marry
You need but whistle, Wife must fetch and carry,
A pretier Custom, if I understand,
Than it is in England here where they Command;
The Ladies here may without Scandal show
Face, or white Bubbies, to each Ogling Beau;
But there close veiled, not one kind Glance can fall,
She that once shows her Face, will show ye all;
Wits there are too, but Poet there is but one,
A huge unweildy jarring Lute and Tunn,
That spite of all my Parts the Laurel won,
Not for his skill in Satyr, or in Lyricks,
Or for his humble Style in lofty Panegyricks,
Or the rare Images that swell his Noddle,
But sitting up and Joking over a Bottle.
His Patron's Wit, still as his own is used,
Yet never had a Friend, but he abused,
What is his own has neither Plot nor Soul,
Nor ever one good thought but what he stole;
Eating, not Writing, is his proper Function,
Supper's his Sacrament, his Extreme Unction;
Like Whores condemned, that free themselves from Chains;
He pleaded for it his Belly, I my Brains,
But Poet Belly routed Poet Haines:
Missing this Post, I get into the Wars,
But finding quickly there is were real jars,
Not liking that robust Confusion there,
Sneaked off in time, to get Commission here,
Well knowing that what ever wrongs are righting.
You London Blades, have wiser ways than fighting.
FINIS.
Books Printed for Abel Roper, at the Bell near Temple Bar.
1. A Weeks Exercise preparatory toward the Reception of the Holy Communion;
Dedicated to the Princess of Denmark, by W. W. 2. Life and Reign of Innocent
the Eleventh, late Pope of Rome.
Books Printed for John Bullord, at the Old Black Bear in St. Paul's Church
Yard.
1. A Critical History of the Text of the New Testament; Wherein is firmly
Established the Truth of those Acts, on which the Foundation of Christian
Religion is laid. By R. Simon, Priest. 2. A View of the true Interest of the
several States of Europe since the Accession of their Present Majesty's to the
Imperial Crown of Great Britain. Also showing the many Advantages of a strict
Union in Opposition to the Unjust Usurpations and False Pretensions of the
French King. Both quarto.

