A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Mayor, And COURT of
ALDERMEN, AT St. MARY le BOW, Upon the 21th. of November, 1675.

By WILLIAM DVRHAM, B. D. Rector of St. Mildreds Breadstreet, London.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Edward Gellibrand, at the sign of the Golden-Ball
in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1676.

Imprimatur,

Gul. Jane, Reverendo in Christo Patri ac Dno. Dno. Henrico Episcopo Land. a
sacris domesticis.

Jan. 13. 1675.
To the Right Honorable Sr. JOSEPH SHELDON, Lord MAYOR of LONDON, AND To the
Right Honorable The Court of Aldermen, WITH THE SHERIFFS.
MY LORD,
IN compliance with your Lordships desire, which with me has the force of
Command, this Sermon was preached, and is now made public in pursuance of an
Order of that Honorable Court, to which I am obliged, and ready to yield my
most cheerful obedience. I am not so great a Flatterer of my self, as to think
this hasty and unpolisht discourse deserves the honor You have put upon it:
yet, I dare not so far distrust Your judgments, as not to think that it may be
suitable and serviceable to the Times we live in.

A Generation who seem to make it their business to elude all the Methods of
Divine Providence, and to baffle all those various Means, which God is pleased
to use for their amendment: Who are neither melted by his Mercies, nor humbled
by his Judgments. To obviate which great and growing Evils, I made choice of
this Argument to treat on. The subject matter whereof is weighty and momentous;
and, as it deserved an abler hand to set it off: so it challenges the most
serious attention from the greatest Persons.

What it loses by the weak management of the Argument must be put upon my
account, who, to prevent the censures of others, think meanlier of it than any
man else can do. Such as it is, it humbly offers it self to Your favorable
acceptance: not doubting but it shall find some countenance from them, who have
brought it into public view. I have only two requests to make, and I have
done. One to God; that he would accompany it with his Blessing, that it may be
in some measure effectual toward the cure of that great Evil it complains of:
The other is to Your Lordship, and that Honorable Court, that Your charity
would accept of my good intentions, and that Your Justice would make some
proportionable allowance for the Infirmities of age, and very short warning.

In the acknowledgment of which Favors, I shall not cease to implore the
Throne of Grace, that God would be pleased to continue Propitious to this great
City, to the Governors and Government thereof: that all heats and animosities
may be laid aside, divisions healed, breaches made up: that all the Members of
this Great Body may be as men of one mind in an house, and study and endeavor
to promote the public good, without respect to private advantages: which is
the most probable means, to make and continue it a flourishing and a happy
City. Which is the hearty and daily prayer of,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servant, William Durham.
January the 17th. 1675/6.
A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, and Court of
Aldermen, at St. Mary le Bow, upon the 21st. of November, 1675.
PROVE. XXIX. 1. He that being often reproved hardens his neck, shall suddenly
be destroyed, and that without remedy.
I Shall not keep you too long, by a needless preface, at the door of the Text:
nor engage my self in a fruitless enquiry after the coherence of these with the
foregoing words.

A task which some have undertaken in reference to this whole Book of Proverbs;
but with no better success, than if they had sought for dependence between
Bede's Axioms, or looked for connection in a Rope of Sand.

The words are an entire Proposition, and resolve themselves into these three
parts.

1. Here is a subject, or person spoken of; One that has been often reproved.
2. A sin which he is supposed guilty of, He hardens his neck. 3. The punishment
which is threatened for this sin; He shall suddenly be destroyed, and that
without remedy.
For our more orderly proceeding, I shall first open these three things as they
are here proposed; secondly, confirm the main Proposition, and then apply all
in a few words.

I. He that being often reproved.] Vir Increpationum, a man of Reproofs; it is a
familiar Hebraism, and is interpreted sometimes in an Active, sometimes in a
Passive sense.

Actively; Thus Shimei falsely calls David a Man 2 Samuel 16. 5, 7.
of Bloods, one that had a bloody mind, a bloody hand, and had (like Manasses)
shed innocent blood very much. And so some take it here in an active sense; A
man of Reproofs is one (in this construction) who by occasion of his place and
office, or by his voluntary undertaking is much and severe in reproving others,
and in the mean space hardens his own neck, and continues in the same or such
like sins which he reproves in others. He that preaches another should not
steal, and himself commits Romans 2. 21, 22, etc.
sacriledg, which is the worst of theft. He that reproves another for
fornication, and himself commits that, or incest, which is the highest degree
of uncleanness; as Judah did Thamar. He that is severe Genesis 38. 24, etc.
toward others, in that wherein he indulgeth himself; This Person is a seared
Hypocrite, who goes against the light of his own Conscience; he proclaims
judgment against himself; when he has preached to others, shall himself become
a Castaway. He shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy.

But others generally take the words Passively; as, a Man of Desires, i. e. one
greatly beloved: So Dan. 10. 11.
a Man of Reproofs is one who deserves to be reproved, and has often been
reproved for his faults. In this sense he is called Vir mortis, a man of Death
who deserves to die.

Now, a Man may be reproved either Inwardly or Outwardly.

1. Inwardly, by the checks of Conscience, which is God's Deputy and Register
within us to take notice of, record, and rebuke us for our faults. When we
transgress the Law of God, a Copy whereof is written in our hearts, Conscience
recoyls, flies in a Sinner's face, and reproves him for what he has done
amiss. Thus Joseph's Brethren Genesis 42. 21.
were rebuked by their own Consciences, which brought to mind the ill usage of
their Brother, And those Jews who brought to Christ the woman Joh. 8. 9.
taken in Adultery, being convinced in their own Consciences by our Savior's
answer, withdrew themselves and their Indictment.

2. Outwardly; and that two ways, either by Word or Deed.

By Word, and that is either Private or Public.

1. Private reproof, is that which is managed by one private person toward
another. A duty enjoined in the Law, Thou shall not hate thy Neighbor in thy
Lev. 19. 17.
heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Brother, and not suffer sin to rest
upon him. And in the Gospel, If thy Brother offend, tell him his fault between
thee and him: Matt. 1^ 15.
And again the Apostle, Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but reprove them rather. A Duty, if well managed, which would bring
much glory to God, much advantage to our Brethren, and much comfort to our
selves; for he that rebukes a Prove. 28. 23.
man, afterward shall find more favor than he that flattereth with his tongue.

2. Public reproof is in the ministry of the Word. The Word of God is not only
for instruction, 2 Timothy 3. 16.
but for correction and reproof: And those to whom the management of it is
committed, are such as reprove in the Gate. The Prophets of old declared their
Messages from God in the Gates of Is. 29. 21.
the City or Temple, because there was the greatest concourse of People. Thus
God did testify against Israel by his Prophets, and does against us by the
Public Ministry every day.

2. Outwardly, by Deed; God's Rod is a speaking Rod, it has a voice, and every
stroke is a reproof. The Rod and Reproof go together, and both teach wisdom.
His corrections are intended for our instruction and imbetterment.

The word which is here rendered Reproofs, signifies Real as well as Verbal
reproofs: not only the reproofs and reprehension of the tongue, but also the
chastisements and strokes of God's hand. Vir increpationum, a Man of Reproofs
is one qui increpatur malis and molestiis a Deo missis, ut viam suam, i. e.
depravatos suos mores, aut opinionem suam malam deserat: When God throws
crosses and troubles in our ways, hedgeth up our ways with thorns, brings
trouble on our loins, feeds us with the bread of affliction, and water of
affliction; these are his Real reproofs whereby he would take us from our
corrupt opinions, or licentious practices. In this sense Balaam was a Man of
Reproofs, when the Numb. 22.
Dumb Ass speaking with Man's voice rebuked the madness of the Prophet, and
yet he hardened himself 2 Pet. 2. 16.
in his evil way.

A man of Reproofs then is he who being often rebuked, either by the checks of
his own Conscience, or by the mouth of private Friends, by the Public Minister
or Magistrate; whom God chastises and scourges with Crosses for his
amendment, but he repents not, amends not, but goes on still and hardens his
neck; which is the second thing to be opened.

II. Hardens his neck;] The word here put for Neck is the hindermost and bony
part of the neck, which consists ex vertebratis ossibus, ut facilius huc and
illuc obvertatur: The Neck is not made of one continued bone, as the Leg or
Arm; but there are several smaller bones so joynted one upon another, as may
serve for the more easy turning of it any way as occasion is offered. And from
hence, Man being made with a pliable and yielding neck, those who are
intractable and contumacious, who will not be turned from their evil
resolutions and practices, are in Scripture usually termed Duri cervice, hard
of stiff-necked.

Or it is a Metaphor taken from such Beasts, whose great strength lies in their
Necks; as the Horse, Have thou given the Horse strength? have thou clothed Job.
39. 19.
his neck with Thunder? and the Leviathan, in whose 41. 22.
neck remains strength, and who is so terrible that none can tame him.

Hence the phrase is used in Scripture to describe a person or people that is
stubborn, obstinate, immorigerous and rebellious. Ephraim is a Heifer
unaccustomed to the yoke, that would not yield her neck to Jer. 31. 18.
discipline. The Sons of Belial, by whom God sets out the worst of Sinners,
have their name from hence, that they will not submit their necks to any yoke
of government, but would do only that which was good in their own eyes.

This is set out elsewhere in other words to the same sense; thou art
obstinate, thy neck is an iron sinew, Is. 48. 4.
and thy brow is as brass. A brow of brass that Jer. 5 3.
could not blush, and an iron sinew that could not bend Hence we read of
rocky-faces, stony-hearts, Ezekiel. 36. 26. Acts 7. 51.
and stiff-hearted.

Now a man is said to harden his neck as he is said to harden his heart, it is
all one and the same thing: And where these two phrases are put together, one
is only exegetical and explains the other. For the understanding whereof we
must know, that

1. There is a natural hardness in the heart of every man. Every child of Adam
is born with a stone in his heart, the taking of which away is a Ezekiel 36 26.
part of God's Covenant with man in Christ.

2. There is an adventitious hardness, which a man adds to that of his Nature.
As he who labors hard, makes his hand every day more callous and brawny than
it was before, so it is in this case, Custom in sin makes the Conscience more
brawny and insensible of sin. Besides the Natural obligation which lies upon
every man, God has given them positive Laws to enforce their obedience to him:
He has given them some abilities to perform what he requires; he has backed
his Commandments both with Promises and Threatenings so far, that he may justly
expect compliance with his Command. But no sooner does the Devil solicit, but
man inclines rather to what he suggests, than to what God injoyns. He sins
voluntarily and persisteth in it obstinately, notwithstanding all the
exhortations, promises, threatenings of God to the contrary. This is properly to
harden a man's heart: A pregnant instance whereof we have in Jeremy, As for the
word which thou have spoken we will not do it; but we Jer. 44. 5. 16, 17.
will certainly do whatsoever proceeds out of our own mouth. But the most
remarkable instance of this sin is in Pharaoh, who notwithstanding all that
Moses Exodus chap. 8, 9, 10.
could say or do in the name of the Lord, hardened his heart still, and became
worse and worse.

3. There is a Judicial hardness. When man goes on thus stubbornly to harden
his own heart, God comes in as a righteous Judge and hardens it finally: the
former is man's own sin, the latter is his just punishment. When men like not
to retain God in their knowledge, he justly gives them up to a hard heart and a
reprobate mind, which is a spiritual judgment, and one of the severest that can
be inflicted in this life.

Now God may be said to harden man's heart two ways.

1. Privatively, by withholding that grace which is necessary to soften it. So
St. Austin often; God hardens the heart, non infundendo malitiam, sed
subtrahendo gratiam; not by infusing any evil into it, but by withholding the
influences of that grace, which is necessary to make it willing and pliable.
And again, Deus dicitur excaecari, quando non illuminat, indurare quando non
emollit; God is said to blind those whom he does not enlighten, and to harden
those whom he does not soften.

2. Positively; if we may so interpret those Scriptures wherein it is
positively said, that God did harden the heart of Pharaoh, and others.

For the thing, it is not questionable; but for the manner how, I dare not be
too positive in determining. Sure it can be by Accident only; for most certain
it is, that God is the Author of no man's sin. It may be (perhaps) thus; God
gives him Commands which are holy, just and good, but these he peremptorily
violates: he plies him with Exhortations, which he despises; gives him gracious
Promises, which he neglects and disbelieves; denounces Threatenings, which he
slights and contemns; bestows many Mercies on him, which he abuses: by all
which, God being highly provoked, delivers him into the hand of Satan his
Executioner, to harden him finally and judicially. When man thus hardens his
own heart sinfully, God steps in and hardens it judicially, and then the
Judgment threatened is at hand; which is the third thing to be opened.

III. He shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy;] In which I
shall only point out these three things, which we shall have occasion again by
and by to speak to.

1. Here is the severity of the punishment; it is not chastisement for our
amendment, but destruction: He shall be destroyed.

2. The celerity and speediness, and unexpectedness of it; it shall be done
suddenly.

3. The certainty and unavoidableness of it; it shall be without remedy. So I
have done with the first thing proposed; and opened those three material things
contained in the Text.

The ground being thus cleared, and the foundation laid, it will be no
difficult thing to confirm the main Propostion; which was the next thing in
order to be done, namely, He that being thus often reproved, thus hardens his
neck, shall suddenly and certainly perish: Destruction treads upon the heels of
obstinate and incorrigible Sinners. Which Proposition, though it be clear
enough by its own light, yet may receive farther evidence from other Scriptures.

There was a time when the people of Israel and Judah provoked God by serving
Idols, whereof the Lord had said unto them, ye shall not do this thing. The
Lord testified against them by all his Prophets and 2 Kings. 17. 13.
Seers, saying, Turn you from your evil ways, and keep my Commandments; but
they would not hear, but hardened ^^v. 14, 15, 16.
their necks and rejected his statutes, till the Lord was so angry that he
removed them out of his sight. Again, God reproves them for breaking his
Sabbaths, and admonishes them for the future to keep them better: but they
obeyed not, but stiffned their necks, that they Jer. 17. 22.
might not hear nor receive instruction, which provoked God to send a fire
amongst them which could not be quenched. Want we more instances of this?
Pharaoh may stand for all. How often does God reprove him by Moses's mouth? How
often correct him by Moses's hand? How often does he promise to submit, and as
often rebels? till at last God swallowed him up in the Red Sea. So in Noah's,
and in Lot's time.

Nor need we wonder at God's severity toward them who harden their necks
against Reproofs, when we consider the manifold and great aggravations of this
sin.

1. It is a sin against knowledge, which makes it so much the greater.
Conviction goes before reproof, Ere we can justly reprove a man for any fault,
we must convince him of two things; first, that the thing we speak against is a
sin; next, that he is guilty of it; if we fail in either of these, we cannot
fasten a reproof. The Word of God, which is the tool we must work withal in
this business, is for instruction and conviction, as well as for exhortation
and reproof: But he that is convinced that his ways are bad, and yet will
pursue them, goes against his own light, and is in a greater measure guilty. He
that knows his Master's will and does it not, shall be Luke 12. 47.
beaten with more stripes.

2. It Is a sin against mercy. Reproof is an act of love; a man reproves not him
whom he does not regard: It Is the greatest act of love, and the truest
expression of kindness, to tell us of our faults; hence we read, Thou shall not
hate thy Brother in thine heart by letting sin to rest upon him; but thou shall
in Levit. 19. 17.
any wise rebuke thy Neighbor. If not to reprove be to hate, then to reprove
must be an act of love and mercy. God loves whom he chastises, and reproves
them in this World, that they may not perish with it. There Is honey in the top
of his rod; mercy in all his rebukes: the greater is the sin which is committed
against so rich mercy.

3. It Is a sin against the means, which God has appointed for our salvation.
His corrections are intended for our instruction; the rod and reproof are to
give wisdom; Reprove one that has understanding, Prove. 19. 25.
and he will understand knowledge.

By all which we see, that Reproof is a means intended by God to bring us to
the knowledge and practice of our Duties. When the sick Patient sputters up his
physic into the face of his Physician, his case is desperate; when we reject
that which alone would cure us, we must needs perish.

4. It Is a sin made up of such ugly ingredients, that it cannot but be odious
unto God.

1. The first ingredient that goes to the making up of this sin is Pride; than
which nothing can be more odious to God or Man; which is clear from that of
Nehemiah; Our Fathers dealt proudly, Nehem. 9. 16,
and hardened their necks, and hearkened not to thy Commandment: And again, Thou
did testify against them 29.
to bring them to thy Law, but they dealt proudly, withdrew the shoulder,
hardened their necks, and would not hear. The next is,

2. Contempt and Scorn, than which nothing provokes more. This sort of Sinners
is like the Leviathan, who slights all the Artillery that is brought against
him. He esteems Iron as a straw, and Brass Job 41. 27.
as rotten wood. The arrow cannot make him fly, sling-stones are turned with
him into stubble. Darts are accounted as stubble, and he laughs at the shaking
of the spear. So he, who being often reproved, hardens his neck; God frowns,
chides, strikes; he cares not, but goes on still.

3. Obctinacy and resolvedness in sin; as in those in Jeremy, What thou
command us we will not do, but we will do whatsoever is good in our own
eyes. Jer. 44. 17.


4. Lastly, there is a sad train which always attends at the heels on it; when
men are come to this, what will they stick at? In that place before mentioned,
when they had once hardened their necks, it follows, they became vain and
followed after vanity; they joined themselves with the Heathens, made molten
Images, made a Grove, and worshipped the Host of heaven; they served Baal, and
made their Sons and Daughters pass through the fire to Devils; and what not?
Indeed, it dethrones that Reason which should have the empire of the Soul, and
sets up Lust and Sensuality in its room; for as Solomon says, He that hates
reproof is brutish. Prove. 12. 1.


And when the sin is so great, no wonder that the punishment is great too. God
is a God of Justice, and by him actions are weighed, he measures out punishment
proportionable to the offense.

Concerning this Judgment here threatened we had three things (as I noted)
observable in the words.

1. The severity of it, He shall be destroyed;] When we find God threatening
this Sin, he speaks at another rate than in other cases. The fifth Chapter of
Jeremy is full of such expressions; A Lion out of Jer. 5. 6.
the forest shall slay them, a Wolf of the evening shall devour them, and a
Leopard shall watch over their Cities, every one that goes out shall be torn in
pieces: what can be imagined more dreadful? When God had smitten Israel with
blasting and drought, with famine, sword, and pestilence, but they returned
not; then says God, thus and thus will I do unto thee, Amos 4. 12.
as if he wanted words to express the greatness of his wrath, thus and thus
will I do, i. e. be fierce beyond all expression.

God's Reproofs are to humble us, and to bring us to himself by true
repentance; but if these do it not, he brings a final Judgment to our utter
destruction. He charges us first with his small Artillery, but if that reduces
us not to our obedience, he falls upon us with his main Battalia. When
entreaties, threatenings and corrections will do no good upon the Child, then
the Father proceeds to disinherit him. When playsters and searings will not
heal the wound, the Chyrurgeon proceeds to amputation. When pruning and soyling
will not make the Tree fruitful, then the Axe is laid unto the root of it. When
reproofs are cast away, and chastisements mend us not, then destructions come
to end us. When men's hearts grow hard and impenitent under judgments, they
treasure up wrath 2 These. 1. 9.
against the day of wrath, and procure sudden destruction from the presence of
the Lord; which falls nothing short of the conteretur in the Text, He shall be
destroyed.

2. Here Is the celerity or speediness of the Judgment, He shall be destroyed
suddenly, when it is least thought on, or expected. Though God be long ere he
set forth to slay the impenitent and obdurate Sinner, yet when he comes he
comes apace. He is full of Patience, but patience abused turns to fury. He is
not slack, as men count slackness: but will come upon Eagles wings; with such
speed as none Hos. 8. 1.
can fly from, and with such strength as none can resist.

He had born long with the old World, and had reproved them one hundred and
twenty years by Noah's preaching; every stroke in making the Ark reproved and
called them to repentance; but Patience being tired, then, the same day that
Noah entered Genesis 7. 11.
into the Ark, all the windows of heaven were opened, and the waters gusht out
to the ruin of the World.

When neither awe of God's Majesty, nor the Counsels, Reproofs, nor Example of
righteous Lot could work upon the Sodomites, then God comes Gen 19. 23, 29.
suddenly with a tempest of fire and brimstone: The Sun rose gloriously upon
them, but it was attended with an everlasting night.

This sudden and unexpected wrath is set out by the breach of a Wall that is
ready to fall, which Isai. 30. 12, 13.
copes and catches a man ere he be aware, and crushes him to pieces.

Sometimes it is resembled to a Whirlwind, which comes on a sudden and carries
all before it. Hence Jer. 23. 19.
that of Solomon, He that is perverse in his ways shall Prove. 28. 18.
fall at once, i. e. certo cadet, he shall certainly fall; subito cadet, he
shall fall suddenly, in an hour when he least expects it; and, undiquaque
cadet, he shall utterly fall in all his concernments, and be utterly destroyed.

3. Here is the certainty and unavoidableness of the Judgment, there shall be
no remedy. He shall be destroyed, and all remedies shall come too late.

God has said it, who is truth, and cannot lie; who never yet broke his word,
either in promse, or threatening. There is a time, when diseases and wounds may
be cured; which, if let run too long, no plasters or medicines can do them
good. There is a time, when God will be found of us, be ready to receive and
save us: but if we stand out beyond our day, Repentance will be hid from his
eyes. There was a time when Esau sought Heb. 12. 17.
his Birthright with tears, but could not find it. Thus dealt God with such as
despised his Prophets, and their Reproofs, the wrath of God came upon them till
there was no remedy. Calamity 2 Chro. 26. 16.
shall come suddenly upon the froward (says Solomon) suddenly shall they be
broken, and that Prove. 6. 15.
without remedy.

There Is nothing can shore up those, whose incorrigibleness provokes God to
come forth for their destruction. No Policy of man can decline him, no power
can resist him. There Is no Remedy of power or force against him. Will ye
provoke the Lord to jealousy? are ye stronger than he? No weapon that is formed
against him shall prosper. He takes away and none can hinder him: Who can say
unto him, what Job 9. 12.
do thou?

There is no Remedy to appease him, for he forbids prayer in such a case for
them. Pray not for this People (says God to Jeremy) nor lift up a Prayer Jer.
7. 16.
for them, nor make intercession to me; for I will not hear thee. Nay, though
Moses and Samuel stood before me, who were so prevalent in prayer, yet my mind
could not be toward this People; cast them out of Jer. 15. 1.
my sight, and let them go. And what can be expected, when God will be no more
entreated, but utter ruin and destruction?

Thus far have I gone in opening the Doctrinal part of the Text, and showed you
the miserable condition of an immorigerous, obstinate, incorrigible Sinner.

There Is nothing now remains, but to make some short reflections upon what has
been said by way of Application, and I have done. And this I shall briefly
dispatch by proposing these four Queries, to which (I beseech you) let your
Consciences make an impartial answer.

1. Whether we of this place and generation be not Men of Reproofs? Whether
have not we been often reproved for our sins?

2. Whether we have been amended by those Reproofs? or, whether we have hardened
our necks against them?

3. If the latter of these appear; whether we have not just cause to expect the
judgment threatened in the Text?

4. What way is yet left to escape so great destruction?

1. Whether we of this place and Age have not been Men of Reproofs? For the
reproofs and checks of Conscience, and the private personal rebukes of Friends,
every man can best and only judge for himself, what he has had.

But as for those which have been more Public, whether verbal or real, the
thing is so evident that it is past denial, we have had our reproofs.

1. For verbal Reproofs; Reproof (as you have heard) is one main end and use
for which the Holy Scripture was given by God. And there is no Nation under
heaven, where the Word of God has been more purely, powerfully, constantly
preached, than in this Nation, this City.

We have been (as Goshen) a place of Light, when almost all the World has sat
in darkness.

It Is now one hundred and fifty years since the light of the glorious Gospel
has shone out amongst us more clearly than in most other places, and great
has been the company of Preachers. Men not of Ordinary rank, but so many
Apollo's, mighty in the Scripture. Who have performed the Office of faithful
Watchmen, to tell you of your sins, and warn you of your danger. Men, who,
according to the abundant Grace of God given to them, have laid Judgment to the
line, and Righteousness to the plummet. Who have neither sewed pillows under
your arms, nor daubed with untempered Mortar. I need not name them to you, nor
the series of time wherein they lived; you remember some, you have heard of the
rest.

So that if this place be destroyed, it is not for the want of knowledge; I am
sure, not for the want of the means of knowledge. They have rather surfeited
and waxed wanton, than suffered a famine of the Word of Grace, or of any thing
needful to salvation.

2. And for Real reproofs, whereby God has testified against us his
displeasure for our sins, that he might bring us to repentance, we have not
been altogether without them neither.

I shall instance only in two, which may be yet fresh in our memories: such as
our Predecessors never felt, and may those who shall come after us never feel
the like! I mean the last consuming Plague, and the late dreadful Fire. And,
because too many amongst us live, as if they had never seen, or not observed,
these dreadful Judgments; afford me your patience, while I give you a short
representation of both; that so upon serious thoughts, you may learn
Righteousness by the things which you have suffered. Of the Plague first.

When Death mounted upon his pale Horse, rode in triumph through your streets,
and spared neither age, sex, nor condition. When the highways to this Great
City, were (as in the days of Shamgar) unoccupied, and none (that could well
avoid Judge. 5. 6.
it) cared to come within the sight or scent of it. When the widest streets
were but thinly peopled; and many, of those few you met, carried death in their
faces. When a man's breath was abhorred by his nearest Relations, and those of
his most intimate Acquaintance hid themselves from him. When the Air it self
became infectious, and that, without which we could not live, conveyed death
into our bosoms. When the sorrows of the dying Husband were increased by the
groans of his departing Wife, and both aggravated by the cries of their
languishing Children. When the hungry Infant crawled to the sick Mothers
breast, and sucked poison instead of nourishment. When your ears were filled,
all the day, with the noise of passing-Bells, and all night with the doleful
tone of those who called for them to burial. When the sad Parents were put to
the ungrateful task of being the winders, bearers, buriers of their own
Children. When the innocent sheep were committed to the ravenous wolf; sick
people to the keeping of cruel, rapacious, and unsatiable Nurses, who were
often ('it is to be feared) more cruel to them than their diseases; and murdered
those, whom their diseases might have spared. When Death fished with his
largest Net, that had the smallest meshes, and spared not the minues, the
Infants of a span long. When every day added such a number to the dead, as
swelled the weekly Bills beyond all Presidents. In a word, When the Plague was
worse, in some sense, than that of Egypt; There was not a house wherein there
was not one dead, but here was Amos 6. 10.
many a house in which there was not one left alive.

Descend we to the next year; wherein God uses a new method, and severer
demonstration of his wrath. He had formerly sent a fire into our blood, and now
sends a fire into our houses; that year took away the Inhabitants from their
houses; this takes away the Habitations from the Inbabitants. One year he
throws an hundred thousand carcasses under ground, and the next levels thirteen
thousand houses with it. He has dealt with us, as he threatened to do unto
Jerusalem; and made this City, as he threatened that, Jer. 19. 11, 12.
a very Tophet. Tophet was a place of burial, and a Isai. 3. 33.
place of burning; so was this City; one year you buried till there was no
place to bury in: In the next it burnt till there was little left to be
consumed.

A fire like that of Hell, the horror whereof no pen can express, nor tongue
can tell. Worse than that at Tabera; that was but in the skirts of the Numb.
11. 1, 2.
Camp, but this in the bowels of this Royal City.

When God had permitted a vile Miscreant to throw but a flunk of fire, and his
vindictive Justice blows the bellows, how soon is it kindled into a flame? how
soon got upon the house tops? what a doleful noise awakes men from their sleepy
beds, and calls them up to quench the growing flames? They in the mean time,
like men amazed, cannot find their hands, but are even at their wits end, and
know not which way to turn themselves. In the mean speace the greedy flames
pursue their prey; and while men make none, or feeble resistance, gather
strength; and, because it is not suddenly quenched, grows unquenchable. Who can
express the horror of that day, when this Royal City, the Metropolis of the
Nation, the Chamber of our Kings, so renowned through the whole World, was
become a Tophet, one Oven? When the proud flames had advanced their curled
looks above the tops of the stateliest buildings, insulting over all engines,
and contemning all force, that was used against them. When the fire, like the
Smith's forge, grew the hotter for the water that was brought to quench it.
When it lickt up whole houses, as the Ox licks up grass. When massy timber
was but as straw, and the very bricks burnt again like stubble.

Then might you have seen fourscore and odd Churches, dedicated to God's
Service, all in flames preaching wrath to such, as would not obey that Word
which had been preached in them.

It were infinite, and beside my purpose, as much as beyond my power, to
express all the dreadfulness of that day. When the Sun it self seemed to be
turned into blood, and the Moon was out-shone by the greater light of the Fire.
When men had so long hazarded themselves to defend their houses, that they were
glad to run away by the light of the fire that consumed them, to save their
lives. While some were disputing with themselves, what to save, and what to
leave, the fire came and determined the debate, and consumed all. And to close
up this sad Meditation,

When the delicate Dame, that seldom used to touch the ground with her foot,
was glad to beat it on the hoof, leading or rather dragging her tender Child in
hand, justled by every Porter without any respect, and walking in as great a
danger, as that from which she fled. And at night, instead of their large
chambers, ceiled houses, warm beds, and rich hangings, were fain to take up in
the open field; where they had no Canopy, but the Heavens; nor bed, but the
Earth to rest upon.

Thus, thus, this famous City, which was elder than Solomon's Temple by an
hundred years (if some calculate aright) and had been two thousand seven
hundred and seventy years growing to its height, in four days space, fell into
that confused Chaos, wherein our eyes have seen it. Now in your cold blood you
cannot but acknowledge that these were real reproofs, and may pass for severe
ones too. That was the first Querie, the second follows; which is,

2. Whether we have been amended by these reproofs? or, whether we have
hardened our necks against them? I wish it may prove otherwise, but I fear the
worst. Should a strict inquisition be made into our hearts and lives, what
reformation would be found there? After all these several and sad
dispensations, may not God say, I would have healed Jer. 51. 9.
you, and you would not be healed; I have done thus and thus unto you, brought
one Judgment in the neck of another, but ye have not returned to me, no not to
this very day?

What sins are left? what duties better performed than before? tell me he that
can, for I know not. Is not God's Name unhallowed by unimaginable oaths,
curses, and blasphemies? Are not his Ordinances and Institutions slighted and
abused still? Is not his Day openly profaned still; and more than ever? Is
drunkenness, uncleanness, debauchery, less in request than heretofore? Are we
less censorious, slandering, and backbiting than we were? Is covetousness,
self-seeking, oppression, injustice, less practiced than before these Judgments
fell upon us? or, do not all these rather grow upon us? What ground has God
gained upon us by these tedious executions? tell me he that can.

Truly (if a man may be bold to speak truth in this degenerate age) there seems
to be but little reformation wrought. But, as those whom God complains of, the
more we are smitten, the worse we Isai 1.
grow: Like the Smith's Anvil, we are the harder for smiting; or like restive
Jades, that go the worse for beating.

Of the prodigious Atheisin which reigns among too many! who never think nor
speak of God, but when they swear or curse; never talk of Religion or the
Scriptures, but to deride and jeer it; who never think themselves Wits, till
they have proved themselves downright Atheists; who make these severe Judgments
of God matters of their sport, but not motives to lead them to repentance.

In a word for all; Are we more serviceable to God? more profitable to men,
more faithful in our callings, more exact in our duties, more humble, more
charitable, more conscionable in our dealings, than before? if not; it is to be
feared that we grow worse. If the furnace soften us not, as it does gold, it
will harden us, as it does clay.

3. And if this be the case with us, what can we rationally expect, but what
the Text threatens, Destruction? We seem to draw toward it apace, and I cannot
well see what will be the next degree of punishment to which God can advance,
beneath Destruction.

We are already in Ephraim's case; strangers had devoured his strength, and he
saw it not; gray hairs Hos. 7 9, 10.
were here and there upon him, and he knew it not: But the Pride of Ephraim did
testify to his face, and they do not turn to the Lord their God, nor seek him
for all this. Is not this as true of us, as ever it was of Ephraim? Are not
gray heirs upon us? is not our glory abated? our strength broken? are not the
symptoms of a declining dying age upon us? Honor and reputation weakened
abroad; trade and wealth lost at home. Poor sinful and feeble Nation! fainting
under its own weight, creeping toward its own funeral; yet alas! we are not
sensible of it, we lay it not to heart!

4. What then remains, but to apply our selves seriously to those ways and
means, which only are left us, for the reconciling us to God, supporting of a
tottering Nation, establishing of a languishing City, and preventing that
destruction which is threatened in the Text? But what are they? Hear what God
himself says; Return to me, and I will return to you. Return, ye backsliding
children, and I will heal your Jer. 3. 1, and 22.
backslidings.

At what time I shall speak concerning a Nation or Kingdom, to pluck up, to
pull down, and to destroy it; if that Nation, against which I have pronounced,
turn from their evil ways, I will repent me of the evil I Jer. 18. 7, 8.
thought to do against them.

If you will loath your selves, and all your doings which have not been good,
and be guided by my Counsel; Jer. 42 10.
I will plant you, and not pluck you up, and I will repent me of the evil that
I have done against you.

What then is to be done? Bend your ear to Discipline, and harden not your
necks against Reproofs. Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, and
accept of the punishment of your sins. Break off your sins by repentance, and
your iniquity by acts of piety and charity. Take unto your selves words, and
say from the bottom of your heart, Take away Iniquity, and receive us
graciously. Now the axe is laid to the root of the tree, bring forth fruits
meet for Repentance.

O good Friends! if there be in your hearts any fear of God's Judgments, any
sense of his Mercies, any pity to a languishing Kingdom, any kindness for an
(almost) ruined City, set, set quickly, set seriously about this work. So may
you happily see God's anger pacified, a tottering Nation supported, trade
revived, and your City totally rebuilt, reinhabited, and flourish again. But if
this be neglected, all other projects and contrivances will be so far from
doing you good, that they will advance your ruin. We may have peace with our
neighbors, but how long that may last is uncertain. Or grant that a General
peace, which is every good man's desire, be concluded in Christendom; yet who
knows, but the first day of a General peace may be the last day of our
tranquillity?

But admit, that we continue at peace with our Neighbors, and all the World;
what will that advantage us, while God himself is our enemy? You may recover
trade, but you will lose the Jewel of great price; Riches may be got, but
Heaven will be lost. What though your City be rebuilt? (and, blessed be God, is
like the Phoenix risen more glorious out of her own ashes) yet without
repentance and amendment of life, the stones out of the walls will Hab. 2. 11.
cry for justice, and the beam out of the timber will answer it. What though
your City be built with bricks? so was Babel, and yet confounded; what though
it were built of hewn stone? so was Solomon's Temple, and yet utterly
destroyed.

Believe it, Sirs! There is no fence against an angry and incensed God, without
repentance, and amendment of life. There was never yet any, either person or
people, that hardened themselves against him, and prospered. When the Mountains
shall be melted, and the Rocks removed out of their place, there will be found
an eternal truth in the words of the Text;

He that being often reproved, hardens his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed,
and that without remedy.
FINIS.

