A CONTEMPLATION Of MAN'S MORTALITY.

Preached at Reading, BY John Dashfield, M.A.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed at London, 1649

To the True-Lover of Virtue and Learning, John Penrice Esquire.
John Dashfield wishes all Happiness.
SIR,
IN the view of these bleeding times I am bold to present unto you A
Contemplation of Man's Mortaitie. a subject indeed really intended upon the
death of your most valiant and undaunted Kinsman Major William P^^chard (the
worlds valor) who (of all men) chose me for his Minister at his execution, and
I in lieu of his approbation, presume to present this unto you, and the rest of
his friends and kindred.

And as Hannah when she had presented her young Son Samuel unto the Lord, did
make him a little coat. So have I put this my little child into a new coat,
and am bold to present it to your Noble Favor for protection. Vouchsafe
therefore to take it by the hand, and I doubt not but the Ephramite shall be
heard here to speak as plain at the smooth-tongued Canaanite: and so I pray
God to bless your person and affairs here that you may be kept blameless
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. And this shall ever be the prayer of
him, that is

Yours in all Christian service, John Dashfield.

Ovid Nec Leges metuunt -- Maestaque victrici Iura sub ense ^acent.
The Contemplation of Man's MORTALITY.
Eccle. the 7 chap. part of the 36 ver. Recordare novissima, Remember thy end.
IT is the general opinion of the best Writers, perfectissimam vitam esse
continuam mortis meditationem, that the most perfect life is a continual
meditation of death. Chrysostom expounding that place of Saint Luke, Qui vult
venire post me, He that will follow me, says, That Christ commands us not to
bear upon our backs that heavy burden of the Wooden Cross, but that we
should always set our death before our eyes, making that of Saint Paul to be
man's Motto, Quotidie morior, I die daily.

In the second of the Kings it is recounted, that the holy King Josias did
cleanse the people from their Altars, their Groves, and High Places, where
innumerable Idolatries did daily increase: to smend which ill, he placed there,
in their stead, Bones, Sculls, and the ashes of dead men: Whose judgment
herein was very discreet; for from man's forgetting of his beginning and his
end, arise his Idolatries: and so reviving by those Bones the remembrance of
what they were heretofore, and what they shall be hereafter, he did make them
amend that fault, and reduced them from their errors.

God created man of the basest matter, of very dust: but this dust being molded
by Gods own hand, and inspiring it with so much wisdom, counsel, and
prudence, Tertullian calls it cura Divini ingenii: but man growing proud
hereupon, and hoping to be a god himself, God doomed him to death, and wrapped
him again in durty swaddling clouts, with this inscription, Pulvis es, Dust thou
art, and to dust thou shall return.

Adam did not without some mystery cloth himself with green leaves; for (as
Saint Ambrose has noted it) he gave as it were therein a sign and token of
his vain and foolish hopes.

When God revealed to Nebuchadnezzar how little a while his Empire was to last,
he showed him a statue of diverse metalls, the head gold, the breast silver, the
belly brass, the legs iron, the feeet clay; and it seems a little stone
descended from the mountain, lightning on the feet, dashed the statue in
pieces. But instead of taking this as a fore-warning of his end, and to have it
still before his eyes, he made another statue of gold from top to toe, which is
held to be a durable and lasting metal: so that the more God sought to
disdeceive him, the more was he deceived with his vain hopes. And this is a
resemblance of that which daily happens unto us: for God advising us that our
first building is but dust, our idle thoughts and vain hopes imagine it to be
of gold; and man's life being so short, that (as Nazianzene said) it is no more
then to go out of one grave to enter into another, out of the womb of our
particular mother, into that of the common Mother of us all, which is the
earth: because therefore we flatter our selves with the enjoying of a long
life, therefore the son of Syrach being desirous to cut off this error,
says, In omnibus operibus tuis, Recordare novissima tua, and in aeternum non
peccabis: Whatsoever thou take in hand, Remember thy end.

Death (says Saint Augustine) in his book against the Pelagians, is nothing
else but a privation of life, having a name and no essence: As hunger is said
to be the defect of food; thirst, lack of drink; darkness, the absence of
light; even so death is but a name for want of life.

Death then having a name without essence, God was not the Creator thereof,
neither cause nor Author, for all things that God made had Essence; which
term of Essence comprehends that which is, or that is to be born. Most true
it is, that for the punishment of sin, God pronounces the sentence of death
against man; but there is great difference, between pronouncing the sentence of
death, and to be the cause of death. They are the words of Solomon, not mine,
Deus mortem non fecit, nec laetatur in perditione vivorum: God has not made
death, neither has he pleasure in the destruction of the living. Creavit enim,
ut essent omnia, etc. For he created all things, that they might have their
being, and the generations of the world are preserved. But in another place he
says, Invidia autem Diaboli mors intravit in orbem terrarum; Through envy of
the Devil came death into the world, Wisdom 2.24.

The Devil then being the author of sin, is also the author of death, by
sin. The Devil could incite man to sin, but he could not constrain him to
yield consent. Adam could keep himself well enough from tasting the Tree of
life, but Gods will was that he should not sin, and so consequently would not
have him to die. But leaving life, and taking death, and following then the
free liberty of his will, he made himself mortal; so that his fault and
disobedience was the cause of death to him, and all men else beside. From
whence therefore the Apostle inferres: Propterea sicut per unum hominem
peccatum in hunc mundum intravit, and per peccatum mors, etc. As by one man
sin entered into the world, and death by sin, so death went over all men,
forasmuch as all men have sinned, Romans 5.12.

Nothing then more certain then death, and nothing more uncertain then the time
when, the place where, and the manner how; Yet one thing, to this purpose
whereof I am now to speak: and I know it may very well seem a novelty to many,
and fabulous to diverse others, because it is a matter very difficult to be
proved, nor do I purpose to bind my self, to justify or maintain the truth
thereof; albeit (in my judgment) their authority that have written on the same
argument may grant it for true, or very likely.

Pliny, and Marcus Varro, discoursing on the time of a man's life, do affirm,
that the learned Egyptians had found out by experience, that man (according to
the course of nature) could not live above a hundred years; but if any one
happened to out-step that limitation, it was judged by particular influence, and
power of the stars, a thing (in natures work) very strange and mavelous.

But pass we to the foundation of this their settled persuasion, they gathered
and conceived by the heart of a man, which (having made proof of many times by
order of Anatomy) they thereby attained to the knowledge of very wonderful
secrets. For, say they, when a man-child is a full year old, his heart poizeth
the weight of two of their dram^; four, when he is two years old, and so
onward (as many years as he lives) his heart increases in weight a couple of
drammes yearly. So that when he comes to the age of fifty years, his heart
weighs then an hundred drammes; but thence forward it is not more ponderous,
but proportionably diminishes his weight (ratably every year) by two drammes,
even according as before it increased. So that at the age of 100 years, the
heart (by continual decreasing) becomes to be nothing in poize; and then
consequently, the man of necessity dies if (by some other accidental occasion)
he dies not before: because there are so many kinds of several occasions,
which can and do customarily hasten death, before men arrive at half the time
of making this experiment in themselves.

We have then nothing more certain or assured then death, and that only in the
will, power, and knowledge of God: so that as the forgetfulness of death is
the cause of a man's falling into sin, so the memory thereof turns him quite
from sin. Recordare novissima, Remember thy end, and thou shall never do
amiss. And the Kingly Psalmist says, Cogitari dies antiquos and annos
aeternos in mente habui, etc. Ps 77.5, 6. And Plato affirms, that the life of
a wise man is meditation in death. Therefore watch and pray, for ye know not at
what hour the Lord will come. It is well weighed by Rapertus, that after God
had condemned Adam to death, he bestowed upon his wife the name of life, Matter
cunctarum gentium, the Mother of all the living; scarce had God condemned him
to punishment, but he by and by shows he had forgot it: and therefore did God
permit the death of innocent Abel, to the end that in Abel he might see the
death of the body, and in Cain the death of the soul, for to quicken his memory.

From Adam we inherit this forgetfullnesse, not remembering what we saw but
yesterday; and the general desire of man strives all it can to perpetuate our
life: which if it were in our hands, we would never see death. But because the
love of life should not rob us of our memory, and that fearing as we are
mortal, we might covet those things that are eternal, seeing that walls,
towers, marble, and brass moulder away to dust, we may ever have in our memory
this rule, Recordare novissima, Remember thy end.

Many holy Saints have styled the memory the stomach of the soul; as Gregory,
Bernard, Theodoret: and God commanding Ezechiel he should notify unto his
people certain things he had revealed unto him; and charging him that he should
well remember himself of them, he said, Comede quaecunque ego do tibi; Eat
whatsoever I give thee. And in another place he commanded him that he should
eat a book wherein were written Lamentations and Woe, etc. being all Metaphors
of the Prophets, having things in his remembrance: and this is more clearly
delivered by Job, nunquid sapiens replebit arbore stomachum sanum? will a wise
man fill his stomach with that heat that shall burn and consume him? Job 15.
which is to say, will he charge his memory with matters of pain and torments?

The proportion then holds thus: as the stomach is the storehouse or magazine
of our corporal food, and keeping therein our present meat, the body takes
from thence its sustenance, whereby it maintains its being and its life: So
the memory is the magazine of the soul, and sets before our eyes the
obligation wherein we stand; the good which we loose, and the hurt which we
gain.

Secondly, as from the disorder and disagreement of the stomach painful
diseases do arise, and diverse infirmities to the body: so from the
forgetfulness of the memory rise those of the soul; for without oblivion
(says Saint Basil) our salvation cannot be lost, nor our soules-health
endangered.

Thirdly, as when the fuel and fire shall fail man's stomach, which is the
oven which boyles and seasons our life, we may give that of the bodies for
loss; so when our memory shall fail us, we may give our soul for lost.
Therefore this advice of the son of Syrach is most requisite, Recordare
novissima, Remember thy end. As the first attribute of man is oblivion, so the
second is his baseness and misery.

In Ezechiel the King of Tire said, Deus ego sum, I am a God: but he was
answered, he was but a man, that is base, vile, and miserable, Eze. 28. So
David, ut sciant gentes quoniam homines sunt, Let the Nations know that they
are men, that is, base and vile. Psalm. 9. And S. Paul, Nonne homines estis? Are
ye not men? 1 Cor 3.2 When we see a man sometimes swallowed up in the miseries
of the body, sometimes of the soul, we say in the conclusion, he is but a man:
Now if instead of the gold of the Angels there was found rust, and that so
fine cloth as that, was not without it is moths, and that incorrupted wood
without it is worm, what then will become of those that are but dust, Qui
babitant domos luteas, who dwell in houses of Clay?

Ecclesiasticus does advise thee to rise up betimes, and not to be the last,
but to get thee home without delay, for there thou shall find enough to do,
Preacurre in domum tuam, et age conceptiones tuas. Jeremie counsels thee to
the same, sending thee to this house of clay and mud.

It Is worth observation, God did not speak unto Moses til he had drawn his
sheep aside into the desert, putting his hand twice into his bosom, the one
he took out clear, and the other leprous.

We have two bosoms to take care of in this life, the one of our own things,
the other, of other men's, but the meditation of our own misery, being the
more necessary, we must ever have in our mind this Reordare, Remember thy end.

A man not knowing himself, cannot know God: Now to know himself, the next
way is to go out of himself, and to consider the trace and track of those
Alexanders and Caesar's etc. Vbi sunt principes gentium, Where are the Princes
of the Nations?

It is the quiere of Gregory Nazianzen, why God having created the soul for
Heaven, did knit it with so straight a knot, to a Body of earth, so frail and
so lumpish? his answer is, That the Angels being overthrown by their pride,
he was willing to repair and to help his presumption in man, a creature in
his superior party as it were, Angelical, but having a heavy and miserable
body, which might serve as a stay unto him, that if the nimblenesse of his
understanding should puff him up, yet that earth which clogged his body should
humble him and keep him down.

There is no man so desperate, nor of that boldness of spirit, but does show a
kind of fear when death looks him in the face, and therefore death is termed
pale, because it makes the most valiant to change color.

Job painting forth such a kind of soule-lesse man, says Quis arguet coram eo,
Who shall be able to control this man, that neither fears the Law, nor his
King, nor his God? Job 21.31. The best remedy is to carry him to the
Sepulchers of the dead, et in congerie mortuorum evigilabit; He shall be brought
to the graves and made to wake; and if the looking upon that sad spectacle will
not work him, there is little hope of good to be done upon him.

Those that entered triumphantly into Rome had a thousand occasions given them
to incite them to pride, arrogancy, and vanity, as their great numbers of
Captains, their Troops of horse, their Chariots drawn with Elephants or
Lions, and beautiful Ladies looking upon them from their windows, and the
like: but the Senate considering the great danger of the Tryumpher, ordered one
to sit by his side, to tell him of his Mortality: and what now are the best of
us all, but Terrigenae et silii somnium, The offspring of the earth, and the
children of men?

This word Recordare, does imply a deep-meditation, that it might stir up
fire in us, according to that of David, In meditatione mea exardescet ignis, A
fire waxed hot in my heart whilst I was musing. Meditation is like Gunpowder,
which in a man's hand is dust and earth: but put fire thereunto, it will
overthrow Towers, Walls, and Cities: so a quick lively memory, and inflamed
considerations of our own wretched estates, will blow up the Towers of our
pride, and cast down the Walls of our rebelious hearts, and ruin those
Cities of clay wherein we dwell: As the Phoenix fanowing the fire with her
wings, is renewed again by her own ashes, so shall thou become a new
creature, by remembering what thou art.

Desire not life then, but with the remembrance of death: there is a Naball in
the 1 of Sam. 25. that desires to live to sheare his sheep, and to make a
feast like a King, though the next day his heart die within him, and he become
like a stone.

There is a fool, Luke 12: that desires long life, to build Barnes, to gather
goods, to lay up fruits, to take ^ase, to eat, to drink, to be merry, Vt ebrii
and ru^tantes intre^t in paradisum: That reeling and belching (says Jeremie)
they may fall into an epicures paradise.

There is a Nebuchadnezzar in Dan. the 4. that desires to mount up his piles of
wonderment, and his Turrets of Babell, but in the midst of his pride, (not
thinking of his last end) is urned into an Ox that eats hay.

There is an Absolon, that not remembering his end, desired to wear a Crown
upon his head, though he be hanged by the hair of the head, and he be
stricken with three darts through the liver, 2 Samuel 18.

There is an Achab, that desires to live, and not regarding his own end, takes
possession of Naboths Vineyard, though in the place where the Dogs licked the
blood of Naboth, Dogs shall lick the blood of Achab. Kings 1.21.

There is an Haman, that desires to live, till he may be revenged on Mordecaie
his enemy, although a gallows of fifty foot high (an eminent place for
execution) be the end of a mischievous courtiers promotion. All which unlawful
desires, although they have Volaticum gaudium (as a Father calls them) yet they
shall have Talentum plumbi, as the Prophet speaks, a Talent of lead, an
intolerable pressure of their conscience in their death. Zach. 5.7.

Thus you may see, fire and water not more contrary, then flesh and spirit:
Here I would feign know, what are the strings? what the buckles? what the cords
of Love? what slime of Euphrates?

What gum of Arabia? what cement or glue do join an immortal, incorporall,
insensible soul, in a house of clay, in a body of earth, the most gross, the
most base, most sollid element? surely, we are wonderfully made: none but God
did compose us, none but God can preserve us, none but God, by his permission,
or direction, ordinary, or extarordinary administration of second causes, can
disolve us; he with a breath gave us breath, he with a word takes away our
breath, and so all our thoughts perish.

Let not Asa trust in his Physician, nor Naaman trust to the Rivers of
Damascus, nor Absolon to the luster of beauty, nor Maximus to the strength of
an Elephant, nor Herod to the flattering clamor of idolising people, that we
are not men, but Gods. Thoses, who in the regard of their constitutions,
communicate in the s^nguine of the Rose, and in the snowie beauty of the
Little, their bodies are (says S. Chrysostom) but Nidus hirundinum, a
Swallows Nest, composed of dirt, and straw: they are no fairer then Jonas
ground, a worm struck it at the root, and the ground withered; so that the
greatest King or Peer, may make King Philips fable, his Motto, and Moral.

Recordare novissima, Remember thy end.

Samuel being to annoint Saul, God gave him for a sign, that he would have
him Prince over his people, that he should find two men as soon as he was gone
from him, nea^e unto Rachells Sepulcher, God might have given him some other
sign, but he chose rather to give him this, to quell the pride and
haughtiness of this his new honor, as if he should admonish and put thee in
mind, That so fair a Creature as Rachell should read a Lecture unto thee, what
thou must be.

But when the time of this disolution shall come to pass, that no man knows,
neither the manner how, nor the place where: therefore, Recordare novissima,
Remember thy end.

First, no man knows the place, and it is no great matter, since Rachell died
in the highway, as well as Jezabell in the streets, since Josias and Achab
both dyed in the field, since Saul and Jonathan died both in one battle, and
their Carcases were hung up as Trophies of a bloody victory in a barbarous
City.

Will you hear a Philosophical comfort? Earth you know is the center, and
Heaven is the worlds circumference. If a man shall draw a circle with his pen,
with a point in the midst of the circle, the circle is equally distant from all
points of the circle, unto the point of the center; there is therefore from all
parts of the point and center of the earth, an equal distance to the circle
and circumference of Heaven: what matter therefore though the bodies of the
Martyrs were intombed in the entrails of wild beasts, though their ashes were
scattered upon Rhodanus, though their carcases were made a prey to the Fowls
of the Heaven? What glory was it to Martialls fly, though it were buried in
concreted Crystal, what shame to Naboth though his blood was licked up with
Dogs? what hurt to the Virgins in the Sack of Rome, whose bodies were
unburied upon earth, whose souls were received into Heaven? Nec viuorum culpa,
qui non putuerunt Aust. Lib. 1. de Civitate Dei. It was neither (says S.
Austine) the fault of the living, who had no power to bury the dead, nor the
punishment of the dead, who had no sense of the afflictions of the living.

Secondly, we know not the manner of our death, and it is a very trifle.

Job compares man to a Flower, Esaias to Grass, and David to a Tree; Is it any
great matter whether the Flower be cropped, or the Grass mowed, or the Axe laid
to the root of the Tree?

At the death of Christ there were three Crosses: upon those crosses were three
persons; The Thief blaspheming, the Thief repenting, the Son of GOD
praying. Quid similius istis crucibus? quid dissimilius is it is pendentibus?
What more like (says Saint Austine) then those crosses? what more unlike then
those persons?

Lastly, we do not know the time of our death, and it is good for us we do
not: in nature (says Seneca) pejor est Letho, timor ipse Lethi, The fear of
death is more terrible then death. Caesar had the death he desired: and surely
that he deserved, to dye suddenly by the hands of the Senators of Rome.

It was the song of Zacharias, that we being delivered out of the hands of our
enemies, might serve him without fear, all the days of our life.

Men would serve God, as they do their servants, with reversions; In vltimis
diebus mortis; In the last days of their death: but God will be served, In
omnibus diebus vitae, In all the days of our life. Nature has only a Trumpet
of lead, but the Ark of God has a Trumpet of silver.

Hear then the difference between Nature and Grace: Nature says, O cives,
cives, quaerenda pecunia primum; virtus post nummes; first seek gold* then
serve God: first betray Christ, then buy a field of blood to bury strangers;
first make ma^y beggars by usurie and oppression, and then build an Hospital
of a bloody Devotion.

But Grace says, Quaerite primum Regnum Dei, Math. 6. First seek the Kingdom
of God, and all things shall be given unto you; all the rubbish of the worlds
treasure, are but castings, adjectanea, as chipings, and shavings, compared to
the pearl of Heaven. Latet vltimus dies ut obseruetur omnis dies; Because
therefore we know not our last day, we ought to observe every day. Epicures
and Balaams that have lived ill, Quando anima in extremis labris, when the
Soul sits on their Lips to take her flight, then they send for their Minister,
to teach them to die well.

We may then give you a little opiat divinity to benumme you, we cannot give a
cordial to secure you. We may tell you that one Thief went from the gallows to
glory, but then we must not conceal, that as* the Lord is rich in mercy, so
not poor in judgment. Recordare novissima, Remember thy end.

This word Recordare is the father of two good effects; first, it moves man to
Repentance, by putting him in mind of his frailty: for being dust and ashes
how dares he contest with his Creator? vae qui contradicit factori suo, as it
is Esaias 45.9.

Secondly, it inclines God to mercy, Memento (quaeso) quod sicut lutum feceris
me. Consider (O Lord) that thou made me of earth, and did mould me up in a
mass of bones, sinews, and flesh, and now Lord, if thou should lay thy
heavy hand upon me, what strength is mine, that it should be able to endure
it? If thou shall not take pity of this poor piece of earth, this crasie
vessel of clay, what will become of thy mercy of old, and of all thy wonted
kindness? if that steel and stronger metal of the Angels was broken by
thee, it is no great matter if earth break and split in sunder.

Nothing more properly appertains unto man then dust, his last end; and
therefore the Scripture terms death a man's returning again unto the earth,
from whence he came. The Flower, the Leaf, they have some good in them (though
of short continuance) as color, odor, beauty, virtue, and shade; but dust
and earth speaks no other good. Amongst the elements, the earth is the least
noble, and the most weak; the fire, the water, and the air have spirit and
actitude, but the earth is as it were a prisoner laden with weightinesse, as
with gyves:

If then man's end be such, but earth, Quid utilitatem saginando Corpore? why
such a deal of care in pampering the body, which the worms may devour
tomorrow? Look upon that flesh which thy father made so much of, that (now)
rotten and stinking Carkas; surely this consideration should moderate thy
desire of being over-dainty and so curious in cherishing thy flesh. Jsaac on
the night of his nuptials, placed his wives bed in the chamber where his dear
and loving Mother died. Tobias spent all the night with his spouse in prayer,
being mindful of the harm which the devil had done to her former husbands;
as being advised from Heaven, that he should temper with the remembrance of
death, the delights and pleasures of this his short and transitory life.

Again, if man's end be but earth, why such a deal of coveting of honors and
riches and rising one against another? why such great and stately houses, and
so richly furnished? Our forefathers lived eight hundred years and upwards,
and past over their lives in poor Cabins and Cotages. Esau sold his birthright
for a mess of potage, but he excused his so doing, for that he saw his death
so near at hand; En, Morior, quid proderunt mihi primogenita; Behold, I am
ready to die, what will birthright profit me? there is a doubt put, why did
the Egyptians so freely bestow their jewels, and their gold, and their silver
on the Hebrews?

The Resolution is, that seeing their first begotten were all dead, they made
light reckoning of those things which before they so much esteemed. Abulensis
moves another doubt, why the Giants of the promised Land did not devour the
Jsraelites, being but a; Grassehoppers in comparison of their greatness? Unto
this, there is a twofold answer; the first, that they came in as strangers,
from whom they presumed they could receive no hurt: the second, that God set a
consuming plague amongst them, Terra devorat habitatores suos, The earth
devoureth her Inhabitants; and there is no man of what strength or metal
soever, that can shun deaths dart, or fence his blow.

Not to shake this Tree for any more fruit, I will but therefore strike this
flint for a spark and away; Death is near at hand: as for the times I need
not tell you of them, for that we all know them by woeful experience. Let us
then use this world as if we used it not, for the sum of our lives (says
Seneca) concludes all in two words, Nasci and Mori; to be borne, and to dye.
Gregory Nissen treating of that place of Solomon, Omnia tempus habent, There is
a time for all things; notes, that this wise man ioynes our Nasci with a Mori,
as being near neighbors: and indeed many times, the time of death prevents
the time of birth. Consider what has been said, and the Lord of Heaven give
you understanding in all things.

FINIS.

