A THIRD COLLECTION OF NEW SONGS, Never Printed before.

The WORDS by Mr. D'URFEY.

Set to MUSIC by the best Masters in that Science, VIZ.

Dr. John Blow. Mr. Henry Purcell. Senior Baptist. Mr. Courtiville. Mr. William
Turner. Mr. Thomas Farmer. Mr. John Lenton. Mr. Samuel Akeroyd.
WITH THOROW-BASSES for the Theorbo, and Bass-Viol.

Royal Oak
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by I. P. for JOSEPH HINDMARSH, at the Golden-Ball over against
the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1685.

The STORM:
Set to Music by Mr. Henry Purcell.
^ BLow, blow Boreas, blow, and let thy sur -- ly Winds make the Billows foam
and roar; thou can no Terror breed in valiant Minds, but spite of thee we will
live, but spite of thee we will live and find a Shore. Then cheer my Hearts, and
be not awed, but keep the Gun-Room clear; though Hell's broke loose, and the De
-- vils roar abroad, whilst we have Sea-room here: ^ Boys, never fear, never,
never fear. Hey! how she tosses up! how far the mounting Topmast touched a
Star; the Meteors blazed, as through the Clouds we came, and Sa -- la -- man --
der-like, we live in Flame; but now, now we sink, now, now we go down to the
deepest Shades below. Alas! a -- las! where are we now! who, who can tell! sure
it is the low -- est Room of Hell, or where the Sea-Gods ^ dwell: With them we will
live, with them we will live and reign, with them we will lau -- gh, and sing, and
drink amain, with them we will lau -- gh, and sing, and drink a -- main, but see
we mount, see, see we rise a -- gain.

CHORUS.

^ Though fla -- shes of Lightning, and Tem -- pests of Rain, do Though fla -- shes
of Lightning, and Tem -- pests of Rain, do ^ fierce -- ly con -- tend which
shall conquer the Main; though the Captain does fierce -- ly con -- tend which
shall conquer the Main; though the Captain does swear, in -- stead of a Prayer,
and the Sea is all Fire by the Damons of the swear, in -- stead of a Prayer, and
the Sea is all Fire by the Damons of the Air; we will drink and de -- fie, we will
drink and de -- fie the mad Spi -- rits that Air; we will drink and de -- fie,
we will drink and de -- fie the mad ^ fly from the Deep to the Sky, that fly, fli
-- e, from the Deep to the Spi -- rits that fly from the Deep to the Sky, that
fly from the Deep to the Sky, and sing whilst loud Thunder, and sing whilst
loud Thunder does* Sky, and sing whilst loud Thun -- der, loud Thunder does
bellow; for Fate will still have a kind Fate for the Brave, and never make his
bellow; for Fate will still have a kind Fate for the Brave, and never make his
^ Grave of a Salt Water Wave, to drown, to drown, no, never to drown a good
Fellow; no, Grave of a Salt Water Wave, to drown, to drown, no, never to drown
a good Fellow; no, never, no, never to drown a good Fellow; no, ne -- ver, ne
-- ver to drown, no, ne -- ver, ne -- ver to drown a good Fellow; no, never,
no, ne -- ver to drown, no, never, no, ne -- ver to drown a good Fellow; no,
never, no, never to drown a good Fellow* ne -- ver, ne -- ver to drown a good
Fellow; no, ne -- ver, ne -- ver to drown a good Fellow

The WINCHESTER CHRISTENING, the Sequel of the Winchester Wedding: A new Song,
set to the Tune of a pretty Country Dance, called, The Hemp-dresser.
^ THe Sun had loosed his weary Team, and turned his Steeds a grazing; ten
Fathoms deep in Neptune's Stream, his The -- it is was embracing: The Stars
tripp'd in -- to the Fir -- ma -- meant, like Milkmaids on a May Day; or Coun --
try Las -- ses a Mumming sent, or Schoolboys on a Play-day.

II.
Apace came on the gray-ey'd Morn',
The Herds in the Fields were lowing;
And amongst the Poultry in the Barn,
The Ploughman's Clock fate crewing:
When Roger dreaming of golden Joys,
Was waked by a bawling Rout Sir;
For Cisly told him, he needs must rise,
His Iuggy was crying out Sir.
III.
Not half so quickly the Cups go round,
At the toping a good Ale Firkin;
As Roger Hosen and Shoon had found,
And buttoned his Leather Jerkin:
Gray Mare was saddl'd with wondrous speed,
With Pillion on Buttock right Sir,
And thus he to an old Midwife rid,
To bring the poor Kid to light Sir.
IV.
Up, up, dear Mother, then Roger cries,
The Fruit of my Labor's new come;
In Iuggy's Belly it sprawling lies,
And cannot get out 'till you come.
I Will help it, cries the old Hag, never doubt,
Thy Iug shall be well again Boy;
I Will get the Urchin as safely out,
As ever it did get in Boy.
V.
The Mare now Bustles with all her feet,
No whipping or Spurs were wanting;
At last into the good House they get,
And Mew soon cried the Bantling:
A female Chit so small was born,
They put it into a Flagon;
And must be christened that very Morn',
For fear it should dye a Pagan.
VI.
Now Roger struts about the Hall,
As great as the Prince of Condy;
The Midwife cries, her Parts are small,
But they will grow larger one day:
What though her Thighs and Legs lie close,
And little as any Spider;
They will, when up to her Teens she grows,
By grace of the Lord lie wider.
VII.
And now the merry Spic'd-bowls went round,
The Gossips were void of shame too;
In buttered Ale the Priest half drowned,
Demands the Infant's Name too,
Some called it Phill, some Florida,
But Kate was allowed the best hint;
For she would have it Cunicula,
'Cause there was a pretty Jest in it.
VIII.
Thus Cuny of Winchester was known,
And famous in Kent and Dover;
And highly rated in London Town,
And courted the Kingdom over:
The Charms of Cuny by Sea and Land,
Subdues each human Creature;
And will our stubborn Hearts command,
Whilst there is a Man, or Nature.
BARTHOLOMEW-FAIR, a Catch;
set to Music by Dr. John Blow.
^ HEre is the ra -- ri -- ty of the whole Fair,
^ Pimper-le-pimp, and the wise dancing Mare;
^ here is va -- liant St. George and the Dra -- gone, a Farce,
^ a Girl of Fifteen with strange Moles on her A -- --.
^ Here is Vi -- en -- na be -- sieg'd a rare thing,
^ and here is Pun -- chi -- nel -- lo shown thrice to the King:
^ Then see the Masks to the Cloi -- ster re -- pair,
^ but there will be no Raffling, a pox take the May'r.
The SHUTTLECOCK; a new Song,
set to a pretty Scotch Tune by Mr. Courtiville.
^ HAve you seen Bat -- tle -- door play, where the Shuttlecock fly's to and
fro one? Or, have you no -- ted an A -- pe -- ril-day, now rai -- ning, now
shining, now warming, now storming? Ah! just, just such as these is a Woman.
Love and true Me -- rit do seldom pre -- vail, for always we hold a wet Eel by
the Tail, their Tongues never are i -- dle, the ^ Humour's a Rid -- dle they
prick with their Needle, and o -- gle and wheedle; and if they have Charms,
it is rare -- ly that Beau -- ty is true to ye, for few or none you are sure are
your own, but in your Arms.

LOVE UNBLINDED; a new Song,
set to Music by Mr. William Turner.
^ MY Life and my Death were once in your power, I languish'd each mo -- meant,
and died ev' -- ry hour; but now your ill u -- sage has o -- penned my Eyes, I
can free my poor Heart, and give o -- there is Advice: By Dis -- sem -- bling and
Lies the Cocquet may be won, but he that loves faith -- full -- ly, will be
undone.

II.
Time was, false Aurelia, I thought you as bright
As Angels adorned in the Glories of Light;
But your Pride and Ingratitude now, I thank Fate,
Have taught my dull Sense to distinguish the Cheat:
And now I can see in your Face no such Prize,
No Charms in your Person, no Darts in your Eyes.
III.
Fain, fain for your sake my Amors I would end,
And the rest of my days give my Books, and my Friend;
But another kind Fair calls me fool, to destroy,
For the sake of one Jilt, my whole Life's greatest Joy:
For though Friends, Wine, and Books, make Life's Diadem shine,
Love, Love is the Jewel that makes it so fine.
The STORM;
set to Music by Mr. Henry Purcell.
^ Farewell ye Rocks, ye Seas, and Sands, green Neptune I de -- spise; I Will ra
-- there court the plea -- sant Strands, than all his wa -- try Joys: In -- con
-- stant Bliss our Fate be -- guiles, the Sea like Love we ^ find; where Calms
are like fair Cynthia's Smiles, and frowns like gusts of Wind. Hear the noise
of the Tar -- paw -- lin Boys; Port, port, Port, port, port, hear the noise of
the port, Luff bawl aft the Sheet is the Ma -- ri -- ner's Wit: A Tarpawlin
Boys: A plague of their plague of their ig -- no -- rant Prattle, and send me
to Land, and send me to ig -- no -- rant, ig -- no -- rant Prattle; and send me
to Land, where ^ Land, where I may com -- mand a pret -- ty kind Wench, a I may
com -- mand a pret -- ty kind Wench, a pret -- ty kind pret -- ty kind Wench,
and a Bot -- tle. pret -- ty kind Wench, and a Bot -- tle.

II.
With all God's Miracles at Land,
Let me acquainted be;
Let Fools that more would understand,
Go find them out at Sea.
His mighty Works I Will praise on Shore,
And there his Blessings reap;
But from this moment seek no more
His Wonders in the Deep.
Chor. Port, port, etc.

III.
The Merchant, when his Sails are furled,
Glides over the foamy Main;
And ploughs with ease the watery World,
So great a Charm is Gain:
When Avarice has any Bounds,
If his contented were;
I Would wage a hundred thousand Pounds,
He never would come there.
Chor. Port, port, etc.

The PERFECTION; a new Song to the Duchess:
Set to Music by Dr. John Blow.
^ WE all to conquering Beauty bow, its plea -- sing Power ad -- mire; but I
never knew a Face 'till now, that like yours could inspire. Now I may say, I
met with one a -- ma -- zes all Mankind; and ^ like Men ga -- zing on the Sun,
with too much Light am blind.

II.
Soft as the tender moving Sighs,
When longing Lovers meet;
Like the divining Prophets wise,
And like blown Roses sweet:
Modest, yet gay; reserved, yet free;
Each happy Night a Bride;
A Mein like awful Majesty,
And yet no spark of Pride.
III.
The Patriarch, to gain a Wife,
Chaste, beautiful, and young,
Served fourteen Years a painful Life,
And never thought 'em long.
Ah! were you to reward such Cares,
And Life so long could stay;
Not fourteen, but four hundred Years,
Would seem but as one Day.
A new SONG;
set to Music by Mr. Thomas Farmer.
^ WHy! why! oh ye Powers that rule the Sky! must the Love -- sick Damon dye?
When the Nymph is at ease, he admires; she that cau -- ses my groaning, and
kills with frowning, for Love her hard Heart could ne -- ver in -- spire: Ah!
leave me to pain, still since it is in vain, still to per -- swade, or change
the fair cru -- el Maid.

II.
Down, down,
By a Brook I Will lay me down,
Where the Stream does sadly run,
Whose Waves my Tears shall still increase;
Oh ye merciless Powers!
That talk of showers
Of Joys in Heaven poor Mortals possess!
Ah! if you would have me
Ever believe Joys after Death,
Give me her to strengthen my Faith.
The DISTRUST; a new Song
set to Music by Mr. John Lenton.
^ NO, sil -- ly Clo -- ris! tell me no such Stories, true generous Love can ne
-- ver un -- do ye; when I de -- sert ye, let af -- fe -- cted Vir -- tue charm
ev' -- ry Fop that now does pur -- sue ye: ^ Search all hu -- man Nature, try
ev' -- ry Creature, stu -- die all Complexions, ev' -- ry Face and Feature; and
when e're I dye, you will too late de -- scry none e -- ver yet did love so well
as I.

II.
Curse on Ambition,
What a blessed condition
Lovers were in not awed by that Demon;
Then cruel Cloris!
Careless of Vain-Glories,
Would reap more Bliss than Pride e're could dream on:
We should have no dying,
No Self-denying,
Sighings or Repulses,
When the Soul is flying;
But truly wise,
Dirt she would despise,
And own her Love the Crown of all her Joys.
The PASSION;
set to Music by Mr. Samuel Akeroyd.
^ BY all the Powers! I love you so, nothing's so dear to me below; and when I
would your Scorn forsake, some An -- gel turns, and brings me back: Al-tho' my
Heart's not fooled with ease, yet you may break it when you please; it is no --
ble, and does ra -- there dare to dye, than languish and de -- spair.

II.
Ah! tell me not that Men deceive,
But if you would be believed, believe:
My Heart, like Tapers, shut in Urns,
Whilst Love gives Matter ever burns:
Since kindness has resistless Charms,
And Beauty, wanting Youth, decays;
Make have, and fly into my Arms,
And crown my blessed remaining Days.
A Dialogue betwixt ALEXIS and SYLVIA:
Set to Music by Mr. Henry Purcell.
Alexis. ^ SIT down my dear Sylvia, and then tell me, tell me true, when we the
fierce pleasure of Pas -- sion first knew; what Senses were charmed, and what
Raptures did dwell with -- in thy fond Heart, my dear ^ Nymph! prithee tell!
That when thy Delights in their full -- ness are known, I may have the joy to re
-- late all my own,


Sylvia. Oh fie, my A -- lex -- is! how dare you pro -- pose to me sil -- ly
Girl, things im -- mo -- dest as those! Nice Can -- dor and Mo -- de -- sty
glow in my Breast, whose Ver -- tue can ut -- ter no Words so un -- shaft; but
if your im -- pa -- tience ad -- mits no de -- lay, de -- scribe ^ your own
Raptures, and teach me the way.


Alexis. ^ A Pain mixed with Pleasure my Sen -- ses first found, when crowds of
Delight strait my Heart did surround; a Joy so trans -- por -- ting, I sighed
when 'twas done, and fain would re -- new, but a -- las! all was gone: Coy Na
-- ture was trea -- che -- rous, when first she meant a Treasure so pre --
cious so soon should be spent; coy ^ Na -- ture was trea -- che -- rous, when
first she meant a Trea -- sure so pre -- cious so soon should be spent.


Sylvia. ^ This free kind Con -- fes -- sion does so much pre -- vail, that I
in your Bo -- some would blush out my Tale; but Dea -- rest, you know it is too
much to de -- clare the Ioys that our Souls, when u -- ni -- ted, do share. Let
this then suf -- fice, if the Plea -- sure could last, a Saint would leave ^
Heaven, a Saint would leave Heaven still so to be blessed, still so, so, so to be
blessed.


CHORUS. ^ LET this then suffice, if the Pleasure could last, a Saint would
leave Heaven, a LET this then suffice, if the Pleasure could last, a Saint
would leave Saint would leave Heaven still so to be blessed, still so, so, so to
be blessed. Heaven, a Saint would leave Heaven still so to be blessed, still so, so
to be blessed.


On AUGUSTUS and SOPHRONIA;
set to Music by Senior Baptist.
^ AV -- gu -- stus crowned with Ma -- je -- sty, his weigh -- ty Cares re --
mo -- ving, be -- held his World, but naught could spy, worth Roy -- al
Thought, but Lo -- ving: A Sy -- nod of the Gods ap -- pear, and vote their Sa
-- cred Sense; that none but the di -- vi -- nest Fair, should bless the
greatest Prince.

II.
Sophronia their Command obeys,
Sophronia their chief Blessing;
With Dove-like Innocence, her Face
Was sweet beyond expressing:
A Time commanding Beauty must,
While the World lasts, be fine;
And when the World is shook to dust,
The Sun will cease to shine.
FINIS.

