JUST RE-PROPOSALS TO Humble Proposals.

OR An impartial Consideration of, and Answer unto, the humble Proposals,
which are printed in the name of sundry Learned and Pious Divines, concerning
the Engagement which the Parliament has ordered to be taken. Showing, How
far those Proposals are agreeable to Reason, to Christianity and to Policy.
How the Proposers thereof may receive satisfaction therein, in all these
respects.

Hereunto are added, The humble Proposals themselves; because they are not
currantly to be found.

Written by JOHN DURY.

1 COR. 10. 18. Not he that commends himself, is approved; but whom the Lord
commends.

January 7. 1650.

Imprimatur, JOSEPH CARYL.

LONDON, Printed by J. C. for Richard wodenothe, at the Star under St. Peter's
Church in Cornhill, 1650.

JUST RE-PROPOSALS To humble PROPOSALS.
SECT. I. Concerning the Scope of this Treatise.
IT is conceived, that these Proposalls contain the strength of all those
Scruples; which the conscientious, and hitherto otherwise well-affected party
toward the Cause of liberty and Reformation, has taken up against the
Engagement: and because it is neither just nor conscionable, that any matter
The occasion and induce meant to write this Treatise.
should be pressed upon the Conscience of any as a Duty, otherwise then by a
clear demonstration of the righteousness thereof, and a conviction of the
judgment therein: nor can it with any probability be conceived, that the
Parliament which with so much Pious zeal and vigor, has opposed the
encroachments of Tyranny hitherto; should now intend any pressures upon any,
which are not absolutely necessary, or further then they are unavoidably
requisite for common safery; therefore it will be very expedient, to endeavor
the removing of these Scruples, as of stumbling blocks out of the way of
conscionable men, The Scope thereof.
whose aim is, to seek Peace and Unity in the Truth; and to offer by a just
Reproposall, and more faithful Representation of matters, some equitable
satisfaction to these humble Proposals.

And to this effect two things shall be weighed without prejudice, The things
to be handled therein.
and taken into serious consideration: First, what strength of Reason, and
strain of Christianity is in these Proposals. Secondly, what way may be
followed, to bring the minds of these Proposers into a quiet frame, by the
performance of these Duties which they themselves acknowledge to be just, and
which to the State will undoubtedly give satisfaction.

SECT. II. The Sum and Substance of the Proposals briefly, and in order.
THe Ministers who have made these Proposals, represent first themselves unto
us; and then their scruples concerning the Engagement, for which they desire to
be excused from the Subscription thereof.

They represent themselves in reference to that which is past, to that which is
present, and to that which is their future resolution. In the Proposals.
In reference to things past, they have faithfully served the Parliament; they
have suffered for the cause thereof in the pursuance Sect. I.
of just liberty and reformation; and they have adhered to their first
Principles unto this day.

In reference to things present, they are peaceable and obedient to the Laws
of the Nation; they endeavor with meekness and humility to preserve their
inward peace, and outward safety; and they find themselves straightned in
conscience upon the case of the present Engagement.

In reference to future Resolutions, they declare that they will behave
themselves according to these following Positions.

1. That although they hold themselves still bound by their Sect. 2.
former solemn Covenant and Engagements; yet that they are also convinced,
that it is necessary some Civil Government should be maintained in the Land.

2. That they count it agreeable to the will of God, to the light of nature, to
the practice of all Christians, to their own principles, and to their former
Engagements; to own the changes of Government, which Gods providence brings
upon a Nation; when he disables one, and inables another, Government to afford
protection to the people thereof.

3. That their owning of the Government will be by living quietly and peaceably
in their places and callings under it; and by submitting to such things as are
imposed upon, or required of them by the Powers which are in actual
possession; being things in themselves lawful, and necessary for the
preservation of themselves and others.

4. That all this may be done without disputing the right and title of those
who are in place of Magistracy over them.

In these things they propose themselves unto us; that we may know what they
are, and what their sense is of the present Government, and the subjection due
thereunto.

Then in the second place, they propose also what their scruples are,
concerning a subscriptio^ to the Engagement, which are of four sorts. viz. 1.
Of that which the words in themselves seem to imply and import. 2. Of that
where they relate to the violating of former Engagements 3. Of that which is a
matter of general scandal and offense. 4. Of that which may become a snare
unto the Subjects, and a prejudice unto the Rulers themselves. Sect. 3.


Concerning the sense of the words, they scruple at them because they seem to
import (say they) things not to be assented unto. As

1. An Approbation of the present establishment as effected by a full and free
Authority.

2. A Ratification and consent of the people unto the Authority.

3. An Obligation to act, at all times, in all places and capacities to the
promoting and strengthening of the Authority.

Concerning the violation of their former Oaths and Engagements; they declare
from the words thereof, and the manner of Sect. 4.
taking the same; that such an awful impression remains upon their conscience
thereby, that except the consistency of the Engagement be made unquestionably
clear, with the solemn League and Govenant; that to enter into it will be
utterly unlawful unto them.

Concerning the matter of Scandal; they say that the taking Sect. 5
of the Engagement being looked upon, as an infringement of former Oaths, will
blast the whole reputation of their persons, and Sect. 5.
of their Ministry, and reflect with more dis-advantage upon the Gospel, then
bring advantage to the State: for which cause, they cannot yield to a
Subscription thereof: till either by a solemn Debate about it (as of the
Covenant) or otherwise; the Scruples of their Conscience be taken away.

Concerning the snare laid by Superiors before their Subjects; and the
prejudice redounding from thence upon the Government it self; it is not offered
as a Scruple, but rather as a warning Sect. 6.
to those that are in Power; that they should not imitate the Episcopal
severity and persecution in King James his days, and in later times, whereby
they laid the foundations of ensuing evils to themselves and their people: and
that they should not act against their professed Principles in having no
respect unto tender Sect. 7-
Consciences.

From all which premises, they infer a conclusion by way of supplication,
put up to those that are in present Power, that they may not be compelled,
either to draw reproach upon Religion, Sect. 8.
and vilify the Reputation of their Ministry, or to suffer so high a penalty,
as to be outlawed of their Birthright for not subscribing the Engagement.

SECT. III. What strength of Reason is to be found in the matter of these
Proposals, to draw on their conclusion.
THe conclusion, which the Proposers infer upon these Proposals, is this; We
beseech you constrain us not to take the Engagement by any punishment; but
suffer us to be in The mair^ conclusion of the Proposals.
safety under your protection; although we subscribe not the Engagement, as you
require us to do.

If the rational ground of this demand be inquired into, it will be found to
stand in the arguments, which make good these three assertions.

1. That we ought not to subscribe the Engagement.

2. That you ought not to punish us for non-subscription. And three Branches of
it.


3. That we ought to have our birth right, which is the benefit of the Laws of
the Nation, and your protection to that effect, though we subscribe not.

If the Reason of the first assertion be asked, viz. Why ought you to subscribe
the Engagement?

The Answer will be this; because we are streigthned in Conscience, The
Arguments proving the first Branch.
upon the Cases incident to the Engagement, and cannot subscribe it without
doubting; which to do, in us would be sin by the Apostles Rule, Romans 14.

What is the cause of your doubting?

The cause of our doubting is, 1. The sense of the Engagement importing things
greatly different from that, which we conceive to be our duty in respect of the
present establishment. 2. The seeming violation of our former Oaths. 3. And the
matter of grievous scandal, which will be given to all sorts of people,
against the Gospel and our persons and ministry therein, if we be counted
perjured in our former Oaths; which rather then to suffer, and to make the
glorying of our Ministry void, we should resolve to dye.

For all which reasons (say they) we ought not to subscribe this Engagement;
because to our thought, these are the consequences of the sense employed
therein; nor can these inconveniences as to us be removed, except the
consistency of this Engagement with the former Oaths, be made unquestionably
evident.

If the Reason of the second assertion be asked of them, viz. The Arguments
proving the second branch.
Why the Rulers of the State ought not to punish them for nonsubscription? The
Answer will be this; because Governors though in highest Authority, are bound
to avoid the laying of snares and stumbling blocks in the way of their
brethren: and if these that are over us now, should do as our former Governors
did, to impose ensnaring Oaths upon godly people, and enforce their
subscriptions thereunto; tbey may by that means in the beginning of their
Government, lay the unhappy foundations of ensuing troubles, to themselves and
their people; as King James and Charles and the Bishops in former times have
done.

And then another reason why the Subscription ought not to be enforced with a
punishment; is because the professed Principles and resolutions of these that
are in present power are to have respect to tender consciences, which in this
case would not be rogarded; if without considerations of these scruples, a
punishment should be inflicted upon the non-subscribers of the Engagement.

And if it be objected: but what assurance can the Governors of the State have
of the non-subscribers peaceable conversation? The Answer is.

1. That the many years experience of the good behavior, and faithful service
of the Non-subscribers ought to be taken as a better security for their
peaceable disposition, then a fained subscription which many yield unto.

2. That they plead for a forbearance from Subscription only, till by a solemn
debate, or otherwise; their conscince shall be cleared of their important
scruples.

If lastly, the reason of the third assertion be asked. viz. Why ought you to
have the benefit of the Law, and our protection to that effect, though you
subscribe not to be true and The Arguments proving the third Branch.
faithful to the Commonwealth? The Answer will be this.

1. Because we have been faithful all along to the Parliament, till now of
late these stumbling blocks are come in our way.

2. Because we have been sufferers with you, and as much as any in the cause of
liberty and Reformation.

3. Because we adhere still to our first principles upon which you did
undertake to give us protection.

4. Because we do promise to maintain the Peace of the Nation, and to pay
obedience to the Laws thereof, whereof we crave the benefit.

5. And because notwithstanding all our former Oaths and Engagements; yet we
acknowledge not only the necessity of a civil Government in general, for the
preservation of humane society, and the prevention of outrages which wicked
men unrestrained would do to those that are peaceable; but we consider also in
particular, this Government which Gods providence has set up over us, to be
that under which we ought to live quietly and peaceably in our Callings; and to
which we will submit in all things law full and necessary for common safety,
without disputing the Right and Title, by which it stands; and seeing this is
the duty, which we are willing to perform, we crave the protection due to such
as behave themselves after this manner, although we subscribe not that
Engagement, which we conceive is greatly different from the tenor of these
duties.

This may be conceived to be the full strength and Rationality of their Plea:
whereunto what by way of answer may be said; shall afterward distinctly appear
in the Re-proposals, and in the discovery of the way of satisfaction, to be
given hereunto.

SECT. IV. What the strain of Christianity is, which in the manner of the
Proposal is followed.
THe manner and way of proposing these matters, as to Christianity That the
things proposed, as to th(...) matter and manner of uttering the same, is not
a(...) all offensive
seems without offense; the expressions being humble, modest, proper and
grave; the point of scruple solicitous, open and plain: and the matter of their
professed Resolution, without vanity or presumption, sad and serious, and
although the Title Page, (if it be supposed that the Proposers of these doubts
were also the Publishers thereof; and that the Title Page was appointed by them
to be made as it is) may seem to contain something contradictory to the
Proposals themselves; something unconformable to Christianity, and something
offensive But that th(...) Title Page and the publication of th(...) Proposals,
(...) offensive, (...) published b(...) the Author of the Proposalls
themselves.
to the superior Powers, which govern us at present; yet it is more suitable
to charity, to think that some inconsiderate Zelot; rather then any
considerable company of learned and pious Ministers of the Gospel, was the
Publisher thereof, and the Author of the Title Page; for it is not likely,
that any true Ministers of Christ in a matter of such concernment, whiles they
pretend to humility in their Proposals; would at the publishing thereof, claim
to themselves the high Titles, of Learned and of Divines: then which nothing
almost could be counted more presumptuous in them, nor could any sting be found
more injurious to wound the Authority of their Rulers with all; then to brand
their public Consultations, and the designs which they have for common
safety; with the-Character which is given in Psalm 64. 5. to persecuting wicked
Atheists, viz. That they commune of laying of Snares privily.

But if any of themselves should have put forth these their own Proposals; with
these high commendations of themselves; and with so much despite against their
Superiors, to whom they seem willing to be humble suitors for a favor; then
it may be judged not only indiscretion and vanity; but malicious Hypocrisy
(even against the very matter and scope of their own Proposals) in him
(whosoever he is) that has thus done it. For if this stinging expression (that
they commune of laying of Snares privily) be the true meaning of the Proposers
of these matters; and their positive judgment of the way of those to whom they
offer their Proposals; it is apparent, that by the publishing thereof, they
have none other aim, but under a fair pretense of Reason and Humility; to
commend themselves unto the discontented multitude, as learned and pious
Divines; and under that notion, to foment in the popular weak apprehensions,
the plausible prejudices, which the change of public affairs has begotten
against the persons and the proceedings of their Governors: which to cover,
strengthen, and insinuate under a Cloak of Religiousness, and a color of
straitness of Conscience, is as far from the truth of Christianity, as that
which to God and Men is most abominable and hateful.

It ought therefore to be far from our thoughts, to suspect that any pious
Ministers of Jesus Christ (who will one day reveal the secrets of all hearts)
should be accessory to any such contrivance; but how far the Publisher may be
guilty thereof, and what a prejudice he has cast thereby upon the Proposals
themselves, and what a jealonsie he has raised against the single aim and
Christian intent thereof, is to be left unto his own Conscience to be weighed
in the presence of God. It shall no way in the least degree forestall my
judgment in the consideration of the matters themselves by way of Re-proposals;
nor my affection in the manner of representing the same to find a way of
satisfaction thereunto.

SECT. V. What those who have subscribed the Engagement, may justly Re-propose
unto these Proposals.
THe Ministers throughout this Nation, who have judiciously and conscionably,
as a matter of duty taken the Engagement, may justly represent and Re-propose
to those, who seem offended at them for so doing, this which follows;
somewhat in imitation of their own style, and in Answer to these Proposals.

We Ministers of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, who have all of us Who the
subscribers of the Engagement are.
from the beginning, sought faithfully the Common good of the Nation, and
served therein the Parliament, for the pursuance of the necessary ends of just
Liberty and Reformation; and have suffered heretofore many grievous things, in
our Names and Estates from the common enemy; and are now (especially such of us
as are posted up) like to become sufferers of the like or worse things from our
Brethren, and friends hereafter. Yet to this day we do constantly adhere to our
first Principles; and are not staggered, either in resolutions or endeavors,
to maintain in our places and stations the Peace of this Nation, The grounds
and inducements of their subscription to the Engagement.
and to pay obedience to the Laws thereof. We conceive it our Duty in such a
time as this, by all ways of justice, of dutifullnesse, and of Christian
freedom with humility; to preserve our inward Peace and outward safety, by
keeping a good Conscience, in the case of the present Engagement; which we
being required to take, and to subscribe could not refuse to do, as finding our
selves obliged thereunto, as to a Duty whereof we can give this rational
account to all that shall desire to know, what our grounds are for doing the
same. 1. Because the former: Engagements oblige them to uphold the foundation
of Civil Government.


First, We have taken and subscribed this Engagement; because we hold our
selves still bound, by our former solemn Covenants and Engagements, (as taken
by us in that sense, which their express words do undoubtedly declare; which
is most clearly suitable to their main ends of public Peace and Safety; and
wherein it is at this time possible and lawful for us to observe them) to
uphold the grounds of Civil Government in this Land; for the preservation of
humane society, and prevention of all those evils, which the outrages of
wicked men un-restrained would produce therein; which is the whole effect of
this Engagement.

Secondly, Upon mature deliberation we did perceive; that 2. Because God has
altered by an extraordinary way, the Government of this State, from a Kingdom
to a Commonwealth, whereunto obedience is due.
the wise and holy Providence of God, (whose judgments are unsearchable, and
ways past finding out) has at this time against and beyond all men's former
thoughts and expectations, shaken the foundations of this State, as it was a
Kingdom, and disabled that way of Government and all that depends thereon, from
affording any protection and preservation to any of the Inhabitants of this
Land; and has enabled another form of Government to afford it; Wherefore we
did conclude from the light of nature; from the judgment of the Learned; from
the practice of Christians in former ages; from our own Principles; and from
our former Engagements; that it was the will of God, we should quietly and
peaceably set our selves in our places and callings, to live under this
Government; and to submit to it, in such things as are imposed upon, or
required of us, by the Powers which are in actual possession; being things in
themselves lawful and necessary, or expedient to the preservation of our
selves and others.

Thirdly, because although we found others making a question 3. Because
obedience is due to the public power, without disputing their title.
of the way, how those who govern at present are come to the helm; yet we
conceived that in this case of the Engagement, we were bound without disputing
the right or title of those that are in place of Magistracy; to declare our
willingness to be true and faithful to the Commonwealth of this Nation,
which now does stand without a King, and House of Lords: because we found this
clear duty included in the obvious 4. Because the words of the Engagement are
not to be otherwise interpreted then as they contain a clear duty.
sense thereof.

Fourthly, because we clearly conceive, that there is no difference at all
between the submission which the Authors of the Proposals themselves rightly
acknowledge to be due to the Powers, which are in actual possession, and that
which is required by the subscription to this Engagement: for seeing the
express words of the Engagement give no ground, to interpret the Act of
subscription, beyond that which is a clear and known duty: therefore we think
it not (as to our Consciences) warrantable to interpret it otherwise; but we
rather think it contrary to a known duty, to make of a thing in it self lawful
and necessary at this time, any scrupulous interpretation beyond what the words
import; or to suspend obedience from a duty, upon the conjecture of something
which may be thought undutifull, And the Proposers interpretation of the
Engagement is undutifull.
when that which is to our Conscience a known duty is apparent: Upon which
ground we declare, that we trouble not our selves, nor do we think it lawful
to stagger others in their thoughts; with the inferences which the Proposers
make upon the Subscription of the Engagement, with Reference to these Queries.

As how far it does imply an approbation of the manner of the present
Establishment; Whether as effected by a full and free Authority yea or no?
whether yea or no, it does imply an active Concurrence, and a ratifying consent
of the People thereunto, further then what has been already acknowledged to be
due to the Powers in actual possession; by all that are in subjection under
them, and depend upon their protection? and whether yea or no, and how far it
fastens an obligation to act to the strengthening and promoting of the
Government, which is at present, or may be hereafter established by the
advantage of possible power? we say, that to trouble our own, or other men's
weaker Consciences, with these or such like doubtful Conjectures to color the
suspension of our own, or occasion the aversion of other men's affections from
yielding obedience to a clear and confessed Reasons why none should interpret
the Engagement as the Proposers do.
duty, is not only preposterous and contrary to the aim of healing breaches,
and of advancing a public good in this time of distraction; but inconsistent
(as to our reason) with the obvious meaning of the words, which are to be
subscribed, and disagreeing (as to our affections) with the Charity due, no
less to superiors, then to other men, which is not to think evil when good
may be thought of them. 1. Cor. 13. 5.
And lastly, it is opposite (as to our spirits) unto that wisdom which is from
above (the Rule of our walking) teaching us, to have pure and peaceable
thoughts in all our actings; to perform duties in Godly simplicity, and without
worldly wisdom; to be 2 Cor. 1. 12.
gentle and easily entreated, to do good works without partial scrupulosity,
and without hypocrisy. Jam. 3. 17.


And upon these principles of true wisdom (which we humbly conceive are not
laid to heart, by our Brethren in the third Paragraph of their Proposals) we
professedly wave all those scruples and the stumbling blocks, which they have
laid to themselves, and wherewith they have puzzled others, upon this clear
Account; that whenever the consideration of these things, which are said to be
employed in the Subscription (which we see not) shall come before us, to be
circumstantially considered for the edification of others, or the clearing of
our own way; we then shall be most ready to declare our sense therein,
according to known principles and the circumstances, which God shall offer; but
in the mean time we think it answerable to the Duty of Christianity, that we
should acquiesce in this plain and general Resolution; that whatsoever
hereafter shall appear to us in any of these doubtful Cases to be a truth, or
a duty; to be asserted or performed, for the good of the Commonwealth (under
what form, or without what form soever we find it established) we shall hold
forth the same freely in word and deed toward all, behaving our selves therein
accordingly in a peaceable manner. Because to do otherwise, we think it so far
from following a known Rule of Christianity in uprightness and simplicity, that
it tends to nothing else but a prejudicate forestallment of our own and other
men's thoughts, by the laying of snares and stumblingblocks before them.

The thing then which we re-propose to our Brethrer is this.

That as we ingenuously conceive, there is no difference at all between the
things which they themselves have mentioned to An Answer to the 3. Sect. of the
Proposals, by way of Reproposal.
be duties of Subjects to Superiors, and the Subscription required by the
present Authority to the obvious sense of the Engagement: So we say to that
which they call a difference, that notwithstanding this Subscription, it is
free for us in Conscience to think differently of the manner of the
Establishment, according to that which our judgment and light does or shall
dictate unto us in reference to changeable circumstances, if only at all
times, and in all circumstances however changeable; we engage our truth and
faithfulness toward the public good of the Commonwealth under the same:
whence we do acknowledge, that upon this Engagement these consequences will
follow, as to our Consciences.

First, That we are bound to approve of the present establishment, so far as
the manifestation of our truth and faithfulness to the Commonwealth, does
oblige us in our places to follow quietly our own Callings, whether the
Authority over us be full and free or no.

Secondly. That we ought not to suspend and deny our active concurrence and
ratifying consent to any thing which in the present establishment shall be
offered and found lawful and necessary for common safety; being offered to us
by the Authority which is, especially because it is declared, that the
Original of all just power is in the People: therefore conceiving that our
consent is required hereunto, (as being some of the People) we judge it our
duty in this sense to give it; least we become accessory to the causes of
disturbing our present peace or future settlement.

Thirdly, That we ought to be obliged in things lawful, necessary and
expedient for common safety to act at all times, in all places and capacities,
to the promoting and strengthening of the Establishment which Gods providence
has set over us, and he has enabled to afford us just protection.

And seeing by this Engagement, we think not our selves bound up by any words
expressed therein; to the particulars: (Of a full and free Authority; of the
consent of the people; and of the strengthening of another establishment, which
may set it self up, etc.) employed and mentioned in the Proposals: but mean to
declare by our subscription, thus far only as we have said, our approbation
of, our ratefying consent unto, and our obligation toward the present
establishment: therefore we conceive not that we do violate any of our former
Oaths, Protestations or solemn League and Covenant, whereunto by the former
Commands Re-prosall to the 4. Sect. of the Proposals relating to the breach of
Covenan^.
of Parliament we actually were, or implicitly could be obliged, but we
remember very well, and consider concerning the Covenant; both the time when,
and the manner how, and the matter whereunto we were engaged by it; and the
sense wherein we then took it, and the asseverations that we should never be
drawn from it by any terror or combination whatsoever; and the durable
obligation brought upon our selves by it, even all the days of our life; and
the consideration which we had before our eyes in the taking of it; namely, the
Glory of God in the first place; the advancement of the Kingdom of our Lord
Jesus Christ, in the second place; and the happiness of the King, and his
Posterity, as subordinate, and in order thereunto (by the liberties of the
Nation preserved) in the third place; all which things, as we did formerly, so
we do still duly consider: and find by the changeableness of public affairs
upon circumstances, which Gods providence has ordered for judgment over some,
and for mercy toward others; and by the unsut^blenesse of the late Kings ways
with the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the inconsistency of his course with the
public welfare of this Nation: that the present frame of the State which now
is, though different from what then was, has not been set up by any breach of
Covenant: and that the Engagement whereinto we are entered, to be true and
faithful to this Commonwealth, as it now is (viz.) established without a
King, and House of Lords, has nothing at all inconsistent with the former
Engagements; or does give us the least cause to carry about with us a
conscience (as to these things) trembling and doubtful, because we find our
selves free from all guilt of the least intention of violating any former
promises, in things which are possible and lawful to be done by us in our
places; which were unalterable conditions of all humane promises, at all times
presupposed and employed therein. Belating to the parity of reason, said to be
between the Engagement to King and Lords, Without Commons, and to the Commons
without King and Lords.


Nor is there now (to our understanding) any parity of reason; in that which we
at this time do, to that which would have been if we had done the like in time
past: for although it would have been undoubtedly inconsistent with our
Covenant at that time; when King, Lords and Commons made up a Parliament, to
have subscribed any Engagement to the King and Lords (if it should by their
Agreement and Authority have been required of us) without the Commons of
England, because the Covenant did expressly subordinate the relation which we
had to the King and Lords, unto the relation which we had to the Commonwealth,
yet now it cannot be understood to be inconsistent with the tenor there of
(when there is no King nor House of Lords in being) to be without them engaged
to the Commonwealth: because we never understood our selves otherwise engaged,
nor could we justly by any Covenant or Oath whatsoever be otherwise engaged to
them; but in order to the Commonwealth, and as they were true and faithful to
the same. Therefore there is no parity of reason in that, which then would have
been to that which now is; neither in respect of the fundamental relation of
being eq^ally engaged to them, and to the Commonwealth: nor in respect of the
comparative relation, in cases of division and opposition, which was our
condition a while ago: nor in respect of the present circumstances of our
establishment, wherein there is none other Power and Authority visible, but
that of the Commons in Parliament, as Representatives to that Commonwealth; to
which at all times, in all cases and capacities, we find our selves
undoubtedly obliged to be true and faithful; that is to say, willing and
active to procure the Peace, the Safety, the Plenty, and the Welfare of this
National Society, in a Parliamentary way, whether it be with, or without a
King and House of Lords: nor can any just desire of the personal prosperity of
a man capable of being on a Throne, or of men called Lords, (which yet we do
not wish any should be deprived of in what is their just due) be justly laid in
the balance by us, with that faithfulness which we owe to the whole
Commonwealth: nor can the present want of them, or any thing which they can
claim justly, prejudice the truth of our affection, toward the public weal
of the Nation in a way without them, no more then their presenct heretofore did
take us off from aiming at the same public weal of the Nation, by the way
wherein they formerly stood. There can bethere fore no parity of reason found,
why the Engagement to the one should sway with us as much as to the other,
although the King, and Lords-House were in being, which the former Engagements
did presuppose: but now this presupposall failing without our guilt, and by
their own miscarriages against the Commonwealth, all the Engagements by which
we were bound unto them, are ipsofacto, made void; and our present Engagement
to the Commonwealth, and Parl, therein, is still the same which it was; nor
could any Covenant or Oath ever alter it, nor did any of us ever intend to
infringe it.

Therefore we shall further re-propose unto these Proposers The Reproposall to
the 5. Sect. of the Proposals relating to matters of offense and scandal.
almost in their own-words, that these things being thus considered (as we
conceive them to be truths clear and unquestionable to all rational men's
capacities) in the nature of this Engagement; and in the full relation wherein
it stands to former Engagements, cannot in our judgments minister the least
matter of scandal or offense to any man whatsoever, either good or bad: who
although they are not able to make, or happily so much as to understand subtle
distinctions, (for we make none, nor need we to seek for any) whereby guilt may
either be evaded or palliated; yet we hardly can imagine, that any will be so
irrationally and unconscionably injurious to us, as to look upon us, as
breakers of our oaths and covenants in this case; or as prevaricators of the
most sacred and solemn things; or as men of ductile spirits unto evil; (for
to be ductile to our duty is our glory) or of prostituted consciences, or led
by Principles of fear or interest; which prejudices (seeing it cannot be
denied, that they are only founded upon the ignorance and mistakes of some men;
and upon the malicious informations and wrongful suggestions of others, and
not upon any solid or just reasons: therefore they) do grossly wound the
Gospel; and such as rail at us, or post us up to be persecuted; and proclaim
us to be perjured; wrong us their innocent brethren, and expose our Ministry to
scorn, (the honor whereof ought to be dearer to us then our lives) endanger
the reputation, and so weaken the power of it in the conscience of our hearers
(who in these times of distraction are soon persuaded to have low thoughts of
their Ministers; chiefly when Ministers themselves study to make one another
contemptible) as that it needs must be believed, that both Christ, and the
State also, will be greater loosers by their disorderly carriage against the
subscribers of the Engagement then either they, or any body else; can be
gainers by their nonscribing of it.

We shall desire always with our Brethren, and we hope no less then they, to
keep in mind the noble resolution of the Apostle; who would not in case of
scandal use his own just power, And relating to Paul's example and resolution.
but chose freely to suffer all outward inconveniences to himself, rather then
to hinder the Gospel of Christ; concluding that it was better for him to die,
then that any in that behalf should make his glorying void: but he never chose
to neglect any part of a necessary Duty, for fear of any Kings or Lords
displeasure; or for the apprehension of any unjust reproaches, to be cast upon
himself by other men although perhapsBrethren, he was resolved, and did
conclude in this case, to go through evil and good report and rather to suffer
bonds and death, then not to procced in the work of his calling according Act.
20. v. 23. 24. and chapter 21. v. 11, 12, 13. Act. 21. v. 20, till 27.
to his Conscience: nor could any combination offew or of many brethren
together, take him off from such a resolution; although otherwise in matters
free to be done, or to be left undone as might tend to edification, he was of a
most ductile spirit, and of a most facile and yielding disposition. 1 Cor. 9.
19, 20. 21. 22.

We shall therefore again say with the Proposers in our Case; that upon these
and such like grounds purely conscientious, and And to the grounds of
conscience,
not out of any private interest or design; but for the manifestation of our
affection toward the peace of this Commonwealth we were not necessitated to
forbear; but were free to yield obedience to the Subscription, which was
required of us. And although how we need not for our ownsatisfaction, to desire
any And to the motion of a Treaty.
debate about the Engagement; yet if any shall desire a friendly conference
with us about the same, we shall no manner of way decline it; but rather
further it on our parts, that it may be rightly ordered unto edification.

As concerning the ensnaring Oaths, and Subscriptions offered by former
Governors; we truly desire they may be duly considered, Re-proposal to the 6.
Sect. relating to ensnaring Oaths.
and that the just judgment of God brought upon those, who without respect to
tender Consciences did press them, and lay them as stumbling blocks before
their Brethren, may be apprehended and seared; but we conceive, that the
requiring of a general promise from Subjects, to perform an undeniable and
unquestionable Duty to the Communalty wherein they live by these that have the
power of affording, or refusing Civil protection to them, is not of the same
nature with those former Oaths and Subscriptions, which former Governors did
require; for the former did relate unto matters of Religious concernment; and
not unto matters merely Civil, as this latter does; and then it is one thing,
to seek advantages against those whom we would entrap: (which was the
Episcopal design in their Canons) and another thing, to lay the foundation of
mutual trust and confidence, between those that are to make up one Body
Politic together; For a^ this subscription does tend to nothing in it self,
but this: so we are confident. that it is not proposed to any other end.
Therefore we are full of hope, that none will smart for it; but such as are
wilful disturbers of the public Peace and Safety: and that none may be found
in such a Categorie, our work shall be to gain all men to their Duties, by a
clear conviction of their understanding concerning the Truth, and faithfulness
which they owe to the Public: nor shall we delight to make any odious, for not
subscribing toward those that are in Authority, as we are made odious rowards
the multitude for discharging our conscience in subscribing; but we shall
rather condole with such, as conscionably abstain from subscribing; being
grieved, that by their own default in Duty, or weakness, Re-proposal to the 7.
Sect. relating to tender consciences.
they should be cast upon the sad Dilemma, either to be liable to the
displeasure and just jealousy of their Superiors; or to be under the trouble
of their own Spirits; which the fear as well of sinning, as of choosing
affliction does bring unto men of Conscience and ingenuity: and that these
inconveniences may be avoided, we shall on the one hand pray and interceede for
them; that the many years exprience of their quiet behavior And to the way of
security for peaceablenes.
and faithful services, may be accepted toward a just degree of security, and
assurance for future peaceablenesse: and on the other hand, we shall also
exhort and entreat, that as none should subscribe faignedly to the profession
of their duty: so all may do it sincerely; but especially such, as hitherto
have been faithful to the Cause; and amongst all these most chiefly, such as
stand piously for the Testimony of Jesus, either in the Classical or
Congregationall Ministry: lest through their failing in this kind, some that
watch for advantages against the Office of the Ministry it self; and from their
least haltings, make use of opportunities, ^o power contempt upon the function;
may not see their hearts desire brought to pass against them.

Thus then we, who at present, upon these considerations to our Consciences
satisfactory; and before all men justisiable, are free to subscribe the
Engagement as our Duty; do lovingly, as Re-proposal to the 8. Sect. concluding
the whole matter.
Brethren, beseech those that subscribe it not, not to censure or asperse us
(whose reputation is as necessary for others as a good Conscience for our
selves) to be men that draw reproach upon Religion; and vilify the reputation
of the Ministry, by which the service of Jesus Christ is advanced; nor cause
others to think of us, that we esteem Oaths as changeable as Opinions, and so
brand us with the odious marks of equivocation and prevarication, nor to
subject us unto the contempt and hate of all, as men of loose and uncertain
principles; and we shall endeavor (so far as God shall give us favor with out
Superiors) to procure to them, the grant of their equitable desires; that none
of them may be outlawed, until by wilful violation of the Laws they deprive
themselves of the protection, and forfeit the benefit thereof; which we should
be exceeding sorry for their and the Gospels. sake, to perceive in any of them.

SECT. VI. What course may be taken to give these Scruplers full satisfaction.
IN the foregoing Section, the subscribers have apologized for themselves; and
I have said in their Name, that which I am persuaded all may, and most will
assent unto; to wipe off the odium, and foul aspersions which are cast upon
them for their forwardness to do their duty. Now I shall humbly offer
something further, toward the satisfaction of these Scruplers; that if the
Re-proposals of the Subscribers, clear not their doubts sufficiently; some
other Overtures may not be wanting to ease them of the same, and induce them to
the performance of their Duty.

If then, in Charity to them whom I esteem brethren, and in Prudency to our
selves, for the preservation of public Peace, by some mutual assurance of
fidelity between Fellow Subjects; it Why a course of satisfaction is to be
aimed at.
is expedient to think upon some satisfactory course, how to prevent further
devisions, and heal (if it be possible) our breaches: left the Common enemy
both of Religion and Liberty, get his fit opportunity, by cooperating with our
failings, to set us aworke to destroy each other, who together have co-operated
hitherto in the common cause of Reformation, and just liberty; If (I say) this
be expedient to be thought upon, I would humbly suggest, toward the removing
of these Scruples; whether conscientiously by single-hearted Brethren, or
politically by some others who have double designs entertained; these ensuing
Motions.

1. Because no man can possibly receive full satisfaction in any thing, except
he will uncase himself that all his doubtings To satisfy scruplers, all their
scruples must be first known.
may be known to those that sincerely study his content; therefore our Brethren
who make these Proposals are to be entreated to declare; whether yea or no
these be all the scruples, which they have against the Subscription to the
Engagement; So that if these be removed, nothing will further hinder their
Subscription?

2. If these are all their scruples, and that nothing is further desired but
the removal thereof, then our Brethren are in the next place to be entreated
further to declare; whether they have in their eye any way of clearing these
doubts, by which they conceive (as knowing themselves best) their satisfaction
if it were Then they themselves should declare their sense of that which may
give them satisfaction.
followed might arise, and wherein their Conscience would acquiesce? As for
example whether a well-ordered Treaty, to remove mis-understandings, and to
determine, by known principles, matters of duty, will do it yea or no? or
whether they conceive that nothing will satisfy their doubtings, and embolden
them to subscribe, but either such a Declaration to be made by the supreme
power, upon the Engagement, as they shall rest contented in; or else such a
liberty to put in their own cautions, their limitations of performance, and
their interpretation of the sense wherein they take it; that in a manner they
shall have their own will wholly, without yielding any thing at all to the will
of their Superiors, to give them satisfaction?

If they will not answer any of these Queres, but will keep a hidden reserve of
doubts; or if nothing but one of the two last Proposals, will be esteemed
satisfactory: then it is evident, that in the Proposers aim there is no
sincerity; for although they seem by their Proposals, to seek satisfaction to
themselves, and What to be judged of the scruplers, in case they will not
declare themselves to the matters forementioned.
a way of agreement with others; yet because they manifestly obstruct all the
rational means of clearing their own doubts; and refuse to deal ingenuously
toward the obtaining of an equitable satisfaction from others, in that wherein
they pretend to be scrupled, it may justly be concluded, that these scruples
are only proposed to color a wilful resolution of non-subscribing, and of
standing at a distance from under the present power; and that consequently
there is some further design in hand as to State-affaires, tending to a future
breach; which how beseeming it may be to the humility and piety of such as are
called learned and pious Divines, to have a hand in, and what Conscience it
will be in them to cover it with the mask of tenderness of Conscience; I shall
leave to the judgment of all single-hearted Christians to determine.

It is a sad thing to consider, how far some men, who want not parts; and who
undoubtedly are truly Godly for the main; are led sometimes (in the agitation
of the affairs, wherein a party which they do affect is in^eressed) away from
the simplicity of the Gospel to play the Politicians, and it is neither well
credible to others, nor at all discernable by themselves; how far when once
they begin to warpe from the way of Christian simpicity, How it comes to pass
that some Ministers play the Statesmen.
and pure love to their duty; the motions of their own passion; the plots of
other men; and the designs of opposition against those whom they dis-affect,
will insinuate themselves into their very Consciences, under the pretense of
piety and zealousness for Religion; which they falsely first imagine to be the
cause they have in hand, and then in favor of this imagination they rashly
licenciat themselves unto many things; whereof in the day of their account they
will be troubled to find a justifiable acquittance. In case the scruplers be
plain dealing men, what ought to be their beheaviour in reference to a Treaty.


But supposing as I ought to do, that in these Proposers there is nothing under
the deck; but that in this modest and dis-creet way, the plain truth and all
the truth of their grievances, at the subscription is represented above board;
I shall now point at the means, which in a fair Treaty, I conceive may
produce unto them so much satisfaction, as in equity they can desire; That they
may have cause to deal ingenuously, either by accepting of that which is
offered, if it may be procured, or by excepting against it, if it seem not
satisfactory; in which last case, I think it would be fair dealing in them, not
only to allege their reasons, why they are not satisfied with what shall be
offered; but also to make their own demands, wherein at least they will rest
satisfied; for to lie only at the word of excepting, is an unreasonable posture
in treating between two equals, when both are alike concerned in a matter of
difference, far more then it is unreasonable when Subjects by a Treaty make
their application toward Superiors, and seek to gain the favor of some
equitable satisfaction from them in a matter of such concernment; which imports
no less then either the loss or the assurance of all their outward protection
and safety.

And seeing to stand always on the excepting, and not at all on the offering
or accepting hand, is a frame of spirit not only unfriendly amongst the
Members of the same Communalty, but altogether unsuitable to the profession of
Christianity; and also most of all unbecoming the work of the Ministry, and
unproportionate to the ways of peace and mutual confidence amongst brethren;
therefore, I shall not be so injurious as to suspect any of them of any
unwillingnesse to treat in a fair way; nor shall I imagine, that any
sinistrous design is hatched by the matter, and the proposing of these
Proposals in the mind of a discontented party, to strengthen the captions,
carping, peevish, and excepting humor of the times. I say, I shall not suspect
any such thing, although to a jealous eye; the matter thereof compared with the
aim therein, and the covered close way of dispersing the same amongst the
doubtful multitude; and at a time whiles petitions to gain delays, and
respit for further resolutions, are presented to Superiors, may look somewhat
suspitiously. Yet (I say) for all this I shall not suspect that any design
contrary to peaceablenesse, is fomented thereby in the affections of any: nor
shall I wish, that upon the appearance of such a cause of jealousy any
strictness should be used in the settlement of this business; But I shall
rather pray, persuade and exhort, that on both sides, the open carriage of all
matters, as in the presence of God, may take away or prevent as well the
appearance of subtle contrivances on the one hand, as the surmises thereof on
the other: for both these equally blast the hopes of unity, and the grounds of
amiable confidence in all men who are at a distance one from another; for which
cause I shall be a most humble suitor toward all sides, that on all hands, not
only a friendly Treaty may be set afoot, and cheerfully assented unto; but that
whiles matters of just scruple are taken into consideration, therein to be
resolved by known and predetermined Why matter of duty should not be suspended
but effectually intended during (...) Treaty, and not Withstanding some
differences.
rules; the matters of clear duty in the interim may not be suspended or
intermitted on eithersides, because all our danger lies in the neglect of
common known duties, more then in any thing else: for if we would but do that
which we confess we ought to do, and which we wish others would do to us;
there would be no doubt a speedy healing of our breaches: nor can there any
good reason be given why I should suspend to act a known duty in that wherein I
am not scrupled, because I ought to be left free to abstain from acting in that
wherein I am scrupled: that which in Christianity is clear and positive, is
always to be intended before that which is dark and negative: nor may I with a
good conscience, refuse to follow the light which I have in the main of a duty,
so far as it is practicable; because I want some light in some circumstantiall
cases, which may fall in, as to me, to be unpracticable. If therefore this
ground can be laid and assented unto, that whatever we shall agree upon to be a
clear and undeniable duty in Christianity or Morality, shall be practiced for
it self, not withstanding all other differences or defects falling in among
us, and that in the disquisition of matters we shall proceed always first to
determine that wherein we fully agree, before we mention matters of
dis-agreement; I am confident that we shall find so much cause of satisfaction
and assurance in each others resolutions and engagements of that kind, that the
different apprehensions of matters which now seem extreme; and through our
mutual mistrustings of each other, are like to be the utter ruin of both,
will be found very inconsiderable, and such as will be wholly swallowed up by
the grounds of mutual assurance which naturally results from every faithful
Engagement, to practice things wherein there is a full agreement between
parties; for the not doing (as I said before) of that which in our places we
should do with singleness of heart, without contradicting and contesting one
with another, about that wherein we suspect each other (as aiming at that which
we should not do) is the Original and great cause of all our distraction and
unsettlement; which if we could intend to redress and remove (viz. by
overcoming evil with good; that is, the fears (...)m. 12. 21.
of evil designs and enterprises, with good motions and engagements unto
unquestionable duties) there is no doubt but we should find a clear way to
Peace and reconcilement: this therefore is the course, which I would suggest to
be followed, between those that are scrupled at the Engagement, and those that
are not scrupled at it, in their friendly conference and Treaty, viz. (...)hat
things (...)old be (...)andled in (...)he Treaty, and in what (...)rder, if
we deal with men of ingenuity.


First let matters of agreement be proposed, understood and ratified, in things
Positive and Negative.

Secondly, Let there be a professed Engagement, to practice that which is
answerable unto their Agreements, and tending undoubtedly to edification
between them.

Thirdly, Let matters of disagreement both positive and negative be thought
upon with these two cautions premised to prevent a breach.

First, That no disagreement in Judgment or practice, shall make void the
Dutiful Engagement, to follow jointly the matters of Agreement.

Secondly, That to take away the offenses, which may arise upon the differences
of opinions and practices, some Rules are to be pre-determined; whereby
contentious debates about the same may be prevented, and whereby the right use
of Christian, of Moral and of Rational freedom therein may be settled.

If therefore those Pious and Learned Brethren, whose scruples against the
Engagement, being thus proposed, have a great influence upon the minds of
others, to make them scrupulous and disaffected at it: if (I say they would
condescend to the Overture of such a Treaty, (which hither to some have not
been willing to do) I am very confident through the blessing of Christ, that an
Expedient would easily be found to settle their doubtful thoughts; and so to
make all others willing to yield unto their Superiors, that ground of just
assurance and acquiescence, for which the Engagement by them proposed, is
requisite.

And this is the course, by which those that are ingenuous may receive
satisfaction, if they seek it as they ought; but if any does scruple more
through Policy then Piety, this course will not But in dealing With men of
Policy th(...) course will not take.
be liked of, because it will cross their design; which is, to keep the minds
of the weaker sort in a staggering condition, that they may not close to any
settlement; but lie open to all manner of changes: I shall not charge any of
the Authors of these Proposals with any such design; yet I cannot absolve all
of them from it; for I may as lawfully suspect them in this matter as in any
other Why the scruplers may be suspected though not charged with Policy.
matter I may do mine own heart, whereof although I know none evil; yet I
shall do my self no injury, to say, that yet there may be some mixture of
deceitfulness in it, when I think my meaning is at the best; For the Apostle
himself would not take upon him to justify himself in all things. I know
(says he) nothing by my self, yet I am not thereby justify; but he that
judges me, is the Lord. So I may without offense say, of the Proposers of 1
Cor. 4. 4.
these scruples, that although I know nothing by them, but judge charitably
that their scruples as to them are truly conscientious yet I must also say,
that thereby they are not justified from the mixture of collateral designs;
but that it is the Lord who will judge them. The maine of the business may be
truly a doubt of Conscience; and yet the managing of it, in the hands of some
may be somewhat else; nor do I wrong the Christian charity which I owe to all
or any of them in this; because it is lawful for me to be jealous over them
with godly jealousy lest by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve by his
subtilty: so their minds should be corrupted from the simplicity which is in
Christ 1 Cor. 11. 3.
And truly to look but upon the matter it self, by comparing the former and
latter parts of the proposals together, a doubt may be made thus; that seeing
the maine scruple where at they stick, is not so much against the Duty
expressed in the words of the Engagement; which is, to be true and faithful,
or against the Object of the Duty considered in it self, which is this
Commonwealth: or against the immediare qualifications of the Object and of the
Duty; which are, as it is now established without a King and House of Lords,
which are acknowledged to be the effects of Gods Providence; but only against
the act of subscribing to the whole, in reference to some State-considerations
and consequences following thereupon; which tend to nothing else, but to
suspend the minds of men, and take them off from the regular performance of a
present Duty, by the conjectural apprehensions of doubtful inconveniences
which may ensue as to the State. Therefore it is not without a rational ground
of jealousy; that although the matters proposed, may be real scruples of
Conscience, and rationally reflected upon by some without prejudice; yet that
in this proposing of them, as to the disposition of the matter, to fetch about
this form of speech, the hand of Joab may also have been in it, for some
selfe-interest of State. 2 Samuel 14. 19.


And this may be thought the more likely to be true, if we observe two things.
First, that the words of this Engagement (which are scrupled at, and said to be
contrary to former Engagements, and the duties mentioned in the second Sect.)
are not at all once alleged; to show distinctly, wherein the mentioned
contrariety does stand; but the objection is made confusedly against the Act of
subscribing to the words, according to that prejudice which the vulgar has
taken up against them in a general notion. Herein then the subtilty of the
Policy does lie: that the matter should be couched in such a way, as does most
commodiously favor that notion, and strengthen it: which in men of learning,
conscience and piety, feeking a clearing of doubts, does not seem to be fair
and plain dealing, and therefore may be thought to have somewhat of a
Collateral design.

Secondly, we may observe also, that if the thing clearly professed in the
second Sect. of the Proposals to be a known duty, had been really intended, and
resolved upon to have been practiced at this time no less then in general
terms acknowledged to be a thing at some time lawfully practicable; there
would not have been any inclination to do two things which here are done; not
without some contrivance. First, the performance of duties confessed to be due
to such Superiors, as are in places over us, and by a people in our case under
them, would not have been per indirectum denied to be due by us unto them.
Secondly, the words of the Engagement upon which the whole stresse of the
scruple is said to lie; and for which that which is confessed to be due to
others is denied to our Superior Powers, would not have been suppressed, and
left in the dark as they are; but clearly mentioned and alleged as they are
not, lest the falacy of the pretended scruple should appear. For if the duty
acknowledged in Thesi, had been applied to the Hypothesis of our present
condition, and the duty required in the words of the Engagement had been
compared therewith, the pretended matter of scruple, would by the full
agreement of the one with the other, havebeen found apparently impertinent: but
it may be conceived, that the matter is laid thus before the pre-possessed
Reader, or weak discerner of such contrivances; to the end, that upon a full
acknowledgement of a just duty, and a willingness to perform the same, in a
case like to ours, the iniquity of that which is supposed to be required of us,
by the Engagement; may be heightened in men's apprehensions, who are easily
swayed to receive the worst impressions of those that are in places of power
over them: by how much then they seem to yield to a rational duty, and be of
an equitable disposition toward their Superiors, by so much they prevaticate
against the intention of the Engagement to make it to be thought altogether
contrary to reason and to justice; by a slye concealing of the words, and a
suspicious interpretation thereof, suggested, as containing matters very far
different from the acknowledged duty, and wholly opposite to former
Engagements. Whereas in truth and deed, there is no such thing aimed at by the
Engagement, nor employed in the words thereof. So that from the third paragraphe
of the Proposals to the end thereof; the whole matter and contrivance of the
discourse may be thought (and yet without doing injury to the Authors) nothing
else but a Political Stratagem and Sophisme grounded upon the mis-application
and mis-interpretation of the Engagement and Covenant, to entangle weak and
And how their Political Scrupulosity and conscientious imaginations of this
nature are to be satisfied in the general.
undiscorning consciences; and to keep up the spirit of dis-affection in the
minds of the multitude under the pretense of scruples of that kind.

The thing then to be offered to obviate the deceit of this political
contrivance of the bosinesse, and to give satisfaction (if it can be admitted)
to this political scrupulosity of conscience is this: that the words of the
Engagement in their plain sense; which imports a clear duty, are to be
confronted with that which in the second Sect. they confess to be consonant
with the will of God, with the light of nature, with the judgment of the
Learned, with the practice of former Christians, and with their own principles
and former Engagements: and then if the Duty mentioned in the Engagement does
run wholly parallel, as the case now stands with us, to that which they yield
to be a Duty as they State the case in general themselves; then they should be
made to reflect upon themselves, that they ought to be satisfied in this; that
by taking the Engagement, nothing is farther required of them then what they
proclaim themselves, to be a performable duty in such a case. But if their
Political contemplations of the meaning of the Engagement, through the
sinister prospectives and jealousies which they take up, and foment against
their Superiors, by an uncharitable mis-construction of their aims; will not
suffer them to acquiesce in this parallelisme of the Engagement, with what they
acknowledge to be lawful; then a further course may be taken, and shall be
offered unto them, if they will intend to bring matters to a fair trial and
issue, and that is this: that the consequences, which they say are employed in
the words of the Engagement, may be taken into consideration and examined in
three respects. And also in particulars.


First, How far the words of the Engagement, do import in the ordinary
acception by an indifferent Judge, any such matters, as they say are employed
therein.

Secondly, How far, if the words should import any such matters in any sense,
the performance of the Engagement in that sense, is agreeable with the Duties
mentioned by themselves in the 2. Sect. performable by Subjects toward their
Superiors, in the case they are supposed and wherein now we are.

Thirdly, How far the Covenant and former Engagements, will be contradictory or
not contradictory to this Engagement, although the consequences here said to be
employed therein, should be granted to follow thereon.

In all which matters, if upon known grounds and principles of Christianity and
Rationality, a regular way of disquiry may be followed, as it becomes Divines
within their bounds, in reference to Conscience, modestly, and not as it
becomes Statesmen, in reference to interests, suspiciously, and if they will
engage to stand or fall to the issue of that disquiry; I dare in the fear of
God, undertake to let them see satisfactory grounds, whereby their scruples
will be cleared, and wherein consequently their Consciences ought to acquiesce,
if they will not subordinate the inclinations thereof, to an affected
scrupulosity for the love of a party. For that all this contrivance of the
Proposals, is like unto the hand of Joab in the mouth of the woman of Tekoah;
to bring about a design, rather then to receive a single-hearted satisfaction
for themselves; is neither irrational to think, nor uncharitable 2 Samuel 14.
to say, but just and equitable in prudencie to suspect: and here we have a
clear example of a smooth and handsome conveyance of a State-business, under a
ministerial cloak and pretense of Religiousness, not in, but out of the Pulpit;
which is one of the things which in another larger Treatise, I have showed to
be one of the main causes of our present distempers and confusions; namely,
when Ministers meddle with State-matters, either in their Pulpits a^ were
authoritatively, or out of the same more subtly in such a way, and to such a
purpose as this; therefore to rectify the fundamental error of the aim and
design of these Proposalls, as to State-Matters, let me refer the ingenuous
Reader, but especially these Learned and Pious Divines, to an unprejudicat
perusal of that Treatise; wherein if any shall show me, that I have wronged
the profession, or unjustly taxed the practice of some, or mistaken my way in
seeking Peace and Truth, to heal our present breaches; I shall profess my
self to be very much beholding to him. Upon this whole matter then I shall
profess thus much; that although I thus trace in the Spirits of these
Proposers by the matter and contrivance of their Proposals such an inclination
to meddle in State Affairs, which is unsuitable to their Calling; yet that I
have no prejudice against them in my heart for so doing, nor do I intend, to
fasten upon them any charge of false and fained pretenses of being scrupled,
otherwise then indeed they are (for I believe truly that they are thus
scrupled, and puzzeled in Conscience about their own imaginations concerning
State-matters, rather through weakness and custom, and want of a Rule to
discern the motions of their own spirits, then through any set aim, to take
upon them the management of State-Matters) but I look upon them, as the frame
of their thoughts represents it self and them by their way unto me; whereof I
have discovered the Rationality, the Christianity and the Policy, to show,
that in all respects satisfaction may be given them, if they desire it
ingenuously; and that if their spirit by the deceitfulness of error is led
forth unadvisedly, in another way then they ought to walk in, that that also
can be discovered; for there is nothing hid but it shall be revealed: and being
revealed, a Rule may be found to rectify whatever is amiss therein. I shall
therefore for mine own part, not refuse (if they will needs insist upon their
Political scruple, and think that their Consciences ought to be engaged, into
those State-considerations) to deal with them upon their inferences from the
words of the Engagement, which is their own Weapon only with this caution;
that we shall not take opon us to become such absolute Judges, of the ways of
those that are in places of Magistracy, as to make our own interpretation of
their ways a Rule of all obedientiall dutifulnes in our selves or other
Subjects, to bind thereunto as to a Law, our ^onscience above Christianity and
Morality; and that in speaking of the actions and intentions of Superiors we
shall be no less charitable to them, then we would have others to be to us, or
we should be to other men ruling in another place in such occurrences of
public affairs, with this proviso, their scruples even upon such Political
contemplations as they meddle withal, shall, if they please, be taken into
consideration; although we shall be in very great danger to go beyond the line
of our Calling, and every foot to go out of our way; which my chief study is in
all these agitations of matters by known Rules to prevent: which the Lord
direct us by the light of his countenance, not only to intend, but also to do,
to the advancement of his glory, and our mutual comfort in the way of
Righteousness, Amen.

FINIS.
The PRINTER to the READER.
THe Treatise mentioned by the Author a little before the ending of this
Discourse, is a large disquisition of the Rules, by which all debates amongst
Christians in general, may be agitated without offense; and by which in
particular, our present controversies may be composed, by a full discovery of
the duties of Magistrates and Ministers toward the public, and to each other
in our present distracting occasions, wherein few men study a Rule; but almost
all are carried by mere interests. Printed for Rich. Woodenothe, at the sign
of the Star under Peter's Church in Cornhill, 1650.


