A Catalogue of some PLAYS Printed for J. Magnes and R. Bentl^y.
TArtuff: or, The French Puritan. A Comody acted at the Theater Royal, by their
Majesty's Servants. Written in French by the Famed Wit of France, Mounsieur
Moliner, and made English by Mr. M. Med^urn.

Plays written by Madam Behne.
The forced Marriage: or, The Jealous Bridegroom. A Comedy acted at the Dukes
Theater.

Abdelazzar: or, The Moor's Revenge. A Tragedy acted at the Dukes Theater.

The Town-Fop: or, Sir Timothy Tawdry. A Comedy acted at the Dukes Theater.

Plays written by Mr. Ia. Howard.
All mistaken: or, The Mad Couple. A Comedy acted at the Theater Royal, by
their Majesty's Servants.

The English Monsieur. A Comedy acted at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's
Servants.

Plays written by Mr. Crown.
Calisto: or, The Chaste Nymph. A Masque, acted at Court by the Lady Mary, the
Lady Anne, and many other Persons of the greatest Quality in England.

The Country-VVi^. A Comedy acted at the Dukes Theater.

The Destruction of Jerusalem by Titus Vespasian, in two Parts, acted at the
Theater Royal, by their Majesty's Servants. Price 2 s.

Plays written by Mr. Lee.
The Tragedy of Nero. Acted at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's Servants.

S^phonisba: or, Hannibal overthrown. Tragedy acted at the Theater Royal, by
their Majesty's Servants.

The Court of Augustus Caesar, or Gl^rian^. A Tragedy acted at the Theater
Royal.

The Princess of Cl^ve a famous Romance, in the Press.

THE VIRTUOUS WIFE; OR, Good Luck at last. A COMEDY. As it is ACTED at the
Dukes Theater, By His ROYAL HIGHNESS His SERVANTS.

WRITTEN By THOMAS DVRFEY, Gent.

In the SAVOY: Printed by T.N. for R. Bentley, and M. Mag^es, in Russel Street,
near the Piazza, at the Post House. Anno Dom. 1680.

Prologue. Spoke by Mrs. BARRER*
A Virtuous Wife! Why what a dam^'d mis^ake
The Poet's in, to think this Bl^y ca^ ^ake*
Nay, in this age, where Virtue is as scarce
As Truth in Women, Wi^ in the l^s^ Fa^ce,
Or Coin amongst the disbanded Sons of Mars*
Who now to the Farmers Daughters tal^ of Plo^*
Then make 'um trudge to Town with Toothles^ Br^ts,
That sprawl in the Handbasket, and (...) like C^ts.
No flying from Colour^* ^ade the Capta^ns (...),
Children and ^^go^s* kept the^ always full*
If Our House ^ere but so for every Play,
I Would soon deser^ my Virtuous part to day;
A Part, that I am sure, can take ^ith none
But Women, or some Ci^t that pays h^lfe a Crown
To see this Wife, that ^e may curse his own.
So modish Beldam once did break the G^^ss
That frighted her ^ith her dum^d ugly Pace*
And why then should I play't, faith I Will give over
Desert the Muses Cause* and play no more;
For Underhill, Jevan Currier, Tony Lee,
Nokes, all have better Characters than me.
Lee peeps out of a little window over the Stage. Lee. What Mrs. Barrer! hah --
What Is that you say?
Have I a better Character in the Play? --
The Devil I have as soon -- pox! don't collogue
I play a Fool you know, a silly Rogue --

Bar. Say what you please, it is written with more Art,
Pray tell the Poet so, and there is his Part.

Lee. Hold hold, -- 'sdeath are you mad, shall we lie down, Throws her Part
away.
Lose all our shares, nay, and affront the Town?
For shame -- What amongst our ^elves have C^vil Wars?

B^r. Pi^h, -- I can live without ye, tha^k m^ St^^s*


L^e. Without us -- very fine -- g^d she pro^o^es --
Come Mada^ Lofty I perceive your Jokes;
This is a Plot, a trick -- 'twixt you and Nokes --

Nokes ^eep^ ou^ of a li^^le ^indow the other side of the Stage. N^kes. How me?
and what of me, peart brother Tony?


Lee. Why Sir, I say you're Mrs. Barrers Crony,
And teach her (...) throw ^p her Par^s*

Nokes. Ye lie.
And you're a Pimp, a Pand^rus of Tr^y.
A Gripe, a Fumble.

Lee. Nay, and you 'gin to quarrel,
Gad you are a Swash, a Toby in a Barrel,
Would you were here.

Nokes. I'^aith would I were th^re.


Bar. Well, I must do it I see, or lose my share,
Come come -- be friends, I Will Act -- for once I Will try.

Lee. Why then all is well again -- Shuts one Window.


Nokes. And so say I. -- Shuts the other Window.


Bar. Since then I must this virtuous form put on.
That like old fashioned Clothes, sits well on none.
At least, as you think Gallants, use me well To the Audience.
Praise me, and lie like any Fiends of Hell --
For if you fall, I Will fly from your illusion,
And turn true virtuous Wife to your con^usion.

Drammatis Personae.
Beverly. A will e^travag^nt G^ntleman, Husband to O^ivi^* Mr. Harris.
Beauford. A young wild unfortunate fellow, always engaging himself in
Intrigues, but never prospering in any. Mr. Smith. Sir Frol. Whim. A humorous
old Knight, vexed that now he is old, he cannot follow the vices and debauchery
of Youth. Mr. Ievan. Sir Lub. Wid^. His N^phew and Ward, an incorrigible Fool,
suitor to my Lady Beardly. Mr. Lee. Brainworm. A clow^^sh yellow ser^ant to
Beauford. Amble. Servant to Beverley. Mr. Vnde^bil. Crotchett. A
Singing-Master. Mr. Bowman. Women. Olivia. The Virtuous Wife, a witty high
spirited Woman, Wife to Beverly. Mrs. Barrer. La. Beardly. An amorous
impertinent old Woman one that has buried three Husbands, yet still very
desirous to be courted. Mr. Nokes. Ienny Whead^e. A Town Jilt, kept by Beverly.
Mrs. Currer. Lidia. Sister to Beverly, in love with Beauford. Mrs. Seymour.
Tissick. Woman to Lady Beardly. Goldsmith, Servants, and Attendants. Mrs.
N^rrice.

Scene Chelsey.

A CATALOGUE OF BOOKS, Printed for R. Bentley, and M. Magnes.
PLays Writ by John Dryden* Esquire
Limberham, or the Kind Keeper. Mistaken Husband, Part. Oedipus, King of
Theebs. Notes of Morockor.
Plays Writ by Mr. Lee.
Nero, a Tragedy. Sopho^isb^, a Tragedy. Gloriana, a Tragedy. Alexander the
Great. Methridates King of Pontus. Caesar Borgia, Son of Pope Alexander the
Sxith^. Oedipus in part, with Esquire D.
Plays Writ by Mr. Crown.
Calisto, Acted by the Lady Mary, and the Lady A^^e, and many other of the
Great^st Quality at Court. Andromache, a Tragedy. Country-Wit, a Comedy.
Destruction of Jerusalem, in Two Parts.
Plays Writ by Mr. Dur^ey.
Madam Fickell. Fond Husband. Foo^ ^urn'd Critic. Esquire Old-sap. Virtuous
Wife, all Five Comedi^s. T^rin^, a Comedy. Forced Marriage, a Comedy. Generous
E^emies, a Comedy. En^lish Ma^^t^i^, a Comedy. All Mistaken, a Comedy.
Town-Fop, a Comedy. Abdellazor, a Tragedy. Plain Dealer.
New Novels.
Happy Slave. Heroyne Musquiteer. Princes of Clev^s. Maria Manchina. Obliging
Mistress. Double Cuckold. Unfortunate Hero. Allmanzor, and Allmanzade.
A VIRTUOUS WIFE, OR, Good Luck at last.
Act the First.
Scene Palace Guard. Enter Mr. Beverly, Matilda, Amble, waiting. Bev. PRithee
good Siren, Sing no more! Do not spread thy Nets to my undoing, nor draw me any
further; I am this hour a Man of business, Business, sweet heart* a blessing
your Function always must give way to. Therefore farewell: nay now thou will
be so troublesome. Sirrah, bid the Coachman make ready.


Matild. Will ye ever use me thus? I swear you are lately grown so ill natured*
my patience is quite tired -- What Business can you have? or i^ it be so,
methinks my Company should outweigh all.


Bever. Well said Lady Vanity -- I warrant you think that glance quaintly with
the Corner of your eye bears an inestimable value, and not to be possibly
deserted.


Matild. Not I, I assure you --


Bever. O yes! or that the soft Rosy inside of your hand, the Index of youth
and Wealthy Nature deserves Millions of Kisses from the Charmed Adorer; ha!
come, confess, Is not this your thought?


Matild* I need not answer, Sir, if you were as ready to have a good nat^r'd
Opinion of me, as you are to vent your ill-natured Jest. But, since Rai^lery is
your Chief Diversion, I hope I may tell you, that whatever my Person has, my
Love I Am sure has deserved better usage from you.


Bever. How better usage! nay, gad, I deny that, except I have dreamed all this
while -- By heaven thou have like a Usurer, hoarded up my Love for this half
year, without allowing me* wherewith to defray Occasional Expenses; and, that
Craving Creature that expects more, I think is most unconscionable.


Matild. And that dull Phlegmatic Creature, that pays less, I am sure is most
ungrateful -- But, Is this Raillery obliging do you think now? Is this consistent
with the Love you have protested? Are these the fruits of passion?


Bever. Passion! fie fie! name it no more! Folly, though but once recited, is too
much. It Is sh^meful to hear it twice: besides, Madam, Love and Passion are
only fit for vacant hours, the friends of idleness, and fowl weather, when
that Divine Essence our Reason has leisure to let loose our Souls to things
transitory -- It Is for a Cloudy season, sweet heart* There Is other matters to be
performed when the Sun shines.


Matild. And pray what do you call Celestial, ^f Love and Beauty are such
transitory things?


Bever. What -- Why, Immortal Wit, true Friends, sprightly Champaign, heavenly
Music, Philosophical Arguments, Exercise, and a number more. Beauty is but a
Sewer to these, a Grace Cup, when the great Banquet is ended, and is used by
your true Lover, as the last Course, fruit is only for the sake of Digestion.


Matild. Well -- what you please, you know your power over me. Weeps.


Bever. Ha, ha, ha -- Come, I have done. I Will vex thee no more. Thou know my
peevish temper, and should bear with it -- Come, no more of this April
weather; Heark'ee, I have bespoke a Ring of my Goldsmith for Thee. 'Twill cost
me 30 Guinnies, and expect it home this morning -- let that reconcile all -- by
heaven I do love Thee.


Matild. You did love me before you were Married: but these Wives are such
Covetous Creatures, They Will be sure to grutch a shilling to another, be their
own Coffers never so full --


Bever. Then more, to confirm my Love to Thee, know, that I am grown Jealous of
my Wife, and fear I have Cause --


Matild. You have often begun to tell me how your Marriage come to effect, and
the cause of changing your name -- but never ended it.


Bever. Now listen then. There was a Gentleman, one Beauford, bred up here at
our University, who, about two years since, unfortunately killing a Gentleman
in a Duel, was forced to fly -- but, ere he went, there was a Match propounded
by his Father (and for some time secretly carried on by him) betwixt his Son,
and my now Wife, the sole Daughter and Heir of the old Lord Thorough-good; she
never saw Beauford but once, and then this misfortune happening, the business
was deferred -- till he got his Pardon; but, before he could procure it, the
old man his Father died, leaving his Estate in Trustees hands, till Beauford
should come to age. Now, in this juncture, I nearly resembling him in stature,
and complexion, and being then passionately in Love with Olivia, boldly pursued
the Plot, and, about six Months since, changing my Name for his, as if I came
just then from Paris, made my Address; 'Twas doubtful at first, by reason we
differ a little in Face; but, telling her I had lately been sick of the Small
Pox, which had extremely altered me, it passed clearly, and in a Weeks time I
Married her, then discovered all, and asked her pardon, which she never wou^d
grant, and that is the reason of all our Quarrels and Jealousi^s --


Matild. But, What will you do, when the real Beaufort returns? 'twill be no
easy matt^r to persuade him out of his Name.


Bever. Nor he me out of my Wife; and, to deal freely, I exp^ct him every day.
For, his Friends have got his Pardon, and expect his return suddenly. How now!


Enter Amble. Amble. Sir, my Lady is walking down this way.


Bever. Begone then my Dear. It Is not fit she see thee: but, be sure you come to
morrow to my House, I Will contrive some way to shift her off, and then we will
waste an hour or two alone.


I. Whead. Will you be sure to remember, a Wife is such a Magnetic kind of
Creature, that I am afraid you will forget me.


Bever. I will not, my honor on my word.


I. Whead. And, Will you still remember your poor Love?


Bever. While my Life lasts.


I. Whead. Will you indeed?


Bever. Indeed I will; see, yonder she is coming, prithee go.


I. Whead. Well then adue -- What, will not you kiss me at parting? Lord, that a
Wife should so alter a Man, a Kiss sure cannot be mis't.


Bever. No, not a Thousand; but prithee now be gone, I am afraid she see's thee
-- Kisses her. Amble, wait on her home, and then go to the Goldsmith, and see
if the Ring be done -- De'e hear*


Amble. Yes Sir, -- Exit Amble and I. Wheedle.


Bever. Here she comes, now for a Scene of Love, Marriage-gallantry, which, in
our modish sense is downright Railing, the effect of Jealousy and Negligence,
and as natural to the Marry'd-Tribe, as want of honesty is to those that
profess it -- hem -- pray heaven I have but breath enough, that is all my fear.


Enter Olivia and Rose. Oliv. What alone Sir! at this time of day, and musing
too, this is a miracle, not one of your Brothers of the Bottle here, nor Dear
Friends of the other Sex, to keep off pelting Melancholy -- this is very strange.


Bever. Let there be no Scandals raised upon the Bottle, I beseech you Madam,
for, to my knowledge, the Wine within that Bottle has been a Blessing to a Man,
when his Impertinent Wife has been a Plague to him.


Oliv. Pardon me, Sir, think not that I find fault with the Wine, for that is
our Friend as much as yours, and often to oblige us, makes the Jealous Husband
sleep soundly* That the VVedlock-Bed may be free from his Midnight unseasonable
railing.


Bever. Nay, rather, we may be free from your unreasonable Impertinencies;
those hours Nature allows us for rest, you take the privilege to disturb
with your damned Questions; and, gad I have often answered them as Children say
their prayers, so between sleep and awake -- that I have never considered my
own words, nor your satisfaction.


Oliv. My satisfaction -- I dare swear you did not, for if you had, you would
have slept soundly, slep^, Sir, as you used to do those nights, when you have
been weary with the Days Fatigue. Your Mouth open, as if you were swallowing
the Jealous Air, th^^ was to be vented against me the next morning, and
snoring in such a horrid VVhistling Tone, such a Barbrous Untunable Key -- That
the poor Bellman has often stood frighted at the door, with the apprehension of
Ghosts and Murders.


Bever. What Is this? I snore? I tell thee, Thou most intolerable provoking
Woman; No Man in Christendom sleeps more silently than I, or with a clearer
Conscience, I thank Providence --


Oliv. Nay, talk not of Conscience, Sir, for that, to my knowledge is in your
Mistresses power, and she keeps it close shut up in the same purse where she
keeps her Guinnyes.


Bever. I a Mistress -- gad would I could get one at a reasonable rate, that I
may be revenged on Thee! well, I Will comfort my self with the hopes, that there
may a chance happen, and then thank your self, that are so ill furnished with
new Charms. That your very expressions, and sometimes Dress is grown
old-fashioned, and faith I ever hated Stale-Wares I confess* They were never
for my purchase. --


Oliv. Stale! what is it you think so Stale Sir?


Bever. Why, a Wife of six months standing is Stale I think; what a pox --
would you have?


Oliv. It Is the corruption of Matrimony that make us so, if we are. Mix Gold
with Lead, and see if the baseness of the one -- does not Eclipse the luster of
the other.


Bever. Ay that Luster you speak of, is so soon vanished, that a man ought to
be of a good sound faith, to believe it is to be found in any Woman, much less
in the married Tribe -- for a Woman's like a false Guinney, that at first being
little worn, might perhaps pass current, but once tried by the
Touchstone-Mariage, is found damnably counterfeit, and good for nothing. --


Oliv. And to requite your Simile, Sir, a dull Husband is like an ill clock, he
always strikes false, and is ever mending, and were it not for fashion sake, I
swear, I think we had better have none.


Bever. The Devil's in her, she will have the last word, and* I must be gone in
my own defense. Well Madam, I have other business now than to stand chatting
with you; but assure your self, I shall find a time to requite your Repartee:
and so adieu dear Wife.


Oliv. Your servant dear Husband. Fleering.


Bever. Very well. There Is no harm in this I hope. Exit.


Enter Lidia. Lidia. Sister, your punishment is like to increase, who do you
think's coming yonder?


Oliv. I cannot imagine, prithee who?


Lidia. Beauford: the real Beauford is returned, has got his pardon, and is
just come to Town; I overtoook him just now, he and his Man are coming down
this way.


Oliv. Now Husband be kind to me, if thou can, thou never had more cause.
Come, let us make haste away, for I dare not let him know me now.


Lid. For fear of your Husband I warrant! well, if this be the Fate of
Marriage, Heaven keep me in a better mind. Exeunt*


Enter Beaufort and Brainworm* Beauf. Sirrah, this is the place where we must
first pitch our Ten^ in pursuance of my design. 'Twas here I had the
misfortune of the Duel, which has since done me so much injury in causing my
absence* for at that time I had commenced two Intrigues, that would have
sufficiently recompensed my trouble, if the Devil had not ruled in ^he air, and
hedged me into that quarrel*


Brain. Ah Sir! he rules in the Earth as well as the Air, and where there is any
Wi^e or Women to be had, you may be sure the Devil's no^ ^ar off. But come Sir,
my Charge, where lodges the Fairy that I am to be Ambassador to? I guess my
Office, I am to be Pimp. Ge^eral still.


Beauf. No sirrah, you must help me to contrive how to speak with Olivia; a
sine Woman, and think I shall be welcome. But do you hear, do'nt let me rely
upon my own invention; for it is forty to one but I spoil all, for I am the
unluckiest fellow at an Intrigue, I believe, that ever breathed. I have run
through more hazards than ever Don Quixot did, and I think have often escaped
as ill.


Brain. No faith Sir, you have done very well for your time, I think you were
not pumpt and beaten above three times about your last business, were you Sir?


Beauf. No Rascal, not pumpt at all: but the truth is, I was three times
swing'd confoundedly.


Brain. Ha, ha, ha! great pity in good faith: but see the difference in
Constitutions now: I warrant another man would have been such a fool to have
left off, and ventured no more, and now you are ready for another beating.


Beauf. A Mistress, but not beating Rascal, nor had the last prevailed so, had
I not been orepower'd; but the Devil's in it, my damned fortune still jades me,
for when I have brought a Plot just to perfection, by some awkard negligent
action or other, I am sure to spoil all again, and then if no skirmish happen,
it is ten to one but I am disgraced, and that is all one: as for example, When I
was in Town last, dining at a Judges House, whilst he was in his study settling
some Law-business, I took the boldness to make Love to his Wife.


Brain. A very pretty boldness truly -- and yet I think you never saw her
before, Sir.


Beauf. Never not I; pox, I never consider acquaintance in these cases: w^ll,
she was tolerable handsome faith, and of a good complexion, but had one
damnable fault. --


Brain. What, Squinting eyes, or rotten Teeth?


Beauf. Neither sirrah, but damnably given to take tobacco, and very inclinable
to drink Brandy: but in short, we agreed about the business, very well, and
faith in a little time were grown very intimate.


Brain. Ay, very intimate; I knew 'twould come to that, a fine Intimacy indeed;
why Sir, do you never intend to have any consideration? What cuckold a Judge? O
Lord! a Reverend Judge -- if you should happen to be a Plotter now, and come to
have any Sessions House business, you will be in a fine condition, hanged at
least: -- Mercy on us a Judge!


Beauf. A Judge! ay a Judge. What a devil is that such a wonder now! Sirrah,
here was the Mischief; My Lord, and she lay in two several Chambers, and I
being commanded thither, came one night with my friend, and lay in another room
close by; about midnight I had occasion to rise, and go to my Lady to discou^se
with her about, some very secret busines^.


Brainw. Ay ay! Law Cases State politics, and such like. --


Beauf. Right sirrah -- but returning back again -- in the dark -- as the devil
would have it, that always helps me out at a dead lift -- I thank him --
instead of going into the right chamber to my friend -- I makes into the other
room, and goes to bed to my Lord --


Brainw. Ha! ha! ha! very fine indeed --


Beauf. There did I tell him (thinking it had been my friend) all that had past
between me and this Lady, of a Jewel she gave me, and what time was appointed
for our meeting again -- in fine so much, that the poor old man was even out of
his wit -- for he cries out murder, calls up his servants, hunts about for his
sword, and had certainly killed me, if in this amazement I had not jumpt out of
the Window into the Garden, and with the hazard of my Neck and Legs, made my
escape: But what became of my sleeping friend, Heaven knows, I have neither
seen him nor her since.


Brain. Why says, Signior, this was ill Luck, that is the truth on it; but what
if it should be catching now, and that I by following your ill fortune, should
have the ill fortune to be hanged for company -- I question whether the wages
you give would make me amends.


Beauf. Ah sirrah -- your cowardice* would be sure to secure you.


Brain. How now! who are these?


Enter. Sir Frolic Whimsey, Sir Lubberly Widgeon, and Singing Master. Beauf. I
know 'em, it is Sir Frolic Whimsey, an excellent old humourist, one so much in
love with the debauchery and vices of youth -- that he is always complaing of
his Age and impotence, the other is his Nephew, and Ward, one Sir Lubberly
Widgeon, an incorrigible fool, and so used.


Sing-M. Sol, la, me, fa, sol, la -- Come Sir begin.


Beauf. Hark, a Singing-Master I Will lay my life* let us stand by and listen. --


Sir Frol. Give me patience, must I still be thus tormented? troth Sir Lubberly
-- let me tell you -- ye are a very provoking fellow, and had not your Father
conjured me on his deathbed, to look after, ye, and breed ye up well, you
should have looked a Guardian for me, you should Sir Lubberly. --


Sing-M. Come Sir, pray be ruled, and sing your Notes -- Sol, la, come Sir,
sol, la, me -- Come.


Sir Frol. Oh give me patience! not yet -- Sir, do not provoke me. Do not I say
-- s'bud sing, and quickly, or by this hand.


Sir L. Widg. Well come what is it* what is it? s'bud must I b^ made a fool thus?
-- Well come it is all one, what is it?


Sing-M. Sol, sol.


Sir L. Widg. Sol, sol -- look now -- What the devil has he to do with my soul!
Oh Lord! must I be thus used? sirrah! you are a Canting Rascal, and sing worse
than the Vinegar-man, or Clark of Pankridge! sirrah, you are -- oh gods bud,
must I be thus used?


Sing M. Ay it is no matter, it is no matter Sir, I must bear with ye: Come sing
your Note Come, Sol, la, me --


L. Widg. Sol, sol -- la me -- pox I shall never do it -- no no, I shall never
-- why this is worse than learning the Catechism, and saying it at Church
without book. --


Sing-M. Well -- I must have patience -- This is common with beginners, I must
bear with ye.


Sir Frol. Bear with him! hang him! a Dunce! a Cuckoo! no time, no tune, no ear
-- ah -- had thou but known me a young man, I would have made thee ashamed of
this Sir, believe me, I had the prettiest way of singing.


Sing-M. Sings very well Sir Frollick, and very well in Tune.


L. Widg* Ay very well, ha, ha, you lying Son of a whore! very well quotha,
profoundly, he sings worse than the prisoners at Newgate ( To buy us bread) ah
that is heavenly to it.


Sir Frol. Sir Lubberlly, you are a foolish fellow, and must, God m^nd me, be
taught more manners! give me patience! is it fit for you to descant on a person
of my age and experience? go to -- ah, Mr. Crotchet, I am the most unfortunate
person! I am grown old of the sudden, as 'twere, I know not how, all my good
parts lost, quite lost as god save me. I am a Cipher now -- good for nothing.


Sing-M. Oh think not so Sir, you are a lusty man. Now Sir, to divert you, I Will
sing you a merry Song. It Is not customary with us Professors -- but to oblige
you Sir --


Sir Frol. Thank you good Mr. Crotchet. SONG
LEt the Traitors plot on, till at last they are undone,
By hurting their Brains to decoy us;
We whose hearts are at rest, in our Loyalties Blessed,
What Demon or Power can annoy us?
Ambition like Wine, does the Senses confound,
And Treason's a damnable thing.
Then let him that thinks well, see his Brimmer go round,
And pray for the Safety, and Life of the KING.
Chorus.
Let Caesar Live long, let Caesar live long,
For ever be happy, and ever be young:
And he that dares hope to change a King for a Pope,
Let him die, let him die, while C^^sar lives long.
How happy are we! when our thoughts are all free,
And blessed in our forced Obedience;
Whilst the politic fool that is Ambitions to Rule,
Still banks at the Oath of Allegiance:
He trembles and flies from his numerous foes,
Like a Dear that the Hunters surround;
While we that hate all, that would Monar^hs depose,
Make the joys of our hearts, like our Glasses abound.
Chorus.
Let Caesar live long, let Caesar live long,
For ever be happy, and ever be young;
And he that dares hope to change a KING for a Pope,
Let him die, let him die, while Caesar lives long.
Ay, this is something. Well -- you have notable skill on my word Sir -- ha!
ce^tainly if I am not very much mistaken, your name is Beauford Sir.


Beauf. The same Sir, and ever servant to Sir Frollick Whimsey.


Brainw. Or his Wife.


Beauf. Sir Lubberly, I have an ambition to kiss your hand.


Sir L. Widg. Sir, that ambition shall be forthwith satisfied.


Sing-M. Sir Frollick -- I Will wait on your Nephew to morrow: I see now you are
engaged -- Exit Crotchet.


Sir Frol. Your servant Sir -- but Mr. Bea^ford, could I have imagined you
would have been such a stranger, and kept your affair so close from your
friend: Troth I must tell you I take it ill --


Beauf. Sir! you know 'twas fit a business of that nature should be carried
with all secrecy imaginable -- for if I had been taken ever I could have got my
pardon. --


Sir Frol. Ah Sir! you are merry Sir, and shoot wide o'th mark. But to come
nearer to ye, it is matter of marriage I mean. Methinks Mr. Beauford I might
have been trusted.


Beauf. Doubtless Sir, very safely. Marriage Sir, What a devil does he mean?


Brain. Nay I know not, but my Corns ache; I am afraid here is some mischief
toward.


Beauf. How do you Sir Frollick? I believe you are not well.


Frol. Well in person, Sir, but in troth my Mind is disordered, I cannot drink,
Sir; If I could but drink, my affliction would be the less, but I am the most
unfortunate creature, I cannot last a month, that is certain, unless my faculty
of drinking returns --


Sir L. Widg. Eating signifies nothing, he never was the better for that


Beauf. No!


Sir Frol. Sir -- I have known ye the time, when I should have drunk ye 1 2 4 6
8 bottles at a sitting, and been never the worse, give me patience, now half a
pint makes me drunk, dead drunk Sir -- I am almost out of my wits -- distracted
-- I cannot bear it.


weeps. Beauf. You must have patience Sir, was ever such an old coxcomb?


Sir Frol. What to be drunk with half a pint -- by Bacchus it is intolerable --
Pray how does your Wife Mr. Beauford, is she breeding yet?


Beauf. My Wife!


Brain. How! his Wife -- why Sir he has no Wife.


Sir Frol. No Wife -- ha ha! you had best persuade me to that, why I came by
your house not above two hours ago, and saw her at a window --


Sir L. Widg. And I kiss her yesterday as she was coming out of the Church --


Beauf. Hey-day -- why sure I am in Fairy-Land, a Wife and Family that every
body knows, and I not know her my self.


Brain. Harkee Sir, for Heaven's sake let us away, for I believe that old
Gentleman is bewitched, and who knows but the Devil may have power over us too
if we s^ay --


Sir Frol. Nay -- you may strive to carry it as secretly as your please Sir.
But what I know I know, you have a house here in Chelsey. -- a Wife and a
Family, and have been married above six months.


Beauf. Thank ye heartily Sir; faith it is the first time I knew on it.


Brain. It Is so -- the Devil is in him for certain.


Enter Peter with a Ring. Peter. Pray Gentlemen, which is Mr. Beauford's house?


Sir Fr^l. Thou needst go no farther fellow -- here he is himself.


Beauf. My name is Beauford friend, ha^t thou any business with me?


Peter. No great business an't please your worship, only I have brought your
Worship the Ring your Worship bespoke of my Master --


Beauf. The Ring?


Brain. Ownds! These are the finest Wi^ches I ever heard of.


Peter. My Master says, if your Lady do not like the fashion, she may have it
altered -- but for the Stones, he dares reposite, they are as good as ever she
wore, and of the right black Water, and true Luster.


Beauf. POK -- but what is it to me? --


Peter. Nay; even what your Worship pleases, ^is at your dispose now --


Brain. Why Sir -- you know you bespoke it for my Lady -- see the defect of
Memory now; Ownds! I remember it as well, as if it were but yesterday. Take it
Sir, it is right.


Beauf. Well, what is the purch^se friend?


Peter. Alas! I know not Sir, your Worship and my Master must agree for that.


Brain. Ay ay! a very honest fellow In Faith, and of a good pleasing Phisiognomy
-- harkee! have thou nothing for me friend? hah?


Peter. Oh gods me! yes, your name I think is Amble, Mr. Beauford^ man?


Brain My name is Tro^, Co^in-German to Ambl^, and thou see I am his man.
Thou can not be mistaken.


Peter. No no mistaken; I remember, I think I saw you once at the Talbot
drinking of Mumm with my Cousin Scuttle-brain.


Brain. Ay the same the same. Well, S^uttle-^rain's a^ honest fellow -- faith
he and I have been old Cronies.


Peter. Have you so lack a day! Well Sir, here is your Watch, it is very well
done, I assure you; and Sir, my Master bid me tell you, if you can spare that
little Money now, 'twill do him a kindness.


Brain. Well, when my Master pays him for the Ring, tell him --


Peter. Very well Sir, your servant -- I Will tell him so, god bouy to your
Worship --


Beauf. Friend, thou had best stay and take thy Money, for fear thou see
that nor me no more.


Peter. Ah God bless your Worship; you're a merry man. See ye no more quoth^?
there is a jest indeed --


Brain. Ay, he jests, he jests -- he is a wagg (...) a ver^ honest fellow -- See
him no more quotha -- ha ha --


Sir Frol. What think you of this now Sir? you have no House, no Wife, no
Family, not you I warrant ye, this amazes ye --


Beauf. Gad and so it does --


Brain. Signior, I think it is best to draw off with the purchase, lest it be
pursued and retaken --


Sir Frol. Well Mr. Beaufort, your care in obscuring your Wife, has made me
long to see my own. For know Sir, that since I saw you last, I am married too,
and, tho I say it, to a Beauty, tho I do not exclude her from the view of the
world as you do your -- but you doubtless have some reason for it -- and I Will
urge it no further, and so farewell -- Exit.


Beauf. How? he married, and to a young Woman? I must know more of this; Sir
Lubberly, a word with you. Prithee what young Lady is it your Uncle has
married -- hah --


Sir L. Widg. Ha -- what is she? why would you know now, would you know -- gad
it will not do -- ha ha ha! not a word of the pudding not I ha ha! are you
thereabout faith?


SINGS.
Rosy Cheeks and dimpled Chin,
Slow Will of Stenson.
Cole-black Eyes, and Milk-white Skin,
Oh! pretty Pegg of Benson.
Beauf. The devil take thee for a positive fool; well I must leave it for time
to discover -- as to the the other business, the old Knight, and this Ring -- give
me sufficient cause to believe, I am mistaken for another -- be it so; It Is but
fortune thrown upon me, and none of my seeking. Come sirrah* I have an old Aunt
here in Town that I must instantly visit, she is called my Lady Beardly. Her
character I Will give thee as we go along -- how now, who is this?


Brain. Hah! I know not; I hope another Witch with a bag of Money.


Enter Rose, and delivers Beauford a Letter and Exit. Beauf. What a silent
Message, and no an answer to be given?

Reads. Your name has betrayed both you and me -- for by that means ^am married
to the wrong person. Seek not to instring^ the Marriage vow, since it is too
late. And I charge ye, never disturb my evenings Walk. The backside of the
Bowling green -- Olivia.

The Devil; What, married to another, and in my name? It Is plain now I have
been undermined, and here is the foundation of all mistakes -- 'Sdeath, I Will
challenge the Rascal instantly. But hold, that will ruin all, for then except
I kill him, I shall never have the privilege of seeing her. No -- to Cuckold
him* There Is the revenge. Gad, I have a fair invitation here, and I hope 'twill
succeed, Since he my Mistr^ss got by fraud; By heaven
I Will get his Wife by Fraud, and then we are even. Exit.



ACT. II.
SCENE, Lady Beardly's House.
Enter Sir Frollick, and Isabella. Isab. NAy, prithee dear go in with me, my
Lady Beardly will take it ill that you should come just to the Door, and then
away without seeing her.


Sir Froll. Sweet Heart -- my Business is too weighty to be controlled by your
advice. Go get ye in -- I Will step over to the Coffee-house to drink a Dish of
Tea, and read the Votes, And then tell her, my Nephew, Sir Lubberly, and I,
will wait on her; Get you gone, I say, farewell --


Isab. To read the Votes a very pretty Employment. Well, I will not r^ile much
at thee, nor vex my self; but, this I Will say, he that leaves his Wife when she
desires his Company, to read the Votes, deserves to be Voted a Cuckold as long
as he lives, did the news never so nearly concern him --


Enter Beauford and Brainworm. Beauf. Hah! Say thou so? gad, this must be a
Woman of Judgment by that sentence; Sirrah, thou shall see me board her.


Brain. What, in your Aunts house; and, the first thing you do? 'shud, Sir, you
ruin your self.


Beauf. Hah -- this damned Rogue goes always about to hinder my fortune*
Sirrah, I Will tell thee I Will do it. What a pox thou shall see me fetch her about
Immediately.


Brain. Sir, though I am sensible you do not value a beating, yet, by your
favor, I do: It does not agree with my Constitution, and therefore I shall
make an honorable retreat --


Beauf. I vow to gad, Madam, there was so much wit and reason in what you said,
that it was impossible for me but to be of your opinion; and, if you would take
my advice, Madam --


Brain. She should Cuckold her Husband the first thing she did.


Isab. Oh heaven's, Beauford!


Beauf. What, my dear sweet charming Isabella -- Is it you? a thousand thanks
to Fortune for this encounter: What a dull Rogue was I not to know thee sooner?
for, Who but she could have spoken so much Wit and Reason in one sentence?


Isab. I was no doubt inspired, by having you so near me; but, you would say, I
have some reason for my sentence, if you knew all --


Beauf. Knew all -- Why faith it is a little unreasonable, that I that have
known all so often, should now know but a part* Come, be free with me --
Prithee what is it?


Brainw. Hah! Why, what so familiar already? 'sbud he has fetched her about
indeed -- Well -- go thy ways Bully, thou have a very dextrous way at it, I Will
say that for thee.


Isab. Why then to thy Continual Torment be it spoken, know thou miserable
Creature, that I am Married, and h^^^ been so almost these two years.


Beauf. The Devil thou have. 'sdeath! What a Thunderclap was that? Married --


Isabell. Married, Wedded; nay, (and what is worse, and what I fear, will
eternally torture thee,) I have, like an imprudent Creature as I was, strictly
bound my self to the Tyrant Con^cience, utter^ to forsake all wild Company,
Knit Night-Caps for my Husband, and live honestly --


Beauf. How! honest too! nay then farewell -- Oh fleeting World! but, I hope,
thou art in jest, my dear, for all this.


Falls down and counterf^its. Isabell. It Is too true, Sir.

The Fates have so decreed it. But, however, one spark of Comfort shall be
yours, least you despair; Therefore know, tho I am Married, my Husband is old
--


Beauf. Old -- oh! that is some amends however. Rises up.


Brainw. Oh! is that some amends -- ha, ha, ha! -- here are more Horns a
making; for, I never knew his e^es twinckle so in a morning, but some body or
other was a Cuckold before night.


Isab. Ha, ha, ha! -- well, Sir, ^ow I have a little revived your drooping
spirits -- I must take the privilege of departing -- I have a visit to make to
my Lady Beardly; besides, it is not for my Credit to be seen with such a young
wild fellow -- for, Who knows what people will think --


Beauf* No more than they have occasion to think I dare answer for 'em -- but,
Madam, you will not be so inhumane, to go away without giving me leisure to
express my self a little; it is just like giving a Man a strong Cordial to fetch
him to a minutes life, that afterward he may die in more torture.


Isabell. If Life were concerned, Sir, perhaps I might be more merciful; but,
yours is but a kind of Mungrel Epilepsie, a Politic Fit, Sir -- and you
Gallants use it, as Beggars do counterfeit Scars, only to procure pity, which
having, you laugh at us. Would there was order taken that you might be whipped
for every such offense.


Brainw. How, whipped* 'sbud, I hope it is not come to that; come, good Sir, come
away.


Beauf. Peace, Rascal -- but, Madam, do but hear me a little.


Isabell. Not a word, Sir; the times are altered: and, heaven forgive us what
is past: it shall be my endeavor to procure it.


Brainw. Amen -- well, I am glad it is no worse -- this shows the woman has some
Religion in her however.


Isabell. To which purpose I will go every morning to the Chapel, and desire,
in my Devotions, to be free from impertinent lewd Company: and then return
home, and, like a true Wife, spend all the rest of the day in my Melancholy
Appartment, and my Nights in the Bed of Honor. Exit, smiling on Beauford.


Beauf. To the Chapel -- very well; I understand ye faith -- the Devil's in it
if I do not thrive at this rate -- this is the second Assignation I have made
within this hour, and luckily with my two quondam Mistrisses that I was in
quest of -- Olivia I had designed to profit by, but, it seems, I have been
undermined by treachery; but, Sirrah, this last was mine for pleasure -- who
now is also Married, and, no doubt, a great comfort to her Husband.


Brain. A very great Comfort -- a Whore is a very great Comfort to her husband
without doubt.


Beauf. Sirrah, no bug words, there was no Whoredom in the Case; no, faith,
I Will say that for her, she never took a penny of Money.


Brainw. Oh, oh; then it is another case if she took no money: it is impossible
she should be a Whore, if she took no Money; ha, ha --


Beauf. Ay, Rascal, it is unreasonable that term should be given her: but, a
pox, I have forgot one material thing, to know her Husbands Name; but, no
matter, I shall know all when I meet her in the Chapel to morrow. I am
resolved to venture thither, though I am afraid the Dogs will bark me out
again; and, by that means, let the Congregation know, how much I am a stranger
to the place.


Brainw. Sir, the truth is, I ever thought your Religion, and the Courage of a
Town-Bully, were very like; for, you care no more for the Church, without the
design of making an Intrigue there, then he cares to fight with a resolute
Fellow, when he h^s the convenience of running away from him.


Beauford. Very well; but, What the Devil makes my old Lady Aunt so long a
coming? I believe she has taken Physic to day.


Brainworm. Physic? Why, Has she been given to that, and alive still?


Beauford. Face-Phisick, I mean, Sirrah: Fucus, white Mercury, Fat of Eeles,
and Jews Tincture, with which she does so mortify deformity, that her Face in
a morning looks like an old Wall new plastered; her head is unthatch't, like
an old Parsonage, thirteen hairs on one side, and three on the other, and her
eyes like lights at the last snuff: her Chin was long since befriended with a
China Beard of comely thickness, but, t'has been so unmercifully used with her
Pincers, that instead of one dimple, she has made forty: Natures hand shook
when she was making, for the white of her skin fell into her eyes, the gray of
her eyes into her hair, and the red of her Cheeks upon her Nose.


Brainworm. A very beautiful Creature in good faith.


Beauford. Then she is the most Amorous Sibill, that ever spoke waggish
Prophesy; entertains all the young Fops in the Town, and to end all, has that
unnatural -- impudence to think some of 'em are in love with her. Pox on her,
were I not to have Money of her, I Would ride the wooden Horse e're be troubled
with her impertinence.


A Chair set on. Enter Lady Beardly, Tisick, Page, holding up Beardly's Train.
L. Beardly. Dear Coz -- welcome to England, I protest I am as glad to see you
as if you were my own Son, born of my own body -- thanks good Coz in troth --
you kiss comfortably -- and pray let me return it -- very good in truth, come,
you are my own flesh and blood, therefore this is no indecency.


Brainworm. If one of her teeth had dropped into his mouth, that would have been
a small indecency I Am sure.


Beauford. None, none Madam, you do me a great honor.


L. Beardly. Why you are grown a handsome Man, in troth, Coz -- tall, well-set,
and strait-limb'd, your leg too very well -- come, I say little, but I have
known the time when a good leg has been no detestable object.


Beauford. Mine is but indifferent -- but I am glad your Ladyship likes it.


L. Beardly. In good faith it is well, very well -- and good Coz: how does my
Brother do? I warrant he is grown an old grave Man by this time. Heaven bless
us, I have not seen him this many a year. Tisick, reach me the great Elbow
Chair.


Beauford. Hearty, hearty, but much troubled with the gout.


L. Beard. Alack-a-day, Is he so? -- well, he has been a Wagg in his days --
lord bless us! I vow he has loved a Wench better then a Psalm-book, Coz: that
he has of my word.


Beauf. Not unlikely, Madam, but I never heard he kept any


L. Beardly. Did ye not? well, that is all one if he did, 'twas privately with
discretion, and not like our Gimcracks now-adayes; yes, yes, he had a little
itching that way, but, in troth, as godly a Religious Conscientious Man every
one knows.


Beauf. Faith, I always held him so: but, Madam, I think Nature intends to
renew your Lease of Life for ever; methinks you look younger than you did when
I saw you last.


L. Beard. Tisick! give me my Glass -- Why truly I think I am not Contemptible
for one of my age. 'This face, with a little setting out may serve.


Beauf. To fright Children into Convulsions -- Pray how do your Ladyships Teeth
hold out Madam?


L. Beard. Oh Cozen! there you strike me! nor can I without Tears Remember my
affliction, my mouth is almost desolate, Sir -- I have but five and a stump --
Weeps.


Beauf. But five -- faith, time has been a little Cruel -- but, Madam, you have
this Comfort, your Gums will last Cawdle-proofe a long time.


L. Beard. Small Comfort, alas, the Marks gone, the Marks gone; it is this that
ruins the Designs of all Ladies of my age: We can make shift to hide our
hair, and our Aches, and our Wrinckles line, But come to your Business, Coz. I
warrant you want Money.


Beauf. A little, I confess, for the finishing a Design I have, Madam -- 50
Guinnies would do my Business.


L. Beard. 50 Guinnies -- Well, you shall not want 50 G^innies to further any
good design. Tisick, go fetch me the Green Purse in my Cabinet -- Ex. Tisick.
What a Mistress I warrant. Come, discover, it may be I may find 50 more if I
like it.


Beauf. Do You hear that Sirrah? we shall roll in Money -- why then to be free
with ye Madam -- It Is about a Mistress -- There is a Lady here in Chelsey, one
Olivia.


L. Beard. Well -- There is so -- What of her?


Beauf. She was formerly my Mistress: but, since my last Misfortune, was got
from me by Treachery. However, I believe I might be received still, and if I
had this Money to set my self out --


L. Beard. -- You could Cuckold her Husband, could you, what and must -- I Will
be your Bawd about this Business -- and to Olivia too my Kinswoman, a near
Neighbor -- In the name of Virtue! This is a very fine design indeed, must I
be your Bawd -- No Sir, no; I Will put a stop to this presently -- you shall have
no Catterwawling Money of me I assure you -- if you will be content with the
allowance your Father left you -- so^mdash;if not -- I have no Catterwawling
Money for ye, and so your servant -- ods-heartlikins, must I be your Bawd --
Exit.


Brainw. Hark ye Sir -- Pray do me the favor to change me a Tester, I know you
roll in Money --


Beauf. Damned Rogue, must you play upon my misfortune too. Well, I see my
damned Luck is coming to torment me again -- Death that I should be such a Fool
to tell her name! and Olivia, who, whatever she really is, was always
accounted virtuous -- pox on it -- Well, I must be very impudent -- deny, I
meant her, and so bring it about as well as I can -- hah -- here comes Sir
Frollick Whimsy -- I Will try him --


Enter Sir Frollick. Sir Froll. Mr. Beauford, your Servant -- I have been
mediating for you within, but my Lady is very angry; pray, What was the matter?
What Lady is that he speaks of?


Beauf. Ah Sir! only a small Mistake: My asking for Money was the Cause of her
anger, if the Truth were known. But, she shall find I value as little to
receive her kindness, as she does to pay them: And, Sir Frollick, since it is my
good fortune to meet you so opportunely, I will presume to request the favor
of you that she has denied; only to lend me 50 Guinnies -- for a Design I have
Sir -- you shall have what security you please.


Sir Froll. Sir, the word of a Gentleman is to me sufficient security. I think
I have the sum about me, and it shall be the sooner yours -- because you say it
is upon Design. Pray, What Lady ^s it -- I did love an Intrigue my self when I
was young -- a Cock of the Game I -- but now by heaven I can do nothing -- No
earthly thing upon my Faith; but come, discover, good Mr. Beauford --


Speaks this as he is ^ing the Money. Brain. My fit of s^aking is come upon me
again -- here is more Mischief hatching -- good Sir -- have a care, this may be a
trick.


Beauf. Sir -- in stead of Olivia, I Will tell him of Isabella -- gad, I Will be
cunning enough this time -- I warrant thee, Sir Frollick, I am so well
satisfied with your wisdom, and secresy, that I can hide nothing from you.
Therefore know, Sir, that this Lady my Aunt spoke of has been my intimate
acquaintance a great while --


Sir Froll. Very well Sir -- a single or a married Woman I beseech you?


Beauf. By good Fortune married Sir -- since my last voyage; which is so much
the better for my design; for you know, a Husband is the most nec^ssary thing
imaginable in such a case; it mak^s the pleasure greater by the safety, and the
sin more sweet, by being the less easy to be discovered --


Sir Froll. It does so in troth, it does so; but, her name, good Mr. Beauford,
her name?


Beauf. Faith, Sir Frollick, to tell her Name is not so like a Man of Hono^ --
but, you are so obliging, that I can keep nothing from you; and, though it is
true we have been very intimate, very ^xceeding intimate -- yet I presume to
tell you -- my dear Friend, will no way be a blemish to her reputation --
Therefore, know Sir -- she is called by the Name of the Incomparable Isabella
--


Sir Froll. What, Sir -- Pray that again!


Beauf. Isabella, Sir.


Sir Froll. The Devil -- what, my Wife -- give me patience -- give me patience.


Beauf. Now, Sir -- the Devil's in it, I am utterly unacquainted with the old
Cuckold her Husband, and am damnably afraid of betraying my self to him --


Sir Froll. Ah -- no fear of that Sir -- I warrant he is a very dull Rascally
Fellow -- hah --


Beauf. Dull -- why she says her self, she believes he has not been ^ Man this
20 years.


Sir Froll. O give me patience -- aside.


Beauf. But, no matter, she revenges her self some way or other, for, if I am
not very much mistaken, she is with Child now.


Sir Froll. With Child -- By the pleasure of generation I lay not with her
these ten Months -- O give me patience! aside.


Beauf. Now, Sir, as good fortune would have it, meeting her here just now
accidentally -- she appointed an Assignation with me to morrow Morning in the
Chapel --


Sir Froll. In the Chapel!


Beauf. Ay, Sir -- ha, ha -- Is it not a witty Rogue? and this Money that you
are pleased to lend me, is to Treat her, with a little at first, you know it is
but civil, for in a little time I expect three times that sum from her; and, to
morrow the business is to be concluded: for, there we are to plot how to mee^
undiscovered by that Jealous, Crazy, Feeble, Impotent Cuckold her Husband --
ha, ha, ha --


Sir Froll. Oh the Devil! this is most insufferable -- but by Heroules -- I Will
be so revenged -- In the first place let me tell you -- that you are the Son of
a Whore: in the second place, you shall have not a penny of Money -- and
thirdly, I am resolved to have instant satisfaction.


Beauf. Satisfaction, For what, Sir? -- I hope you have no concern with this
Lady -- she is no Relation of yours.


Sir Froll. No -- no -- only my Wife, Sir, that is all --


Beauf. His Wife! gad I have made a fine business on it.


Brain. His Wife? O Lord!


Sir Froll. Give me patience: Does Sir Frollick Whimsey live to be thus abused!
no, the Sword shall right me -- the Sword shall plead my Cause -- the feeble
impotent Cuckold shall make a feeble impotent Coxcomb of you: Expect it. As for
her part I Will spoil her Chappel-meeting. This is her going to Prayers -- By
this light she shall p^ay no more I am resolved on it -- and, for you, Sir, I Will
be with you instantly. Exit.


Brainw. Now does he look like one that is just apprehended for stealing sheep.
It Is well Fornication is no Felony, if 'twere, of my Conscience that Countenance
would go near to hang him --


Beauf. Had ever Man such Fortune! such Crowds, such Degrees of damned Chance
-- gad, I believe the Devil is grown Conscientious, and makes me spoil all my
Designs, out of a mere Principle of Kind^ess -- if he had let me had the Money,
perhaps I might have been contented -- but now, in spite of him, I Will go on --
I Will weary him at his own Weapon Malice. I Will instantly go and meet Olivia in
her Walk the backside of the Bowling-Green, Then make my peace with Isabella
by a Letter, and so proceed as occasion serves. Come, Sirrah, you might have
hindered this if you had not been a dull Rogue -- but, come your ways with a
Pox to yee^mdash;


Brainw. Ay, come -- with all my heart -- s bud, I am in a cold sweat. Exeunt.


Re-e^ter Sir Frollick, his Sword drawn, Sir Lubberly following. Sir Froll.
Come, Sir, come on Sir -- sa, sa -- Why where are ye? Why don't you appear?
Sa, sa


Sir Lub. W. What a Devil -- What Is here? my old Uncle Fencing with his own
shadow -- ha, ha -- was there ever such a Co^comb? Do You hear, Uncle; Don't kill
him, 'twill be Murder -- Uncle; ha, ha, don't kill him --


Sir Froll. Where the Devil is this Rogue now?


Sir Lub. W. Rogue, why hanged -- hanged -- Uncle, hanged la^t Sessions: But
come, if you have a mind to breath your self turn to me -- Come, your point --
your guard -- Come, you shall see what I can do.


Sir Froll. What you can do?


Sir Lub. W. Ay, what I can do. What a Pox do you think I can do nothing? sa, sa.
There was in your Guts Uncle.


Sir Froll. And there I was on your pate, Sir -- Strikes him.


Sir. L. Widg. My pate, Sir?


Sir Frol* Ay, Sir, on your Back and Shoulders, Sir -- beats him about.


Si^ L. W^dg. Back and Shoulders, Sir?


Si^ Frol. And will be all over ye instantly, give me patience. This is fine --
What you are his Second are ye? I Will Second ye.


Sir L. Widg. What Second, I Will have you know, I am First and Second too Sir,
if you go to that -- what a Devil ails him? why Uncle you should not strike
mun, you should push and push, and then go back, and push again; what a pox you
lay on as if you were Thrashing.


Sir Frol. ^hank your self then, for interrupting a man when you see he is in
passion --


Sir Lub. Ay, a man had need be in passion indeed, that fights with his own
shadow -- ha ha ha!


Sir Frol. The Rascal is got away -- but I Will be revenged of him, if he be
above ground -- and you there Medly of Clown and Fool; What I warrant you, you
have left my Lady alone now?


Sir L. Widg. No but I have not -- The Monkey is with her -- I left 'em both
mumbling of Chestnuts in the great Parlor.


Sir Frol. Did you so, incorrigible Dunce?


Sir Lub. Look now -- you are the strangest man -- what a Devil would you have
me do? she can talk of nothing but of White-washing and Painting -- and can
talk of nothing but St. George and the Seven Champions; and what a pox, what
discourse shall we have?


Sir Frol. Discourse -- Sir, she expects none -- Do not vex me; Consent to
marry this Widow, and go about it instantly, or look for no favor from me.


Sir L. Widg. Why, what a damned unreasonable thing is this? now that a man
must be forced to marry a Witch Volens nolens, whether he will or no -- pox,
I Will hang my self rather, I Will never -- nay a withered old Witch -- a Bawd too
it may be.


Sir Frol. No matter if she be; she has the more experience, and though her
Face is homel^, her Bags Sir are comely; her 1000 l. a year is beautiful --
Come, I Will have no more delay -- either go and address, stick close to her, and
quickly too, or I Will make a better proffit of my guardship then ^ou expect, and
so I leave you to consideration --


Sir L. Widg. Stick close to an old Woman! what an unnatural fool is this --
well, this is ever the fate of us young Heirs: let our Fathers, leave us never
so much, either by our jilting Wenches, unconscionable Tailors, or cheating
Guardians; gad we seldom come to possession. If I do marry this old Gipsey now
-- I shall be a wretch-Roque, and if I do not marry her, I shall be a poor
Roque. Let me see this old, and crooked, and monstrous ugly -- but then she has
Gold that is young, and pretty, and surprising -- but then again, she has a
Tongue will make a man deaf, a Breath that will blast him, and 1000
imperfections more, and that is the Devil -- but then again, she has 1000 l. a
year, and that is good -- but then a pox, she has Rubies in her face, which
shows she drinks Brandy intolerably -- but then again, she has a fine Ruby in
her Cabinet that drinks none; but then again, she is craggy and tough, and can
never be a good Bedfellow; but then again, I may keep a Wench that can -- ha ha
ha! I vow that last thought has refreshed me extremely -- And dear Money, most
powerful Riches, thou have overcome me; for thy sake this Hagg shall be Courted
-- for thy sake will I pass this dangerous Rubicon, and for thy sake, call this
decrepid, antiquated Megera, the blooming Miracle of Nature -- Exi.


SCENE II.
Enter Beverley and Jenny Wheedle. Bever. By heaven it is true; the Rascal faced
me down, that his man gave me the Ring this morning, and also gave my man his
Watch, when neither he nor I saw either of 'em.


Ien Wh. This must be some strange mistake sure --


Bever. Mistake her not, if he had staid a little longer, I had paid him in
other coin than he expected; as for your part, I may chance to get another for
ye -- I mean, if my humor hold, and you appear as pleasing to me the next time
I see you, as ye do now.


Ien Wh. I imagined some great uncertainty would attend, ^f you were to promise
any thing; and the pride you have in thinking ye can judge of Beauty, is always
far beyond your good Nature, in bearing with its defects, for you will sure to be
eager in condemning a Woman, if she does not look well, but are very slow in
commending her if she does --


Bever. No 'faith -- I always speak my thoughts freely, it is true, I would not
willingly have my applause bestow^d on ill subjects; but you I Am sure have no
reason to resent it, for I have always been favorable to you --


I.Whead. You never railed at me in your life I warrant.


Bever. Never but when I was drunk, and then gad if it had been Treason 'twere
all one.


I. Whead Then since you see the plague and inconvenience of that odious crime,
why will you not desert it, why will you venture to drink again?


Bever. A pretty question faith, prithee ask a big-belly'd woman that escaped
death narrowly the birth of her last Child, why she would venture again: why I
tell thee it is as natural to us as to thee, Lying, Drunkenness is the Souls
Carnaval, where the noble Essence has liberty to range and divert it self,
uncontrolled by the severe Rules of Wisdom, Nature, Religion, or Honesty: why
would I drink again, there is a question indeed?


I. Whead. I wish you could leave it off for all that -- but now to our Love
affair -- be sure to come in disguise, when next you visit me; for I have often
observed a fellow prying up and down near my window, and guess he is a spy that
your Wife has hired to watch us*


Bever. I believe no less, and will therefore follow thy directions, -- How now?


Enter Amble. Amble. Sir, my Lady is come back again I believe, suspecting
something, and is just coming into the chamber -- Treading. hark, you may hear
her.


Bever. The Devil is in her, sirrah! run out and hold her in discourse a little
-- Come Madam, step into my study here, and be sure make no noise, in in --
quickly -- Shuts her in.


Enter Olivia. Oliv. A saucy Groom -- what -- stop my passage -- but I am apt
to believe it was done by Order. What Sir, are you frighted at my presence, you
make such a fumbling about the Lock -- pray, if I may presume so far, let me
know who it is you have shut in there -- That you take such care to conceal --


Bever. Why a young bashful fellow, a student of my acquaintance, that is gone
in to read a little.


Oliv. But to be locked in, by your favor, is a little odd, pray what is his
reason for that --


Bever. Melancholy Madam, he is much given to melancholy ^esides he desired that
he might not see you.


Oliv. Not see me!


Bever. Ay -- he says he is ready to swound if he sees any Woman after dinner --
and for my part, you know I could do no less than grant his request.


Oliv. Not see a Woman -- he should have little of a Student in him by that --
but doubtless this is some dull ^^egmatick country Clod, whose hard fisted
Father, thriftily getting about 200 l. per annum, in hopes to make his
successors Gentlemen, has placed this stripling in the Inns of Court, where he
has learnt to swear modishly, sc^ape a scu^vy Lesson or two on the Violin --
wear tawdry Clothes, kiss his Laundress -- but never pay her -- rail at every
thing, and understand nothing --


Bever. Gad ye are very free methinks Madam, with a person you don't know --
but let me tell you (think what you please) the person within enclosed, is a
very ingenious person, ay, and a very handsome person, and though at this time,
a Melancholy, Philosophical person -- yet a person that is generally as good
company, as any person in Christendom -- gad I Will say that for her.


Oliv. For her -- what then, this is a she-Student all this while -- What her
Sir? what her?


Bever. Her -- why him or her -- It Is all one -- what a pox, any man may
mistake a word -- Confound it, I have spoiled all --


Oliv. Come Sir, your Artifice is too weak, now the discovery is so plain, and
I am resolved to see this Philosophical Gentleman e're he goes to secure all --
Let me peep in, and if there be a man --


Bever. If there be, why what a Devil do think I Would tell a lie? on my honor
it is a man, a dull poring Melancholy Rogue; a FellowCommoner.


Oliv. Base man -- now I am too sensible of your lewdness and ingratitude, and
be confident I Will be revenged at full -- for from this moment, the duty of a
Wife, and the reserved behavior incident to that name, shall be as far from
me, as Constancy from thee. Now by you Sky it shall, I have sworn it.


Bever. So -- I thought 'twould come to this. Well Madam, since you have
discovered the business, recall your patience, and wink at it. It Is my first
offense, and who knows, if you show good Nature now, but it may work upon me --.


Oliv. Wink at it -- What be your Bawd my self! oh Confusion! have I been bred
with such Integrity, taught Virtue from my Cradle, practiced it, supplied the
office of a Wife with credit, and never did action that could taint my Inno^ence
-- have I been this, to be at last a Pandress -- What, catch my Husband with a
whore, and wink at it?


Bever. God's Death! Cease your noise, or by heaven I shall grow an^^^*


Oliv. No -- from this moment Ill be free as Air; let my self loose to gaiety
and pleasure, wanton and wild as Mercenary Creatures -- I will Sir, and to give
you some reason to believe it, know that there is a Gentleman, one Beauford, (
a name you are acquainted with) newly returned from Travel, one who has loved
me.


Bever. The devil! Beauford returned? and you intend Madam to invite him
hither, that he and I may be good company together -- hah --


Oliv. Not for your company Sir -- whilst I have a Closset in my Apartment to
entertain him in; And if he is not as glad to learn Philosophy of my teaching,
as your Female Student within there is of yours, the Devil's in it.


Bever. Is it possible that I can be patient, and hear this Madam? do not
presume too much upon my temper; for assure your self, since you have thus far
provoked me; your Insolence has taken away all guilt on my part, for what ever
privilege I take, I am sure you plead by a contrary Charter, and must own
bondage.


Oliv. Bondage -- I laugh at it -- no Sir, you cancelled your right in that,
when you broke your Marriage vow, and let those frozen fools own it, whose
souls are too narrow and spiritless to revenge their injuries, mine shall be
free as thought: I Will plot the manner instantly, and my proceedings shall to
after ages, prove a Law for all wronged Wives to plague their Husbands with. --


Jenny reads. Bever. Excellent! Is there a greater fury than a virtuous Wife?
no, not in Hell, I am confirmed in it.


Oliv. But* why is this Peerl^ss Creature obscured all this while? this
compound of Impudence, Lust, and sophisticated Beauty, flattered by the Devil's
Pencil, to please ye for an hour, and created by him to abuse ye for an age.
What dare you not let me see her?


Bever. Yes; gad thou shall see her, if it be but only to vex thee -- Come
forth my Love -- fear nothing, I Will protect thee.


Enter Jenny Wheedle. I. Whead. Oh let me not come out -- shel'll kill me!


Bev. By all that is good, who hurts a finger of thee, had better never been
born: now look your fill Madam -- and when you have done looking, know I love
her.


Oliv. Oh that we were alone! thou wretch Runs at Jenny, she runs behind Bever.


I. Whead. Oh save me! save me!


Oliv. Death and destruction, he kisses her -- who is within there? Mr. Amble --


Enter Amble. Amble. Here Madam.


Oliv. Mr. Amble come hither, I ask you pardon for my late passion -- I have
observed you long, and have believed your merits far above your fortune -- pray
come hither, nearer yet -- here is a Ring I love, I freely give it you* start
not* but take it -- Takes hold of him.


Bever. How now sirrah; whence springs this Impudence?


Amble. I beseech you Madam -- Oh Lord Sir, I cannot help it.


Oliv. What a Coward -- flinch! come nearer I command ye, there is my hand, kiss
it.


Amble. Oh Lord Madam -- Trembles, and looks on Beverly.


Bev. Sirrah -- be gone, or I Will run my sword in your Guts.


Oliv. Stay, or I Will cut your Throat -- Kiss it I say --


Amble. Oh I beseech you Madam!


Bev. Dog, still here?


Amble. Oh I am gone Sir* I am gone -- Runs out,


Bever. Very well Madam, I see you can find ways to divert your self, without
troubling your Modesty -- in which pleasant humor I Will leave you to your
Coachman* if you please, and part from you with as little regret or concern, as
I would from the Orange-wench in the Playhouse -- Come my dear, come -- Exit
Bev. and J. Whea.


Oliv. Well Sir, and I am resolved to be revenged on thee; and tho my Virtue
will not let me do it the right way, yet I Will make thee as jealous as if I did*
Beauford shall be the man, I shall find him in the Walk -- nor can I doubt my
wit upon so fit an occasion. Husbands such niggards of their Love are grown,
That the poor Wife that should have all, has none.
But pining sits, with her allowance small*
Whilst rampant Misses get the Devil and all.



ACT III.
SCENE Chelsey. Enter Beauford and Brainworm. Beau. THat row of Trees I
remember. Yonder Is the Bowling-green, Come sirrah. This is the place*


Brain. Where it is ten to one, but we shall b^ well cudgelled, and so return
home again, like fools as we came.


Beauf. Cudgelled! why you cowardly Rascal; who should cudgel us?


Brain. Who? why Piccaroons Sir -- Land-Pirats, that are doubtless looking for
Prize, as well as you.


Beauf. Sirrah -- thou art a cold spiritless Rascal, and only swaid by the
motions of thy fear: but these are Trifles to men of wit and courage, pray --
how came ye off with your last business, did you deliver my Letter to Isabella?


Brainw. Ay there is another -- I had like to have made a hopeful journey of
that too. Yes Sir, I delivered it.


Beauf. Well -- and what said she?


Brainw. Why, after she had snatched the Letter from me -- she calls to her
Footmen to go and whip that impudent Rascal that came to trouble her, where had
not my legs been my best friends -- I had been tied to a post and slashed as
god sa' me.


Beauf. Ha ha -- I find this was her cunning, her Husband was upon the sent --
but see who comes yonder -- ha, it must be Olivia; oh the charming Rogue how
she shines -- sirrah not a word now in contradiction, I charge ye -- for tho I
am a little unlucky sometimes, according as the wind sits, yet for making a
Court to a Lady, I defy all Europe, gad go go, your distance --


Brain. I think there are no men with her, that is one comfort.


Enter Olivia and Lidia. Lidia. I see he has picked the meaning out of your
Letters --


Oliv. It Is he; Now would I give 20 Guineys, my Husband were by to hear the
harangue betwixt us.


Lidia. So would not I, for this object would so nettle his jealousy, there
would be no enduring him -- I vow methinks, he is a very handsome person, and I
believe of a good Conscience.


Oliv. A right Town-Gallant Madam, if those are your conscientious persons, and
one that would as soon address to your Ladyship, if he knew the advantages he
should get by it, as any one in Christendom. Prithee observe his demure
countenance -- I see Sir, you will take no warning; you will venture a great
deal of my anger, to enjoy a little of my company.


Beauf. No Madam, 'twas rather that I might enjoy a great deal of your company
for a little of your anger -- Ah! did you know the languishments, and
heart-breakings I have suffered for you -- well, it is gone and past -- and
heaven forgive you.


Brainw. Ay and you too -- ha ho* heart-breakings quotha!


Oliv. It Is as destiny pleases to order Sir. But methinks the Beauties of
Paris, and the success that always attended your endeavors, should banish
these resentments from you: I know the little Love you had for me has been dead
long since --


Beauf. Why the Devil take me Madam, if you are not the only person I adore,
and ho^rly die for.


Brain. S'bud! every one he has met these six months, has been that only person
to my knowledge --


Oliv. You have deserved better I confess -- but Sir, in this age, Merit like
Wit, is never paid the applause due to it, till the owner be past receiving --
For my own part, I am as comfortless as you, and as destitute of a Remedy; for
my Husband is grown the unkindest man in the World to me.


Beauf. Ah damn 'em Madam, they are all so nowadays --


Oliv* He keeps a Wench under my Nose; nay, is not so contented, but he le^s me
see her, and courts her before my face -- pray give me your advice now Sir; is
it not reason that I should be revenged of him for this?


Beauf. Reason! ay -- gad, the profoundest Philosophy in the world, has not
half so much reason in it --


Oliv. I knew it must, See now, what an extraordinary blessing a man judgment
is! had you not ass^r'd me this, I vow I should have been fearf^l how to
proceed.


Beauf. Ah, Madam! would you but take my advice, you should find one Kind
humble servant of more worth than Twenty resty peevish Husbands -- a Husband,
Madam, is the meo^ Bank-rupt of Love* he scores for all he has without ever
being able to repay a penny -- but, a vigorous Lover still brings ready Money
-- here is this for that, without fraud or design -- And, gad, a plain-Dealer in
Love is as necessary as in Merchandise* there ought to be no goods delivered
out without a just Exchange to the full value --


Oliv. Well, I see you are owner of so much Wit and Reason, that I am resolved
to discover my Design to you -- And also to desire your assistance --


Beauf. Assistance -- so -- Do You hear that Sir. to Brain.


Oliv. For, since no fair means, entreaty -- nor Love, can make my Husband
leave his lewd Courses, I am resolved to see what Jealousy can do, to which
purpose you shall be my Gallant; Address to me; Court me; Sing -- Cringe -- Bow
-- Swear, and be very Modishly soppish before all Company* which gallantry I
will receive with as ridiculous an affected behavior, as a Mail-Lady -- an
overture with Mr. Such-a-one, after a Midnight Assignation with my Lord --


Beauf. Ha, ha, ha -- very well -- I vow to gad, Madam, very well.


Brain. Ay, ay -- she is your own, Sir -- She Is your own --


Oliv. But see the Sun declines -- I must be gone, have a little patience, Sir;
and, if you think your time well employed, be here about an hour hence; perhaps
there may a Messenger come that may guide you to a place where we may discourse
further * but, for the present, le^ me entreat you to be gone, here is company
coming.


Beauf. Your humble Servant, Madam -- I Will be as punctual as the minutes --
Come, Sir -- Ex. Beauf. and Brain.


Oliv. It would be now a doubtful question, whether any Woman, but I, would not
make use of this opportunity; he, I find, Imagines the business half done
already; and, there are some of my sex that I believe would think it great
pity, that troublesome Virtue should dash a Man's hopes that means so well,
and is so willing to revenge their Injuries. Heaven! of what corrupted Natures
are these Men, especially when they come to be Husbands: But mine is sure the
worst of all; There Is nothing can reclaim him. However, he shall not think I
resent it, for* in appearance, I Will be as careless and as wild as he -- I Have a
Plot upon his Mistress too -- It Is here well forged, I am sure, and, I hope,
will prove lucky -- Exit.


Enter Sir Lubberly and Boy. Sir ^roll. Well, Sir; Have you considered on my
Imposition? Have you fixed your resolution to Court this Widow --


Sir. L. Widg. I have; I have considered her as the very seething pot of
Iniquity, and my self the Ladle of Discretion, ordained to cool her when she
boileth over.


Sir Froll. But will you Marry her?


Sir Lubb. Marry her -- a pox o'that word, I never hear it, but it gives me the
Griping of the Guts -- Could you not have named any thing else -- I Will lie with
her, and that is all one.


Sir Froll. No, no, Sir; there must be marriage in the Case --


Sir Lub. Well -- the Devil take her, I will Marry her then; I will do it in
spite of her intolerable Age, and more intolerable qualities; for, to tell
you the truth, the Devil and I have been drawing Cuts for this two hours, and
the Change has always fallen on my side.


Sir Froll. Oh you are merry, Sir I am glad on it, and I assure you, Coz, this
Consent of yours pleases me well: alas -- what I do is for thy good, Child --
and, let people say what they will, the Lady is rather to be admired then
contemned --


Sir Lub. W. I never knew a Witch that was not admired; Oh what fine thin hair
she has -- what a delicate low forehead what little pretty ferret hollow eyes,
and what a tall and stately nose? then she must be very harmless, because she
is toothless; then how thrifty must she be, that is so old? and how virtuous is
she like to be, of whom no man can be jealous?


Sir Froll. Right, as gad save me. Thy sentiments of her are right --


Sir Lub. Then there is Counsel and Gravity, and Dullness; and then little or no
Lechery, which, alas, in young ones is too predominant; besides, that ancient
Cornuted Philosopher instructs us well -- give me, says he, a Pippin that is
withered like an old Woman, and a contrario sequitur Argumentum, give me a
Woman that is withered like an old Pippin --


Sir Froll. An excellent Morral 'Faith -- for, Sir, I have wrought the Fool
finely; for; by this means, wanting heirs to inherit, the Estate must of
necessity fall to me -- ha, I think here she comes -- Come Coz -- let us not
miss this opportunity.


Sir Lub. W. 'Sbud -- how my heart pants now -- here, Sirrah, take this Book,
be sure to prompt -- when I am out, do you hear?


Boy. Yes, Sir.


Enter L. Beardley, Isabella, Lidia, Tissick, and Letitia. Letitia Sings. Sir
Froll. Stay, here is my Wife, and Company with her -- perhaps she may be busy
-- stand by, and observe a little -- Come, out with it Lettice -- I like it
well --


SCOTCH SONG.
1.
SAwney was tall, and of noble Race,
And loved me better then any yen,
But no he liggs by another Less,
And Sawney will nere be my Love again.
I gave him a fine Scotch Sarke and Band,
I put um on with my awn hand;
I gave him House, and I gave him Land,
Yet Sawney will ne'ere be my Love again.
2.
I robbed the Groves of all their Store,
And Nosegayes made to give Sawney yen;
He kissed my Breast, and fain would do more,
Good feth methought he was a bonny yen:
He squeezed my Fingers, grasped my Knee,
And Carved my name on each green Tree;
And sighed and languisht to ligg by me;
But now he ne'ere will be my Love again.
3.
My Bongrace, and my Sunburned Face
He praised; and also my Russet Gown;
But now he dotes on the Copper Lace,
Of some lewd Queen of London-Town.
He gangs and gives her Curds and Cream,
Whilst I poor Saul sit sighing at heam;
And never Joy Sawney unless in a Dream;
For now he never will be my Love again.
L. Beard. Very hot -- soultry hot upon my honor -- phoo -- my Lady Whimsey --
How does your Ladyship resent it? I shall be most horribly tanned.


Isab. It Is warm, Madam.


L. Beard. Oh hot* hot -- I am ready to fry -- good lack-a-day, how strange is
this -- Mrs. Lidia -- pray feel me! pray feel my pulse -- g^d forgive me how it
beats, I see I must Purge and let Blood --


Tissick. Marry does it, like one of five and twenty -- I assure your good
Ladyship.


L. Beard. My Lady Whimsey, Mrs. Lidia, pray feel, I protest I never felt the
like! Why who would think this of one of my age?


Lidia. It Is very strange indeed Madam; so is your Complexion too: For my part
I have often wondered how it was possible for your Ladyship to preserve ^our
Beauty so long --


L. Beard. Truly, Mrs. Lidia, it has been a wonder to many -- but art is a rare
thing -- you must use art, Mrs. Lidia, if you would look attractively, and live
long -- Tissick -- give me my Carrawayes.


Isab. What Art I beseech your Ladyship?


L. Beard. Nay, it is worth your knowing in troth. Why Madam -- the Face
preservative is, to be sure to suite your Ingredient to your Complexion -- your
Tawny, or Olive-colour'd skin would look better if it were White; Therefore
White must be added: Then your pale dead Tallow Color requires a Tincture, and
it must have it, it is very necessay, and no more discredit to ye, then it is to
wear a piece of thin Gold for the Kings Evil; or a row of Ivory Teeth, when
your own have uncivilly left their habitations.


Lidia. So now shall we have a Description of her own Imperfections and
Deformity, by a Misterious advice how to shun them --


L. Beard. Defects in Nature, Madam, must be supplied by Art; It Is not only
requisite, but Customary -- and it is the knowledge of what ingredient is most
natural, is the main cause of b^ing beautiful -- why now I always us^ a
certain blew re^^ection to my face.


Lidia. How, Blew?


Isab. Me^cy on us.


L. Beard. Blew, Madam -- and sometimes when I am sick and out of orde^, Black
and Blew are very convenient: It Is a little strange to you, I warrant -- but my
complexion requires it* and I always consult that.


^id^a. Nay, any one that sees your Ladyships face, may easily guess your great
knowledge in these matters.


L. Beard. Some observations Mrs. Lidia; some observations: I have not, I
think, be^n backward in procuring the good of my Neighbors -- pray let me look
on ye -- hold up your ^ead -- a little more -- ay, it is so -- a Phillamot would
set off your Face extremely --


Lidia. 'Twould make it Olive-Colour indeed, if you call that setting off.


L. Beard. Olive-colour! ah, you are ignorant Mrs. ^idia, Olive-colour! 'Twould
make it ruddy. Ruddy! there is your Complexion! Why that, which you have on,
spoils your face instead of beautif^ing it -- I have some Powder in Boxes at
home would do ^e a kindness if ^ou would use them.


Is^b. Have you not a great care Madam -- least some of those Boxes should come
to public view -- you know that would not be for ^our R^putation --


L. Beard. Care, Madam -- yes, I warrant ye; never doubt that: For, if a
stranger comes into the Room -- whip -- they are gone in a moment -- and now you
put me in mind on it, in troth I was damnably frighted once about such a
business.


Lidia. Were ^ou so?


L. Beard. Ay -- I Swear, most strangely frighted, it makes me ready to tremble
every time I think of it -- I Will tell you how 'twas sitting one day dr^ssing my
-- 'Twas before I was Married, and I think truly it is now about Five and twenty
years ago -- sitting, as I was saying, dressing my head, my Husband, who was
then a Servant to me, and one, that though I say it, laid as close seige to me
as any man in Europe could do -- he, I say, stole softly into the Room, and
stood just behind me --


Isab. As you were dressing your head?


L. Beard. Ay -- but I presently turned back, and being extremely surpised to
see him -- thinking to mend all, snatched up my false head of Brown hair, and
Curled Tower, that lay by me -- (For, to tell you true, my own was ever of a
scurvy color) and, gad forgive me -- in have* put it on the wrong way -- ha,
ha, ha, Oh heaven! What a Case was I in -- I looked for all the World like one
of the Satyrs in a Pastoral -- ha, ha, ha --


Lidia. I vow this was a strange Misfortune indeed -- but, What said the
Gentl^man? Did he not laugh soundly?


L. Beard. L^ugh -- ay -- I warrant ye -- he Laughed, and I Blush't, and he
Laughed, and I Trembled -- for, you must think, I was most terribly fright^d --
as I hope to be saved -- I had like to have miscarried about it^ I was fain to
w^ar an ^agles Stone abo^^ me for three months*


Isa^. ^n Eagles stone


L. Beard. Yes, I assure you, the only Sovereign Remedy in the World to keep
young Ladies from miscarrying.


Lidia. Misca^rying ^ Why* M^dam, you say, this was done before you were
M^rry'd* For he^ven's sake what do^s your Ladyship mean?


L. Beard. Gad forgive me, What shall I say now? -- Did I say before? pray,
p^rt Mrs. Lidia, remember your self, Did I say before? I said after we were
Marr^'d I assure you --


Ent^^ Sir Frollick, Sir Lubberly* and Boy. Sir Froll Come, Sit* now I think we
may venture -- My Lady Beardly, in all Joy and Duty, I kiss your Ladyships hand
-- in the next place give me the favor to introduce my Nephew here, Sir
Lubberly Widgeon, a man of good quality and parts, and one that will be proud
^o be graced with your Ladyships, acquaintance --


L. Beard. I (...) his humble servant, Sir. Salute.


Sir Lubb. Well, there is no such Kissing, as where there are no Teeth.


Lidia. Come, let us take this opportunity to get away, Madam: We Will wait for
your Ladyship in the next walk.


L. Beard. Your Servant, my Deares; I Will oblige my self with your sweet company
incontinently -- Exit Isab. and Lidia.


Sir Froll. The Cause of my waiting on ^ou Madam, is to inform you, That this
Gentleman -- loves ^ou --


L. Beard. Ha, ha, ha -- I protest, Sir Frollick -- you make me laugh -- Love
me -- why it is impossible -- alas, Sir -- I am old, I am old.


Sir Froll. Your age has been cautiously considered, Madam: and, though my Nephew
be backward ^n these matters, and unwilling to break the Ice himself. Yet, he
knows as much for his Inches, as any man on this side Rome, I Will say that for
him.


L. Beard. Nay, verily, the Gentleman has a very hopeful Countenance; your
Jolt-head -- long Ear* and sober Sheeps look never fails. He should be a
Barrister by his Phisiognomy.


Sir Froll. He has some Knowledge in the Law indeed -- besides, Madam, he has
traveled most parts of the World, and can discourse of the Manners and
Customs of Nations very elegantly -- ah, he has escaped great Preferments very
narrowly.


L. Bea^d. Well, Sir -- I wish I were younger for his sake, then perhaps I
might say something.


Sir Lubb. Madam, for ever I Will enclose you here, with the Circuit of this
Ivory pale -- What Is next Sir?


Boy. You Will be the Park --


Sir Lub. I Will be the Park, and you shall be the Deer:

^^ed where you will, on Mountain, or in Dale,
Graze on my lips, and when those Hills are dry --
When those -- Hills are dry -- are dry -- hum -- are dry;
What Is next you Dog?

Boy. Stray farther where the pleasant Fountains lie --


Sir Lubb. Stray further where the pleasant Fountains lie.


L. Beard. Very well -- I vow there is a great deal of pleasure in being
Courted, I Swear there is -- Come, Sir Frollick, pray let us walk down the next
walk -- here is Company coming, and another time, Sir Lubberly, more of this if
you please -- but, let the next be ^n Prose I beseech you --


Sir Lub. Prose! Well -- it shall sweet Queen; sweet old Queen it shall -- any
thing to please thee my Dear Landabrides. Exeunt.


Enter Beverly in Disguise. Bever. So, now to my Mistress; in this Disguise I
think I need not fear being Dogged by my plaguy-Wife, or any of her Setters;
for she is as Revengeful and jealous as an Italian that has trapan'd his Wife in
Masquerade -- Gad, these Wives are unreasonable Creatures, as headstrong as
wild horses, and as unconscionable as a Jew to a Christian that owes him money.
Marriage is a mere Game at Bowls: where the Wife is the Jack, to which, it is
true, all our endeavors should tend. But, how unreasonable is it to expect an
excellent Close cast, when the Biass of our Bowls run clear another way -- Ha
-- sure that is Beauford: It Is so, what makes him here?


Enter Beaufort and Brainworm. B^auf. I think she will esteem me for a Man of
honor: I am sure I am very punctual, as Faith it is true, I ever was in these
Cases -- Sirrah, look up that Walk, and try if you can see any body coming --
Now, Dear Olivia, keep but thy word, and I am blessed for ever.


Bever. Olivia! on my life here is some Intrigue or other going forward -- it
may be I may make a Discovery.


Beauf. Oh, here comes one I believe that will release my Doubts.


Brainw. He does look as like a Pimp as another man, that is the truth on it -- I
believe Don, you may venture on him.


Beauf. Have you no Message to deliver Friend, to a Gentleman that was to be
walking here? no Ticket, nor Appointment, nor no such thing? hah!


Brainw. From some distressed Lady, or Damsel, that is Destitute of ^uc^or, or
so? No tidings, Friend; no tidings?


Beauf. Peace Sirrah: Come, I Am sure I Am right, thou art the person.


Bever. Why, Faith Sir, I have a Message to deliver.


Beauf. Very well, a very honest Fellow, Faith; here is money for thee.


Bever. No reward, IN beseech you Sir, till you know whether I may deserve it
or no? for I must know your name, and by some token or other, that you are the
right person, before I can discover any thing.


Beauf. And all the reason in the world faith -- gad a person of great Conduct,
and understanding this -- I see she is cunning; she chooses her man for these
affairs. Well, to make all things clear friend, in the first place know my name
is Beauford.


B^ver. B^auf. So -- oh my propitions fate -- aside


Brain. And I am known by the Name and Title of Diggory Brainworm of
B^oby-Town, in the County of Ham^hire, Yeoman.


Beauf. Keep your distance, sirrah! then as a secure Token, Friend, that I am
the true, real, appointed individual person, know that Olivia your Lady -- and
my goddess -- about an hour since met me here, where after a world of happy
raillery betwixt us, she bid me wait her here, and promised about this time to
send a messenger to conduct me to her -- hah -- What think you now, is this
token enough?


Bever. Enough in conscience Sir, and I am now confirmed, you are the right
person, and may therefore be free in the relation; Know then Sir, that my Lady
waits for you, she is alone Sir, and the cuckoldly Fop her Husband is abroad
Sir.


Beauf. Is he! the fool abroad -- ha ha ha!


Bever. Ay ay Sir! go on, go on and prosper -- ha ha ha! ^'faith you are a
happy man.


Beauf. Ha ha ha -- thank thee heartily faith; gad thou art a very obliging
person -- but thy Lady shall be good to thee upon my account.


Bever. On his account -- very good; oh how my heart beats for revenge --


Beauf. Here Is fortune now Rogue! here is fortune! well -- I forgive all my ill
luck past for this days happy success, and is she alone, say thou? and is
the cuckoldly Fop her Husband gone out?


Bever. Gone, gone Sir, the coast is clear, and you may go and plunder the
wealthy Magazine without control; he Sir! alas she can quickly pop him out
of the way, when she has any private design -- besides Sir, I was assistant in
the business -- for you must know Sir -- I hate him mortally --


Beauf. Do thou? Why then the Devil tak^ me, if thou art not the civilest
fellow that ever I met with -- here; prithee let me be a little grateful to
thee -- gad I shall be ashamed of my self ^lse --


Bever. Not a penny ^'faith Sir, let me beg you not to offer it.


Brain. Well -- This is certainly the first pimp that ever refused money.


Bever. But come Sir, come away; methinks I long till you enjoy your happiness.


Beauf. Ah dear Rogue, and so do I too faith: Here Is fortune now Sirrah --
here is fortune!


Bever. Hah! a Wag, you shall have her, wag you shall have her.


Beauf. Ah dear Rogue, L'am bound to thee for ever --


Bever. And poor Cuckold shall be locked out -- ha ha ha!


Beauf. Ha ha ha! ay no matter, no matter; let him! let him! Pox, what should
dull Husbands do with such blessings?


Bever. Ay, right, righ^* wha^ indeed? come, come, go with me, I Will place you
both convenien^ly -- ay wag wag come along*


Beauf. Thanks my dea^ charming Rogue -- here is fortune now; here is fortune --
Exeunt.


Enter Servant. Se^v. My Lady sent me with a message to a Gentleman in these
Walks, and the devil of any living creature I can find, but an old Woman a
knitting -- 'faith I Will even go home again; oh I think yonder he is --


Re-enter Beverly. Bever. So, now I think the Fox is shared, and cunningly, and
shall accordingly be used, ever he gets free again -- hah -- This fellow must
certainly be her messenger. It Is so -- I know him now, but I Will hinder his
discovery immediately --


Serve. Sir, Sir, -- My Lady stays for you -- Oh Lord my Master!


Bever. Yes Rascal it is I; your design is discovered. Sirrah you come to convey
Beauford to my wife?


Serve. Oh good Sir forgive me, I did but as my Lady commanded. --


Bever Well; to make you amends now, do what I command you, take no notice of
my Disguis^ -- but tell your Lady that I dogged you and Beauford to the
Gard^n-house -- and as soon as he was entered -- locked him in. Do this
faithfully, or expect not to live a day -- For if I find thou ^ail'st in the
least scruple, had thou a thousand lives, thou should loose 'em all.


Serve. Oh -- I will be very faithful Sir.


Bever. Away then, and now for my reveng^ -- I have this Beauford; whatever my
Wives design was in this business -- he I find, had a downright rank, lewd
intent -- for which I Will reward him* I Will instantly order my servants to be
ready, and whipping, and pumping, tossing in a Blanket, -- all that malice, or
ill nature can invent, I Will inflict upon him -- Let him hereafter demand what
satisfaction he pleases. And since to cuckold me was his intent,
I Will act that Cuckold in his punishment. Exit.



ACT. IV.
SCENE Palace Garden.
Enter Beauford with a Blanket wrapped about him, and Brainworm in his Shirt, and
a Petticoat over him. Brainw. OH Gadsbud! Were ever poor Intriguers so used?
all my bones are out of joint, and lie as if they were no kin to one another.
It Is well it is a calm morning, for a little pus^of wind would certainly shake
me to pieces.


Beauf. 'Sdeath - have I used Intrigues so long, know all the quirks and
quiddits from the Maid to the Matron; and at last live to be whipped, and tossed
in a Blanket?


Brainw. Ay, here is fortune you know Sir -- here is fortune! You Would forgive all
your past ill Chance for this happy hour -- Well, I shall be hanged; I am
certain on it -- your damned luck will never leave me but at the Gallows?


Beauf. Sirrah! leave Condoling -- now it is unnecessary, and let us plot how to
repay this affront; Olivia, as I was just now informed by her Woman, was not at
all accessory -- This was her Husbands revenge, who it seems dogged her
Messenger -- but how should we know that I was concerned?


Brainw. Your old friend the Devil, no doubt gave him some private intelligence
-- and if the Truth were known, assistant too -- For the Rogues were shaped
like Furies. And bless us! who knows but they might really be so?


Beauf. By their unmerciful usage of us, it is true, we might guess 'em Furies
-- I am sure the greatest Devil in Hell, could not use me worse.


Brain. They mounted me into the Air like a Cat -- I was half an hour a
falling -- besides, my Sex is changed, I shall never be my own man again whilst
I live, nor my Wives neither -- There Is my s^rrow weeps.


B^^uf. My Sex I think is not changed yet -- but by yo^ Sky I Will have ^t
changed with all the speed I can. I Will cross my luck one way or other, I am
resolved on it -- Come sirrah we'll to the Tavern. a brisk bottle will ripen ou^
Wits for Invention, I can get that upon Tick.


Brainw. To the Tavern^ ay, we are in two pretty decent habits to go to the
Tavern in, are we not? Ounds! how I could cursethat Queen Fortune, for putting
this affront upon the top of my Fan^ily -- To the Tavern quotha? Why we shall
be taken for some of the Wild Irish that come to pilfer and steal, and so sing
the Second part to the same Tune, Of Beating and Kicking --


Beauf. Faith it may be so -- hush, I think here is a man coming out of a House.


Brainw. A man! Pray Heaven it is not the Beadle.


Enter Sir Frollick Whimsey and his man. Beauf. Sir Frollick Whimsey by heaven,
but it is imp^ssible he should know me in this garb, and if he questions me,
I Will counterfeit an Irish man, and gabble in that Language.


Sir Frol. Is there no Law for Corruptions in these Cases? shall a Rascal
presume to cuckold me, and shall not I presume to have his Life or his Money?
give me the Rascal, I Am resolved on it -- how now? What are these that sneak
about my door at this time of the morning? What are you sirrah? hah --


Beauf. Aw Cram-a-cree -- ee be a pauvre honest Irishman, and Chris shall save
thy good face.


Brainw. 'Sbud what shall I do now? for the devil a language can I speak but
Pedlars-French. --


Sir Frol An Irishman -- a Ras^al I believe -- And you there sirrah, what
Countreyman are you?


Brainw. Mo gortogal agi agan aga Highi Lagand Dugutch magan.


Sir Frol. A Dutchman, a Thief I believe, both Thieves as gad save me, and come
to rob my house.


Beauf. Oh-hone -- a Tee^, a got pless thy sheet coontenance, ee never was Teef
in Englands, o my saul Joy, eet vas in Irelands, and Teef is very fine Trade
there.


Brainw. Thegeef, thogou lygyst igin thygy throgote.


Sir Frol. What does the Rascal call me goat? Strik^s him, Give me patience,
here is rare impudence! come sirrah, come you back too. I Will make you ( Strikes
Beauford.) know the respect due to a Knight, and a Justice of Peace -- Within
there -- call Toby Scribble my Clerk hi^her, I Will see thee soundly slashed, as
gad ^ave me, I Will do the King that service -- the poor rogue^ have no Money I
think.


Beauf. Will-a-loo, oh hone, o hone; 'sdeath what shall I do now? this is worst
of all, for if he dis^overs me, I shall be whipped to death.


Brainw. Ay* ay, here is fortune too Sir, here is fortune; oh*


Sir Frol. Sirrah stand there, and hi^der 'um from running; hoa, will no body
hear me?


Enter Isabella. Isab. What is it I see! Beauford, and in this strange
ridiculous disguise -- ha ha ha -- Beauford and Brainworm make pitiful signs of
discovery to Isabella.


Beauf. The Devil, this damned Jilt will discover me.


Isabel. Ha ha ha! what can this mean? here has some damnable chance happened
to him, and his Signs are to let me know he wants my help, ha ha ha, lord how
he looks! Come prithee my dear, let the poor fellows go this once, do not
defer revenging my injuries by staying to punish these Creatures; it is true,
they look like very lewd scur^y Rascals, especially, that tall fellow there in
the Blanket* but come, for my sake let um escape.


Sir Frol. I will deny thee nothing; go get ye gone ye Curs, and thank this
Lady -- ye had been swing'd else -- and now to my other business, I Will not
sleep till I am revenged of this rascal Beauford, what e're it cost me. Exit
Sir Fro!.


Brainw. Oh the D^vil go with him, what a fright have I been in!


Isabel. What here still -- in my life I never saw two such impudent creatures.


Beauf. Nay Madam, will you not know your poor se^vant?


Isa^. Ha, ha, ha! Am I company for the wild Irish? are vagabonds fit to be of
my acquaintance?


Beauf. No Madam, but a friend in Masquerade I hope may.


Isabel. Masquerade! I swear this is one of the newest Masquerading Habits that
I ever saw, but I suppose it is pertinent to your Intrigue Sir, and doubtless
there is some trick in it.


Beauf. Trick, ay, a damnable one too, if you knew all aside. I must invent
something, lest she find the tr^th on it -- it is true, Madam, there was a plaguey
Plot in it as you say: for coming from a friends house about twelve a clock last
night, where we had been at supper; a dozen lusty Thieves beset us, and in
short, robbed and stripped us* for what could we do against a dozen you know?


I^abel. Thieves, and a dozen of 'um? --


Brainw. Thirteen by this ^^ight; I beat a dozen of 'um my self.


Isab. Did you? Why who could rob you then?


Beauf. A damned lying rogue, he beat 'um -- he was bound, and thrown into a
Ditch, and had not I helped him out h^d been smothered, ^^rrah, not a word more
for your life; I wonder for my part we were not both killed.


Brainw* And so do I too faith.


Beauf. But come set your wit at work, and contrive some way tha^ I may be rid
of my Mantle de la guer* here* and then I am wholly devoted yours.


Isabel. For your man I have a habit, but I swear I know not how to contrive
for you, unless you will make shift with that my Brother, a Rushia Merchant
left with me, when he went to Sea.


Beauf. Pox, any thing rather than this Blanket, let us see it,


Isabel. Come in th^n softly.


Brainw. Ay, ay, come, that I may get rid of my Parliament-Robes too* sbud I
hope this garb will come in fashion e're long, there is many as ridiculous, that
has -- Exeunt.


Enter Olivia in ma^s Clothes, Lidia. Oliv, Now prosperous Fortune, if ever
thou were indulgent to an injured Woman, assist me, and if there* be a subtilty
natural to ou^ Sex, that is capable of revenging wrongs, Husband be sure of the
^ffects -- I Have now a double Cause, my own and Beauford's -- who has had but a
scurvy return for the service he intended; come Sister give me the Vizard.


Lidia. What will my Brother think when he comes home, and finds you have
deserted his house?


Olivia. No doubt but he will be embraced betwixt hope and fear, but my firm
resolution makes me negligent of that, it is only the loss of my company, can
make him sensible of the blessing of it; for the value of a Wife, as of all
good things else, is best known by its want. For if once there be a neglect in
Love, the gordian knot of Wedlock, will so stretch and slacken, that it is ten
to one but a witty Adventurer may easily undo it, to tie a faster in its
stead; this was Beaufords opinion, who I think has now sufficiently paid for it
-- but I Am tardy Sister, but no more of this now, be sure to keep council, and
expect the happy result of all -- farewell. Exit Oliv.


Lidia. What a mad fellow is this Beauford? wild as a storm, rash, and
inconsiderate, and yet I know not what ails me, ever since I saw him yesterday
in the Walks -- he has been continually in my thoughts; methinks his vices too
look less ugly in him than in another: pray heaven these pleasing thoughts
breed no heart burnings: he is handsome, and I have folly enough to love a worse
face -- it is but venturing, if I am snared, I Will silently mourn my fate in some
dogril Ditty, and get out of the Labyrinth as well as I can. Exit.


SCENE II. A Chamber.
Enter Isabella, Beauford, Brainworm dressing themselves. Brainw. Ha ha ha!


Isabella. Ha ha ha -- a very pleasant M^tamorphosis.


Beauf* A Plague, this is more ridiculous than my Blanket, and I behave my
self worse in this garb, than an Ambassador of that Country does in an
English one -- a pox of your hanging sleeves and strait hose here. Well, that
Nation are certainly the most Clowns of all others, they love no variety, as
men of Honor should, nor ever change their damned old fashions, because they
know not how to behave themselves in new.


Brainw. Ha ha! save ye Don Diego, save ye Don, shall I twirl your Manchatoos,
or set your Ruff Signior? ha ha!


Beauf. Very well sirrah.


Isabel. Ha ha! he looks more awkerdly than a Country Grazier in a la^'d Coat*


Brainw. Ay, or a Clumsie Citizen on a Training-day --


Beauf. So Rascal, pray get you to the door and watch the old Knights coming
back, and be careful de'e hear? or I shall spoil this mi^th of yours.


Brainw. I will Sir -- I will -- Don -- Diego quotha, ha ha ha! Exit.


Isabel. I think Sir 'twill be very convenient for you to go too, for I assure
you, I cannot secure my Husbands absence long.


Beauf. I fear him not Madam, he is gone to his Council, to tell him he is a
Cuckold, and desire his advice, ha ha --


Isabel. His jealousy will spur him home again sooner than you imagine, and
then how your ^ushia counterfeit company will agree with his rough Italian, is
a greater doubt than you have wit to consider on.


Beauf. Faith Madam, my confidence like my love, is too fierce to be very
thoughtful, this only I can say for my self, I have three to one against the
ill fortune of his coming, and that is enough to encourage a Gamester. If there
do^s a damned chance come in by the by, I Will honestly bowl about a curse or two
-- and patiently suffer under tribulation.


Isabel. But what amends Love or Reward, must I expect?


Beauf. Why you shall have all I have Madam, a hearty sigh from the bottom of
my heart, that I am able to pay, and no more.


Isabel. P'sh, I mean from my Husband Sir, but I find this agr^ement you
propose, not worth my Signing to* and so adieu.


Exit running. Beauf. Nay, if I leave thee so, I am a dull rogue ind^ed -- I Am
resolved to have a parting kiss, come what will on it. Exit.


Enter Sir Lubberly. Sir Lub. My rich ol^ Widow, I must not be tardy in chase
of her, I think the other two hours chatt will do the business, for she begins to
chatter bawdy, and discover her Writings, and it is observed, when once a Widow
does that, she is your own* and faith good Writings, and full Bags, are the
strongest motives to raise passion now-adays, That jolly Poet says -- Face of
young Miss is best for keeping Pony,
But the best part of old Widow is her Money.
But come, a little of my Uncles advice will do well, I heard him go in here.
Exit.

Reenters running, Beauford and Isabella after him. Oh monstrum horrendum! oh
my poor cuckoldly Uncle! Oh thou art bob'd, thou art bob'd, sure, never was the
like seen, felt, heard, or understood, no never -- never


Isab. Nay, Sir Lubberly -- pray stay and hear me speak.


Beauf. Hoblia Castilliano Signiour.


Sir Lub. Castilliano Cuckoldiano Signiour -- oh horrid! what in this rampant
Habit too? this is intolerable, but I Will publish instantly -- I Will divulge,
I Will be as loud as Thunder; the Stentrophonical Tool shall be nothing to me --
my Uncle shall know, I Will inform him immediately How Beauford like a thief of
Foreign Nation,
Has ransacked, rifl'd, robbed his Wives Plantation.



Isab. Fie Sir Lubberly, pray have more regard to my Honor, than to have such
an opinion, I Will assure you there was no such business in agitation.


Sir Lub. Agitation -- O Lord there she is again -- agitation.


Beauf. Sir, upon my Honor I was only teaching her a new Sar^abrand -- I
borrowed this Habit for that purpose.


Sir Lub. What, behind the Bed?


Isa^. What a malicious accident was this? aside.


Beauf. Peace, I Have a trick shall bring all off yet -- well Sir, what ever
constructions you are pleased to make of us; yet 'twill be your best way to be
silent, I shall ruin your Amors with my Lady Aunt Beardly else. I assure ye
that you shall be no Relation of mine, unless you can hear, and see, and say
nothing Sir.


Sir Lub. Oh do not talk of making a breach betwixt me and my dear Lady
Beardly, I beseech ye Sir.


B^auf. Shall I trust to ye then, will you be silent? is your mouth ^hut up?


Sir Lub. Shut up, ay -- as close as a Cockel-shell, not a word of the
business: now, though my Mother were concerned, I Will do any thing rather than
break off with my Lady Beardly: go get in again, go I say; not a syllable not
I -- do says -- do -- get ye in once more mum -- mum.


Beauf. Oh your servant Sir, I have no business there not I, nor had I spoke of
this, only you were pleased to say you saw something.


Sir Lub. Not I man -- I saw nothing, nor can say nothing, I am dumb and blind,
a Fool, or a Pimp or any thing, and so fare ye-well, prithee get ye in again --
mum -- not a syllable, not I.


Exit. Beauf. Ha, ha! I knew there was no way like this.


Isab. 'Twas well you had the good luck to find it out, the fool would else
have been very troublesome; but see, here he comes again.


Sir Lubberly Reenters. Sir Lub. Oh we are undone, undone -- my Uncle is come
home, came in by the back door of the Garden, and is just coming up, a pox on
him.


Beauf. So I find I must to my Blanket again. Damned chance, What Is to be done
Madam?


Isab. I am at my wits ends: Sir Lubberly, run you out and hold him in
discourse a little, while I contrive something.


Sir Lub. Ay ay, any thing, any thing. Exit.


Isab. There Is no other way Sir for ye, but to counterfeit my Brother
Alexander, new come from travel, this Habit suits you well -- one side of his
face was blasted, which was the cause of his wry mouth, and loss of an eye;
then he is of a strange waspish temper, this you must strive to imitate; and
because my Husband never saw him but once, if you take care in doing this, I Am
confident 'twill not be easy to discover ye.


Beauf. 'Sdeath I shall never do it right -- I shall betray my self.


Isab. Nay, if you fail in resolution, you are undone -- come here is a
Temple-patch for your Eye -- let us see now, draw your mouth awry and look upon
me -- very well -- now observe to speak petti^hly Beaufort makes grim faces and
I warrant he knows ye not.


Beauf. Oh here he comes, now my penance.


Enter Sir Frollick. Sir Frol. This plodding fool is never at home when a man
has occasion for him -- how now* give me patience -- who have we here?


Isab. I imagined Sir you would wonder at him -- why, it is my Brother
Alexander, newly arrived from Travel.


Sir Frol. As gad save me, 'twas a wonder to me indeed -- hah -- why what a
monstrous Habit he has on -- Brother, you're very welcome home -- I am glad to
^ee you good Brother.


Beauf. The like to you, Sir, the like to you: but, by your leave, Sir, I am a
Man of few words, you know my humor.


Counterfeits a wry mouth, and speaks petti^hly. Isabell. It Is his way, Sir,
you must bear with him.


Sir Frollick. Ay* ay; with all my heart -- but, good Brother, How stand your
affairs since I saw you last? Do you thrive?


Beauf. Perhaps I do, perhaps I do not, Sir. I hope I am known to understand my
business, Sir; and therefore will take the privilege not to give you any
account, Sir. Sir Frollick sits down.


Sir Frollick. Any account, Sir -- as gad save me, he speaks as if he would
fright English out of its wits: but, Why so long, good Brother?


Beauf I am not hot, Sir; nor cold neither, Sir -- What a Pox I know what I am,
Sir; and what I do as well as another, if you go to that, Sir.


Sir Frollick. A pleasant humor.


Enter Brainworm. Brainw. Come, Sir, come away; the Devil's in ye, ye can never
leave off in a reasonable time; if the old Cuckold comes and finds you here,
you will remember it as long as your name's Beauford; I Will tell y^ that.


Sir Frollick* Hah -- What Is this?


Beauf. Oh confounded Dog -- how now, What Rascall's this?


Brainw. Hey day -- What new Veg^ry's this -- What a pox do you stand making
mouth's for? 'Sbud, Is this a time for Mummery. Good Sir, come away -- my old
fit of the Palsy is come, and I Am sure there is a beating not far of.


Sir Froll. Right, Rascal -- If I and my whole Family are sufficient, assure
your self ye shall be well furnished -- What, hoa -- within there. Starts up,
and draws his Sword, and stands at the door.


Whispers a Servant. Brainw. O! gads bud; What, more mischief still -- Sir, I
vow to gad, Sir, I was not at all accessory -- 'twas he that contrived all, and
drew me in -- however, Sir* I have a pair of Ears, and a piece of my Nose at
you^ Worship's ^ervice; to show that I am a very honest fellow, and so forth,
Sir, -- Oh! What shall I do?


Sir Froll. No, Rascal, I Will take no Composition in this Case, Sir. Come away
there -- Brother, I beg your pardon, they are so tardy -- it is only a small
Entertainment, I have provided by wa^ of Bas^inado or so* I know what your
Rushia humor loves.


Complements the Spanish way. Beauf. Ah plague of your Compliment: 'Sdeath, no
way to escape?


Sir Froll. O now I think they are coming.


Isabell. I see there is no way to relieve him -- therefore it is policy to
secure my self -- for, whatever he suffers, it is requisite I preserve my own
honor -- Aside. Was there ever such monstrous Impudence? by heaven, my Dear, I
took him for my Brother, and so Caressed him accordingly -- and that he should
prove a Rascal, a Cheat at last, and only take this Disguise to abuse me -- Oh
I may thank thy wit and quick apprehension, heaven knows how I had been used
else.


Beauf. Oh dam her -- was ever such a Jilt -- nay, Sir, pray hear me then --
this Woman -- here, your damned Wife --


Enter Servants with Batoons. Isabella. But I Will make ye an Example, I Will teach
ye to tempt my Integrity -- I will ye treacherous Rascals; come, fall on, fall
on.


Beats 'um, and she takes a Batoon, and helps to beat 'um out. Serve. Make ready
the Wheel-barrow there -- Sirrah, we'll hamper ye. to Brainworm.


Sir Froll. Hah, hah, hah -- As gad save, this is some revenge however; So --
so -- well done Sweet heart; well done in troth -- thou have troubled thy self
too much dear Rogue, In Faith thou have.


Isabell. A scurvy Impudent Rascal: What, seek to corrupt me?


Sir Froll. Come, he has his payment -- he will be rampant no more this six
months I warrant him -- Come, let us go, In Faith I Will kiss thee for this -- as
gad save I will -- come --


Isabell. A thousand to one but I had been trapan'd. Lord! What a wicked World
is this? Exeunt.


SCENE III. Palace Garden.
Enter Beverly and Wheedle. Beverly. Come, come, ye are false as Hell, and
shall repent your treachery: and, whatever you think me, Madam, in matter of
love and Intrigue, I Will confirm my self to be a Man of honor in this, gad I le
be sure to keep my word with ye.


Wheedle. Sooner then to a Man you had promised to be a second to, I dare swear.


Beverly. Ay, especially if I were to fight for you, or some of your Sister
Town Jilts; gad, a Man's well rewarded that fights for a rotten Orange.


Wheedle. You might have elevated your thoughts a little -- but it is true, your
Talk is suitable to the Company you keep, Tailors Wives, and Exchange-Wenches,
who will sooth your passion for half a pint of burnt Brandy, and vow and
protest you are the lovingst Man they ever met with.


B^ver. Very well, you can rally now, Madam; now the Vizard is pulled off, a
man may have the privilege of viewing: this is your integrity in the Devils
name, your dyings, your sighings, and your innocence with a Pox to you, but this
shall not bubble me out of my reason.


Wheedle. Your Reason's as Corrupt as your Nature -- pray recollect your self a
little, Sir, let the Fa^^e of your fancy wheel a little about this way, if I
am not mistaken matters have been otherwise 'twixt you and me, there was a
beginning of Amors -- when there was none of this Jealousy, but Vows, and
Oaths, and Tears, and languishings, and all that -- I do remember, Sir, there
was such a time.


Beverly. And ther^ ^as a time too, Madam, when you^ Mercinary Vice lay in your
(...), and not in your Tongue, which perhaps pleased me better (...) a time
too, when you had Innocence, Charms, and Graces, to procure the languishings
you speak of: and when I could have flattered my self with the hopes of
gathering that precious flower, which you Women say you lose -- but never any
could find, that ever I heard of I remember there was such a time Madam.


Matilda. And might have been so still had not my too easy nature abused me:
oh that I had the power of being inconstant, that I might have the power of
torturing ye!


Enter Olivia in Man's Clothes, Maskt. Olivia. Here they are -- and sure, by
their strange carriage to one another, have been quarrelling -- I Will stand
apart and observe.


Beverly. Torturing me -- ha -- ha -- prithee do not flatter thy self with
things impossible, for my part I must confess my self a true Rover -- I am
always for the pl^asure of Love; but, when it comes to torturing, I thank
heaven, can as easily cast it off as a shoe that wrings me -- yet I can love
Women, and, to your knowledge, heartily; but, if they expect Tears,
Heart-burnings, and such like; Gad, I must beg their pardons, it is not my way.


Matild. Ah, you know what a fond fool you have to deal with -- ungrateful man.


Olivia. So, this suites well with my design, and now good luck, lying, and
^lattering assist me -- heavens! What strange barbarity is this? Can any many
be so destitute of Nature, Reason, and Humanity, to draw Tears from so
incomparable a Beauty? Ah, charming Creature, too precious for mankind, since
used so cruelly! What Adoration can at^one this Crime* Life is too poor, too
mean a Sacrifice.


Bever. How now? What a Devil have we here? a young Masquerade, that hopes to
ingratiate himself by taking her part -- Harkee Sir, your absence will be very
necessary; for to stay and proceed further in this business, will perhaps be
more dangerous then you imagine.


Olivia. Dangerous -- Sir, I love danger -- my name's Dangerfeild -- O from the
dangerous minute of my birth, danger has been my chief Companion -- you shall
always find me ready, Sir, to prove that danger you speak of -- but first,
fair Creature, a word with you.


Bever. 'Sdeath, this is the most impudent young Rascal that ever I met with;
Sir, be gone, or I shall be provoked too --


Olivia. Nay, Sir, be Civil, as you're a Gentleman -- I Will speak but a word or
two with her* and then am wholly at your Service: Madam, though my hatred to
this Gentleman makes me disguise my self from him, it is fit you should see the
face of your humble Adorer.


Wheedle. By heaven a sweet Creature!


Olivia. Ah, be (...) Creature, to let my hearts first oblation be its
Martyrdom; Why should a Man, inconstant as the Wind, that lives in Heaven, and
yet not knows his happiness, and rather slights his goddess then adores her, be
owner of such Treasure and I want it? I that have loved ye with a heart so
passionate, more nobly fixed, more constant and more kind than Love can frame in
strong imagination? and, Is there no return, no reward, no answer?


Wheedle. There is, there must -- Oh gods! ^y heart yields faster then he has
time to storm it.


Olivia. My Fortune's I can boast as great as his and my desire to serve ye far
more: besides, in stead of his base impure love, I Will greet your beauty by the
name of Husband; I Will cure your mangled fame* So well I love ye, I Will Marry ye.


Wheedle. Marry me! Oh happy sound -- and ten times happier, coming from so
sweet a Mouth -- Marry me! Sir, I Am yours, and will be yours for ever and ever,
nothing shall part us Marry me! not time, nor destiny, nor any thing my dear
dear -- but, Will you marry me indeed? Oh heaven! this is the Joyfull'st minute
I e're knew; Will you be sure to marry me?


Olivia. Most certainly; there is my hand on it.


Wheedle. I affectionately; kiss it: Some Gold and Jewels I have of my own too,
and they shall all be thine, dear Creature -- Oh heaven! Shall I be married at
last?


Beverly. A very fine business this: but, sure I shall put a stop to the
proceeding, I must not lose her so for all my fooling. Hark ye, Sir, I suppose
you that know so well how to get a Mistress, know as well how to defend her --
come, draw Sir* draw.


Wheedle. You see the Advantage you have of me by my short Sword, and therefore
doubtless speak this; but, I conjure ye, if ye are a Gentleman, or a Man of
honor, and courage, defer the matter, and let a Duel decide it too morrow
morning.


Beverly. No, Sir, delay is ever a friend to Cowardice, and therefore I Will not
oblige ye with it: but, to let ye see I am a man of honor and courage --
there is my Sword for ye -- now give me yours, and let us fight -- come, come
you trifle, Sir, your Sword, your Sword.


Olivia. Hold, Sir -- and now stand -- a little further -- dam me, stand off. I
say, Sir, the Ancients did allow policy sometimes to be preferred before
valor -- now, I think in policy, it is fit I enjoy this Lady before I fight
for her, or else being killed, where is my reward? Therefore, have a little
patience, Sir, too morrow you shall find me ready in this Plain Field, near the
Bowling-Green, till when I give you leave to live, and meditate: but, this Lady
must along with me.


Bever. Oh infamous Cowardice! 'Sdeath, Sir, you will not serve me so?


Olivia. Even so, by this good hil^, Sir. Nay, keep your distance too, or I
shall give you such a mark, Sir -- shall make you wish you had stood farther
off, Sir -- now does my fingers itch to swing him a little -- I Am sure I shall
never have such another opportunity.


Bever. Hell and Confusion -- was ever man thus used -- Sir, for shame, for
shame be more a Gentleman, and consider your reputation --


Olivia. Come not nearer Sir -- Sa -- sa -- sa: by Heaven I shall tickle ye if
ye do.


Wh^adle. Ha, ha! I swear this is very pretty.


Bever. Is there no remedy -- How now, Who comes here? Beauford -- 'Sdeath,
this is worst of all.


Enter Beauford. Beauf. Oh Plague of Intriguing, I say -- my Bones are
certainly all broke, methinks I can hear 'um rattle as I go along -- how now,
Who Is this? --


Olivia. Beauford, as I live, that has had no opportunity of going home since
his Disgrace -- but has made shift with a strange habit. I Will go and discover
my self to him; 'twill be some part of amends for his late misfortune. Goes and
Whispers him.


Beauf. And, Is that your Husband d^ee say -- Oh how I long to be at him. Lend
me your Sword, Madam, I Will revenge my self immediately.


Olivia. No: I Will have no fighting -- I have given the poor Fellow his life --
therefore must protect him -- but, Sir, Is there no way to revenge your self
but by the Sword? methinks there should here is his Mistress who^ I have also
conquered -- sure methinks there should be a better way Sir, then fighting.


Beauf. Madam, I humbly thank you for refreshing my memory -- for* I vow to gad
I had clearly forgot the other way -- hah -- his Wife and Mistress both in my
power -- faith, here is occasion for revenge enough, that is the truth on it --
Sir, you have the good fortune to escape me now, and, I think, have some reason
to be glad on it; I had seconded your Blanket entertainment else I assure ye --
but there is other matters in hand now -- this Gentleman, this Lady, and I, have
some private business together, Sir, and so farewell t'^e --


Olivia. Ha, ha, ha -- how he looks -- this happens as I could wish -- and now
dear Wit I thank thee. Exeunt.


Bever. Shame and Anger ties my tongue up; but, I Will not sleep till I am
revenged, though the performance hazard my life and fortunes. Exit.


Enter Lady Beardly, and Tisick sitting smoking. Tisick. And is too morrow the
day -- good Madam.


L. Beardly. Alas, I am afraid so, Sir Lubberly has no patience -- I know he
will never leave tempting me till the business is done: and I swear I tremble
as much as I did at Fifteen, when I was first Married, I vow I do.


Tisick. Truly I think your Ladyship perhaps has some Cause; for, in my opinion
the Gentleman is too young for ye.


L. Beard. Too young for me, in troth no -- not an hour too young: marry, would
he were younger, I could bear with him I warrant ye -- there are two things
always further these Marriages -- (Youth and Money) for, if they were not
young, we would not Marry them -- and under the Rose, Tisick, an we were not
Wealthy I Am sure they would not Marry us -- how now, Whose there?


Enter Boy. Boy. Madam* Sir Lubberly is come to wait on ye.


L. Beard. Od's my life -- here had like to have been a surprise -- breaks the
Pipe. Tisick, some Musk quickly to sweeten my breath -- and reach me hither my
Box of Writings -- So, so; I Vow I was terribly afraid he should have found me
smoking Tobacco -- hum -- 500 l. due on this Bond at Michaelmas. Enter Sir
Lubberly Singing. For he that a Bonny Brisk Widow will Wed,
Must Ransack her Coffers, and creep to her Bed.
How does my dear Lady and Wife that must be -- what, perusing -- well* I have
been with Sir Timothy Ticklecause, and the Settlements are almost drawn; the
happy hour is approaching, it is coming, Rogue, it is coming.


L. Beard. Your Servant, dear Sir Lubberly, I protest ye make me blush.


Sir Lub. Those blushes influence the heavens, and give a radiant tincture to
the Morning; Madam, you are the very Cinthia of perfection.


L. Beard. And you the Phoebus of Wit and ^allantry.


Sir Lub. Madam, your Person is Natures Essence Bottle, and your mind the
Mirror of Virtue and Discretion -- but now we are talking of Essences -- hugh
-- methinks here is a scurvy smell of Tobaccoe.


L. Beard. Oh faugh -- do not speak of it, Sir -- Get ye gone baggage aside.
Oh, if I smell Tobaccoe I swound immediately -- Exit Tisick. hugh -- Sure you
mistake, Sir Lubberly -- I smell none --


Sir Lubber. Hah -- gad I Am sure I think I smell it -- but, no matter, now to
our business: Shall too morrow be the day? Shall I be happy --


L. Beard. Alas, Sir, I must needs show the Widows failing. I have not power
to deny ye any longer.


Sir Lubber. Have not? and, Shall I possess all? -- and, above all thy
excellent Person -- without control at Board, Bed, and so forth, ha --


L. Beard. Ay, what you please, Sir -- alas, I Am a poor weak Creature; but, I
know, you will be as kind as you can, Sir.


Sir Lubber. Kind -- the Fat Friar to the Black-brow'd Nun shall not be kinder
-- we will never quarrel -- nor throw Tongs and Candlesticks at one another, as
the Custom is, but live and Coo together like two Turtles.


L. Beard. So we will in troth -- and, for my part, I Will never scold.


Sir Lubb^r. And I Will never be Drunk -- unless it be with thee, and then you
know it will be Convenient.


L. Beard. It may so, it may indeed: but, there is one thing more my Dear, that
I must beg of thee. Do not keep a Whore; do not fail that way. Let me be
sufficient -- Alas I know I shall be loath to spare thee. Therefore keep no
Whore I beseech thee.


Sir Lub. Well, I will not, I will not: come, I Will resist temptation for once -- I Will
try what I can do -- and yet gad a Whore would be very necessary -- but, for
thy sake I Will strive against the grain -- come, I will keep no Whore -- I will
oblige thee. Thou shall serve (...)*


L. Beard. Why* blessing on thy heart! and* when I fail in my a^^ection, I Will
give you l^ave to ramble: why never ^as such a Couple as we ^^all ^e -- we will
nothing all day but talk, and chat, and look upon one another.


Sir Lub. Ay, and ^it together in two-lin'd Elbow Chaires by the fire side --
and at night (...) old stories -- then drink a dose of Mi^abilis, go to bed,
and snore hea^tily, and never rise till Twelve the next day.


L. Beard. No, not till three, if you think fit; in troth I am transported
strangely -- I did not think I should ever have seen such happy days again -- I
vow it is very comfortable -- then, Sir, we will live so merrily --


Sir Lub. And sing perpetually.


L. Beard. And kiss everlastingly -- Shalllwe not Sir?


Sir Lub. Ay, ay -- kiss -- why we will do nothing else the sir^t Month. Come
hither to me, come hither to me my dear old Queen and let us incorporate.


L. Beard. Ah dear Sir! well, I protest my heart's at my Mouth.


Sir Lub. Come away then to Church immediately -- first say grace, and then
fall too. And let all judge whilst thus we are entwined,
If ever pair were fitter to be joined. Exeunt.



ACT V.
SCENE Palace-Garden. Enter Olivia and Wheedle. Whea. Prithee my dear, defer my
bliss no longer, oh how I long for the happy minute t^a^ is ^o complete my
Joys! methinks each hour is a day, and each day a thousand ages, I vow I Am
a^^aid you begin to repent your promise.


Olivia. Never fear it, and since you are resolved to venture, go and fetch me
the key of the Cabinet, where your Jewels are, as you promised me, and th^n
command me what you please.


Wheedle. I Will fly swifter than Thought, and am glad any price can purchase
thee. Exit.


Olivia. Ha, ha, ha! alas poor silly creature, if thou did but know what an
insufficient -- what a sign of a Husband thou were so eager of, thou would
think the purchase dear at the rate of a^gilt shilling. Sure never was creature
so fond, she haun^s me where ever I go, smiles when I smiled, and is sur^ to
be ^el^ncholly when I am so, and then is eternally vowing perpetual Love and
Constancy. Nay, and what feeds my revenge high, and pleases me most of all, is,
she is now going to deliver me up all her Jewels -- those very Jewels which my
Husband has given her, as the price of his impure Love; and this is so full
satisfaction, that my wishes are all bounded -- here comes Beauford too, whom I
must confes^ I have u^'d but s^urvily, in so long delaying the reward due to
his passion, but it is his misfortune, for the only satisfaction he desires, is
the only thing I dare not grant him. Well Sir, what now?


Enter Beauford. Beauf. Madam, I have waited so long for the happy minute, and
have had so little satisfa^tion on your part, that 'gad I can forbear no longer
-- what though Love did not induce you to recompense; methinks, in conscience
you might a little consider my necessity.


Oliv. Ha, ha, ha! well, I say Si^, how ^oor are they that have no patience*


Beauf. Ay gad, I say, how poor are they that have all patience, and no reward
for it.


Oli^. Reward -- ^ye Sir, come do not give me cause to think ye Mercinary, do
all things free and generously; when service comes to be paid once, where lies
the obligation?


Beauf. And when Love Madam -- like hoarded mettle, lies rusting, and is almost
spoiled for want of use, where lies the pleasure or profit?


Oliv. Bring but your recompense within the list of Honor* Reason, and Virtue,
and there is my hand, I Will be more free than your wishes in the performance.


Beauf. Ah dear Rogue -- on this white Altar I could eternally pay my hearts
oblations -- but a word more of Virtue and Reason, and I swound, my Teeth
chatter already; 'gad it is like swallowing an Issicle just after a man has
drunk a comfortable Elixir to warm him. But Madam, in strict sense, what
greater reason is there, than in charitably saving a poor young hopeful fellow
from the grave; or what is more like a Woman of Honor, than to be punctual in
keeping her word?


Oliv. Cucko^lding ones Husband is a glorious point of Honor, I must needs say.


Beauf. And so it is, and necessary too, as your case stands; let me tell you
that Madam, virtue has nothing to do here, you are to follow the dictates of
Love and Revenge, without the consideration of what is right or wrong. -- As in
a D^el no man of Honor or Courage invited to be Second, stays to debate whose
Cause is best, but boldly pushes on at all adventures -- and makes his friends
Life and Honor equal with his own; he that coldly stands in niceties or
punctillo's, is a Craven and no Cock of the Game, I Will answer for him.


Oliv. Well then, since it is decreed, and that I am to pay ^o dearly for your
service, I Am resolved to have my penny worth out of ye, therefore listen to my
Commands, which obeyed and performed, perhaps I may come to terms.


Beauf. Oh very well.


Oliv. My Husbands Mistress is so passionately in love with me, that she has
discovered all her secrets, and is now gone to fetch the key of her Jewels,
that lie in a Cabinet at her old Lodgings, and your assistance I shall want in
the conveying them hither; I had designed you should have share with me, but
since my Love is the only Reward you expe^t, that other profit must be wholly
mine.


Beauf. Ha! Jewels! gad such helps would be very necessary, as my condition
stands, her love may be won at more leisure -- nay Madam, if you are resolved
to keep your vow, I cannot be so barbarous to


Oliv. To infringe it, I am not wi^ling -- hah --


Beauf. No, not for the world ^adam -- but these Jewels how are they to be
purcha^ed? for you know it is not requisite for me to go thither my ^elf.


Oliv. I have considered it, therefore your best way will be to seek out my old
Servant, he tha^ I sent to you in the Walks, he is an honest fellow, and I Am
sure be very careful in the performance; st^y you here, and I Will send her to ye
with the key, this performed, my revenge is complete; and I Will instantly write
a challenge to my Husband to meet me this evening at my Lady Beardly's: perhaps
now he finds his error, he may reform, if not, the Wit and Honor of the
enterprise rewards me, and so farewell to Love and Matrimony. Exit.


Beauf. Hah! Jewels! gad this happens well, for my late extravagant expenses
have put me damnably out of Cash -- and this seasonable recruit, just in this
juncture, proves very happy -- well, I see I have some propitious Stars, though
they are commonly cloud^d. Enter Brainworm, a Letter. How now sirrah, What Is
the news?


Brainw. News, so, he has found it out already, sure there is somethin^ very
like a Pimp in my Phisiognomy, for I never went about a bawdy business in my
life, but if my tongue did not discover it, my looks did, and that is all one --
would I had burnt this Letter, for ten to one but my bones must pay postage for
it, the contents are doubtless Harbengers to another beating.


Beauf. Sirrah, no more grumb^ing, but let me know the business; how now,
What Is that, a Letter you have in your hand there? come let us see it, let us
see it.


Brainw. A pox of ^our Eagles eyes.


Enter Beverly disguised. Bever. Revenge, as it is the solace of wronged
spirits, so it is a benefit designed by Heaven, to show the difference between
the brave and coward: it is the Cordial drop that sweetens the injuries we have
received, and gives us courage to repay 'em; if I should now rashly fight with
Beauford about this, she would then be forwarn'd, and I should frustrate my
design upon her -- no, I Will first pursue the effect of this disguise, I shall
have Duelling hours enough hereafter -- hah, and as good fortune happil^*
orders it, yonder he is -- now Cunning, Malice -- Man's best Wit, and Woman's
damned Hypocrisy, I implore your assistance.


Beauf. Ay, here is your excuse, here is your melting expressions; what she did
then sirrah, was upon compulsion, and against her Will poor soul.


Brainw. Compulsion, ay that is a fine sham indeed; 'twas a pretty entertainment
faith, to cudgel our bones out of Joint, and then send word she did it upon
compulsion, compulsion in the Devils name.


Bever. What! my dear, noble, and most accomlish'd spark of fortune, is it you?
in faith I am over joy'd to see ye, gad I was afraid, I should never have been
so happy again.


Beauf. Hah, my good and trusty old friend, letme embrace thee.


Bever. Ah deer Sir!


Beauf. Why this is an excess of furtune, too happy for my hopes -- for I was
just now sending my man all over the Town to seek thee.


Bever. Why, what blessed chance had I to come so opportunely! Well Sir, and
how came ye off with your last business? faith I heard the ill-natured cuckold
used ye very ill.


Beauf. Ah most damnably, o'ons I was beaten plaguily, and then tossed in a
Blanket.


Bever. A Blanket! why what an unnatural chance was that? 'sdeath is it
possible that so witty, so amorous, and so politic a man as you, should have
such damned Foot-boys luck to be tossed in a Blanket? as I live 'twas
intolerable.


Beauf. 'Twas so -- but I thank fortune I have now the power of revenging my
self sufficiently, for I have at this time both his Wife, and Mistress in my
custody, besides a third benefit, which out-weighs all; which thou shall know
presently.


Bever. How, his Wife too say ye Sir? oh (...)!


Beauf. His Wife, rogue, his Wife, and she is in so quaint a disguise, that
igad I defy him to find her out, if he has only instinct to make his discovery.


Bev. Death and Damnation* -- I shall never have patience. aside. Why this Sir,
compleats your happiness, and I doubt not but you have made use of your time --
Well, was she pliant -- is the business done -- hah --


Beauf. No faith, to confess the truth to thee, I have been a little tardy in
that business -- and she has hitherto always put me off -- but then it has been
with so many smiles, and with such a soft languishing Air, that my hopes are as
great as ever, besides, it is now bounded with an affair I am to do for her: ha,
ha! sirrah, there are Jewels in the case, Jewels which Beverly's Mistress has
given her, in which I Am to share, I thank him for being so bountiful.


Bever. Jewels too, Sir -- now fortune be constant.


Beauf. Jewels, and of Considerable value, all that that Coxcomb was so long
troubling himself to bestow upon her, are ours in an instant; she will presently
be here he^ self with the Key of the Cabinet, ha, ha, ha! Oh my gall will break
with excess of Contentment.


Bever* A very quaint business, I vow to gad, Sir, ha, ha, ha!


Beauf. Now, as good luck would have it (whom I will never blame again, I am
resolved on it) thou art come exactly at the time to be Messenger, for 'twas
Olivia's desire that yo^ should be sound out, as the person amongst all her
Creatures most fit to be trusted in so weight* a business.


Bever. Ah she is a good Lady, heaven bless her: O Propitious!


Beauf. For you man go unsuspected to her lodging, and bring all off clearly;
but I dare not, for fear of being discovered; for I hear that Jealous Coxcomb
watches for me, as I think he has reason, h'ah, Has he not?


Be^e* Ha, ha, ay Sir; but I Will warrant we will be cunning enough.


Enter Matilda with a Key. Beauf. Oh here she comes her self with the Key --
Madam, this is the honest Fellow the Gentleman ordered to fetch the Jewels.


Wheedle. Well, here is the Key, and pray Friend be careful, for, I assure ye
they are of value. Beauford gives the Key to Beverly.


Bever. I warrant ye, Madam; but, 'twould be more easily performed, if you
could go a little way and show me the house, for, to ask questions, will not be
necessary; do but that, Madam, and for the rest let me alone.


Wheedle. That I will with all my heart; this Mask will disguise me a little.


Bever. Nay, Sir, I would not have you go, for if you are seen all is discovered.


Wheedle. He says tr^e, stay you here, Sir; come, Friend, and be sure be
careful.


Bever. Never fear, Madam -- I Will secure the Jewels, and you too with a
vengeance. Exeunt.


Beauf. So, so, this will be some recompense however, for the ill fortune I
have had formerly; I see now the Devil has a principle of Civility in him, and
will not too much disoblige a person that deserves better at his hand -- let me
see, What shall I do with these Jewels, hah? gad, I Will convert 'um instantly
into Money, all Gold; fine yellow Rogues, and then will so Chine and Chink them
in Beverly's Ears, I Will make him mad, ha, ha, ha! Sirrah, ^ou shall have a new
Livery too, and Money in your Pocket, Rogue; you can provide your self a Whore,
I think, cannot ye?


Brainw. A whore, ay, I Am a fine fellow for a whore indeed; alas Sir all
natural motions were cudgelled out of me a great while ago, I can hardly
remember what ma^es the distin^tion between the Sexes a whore quotha, alas --
my capacity has not extended that way a long time.


Beauf. Ha, ha, ha! and then we'll row and revel like Emperors; oh Madam, the
business is done, I have been diligent you see.


Enter Olivia hastily. Oliv. Diligent! the Devil, what, and let Wheedle be
carried away so tam^ly by heaven it is downright cowardice.


Beauf. Carried away, ha, ha! that is a pretty jest indeed, why it is your man
Madam, the honest fellow you bid me discover the business to; she is gone but a
little way to show him the house, she will be here again presently.


Oliv. Oh intolerable blindess and stupidity! this honest fellow you speak of
was my Husband in disguise; I saw him pull his false Beard off, and met her
dragging her along: Oh I could curse!


Beauf. Her Husband! Confusion, I have made a fine piece of Work on it.


Brainw. So there is my new Livery gone again.


Oliv. Come, pray Sir give me the Key of the Jewels, ten to one but your ill
luck will make you lose that too -- if I trust ye any longer -- come, deliver,
I Will do the business now my self: the Key, the Key.


Beauf. So, I Am a very pretty Fellow, 'Faith. Stands trembling.


Olivia. Ad'sdeath, What a sneaking look is there? -- you look as if you were
Arraigned for a Rape, and were now going to plead to the Indictment -- come,
Where is it? What a fumbling you keep -- What, cannot you find it?


Beauf. Fumbling, Madam, I don't fumble, not I -- I am looking, I don't fumble,
not I, Madam -- would I were in a Sea Fight!


Olivia. What, not yet? -- Oh, my prophetic fear -- there must be something in
this -- What Is the matter? speak -- ' Speak, thou vile Creature! Where is it?
Still that leering Dog-look -- a hundred to one but you have mistook, and given
that to my Husband too.


Beauf. I vow to gad and so I have Madam.


Olivia. Ah que sui Malhereux! Both stamp.


Beauf. Ah Mort dieu Jernie bougra.


Olivia. This is the most unlucky could possibly have happened; all that my Wit
has been so long toyling for, lost and ruined in a moment: I warrant ye told
him too that I was here with ye in disguise.


Beauf. Yes, 'Faith, I told him that too.


Olivia. Monstrous -- Why this is mere infatuation -- you are the most unhappy
person that ever was.


Beauf. The unlucky'st Dog that ever breathed, as I hope to be saved.


Olivia. Well, I have this Consolation however, it frees me from your
importunate Adresses; you cannot sure have the impudence to persist after
having failed the performance of so necessary an Injuction.


Beauf. Faith, Mad^m, my impudence, like my ill fortune, will never leave me,
till it has undone me. I am a very Spaniel, in Love, Madam; the more my ill
usage, the greater my passion.


Olivia. Then, to thy terror be it spoken; know (oh most unfortunate person)
that I have fooled thee all this while, made thee a downright property, and am
a very Miser in affection. In fine, Sir, by the way of Advice, let me tell ye
-- you do but swim against the stream, and vainly dash against the rock of my
Constancy; therefore desi^t in time, do; Marry, grow virtuous, and love
honestly; Look gravely, say your prayers, think on Hell,
Your Ill luck comes by Whooring, so farewell.



Exit. Beauf. Very good -- I have been a Stock Fish to a fine purpose 'Faith --
think of Hell in the Devil's name; and gad I will think so much on it, that I
will keep my self from thence, if possible, least I should happen into thy
d^mn'd company again. And now my eyes are open too; 'igad I begin to find that
I am but a kind of a Coxcomb.


Brainw. Oh do you begin to find it -- 'faith you might have found it before now,
one would have thought, 'thas been visible enough.


Beauf. I have now Mistress, and, faith, little or no money; two necessities
excellently well matched; for a Man that has a Mistress in this Age, and no
Money to give her, is like one that sets a Lawyer to Plead without his Fee,
whatever happens, his business is sure to be neglected -- I have one stake left
however -- this Ring here -- which, as it luckily came to me, shall now as
luckily relieve me -- Sirrah, go you to yonder shop, and bid the Goldsmith come
hither to me.


Brain. Ay, ay, come, let the moveable vanish, that we may drink a Bottle, and
put our selves in heart again. Exit.


Beauf. This will make a little blaze; and, let the worst happen it is but
practicing Reformation at last, and wheedle my old Aunt into a belief of my
Conversion, and then all is well again. Enter Brainworm, Goldsmith, and
Officers. Oh here is the Goldsmith.


Gold^mith. To buy a Ring, say thou -- in troth it could not have happened
in a worse time: For, I have just hired these Officers to arrest a person, that
has lately put a Cheat upon me; but, come, I will have a little patience to do
your Master a kindness.


Brainw. Come, Sir, you must dispatch the business quickly, because he says,
he is in haste.


Beauf. Here, Friend, this is the Ring -- good Stones, I assure ye, and of true
vallue.


Goldsmith, Ay, like enough, Sir -- by Coxbodikins, the very self-same Ring I
was cheated of, and which I made for Mr. Beauford, this was happy fortune
I^ack; now Timothy Touchstone, show thy self to be a Citizen of Wit and
Policy, and cramp this Gallant. And pray how long have you had this Ring, Sir?


Beauf. How long have I had it, Sir?


Goldsmith. Ay; How long have you had it, Sir? and, How came you by it, Sir? --
Look'ee, Sir, I am a Magistrate, and, with your leave, may ask these Questions:
I say, How came you by it, Sir?


Shows a pocket-Staffe. Brainw. A Constable! Oh gads bud I shall be hanged.


Beauf. Came by it, Sir? why, Sir, my Grandmother left it me for a Legacy; Sir,
it has been worn by our Family this 500 year: what a Devil do you think I don't
know how I came by it, Sir?


Brainw. O damned lie, damned lie!


Goldsmith. Very well, Sir; the King has a precious Subject of you, that he has
in troth, that can Cheat his Liege People, and carry it off with such
confidence -- Officers, I charge you in the Kings Name to Seize him -- this
Ring is mine, he cheated my Man of it, therefore look to him.


Beauf. So, a rare business again. Playing with his Hat.


Goldsmith. What hoa -- there -- Peter -- come, Sir, we shall publish what you
are.


Brainw. Oh what shall I do? -- now will this plaguey Watch rise up in Judgment
against me too -- Is there no way to hide it? No contrivance? -- Oh that
fellows face frights me worse then a Furys. Oh what shall I do? Ties the Watch
in his Hat, and puts it on.


Enter Peter. Goldsmith. Come ye hither, Sirrah; do you know these persons?


Peter. Know 'em, ay, as well as I know my Dame at home, Sir; this is he that
had the Ring and this other here Cheated me of the Watch; I Will fearch, I Will
warrant he has it about him.


Brainw. Search what pleases thee; but, do not Scandalize the Innocent O Man!


Peter. O Man -- What a dickins are you turned Quaker o'th sudden, and have the
confidence to wear your Hat before Mr. Constable? Come, come, strike fail, Will
ye Friend?


Brainw. Look thee Friend; do not involve thy self in mischief, I profess my
self to be no respecter of persons -- nor will I veil my Bonnet to any one, no
not to the King profecto.


Goldsmith. I^le try that Sirrah, presently. Strikes off his Hat. Oh here is the
reason, pray observe my Masters, he has tied it in's Hat, a cunning Rogue for
ye; come, away with 'em; Are you so good at tricks? I Will trick ye.


Beauf. This was your Project, Rogue; this was your Project.


Brain. A pox of your Projects: Oh, What will become of me?


Goldsmith. Come, come; away with 'em.


Beauf. This damned City Rascal has no Mercy -- and I see I must send to my old
Aunt for her assistance -- come, Whether would you have us your Polecats?


Officer. Oh we will show ye presently -- we will show ye. Exeunt.


Enter Olivia and Lidia. Lidia. And is it all discovered


Olivia. All, I swear: and only by his damnable misfortune, in mistaking my
Husband for my old Messenger.


Lidia. Did he tell him you were in Men's Clothes too?


Olivia. That I think was omitted; he only named a Disguise: but 'twould have
been an excellent Scene of Mirth for thee, had thou but seen how he looked,
when I first railed, and at last discarded him; He was as pale as death, and
shook, as if he had an Ague.


Lidia. No such occasion of Mirth, if you knew all. Aside.


Olivia. I expect him here at his Aunts presently, and then to observe the
harrangue between my Husband and he will be excellent diversion.


Lidia. But, How shall I contrive to be there? I dare not let my Brother see me
with you, for I have ever made him believe I was ignorant of your designs; but,
if I could be a private Spectator.


Olivia. Private -- Why it is but pinning up your Gown, putting on a Scarf,
pulling your Hood over your Face, and practiceing a little the Chambermaids
impudent Gate, and you may pass for one of my Lady Beardly's Family.


Lidia. Well; I Am resolved I le venture, if it be only for the sake of seeing
so extraordinary an Encounter.


Olivia. Follow me then; I think I hear some body coming. Exit.


Lidia. By this means I shall observe Beauford's actions; for I believe I Am
alloted to prove his good genius when all is done. Exit.


Enter Sir Lubberly, and Lady Beardly, and Tisick. Sir Lubber. Prithee Woman do
not trouble me, I am busy.


L. Beard. Are ye so? -- why then perhaps it is my pleasure to delay that
business. I wonder Sir Lubberly you are not ashamed to use me thus. Why would
^ou let me fall over the great Form in the Hall, and not give me timely
warning? knowing, like a cruel man as ye are, that the Monkey broak my
Spectacles yesterday, g^ing to read a Proclamation.


Sir Lubber. I give ye warning -- why what a Devil are ye blind -- Cant ye see
neither, this is worst of all, this raises my dislike of ye to an extravagant
degree? Why hark'ee, speak in your own Conscience, Can you be so unreasonable
to desire me to fall in Love with that Madrid Face of yours? come, I put it to
ye, Can you be so unreasonable?


L. Beard. Madrid-Face, I scorn your words Sir: for, had not Age been a little
too bold here, there is never a Woman in Christendom has a more comely
countenance though I say it: come, I would fain know the defects of it.


Sir Lub. Would ye, well, well, have patience, and you shall: Why, in the first
place, ^our eyes are sunk so hollow, that a man had need of a perspective Glass
to look into your head to discern 'em; then your Nose is like the Gnomon of a
Dial, which the Sun has warpt for many a year -- but what is a continual
eyesore to me, is that intolerable Beard of yours -- Why the devil don't you
go to the Barbers? Why don't you shave? o'ons those whiskers are most
abominable.


La. Beard. Ha -- alack-aday, it does sprout indeed, looks in her Glass. this
is my purblind Woman's fault now, oh fie! in troth, I cannot blame him, this is a
little unseemly, that is the truth on t; Takes out a great pair of Cizers and
snips her Beard. but it is many a good Woman's imperfection, that is my comfort --
but come Sir Lubberly, I am the Consort of your bosom, and you should,
methinks, wink at my imperfections: consider, there is no wife but has external
or internal failings; ah Sir Lubberly! you could have wink d once -- you could
have born with this face of mine before ^ou had your ends -- but now my Nose is
like the Gnomon of a Dial. Hah! well, you verify the old proverb.


Sir Lub. What proverb now? come, what proverb?


L. Beard. When the Devil was sick, the Devil a Monk would be, But when the
Devil was well, the Devil a Monk was he. weeps


Sir Lub. What a pox then, you make a Devil of me do ye? hah? this is rare
impudence, but I Will fetch your Similes out ye old Jade.


Strikes her. L. Beard. Help help there, why Sir Lubberly are you mad? gad
forgive me, are you infatuated? what swinge your wife the first week of your
marriage, before the Wedding-shooes are warm, as one may say -- oh Villain,
Fool, Coxcomb, why thou art like --


Sir Lub. Like -- what more Likes still -- mum I say -- Tace -- I command ye,
as you expect Bamboo should sleep in peace, be silent. Exit


L. Beard. Oh woman, woman, what have thou brought thy self too!


It Is. Come come, have patience Madam, have patience.


L. Beard. Patience -- What a woman of quality as I am, and suffer my self to
be thus used? I have made a fine business of it; in troth I have supported this
decayed frame of Beauty to a rare purpose, if this be the fruits on t! And yet
it is no more than what all of us are liable too; Marriage is a thing we are as
greedy of, as a Fish is o^ a bait, though he swallows his destruction: we
cannot help it, it is in our na^ures, nay, we cannot live without it; and then
too, if we do marry, it is to these young Rascals, though we are sure it is not
us they love, but our Money; well, I must do something by way of prevention;
I Will go and invite all my Relations and Friends to dinner; it may be good
admonition, may work much upon him; if not, my penitence shall be a warning to
my whole Sex, That they may know how dearly I repented,
That married thrice, yet could not be contented.



Exit. Enter Sir Frollick, Isabella, Lidia, with Sir Lubberly. Sir Frol. How
now Sir Lubberly, what flinch from your friends, your guests, and Relations --
give me patience! this is but an odd way of welcome -- what my good Lady in
tears too -- hah, by my faith this is a little of the soonest Sir Lubberly.


Sir Lub. Ah let her alone, let her alone -- the more she howls, the less she
scolds, you understand me.


Sir Frol. Ay ay, Sir, I understand ye, ha, ha, ha! give me patience: What an
intolerable dunce is this Nephew of mine! come no more of this April weather;
faith this ill agrees with a Bride the first week of her Marriage.


Isab. Especially one matched so to her hearts content, one that married a
young man for the pleasure of his company, and yet having possession, is not
satisfied -- fie -- I swear this can be no fault of his, but the effects of
your own ill nature.


L. Beard. Well Madam, mock on -- it may be your own case another day, when you
come to be old; I as little thought as you to come to this, but you see the
consequence of Love and Folly.


Sir Frol. Come good Madam, no more of this, I have an affair to inform ye of.
I met your Nephew Mr. Beauford, just now in the Constables hands, and upon
information of the busin^ss, found it to be a very slight matter; and though
for my part, all things considered, I have of all men, the least reason to
stand his friend, yet thinking my self sufficiently revenged on him, and my
good nature prompting me to forget and forgive, I took him into the next Tavern
to know the truth of the matter, and after we had drunk half a dozen bottles,
and debated on the matter, I desired the Officer to bring him hither to you to
make an end, he is without there, and in my opinion, 'twill be for your credit,
to discharge him as soon as ye can.


L. Beard. In troth and so I will -- who knows -- but I may live to have
comfort of him -- nay Sir, never mump nor lowre for the matter, as gad save me,
I will have consolation one way or other, I in troth will I, and there is the
resolution of a wronged Wife.


Sir Lub. Then there is the resolution of an enraged Husband strikes her.


Lydia. Fie Sir Lubberly, what strike a Woman?


Sir Lub. Woman, hang her, she is no Woman -- nor on my conscience was -- ah, if
I could but create a fancy, or find by any Search, Art, or Industry -- that she
ever had been Woman, I could be patient, but to marry a piece of German
Clockwork, that only hangs together like Geometry -- a Hagg, a Witch of Endor
-- oh it is intolerable!


Isab. But will unmanning your self by beating her, help this?


Sir Lub. I don't know -- it gives my heart a little ^ase however.


Sir Frol. But see, who comes here?


Enter Beverly pulling in Wheedle, dressed in a mean Countrey-Habit, and Olivia
after. Bever. Nay Madam, no drawing back, I am resolved to have my humor.


Whead. Dear, Sweet Sir, do not shame me before all this company.


Bever. Confound your Sirens note, I am deaf to entreaty. Gentlemen and Ladies
pray view this Creature, peruse her well, she is worth your observation* this
piece of Country dirt was once my Mistress, Lady of my Heart, of all my Love,
my Honor, whose face made me forget a virtuous Wife, to fawn and dote upon her
hypocrysie -- I fell in love with her in a Country village, where her old
Father lived, a peaceful Ploughman, that knew no Heaven beyond a fruitful Crop;
no^ Hell beyond foul weather; there at her Task as she sat spinning, mourning
in tears, the slavery of her life; And those hands that now appear so delicate,
then parched and Sunburnt, turning the rude Wheel; I saw her, pitty'd her,
quickly wooed and won her.


Sir Frol. Very well Sir.


Bever. Brought her to Town, cherished her as my life, gave her rich Cloths and
Jewels, made her sit at a new Play amongst the greatest Ladies: in Fine, so
well I loved her, that had she not been less grateful than the Devil, she never
could have deserted me. But mark what creatures Women are
So infinitely vile and fair. --
(as a person of great Wit and Honor satyrically says) this Devil, whose
kindness all proved subtilty, mauger all my Favors left me, slighted me, and
falling i^ love with a smooth-faced flashy fellow, had the impudence to court
him, with the very Jewels I had given her; but that, as good fortune ordered
it* I countermanded, and as the reward of your ingratitude, for ever banished
you my heart; and thus in the same gorgeous habiliments I first found you in,
have turned you loose upon the Common. Display the fatal snare, in which men
fall,
And shown proud Iilts, there great Original.



Sir Lub. Gad and prudently done too, for the downright Devil's in 'um now-a
days. But come, now I have another business: I have a Ticket from the young
spark I lately spoke of, to meet him here, but am afraid he is too much a coward
to keep his word.


O^iv. Is he so Sir?


Bever. I beg your pardon Sir, for my suspicion -- but come, no more words,
let us steal softly off, you understand me.


O^iv. Ay Sir, I understand ye very well, but I know not what is the matter* I Am
in so good a humor, that I am now more inclined to a reconciliation, than to
fighting* Come faith Sir, let it be so, for what is past, I Will make ye amends,
and because it is fit ye know the person that put that pleasant trick upon ye
yesterday, you shall see my Face, how do you like it? unmasques.


Bever. My Wife! sure it is not possible!


Wheed. Hah! his Wife?


O^ivia. By heaven very possible Sir, and very true I assure ye; I am that v^r^
Numerical person you were speaking of. One that to farther her revenge, has so
long worn these fortunate breeches, that she can hardly consent to return to
quondam Petticoats again; one that has cured your jealousy by giving the cause
to be so, and lastly, won your Mistress in spite of your Sword, and Policy.
^ut for ^ou Madam ( To Wheedle) I vow to gad, it is an extreme affliction to me,
that I am utterly incapacitated of serving ye in that manner you, I know,
expect, and passionately desire: it is alas a cheat Madam, that Nature has
imposed upon our Sex: you must needs think much against my own good liking; yet
though I cannot be the happy person, I Will give ye a word to some young spark
that can, and I know, you will like that as well.


Sir Lub. Hark Sweetheart, if thou will accept of half a Crown a week, and be
content to lie in a Garret.


Whead. Base treacherous Creature -- ah curse upon my stupidity!


B^ver. Come to my bosom, thou art mine again -- all -- all my own, and shall
be so for ever -- for from this moment, all base drossy thoughts, that soiled
the life and luster of my Judgment, shall vanish; and instead of those, thy
Beauty, Love, Constancy, and Wit, shall crown my heart -- blot from thy breast
my faults, and let our union teach the Wild, Roving, and inconstant World, how
they should Live and Love, my dearest Creature.


Oliv. This now is like a Husbands love; free as it should be; Which mine shall
^qual, and now I Will boldly say,
Whensoe'er yours was, this is my Wedding day.



Enter Lady Beardly, Beauford, and Brainworm. L. Beard. Come Sir, and pray let
me hear no more of these Frolicks, live civilly and orderly -- and strive to
oblige your Aunt -- come, you may if you please, be a comfort to her in her
calamity: We are not so near akin, thank heaven, but we may comfort one another.


Sir Lub. Old Joan cease your Clack, it offends my Ear: Cousin Beauford, welcome
to my house, I Am your Uncle, do you see, and there is a respect due; but no words
of that, let the old Women chatter to themselves, make thy address to me boy*
Come, there is a Collation stays within, pray let us all go and toss a bottle or
two -- Coz, give me thy hand, do hear -- see me often -- do -- igad, thou
shall be welcome; come Gentlemen, pray let us go.


Bever. With all my heart Sir, I Will make one, Mr. Beauford and I have long been
at difference, and many rough Scene has past betwixt us; come, let it end now:
for the injuries I have done you, I as^ ^ou pardon, and will give you what
other satisfaction, you will demand, for those you have done me, I forgive 'um
freely.


Sir Frol. And so do I.


Oliv. And I.


Isab. And I.


Brainw. And I, h^ has got me many a beating, heaven pardon him, I do.


Bever. And further, by way of recompense for loss of this Lady, I promise upon
my honor, that any thing (but her) shall on my (...) be readily tendered, to
express the endearments, I desire to pay Mr. Beauford.


Be^uf. Faith Sir, I am heartily sorry your Comple^ent is lost upon me, but my
brains are grown so watery, and my wit is so thin Sir, with my common Calamity,
that I fear I should make but ungrateful Repartee: I am now studying new
Philosophy, and to baffle my future ill luck, am resolved voluntarily to
embrace some strange misfortune: that being once at the lowest ebb, the Devil
may have no power over me; to which purpose I will instantly marry the most
ugly, old, vicious, mercenary creature I can meet with; and if there can be
worse luck than that, I am mistaken.


Bever. Ha, ha! this is an excellent humor in faith.


L. Beard. Why, what a mad fool art thou? have not I told ye that I would stick
by ye?


^yd. And will ye marry any Woman, do you say Sir?


Beauf. Any Woman, by this light -- thee if thou will -- and faith, now I look
on thee again, thou art a very fit person, and I believe the Devil has sent
the^ hither just in the nick, to make thy market* come give me thy hand -- let
thy consent answer it* and here I do promise upon the honor of a Gentleman; I
mean an unlucky Gentleman, to marry thee to morrow.


Lyd. I most Religiously accept of it.


Sir Frol. and Bever. Hold, hold, we must deny this Contract.


Beauf. Gentlemen, it is too late -- but stay now, let me consider her a little,
by her Face she may be a Witch, by her Tongue a Scold, and by her Habit a Whore
-- a very hopeful Spouse in faith; but pray cause her to unvail, for I am
resolved you shall see the worst of her, now my hand's in, discovers her self.


Sir Frol. Give me patience -- what -- Madam Lidia!


Bever. How -- my Sister!


Beauf. Now do I expect some stale, rotten, overgrown Chambermaid, some eternal
Green sickness, some compound of Paint and Impudence, that has been suffered to
live, merely to plague mortality; but come, hanged, I Will stand up boldly, and
bear my affliction like a man. Well Sir Frolic, my doom is she, a Witch or a
Gipsey.


Sir Frol. O'ons, are you mad Sir? -- why it is Mr. Beverly's Sister, one worth
at least ten thousand pounds.


Beauf. What ten thousand pounds?


Bever. Sister, this does not suit your Education.


Lidia. Brother, your pardon, I am now at age, and will not be controlled.


Oliv. This was more than I expected, but I am glad on it for Beauford's sake.


Lidia. What, I warrant Sir, you repent your bargain now? come what do you think
on it.


Beauf. Think on it! the Devil take me Madam, if I am not past thinking; I am
all ecstasy, fear, hope, wonder; but will you really marry me? and are you
worth ten thousand pound, is there no trick in it? gad, the apprehension of my
late ill luck does so torture me; therefore dear Creature tell me; swear, is
there no trick in this upon your soul?


Lid. None I swear -- I am resolved to marry ye.


Beauf. Not a word more, there is a bargain made.


Bever. Mr. Beauford, do not flatter your self; your Estate must be consulted,
before we proceed further in this affair; she is my Sister, I am her Guardian
too, and have now 6000 l. of hers in my hand.


Beauf. Have ye so! I'gad I Will have something else of hers in my hands then, by
to morrow night, I am resolved: and, now I think on it better, your Honor is
pawned to assist me, and I challenge it as you are a Gentleman.


Beverly. The Devil's in it, that this should happen thus. Aside. Well, Sir,
though this be an odd turn in fortune, yet never shall any breach of promise
taint my Honor; Here take her, She Is yours, and now he hold to say*
Midst all Ill-Luck, This is your happy day.



Beauf. Well, if this should be a Dream at last now -- but a pox it is
impossible, I have her in my arms here, and if the Devil takes her from me
now, gad he shall take me too. We Will go lovingly together.


Sir Frollick. Come, all is well, all is well: this was a lucky business, faith;
but give ye Joy, Sir, give ye Joy.


Sir Lub. Now, if my Grannum there and I were reconciled too, we should be all
Friends; but, How the Devil is it possible, when a Man has such a continual
Hagg-look from her? No, it will not be; 'Sbud, me thinks she looks more like a
Witch every day then other; I shall be haunted ^re long with her I^^s, and
Fairys; Well, I Am resolved to spend all her Estate in comforting my heart up*
I Am conscious to my self how much I want it -- for* He that Wedds an old H^gg,
that had three Men before*
H^s o^e Hell on Earth, and another in Store.



Epilogue. By Mr. Nokes, Representing my Lady BEARDLY.
ALl you (...) know the (...) disposition,
Mou^n my h^rd fate, and pity my condition*
At 15 years my heart to Love began, Weeps.
And placed it is dearest happiness in Min*
I Married, Buried, Matched a Second time,
Nay, and a third, Was ever such a Crime?
My two first Husbands loved Wine more then Prayers;
One's Heart I broke, the other his Neck down Stairs;
The third Fool I Cornuted -- a mere Logg --
But, this fourth Rogue here beats me like a Dog.
A decent Curse for her that leaves Bandore,
Paints her Haggs face, and Marries at Fourscore:
But, least there should be any Matron here,
To whom I may not gratefully appear;
One who perhaps may quite mislike this Dressing,
Matched with a Boy, yet mist the only Blessing:
Who, Miser-like, would reap all Grains that grow,
When she, alas, is much too old to Sow:
Fearing her Rage, I Will change my Sex, and th^^
Cast my Snakes-Skin, and thus turn Nokes again.
Pulls off all his Head-cloaths. So State-Fanaticks change to the Party-Royal,
And when they dare Rebel, noe more turn Loyal.
FINIS.

