The Interest OF ENGLAND IN THE Protestant Cause.

Zach. 4.6. Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit says the Lord of
Hosts.

Isa. 59.19. They shall fear the name of the Lord from the West, and his glory
from the rising of the Sun: When the enemy shall come in like a flood: the
Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a Standard against him.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCLIX.

The Interest OF ENGLAND IN THE Protestant Cause.
THe Duke of Rohan in his life time a wise Statesman, an excellent Captain and
a zealous Protestant did write a Solid discourse, to show the Interest of the
States of Europe, wherein upon most rational grounds, he does make it appear,
that the Interest of England is to make a third party in Europe, upon the
Protestant account, to balance all public affairs and State-transactions
between France and Spain: and does assert that if the State of great Britain
does not divide and weaken it self by civil controversies; no foreign State
can molest it: but it will be able to uphold the persecuted Protestants every
where, and balance the powers of Europe so between France and Spain that
neither of them shall become too potent to sway the affairs of Europe
Monarchically for their own ends; which is the constant design of those two
opposite Nations.

His discourse will be found by all that read it very rational and clear; but
he only reflects as a S ates-man upon the outward circumstances of humane
affairs, and the ways which Policy does suggest to balance power with power,
and treaties by treaties, and corresponde cies by correspondencies, concerning
the transactions which are between States: and by these means he would have
England to interpose in all public affairs to make it self considerable;
wherein he stands up for the honor of England, and the advantage of the
Protestant cause as a States man in matters belonging to his clement: But there
are other matters of far greater weight, concerning the interest of England in
the Protestant cause, then any he does mention or could speak of in his time;
which now ought to be taken into consideration, not so much upon a State, as
upon a true Christian account.

For the Protestant Cause (if rightly understood) does not rely upon such State
transactions as he does mention, but is bottomed upon matters of a higher
nature; which few States men understand or regard; for they measure all things
in the balances of Power and Policy as they may tend to the settlement or
unsettlement of their present greatness, or to the furtherance or hinderance of
their future designs. But the Protestant Cause (if rightly understood) is not
so much upheld and propagated by the balance of power and policy as of
Righteousness and of Truth manifested. By the balance of Righteousness the
liberty of Christians is maintained, that the Tyranny of power may not make
them slaves to the lusts of men, and by the balance of Truth (which is the
Word of God) the understandings of Christians are enlightened to discern
pernicious errors to avoid them, and their wills directed to follow the ways of
Godliness wherein their strength does lie, to advance the Kingdom of Christ in
their generation.

For whereas all the States of the world do mind nothing else but their own
greatness, in might, in honor, and in riches above their neighbors: The
Protestant Cause does aim at nothing properly but at the greatness of Jesus
Christ, that his Kingdom of Truth, of Righteouseness, of Peace, and of joy in
the Holy Ghost may be exalted and set up in the hearts of all men, above all
other advantages of might, of honor, or of riches: So that the Protestant
Cause is not to be taken for a Combination of worldly powers in a league to
oppose the Papists by outward might, but to be a conjunction of heavenly
powers, that is of spiritual virtues and grace to be held forth in the way of
impartial Christianity, whereby the Kingdom of Satan (which Popery does
uphold) will be at last made manifest and overthrown.

And to bring this to pass, the means which God has ordained to advance the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, is to be set a work in a Gospel way; which is none
other but the Communion of Saints in spiritual concernments of Truth and
Righteousness. And this Holy Communion cannot be entertained without a
Religious correspondency to maintain and propagate the common Interest of the
souls of men into Christ's Kingdom, which is the proper work of the Protestant
Cause, and ought to be the main design of those who are obliged to prosecute
the same.

And although all Protestants as such are all equally obliged to mind
unanimously the advancement of this Cause; yet I conceive that the godly party
of these Nations, are more then any others stricktly and solemnly obliged
thereunto: and that therefore they ought more then others to lay it seriously
to heart, and to act therein more directly and professedly, that is, to lead
other Protestants in the way for the discharging of their duty.

The reasons which move me to hold forth this assertion, I have thought
expedient, at this juncture of time, wherein the great Assembly of the
representatives of the Nations is met, to lay open; that such as are sober
minded, godly, wise, and conscionable Christians, who are entrusted with the
great concernments of these Nations; may be put in mind of the engagement which
before God and men does lie upon them; And that there may be no mistake of the
true aim of this discourse: the thing to be made out and insisted upon is this.

That all who are godly and faithful in the three Nations are bound in
Conscience before God and toward all the Churches of Christ jointly to intend
a Religious correspondency with foreign Protestants, that the Kingdom of Christ
in this our generation may be advanced by the communion of Saints, which we are
more strictly bound to prosecute toward other Churches, then other Churches
are unto us. Nor is the State it self, for so far as it is a Christian State,
free from this engagement.

And to prove this I shall first consider the engagement of the Godly, and then
of the State as Christian.

The engagement of the Godly will appear from three grounds.

First, from the truth of the Christian Religion whereof we make profession.

Secondly, from the sad condition wherein all the Churches are at present.

Thirdly, from the designs of the adversaries and their attempts to ruin the
Protestant Cause.

Of the First.
THe Truth of the profession of Christianity does oblige all that are Godly to
maintain a Religious correspondency with their Brethren of the same profession
in three respects.

First, in respect of the substantialls wherein the Truth of the profession
does consist.

Secondly, in respect of the ends for which the gifts and graces of God are
given to us, and received by us in the profession.

Thirdly, in respect of the means by which these ends are attained.

1. The substance of the profession does consist in the soundness of the
doctrine of Faith and in the holiness of life of the professors, Tit. 1.1, 3 9.
and 2.11, 12, 13, 14. and those that make profession of Christianity are
obliged by the speciciall command of God to maintain and advance both these one
toward another, 1 Pet. 4.10. and toward all men, Mat. 5.16. by the Communion
of Saints, which consists not only in the conjunction of believers to strive
together for the Faith of the Gospel, Phil. 1.27. Jude. 3. But also in a real
endeavor to strive one for another in prayers, Ephesians. 6.18. And by the
conjunction or rather communication of their gifts and graces to provoke one
another to love and to good works, Heb. 10.24. Now such endeavors as these
cannot possibly be put forth by any, except they maintain some Religious
correspondency one with another to that effect; therefore such a correspondency
is absolutely requisite to be intended and upheld between all the Godly of
these Nations, and their neighbor professors of the Truth; And if we mind it
not, it is evident that we come short of a Fundamental duty, and fall under
the guilt of breaking the Communion of Saints; of neglecting the fight for the
Faith, and of carelessness to provoke one another unto love and good works,
which God will certainly require at our hands if we continue so to do, having
so great cause and so many and fair opportunities to do otherwise.

2. The end for which God does give the gifts and graces of his Spirit unto the
Saints; is, that the members of the Body of Christ should profit thereby one
toward another, 1 Cor. 12.7. and that they should trade therewith to gain more
graces for themselves, Luke 19.12, 13. Mat. 25.14. But it is no more possible
to do this without maintaining an intercourse of Spiritual Correspondency one
with another, then it is possible to the dis-jointed members of a natural
body, to conveigh blood and nourishment each to other. Therefore a course of
Religious Correspondency is absolutely necessary for this cause also: And if
this be not intended, God's aim in giving his gifts unto his Saints and
Churches is not fulfilled, and he will certainly deprive such of the gifts
which they have received, who continue under the guilt of not making a right
use thereof. For if the end of God's giving should be answered by our
receiving, then we are bound in Conscience to receive grace only for the
advancement of his Glory, 1 Corinthians. 10.31. and of our mutual edification, 1
Cor. 14.26. and Rom 14.19. and 15.2. And if these two ends are so subordinate
one to another, that God cannot be glorified otherwise by us, then by this,
that we bring forth much fruit one toward another, John 15.6. (for our good
cannot reach to him as David says, Psalm. 16.2. but to the Saints that are in
the earth, and to the excellent ones in whom ought to be all our delight, Ibid.
ver. 3.) then it will follow that the main use of all grace, is the improvement
thereof toward others. But it is not possible to intend this improvement of
our goodness toward the Saints for mutual edification, except we use means to
know one another spiritual condition by some course of spiritual
Correspondency; Therefore such Correspondency is wholly necessary to be settled
and entertained, if we will not deprive God of his glory, and the Saints of the
interest which they should have in us by the right use of our Talents toward
them.

3. The means by which these ends are to be attained, is to endeavor to keep
the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, which we are commanded, and by
many reasons exhorted to do, Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5, 6. Now this endeavor being the
effect immediately flowing from Charity which is the chief edifying grace as
appears by, 1 Cor. 8 1 and chap. 13. per tot urn, and Ephesians. 4.15, 16. And
seeing Charity cannot be maintained, nor edification advanced, nor the unity of
the Spirit upheld, except there be an endeavor put forth to take notice of one
another state; therefore a Correspondency for mutual intelligence in
spiritual matters tending to unity and peace in the profession of the Truth,
is a thing absolutely necessary amongst such as intend sincerely to uphold the
Truth of the Gospel-profession; or if they intend it not, it is evident that
they come short of the Fundamental duty of the life of Christianity, by
neglecting the means of mutual edification wherein God is chiefly glorified,
and such as continue in this neglect, and order not their way aright in the
profession of the Gospel, shall never see the salvation of God, Psalm. 50.23.

Of the Second.
THe present sad condition of the Churches comes under a twofold Consideration,
the one is in respect of their unacquaintedness with one another state; the
other is in respect of the opposition at which they are to cross one another in
their ways.

If the Protestant Churches though agreeing in the same Faith, and in the Rules
of order be considered as unacquainted with one another's state, and
consequently at a distance in their minds one from another: Two evils arise
from thence; First they not only make void the Truth of the holy profession by
the neglect of the Duties belonging thereunto whereby the name of God is
dishonored, their own mutual edification hindered, and the glory and comfort
of that unity which should be amongst them in the manifestation of love and
holiness, is darkened: But by this means they being at a distance and
dis-jointed from each other are void of that care which the members of Jesus
Christ should have one of another for their mutual good, and become liable to
all the inconveniences which are incident unto a solitary condition whereof
Solomon gives us briefly the heads, Eccl. 4 9, 10, 11, 12. which are the want
of help in bad occurrences, want of encouragement and counsel in good
enterprises, and want of defense in cases of opposition. Therefore says he,
two are better then one for they have a good reward for their labor, ver. 9.
The meaning is for their joining in labor, and this good reward is their
freedom from the forenamed inconveniences which one that is alone is subject
unto. For says he, woe be to him that is alone, when he falls there is none
to help him up, ver. 10. that is, if a mischance happen or he lie under it,
there is none to remove it. And again if two lie together they have heat, but
how can one alone be warm, ver 11. If two lay their heads and hearts together
in one design, to contrive it or put it in execution, they will warm one
another affections and resolutions, but one alone can add nothing to his own
wisdom, courage, or strength: and then Solomon says, if one prevail against
one, there are two to withstand him, ver. 12. That is if an adversary assault
one alone he may be overcome, but if there be two to make resistance, the
adversary is not like to prevail, and then a threefold cord is not easily
broken, ver. 12. This is the advantage of joint labors which a solitary
working is deprived off, as this is true in a single person, so we may say of
single bodies or solitary Churches: Woe to the Churches that are alone, for if
they fall into scandals or divisions, there is none to help them but they
crumble away to pieces within themselves of which we have too too many sad
experiences; and if a Church alone would advance any good work, it can do it
but coldly and without effectual zeal, and this also is no less evident; and
if any adversary set upon any of them being alone, In vita agricelae.
they may be conquered dum singuli pugnant (says Tacitus) universi vincunctur;
he says it of the British Cities whilst every one fights singly, all of them
are conquered, what he said of the Cities we say of the Churches, their want of
correspondency and communion in their spiritual warfare, to join together in
the fight for the Faith of the Gospel, does expose them to be conquered by the
power of Antichrist, and it is observed that Popery never prevailed more since
the Reformation then now it does. By all this it is apparent how necessary the
Association and Correspondency of Churches is, and what danger they put
themselves and the whole body of the profession to, who love to stand and walk
by themselves alone, and if it be both good and pleasant for Brethren to dwell
together in unity, Psalm. 133. ver. 1. and so good that all spiritual graces
(such as were typified by the anointing of Aaron) ver. 2. and all temporal
plenty (such as the dew of Hermon does bring with it) do follow thereupon; and
if it has the rich promise of a blessing for evermore to be commanded there
where Brethren dwell together, and dwell in unity, ver. 3. then it will follow
undenyably, that where they dwell not so together but are dis-jointed and
without any mutual correspondency, there can no such blessing be expected,
which woeful experience does speak aloud unto us. It will be needless to be
large upon this theme of solitary walking to show the inconveniences that
arise thereupon; there is none so void of all sense and reason but he does see
and feel the same.

But if the distance and unacquaintedness of Brethren does bring such
inconveniences up n them, what will their opposition and walking cross to one
another welfare do? Nay, what has it not done already? We may truly say that
there is nospiritual nor bodily evil befallen to the public state of
Protestants, but their cross walking to one another has either occasioned it,
or aggravated the will thereof, and this is the more to be lamented and
blamed, the less cause there is in their profession for such opposite walking:
for if any will but look upon the rules of that faith and obedience which all
parties do professedly own, it will seem contrary to all common sense and
reason that they should be opposite one to another, for it may be wondered at,
how it falls out amongst intelligent men, that their understanding in
fundamental matters of Faith being so fully consonant, their affections should
be so far dissonant: and again in matters of duty, their conscience being for
the main, bound up to one and the same Rule, which is the Word of God; how they
should be at so much division and strife about the application of that Rule
unto lesser matters. Furthermore it is no small wonder unto me, that they
having the Oracles of God, and therein two Rules of scripturall Interpretation
prescribed, viz. the Analysis of the Text, and the Analogy of Faith; that the
scholasticall way of handling Evangelicall debates should be so much in use,
and that in the debates about the depth of secret and unsearchable mysteries
(which all sides confess to be such) there should be so much Animosity. And
lastly, that where the substance is agreed unto, and in the outside of
profession only, there is some difference about prudentiall and
circumstantiall matters of Order, Discipline, and Government, there should be
so little condiscention and mutual forbearance made use of; notwithstanding
all the acknowledged precepts and duties of Christian charity, and long
suffering for mutual edification. Now that from this unreasonableness of
division, and the great want of moderation and discretion, in managing the
same, scandals and offense should infinitely be multiplied amongst the Churches
is no wonder at all; for how can it be otherwise, when all charitable thoughts
are laid aside, and no bowels of compassion by reason of humane frailties
entertained, but that all manner of provocations to offenses will on all hands
be both given and taken; whence prejudices will continually be more and more
heightened, and the Spirit of strife will (as we see it does) carry on the
parties to embrace in their opposite courses, worldly Interests of a contrary
nature, that they may cross each others advantages: by which means the world
takes insensible possession of the hearts of Professors which makes them for
the most part mind more the formality of their partial way, then the
simplicity of the Gospel, and the power of godliness: so that the life of the
spirit (though much pretended unto by some, and not altogether unknown to
others) cannot break through to work any sensible effects of holiness and
spiritual edification; but all the means thereof, and the ways of holy
communion being either neglected or obstructed, and the profane world
observing our miscarriages, the way of Truth and Holiness is evil spoken of
by them, and the name of God is blasphemed for our sakes.

Now to remedy these evils, and to draw the Churches to some principle or
degree of spiritual unity, that the wrath of God may be prevented (which may
justly suffer us to devour one another, till we be consumed one by another, or
the Candlestick removed from us all) let us mind but one Apostolical rule to
be put in practice amongst us, whereof the equity is altogether undeniable; and
there may be yet some hope of our preservation in store. This Rule is given to
the Philippians to heal the breach which was between the Jews and Gentile
Believers about the matter of Circumcision, and it is this: It ye be otherwise
minded, God shall reveal even this unto you; nevertheless whereto we have
attained already, Phil. 3.15, 16.
let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing. If then we could be
so happy, as to be able to persuade the Churches to observe this part of the
Rule, one toward another: First, namely to bear each with others imperfection
in knowledge, till God reveal further his Truth, and then if in the mean time
they would own another in that whereunto they have already attained; and
therein walk by one Rule, and mind the same thing: that is, intend that good
toward others, which they would have others intend toward them; the mischief
which through the neglect of this duty is like to ensue might be prevented; but
how to make the Churches sensible of the necessity of observing this Rule and
precept, is scarce imaginable, except some godly party would professedly own
this as a duty toward them all in common, and undertake to provoke them by
some Religious way of Correspondency to a reciprocal practice thereof. Which
at this juncture of time none can do so advantagiously nor is bound to do so
carefully as the godly party which appears in England. Therefore again such a
Correspondency is absolutely necessary for the Churches upon this
consideration, namely to preserve them from the forenamed evils of their
homebred distempers, and from the wrath which undoubtedly will follow
thereupon, if they continue therein.

Of the Third.
THe endeavors of the adversaries of the Protestant Cause are of three sorts,
according to the Principles and inclinations of those that are opposite unto it.

The first sort are the Profane and Hypocritical Professors who are within
their own bosom and betray the Cause.

The second are the open Atheists and mere Politicians who being often times in
places of power in the State; despise and neglect all matters of Religion.

The third are the Papists who commonly take hold of the advantages which both
these forenamed adversaries give against the Cause to weaken it, and thereupon
set their own Engines of another nature a work to overthrow it.

The Profane and Hypocritical professors are such as understand not what is
meant by the power of Godliness, and yet being willing to be counted Religious
take up the outward forms of the profession and appear zealous for the
Interests thereof, in the way of a party by which means the animosities and
disputes for Circumstantiall matters are increased; and with these the weaker
sort of plain hearted Christians are involved into controversies; all which
cannot be called professed adversaries unto the Cause, for they have no design
formed against it; but their way of owning the profession by multiplying of
scandals is opposite to the Cause and does undermine it. Now to remedy the evil
which does arise from these professors, there is none other way open but that
the Godly and intelligent Professors of all parties should correspond together,
in the way of saving Truth and Holiness; to own one another; and cry down the
heat of disputes concerning Circumstantiall matters upon the grounds of
Christian liberty and Moderation in beating one with another.

As for the Atheists and the mere worldly Politicians who make a mock of those
that are Godly, and mis-construe all their proceedings as if they were done
only for worldly advantages; these are more directly opposite unto the Cause it
self, and taking hold of the scandals which arise amongst the Professors, they
thereby foment a seed of division amongst them, and make their weakness redound
to the discredit of the Profession it self. Now to dis-appoint the denign which
Satan does drive on, against the Protestant Cause by these his Instruments, no
course will be effectual except the Godly of all parties by some mutual
Correspondency come to some joint resolution to remove the scandals which give
them matter of obloquie against the ways of Godliness.

But the Papists are the most open and professed adversaries to the Protestant
Cause: these build their plots upon all the miscarriages which are amongst the
parties, how to stagger the weak, and to divide us more and more, by their
subtle emissaries of several sorts (which their Colleges de propaganda fide
as they are called do maintain) in hope that thereby we shall be made a prey
unto them at last.

Now to take this advantage out of their hands, and to stop the gaps whereby
they break in upon us, that they may cunningly heighten our passions, and make
our divisions irreconcilable; there is no likely way but this, that some Godly
and considerate party should stir up the rest to Correspond with it self, and
each with another, in these main an fundamental Duties and Truths of
Christianity, wherein they are all united, and whereunto they have all
attained, notwithstanding their different opinions in lesser matters. And
except some such course be taken, there is no human possibility to prevent the
effect of the plots which the Papal Conclave has against the Churches, which
has prosecuted and does prosecute with indefatigable diligence, with
innumerable Agents of several sorts, with immense cost and charge, with all
manner of crafty insinuations, and fair pretenses, and with all the zeal that
either the opinion of deserving heaven, or the hope of temporal Greatness,
Power, and profit can breed in Superstitious, in ambitious and coveteous minds.
Therefore to countermine these practices of the common adversaries, and to cut
them short of the advantages, by which they will at last work out their ends,
if no remedy be found: this religious Correspondency in things whereunto the
Churches have attained, is absolutely necessary; and without some intercourse
between them to this effect, it will be impossible, as to men to prevent the
mischief which will ensue.

Here although it is not my design to make any State considerations a ground of
this discourse, because the strength of the Cause and the true Interest of the
Gospel is not bottomed upon the out ward circumstances of the affairs of this
world, yet because some use may be made of the prevailing power of Papists
against the state of the Protestants in this our age, to awaken us with zeal to
our spiritual duty, therefore I think it will not be amiss to make a little
digression concerning this matter.

If we look then upon the Protestant States in Germany, in France and else
where in Europe, and consider that which is obvious to all, we may perceive by
the causes of their present weakening and unsettlement their destiny in time to
come, if those causes be not speedily removed. For it is certain that the house
of Austria and the Papal Conclave, since the days of Charles the Fifth. When
the first War about Religion was raised, in the year 1546. have entered into a
League for the Extirpation of the Protestant party, which has been to this day
carried on between them and the design thereof constantly prosecuted; nor has
any thing both first and last given them the advantages of all their successes,
so much as the divided affections and neglected Interests of Protestants
amongst themselves, about matters of Religion: for the Elect or of Saxony in
the last war for the liberty of Protestants did betray and desert first the
Elector Palate ne in his undertaking, and made him miscarry in the defense of
the Protestant Cause, only because he was jealous; that the Calvinists (as
they are called) should become too great in the Empire. And then afterward he
refused to join in the Swedish Evangelicall confoederacy erected at Heilbrum,
in the year 1633. only because he would not be engaged to maintain a War for
the securing of the Calvinists liberties, jointly with the Lutherans, which the
Swedish undertook to do: and although at the pacification of Munster, in the
year 1648. the Protestants have carried it and gotten it settled by a statute
Law of the Empire, viz. that the Rights of both Lutherans and Calvinists, and
their liberties, shall be equally secured and upheld in the Germane
Territories; yet it is manifest, that not only the Emperor ever since has
persecuted the Protestants more then ever before in his Hereditary Lands, and
that neither at the following Diet at Ratisbone, nor at the meeting of Deputies
from all the States since held at Franckfort, nothing has been ratified which
was concluded at Munster, to the advantage of the Protestant Cause; but the
whole matter of that treaty relating thereunto has rather been made
disputable, and is hitherto without effect, and will henceforth be made void;
because the Pope having declared that whole Treaty prejudicial to the Church,
and consequently null: The zealous Papist is bound not to keep it, though sworn
to it, seeing he has dispensed with his Oath, it being against the public
good of the Church. Thus although the Swedes did constrain the House of Austria
to a peace with the Protestant party: yet they will but watch for their
opportunity to break it with advantage as soon as they can, so that it is very
manifest, that the House of Austria having gotten their ends to have the
imperial dignity continued in their Family, this Emperor no doubt will still
prosecute his design to bring the Protestant States under his and the Popes
subjection, and to make himself absolute in the Empire: nor is there any humane
possibility to prevent the future prevalency of the Austrian absoluteness, and
the effect of the Papal league therewith for the extirpation of the Protestant
Party, but by removing the causes of that weakening and unsettlement which has
hither to befallen unto them, which are none other but their want of
concurrence and hearty Correspondency in a common interest for common safety
and Gospel liberty. If therefore this concurrence, and the Correspondency in
religious matters, which is to be the true ground thereof, cannot be procured
nor maintained amongst Protestants; it is apparent that the Cause will be lost,
and that henceforth without a miracle (which we have no special promise to hope
for in this case,) no safety can be hoped for to secure and preserve the
Protestant States in Europe; seeing they are not only in Germany, but out of
Germany also; not only divided and shattered in their Counsels without any
Correspondency for a common aim, but even falling out one with another, and
fiercely breaking one another strength, which divisions the enemies seek with
industry to foment, as is apparent in the constitution of affairs, wherein the
Dane with the Brandenburger are engaged against the Swede, to make the
Protestants ruin one another in favor of their common enemy.

Therefore such as can foresee this eminent danger (and every one that is
rational cannot but foresee it) and such as can disdern the only remedy
thereof to be such a Religious Correspondency as is here sued for; and yet are
not willing to set this remedy a work for common safety: it is evident that
such are not only unfaithful to the cause of Religion, but in their hearts
deserters and betrayers of the common Interest of Protestants, which God
certainly will call them to an account for, if he has betrusted them with means
fit to uphold the same for his truths sake: for God does give a Banner to his
people for his truths sake; and to whom the Banner is given, they are bound to
display it, Psalm. 60.4. but how to display it without some Religious
Correspondence toward a concurrence in the work of common edification, is not
Imaginable; and therefore such a Correspondency is absolutely necessary.

If the disadvantages which Protestants lie under at this time for want of a
mutual Concurrence in their common Interest, should be reckoned up in
particular, this discourse might be enlarged into a great Volume; but this is
not suitable to my scope, and needless at this time; it will be sufficient to
observe, that whereas heretofore in the Empire, the voices in the Electoral
College were equal, viz. three Protestrants, and three Papists; and the War
was raised for the casting voice; namely that of the King of Bohemia, whether
the Protestant of the Papist should have it: now it is apparent that the issue
is not only a determination of that voice, to be Hereditarily annexed unto the
House of Austria, but that in the other voices of that College, the P pists
have gotten four for three, so that in the Supreme sphere of the Empire, the
Protestant party is wholly weakened; and if (as there is cause to suspect) that
the Prince of the Saxon Electoral House, may turn Papist, then it is likely the
five Papists will cast out the two remaining Protestants, Brandenburg and
Palatin, which are so weak already that they can make no defense, if any
assault should be made against them.

As for the other disadvantages both within and without the Empire, there is
scarce any great Protestant Family, but the Papal industry has gotten some
branch of it to graft it upon the old Stock; by which means all manner of
instruments are prepared to divide and break them within themselves: as
formerly the Emperor Charles the Fifth, brake the Saxon Family by setting
Maurice against John.

In France, all the places of Security which the Protestants had, are taken
from them, and that which in former time the Roman French Church rejected as a
prejudice unto their liberty, is now received and admitted, viz. the Council of
Trent, which the Papal Conclave, and the House of Austria have made a yoke to
be imposed upon the necks of all States throughout Europe: and who ever will
not submit unto it, is to be cut off. Thus both in Germany and in France, the
design of suppressing the Protestant profession, is strongly carried on; and
there will be no possibility to hinder it in humane appearance, but all
appearance to hasten it, if there can be no Religious Correspondence set a foot
amongst the heads of the Protestants to concur in thoughts which should advance
the Gospel, and settle the grounds of common unity in God's way for their
mutual preservation. Such then as are betrusted with the public management of
the affairs of Protestants, and make it not any part of their work to advance a
Religious Correspondency to this effect amongst them, when they have the means
in their hand, and ability and opportunity to do it, will have much to answer
before God. Therefore such a Correspondency is absolutely necessary to be
intended and maintained; not only for the advancement of the Truth of the
Gospel, in serving Christ with one shoulder against Antichrist; but in respect
of outward safety, and the securing of our Natural and Spiritual Rights and
Liberties, to our selves, to our Brethren, and to our Posterity.

Of the Engagement of the State.
HItherto I have reflected upon the reasons which should induce the Godly
professors in these Nations to intend the duty of Holy Communion and
Correspondency amongst themselves and with their neighbors, for the
manifestation of the Truth of the holy profession and the maintaining of
Christ's Kingdom un animously in this our Generation; now it remains to show
how far they are engaged beyond others in this work, and that the State it
self as Christian is not free from this engagement, but ought to mind it and
advance the work in a leading way; for if it has been made out convincingly
both upon spiritual and rational grounds, that not only for the advancement of
Christ's Kingdom in the world, but also for the outward safety and preservation
of the Churches which from within are undermined and from without are
assaulted, a Religious Correspondency is absolutely necessary for them. Then an
enquiry may be, and ought also to be made further, of two things.

First to whom the procurement of this Correspondency does chieflly belong.

Secondly, how it may be procured and maintained amongst the Churches, and to
answer in general terms these Questions I conceive we may say thus.

That the procurement of this Correspondency, does chiefly belong to those who
stand most in need thereof for their own welfare and safety, and who have most
eminently engaged themselves to undertake the procurement of it. And that the
way to procure it amongst the Churches, Phil 2.4. Heb. 10.24.
can be none other but a Christian endeavor to live and converse with other
professors in the Communion of Saints, which is not to look to our own things
alone, but that every one should look also to the things of others; and in the
consideration of others, to provoke them unto love, and to good works of a
common concernment.

Thus much in general: but then to answer the first Query in particular; I
conceive it may be truly said;

That the Godly Party living in this Commonwealth, does stand in more need of
this Correspondency for the welfare of their Cause, and for their own safety,
then any o her Churches do; and that the same Party, together with the State,
has more eminently engaged it self toward God and men, to undertake the
procurement of this Correspondency, then any other State or Churches have done.
And to make out both these assertions to be truths, I shall briefly offer
these considerations,

First in respect of the need which they stand of it; it is in my apprehension
thus.

The Godly Party of this Nation with the State has been led forth in a
peculiar way of acting against the world, and against Antichrist, which others
have not been acquainted withal.

This acting has set them in opposition, not only to the world and
Antichrist, in a more direct way then others, but also put them at a distance
from their Brethren themselves; who partly by reason of their weakness, partly
for want of that information which we should have given them; partly because
they have been prepossessed with false and injurious informations against us,
and have been for the most part so offended at us, that they have scrupled very
much, and many still scruple to own us as Brethren, and look upon us rather as
Apostates from the Cause, and separate from all Relation toward other
Protestants in their esteem we are a new thing, start up and standing alone by
our selves. Now to be in such a condition, seems to be for us very unsate, for
if our enemies be able without any control, to represent us unto the world,
and to the Professors of the Gospel, as giddy and unsettled men, fit only to
distribute and not build any thing; and if we take no thought how to vindicate
our Cause from false aspersions toward our Brethren, and toward men of
impartial judgment: the Cause of Christian and civil liberty which we have
undertaken and maintained hitherto, cannot prosper, but must needs at last
miscarry in our hands. For the prosperity of the Cause, is nothing else but the
gaining of Godly men's affections at home and abroad to it: and if we make no
Application to our Godly Brethren and neighbors, to set them right, and inform
them of the truth of our Cause and proceedings, and to interest them to
Correspond with us upon a Gospel account; how can our proceedings be
successful? how can our Cause be justified? and how can we promise safety to
our selves, when our professed enemies, together with our misled neighbors,
shall jointly conspire and rise up against us? I know, and am confident that
the cause will prosper in God's hand, and that he will carry it on, and
preserve the Instruments thereof, who follow him in his way; but I do not see
any ground to believe that he will do it without the ordinary Gospel-means of
propagating the Truth, and of maintaining the Communion of Saints. If then he
does intend to preserve us, and to make use of us any further in this his work,
I am very confident that he will set us in the way whereunto he has promised
to give a blessing, which is the way of brotherly love; in a Religious
Correspondency toward the rest of the Churches professing his name in the
Truth. By how much then our undertakings are more resolute and destructive to
the course of the world, by so much they are the more difficult to be carried
on; and therefore we stand the more in need of the help and concurrence of the
Godly, every where to carry it on with us to a good issue. And by how much our
present leaders in the cause are less interessed in the Godly Party a broad; by
so much if they desire to provide in God's way for the success of the Cause,
and for their own safety therein: they should the more apply themselves to
advance a Gospel-interest toward all the professors thereof; and maintain with
them to this effect, a Religious Correspondency therein. For as a man that is
in a fight, does not make use of any one of his members alone; but all the
members of his body are set in a posture to concur, and supply mutual strength
as standing in need of each others help: so in this conflict of the body of
Christ against the powers of the World, and the subtilty of Antichrist; as all
the Churches are aimed at and assaulted, so they stand in need of one another
help; and that part of the body which is most violently assaulted, stands
most in need of the assistance of the rest for its safety. Now it is without
all doubt, that the Godly Party of this Nation, is most in the eye of the
enemy; and when the universal breach (which is near at hand) between
Protestants and Papists shall be made, it will be most violently put at;
therefore it does stand most in need of help, and is bound for its own safety
in a Gospel-way to endeavor to receive it.

But the matter of danger wherein we are more then others, is not the only
reason which does oblige us to procure this Correspondency more then others;
but the engagement which lies upon the Godly Party and the State it self of
this Nation more eminently then upon others to procure it, is another
obligation binding us thereunto.

This Engagement is eminently apparent in three Declarations of the State.

First, in the Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, published by the
Parliament, Anno, 1641.

Secondly, in the National League and Covenant of both Kingdoms.

Thirdly and lastly, in the Declaration of the Parliament published the 12 of
July, in the year 1653.

In the Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, at the latter end thereof,
the Clause obliging the Godly Party which then did manage Public affairs, to
mind a Correspondency toward foreign Protestants, is expressed in these words.

We will labor by all offices of friendship, to unite the Foreign Churches
with us in the same Cause; and to seek their Liberty, Safety, and Prosperity,
as bound thereunto by Charity to them, and by wisdom for our own good: for by
this means our own strength shall be increased, and by a mutual concurrence to
the same common end, we shall be able to procure the good of the whole body of
the Protestant Profession.

This is as solemn a promise, fully and expressly obliging them to seek this
Concurrence and Correspondency, as can in so few words be expressed.

In the National League and Covenant, the last words thereof engage also deeply
those that did swear it, to desire affectionately as in the presence of God,
and consequently when opportunity should be to endeavor sincerely this.

That the success of our proceedings, may be deliverance and safety to all
God's people, and an encouragement to other Christian Churches groaning under,
and in danger of the yoke of Antichristian Tyranny, to join with us in the same
or like Association and Covenant to the Glory of God, the enlargement of the
Kingdom of Chrict, and the peace and Tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms and
Common wealths.

This profession being made in presence of God, with a hand lifted up unto
Heaven by the Godly Party of both Nations, as it is conscionably to be minded;
so it cannot reach the End for which it is made, to give an encouragement to
other Christian Churches, to assert jointly with us their Gospel-Liberty,
except we endeavor to maintain a Religious Correspondency with them.

In the Declaration of the Parliament of the year 1653. the address is made in
express terms: To all God's people as well in Neighbor Nations as in this, the
professions are more zealous and a^ge to this effect, then any of the former.
For they declare a great expectation of the breaking forth of the Kingdom of
Christ in all the earth, they manifest their faith and hope to this effect:
That God will not suffer his people here to deal falsely with him in his Cause,
till he has accomplished his great work, and brought about his great ends: And
thereupon they make an earnest prayer, that God would unite their hearts to
himself, that they may be one amongst themselves, and with all the people of
God, who are members of the Body of Christ; and that they may be fitted and
used as Instruments in the hand of God for a more full and clear revealing of
the Lord Jesus, and a right promulgation of the blessed Gospel, and the true
interest of his Kingdom, and the advance thereof, that oppressing yoaks may be
broken, and all burdens removed; that his Tabernacle may be fully raised up,
and his Temple built by his Spirit, that all his people may have one lip, one
heart, one consent, one shoulder to bow down and worship him; that the envy of
Judah and Ephraim may be taken away, that they may be one in one fold with one
Shepherd; that the Swords and Spears may be turned into plough shares and
pruning hooks, and the earth filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as the
waters cover the Sea.

Now where such profession are so solemnly and so largely in a public way
addressed unto God, and all his people in this and in Neighbor Nations, and
made in a manner the chief matter which was aimed at in that National Assembly
of the States in Parliament; what can be conceived more obliging toward the
undertaking of the work? If therefore we should put forth no endeavors to
perform this Duty, whereof we acknowledge our selves so fully convicted, by so
many Professions, and Vows, and Prayers, and Declarations; will it not be a
guilt lying so much the heavier upon us in the day of our accounts, by how much
the more we have engaged our selves unto it. Certainly God will not be mocked;
and if after so many Protestations in times of distress, and Deliverances
since obtained, and Successes given in to enable us to perform our Vows and
Engagements; we should undertake nothing toward the discharge of this duty,
which lies so eminently upon us, our guilt will suddenly overtake us, and the
punishment thereof, if not prevented by some attempts suitable to our
Engagements, will be fearful and severe.

Therefore that it may be prevented, the second Query should be laid to heart,
viz. How a Religious Corrospondency may be procured and maintained between the
Godly Party of this Nation, and the Foreign Protestants.

But to Answer this Second Query before any resolution appear, that the Duty of
Correspondency will be intended, seems superfluous if not preposterous; it
will then be seasonable to speak of this thing when some shall be deputed to
take the matter into consideration and undertake the management thereof.

In the mean time let me take God and all that are Godly in these Nations to
witness, that I have herein not been wanting to my duty, but have discharged my
conscience in faithfullness to the Churches and to the State of these Nations,
concerning this great concernment, if others who ought to mind it without
partiality no less seriously then I do discharge not their Duty in their
places, when called upon, and when the opportunity does require their
concurrence, the fault will lie so much the more heavily upon them, by how much
they have been more earnestly pressed to mind their Duty: Nor can any pretense
be alleged why it should not be done at this time without any delay, Is it not
now seasonable, yea necessary, that we should lay the animosities and interests
of parties aside, to embrace a Gospell-Interest? and is the Gospell-Interest
any thing else, then that all who have received the Truth which is after
Godliness, should own one another in that whereunto they have attained? and
walking by the same Rules mind the same thing? which is the end of the
Cammandement to serve one another through love, out of a pure heart, out of a
good Conscience and out of Faith unfeigned. Why may we not all declare that
whereunto we have attained? are we not bound to give an account of the Faith
and hope that is in us? should we not cause our light to shine, that others may
see it, and glorify our Father which is in heaven? what should then hinder a
concurrence amongst us, to advance the Profession of our unity in
Fundamentalls, and in the Rules of mutual edification? Verily I am not able to
conceive any thing except it be a leaven of jealousy; and the animosities,
which the divided parties as well for State Interests, as other outward
concernments, have fomented amongst themselves hitherto; Now the Lord persuade
us to give up our desires to him, and teach us to drown all prejudices in his
love, by subordinating all our private concernments unto the great concerment
of the Kingdom of Christ which is Righteousness, Peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost, for he that serves Christ in these things (says the Apostle) is
acceptable to God and approved of men: Romans 14, 18, 19
therefore (says he) Let us follow the things which make for Peace and things
wherewith one may edify another. I believe that all who are Godly in all the
parties are grieved to see the viciousness of the times, and indeed who cannot
but lament to find that the deliverance, and the liberty which the Lord has
miraculously bestowed upon us to the end we should serve him, according to our
Vows and Promises made in the time of our distress; are now turned into
Licenciousness, so that no where is so much excess of Riot and Wantonness, with
Pride and Coveteousness, with oppression and deceitfulness, as here in England;
where nevertheless the Gospel is more purely and more powerfully preached then
in any other Protestant Churches of Europe; it is true that the members of the
several Congregations are not guilty of this,, because their overseers look
after them, and they are liable to censure if they misbehave themselves: but
these members of Congregations make not up the Body of the Nation, and the
dissolute unruliness of the common sort, and of all that will exempt themselves
from being under any Discipline is without restraint by reason of the scandals
of the divisions and distances whereinto professors are fallen. So that their
want of unity in upholding the ways of Godliness, has opened a door to all
disoluteness to break out upon the face of the Nation; and it may be truly said
but not without grief, that if any one abstain but from giving Scandal on the
Lord's day, he may be in all other things as ungodly and profane as he will:
Now to remedy the exorbitancy of the disorderly walking of those that belong to
no Congregation; for whose sake the name of God, and the holy profession is
evil spoken of amongst the adversaries; were it not expedient that the Godly
of all parties, should agree at least in this amongst themselves, to recommend
the care of reforming such abuses unto the civil outhority; for seeing such as
belong to no Congregation, but live as Atheists in the World, fall under the
inspection of those whom God has entrusted with the Government of State, it
would be very suitable, to the zeal of those that are Godly wise, to entreat
jointly the authority which God has established over all the public
concernments of the Nation, to Regulate the conversation of such as walk
without any control in all manner of Lascivioness and disorderliness, and who
knows but that the concurrence of all parties in this desire, might by God's
blessing give an overture to concur and correspond in other matters also
relating to his Kingdom to remove other scandals which break forth amongst the
Professors themselves; which I hope the Lord will grant for his name sake, and
therefore shall not cease to pray that the God of our salvation who has been
wonderful in Counsel and excellent in working for us, who has plucked us as a
brand out of the fire and turned the Counsels of our enemies and Achitophels
into foolishness, who has caused light always to shine out of the dark clouds
which have covered us, who has brought us by his Almighty arms as upon Eagles
wings unto this settlement wherein we are, and who has done all this not for
our sakes but for his own Holy name sake that it might not be profaned amongst
the Heathen; I say my prayer is and shall be that this God of our mercies,
would pardon all our unthankfulness for the blessings bestowed upon us; and
that notwithstanding our unworthiness he would graciously perfect the work of
Reformation begun, which sticks so much upon our hands, for he it is alone who
can work all our works in us and for us; he it is who also will do it. O Lord
our God are not thy gifts and graces without Repentance? art not thou the same
from Everlasting to Everlasting and changest not? have thou not in our deepest
backsliding when we were even returning into Egypt and when our leaders caused
us to err, rescued us out of their hands, and set us in a large place as at
this day? and will thou do all this to no other purpose but to destroy us?
Shall the dead whom thou do cast off in thy wrath praise thee? and when thou
have brought us to the door of a saving Reformation and given us a desire to
enter into it, will thou suffer it to be shut upon us? will thou suffer the
enemy after so many glorious manifestations of thy presence at last to say
where is now their God? where is he in whom they have trusted? Truly we have
trusted in thee, and still we have none in Heaven but thee and in earth we
desire none besides thee; there is none else to be trusted into: for besides
thee there is no Savior, nor refuge in time of trouble. But we like Jesurun
are grown fat, and have kicked; we have forsaken the Rock of our salvation, we
have rebelled and vexed thy Holy Spirit, we have forgotten our Vows, we have
turned thy grace into wantonness the liberty obtained into licentiousness, the
Gospel of Peace into contenciousness; the Truth into formality, and the unity
of the Spirit into division and singularity: Therefore the Interest of thy
Kingdom, which is our only strength and glory has been lightly esteemed and
neglected; self interests have been followed; and from thence the fruit of our
own animosities, strife and envies have overtaken us. What shall we say O Lord
our sins do testify against us; we are ashamed to look up unto heaven and our
confusion does cover us; if thou had not bestowed the richest of thy graces
upon us, or if we were ignorant of our duty, our guilt would not be so heavy,
but herein is our sin exceeding sinful, that we do talk of thy Counsel and
will, more then all the world besides, and yet do little or less then any to
fulfill it; for hitherto all have sought their own, and few or none the thing,
of Jesus Christ; fewer do seek him for his own sake only, yet be has sought
us, and that for our sake even then when we were his enemies. O the depth and
hight of thy love! What shall we render, what can we return to thee again?
Shall we not love thee still, shall we not rely upon thy mercy: seeing we
know that there is mercy with thee that thou may be feared? O then let not
our hearts be hardened any more from thy fear, but let us now draw near unto
thee, upon the account of Jesus Christ who has loved us and washed us in his
own blood, let us find access at the throne of Grace, to receive not only
merciful forgiveness for what is past, but supply of present help in this time
of our need.

Help us to a true Gospel frame and settlement within our selves, through love
to thee, to thy Truth and to each other without partiality.

Help us to advance thy Kingdom in the Communion of Saints toward all thy
Churches abroad, whose outward safety is wrapped up in our Peace and settlement.

Help us to mind the oppressed for the Truth's sake, being willing as thou
shall enable us to bear their burdens.

Help us to mind thy ancient people the seed of Abraham thy friend, and the
remnant of the Gentiles till the fullness thereof come in.

Help us to oppose effectually all Tyrannical and imposing powers and
practices of Antichristian subtilty, by the lifting up and maintaining of the
Standard of Christian liberty and Truth according to the Gospel. and to these
effects.

Let the Spirit of wisdom and counsel, of strength and courage, of all virtue
and grace in the fear of thy name; rest upon the head and heart of him whom
thou have set over these Nations to govern them in Righteousness.

Let the same Spirit dwell and preside in the great counsel of these Nations,
that they may with one shoulder unanimously concur to heal our breaches, to
join unto thee, to settle a lasting Reformation of all our disorders in
Judicatures, of all public scandals amongst professors; of all defects and
corruptions of Piety and Learning in the Seminaries thereof, whether in the
Universities or in inferior Schools of common education.

Let the Magistrates in all places be found faithful to their trust and the
Ministers of thy Word be as thine own mouth to thy people and shining lights
before them in the beauty of Holiness.

Let the Armies by Sea and Land sight always under thy Banner, and being
faithful unto thee and thy Cause for the relief of the oppressed, go thou
before them as their Captain with thy presence, and let thy Glory be their
reward.

And lastly, let all the people of these three Nations from Dan to Bersheba be
owned by thee as thy people: and enjoying thy Ordinances in the Purity thereof,
the unclean Spirit and those that use a rough garment to deceive the simple,
may be cast out; and Peace and Truth many continue with us so long as the Sun
and the Moon shall last. Grant according to the riches of thy grace these and
all other things subservient thereunto for the sake and in the Name of Jesus
Christ thy Son and our Savior to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost be given
all praise and glory for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.
A Postscript To the Christian READER.
TO fill up this Page which otherwise would have been empty; I shall impart
unto thee an extract out of Sir Edwyn Sands his Book called Europae Speculum:
or a View of the State of Religion in the western parts of the world, page 183,
with my observation thereupon.

He says thus. The end (of these unhappy differences in Religi n between the
Reformed and Lutheran Protestants) will be that their enemies shall laugh, when
themselves shall have cause to weep, unless the graciousness of God stir up
some worthy Princes of renown and reputation with both the sides, to enterpose
their wisdom, industry, and authority, for the uniting of these factions, or
at least wise for reconciling and composing those differences in some
tolerable sort; a work of immortal fame and desert, and worthy of none other
but of them, of whom this wicked base world is not worthy.

Sir Edwyn has been a true Prophet in this matter; the enemies of the Truth
have had cause hitherto; and have new cause to laughed at both our
Ecclesiastical and Civil divisions, and to hope thereby for our ruin: and I
cannot disprove the remedy which he proposes, namely that some Princes of power
with both sides should interpose either to unite the parties, or at least to
allay their differences; I say this endeavor of Princes is not to be
dis-owned; only I would have this caution added, that their endeavor in doing
this should not be so much Authoritative and Magistraticall as Christian and
Evangelicall; if then they and their Counselors could without Political ends
and Interests in true simplicity and Christian sincerity take the work in hand;
to follow it as becomes those that serve Jesus Christ in his Gospel-way, to
lead men to the principle, of love, of moderation, and mutual forbearance,
there might be hope by their means to effect something in the work. But
hitherto their interposing has been very little effectual because the
jealousies of States have been and are such amongst those that manage the
affairs of the world; that for the least difference upon any circumstantial
punctillio of greatness they either fall out or at least break off all
concurrence in common designs. And if at any time they do concur in settling
matters relating to Conscience, they then as States mea in Au hority, impose
them, in a way wholly inconsistent with Gospel liberty; which can never hold
where the light does more and more break forth: For this causes: whole
difficulty does lie in managing the Spirits of men with Christian meekness to
gain them to their duty, which is

First, wi lingly to declare that whereunto they have attained and wherein they
agree with others.

Secondly, faith fully engage themselves to observe the Rules of inoffensive
walking notwithstanding such differences as are exstant among, them, if these
things could be attained (not by any command but by a loving persuasion) from
each party, the work might be done both there and here; where we have as much
need of healing as any where else.


