A Brief RELATION OF That which has been lately attempted to procure
Ecclesiastical PEACE amongst PROTESTANTS.

Published, by Samuel Hartlib.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by I. R. for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Green Dragon. 1641.

Sir Edwin Sands in his Book called Europae Speculum, or a view of the State of
Religion in the Western parts of the World, Page 183.
THe end (of these unhappy differences in Religion, between the Reformed, and
Lutheran Protestants) will be that their enemies shall laugh, when themselves
shall have cause to weep, unless the graciousnesse of God, stir up some
worthy Princes of renown, and reputation with both the sides, to enterpose
their wisdom, industry and authority, for the uniting these factions, or at
least wise for reconciling, and composing those differences in some tolerable
sort: a work of immortal fame, and desert, and worthy of none other, but of
them of whom this wicked base World is not worthy.

A Brief RELATION OF THAT WHICH HAS BEEN LATELY ATTEMPTED TO PROCURE
Ecclesiastical PEACE amongst PROTESTANTS.
THE purpose of soliciting a Roncilement amongst Protestants in matters of
Religion was first undertaken, and afterward prosecuted after this manner.

When in the year 1628* John Dury was in Prussia Minister to the English
Company of Merchants residing at Elbing, he was sent unto, dealt withal, and
moved by Dr. Godeman a wise, godly, and learned man, one of the King of Swedens
Privy Counselors, and Judge of his high Court in those parts, to second him in
a business of Ecclesiastical Unity amongst Protestants, which he said, his
King and Master would be glad to advance. So good a motion being readily
entertained, it came to pass afterward, when Sir Thomas Roe was sent
Ambassador Extraordinary by his Majesty of great Britain, to agree the Sweds
and Polonians (which also he did successefully perform) that both Doctor
Godeman, and Master Dury did make him thoroughly acquainted with all the
passages of their negotiation. Whereupon he according to that generous
disposition, which does lead him to favor all good endeavors of a public
nature, did very willingly assist them with Counsel, and at Master Duryes
entreaty, conferred with the Lord Chancellor Oxonstiern, to see how far he
would show himself in the business, and what course might be resolved upon to
proceed jointly to the effect thereof. The Lord Chancellor manifested a good
liking to the work, and promised to my Lord Ambassador to join effectually
therein toward his King, and the Lutheran Clergy of his best acquaintance.
Upon this ground, my Lord Ambassador encouraged Mr Dury to proceed, and when
his Lordship was gone into England, the Lord Chancellor sent for him, heard his
particular proposalls, conferred with him about the same, testified his
willingness to give assistance thereunto, and desired Mr Dury to give him
information of the passages of the work in time to come, so he went from Elbing
into Engl. in the year 1630. Chiefly, because his Congregagation at Elbing was
dissolved by reason of the inconveniences which war had brought upon the
Trade in that place; and because Sr Thomas Roe had promised to move the chief
Prelates in England to assist him in the work of pacification. Being then
arrived there, he first acquainted his most familiar friends of the Clergy with
his purpose, and showed them some declarations written by the chief Preachers
of Dantzigh to make it appear, that they were not only ready to join in such a
negotiation, but also desirous and in hope that the Divines in England would in
like manner concur; which being done, he came to Sr Thomas Roe, who was
mindful of his promise, and became every way as good as his word toward him.
For he recommended the business toward the Kings most Excellent Majesty; who
was pleased to refer the consideration of this matter to my Lords Grace of
Canterbury, and to the Bishop of London, that they should hear Mr Dury, and
declare their resolutions to his proposalls. This was done accordingly. And he
was commanded to write unto the Divines of his acquaintance in Prussia, and to
the Lord Chancellor Oxonstiern, to testify first the good inclination, and
resolution which the Clergy of England had, to cooperate in due time toward so
good a work. Secondly, that their Council for the present was only this, that
to prepare a way for future treaties, the Magistrates of both sides should
inhibite railing disputes in the Pulpit, and put down the names of partiality,
so far as could be done, and not suffer any debatements to be taken up or
fomented about matters of Ceremony in the form of public worship.

This he did, and after a good space, when news came, that the Protestant
Princes in Germany had leagued themselves together for their mutual defense,
and that an amiable conference of their Divines had been holden with good
success at Eeipzigh to compose the differences in Religion, Master Dury was
permitted to go into Germany, that he might see how the Divines of all sides
might be disposed toward a Conjunction of Counsels, and endeavors in the
work.

To make away for this purpose, he had before hand through, Sir James Spense
Lord of Oreholm, and General to the Scottish Nation, in the Swedish Army,
given notice to his Majesty of Sweden, what his aim was in the business of
Reconcilement, and how it might be effected: Therefore when he came in the year
1631. into Germany, he found the King somewhat prepared, whom soon after the
Battle fought at Leipzigh, he spoke withal at Wirtsburg. His Majesty was
pleased to give him large audience, and by conference received full information
of all those deliberations, and particular ways, whereby the work could be
prosecuted, of which, the Sammlary resolution whereunto his Majesty gave
assent, was this. That the Council given by the Reverend Prelates of England
was to be followed, for the inhibition of disputes, and partial names: and
that as Master Dury did intend to labor with the Divines of the Reformed side
to dispose them, to join unanimously in the means, and ways of amity, so his
Majesty would recommend the same endeavors to be undertaken, by some Divine of
the Lutheran fide, who should in like manner work upon the rest of their own
party, and afterward when a fit preparation should be found on both sides, then
His Majesty did offer to give unto Master Dury his Letters of Public
Recommendation toward the Princes of Germany, and chiefly toward the Elector
of Brandenburg, and Landgrave of Hessen, that with his and their concurrence,
and the Help of foreign Divines, the business might be brought to a solemn
conclusion. This favorable resolution being taken, Mr Dury dealt first with
the Divines of Hessen, then with those of Hanaw, and of the Palatinate, and of
Deuxpont, and of the Wetteraw, till he heard the King of Sweden was dead, which
evil news, although they made a stop in some part of his resolutions, yet they
made him not leave the same, but altering a little his course, he procured from
all the foresaid Divines certain Letters and Declarations, whereof some were
inscribed to my Lords Grace of Canterbury, some jointly to him and to the Lord
Bishop of London, whereby they showed their serious intention to labor for
unity, with a desire to be assisted by the Church of England.

Whiles this was a doing Sir Robert Amstruther arrived as Extraordinary
Ambassador from his Majesty to the Princes of Germany. With him Master Dury
(having now gained the consent of the Reformed party, and thinking it fit to
deal with the Lutheran side also) went to the meeting of the Protestant States,
which was appointed at Heilebron to frame an Evangelicall League. There he made
use of some Lutheran Statesmen to insinuate to the Divines of that side certain
propositions, which made known unto them his purpose. This first motion was not
without effect toward many and chiefly toward those of Strasburg, and
Norimberg, and some in the land of Wurtenburg. The meeting being ended, and the
League framed at Heilebrone, he returned from thence toward the quarters of
Franckfort, and dealt with two superintendents Doctor Dunner who was set over
Mentz, by the Lord Chancellor of Sweden, and Doctor Leisering who had the
inspection of Darmstat, and with the Senior Pastor of the City of Franckfort,
Doctor Tettelbach. All these were brought to recommend the work unto their
Brethren, and in the mean time the Churches at Paris, Geneva, Metts, and the
University of Sedan sent their answers (for Letters formerly had been written
to them) wherein they assisted Master Dury with Council; Some also of the
Lutheran side declared in like manner a forward zeal and inclination to the
work, by certain Writes imparted to that effect unto him. Therefore when a
larger opportunity to work more effectually upon all, was offered by another
meeting of the Protestant States, which was appointed at Franckfort, he thought
good to make his intention known unto the convocated Ambassadors, and desired
their assistance to further the same, whereupon a resolution was taken to this
effect;

``Whereas Master Dury having desired of Confederate Evangelicall States,
permission to treat with the Divines and Pastors of their Churches concerning
the means of Peace Ecclesiastical; Although the Ambassadors then present had
not gotten any particular instructions concerning this matter from their
Principalls, yet nevertheless their opinion was, that if the Lord Chancellor
Oxonstiern would by his authority advance this matter, that their Masters who
wish from their hearts for this Unity, will be so much the more ready with all
their endeavors to give assistance thereunto, according to the beginning made
at the Conference held at Leipzigh, whereunto the Lords States, who are now
present, in like manner unaminously do compromitte.

Having gotten this approbation of the Work, and recommendation thereof by the
States unto the Lord Chancellor; and being much encouraged by the private
promises of assistance, which the several Ambassadors from all parts made
unto him, he thought fit to write Letters to all the Lutheran Universities, and
to those of the Low Countries to acquaint them with his purpose of seeking
Unity in matters of Religion. Which being done when afterward another meeting
was in agitation to be held at Erfurt in the Spring, he thought it fit (because
he was minded to return in the mean time for England) to move the Ambassadors
of the Palatinate, of Brandenburg, of Deuxpont, and of Hessen; in case that any
meeting should be held before he could come back again, that they would be
pleased to set amongst themselves some course, how this matter might be
prosecuted thereat, lest so good beginnings might be without effect. They
consented to this motion, and met to consult about the matter. The effect of
their resolution was this, That they would labor, in case a meeting should be
called, to cause insert in the Letters Invitatory this clause,

``That every one of the Princes would be pleased to bring along with him a
Divine or two, instructed and authorized by his Churches, to give advice about
the means of procuring unity, and composing differences in Religion; and if
the States should not meet there, that nevertheless in time, and place
convenient, some particular convocation of their own Divines should be brought
to pass, wherein these two points should be put to deliberation.

First, Whether, yea, or no, the Acts of the last Conference held at Leipzigh,
should not be received by all the Churches, so far as they contain an
agreement of the Articles of the Confession of Ausburg?

Secondly, Whether, yea, or no, the heads wherein a disagreement may be yet
remaining in that Conference, cannot admit of a Reconciliation; if yea, what
that Reconciliation may be; if no, then it is to be inquired, whether or no,
those remaining differences of opinion be of such importance, that by reason of
the same, a Schism should be upheld betwixt the Churches.

These things the Ambassador, and Chancellor of the Elector of Brandinburg did
take upon him to set forward by the means of his Prince. So then Mr. Dury went
through Holland (where he saluted the chief Divines to whom he had written out
of Franckfort, and some others of his acquaintance) and arrived at London about
the end of the year, 1633. There he found D Laud, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury
in his Predecessors place. Therefore the Letters and Declarations of foreign
Churches and Divines were presented to him, with a brief Narration of more
particular proceeding. All was well liked, and resolution agreed upon, that Mr.
Dury should proceed, and return again into Germany, which that he might do with
greater advantage to the work, he dealt before his departure with the Reverend
Fathers in God, Doctor Morton, Lord Bishop of Durham, Doctor Hall, Lord Bishop
of Excester, and Doctor Davenant, Lord Bishop of Salisbury, who gave him
certain Theological declarations for the advancement of his purpose. To which
effect, he also wrote into Ireland, to the Most Reverend Father in God, Doctor
Usher, Lord Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of Ireland, and to the two Lord
Bishops of Kilmore and Ardach, who in like manner did afterward jointly assist
him with their advices to the same end. In the mean time letters were sent also
from Helvetia, and from Norimberg, giving such testimony of concurrence, as
were fit to encourage him to proceed. For which cause also when he was ready to
go back again into Germany, my Lords Grace of Canterbury gave him in answer to
the Letters which he had brought from the German Protestants of both sides to
him, two letters, the one to be communicated unto the Reformed, the other unto
the Lutheran party, wherein he did acknowledge the receipt of their Letters, and
moving them to proceed in the good purpose which they had undertaken, he
promised in due time his further cooperation therein. With these Declarations,
together with a Recommendatory letter unto Sir Rob. Amstruther, who was then
Ambassador for his Majesty in Germany; Mr. Dury went from London to Hamburgh,
where he found Sir Robert waiting for a new Commission to go for Franckfort;
And whilst his Lordship stayed, he took occasion to acquaint the chief Divines
of that City in their Consistoriall meeting, with his negotiation, who having
promised to join endeavors, he went from thence toward Franckfort, to a great
and solemn meeting of the Protestant States, where he arrived in my Lord
Ambassadors company in June 1634. There he dealt in particular, first with his
best acquaintance, and then made a proposition in general to the assembly;
thereupon the States were moved to depute out of every College, some to take
his business into consideration. These came together, gave Mr Dury audience,
received informations of the Circumstances of this work, and perused several
declaratory writings, which diverse Universities and Divines of both sides in
Germany, as also out of Germany in foreign Churches, as England, France,
Helvetia, and Transylvania had given to him, which moved them to take the
matter into serious consideration, and make a decree whereof the heads are
these.

First, ``That Master Dury having been heard by a solemn Committee, and the
Writs which he produced, taken into consideration by the rest of the States,
all of them with unanimous consent, did judge his Work most laudable, most
acceptable to God, and most necessary, and useful to his Church, yet seeing it
was of great and weighty consequence, and that many of the Ambassadors had not
received any instructions thereabout from their Masters, therefore no final
resolution could be taken by them at that present, but that they would
faithfully relate and recommend these businesses unto their Masters to bring
them to some effectual resolution.

Secondly, That others which had received instructions from their Principalls,
about the matter, had proposed two ways of proceeding in the work, some
thought it expedient, that the manner of proceeding which Master Dury had
suggested unto the States, should be followed in bringing a Conference of
peaceable Divines to pass, that a Fundamental agreement in points necessary
for salvation, according to the Example of the Conference held at Leipzigb
might be settled; And that to this effect, the States of the four Upper Circles
should give up unto the Prince Elector Palatine, their more particular advices
toward the furthering of the matter, and that the Declarations of the two
Saxon Circles should be given up to the Elector of Saxony and Brandinburg, who
then should agree amongst themselves concerning the time and place of a
Meeting, which might be named unto the rest, and afterward Invitatory Letters
should be sent to foreign States and Princes to move them to send thither also
some of their Divines. Thirdly, That others thought it no less expedient to
proceed thus; Namely, that the Electors of Saxony and Brandinburg should be
entreated by the States, then met together, to reassume the amiable Conference,
which was begun three years ago, betwixt their Divines, and those of Cassell,
and to this effect that (if not sooner, at least then) when the Treaties of
Peace Universal should be set on foot, a meeting should be appointed,
whereunto peaceable Divines on both sides, both within, and out of the Empire
should be called: In which meeting this should chiefly be aimed at, that an
agreement should be made in a Common Confession of Faith containing all the
Fundamentalls of Religion necessary for Salvation, setting other points of
Scholasticall dispute aside.

Fourthly, That the Ambassadors who had no instructions did promise to relate
unto their Principalls, their advices, and procure fit resolutions thereupon,
which should be sent unto the Civil Electors, professing the Protestant
Religion.

Fifthly, Moreover, that it was fully consented unto by some, and by some taken
ad referendum, that in the mean time all Christian moderation was to be used on
both sides, as well in Preaching, as in Writing; lest if this was not done, some
hinderance might befall unto their Unity, and being done by this means, the
Civil Peace also might so much the more be advanced.

Sixthly, That Prayers were to be conceived in the Churches of both sides, to
entreat Almighty God to bless these attempts.

This was made an Act the fourteenth day of September, 1634. To which the seal
of those which had the direction of the meeting was applied, and all the chief
hands did subscribe it.

Of this Act, the Original, sealed and subscribed, was given to Master Dury,
to enable him to testify authentically to other Churches, the resolution of
the Protestant States, that thereby all well-willers unto the work might be
encouraged to continue in setting it forward. Upon this ground he went again
toward England through the Low Countries, where he informed the Divines of his
acquaintance, and the Deputies of the Provincial Synodes of things past at
Frauckfort, and elsewhere in these consultations, obliging them thereby to take
the matter to heart. And when he arrived into England, My Lords Grace of
Canterbury being informed of all matters, did by Sir Thomas Roes procurement
recommend him to the King, who was pleased in taking more particular notice of
his person, and work, then in former time, to permit him still to proceed. To
which effect he went over again into Holland, with His Majesty's Letters of
safe Conduct; with a testimonial from my Lords Grace of Canterbury, bearing
witness that Master Dury had acquainted him with the success of his
proceedings, that he went again out of England to prosecute the same business,
not only with his knowledge, but also with his approbation, and assurance that
he would be ready in due time, to advance (...) holy desires of Peace. He had
also private Letters from Doctor Davenant Lord Bishop of Salisbury, and Doctor
Hall Lord Bishop of Excester, to some of the chief Divines of the
Low Countries, to move them, to concur more effectually in these endeavors,
then they had formerly done. Moreover, he had Letters from the Ambassador of
the Lords States of the Low Countries, residing at London unto the States both
of Holland and Zealand. Thus he set forth, and arrived at the Hague in July,
the year 1635. There he dealt first with the States of Holland, to induce them
to recommend these thoughts unto their Provincial Synod which was then begun.
Afterward he went to those of Zealand, and appeared in their Classical
meetings held at Walcheren, Zirickzee, Tolen and Goes, then he dealt with the
University of Leyden, and the Synods as they came in order; namely, with that
of North-Holland, and of Vtrecht, and with the French Synod in those parts,
from which Declarations were obtained, fit for the advancement of his purpose:
When he had thus far proceeded in Holland, and found that evil affected
minds toward Peace, raised ungrounded surmises against him, to stop the good
inclinations of impartial men, he used means to clear men's judgments, by
causing somethings to be Printed for the better information of all. And having
understood that the Lord Chancellor Oxonstiern was to go from Germany into
Sweden, where he hoped that his Lordship would do more then in Germany he was
able to do. For the work of Peace, at the persuasion of some friends, he took a
journey thitherward, where he arrived in June, Anno 1636. Nor was he altogether
disappointed of his expectation. For the Lord Chancellor coming thither
favored his work, and although his proceedings were slow, yet much realitie
was found in them. For when a resolution was taken to permit Master Dury to
treat with the Diviaes of that Kingdom, four places were named Stockholm,
Vbsall, Westerose, and Strengnese, to which he might address himself
particularly, and lay open his intention, having therefore first dealt with
those of Stockholm, he had the Lord Chancellors Letters to make way for him, at
the other places: of which the University of Vbsall was the chief. There he
had conference both Collegially and severally with the Professors of Divinity,
who gave full assent unto his desires, and set down these conditions, upon
which they were ready to agree, and join with the reformed side.

1 `` That a full agreement should be made in all the fundamental Articles of
faith. 2 That all errors overthrowing the foundation, or tending to overthrow
the same, should be condemned. 3 That in matters Ceremonial and of
indifferency, there should be a mutual toleration. 4 That betwixt the parties
united sincerity and uprightness should be maintained, lest ancient errors
might be upheld under doubtful speeches. 5 That when peace is made, none should
be suffered to maintain, excuse, or spread any more the errors once condemned.
6 That ambitious and needless disputes and brablings should be inhibited on
all sides. 7 That former reproaches and injuries should be put to oblivion. 8
That the Church government should be settled according to Apostolical Rules.
These demands the rest agreed unto, neither was any thing of moment added
thereunto by any. Therefore being returned back again into Stockholm, and
having informed the Lords Regents of that which was past, thoughts were
entertained about the first, and the last of these conditions, as the chief of
all the rest, namely, concerning Fundamental Articles of Faith, and the
establishment of Ecclesiastical Government; Touching the first, namely, how to
limitate the number of Fundamentalls, and distinguish the same from Not
fundamentals, Mr. Dury did impart a brief discourse unto those of Vbsall, to
which they made no reply, as being loath to go too fast, before they should
have the consent of their Brethren; yet silently they assented thereunto.
Concerning the second, because they then were, as even yet at this time, they
are in deliberaration to settle their Ecclesiastical Government, by Cannons,
which they are about to make. Therefore both the Dean of the Faculty of
Divinity at Vbsall, the Queens Tutor at Stockholm, and the Lord Chancellor
conferred several times with Mr. Dury, about that matter, to know the
Constitutions of the Chief Reformed Churches, wherein he labored to give them
satisfaction; and imparted also unto them the printed judgments of the English
Prelates, Doctor Morton, Doctor Davenant, and Doctor Hall, which besides some
other public Treatises of the same nature, were communicated unto them. But
the Lord Chancellor being desirous to confer more particularly, and at leisure,
with Master Dury, about all matters belonging to the further advancing of the
work of pacification, took him along in his company and Coach toward Vbsall,
in a Circuit which he made thitherward from Stockholm, through Strengnese, and
Westerose. In this progress the the Bishops of Strengnese and Westerose, were
dealt withal the second time. They settled good resolutions, and laid grounds
for constant future treaties; so far, that they had thoughts of sending some
body into England; Nevertheless, before matters could be brought to full
maturity, some of the German Lutherans hearing large reports of Master Duries
proceeding in Sweden, and being moved with jealousy that the Swedes would come
to some public Treaties, and therein to a Conclusion without them, did
expostulate the matter, and by letters endeavored to dissuade them from all
further entertaining of his motions, by which means their spirits were
troubled, and their resolutions so clogged, that from that time forward, they
went heavily to work; yet Master Dury hoping to overcome all such letts, did
not leave the work, but labored so much the more to engage them to it, by
showing ways free from all exception, whereby the differences which they did
stick at, might be composed. This he did first at Vbsall, and afterward at
Stockholm, in a meeting of the chief Clergy, which was commanded to deal with
him, wherein he gave them satisfaction to all their demands, in a whole days
conference instituted to that effect, so that they seemed to acquiosse. And
because they had laid this as a main ground, That if a Fundamental agreement
could be found in the Doctrine of the Lords Supper, they would not much stand
to debate other matters. Therefore not long after their conference, he offered
to the Archbishop and professors of Vbsall, a learned and Patheticall
Declaration, which from the University of Aberdeine, and Ministry of Edinburg,
was sent unto him, to show the fundamental agreement of Protestants in that
point. At this Declaration some small exceptions were taken, in respect of
certain forms of speeches contained therein, which Mr. Dury having fully
explained, and thereby resolved their doubts, those of Vbsall did rest
satisfied, but some others there were, who, having set themselves professedly
against the work, would, by no means, receive any content. For, the more
humbly, and discreetly, it was offered unto them, the more they sought to avoid
it, and labored by all means to cry down, and discredit the very purpose of
agreement, lest the good liking which the Lords Regents did show thereunto,
might take some real effect, and work upon the spirits of the common Clergy,
a good impression to give way unto it: This their perverseness being fully
apparrant, moved Mr. Dury to deal in some kind more strictly with them, than
otherwise his inclination would have suffered him to do: yet at last, to avoid
occasions of strife, he resolved to depart from thence, and let the business
lie a while asleep; but lest some unconscionable men might falsely traduce all
his proceedings in his absence, as then already in his presence they had begun
to do, by misinforming others, of his words and actions, and misinterpreting,
suspiciously, his aim, he caused to print, (before he went away from thence) a
Summary, and true Narrative, of all his chief actions and proposalls, which he
offered to the Clergy of that Kingdom, met in a Convocation. And afterward, to
the end they should have no just cause of false surmises, or pretext to traduce
his intentions, he made a solemn Vow to bind himself to lawful purposes and
unblamable ways of proceeding, which he put to Paper and presented to the Lord
Chancellor to be imparted unto the chief of that Clergy. These preventions
being used, when he was resolved to be gone, the Lords Regents were pleased, in
the Queens Name, to give him a Declaration, and dimissory Letter, whereby his
actions in Sweden were approved, bearing witness that Master Dury being come
into Sweden to dispose the minds of their Clergy unto the work of Peace
Ecclesiastical, according to the grounds laid by the States of the Empire at
Franckfort, Anno 1634. he had dealt by permission and command of her Majesty,
with the chief Divines of that Kingdom; and although some difficulties were
risen, as in weighty matters is usual, yet that he had not omitted any thing
which could serve for the taking away of the same. Thus he went from Stockholm,
Anno 1638. and came to Lubeck, there he had speech with Doctor Hunnius, one of
the chief Divines of those quarters. Him he prepared to entertain the motion of
Peace, which afterward should be made unto him. From Lubeck he set forward
toward Hamburg to meet Sir Thomas Roe who there was residing as Ambassador
Extraordinary from His Majesty of great Britain toward the King of Denmark,
and Princes of Germany. To him he gave attendance, all the while he staid in
those parts, not leaving his former purpose, but rather using the advantage of
his Lordships favorable countenance.

In this new period of the negotiation, he went slowly to work, first because
he looked toward the Swedes, how they would behave themselves after his
departure; Secondly, because he waited for some overture to begin, and make
some Proposalls at the public Treaties of Peace in Germany, which then was
thought upon by reason of the Emperors Ambassador, who was come to those parts,
and the Mediators which did offer themselves toward that negotiation. But when
those Treaties were not likely to proceed, he went to Bremen, that he might
acquaint the Divines of that place, with his former proceedings, and gain in
time to come their assistance by way of Council. These were very cordial in
the business, and entertaining him with all kindness, and liberality (which
no Germans before them had done) such encouragements, and declarations were
given, as he could desire both from the Clergy, and Magistrate of that City.
Then he proceeded toward the King of Denmark, who was at Gluckstad, There with
the good liking and countenance of my Lord Ambassador, he acquainted the Lord
Chancellor Ravent^low with his desire to deal with the Clergy of Denmark. If
His Majesty would give him leave so to do. His Majesty gave way to his demands,
and was pleased to recommend certain Writs (which his Chancellor received from
Master Dury) unto the consideration of his Divines of the Universitie of
Coppenhagen.

These gave their judgment, and advice concerning his negotiation, tending to
show their approbation of the purpose, their particular Counsel, and
Proposalls in prosecuting of it, and their willingness to treat further about
it, with Master Dury, if his Majesty would give permission thereunto.

The King caused their judgment to be delivered to Master Dury; who thereupon
did accept of the offer of their Treaty, and gave them a large Answer to all
their propositions containing diverse overtures toward a constant progress in
a Theological way of Treaty. Unto this answer, by His Majesty's Command, they
gave a further declaration of their judgment; whereunto Master Dury having
replied, and showed His Majesty a brief, and ready way to come to the purpose,
the King was pleased to write unto my Lord Ambassador, to let him know that he
thought it fit, Master Dury should be more particularly authorized from
England, before the matter could proceed betwixt him and his Divines to any
issue. Whiles these matters were thus in agitation, Master Dury dealt also with
the Magistrates, and Ministry of Hamburg, and Lubeck, and with the Most
Reverend, and Most Illustrious Archbishop of Bremen, who gave him a reference
to some chief Divines, who entertained his motions with very good liking, and
gave him an answer to the same. In like manner he made Proposalls to those of
Stood, who took the same into mature consideration, and promised to concur
with others in answering. At last he went to those of Brunswick, and Luneburg,
where, with the singular favor of those Princes, and by the most pious and
peaceable inclinations of their Counselors, and chief Divines, toward the
Work of Reconcilement, a ground was laid for a very effectual progress. For
they have made the Work their own, undertaking to dispose the rest of the
Lutheran Churches, and Universities, unto a real concurrence in it, that
afterward they may proceed with our Churches, jointly, to a full conclusion.

Duke Augustus of Brunswick was the first to whom Master Dury made his
address: this learned, and wise Prince, was pleased, in favor of the Work,
not only to convocate his chief Divines, and appoint them, with some of his
Counselors of State, to confer Collegially, a whole day with Master Dury,
but also to settle a resolution, which his Divines subscribed, obliging
themselves thereby, to join in all the ways of agreement, whereof they had
conferred together; and moreover, to recommend the matter to his Cozen Duke
George, by a large, and most effectual Letter.

With this address he came to Duke George, residing at Hildesheim, where he
had no less, but rather more favorable entertainment then he had gotten at
Brunswick. For, by an Act of Council the chief Divines, who then were in
place, were appointed to visit and entertain him, till others that were sent
for should come; And when the chief of them were come, Master Dury was lodged
and entertained with him in one house, at the Princes charge, for the space of
fourteen days, that they together might ripen matters, and bring their
thoughts to a head. Which being done, a Committee of some Counselors of State
was appointed to give them public audience in the Prince His name, to hear
them confer upon the matter of agreement, to consider their Councels, and joint
resolutions, and to make relation thereof unto the Prince, that by his
authority, and Countenance, such assistance might be given to the Work, in due
time, as should be thought expedient. All which being done, first, the Divines
gave to Master Dury, a Theological Declaration, wherein they testified their
agreement to all his Proposalls, and then their more particular resolutions,
concerning the manner of proceeding which they would follow in the future
advancement of the Work on their part, were also imparted unto him. The
substance whereof was this.

That Doctor Calixtus chief professor of the University of Helmestat should, by
order of the Prince, put forth some Treaties, wherein the heads of matters in
dispute amongst Protestants should be handled Historically out of Antiquity, to
show what the Church of all ages has believed thereof, and how,
notwithstanding some difference of opinion thereabout among the Ancient
Fathers, Brotherly love was always maintained. These Treaties should be thus
improved; First they should be sent unto the Lutheran Universities of
Wittenberg, Leipzigh, Iena, Marpurg, and Rostock, and also to those of
Brandenburg, Hessen and Bremen, to move them to declare their judgments
therein for mutual agreement. Then, at some fit occasion some body should go
to Leipzigh and Wittenberg, and deal with the Saxon Electorall Professors by
word of mouth, to dispose them to a full resolution in this business. To which
effect also the Prince should move the two Dukes of Saxon Weymar, Duke William,
and Duke Ernestus, who have long wished for this Reconciliation, to cause their
University of Iena to cooperate therein; And in process of time, when the
business should be brought by this way of proceeding, to some considerable
ripeness, then it should be required, that from great Britain, and elsewhere,
some body might be joined to Master Dury, and also from Germany some body
should go into England, and other parts, to speak with the chief Divines of
those Churches* that when there should be good hopes of bringing the matter to
pass, then the Sovereign Princes and States of all sides should be entreated
to agree upon a meeting, to make some conclusion in the matter: for the good
success whereof, public prayers should be made with common consent in all the
Churches.

These resolutions being taken, when the Prince himself had spoken to Master
Dury, and given him assurance of his willingness to set forward this purpose,
he did dismiss him with a recommendatory Letter unto his brother, Duke
Frederick, residing at Zelle, who in like manner received Master Dury very
kindly, and moved his Divines to confer with him. In this conference, when
they had received satisfaction to some doubts which were proposed, they gave
consent unto all which was concluded at Brunswick and Hildesheim. From Zelle he
went to the free City of Luneburg, where he acquainted the Ministry of the
place with his Proposalls made unto other Churches, that they might also take
the same into their consideration, and in due time, with consent of their
Protector, Dr. Frederick, resolve what to do therein.

Thus the Circuit of Brunswick and Luneburg being finished, he returned to
Hamburgh in February, An. 1640. from whence without delay he went toward my
Lord Ambassador, Sir Thomas Roe, who was at Gluckstad, with the King of
Denmark, to give him account of all the passages of his proceedings. There he
also dealt further with the Lord Chancellor, Detloff Raventlow, and the King
himself was pleased, upon my Lord Ambassador his recommendation, to give him
access to kiss his hand, and in presence of his Son, the Archbishop of
Bremen, to speak with him about the setting forward of his purpose. In which
discourse, his Majesty showed a good liking to his proceedings, and gave way
that, if he thought fit, he should make new proposalls, touching means of
Reconcilement, unto his Divines, that they might have further occasion to
entertain these thoughts as well as others. Hereupon Master Dury did impart
unto the forenamed Lord Chancellor, a paper, containing certain heads, fit to
be Theologically consulted upon by them, that their resolutions touching the
same, might in due time be framed, and also made public, if they themselves
thought it expedient. Thus the Treaties at Denmark being again set on foot, he
returned from Gluckstad with my Lord Ambassador toward Hamburg, and gave, by
letters, information into England, concerning all matters of moment, which
passed in his work. Then also some writes, presented formerly unto the Divines
of Denmark, were made public, that many who desired to know the passages of
that negotiation, might have satisfaction therein. Not long after, my Lord
Ambassador was recalled from Germany into England, about which time the private
disputes amongst those of Bremen were come to some height: for those that were
most inclinable to moderation, suffering wrong, had sought Master Duries
advice, and desired his help to compose their doubtful questions. Therefore he
sent to some of the Prelates of the Church of England, and some of the
Professors of Divinity, in both Universities, certain Writs, which the chief
Divines of Bremen submitted unto their judgments, containing the true state of
their difference, which reflecteth much upon the main controversy debated
betwixt the reformed, and the Lutheran Divines; therefore the decision thereof,
will be a singular preparative for the common and more public Unity of all
Protestants. To these Writes, the Lord Bishops of Salisbury, and of Exceter
have already given their answers, and the rest to whom they are sent, have
promised to do the like, who, no doubt, will be as good as their word; In the
mean time Master Dury ripened, somewhat, matters toward the Lutherans, and
endeavored to smooth the knottinesse of the Clergy of Hamburg and Lubeck.

For, finding some warping of their intentions, which he perceived would bend
another way then was expedient; he dealt first with Doctor Hunnius a leading
man at Lubeck, and then with the Senior Preacher of Hamburg, that when these
two should be set in a right way, the lesse-knowing and more clamorous Clergy
might be more easily persuaded, and wrought to admit the thoughts of
moderation. As for Doctor C. lixtus, although some men of strife, and evil
willers to him, did undertake to disturb him in these peaceable thoughts, yet
being strongly countenanced, by Superiors, he has begun to perform his
promise, giving Master Dury full assurance of his constancy, and of the
concurrence of many others toward the furtherance of the same Counsels. And
because the opposition made against Doctor Calixtus, by his Brethren, was like
unto that which the chief Professors of Bremen suffered by their Brethren,
Master Dury conceived that the similitude of their cases, might be a motive to
induce them to mutual correspondency, in the work of Reconcilement. Therefore
having gotten the Original Writes which Bishop Davenant, and Bishop Hall sent
to those of Bremen, he went thither, to deliver the same, and confer with
them about the matter, whereunto he found them exceeding well inclined. In the
way going thither, he dealt with one Statius Buscherus, Doctor Calixtus his
chief opposer, endeavoring to mollify and withdraw him from some preposterous
courses: and coming back again, he stayed a whole day at Bremervorde, the
Residence of the Most Illustrious and Reverend Archbishop of Bremen, with whom
he had twice occasion of large conference, tending to give him satisfaction
(which he also received) concerning some doubts, which he had conceived of the
Work. From thence passing through Stade, and having insinuated unto the chief
Preacher of that place Mr Haveman some writes tending to Pacification, he
arrived at Buxtehude, where he met with Master Scholvinus the Pastor of the
place, a learned and moderate Lutheran Divine, whom he confirmed in a course of
conference, and correspondency, begun with Doctor Bergius at Bremen, toward
the ripening of matters belonging to Pacification.

Then being come back to Hamburg he made himself ready to return for England:
And to this effect took his leave of the Magistrate, and Ministry of that place:
some of the Magistrate were very earnest with him to persevere in the
prosecuting of his work, and the Ministry gave him their answer in Writ,
showing that they were willing to proceed; first by way of private
correspondency in writing, and then by way of public meeting, when things
should be ripened. Before he went from Hamburg he sent by Sea to the chief
Prelates, who in England had assisted him, a Treatise, which Doctor Calixtus of
Helmstat, had written in behalf of the work, that they might declare their
judgment unto him concerning the same. Then he passed again through Buxtehude,
and Stade, where he confirmed Master Haveman and Scholvinus, in their
resolutions to moderation, and dealt again with Statius Buscherus, to take off
the edge of his spirit against Doctor Calixtus. At Bremen he stayed fourteen
days, to print an Information directed to all the Reformed Churches,
concerning the Councels of Peace, whereunto the Lutheran side does give way,
that if the same find on the Reformed side in like manner approbation, the
business may be in due time set forward by public authority. From Bremen he
went to Oldenburg, where he dealt with the Superintendent of that place, and by
his means presented to the Earl of Oldenburg, that which was fit to give him
information of his work. From thence he came to Embden, where he stayed certain
days, to insinuate the printed Information unto the Divines, both of the
City, and of the County. At Groningen he did the like: from whence coming to
Amsterdam, he conferred with the chief Divines of his acquaintance there, and
sent to all the Presbyteries (which they call Classes) of North-Holland, and
neighboring parts; so many copies of the printed Information, with adjoined
letters, as were requisite to be imparted unto them. From the Hague he did the
like unto all the Presbyteries of South-Holland and Zealand, and of the
neighboring places, as also to the Synods which are to be held in every
Province. Thus having given satisfaction to the chief of the Low Countries, and
used means to send information from Amsterdam into Helvetia, and from the Hague
into France, he came to Zealand, and took Shipping for England: Where he safe
arrived, and purposes to make suit now unto all those that are able to give
assistance unto so good a business, but chiefly to supplicate his Sacred
Majesty, and the High and Honorable Court of Parliament, that those good
preparatives, and hopeful beginnings, so far, and with so much pains advanced,
may not be suffered to fall, without profit, unto the ground, through want of
all outward countenance, and help necessary to uphold such a Spiritual Agency.
All parties have been dealt withal, their dispositions are sufficiently tried
and discovered, their Leaders are all engaged to concur, neither has any of
the foreign Churches taken offense at the carriage of the work: but every
where, the Princes and Counselors of State have professed a great deal of
liking thereunto. Therefore it ought to be kept afoot, and upheld in the
spirits of men for many pregnant reasons, which elsewhere are alleged more at
large: But now we will mention only this, that as we are bound in Conscience,
at all times to maintain the care of Brotherly love, and holy Communion, in
Spiritual things, so now, at this time, we find it absolutely necessary, even
for our own temporal safety so to do, because if this care be not taken to
heart, it is most certain, that the breaches of Protestant States and Churches,
which have made many of them a prey unto their enemies, will, in the end,
betray them all, and at last come to such a height, that they will devour and
consume one another. Therefore all true-hearted Protestants, that are zealous
for Gods glory, and the safety of his Church, but chiefly those that are in
authority, or credit, able to dispose others; are humbly entreated to embrace
these thoughts without partiality, considering the Apostles exhortation, Phil.
2. 4. That every one should not look on his own things, to seek himself alone,
But, that he should also lay to heart the things of others, and chiefly such as
may tend most unto public edificacation. For if we be commanded every one of
us, Romans 15. 2. to please our Neighbor for his good to edification: then
surely we ought far more to labor to please all, in that which is best. And
if every one ought to do this, then most of all those that are eminent in
place, and in credit with others: For to whom does this duty rather belong,
than unto such. As then the work ought not either to be agitated without the
knowledge and consent of Superiors in Church and Commonwealth, or to be
publicly afoot without their authority, so they are called and appointed to be
Builders of the house of God, before all others, and this is the cause why thus
we sue unto them, and would have all such as love the welfare of Sion, to
second our suit. For what can be conceived more useful to the Church of God at
any time, than the Councels of Peace are at this time? Nay, what is more
necessary to prevent all manner of confusions, and disorders now growing upon
all the Churches, than this endeavor is? Therefore again and again, all men of
gifts ought to be entreated, for the love which Christians should bear unto
Christ Jesus their Savior, for the respects due unto the Commandments of God,
for the comfort which the Gospel of Truth is able to yield unto their own
souls, for the bowels of Compassion, which they ought to bear unto the
afflicted Church of Christ (their Spiritual Mother) and for the fear of Gods
dreadful Indignation, and stretched out hand, now ready to fall upon those,
that presumptuously despise, and carelessly neglect his express Commandments:
I say, that all men of gifts, for these causes ought to set their hearts upon
the Counsels of Peace, and employ their Talents for mutual edification, in
showing the means of Brotherly love, of meekness, of righteousness, of
humility, of mercy, and moderation, for the enlarging of the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ, whose love does constrain us to propose, in this manner, these things
without all humane respects, and makes us earnest with freedom (as not being
ashamed of our duty) to press the matter thus home, upon the Conscience of
every one in his distinct charge and place, that at least, such as have any
feeling of godliness, and know what the power of Religion requires in our
public Profession, should not want some Spiritual provocation, and awaking of
their hearts toward the performance of that, which is required in the
Communion of Saints.


