A SUMMARIE PLATFORM OF The heads of a Body of Practical DIVINITY, Which the
Ministers of the Protestant Churches abroad have sued for, and which is farther
enlarged in a Treatise entitled, An earnest Plea for Gospel-Communion, etc.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Wodenothe in Leaden hall-street, 1654.

The Copy of a Letter written by Doctor Usher, the Primate of Armach, to
Master Dury, concerning the Publishing of this Body of Practical Divinity:
according to the premised Model.
Master Dury,
I Am glad that you are still willing to take some pains about the procuring of
a body of practical Divinity, a work which I have long wished for, and which
formerly my heart was in, and my hand would have been in, if God had been
pleased to continue our Peace; for when you brought over the Letters from the
Foreign Churches, wherein they made it their Request unto us, to Gratify
their Churches with some Endeavors about the Compilement of this Work, which
were seconded by a Letter from the Ministers in and about London unto me, when
I was in Ireland, many years ago, I was very glad of the motion, and laid it
seriously to heart, and conferred with some of my Brethren about it; that we
might bring the work to some Perfection. Doctor Downam the then Bishop of
Londonderry, was a man whose studies were much bent that way, for which cause
it was referred to him, and he readily did undertake the task, to draw up a
Model or Platform according to which that Systeme or Body might be Compiled,
that the Ministers who had written to me, might be able to choose their tasks,
and set themselves awork about it; this Model he promised to send unto me to
revise it, before it should be imparted to the foresaid Ministers, that in our
joint name it might be sent unto them. But he either for want of health, or
some other impediments did not expedite the Work before his death, and when the
troubles of Scotland did begin, which had some Reflection upon us in Ireland:
and I being come over hither, he the Bishop of Derry being dead the troubles of
Ireland taking fire at the Proceedings of the then Parliament here, and the
great Distractions of this and the other two Nations increasing ever since; I
could not do what was desired of me, and what I heartily desired might have
been done, and wish yet may be done: for it will never be too late or
unseasonable to set upon such an enterprise; if therefore by your solicitation
and pains you can oblige those that in the Universities, or in and about this
City, are able and willing to undertake it, I think you will do a work very
acceptable to all that are Godly, and Profitable to all the Churches at home
and abroad. Let me therefore entreat you to proceed, that whiles there is any
appearance of doing good to our Generation; we may not neglect the opportunity.
As for the Model of the Heads which you have showed unto me, I shall advise
this, that the Precognitions may not be insisted upon largely; but as briefly
and substantially as may be; and if some References be made unto such Authors,
as handle the heads of the Precognitions more at large, it may give
satisfaction to such as will be more curious and desirous to see things amply
handled. Secondly, my advise is; that the work may be contracted to as few
hands as may be: who may meet and confer together about it, when they are
perfecting their tasks. Thirdly, I would not have the Work too large and
voluminous, for several reasons, yet as full of matter as can be; and where
enlargements may be thought useful, references may be made to such Authors as
use them most effectually. Lastly, concerning the Cases of Conscience which
should be handled in this Body, I think they may be brought in and inserted
under every head of matter whereunto they belong. This is for the Present that
which I would suggest. I pray God direct and assist you and all those that go
about it; and what I shall be able to do toward the Encouragement of able
Workmen therein; you may be confident shall not be wanting from

Your loving Friend, Ja. Armachanus.
From my Study, the 14th. of December. 1653. The Direction, To my loving Friend,
Master John Dury, these.
A SVMMARY PLATFORM Of the Heads of a Body of Practical Divinity.
BY the Body of Practical Divinity is meant a full and orderly Collection of
all Divine Truths, relating to the Practice of Piety, to be digested into a
Systeme, or some other kind of Book.

The Scope then of this Book should be to hold forth the whole Doctrine of the
life of Godliness, in an exact description of all the Precognitions, Principles
and Parts thereof; with a Resolution of the material doubts which may be
incident thereunto.

This Doctrine may be delivered two ways:

One way Positively, by holding forth the undoubted Truths, as they are
Demonstrable from their proper grounds.

Another way Doubtfully by resolving all the Cases of Conscience which are
raised thereupon.

The Positive Doctrine will be complete, if it deliver three things.

First, the Precognitions which are to be presupposed, that it may be
acknowledged, that there is a life of Godliness. Secondly, the Principles which
are to be received and believed, that the life of Godliness may have a being,
and be entertained in the soul. Thirdly, the Parts which are to be wrought out
in the whole man; that the life of Godliness may be powerfully, effectual in
all his faculties and ways.
Of the Precognitions.
The Precognitions are certain Truths, which presuppose a man only to be
rational; and are to be made out unto him as such; therefore they must not be
deduced and offered unto him as Scriptural Oracles, but as Conclusions evinced
from the grounds of sound reason, and may be referred to six Heads.

1 That there is a Supreme Power over all things visible and invisible, which
amongst all men is called God. 2 That this Supreme Power is to be feared,
worshipped, and glorified by man. 3 That this Supreme Power is a Rewarder of
those that seek after him with fear, to worship and glorify him. 4 That the
Writings of the Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles in the Old and New
Testament, are the Word of God. 5 That these Writings were given to teach men
the true way to seek after God by Fearing, Worshipping, and Glorifying him. 6
That there shall be a time wherein God will judge men according to the Works
wherein they have or have not Feared, Worshipped and Glorified him.
Of the Principles.
The Principles are certain Truths which presuppose a man to believe that the
Scriptures are Gods Word, and upon this supposal, this fundamental position is
to be made out, which is the root of all the Principles of Godliness, viz.

That in the Scriptures God does hold forth a Covenant to be entertained
between himself and men, which being believed, two things are afterward to be
delivered from the Scriptures.

First, how the Covenant is revealed therein. Secondly, how it is made and
confirmed with men.
Concerning the revealing of the Covenant in the Scriptures, the Doctrine of
the Canonical Books (which are the only true instrument of the Covenant) as
they are distinguishable from the Apocryphal, is to be delivered; where two
things are to be made out.

First, what the true Characters of Canonical Scripture are; and that the
Apocryphal Books have them not. Secondly, that in the Canonical Books, the
Truth and Covenant of God, is held forth by Divine Authority Infallibly,
perfectly and evidently.
Concerning the making of the Covenant, two things are to be held forth from
the Scriptures.

First, what the Tenor of the Covenant is, which God does make with men.
Secondly, what the Motives are which oblige men in conscience to entertain it.
Concerning the Tenor of the Covenant three things are to be opened.

First, who the persons are concerned in the Covenant. Secondly, what the form
of the contract, and the terms of the agreement are, between these persons.
Thirdly, what the performance and accomplishment is of that which is contracted
and agreed upon.
The Persons concerned in the Covenant are God, Mankind, and Jesus Christ.

God is considered here as he is the Author of the Covenant, and as such only
revealed, and to be known by us.

Mankind is considered as he is bound to depend upon God by a Covenant.

Jesus Christ is considered as he is the Alone Mediator between God and man by
a Covenant; in respect

Of his twofold Nature; as being both God and man in one person; and
consequently a true Medium and center of all Gods and men's properties.

Of his threefold Offices as being the great Prophet, the High Priest, and the
only King of all Saints in heaven and in earth.

Of his twofold state of life, the first of Humiliation on earth; the second of
Exaltation in heaven; and the works of his Mediation between God and man in
both estates.

The form of the contract and the terms of the agreement are to be opened in
showing two things: 1 That the manner of Gods contracting is with none directly
and properly, but with his only begotten Son; and with mankind only in, by,
and through him. 2 That the things promised by God and the terms upon which
they are promised, are distinguishable, First, as the promises are made to
Christ. Secondly, as they are made to the believers in him.



And lastly, as they are made to the professors of his Name.

The performance and accomplishment of that which is promised and agreed upon
to be done on all sides, is to be opened in two things: 1 How Christ by his
obedience and sufferings having performed all that he did undertake toward God
for mankind; did by his death make over all the promises of the Covenant by way
of Testament unto such as believe and profess in his Name; that from him by
Faith they might become theirs directly and properly. 2 How the Father by his
power and glory made good unto Christ all his promises, by raising him from the
dead, by setting him at his right hand, and by giving him all power in heaven
and earth to administer his own Testament by sending forth the Holy Ghost; for,
through, in and by the preaching of the Gospel: And in this Administration of
the Testament of Christ by the Spirit in the Gospel there is to be opened 1 A
general call given, and an offer of Grace made by Christ on Gods part unto all
that hear the Gospel. 2 A particular application of Grace dispensed according
to Gods own will, whereby the terms of the Covenant are made good,



To all believers, by their effectual calling and conversion unto God, and by
their constant perseverance in grace unto the end.

To all professors, by their gathering of themselves together into one body,
and by their mutual edification and growth through the unity of the Spirit, and
the communion of holy duties.

The tenor of the covenant being thus opened, the Motives which are powerful
to oblige men's consciencies to entertain the offer, and keep the tenor
thereof, are to be delivered, and may be reduced to three heads. viz.

1 To the happiness which in this life befalls to those who are in Covenant with
God. See Psalm. 25.10. 2 To the obligation which lies upon the consciences of
men to obey Gods Commandments and his calls. 3 To the condition wherein men
shall be at the day of Judgment.
When these heads are handled which concern the making of the Covenant; then
the Truth concerning the confirmation of the Covenant is to be opened, to which
head does belong the Doctrine of the signs annexed unto the administration
thereof amongst the professors; where two things are chiefly to be insisted
upon.

1 How they are instituted and appointed by God, to be outward means to assure
us of his meaning; and to seal up the realty of his working and effecting the
tenor of the Covenant in the inward man. 2 How they are to be used by us, that
we may be confirmed in Grace thereby, and receive the effect of that for which
God has appointed them.
Hitherto the Doctrines have been mentioned, which relate unto the principle of
the life of Godliness which is the Covenant of Grace; now follow the heads of
Doctrine which contein the parts of this life, which are two:

The one containing the substantial, the other the circumstantial life of
Godliness.

The Substantial life is the power and practice of all the truth, whereby God
is enjoyed in the Covenant; and the Doctrine thereof may contein two parts. The
first should hold forth the Material parts of the life of Godliness distinctly.
The second the formal union of these parts in the whole man conjoyntly.


The Material parts of the substantial life of Godliness, make up the inward,
and the outward man of God.

The inward man of God is the New Creature, whereof the Doctrine to be
delivered should contein these heads: 1 What the Regenerate state of the soul
is; and how it is wrought by the Spirit of God. 2 How it is discerned and
differenced from the unregenerate state of the soul. 3 What the acts and
motions of the spiritual life are, wherein the regenerate soul has secret
fellowship with God. 4 What the deceits are of natural imaginations, of
superstitious practices, and of Satanical delusions mixing himself therewith,
whereby he does transform himself into an Angel of light, and whereby the soul
is bewitched and possessed with an unclean spirit, instead of being renewed by
the Holy Ghost.


The outward man of God is the state of life, wherein all our ways are through
the inward principle made conformable unto the heavenly calling. Here the
Doctrines are to be delivered, 1 Of self-denial, in respect of ungodliness and
worldly lusts which cleaving to our nature are fomented from without in our
flesh. 2 Of self resignation, or of offering up our ways to walk after the
Spirit; by The life of Sobriety in respect of our selves. The life of
Righteousness in respect of our Neighbors. The life of Religiousness in
respect of God. The formal Union of these parts stands in the life of universal
obedience, whereby the whole man in all his acts is inwardly and outwardly
subordinate unto the will of God, according to the tenor of his Law; where the
Doctrine of the ten Commandments should be delivered in three things.



1 In the Rules of interpreting the Commandments. 2 In the Abstract of Duties;
showing how all virtues commanded, and vices forbidden are to be referred to
the ten words of the Law given upon Mount Sinai. 3 In the spiritual watch to be
kept over ones self and over others; where the means and helps to duties, and
the signs and causes of sins are to be laid open.
The circumstantial life of Godliness is the state of the life, wherein we walk
circumspectly before God, in respect of our severrl relations and callings;
where the duties relating to the circumstances of our natural, and of our
spiritual states and callings severally and to both jointly are to be opened.

Our natural states and callings are differences by the properties of sexes;
and by the several kinds of humane societies; and the relations arising
between the members thereof.

The sexes being male and female; the works proper to each of them are to be
described, and the limits of their power and authority in their employments set
forth, from the preeminencie of the properties which are in the one above the
other.

The natural societies of men arise either from the unity of blood, or of
outward interests.

From the unity of blood there is 1 The society of man and wife to propagate
mankind. 2 The society of parents and children. 3 The society of brethren and
sisters, of kindred and allies.


From the unity of outward interests there is 1 The society of master and
servant. 2 The society of Magistrate and Subject. 3 The society of Proprietor
and Tenant.


The spiritual societies arise in the Church from the several conditions and
joint relations; 1 Of members to each other, and to their Officers. 2 Of
Officers to each other, and to their members.


Of all these states and relations the duties should be laid open as they are
prescribed in the Word distinctly.

Then the state and calling which has a respect to all sorts of societies
jointly, as being the seed-plot and seminary of all the virtues to be exercised
therein, is the state of Schools; where ought to be delivered: 1 What kinds of
Schools ought to be constituted suitable to the principles and life of
Christianity. 2 To whom the care of erecting, and reforming of Schools does
belong; and what necessity there is of this work. 3 What the peculiar duties
are of Schoolmasters and Mistresses; and of Scholars of both sexes.


Hitherto the first and positive part of the Body of Practical Divinity has
been delineated; the other part which should contein the Cases of Conscience
may be divided into two parts; whereof the first should be a general direction
how all Cases ought to be resolved: the second should be a special collection
of the most considerable Cases which ought to be resolved distinctly by
themselves.

In the general direction two things should be taught, 1 How all believers
should endeavor to resolve their own doubts according to the Analogy of
Faith, Hope and Charity, by the general principles of the Covenant; and the
fundamental Rules of duties pertaining to Godliness. 2 How Teachers or
experienced Christians should endeavor to help the weak and doubting
professors to resolve their Cases, by reflecting upon the nature of the subject
whereunto the doubt does belong; and by considering the capacity of the person
who makes the scruple, and the occasion upon which it is raised.


In the special collection of particular Cases the chief thing advisable is
concerning the ordering of them; that they should be ranked in the method,
whereby they relate unto the parts of the positive Doctrine; and as they may
from thence arise in the mind of a weak Christian; so that whether the Cases
be collected and put into one distinct part of the body by themselves, or
divided severally and dispersed into the whole body under the heads of the
matter whereunto they belong, the method may still be the same, to find them
out upon all occasions when a resolution is to be sought after.

FINIS.

