CERTAIN CONSIDERATIONS, SHOWING The necessity of a CORRESPONDENCIE in
Spiritual matters betwixt all Protestant Churches.

An especial means for effecting whereof, and healing our present breaches,
would be a NATIONAL SYNOD.

By John Dury.

FIDE JVSTVS VIVET

DEVS PROVIDEBIT

RY

printer's or publisher's device

Printed for Will. Hope, Anno Dom. 1642.

Certain Considerations, showing the necessity of a Correspondency in
Spiritual matters betwixt Protestant Churches.
THere be three heads of reasons, by which the absolute necessity of a
Spiritual Correspondencie in religious matters betwixt Protestant Churches may
be made apparent, which are these:

First, the truth of their Religious profession of Christianity does oblige
them to intend a mutual Correspondency. Secondly, the condition of the
Churches should strongly induce them speedily to settle it one with another:
And thirdly, the danger of the public states should move them to maintain it
constantly, when once it is settled.

Of the first.
In the truth of our Religious profession of it does consist; the end wherefore
God gives his graces, for which we should make use of the same, and the
means by which we may attain to this end.

The truth of Christianity consists in the soundness of the Doctrine, and in
the holiness of the life of the Professors, Tit. 1.1, 3, 8. To maintain and
advance both these, Protestants are obliged one toward another, by the
communion of Saints, whereof they make profession in the Symbol of the
Apostles. But the communion of Saints is not only the conjunction of believers
in faith, and hope, and hearty prayers toward God one for another; but also a
real endeavor to communicate the graces which God has bestowed upon every
one severally, to each other in common, by a charitable care to provoke one
another unto love, and to good works, Heb. 10.24. which cannot possibly be
done, except a Correspondency for maintaining of Truth and Holiness be
intended: Therefore such a Correspondency is absolutely necessary to be
intended; and if it be not intended, the communion of Saints is broken, and the
truth of Doctrine, with the life of Holiness, will suffer loss and damage
thereby, and God will infallibly require such a loss at the hands of those
which are causes thereof, or do not hinder it when they may.

The end wherefore God does give the graces and gifts of his Spirit, is, that
the Members of the Corinth. 12. 7. and that they should trade therewith, to
gain more graces, Luke 19. 12, 13. Matthew. 25.14. But it is no more possible to
do this, without an intention of maintaining an intercourse of Spiritual
Correspondencie, then it is possible for the members of the body, which are
not knit together by joints, sinews, and veins, to conveigh blood and
nourishment one to another: Therefore a course of Correspondencie is absolutely
necessary to be intended; or, if it be not intended, and put in practice, Gods
intention, in giving his gifts unto his Church, is not fulfilled, and he may,
and will justly deprive such of them as make no good use thereof.

The end, to which we should use Gods graces, Corin. 10.31. and our mutual
edification, 1 Corin. 14.26. and Romans 14.19. and 15.2. These two ends are
subordinate one to another: For, God cannot be glorified otherwise by us, then
by this, that we bring forth much fruit one toward another, John 15.6. and
Matthew. 15.6. because our good cannot reach to him, as David says, Psalm. 16.2.
but to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent Ones, in whom
should be all our delight, ibid. ver. 3. But it is not possible to intend this
communication of our goodness unto the Saints, by the endeavor of mutual
edification, except we use means to know one another condition, of which, the
chief is a constant course of mutual intelligence and correspondencie:
Therefore a settled Correspondencie is wholly necessary to be intended, if we
will not deprive God of his glory, and his Saints of the interest which they
should have in us by the right use of our talents.

The means by which this end is to be attained Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5, 6. Now this
endeavor, because it is the immediate effect of true charity, therefore it is
the true means of mutual edification: For only charity is that which does
edify, as may appear clearly by 1 Corinthians. 8.1. and Chapt. 13. Ephesians. 4.15,
16. Now charity cannot be maintained, except there be an endeavor to know one
another estate; nor can the unity of the Spirit be kept or sought for,
without this same care: Therefore a Correspondencie for mutual intelligence in
Spiritual matters, tending to unity and peace in the profession of the truth,
is a thing absolutely necessary to be intended by those that make sincere
profession of the Gospel; or, if they intend it not, it is apparent they
neglect a fundamental duty of the life of Christianity, because they make no
use of the chief and only means of mutual edification, wherein God is
chiefly glorified.

Of the second.
If we look upon the Churches, and consider, as we ought, seriously the
lamentable estate wherein they are, the causes thereof, and the issue which is
likely to follow, if God does not prevent the same, it will evidently appear,
that a mutual and brotherly Correspondency for maintaining of truth and peace
is most absolutely necessary to be speedily settled, for public edification of
that which is already decayed, and of careful preservation of that which is
yet entire, from inevitable ruins in time to come* And to make this clear,
the Churches should be considered, as they stand in relation one to another
within themselves, and as they relate their common adversaries, who watch over
them for their destruction.

In respect of themselves, as they stand within Manasseh Ephraim, and Ephraim
Manasseh, and these two against Judah? and what is more deplorable, then to see
all the excellency of Jacob turned to a reproach and byword amongst the
profane adversaries of truth and godliness? and the whole fruit of the
glorious profession of the Gospel of peace, to become the bitterness of gall
and wormwood to those that should reap sweet comforts and salvation thereby? is
not this most miserable and deplorable? and yet this is the very case of
Protestant Churches within themselves: for they snatch on the right hand, and
are still hungry of one another flesh; and eat on the left hand, and are not
satisfied.

Now if this evil be not remedied, it is most apparent, that they will at last
destroy one another: For, A Kingdom divided within it self cannot stand. But
to find a remedy hereunto, there is no possibility, except some course of
amiable Correspondency (which should be settled speedily amongst them) be used
for the healing of present breaches, whereby they tear their own bowels in
pieces, and for the prevention of future causes of divisions and distractions
amongst themselves.

The healing of present breaches can be but three ways intended.

The first is, by laboring to suppress injurious, notorious, and public
scandals, raised against one another, which pre-possesse the minds of parties,
and inflame them to vindicate practices more and more.

The second is, by disposing their minds toward reconcilable intentions;
which may be done by rectifying their mistakes concerning each other, by
setting them in a right way of writing, and treating of Theological matters
without passion and prejudice, and by suggesting unto them impartial ways of
proceeding, whereby a full reconcilement of differences, and the unity of the
Spirit may be by Gods grace obtained in due time.

The third is, by procuring a Synod of Protestants, wherein their Brotherly
love and reconcilement may be settled by a firm league of duties to be
intended for their inward mutual edification in future times, and for their
joint outward propagating of the Gospel unto all that are ignorant thereof.

These three ways of healing breaches, as they are most necessary, so they
cannot possibly be intended without a speedy settlement of Correspondency and
entertaining of Intelligence by some, that may make their address, and have
access unto all parties to work these matters upon them by ways void of all
exception and partiality: and therefore a settled Correspondency for mutual
Intelligence, in respect of these things, is absolutely necessary. And if it be
not intended, but slighted and hindered, certainly the guilt of the ruin of
Protestant Churches will fall heavy upon those, who give occasion to stop the
intercourse of such a Correspondency.

The prevention of future divisions and distractions is necessary to be
thought upon; not only because naturally our inbred corruption does beget in
all humane societies, but chiefly in those which concern Religion, the seeds
of strife, by reason of the pride, the ignorance, and the passion of
selfe-seeking conceits of some which trouble all; but also, because these
breaches and divisions will continually grow worse and worse, and come to the
extremity of imbitterment: so that they will be past curing in short time, if
no course be taken to stop them speedily. Now it is most evident, that no
course can be taken, except a settled intercourse of Intelligence betwixt the
leading men of the Churches be brought to pass; and this cannot be brought to
pass, without the upholding of a Correspondencie: And therefore a
Correspondencie is most absolutely necessary to be speedily settled.

In respect of their adversaries which watch over them for their destruction,
their case is very dangerous, and exceedingly to be feared. There be two sorts
of common adversaries: some are crept in from without amongst them, who make it
their work to foment their divisions, and cast in bones amongst them to keep
them at perpetual variance; as is most clear by doleful experience both in
Germany and elsewhere. And others stand without, laying new plots, if the old
should fail, and maintaining the old ones so long as they can possibly, by all
manner of Emissaries and Practices, and with much cost of Bribery and
Correspondencie, whereof a little Volume could be written, if need were, but
because this is no less evident to all that have eyes in their head, then the
Sun is at noonday, I shall not need to enlarge my self; chiefly, seeing
already something has bin written of this matter not long ago: and seeing by
daily experience the Practices and Plots from without are discovered more and
more, with an evident sequel and coherence which they have toward another.

Now, seeing the Papists, though many ways amongst themselves divided, yet, as
common adversaries to Protestants, concur and join fully with indefatigable
pains and diligence, both to undermine the fundamental Constitutions of the
Churches inwardly, and to assault them outwardly to disturb their peace; and
both ways to work out correspondently, not without great cost and expenses,
their most dangerous plots and attempts, which infallibly will bring
Protestancie to ruin, if no common course be thought upon, and concurrently
followed to prevent the same. Now no such course can possibly be taken and
followed by way of concurrence, without a settlement of some Correspondencie to
that effect betwixt the Churches: Therefore this settlement of a
Correspondencie is absolutely necessary. For if we know, that the enemies of
the Churches, and of the Gospel take a common course to oppose the same, and
yet take no thought of any common course, to maintain both these in safety
against their devices, it is evident, that they will work their ends, and that
we wittingly and willingly suffer our selves to be overthrown, and the Gospel
to be extinguished. If then these ends and machinations of theirs be known to
any Protestants, who study not to resist the same, it is apparent, that such
are guilty not only of their own blood, and of the blood of their Brethren in
all the Churches; but also of the detriments which may befall unto the
profession of the Gospel. From all which evils that I may approve my self
free, and be found guiltless in the presence of God, I have thought good thus
to bear witness of these things, that I may procure, so far as in me lies,
the necessary and only remedy of imminent dangers, and that it may not be
neglected any longer, if possibly it may be used.

Of the third.
It will be altogether needless to make in this place any description of the
weakness and tottering estate of Protestant Princes and Commonwealths, to
show in what case they are by reason of these troubles; but it will suffice in
a word or two to point at the true causes of their miseries, and the lamentable
issue, which in all humane appearance will follow thereupon, if no prevention
be used. The true causes then of the weak estate are none other, but their
inward divisions, chiefly for matters of Religion, which have in matters of
State not only distracted continually their actions, so that, by reason of
jealousies concerning Religion, they never could join in Counsels together
for mutual preservation; but also this has made some of them to help forward
their neighbors overthrow: For, seeing all the commotions of States in this
age are originally sprung from the differences of Protestants and Papists in
Religion; and seeing the only aim of the Pope and of his Agents is, and has
been, to root out the Heretics, that he may reduce all again to himself, by
settling Ecclesiastical affairs according to his own Laws (to which nothing
is so opposite, as the profession of the Gospel) therefore he has used all
means and ways to trouble the Protestant States, and has brought these
wars upon them to weaken their strength, and make them and the profession of
the Gospel to become contemptible: for, perceiving that the flourishing Estate
of Protestants did spread the light of the Gospel exceedingly abroad; and that
by that light, as well the gross errors of his Doctrine, and ignorance of his
dumb Idol Clergy, as the Tyranny and Superstitiousnesse of his Ecclesiastical
Antichristian Government was discovered more and more, and in the end would be
brought to naught: therefore, to keep his Throne and Kingdom from falling, he
has set his wit and strength aworke to make divisions, and increase strife
amongst Protestants, by flattering some, persecuting others; and finding them
sufficiently of themselves disposed and inclined thereunto, he has brought
his ends so far about, both in Germany and elsewhere, partly by the Lions
ways, and partly by the Foxes; that if the seeds of Ecclesiastical divisions,
which give him all his advantages, be not taken away, there will never be any
possibility of preventing a total desolation of these Churches and States. Now
these seeds of division cannot possibly be removed without some Correspondency,
tending to settle Protestants in a joint course of professing the Gospel, for
the better propagating thereof unto Gods glory, and for their mutual
preservation against these his violent and subtle attempts: And therefore in
this respect also a course of Correspondency should be maintained constantly,
and countenanced by civil authority, for a concurrence in Spiritual matters
betwixt the godly Divines of the Protestant Churches, that the truth, wherein
all agree, may be confirmed and supported by Authority to last unto future
ages; and the differences, which cause their inward distractions, may be
reconciled, so far as possibly can be done by print, or public amiable
treaties, whereunto the settlement of a Correspondency, and some agency amongst
them to this effect is absolutely necessary.

FINIS.

