THE Richmond Heiress: OR, A Woman Once in the Right. A COMEDY, ACTED At the
THEATER ROAYL, By Their MAJESTY'S Servants. Written by THO. D'URFEY, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Briscoe, over against Will's Coffee-House in
Covent Garden. 1693.

To the Honorable and my very much esteemed Friend, Sir NICHOLAS GARRARD, Bar.
^
SIR,
GReat Courtesies, which are in their value beyond gratifying, grant the
receiver this Excuse however; that he may expect a Pardon, if his Endeavor be
answerable to his real Will and natural Ability.

I am extremely Sensible of the many Favors I have had from you, and I am as
sensible of the very few ways my ill Stars make me capable of returning 'em
this little flourish, Sir, is only to Introduce a common Truth, which your
Judgment can inform your self very well without my telling; which is that a
Poet has no better way of paying his Gratitude, than by an offering of the
Fruits of his Brain, to the generous Person he is obliged to.

Sir, if I had not known you to be one that has made it some part of your
business as well as diversion, to encourage things of this Nature, I should not
have troubled you with this, but the Conversation which for some years I have
had the honor to enjoy with you, has given me this boldness, asuring my self,
that as you have the same good Humor as formerly, so you have a Gusto and
Relish to taste with the same Appetite now, as you did at other times, when I
have been so Happy to entertain you with the like sort of Treat.

Sir the Comedy I now present to you is in the best Judgment of my most
judicious Friends one of the best of mine, and till I see more and better
Matter and Humor in a scription of this kind, I shall not be uneasy when I
think on the little poor abuses and disturbances of a malecontented Party, that
like the Devil have for some late Years owed me an ill turn, and I have reason
to fear now will never have done paying me.

The entertainment of Songs and Dances in it, as they gave more diversion than
is usually seen in Comedy's, so they were performed with general Applause, and
I think my Enemies have cause to say with greater than is ordinary; and though
this had its Inconvenience by lenghtning the whole Piece a little beyond the
common time of Action, which at this time o'th Year I am sensible is a very
great Fault, yet the worst of malice has granted me this, that there appeared
no defect of Genius, whatever there might of Judgment.

The Perusal therefore, Sir, most humbly I commit to yours, and dedicate both
my self and it to you, whom I know to be a Man of honor and sense, in which
attributes, I think all others are comprehended, and since I know your temper
too well, to enlarge much upon Complement, or trouble you with impertinent
Praise, I will only think of you as all the sensible World does that know ye,
and make an humble Suit to ye to accept this Trifle as a mark of Gratitude from,

SIR, Your most obliged, And most humble Servant, T. D'URFEY.
London, May 6. 1693.
The Actors Names and Characters.
Sir Charles Romance,] A traveled old Knight, grave and sententious, Guardian
to the Heiress and Father-in-Law, yet contriving her for his Son. Acted by Mr.
Freeman. Sir Quibble Quere,] A soft, easy, half-witted Knight, credulous to an
extravagant degree, perpetually asking Questions about the Playhouse and Town
Intrigues, though always banter'd and kept in Ignorance. By Mr. Bright. Tom
Romance,] Son to Sir Charles; a young, vain, fluttering, lying Fellow, always
bragging of his Mistresses Favors, and showing their Presents, perpetually
intriguing, and never constant to any. By Mr. Powel. Dr. Guiacum,] An
opinionated Chimical Doctor, a great pretender to cure Lunaticks and Claps. By
Mr. Sandford. Frederick,] Half-Brother to Sir Quibble; a witty, young,
Town-Spark, who through the Vice and Inconstancy of his Humor, though he were
contracted to Sophronia, breaks off with her upon a slight occasion, to pursue
an Intrigue with the Heiress, who has much the greater Fortune. By Mr.
Williams. Rice ap Shinkin,] A young, whimsical, Welsh Fop, that imitates Tom
Romance in Intriguing, his Kinsman too and Companion. By Mr. Bowman. Dick
Stockjobb,] An opinionated impertinent Citizen, a great Stock-jobber, and
always laying Wagers, and against the Government. By Mr. Underhill. Hotspur,] A
rash, hot headed, quarrelsom Fellow, Friend to Frederick, and intrigu'd with
Mrs. Stockjobb. By Mr. Hudson. Quickwit,] A witty, but poor Scholar, that being
hired by Frederick to steal the Heiress, feigns himself mad, and takes upon him
the Name of the Lord de la Fool. By Mr. Dogget. Cunnington,] Subtle and
mischievous, and Antagonist to Quickwit in his Design upon the Heiress. By Mr.
Bowen. Christopher,] Servant to Dr. Guiacum. Numps,] A Country-Fellow, employed
as Servant to my Lord de la Fool.
WOMEN.
Fulvia,] The Heiress, a witty, generous, and virtuous young Lady, who being
privately in love with Frederick, feigns her self lunatic to trick her
Guardian, and avoid impertinent Suitors. Acted by Mrs. Bracegirdle. Sophronia,]
A Female plain-dealer, passionate and high-spirited, very satirical upon the
Town Humors, and particularly severe upon Frederick for deserting her. By Mrs.
Barry. Mrs. Stockjobb, alias Pogry,] Stockjobb's Wife, formerly a French-man's
Widow in P^cardy; but coming over as a Refugee, is married to Stockjobb, a
trim, gay Coquette, yet pretending to Religion and Good-breeding. By Mrs.
Bowman. Madam Squeamish,] A young fantastical Creature of Richmond, horribly
afraid of being Lampoon'd, and yet perpetually doing something or other to
deserve it. By Mrs. Knight. Marmalette,] An old ridiculous Waiting Woman of
Fulvia's very desirous of a Husband, and contriving all she can to get one. By
Mrs. Lee. Po^ade.] A Waiting-Maid. Mad men, Clown, Musicians, Singers, Dancers,
Constable and Watch, Footmen and Attendants.
PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. Dogget, with a Fools Cap with Bells on his Head. FOols are the
Chief Support of Stage Affairs;
Were there no Fools, there then would be no Players.
From the Country Caf, the Citt, the Man of Law,
The Courtier, and the Coffee house Iackdaw,
To the Clergyman, that Vice so slowly quells,
All have strong Titles to the Cap with Bells:
And I (Curse on it,) am fixed here like a Glass,
For every John a Nokes to see his Face.
Had my kind Stars designed me for a Shop,
Made me some young, pert, lucky, thriving Fop,
I might with Credit all the Town deceive,
And cheat so long till I could fine for Shrieve:
At least in Furrs, the City Livery wear,
And come to eat a Custard with the Mayor.
Or had my Fate, but that is too fine a Thing,
Designed me some Court Pest to cheat the King,
Conscience would stretch as I had changed condition,
I should have made a swinging Politician.
Or had I been some Canting Babe of Grace,
As for the Pulpit I Have a lovely Face,
How could I thump the Cushion! With what Zeal
Have trimmed between a Crown and Commonweal?
I could have drawn the Sisters in by Shoals,
Smugled My Gossipps, soaked the Christning Bowls*
Caressed their Bodies, and refreshed their Souls.
In every several Station and Affair*
I had been happy: But by being a Player,
I Am now obliged to expose your Faults in vain,
Uncertain my Applause, uncertain too my Gain.
Sometimes, it is true, you laugh, and then I Am famed;
But oftener some young Spark, whose Vice is shamed,
Cries, Rot the mimick Rogue, would he were damned.
Diseases by ill Appetites are nursed,
The Physic gripes, and the Physician's cursed.
And Players, like Bailiffs, are esteemed by you,
Rogues for Arresting, though the Debt be due.
Some of this Hot-brained Tribe, I Am told to Day,
Have led a Potent Power against this Play:
Armed with Resolve, in spite of Justice, throng
To Storm the Muses Fortress right or wrong.
What Pity it is, waving that mean Intent,
That so much Wit and Conduct was not bent
Against our Foes, to farther the Descent.
Such Hands, such Hearts, nay, and such Heads beside,
'Oons we had Conquered France by Whitsontide.
The Author therefore, thus besiig'd, does sue
For timely Succor to the Generous few,
To his old Friends, that always came in Season,
And never failed to laugh when they had Reason,
I Will promise some Diversion in my way,
I am to Act a Madman in the Play,
A Part well timed, Sirs, at this time of day,
All are crazed now -- Beaus, Warriors, Citts, Projectors;
The World's the Stage, and all Mankind are Actors.
BOOKS newly Printed for Samuel Briscoe.
THE History of Polybius the Megalapolitan, containing a General Account of the
Transactions of the World, and principally of the Roman People, during the
first and second Punick Wars, and with Maps, describing the Places where the
most wonderful Engagements and Battles of the Ancient Romans, were fought both
by Sea and Land: Also an Account of their Policies and Stratagems of War in
conquering the greatest Part of the then known World in Fifty three Years:
Translated by Sir H. S. To which is added, A Character of Polybius and his
Writings, by Mr Dryden: In Two Vol. 8o.

The Lives of the Twelve Caesar's, Emperors of Rome: Written in Latin by C.
Suetonius Tranquillus: Translated into English by several Eminent Hands; with
the Life of the Author, and Notes upon those Passages which relate to the Roman
Customs: Also the Effigies of the Caesar's on Copper Plates. 8o.

There is in the Press, and will speedily be Published, A Collection of Letters
of Love and Gallantry, etc. All written by Ladies. Vol. I. Price 2s. 6d.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THat Famous Powder, called Arcanum Magnum, formerly prepared by the Learned
Riverius, Physician Regent to the French King; and approved by most Persons of
Quality in Christendom, for Preserving and Beautifying the Face, even to old
Age: It cures Red Faces; it takes away all Heat, Pimples, Sun-burn and Morphew;
it prevents, and takes away Superfluous Hair growing on the Face: In short, it
adds more Luster and Beauty than any Powder or Wash known, as many Persons of
Quality can testify, who daily use it with the greatest Approbation. It is
Prepared only by I. H. Doctor of Physic, in Knightrider-street near
Doctors-Commons Gate, a Blew Ball being over the Door; where it may be had for
2 s. 6 d. the Paper, with Directions for its Use.

SONG, by way of Dialogue between a Madman and a Mad-woman. In ACT II.
He. BEhold the Man that with Gigantick might
Dares Combat Heaven again;
Storm Jove's bright Palace, put the Gods to flight,
Chaos renew, and make perpetual Night.
Come on ye fighting Fools, that petty Jars maintain
I Have all the War of Europe in my Brain.

She. Who Is he that talks of War,
When Charming Beauty comes:
Within whose Face divinely fair,
Eternal Pleasure b^oms
When I appear the Martial God,
A Conquered Victim lies,
Obeys each Glance, each awful Nod,
And fears the Lightning of my killing Eyes,
More than the fiercest Thunder in the Skies.

He. Now, now, we mount up high,
The Suns bright God and I,
Charge on the Azure downs of ample Sky.
See, see, how the Immortal Cowards run:
Pursue, pursue, drive over the Burning Zone;
From thence come rolling down,
And search the Globe below with all the gulphy Main,
To find my lost, my wandering Sense again.

Second Movement.
I.
She. By this dis-joynted matter
That crowds thy Pericranion,
I nicely have found, that thy Brain is not sound,
And thou shall be my Companion.

II.
He. Come let us plague the World then,
I embrace the blessed occasion;
For by Instinct, I find, thou art one of the kind
That first brought in Damnation.

III.
She. My Face has Heaven Enchanted,
With all the Sky-born Fellows.
Jove pressed to my Breast, and my Bosom he kissed,
Which made old Juno jealous.

IV.
He. I challenged Grisly Pluto,
But the God of Fire did shun me.
Witty Hermes I* drub'd, round the Pole with my Club,
For breaking Jokes upon me.

Chorus of both. Then Mad, very Mad, very Mad, let us be,
For Europe does now with our Frenzy agree,
And all things in Nature are Mad too as (...)*

V.
She. I found Apollo Singing,
The Tune my Rage Increases;
I made him so blind, with a look that was kind,
That he broke his Lyre to pieces.

VI.
He. I drank a Health to Venus,
And the Mole on her white Shoulder.
Mars flinch'd at the Glass, and I threw't in his Face*
Was ever Hero bolder?

VII.
She. It Is true, my dear Alcides,
Things tend to dissolution,
The Charms of a Crown, and the Crafts of the Gown,
Have brought all to Confusion.

VIII.
He. The haughty French begun it,
The English Wits pursue it.

She. The German and Turk still go on with the Work,


He. And all in time will rue it.


Chorus. Then Mad, very Mad, etc.


SHINKEN's Song to the Harp. In the Fourth ACT.
OF Noble Race was Shinken, trum tery, tery, tery; trum trum,
The Line of Owen Tudor, trum, trum, trum;
But her Renown was fled and gone,
Since cruel Love pursued hur: trum, trum, etc.
II.
Fair Winny's Eyes bright shining, trum, etc.
And Lily Breasts alluring, trum, etc.
Poor Shinkin's heart, with fatal Dart,
Have Wounded past all Curing: trum, etc.
III.
Hur was the prettiest Fellows, trum, trum, etc.
At Bandy once and Cricket, trum, etc.
At Hunting-Chace, or High-foot Race,
Gadsplut, how hur could ^rick it: trum, etc.
IV.
But now all Joys defying, trum, etc.
All pale and wan hur Cheeks too, trum, etc.
Hur heart so aches, hur quite forsakes
Hur Herrings and hur Leeks too: trum, etc.
V.
No more must dear Metheglins, trum, etc.
be top'd at goot Mountgomery, trum, etc.
And if Loves sore, smart one Week more,
Adieu Creen Sheefe and Flummery: trum, etc.
SONG. In the Last ACT.
ALL Europe is now in Confusion,
Then Friends, let us think it no Crime,
(Since all things do bode Dissolution)
To make the best use of short time.
II.
Though Nations do rise against Nations,
And Peace is frighted from home;
The Planets remove from their stations,
And seem to portend our sad doom.
III.
Strange Earthquakes make War against Nature*
And Ruin circles us round;
There is something more in the matter
Than ever yet Philosophers found.
IV.
Sound Reason no longer convinces,
So Potent Discord is grown;
For some of the Brave fight for Princes,
And Crop-ear'd Prigs fight for none.
V.
The Church, that should teach us true Morals,
And prove Devotion great gain,
Foment in the Pulpit odd Quarrels,
And then leave 'em us to maintain.
VI.
Then fill up the Glass a Health Royal,
No Stars nor Omens we'll fear;
A Health to the Fair and the Loyal,
Though Doomsday be never so near.
THE Richmond Heiress, etc.
ACT I.
SGENE I. Richmond- Hill.
Enter Cunnington disguised, meeting Quickwit dressed fantastically in gay
Clothes. Cunning. BLess my Eyes from an Apparition! What art thou? Thou can
not be Tom Quickwit!


Quick. As sure as thou art Ned Cunnington the Ungodly, my Brother in Iniquity,
and Fellow-Collegian.


Cunning. Thou seem my Brother-Collegian indeed by thy Voice and Grimace;
but then again thou may be Brother to some Prince by thy Habit. Prithee let
me look on thee and wonder!


Quick. Do, do, Ned, wonder on, whilst I slouch my Hat, and practice the Air of
a Country-Booby of Quality to improve thy Admiration.


Cunning. Harkee; prithee let me ask thee a civil Question: Have not made some
Nokes of Quality here about Richmond drunk, and stole his Clothes, hah?


Quick. No, ye Rogue; though I am your Brother in Wit, I am no kin to ye in
Mischief. I love to give occasion for Men's Wonders; and there is a Mystery in
this Habit, Ned, surpasses all your Cunning to find out. But come, to examine
now in my turn: Prithee, what Project have thou now a-foot here at Richmond?
For by this comical Disguise, there must be something more than ordinary. What
stanch Fool have thou to Cully out of his Money? Or, what half-Fool out of
Meat, Drink, and Lodging, hah?


Cunning. Why to tell thee the Truth, I am intrigu'd here with a Son of a
Whore, who is also the Son of a Knight, and have (thus equipped as I am) been
with him to Night upon a Frolic.


Quick. Intrigu'd was an admirable Word there; for thy Bubbles are all used
like common Whores; when thou have had thy Pleasure of 'em, they are left to
their Fortune. Well, and this Compound makes up one substantial Fool; hah?


Cunning. Yea, verily; Fools, half Fools, and such like, are Cunnington's Real
Estate; and sometimes I Have the luck to have a Wit to provide my Personal. I am
a true Terrae Filius, and flourish by the Abuse of Mankind, wanting seldom or
never Matter to work upon: But if some malignant Planet should reign, whenever
you hear that I am out of Fool, you may reasonably conclude too that I am out
at Elbows.


Quick. A little Hardship is a good Whetstone to make Wit sharp; and we poor
Fellows, Ned, that live by 'em, like Black birds, thrive best in hard Weather:
For not being born to Estates for our selves, Fortune has disposed 'em to
others with weaker Brains for us to manage. Now I improve my Talent by Love,
Compliance, Insinuation, etc. I love every body, and every body loves me: I
oblige all People; I mimick this or that Sot in Company, to humor perhaps one
that is a worse himself. I flatter and sing to the Women, to get their Tongues
on my side too: And now and then when I am desired by some rich Booby that is
worth the managing, I can turn my Face into a Changling Grimace, and act like
Solon in the Play; when, as I hope to be saved, I Am all the while bant'ring
him, and thinking him the more comical Solon of the two, as a Man may say.


Cunning. Why this is an artful Method, I confess; but, for my part, if I
should practice it, I should starve: For to tell thee the truth, I love no
body; nay, what is worse, can hardly counterfeit common Courtesy to the World.
The reason is, I hate all People that I think happier than my self: If that Man
has a fine Coach, I wish his Horses may founder; if this has a pretty Wife, I
wish him a plaguey fit of the Stone, and my self a bed with her: If a third has
a rich Cargo in a Ship, or a fourth a delicate House, I wish one may be sunk to
the bottom, and the other burnt to the ground.


Quick. Ha, ha, ha; an incomparable Humor 'faith.

Enter Marmalet, and whispers Quickwit, and Exit. Well, Ned, I see thou art now
about some new Project, and 'twould do thee an injury to keep thee longer from
thy Vocation, therefore I Will leave thee.


Cunning. Ah, Brother, I smell your drift; my Grannum there must be Ha^binger
to some notable Intrigue. Come 'faith, impart, I Will assist thee; I Am good at it
thou know.


Quick. Ay, but this is a secret only proper for my Sphere of Activity;
besides, I have had this Advice formerly, Keep Cunnington from thy Secret and
thy Mistress, or he will certainly endeavor to betray the one, and debauch the
other; and so no more wheedling, good Brother. Ha, ha, farewell, farewell.


Exit. Cunning. This Rogue has some profitable Design on foot, that is most
certain; and now I think on it, it may be as profitable to me to overreach him
in it. 'Gad, I Am a strange odd sort of a Fellow; I do not only envy a Man
that is richer than I am, but that is wittier too; and would by my Good Will
engross all the Money in the World, and all the Sense too. New is my Head as
full of mischievous Contrivance, as a young Thief that is just going to do his
Probation Exploit; and from my Brain I have present information, That the Old
Woman that was here just now, is wove in Quickwit's Design: I Will after, and dog
her; these old Runts are as leaky as Sieves: And if I can, by speaking French
giberish pretending to be a German Astrologer, get to tell her her Fortune, all
the rest of her Secrets shall quickly be laid open. Humph, this may turn to
good advantage of my side too, and be more valued, as flowing from the Fountain
of my own Wit: I hate the poor Satisfaction of being obliged to Fortune for a
Benefit.

That still appears to me the sweetest Gain,
That Springs from the rich Soil of my own Brain.

Exit. Enter Frederick with Quickwit. Fred. My Noble Lord de la Fool, your
Lordship's most Obedient -- Ha, ha, ha! Why 'faith, Tom, I think we have
equipped thee with as decent a Garb as any Whimsical Peer of 'em all need to
wear. Prithee cock thy Hat, and strut a little more.


Quick. Oh, Pox, I can do that well enough: But how to act the Madman right,
and bubble the Doctor, there will be the difficulty.


Fred. Oh, prithee, affront not thy own Abilities: Thou were a rare Mimicker at
the University, I remember, and I Am sure can not lose thy Talent so soon:
Besides, this is a Doctor for the purpose; Positive, Ignorant, and easy to be
imposed on; one that having a long Worm in his own Pate, solidly believes he
can cure it in other Men's. He was first Apothecary of a Physick-Garden; but
happening to cure the Son of a great Statesman that had cracked his Brains with
studying to outdo his Father, in out-witting the French Councils, got himself
into Money and Reputation, and is now, forsooth, President of the Insanery.


Quick. And are you sure the young Lady will help me out at a pinch, and that
she only counterfeits her self mad for your sake?


Fred. Most certainly. I have told thee nothing but Truth, upon my Honor. Oh,
she is the Soul, the Miracle of her Sex:

Young, yet discreet, without Ill Nature witty,
Rich without Pride, and without Art is pretty.
Besides, I have often, as a Lesson, told thee, That Sir Charles, her
Fatherin-Law and Guardian, being always an inveterate Enemy to our Family; and
designing her for his own Son, has forced me to this Artifice of thy
Assistance, and that sweet Angel to frustrate all other Pretensions, to act a
witty Scene of Lunacy.


Quick. Your Brother Sir Quibble Quere, you tell me, is to be bubbled too; so
that I find I Am to divide my Brains into three several Projects: First, to
disappoint the Guardian: Secondly, to banter the Doctor: And, thirdly, to make
a mere Ass of your Brother, to pay a friendly Tribute to your Wit. As I take
it, Sir, this is my Charge.


Fred. Thou have hit it, dear Tom; it is so. He Is but my half-Brother thou
know, and can claim but little Obligation upon the score of Affinity.
Besides, he is a Block-head, and I have only hedged him into this Business to
stand buff with his Purse upon occasion, and pay the Expense of it. My Mother
did me manifest wrong by crossing the strain. Her last Husband, old Sir Quibble
Quere, was, for above thirty Years together, an old Court-Follower; but of so
harmless a Character, that though he never bettered himself, he hindered no one
else, being always like a Turn style, standing in every body's way, and
hindering no body. He was also called here, The Teizer of Richmond, and would
ask you more foolish Questions in a quarter of an Hour, than a hundred wise Men
could answer in a Year: And this Brother of mine is his own, by this Light.
See, yonder he comes. I have told him I Have employed thee, and prepared him
aptly for the Business -- Now if thou can but answer silly Questions
briskly, thou win'st him for ever.


Enter Sir Quibble. Sir Quib. Brother, good Morrow to you.


Fred. Oh, Brother, your humble Servant, you are well met, we have been
contriving here for ye; this is the honest Gentleman I told ye of.


Sir Quib. Is this Mr. Quickwit, Brother, that I saw when I was at London, he
that mimick'd the Madman so comically.


Fred. This is that very ingenious Person, Brother.


Salute here. Sir Quib. Oh dear! Well, I Will say it, he did it purely. Sir, your
humble Servant.


Quick. Sir, I am yours extremely.


Sir Quib. Ha, ha, ha, you have dressed him to a T, I see* Brother.


Fred. As the Noble Family of the De-la*Fools ought, Brother.


Sir Quib. Ha, ha, ha: And pray, Sir, when did you come to Town? Who was your
Bedfellow last Night? Which is your Inn? And what have you for Dinner to Day,
Sir?


Fred. Four as pretty pertinent Questions as a Man could wish to answer.


Quick. Why, Sir, I came to Town yesterday, half an Hour, half a Quarter, and
seven Seconds past Five in the Afternoon: I lodge at Boddycotts, at the Red
Lion: I have a good Rump of Beef and Carrots for my Dinner: I lay with one Nick
Fiery face, an honest Attorney of Staple-Inn, and had like to have lain with a
pretty Black-ey'd Cook-maid, belonging to the House: And there is an Answer
overplus for once to oblige ye, Sir.


Sir Quib. Why merry be thy Heart, you are a pure Fellow, I Will sayt. And
prithee who have left behind thee in London now?


Fred. There Is another very pretty Question.


Quick. Why faith, about three or four Millions I believe, Sir; I could not
well spare time enough to take all their Particulars.


Sir Quib. And prithee how does the Playhouse? How does Mr. Betterton, and my
old Friend, Mr. Nokes? Prithee when did he play Sir Martin last, hah? Does Mr.
Sandford Act the Villain still, prithee? And jolly Cave Underhill in Epsom
Wells? How does my Comical Justice do, hah?


Quick. Hold, hold, Sir, you're to fast upon me; be pleased to couple your
Questions, and I Am at your Service; but for so many of 'em together, 'Gad I
have not half Memory enough, Sir.


Fred. D^'life, thou flagg'st already; hold out briskly, Man.


Aside. Quick. Damm him, I begin to be in a Sweat.


Aside to Fred. Sir Quib. And how does Mrs. Barry Act now, hah?


Quick. Oh to a Miracle Sir -- There he was pretty reasonable.


Aside. Sir Quib. She plays the Queen in the Spanish Friar better than any
Woman in England: I Will say it, I had rather see her wag after the ^idlers in the
Procession there, than see another Coronation ad'sdiggers. And Mr. Powel,
what is he doing prithee, hah?


Quick. Hah; the Devil hah ye -- 'Sdeath, here will be no end of this doing:
Why how the Devil should I know, unless I could conjure.


Sir Quib. I mean, what new Part is he studying? Ad'snigs, that Powel's a very
pretty Fellow. Where lies the Scene I wonder? what is the Humor on it? and how
does he contrive?


Quick. Hey day, Where? What? and How? nay faith, Sir, if you don't stand to
your Article of coupling your Questions, I can be no longer your Interpreter;
and so your Servant. Oh --


Fans himself. Fred. Ha, ha, ha, ha, there is one Bowen too, a notable Joker,
hah?


Sir Quib. Prithee excuse me now, it is so long since I was in Town, that I even
long to hear of all the new things.


Quick. Not all at a time, I beseech ye, Sir; the rest will be a new Diversion
for you to morrow.


Sir Quib. No, faith, I must have 'em now. And Mrs. Bracegirdle, prithee where
is she now?


Fred. Ay, ay, Mrs. Bracegirdle: Come, Tom, your Answer quickly.


Quick. So, he has set me a conjuring again.


Sir Quib. Well, I Will say it she Acts Statira curiously.
From every Pore of him a Perfume falls. Speaks this affectedly*
He kisses softer than a Southern Wind:
Curles like a Vine; and touches like a God.
When I was last at the Play, and she was saying of this, my Mouth, I Will say it,
went to-and-agen, to-and-agen, as fast as hers, and repeated, it after her so
loud, that all the People in the Pit thought I was bewitched.


Quick. Ay, and the Devil take me if I don't think thee bewitched now*


Sir Quib. Then there is Mr. Dogget, that Acted Solon so purely, O Lord, what is
become of him, prithee?

And then, I Will say it, there is Mr. Bowman, and Mr. Bright, and Mr. Hudson, and
Mr. Hains; and though last, not least in Love, the only remaining Branch of the
old Stock, honest Mr. Kinaston.

So Men in Thunder quit the open Air,
Because the angry Gods are then abroad.
Oh, he has a rare way with him, I Will say it, and a number besides these, that I
have forgot; Prithee, How, and Which, and What, and Where, and Why, and When,
--


Quick. Whiew! Nay then your Servant in faith.


Fred. God's Death, come away immediately, here is Sir Charles and the Doctor coming
down the Hill; away Tom, I have some more Instructions to give you yet.


Quick. Ay, with all my Heart, I shall be blunderbuss'd with Where Is, and What Is,
and Whens else -- A Plague of his Epileptick Visage, he is gaping for another
Quere I see.


Exeunt Fred. and Quick. Sir Quib. Pox take him, I had above Twenty Questions
more ready, but especially about Hains, and his Fortune-telling; 'gad I will
know something about that I Am resolved, for that is a Material Point.


Exit. Enter Sir Charles, Guiacum, and Christopher. Sir Char. Therefore, as I
was saying, Doctor, look well to your Patient, she is not only my
Daughter-in-Law and Ward, but the Darling Jewel of my Life, the Treasury of my
Son's Hopes too, an Heiress worth Fifty thousand Pounds, who, had not this
delirious Accident happened, should have been this Hour happy in his Embraces by
Marriage.


Guiac. Fear not, Sir, my Care and Medicines will work the desired Effect.


Sir. Char. Madness, Doctor, is but a more extravagant sort of Wit, caused by
the excessive Heat in the Brain: I studied the very Point many Years ago, in
the College at Barcelona; it is but the Skill of cooling the Part, and the
Patient presently recovers.


Guiac. Ay, but, Sir, this is a new Case, and I must do it specifically; for
she is very obstinate, and will take no Medicines; nor do I resolve to make her
Blood ferment, by putting her into a Rage about it, she has Fire enough
already; for about the Age of Eighteen the Heat predominates extremely in her
Sex; and then, if ever they are infected, they become strongly delirious.


Sir Char. Your Reason, Doctor?


Guiac. Why, Sir, at that Age the warm Quality of their Blood, fermented by the
force and vigor of the Animal Spirits, naturally make 'em half mad: To remedy
which there are but Two ways, which are either to get them Husbands just in the
Nick, or for want of such Provision to send 'em to me.


Sir Char. Why, God-a*mercy Doctor, this old Fellow is too Lepid to be a
Whoremaster sure: If this hoary Elder should be a Rogue now, and make use of a
natural Recipe to cure my Daughters Madness, my Son and I were finely served.


Guiac. Farewell, Sir; I Will make as quick a Cure of your Daughter as I can,
because I very suddenly expect a Noble Lord under my Custody. Adieu.


Sir Char. This jealous Humor of mine is a great Fault: Here Is a poor old
Fellow, that is so much a Cripple, he can scarce drag his Legs after him, and
yet I must suspect him for a Whoremaster. Well, I must go after and humor him,
least when he has cured my Daughter, he should, in revenge, Introduce new
Suitors to her, and so baffle my Son's Designs; who, I think, I see coming down
the Hill yonder, -- Ay, it is he, and two more with him; they seem in hot
Dispute; I Will stay a little while longer to observe.


Stands aside. Enter Tom Romance, Hotspur, Rice ap Shinken, and Boy. T. Romans
But prithee, a Pox on thee Will, what a Devil ails thee that thou art so averse
to my way of intriguing, when I tell thee, Women, dear Women, are the only
Comforts of my Life, I can neither eat, drink, nor sleep well without 'em? And
my Welsh Cousin Rice ap Shinken here is of my own Humor to a Hair; he chuckles
at a White Petticoat like a Turkeycock at a Red one; he is the very Devil at a
Wench; Cat after kind, as the Proverb has it, the Britains were all
Whoremasters from the beginning.


Rice. The Shinkins was pear as crete Lovers to the pretty Omans, that is fery
true; the plack Eyes, with the plack Eyebrows, was goot; and when her sees the
Red Lip, the White Skin, and the soft Pubby, then Shinkin's Heart was peat,
peat, peat, like a Drum, by Cadwallader.


Hotsp. Peat, peat, peat! What a Plague can any one above the Degree of a
Kitchen, love a Fellow that makes Fritters of English, as Falstaff says? A
Welsh Beau, with a Head as barren as the Mountains in his own Country. Ha, ha,
ha, I Will never believe it; I Am resolved to abuse these Puppeys for dear
Frederick's sake, whom I know they hate.


Aside. Rice. The Muntains in her Country was fery goot Muntains, and breed
fery goot Sheep and Coats, look you, and if Williams is Cholericks, that is not
much, her will laugh and be merry, look you, if Williams is Choleric, he, he,
he ha.


T. Romans Ay, ay, Will, you must not think to beat us out of conceit with our
selves with drolling: 'Gad I know a Lord's Wife near St. James's that is ready
to die for me; she says, of all charming things in the Universe she admires my
Nose.


Hotsp. Ridiculous! I Will near believe such a Satyr upon the Sex: Why there is
not a Negro in Town but can fit her with a better.


Sir Char. Oh, I know him now, this is Hotspur, one of Frederick's Friends, and
the Enemy of our Family.


Aside. Rice. There is likewise, look you, Williams, the young, sweet,
sharming, pretty Daughter to a crete Shudge yonder, that is in love with
Shinkin for his Leg, look you; here is the Symetry, here is the Shape, here is
the Calf, look you, and here is the Small, fery goot.


Hotsp. Leg! 'Oons, I have seen a handsomer upon a Gate for High Treason, after
it has stuck parching in the Sun above a Twelvemonth.


Sir Char. Why does not that Welsh Runt give him three or four Kicks now with
that Leg the Lady is so in Love with? Sure this will come to something anon;
now I shall see what Mettle the Boy has.


Aside. Rice. Now Williams is Cholericks again, ha, ha, ha, ha. Harkee, do you
know me, Williams?


Hotsp. Know thee? oh yes, thou art his Ape, both things so contemptible with
the Women, that --


Rice. Look you, Williams, if Apes be Signals of Affronts and Disparagements,
splut her shall not find Shinkin so tame.


T. Romans Phoo, prithee don't mind what he says, Cousin Rice: Come here is that
shall undeceive him presently -- Look Will, to prove to thee what a Favorite I
am with that dear, dear Sex, I will show thee some Favors from 'em; for, to
say Truth, I never took any true Pleasure in an Intrigue with a Woman, if I had
not the Satisfaction of Exposing her to my Friend.


Hots. Well said, trusty Knight, the Woman has blessed her self with a true
Friend of thee in the mean time.


T. Romans Why, I enjoy n 'em to secrecy, Man, so that she is secure enough in
Conscience, as I will thee now; therefore be sure you don't tell any Body: Do You
hear?


Hots. 'Faith, but I will, Sir, if you tell me any thing.


Sir Char. God's Death, not draw yet! What a Plague does he mean?


Aside. T. Romans Pshaw, pshaw, that is all one, I Will trust thee for all that,
Faith; why, I Have a thousand things to divert thee with, Man; and, 'Gad take me,
have the greatest Pleasure in the World in telling 'em: First then here is a
Billet Deux, from my Lord Awekings's Daughter, a great Man at Court, and a
swinging Politician, who, having more Business in his Head than to mind his
Daughters, gave me opportunity at the Musick-meeting at London, to make an
Intrigue; and the Creature is now grown so fond, that my Father was fain to
design a Wife for me, here at Richmond, to divert me. Thou shall hear what she
writes: Sweet, sweet, sweet Tomme, can thou find in thy Heart to be so long
away from thy dear, dear, dear Betty? Ah, sweet Creature! -- 'Gad, I believe
I shall wear the Paper to a Cobweb with kissing it.


Reads the Letter. Hots. God's Death, can there be so simple a Creature in Nature?


T. Romans Prithee mind me. I swear I never go to Bed but I dream of thee, nor
ever rise without crying: My dear, sweet, heavenly Tomme is always in my
Thoughts: And if his poor Betty were half so much in his, I Am sure he would
come this Night through the Boards of the little House in the Garden to see
her, as he used to do. That was our way of meeting, you must know; and, 'Gad, I
have been plaguely incommoded sometimes to get cleanlily to her. But did ever
hear any thing so Soft and Tender? hah!


Hots. Never any thing so Silly before, the Devil take me.


Sir Char. Again an Affront! Now where is the first Pass, now Tom?


Aside. Rice. There is crete deal of Doubts, and Jealousies, and Pribbles, and
Prabbles, which show Loves and Affections, look you.


T. Romans Then, in the second place, here is a Garter of Sir Thomas Wittal's
Lady's, here at Cue, taken from above her Knee with my own Hand I Will swear; a
Locket, from pretty Peggy, Daughter to one Quicksilver a Goldsmith, at the
Cawdle Cup in Lombard Street; a Picture, from dear Ienny Flippant, a rich
Widows Niece in the old* Pall Mall; a Roman Glove, from sweet Lady Susanna
Simple, in St. James's- Square. And more, to show ye that I deal with all
degrees of Females, come hither, Sirrah, there is a piece of delicate Point,
from Moll a Sempstress in the New-Exchange, to make me a Crevat; and a Head of
curious bright Hair, from my Lady Freckles Chambermaid, to make me a Peruke.


Sir Char. This is so like these young Rogues, to brag of their Mistresses
Favors.


Hots. Red and rank as a Fox by Jove: Pox on thee, Bright, do call it*


Rice. And, to show ye that the Prittains are admired too, look you here was
delicate creen Leeks, sent by young Widows of her Cousin Tomas ap Evan, ap
Rice, ap Shones, ap Davy, ap Shinken, as a Token of her Love, and to wear in
her Cap upon St. Davy's Day.


Pulls out a great Leek. Hots. Death, ye brace of Buffoons, what do you teize me
with all this Stuff for?


Sir Char. How, Boffoon, 'Sdeath, and near a hole in his Guts yet? Oh, cowardly
Villain!


T. Romans Stay, stay, I have two things more in my Fob here better than all;
first here is a Bracelet of witty Sophronia's; and, above all, a Seal, with a
wounded Heart engraved upon Coral, of my dear, dear Fulvia's.


Hots. Nay, then I Will no longer have Patience, therefore draw, for ye Lie.


Sir Char. The Lie; so, 'Gad I Will whip him through the Midriff my self, if he
takes that.


Hots. For, first, Sophronia is a Woman of too much Sense to give a Bracelet to
such an Insect: And, secondly, Fulvia is my Friends Mistress, and has no Heart
but for him. Come on, Pox, come both of ye.


Rice. Stand to her, Cousin; splut, her will show her a Welsh Thrust.


T. Romans loyters back. T. Romans The Truth is, that last was a Lie; but since the
Welsh-man's Blood's up, I Am resolved to vindicate it: Come, Sir.


Sir. Char. Hold, hold Tom, and Cousin come you back; tho, his Insolence
deserves Chastisement, he shall not have it to the dishonor of our Family;
I Will take it upon my self: Come on Sir, you that were so hot.


Offers to Fight. Hots. Ay, Sir, with all my Heart.


Rice. Pray Uncle let hur go, hur has killed no Rascals since hur came from
Wales.


T. Romans Prithee, old Gentleman, get you out o'th way, I Am in the humor of
killing him.


Sir Char. Son Tom, it must not be: What Is your Name, Sir? you are like to
escape this time.


Hots. Why then a Pox on ye all, my Name's Hotspur, and you may see me at the
Wells every Morning; and more, to provoke ye to take Satisfaction, know that I
am Friend to Frederick, and will espouse his Interest in the Heiress to the
last; and so adieu.


Exit. Sir Char. Ay, it is so, it is this rich Heiress is the cause of all these
Brawls; but come Son, since thou have me of thy side, be confident, Policy as
well as the Sword shall secure her to thee: For above all the World's great
Benefits, a Wife is best in her good Circumstances.

To follow Wars abroad may Honor bring,
It Is brave Preferment there, to serve the King.

T. Romans But a rich Heiress here is, a Heavenly thing.


Exeunt. ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Frederick, Hotspur, Quickwit, and Numps. Sophronia discovered at a
distance, reading. Fred. A true Friend is the most solid Good a Man can possess
in this World: And though, dear Will, I ought extremely to thank thee for abusing
those two Fools for my sake, yet I could wish Sir Charles had been absent,
least this new occasion of distaste may cause him to be more vigilant, and so
hinder our Plot upon the Heiress.


Hotsp. Faith, dear Fred, I beg thy Pardon with all my Heart if I did amiss;
but the Devil take me if I could contain my self after hearing such a
Preposterous deal of Impudence and Folly: I could have beaten them with a
better Will than a Turk would a Christian Slave that he found had an Intrigue
with his Wife or Daughter.


Quick. Well, well, let us to the Proof, I long, methinks, to be acting my
Madman: And as for Numps here, he will do his part to a Miracle, I have taught
him his Lesson perfectly.


Fred. What, my Lord de la Fool's old Serving-man, he has hit the Family Beard
to a Hair I see, and it is impossible he should miscarry; for I am privately
informed the Doctor knows neither of them by sight, and has only heard of a Son
of the Countesses that was mad, and suddenly to be brought to him as a Patient.


Quick. The Letter I have given him there expresses all that. But be sure to
remember your Canting West-Country Tone, Numps, and your byword, 'Odswokers.


Numps. Well, well, Why thou can not think, mun, che can forget as zoon as
chave learned it: Why zure chant a bin a Schollard zo long but that che can con
my Lesson, 'Odswokers: What, does the Mon take me for a Vool? Umph.


Fred. Admirably well, Numps, and there is a Guinea to encourage thee.


Hotsp. The Rogue mouths it as if he had been bred at Taunton-Dean indeed.


Fred. Well then, away both to your Tasks: Oh, I long to have the Event answer
the Expectation; get her but off, Tom, and the promised Five hundred Pounds
shall be as ready as the joyful Minute.


Quick. I used to be successful in these Matters: But if I should return now,
like a maimed Tarpawling from a Sea Fight, with a Leg or an Arm lost in your
Service, you cannot do less than procure me a Place in the Hospital.


Fred. Ah, never fear, there is no such danger.


Hotsp. No, no, the worst on it can be but a dozen or two of Kicks, a Cudgel, a
Rib or two broke, or so, that is all.


Quick. Ay, ay, that is a small Matter, you know. Well, what ere comes on it, I Am
resolved to venture; and so Fortune for us: Come along Numps.


Exeunt. Fred. Ha, ha, ha: Now shall I be as impatient till I have an Account
of this Rogue's Proceedings, as a young Heir that hears his niggardly Father is
sick, is, till he hears he is dead.


Hotsp. If my Eyes dazzle not, yonder is a Subject very proper to improve your
Patience, a Lady, Fred, a reading.


Fred. Sophronia, as I live; ay, Will, this is a Lady indeed, the Wonder of her
time: Do know her?


Hotsp. Not to Intimacy, and yet enough to hear of your Worship's former
Intrigue with her. What a strange Fellow were thou to desert so fine a Lady?
I Have heard there was a Contract between ye.


Fred. Some slight Papers, I think, which I know her Pride is too great ever to
expose, or call me to an account ^for. Besides, what is a Promise, when put in
Competition with Fifty thousand Pounds, Will? No, no, she was too wise for me,
her Wit was always too Satirical; a Quality I could never suffer in a Woman:
She Would conjure me with Morals out of Seneca; and run me down an hour or two
together in Argument on the Towns Common Vices; nay, and what I hated worse
than all the rest, though all her Friends knew well enough she loved me, her
Pride, that was too great to let her own it, would make her always use me ill
before 'em.


Hotsp. They call her here in Richmond, The Female Plain Dealer.


Fred. They do so, and justly too, for she takes as much Pride in speaking
blunt Truths, as the rest of her Sex do in studying queint Lies. But see, the
Walk begins to fill, here is more of the Tribe coming.

Enter Squeamish, and Mrs. Stockjobb with a Lampoon. And if I am not mistaken,
Will, there is one of your Acquaintance, if you have not forgot your little French
Pinnace you used to brag of so, Mrs. Stockjobb.


Hotsp. Forget her! 'D'sdeath, I should as soon forget my Sex; why she is my
All, Man, my Estate Real and Personal: She came hither first as a Protestant
Refugee, and full of seeming Sanctity, but betwixt thee and I, Fred, a very
Cheat: She Is Dick Stockjobb's Wife, it is true, but a Meet-help to me alone,
Fred.


Fred. I have heard of that City-Fool, they say he got all his Estate by
drawing in worse Fools than himself to lay Wagers, this Siege, or that Battle,
this Fight at Sea, or that on Shore; and for the late City Crimp of
Stockjobbing, a very Dragon, though in other Matters poor, sneaking, and
uxorious; and the French Woman, I hear, manages him rarely. But, prithee, who
is the other, by her fantastical Behavior that must be some extraordinary
Creature too?


Hotsp. Oh, she is a Rarety of another kind, one Madam Squeamish, she is a Native
of Richmond here, very fantastic and impertinent, as thou say; for which she
has every Summer a new Lampoon made of her, that does so teize her, that she
grows lean upon it, and cannot forbear expressing her Resentments in all
Companies.


Fred. Well, Sir, I Will leave you to their Management, and the rather, because I
see yonder Philosophical Lady is turning this way, and I am not at present
armed for a Rencounter. Farewell; we'll meet at Night at the Red Lion.


Exit Frederick. Hotsp. What Paper's that they are so busy upon? I Will stand
aside and listen.


Squeam. Was there ever so barbarous a Disappointment, Cousin! Expecting a
Letter this Morning from the dear, dear Man I admire beyond all earthly Joy, my
Maid brings me this, with the fold and visage of a Billet deux; but, oh horrid!
I had no sooner opened it, and prepared to feast my longing Eyes with what they
expected, but, fogh! what does it prove to be, but an odious Lampoon, and the
most nauseous filthy thing that ever was heard, as I Am a Virgin!


Mrs. Stock. Dis is now de Barbarity of your Nation: In France we have no
Scandal, no Affront, noting mal a propos: You may sing, you may dance, you may
keep de bon Companee, vid dis great Lord, or toder Gentleman; and yet dear is
no dam Lampoon. Diable! if de Author had dare abuse me so, by dis Hand I voud
find him out, and murder him.


Squeam. Why then you must find him out, and murder him, Cousin; for hear you
are for your Comfort, and swingingly.


Mrs. Stock. By my Faite de Fellow dat did say dis, is de very dam Rascal in de
whole Varle; I will poison him, I will hang, I will have his Trote cut, by dis
Hand.


Squeam. But prithee, Cousin, who is this Hotspur that they slander you with?


Hotsp. 'D'sdeath, I can forbear no longer! Why, Madam, this Hotspur is forth*
coming, if your Ladyship has any use for him. By your leave, good Madam: 'Pray
let me inspect this Paper a little.

Rushes out, and snatches the Paper. Damme, if any Rascal has abused us, I Will
maul him.


Mrs. Stock. He here; vat sall me do now! Us! vat you mean, Sir? I know you
not; you are de Stranger to me.


Squeam. Oh fie, Cousin; pray don't let my Company cause a breach of
Acquaintance. Come, you must own him a little.


Hotsp. Pox! prithee don't stand upon Punctilio's now, Fubbs, but help me to
find out this damned Poet. I Will teach him to Lampoon me: I Will slaughter him, by
Heaven.


Squeam. Why really, Sir, it is a horrid brutal Trick these Fellows have got: A
Woman cannot enjoy her Youth in a degree a little above the Vulgar, but, oh
horrid! she is presently popp'd into a Lampoon. I did but innocently regale my
self the other day, amongst other choice Female Friends, at my Lady Goodfellow's,
with a Glass or two of Hockamore, and if the beastly Poet, in his next Paper,
did not say I was drunk there, I Am no Christian! O filthy!


Here Sophronia comes between 'em. Soph. Your Servant, Mrs. Squeamish; nay, I
have heard all, and as a Friend to Justice and Morality, although unasked, must
give you my Opinion too.


Squeam. She hear! oh horrid! nay, then we shall be teiz'd to death. She has
more Tongue than twenty Lawyers, and rails with more Malice than a Terrae
Filius at Oxford, that has been just expelled the University.


Mrs. Stock. Dis is ver Deevil of a Woman; I must wheedle her, dear is no oder
way. Your most humble and obedient Slave, dear Madam.


Sophr. Oh no Ceremony, good Mrs. Stockjobb: But, Mrs. Squeamish, prithee why
art thou so mortally offended at this Lampoon? Methinks the Poet speaks very
honestly.


Squeam. Honestly, Madam! What, to say I was drunk? Oh filthy!


Sophr. Drunk indeed was a little too uncourtly: Mellow had been a good Word
there; for to my knowledge there were six Quarts drunk in two hours time
between four of ye, besides my Lady's farewel-Bottel of Aquamirabilis. Her fat
Ladyship I hear set a great while before the Sun; and for the rest of ye, your
Tongues were all as glib as a Consort of Midwives at a City-Christ'ning.


Mrs. Stock. Vell, dis I must say of de French, Dey are de most temperate
People in de whole Varld; l'Homme du Cour delights in noting but de cool Mead,
de Tizzan, or de Sherbet vid Ice.


Sophr. Yes, the comfortable Usquebagh, the refreshing Spirit of Clary, or
sometime the cool Brandy and Burrage, good Mrs. Stockjobb.


Mrs. Stock. Oh fie, fie, fie, Madam; de Brandy is de Regale for de Dutch, not
de French: Here is de strange difference, De Brandy vill make de Frenchman as
dull as de Dog, and de Dutch man to fight like de Deevil: Beside, our Native
are given to make Love mush, vich is great Enemy to Drink. De Englishman vill
come drunk to his Metress, break her Vindow, tear, her Commode, and kick her
Lap-Dog, vhen de French man dare no ^oush one Hair of his Tail, but look like
de Fool, and sigh. Dear is de difference again, all is Cringe, all Obeisance;
dear is no Huff, no mal Visage, no Pesantry in France, ma Foy.


Squeam. But will you vindicate a Lampoon, Madam? oh horrid!


Mrs. Stock. A filthy Libel dat sall sawzily affront le Femme du Qualite, and
have de impudence to expose --


Sophr. To expose the good Man your Husband's Cuckoldom, and your close
Intrigue with this Hotspur that is mentioned there; that indeed is very saucy,
Mrs. Stockjobb.


Hotsp. So there is a Bob for me again. Nay, nay, good Madam, turn the Tide of
your satirical Vein another way, I don't like this kind of Railery.


Sophr. Oh, cry ye mercy, Sir, you need not tell me your Sentiments; I know an
honest Reflection must needs be Rhubarb to a Man of your Kidney and Character.


Hotsp. My Character! why what is my Character, Madam?


Sophr. Why troth, Sir, no very good one; and since you will have it told, it is
-- let me see, A lewd, vain, noisie, impertinent, drunken, roaring, debauched
Character.


Hotsp. So, so, she has fitted me for asking Questions.


Sophr. Come, Sir, for once I Will be a little satirical, and venture to describe
the course of life of all you Men of the Town: In the Morning the first thing
you do is, to reflect on the debauch of the Day before; and instead of saying
your Prayers as you ought, relate the lewd Folly to some other young rakehelly
Fellow, that happens to come to your Leve: The next thing is to dine, where
instead of using some witty or moral Discourse that should tend to improvement,
you finish your Desert with a Jargon of senceless Oaths, a relish of ridiculous
Bawdy, and strive to get drunk before ye come to the Play.


Hotsp. The Devil's in her; she has nicked us to a Hair.


Sophr. Then at the Playhouse ye ogle the Boxes, and dop and bow to those you
do not know, as well as those you do. Lord! what a world of sheer Wit too is
wasted upon the Vizard-Masks! who return it likewise back in as wonderful a
manner. You nuzzle your Noses into their Hoods and Commodes, just for all the
world like the Picture of Mahomet's Pigeon, when he gave the false Prophet his
ghostly Instructions. Fogh how many fine things are said there, perfumed with
the Air of sour Claret! which the well-bred Nymph as odoriferously returns in
the scent of Lambeth-Ale and Aquavitae


Hotsp. 'D's heart, what shall I do! I shall never have patience to hear this.


Sophr. Then at Night ye graze with the hard-driven Cattle you have made a
purchase of at the Play, and strut and hum up and down the Tavern with a swashy
Mien, and a terrible hoarse Voice, which the Lady (to engage your liking)
returns with some awkward Frisks, instead of Dancing, and a Song in a squeaking
Voice, as untunable as a broken Bagpipe. Then supper coming in, the Glasses go
about briskly. The Fools think the Wenches heavenly Company, and they tell them
they are extreme fine Gentlemen; 'till at last few Words are best; the
Bargain's made, the Pox is cheaply purchased at the price of a Guinea, and no
repentance on neither side. What think ye, Sir, am I not a rare Picture drawer?


Hotsp. 'Faith yes, Madam, and must sure have been a Practiser you self, you
have done it so exactly. 'D's death! no Help yet! Oh, here comes Stockjobb;
this was lucky: I shall be relieved now, sure.


Enter Stockjobb and Sir Quibble. Stock. Hoh, honest Will, good morrow to thee;
good morrow, Cousin Siss, and Madam your Servant, and so forth. What, and Pegry
here too! Why how now, little Pogry! how does my Deery! how does my Fawn, my
Pricket, my Duck, my Dove, and so forth. Well; does Richmond-Air agree with
thee? Does little Hans-in-kelder kick yet? Hah, Pogry? Prithee how do like
the Prospect? Is It not a sweet Place, and so forth.


Mrs. Stock. Any, par ma Foy is it de ver fine Place. Dicky, we have valk dis
morning as far as de Mount; dear is de Grove just by de River tout charm^nt,
vere is de most rare place to lie and sleep in, Dicky.


Sophr. And to make ye a Cuckold in, Dicky.


Mimicking her. Stockj. Ha, ha, ha! Oh your Servant, Madam, Sophronia; are you
so brisk already with your Jokes, and so forth? Do You hear, Pogry? Madam
Sophronia is at her Jokes slap-dash this morning.


Squeam. Ay, Cousin, she has been breathing her self upon us.


Hotsp. Her Ladiship's out of danger of a Tissick for this Season, I Will warrant
her.


Sir Quib. They talk as if she had been beating 'em all, I Will say it. Pray,
Madam, why do they talk at this rate? Where lies the Jest on'^? What is the
meaning of your high Discourse? And when will you Raffle at the Wells again,
Madam?


Sophr. Fool --


Sir Quib. Fool! that is nonsense I Will say it. And why Fool, pray, Madam? What,
and which, and where, and when, and --


Stock. Hold, hold, prithee, Sir Quibble, let me attack her; she called me
Cuckold you know. Come, Madam, I Will stand ye fair, 'saith: Your Reason, your
Reason; come, slap dash away with it, and so forth.


Sophr. Why I have skill in Physiognomy, and see it in thy Face: All Humanes are
allotted to some Fate or other, and thine is to be a Cuckold. The dimpled Slit
there upon the Tip of thy Nose, and shaggy meeting of thy Pent-house Eyebrows,
show it plain, To be brief, a Lampoon upon ye all were a meritorious Work:
First you, Mrs. Squeamish, for always railing at it; and yet by your ridiculous
Behavior perpetually giving cause. Secondly, thee Knight, for being Friends
with Fortune, that allots thee to be bubble^ by thy younger Brother. Next you,
Sir, for the intolerable Town* Vices of Drinking, Wenching, Gaming, cum m^ltis
aliis, as I told you before. Then you, good Protestant Refugee, for wheedling
and co^uting your Dicky there: And last poor Dicky for running about the Town*
Wagering and Stockjobbing, when Pogry has a more proper Job for him to look
after; and so farewell to ye. Look Sharp, if thou would be free from future Scorns;
The less thy Heed; the larger still thy Horns.


Pats him on the Pate, and Exit. Stock. Hey, Slap dash, why she is as sharp as
Vinegar this Morning, and so forth.


Sir Quib. Zooks, so she is, I Will say it: But why the Devil does she rail so:
And where the Devil has she all her Wit I wonder?


Mrs. Stock. Dis Railery is too morose, she wants de French breeding extremely.


Squeam. To vindicate a Lampoon? O filthy!


Hotsp. Faith, Dick, Thour't a Fool if thou mind'st what she says, she uses her
Father, Brothers and Sisters in this manner.


Stock. Not I, slap dash, she may talk what she will, and so forth, I believe
nothing against Pogry. Come Cousin, Siss, and Gentlemen, I invite ye all to
Dinner to Day, for little Pogry and I here, intend to have the Fiddles, and be
merry. Hey, slap dash, I vow my Heart's as light as a Feather; for I have laid
a World of good Wagers this Morning, I shall get five hundred Pounds by 'em I Am
sure; besides Stock rises to a Miracle: And I Have invented two such rare
Projects for the improvement of Tabby Cats Skins for Ladies Muffs, and Spirit
of Acorns to cure Agues, that the whole Exchange rings of it. Come, there you
shall know my Wagers too, and say of me, as that Eminent Common Council-man,
some Years since, did to the then Lord Mayor, Oh how great a Grace from Heaven
is a Wise Citizen!


Exeunt. SCENE II.
Enter Cunnington and Marmalet. Marm. Well, as I Am a Christian, Sir, if what
you have promised me prove to be true, you have made me the happiest Woman in
the whole World.


Cun. Hold a your Tongue, and take care you no cross your Star: Come vere sall
we be private?


Marm. Have but Patience a Minute, Sir, I Will only go and see what the Doctor is
doing, and come and conduct ye immediately.


Cun. Make haste; vat you tink de Star vill stay for you.


Marm. I go, Sir, I go.


Exit Marm. Cuning. Ha, ha, ha, ha, I find this is some old Waiting Woman
belonging to this place, whom I have already turned the wrong side outward,
with promising her a Husband: I have engaged to tell her Fortune, upon
Condition she discovers all her Secrets to me: The first of which shall be, the
Discovery of Quickwit's Design, which I am resolved to ruin, only for the dear
sake of the Mischief that will come of it: I have frighted her damnably
already; I have made her believe I am the Son of the Devil upon a
La^land-Witch; and that if she obeys me, she shall live to be a Countess; but
if not, she shall be brought to sell Save-alls and Card-matches, old Rags, and
Small coal in her old Age, and, at last, die upon a Dunghill near Fleet-ditch.
Here she comes, now to my Grimace again.


Re-enter Marmalet. Marm. Come, Sir, the Coast is clear now: Softly for
Heaven's sake; for the Doctor is just coming up.


Cun. If he dare come in my presence, I will conjure him --


Marm. Bless me!


Cun. Vat you pray! Zoon, Let me no hear you pray -- go, get you gone.


Exeunt. Enter Guiacum with a Letter, Sir Charles, T. Romance, Shinken, and
Numps. Guiac. Well, Friend, the Countess has done me the Honor to inform me in
her Letter here, that she relies upon my Skill and Experience to cure her Son,
nor shall my diligence be wanting; but she writes me no Word here, whence the
Delirium sprung: Prithee how came his Brain distempered first; what Accident,
what Cause, hah?


Numps. Odswokers, and't like your Worship, all that I know is, they zay
Master Toomas was hugely in Love with one of his Lady* Countesses Dairy Maids;
and becase they crossed him, he dissolved with himself to vall stark mad
upon it: Her Name was Mopsee, and't like ye, you was parlous Jade, you had a
Skin an 'twere any Milk-pan, and a Vace as bright as a Pewter-dish; you was
vengenable handsome, Odswokers --


T. Romans Odswoker, ha, ha, ha, damn him, What silly Clownish Booby have we got
here?


Shink. He was come of the ancient Stock of the Pritains, I believe by his
Peard: And look you, Cousin, if he is Pritains, he is Shentleman a-course, and
Shinken will findicate his Honor.


T. Romans His Honor, ha, ha, ha, why, hark'e, Cousin, the Beggars have long
Beard^, are they all Gentlemen too?


Shink. Look you, Cousin, if they are Pritains, they are.


Sir Char. A Man of Quality! supposed to be well bred too, and run mad for a
Dunghil-Drab, a Dairy-Wench! This is very odd. The Name of this unhappy
Gentleman, good Doctor?


Guiac. Why, Sir, his Name is De la Fool, he is of the ancient Family of the De
la Fool's of the South; their great Ancestor was a famous Officer under King
Harold, who being routed by William the Conqueror, fell mad, and the Disease
has more or less run in the Blood ever since: There is near them another Family
of the De la Wit's too, that are crazed at one time of the Moon; and indeed, it
may be properly said, they divide her between 'em, one being mad in the Wax,
and the other in the Wane.


Sir Char. Nay, nay, it is a mad Age here too as well as in the South, and
therefore I the less wonder at it; but my Daughter, Doctor, my Daughter, how
does she recover?


Guiac. More of that, Sir, presently -- Go, Friend, and try if you can decoy my
Lord hither: And go you, Christopher, and bid Marmalet bring her Lady too;
there is no better Cure of Lunacy than by reflection, Sir Charles your
Daughter's Distemper proceeding from disordered Love, makes her still vent the
Effects upon the imaginary Persons; particularly I have observed four, of
different Qualities, which are a Courtier, an Alderman, a Politician, and a
Divine.


Sir Char. There were four that did formerly teize her for her Estate indeed;
but proceed, good Doctor.


Guiac. To sooth her Malady therefore, and that I may the better time my
Medicines, I have ordered four Persons always to stand ready to represent'em,
which you and this Gentleman may now as naturally supply; for she distinguishes
very little as yet. Pray stand in order; and, by the Life of Galen, 'twill make
ye laugh heartily to see what Freaks she will perform. Well, Christopher, is she
coming?


Enter Christopher. Christ. Yes, Sir.


T. Romans Why then may I never make a good Intrigue more, if this plaguey Doctor
instead of a Cure upon me, would not make me run mad in a Week's time, if I
were with him.


Shink. By his Prabbles and his Pratings, I think his Prains in as pad
Conditions as his Patients, by St. Davy.


Guiac. This new Madman, now being possessed with a Frenzy somewhat near his
own, will very much assist her; therefore I resolve they shall be much
together; for I have some reason to hope the worst is past, because she
inclines to Music, and will often sing very sensibly. Oh, here she comes, pray
observe now.


Enter Fulvia madly dressed, and Marmalet. Fulv. Give me fresh Air, the Place
is hot and soultry; the Rooms are warmed with Lovers scorching Sighs that glow
and breath upon me. Is there no remedy? Must I be crowded thus -- Hah! Who Is
here? My cringing, complementing, comical, coxcombly Courtier again, my
perpetual Teizer, Sir Thomas Spindle: What Impudence is this? He has nothing
but a silly Place at Court, 250l. a Year, it will not buy me Pins: he cannot settle
four Groats upon me, and yet plagues me Four thousand times in an hour. Lord!
how he looks too like a Death's Head in an Apothecaries Shop, his Lips pale,
his Eyes sunk, and his Cheeks as thin as an Anatomy: A Cordial, a Cordial,
Doctor, the Man's dying; did ye ever see a thing look so?


Guiac. Lean, lean, Madam, as Lovers generally use to be: I Will advise him to
get a pair of Plumpers against he comes next. She takes your Welsh Cousin for
the Courtier, Sir Charles.


Marm. So now she is safe, I Will back again to my Fortune Tellers. I was born to be
a Countess, as I Am a Christian.


Aside and Exit. Sir Char. She has been horribly mad I find.


Shink. As March-Hairs; look you, Uncle, that is the fery plain truth of
Matters.


T. Romans Pox on it, would she would get her Senses quickly, or give me leave to
make Love to some body else: I am like a Fish out of the Water all this while,
I cannot live nor breath without intriguing; I Have above forty Bille^ deux now
ready sealed that all stick upon my hands, 'Gad take me.


Fulv. Hah! Sure my Eyes dazzle, who comes next here, what the honorable and
famous Politician, Mr. Votewell?


Guiac. Pray observe, Sir, she takes your Son for a Politician.


Fulv. Indeed, Sir, you wrong your self and the Nation, to leave the Affairs of
State for my sake, the French will certainly outwit us in your absence; nay,
you shall not stay a minute longer, indeed you shall not. Go, go, Sir, you must go,
the Committee wants you -- Fie! Fie! A Senator waste his Time in teizing one
single Woman, when he may have the Opportunity of plaguing a whole Nation!
Faith it shall never be said -- Doctor, pray help me, we'll thrust him out.


Changing Tone. T. Romans Ay, 'Gad, would ye would, I shall lose a rare Intrigue
else.


Aside Guiac. Not so, good Madam, he is troubled with the Gout, and too quick a
Motion may injure him; we'll send for a Chair: Hey, within there, fetch Mr.
Votewell a Chair.


pushes him away. Fulv. Ha, ha, ha, ha, Oh! the intolerable Machinations of a
conceited Statesman; but stay, what more solid Mischief is this approaches me,
Hah! sure it is impossible; what, Mr. Alderman Niggle? Nay, then I Am surprised
indeed.


Guiac. Good! you are taken for the Alderman, Sir Charles, look grave and feed
the Humor.


To Sir Charles. Fulv. See how he has powdered his Peruke, and smugg'd his old
Face up with a pernicious Design to ruin me. Look how he frisks and hops about
to show me what heat and vigor remains in Sixty five: Ah!

Shrieks Hands off, I Am resolved you shall not touch me; Fie, Fie, Fie, an old
Fellow, and thus rampant: Ah -- ah -- help, help, Doctor quickly, this Devil of
an Alderman will ravish me.


Guiac. Oh! Fie, Fie, Madam, by the Life of Galen, there is no danger, the
Alderman's too old.


Fulv. Look, he frisks, he dances, he jumps; hark'e do you hear him too, he says
he stews his Gold-Chain in Hearts horn Jelly, and drinks it every morning to
make him lusty -- Ah -- he comes upon me again, he will ravish me, He can ravish
me, help, help.


Guiac. Oons, it is impossible, Madam, when did you ever hear of an Alderman
that ravished any Body -- If she were in her right Wits now, i should think she
meant this as a Satyr upon the City, by the Life of Galen.


Sir Char. This is, indeed, the most fantastical Frenzy that ever I read or
heard of: How long does it usually hold her.


Guiac. Forty minutes together, sometimes more; I have weakened it to forty
minutes by my skill, it formerly held her an hour.


T. Romans To the dear, soft, white, pretty hand of that super-excellent Lady
Mrs. Gillian Gingerbread; ah, 'gad take me this billet should have been
dispatched away this very minute, and here am I playing the fool in a Mad-house.


Shink. Nay, pray you Cousins, have patience, she is engaged now with the
Fellow in the Placks, look you, pray you let us hear.


Fulv. Oh, -- Mr. Tickletext --


groans and weeps. Guiac. Observe now how the humor turns, now she is come to
her Melancholy sit, and takes Christopher for a Parson.


Fulvia. Reverend Mr. Tickletext, Wise Mr. Tickletext, that ever I should live
to see you thus overtaken, to leave your Flock in the Wilderness, to follow me
upon the Mountains, to fall from your zealous and instructive Principles,
carnally to fall in Love, and change the strong motions of the Spirit for those
of the Flesh -- O, Mr. Tickletext --

weeps! What will become of your poor Soul?


Guiac. I Have observed she is always extremely troubled about the Parsons Soul,
it is a thing worthy observation.


Fulv. Doctor --


mournfully. Guiac. What say you, Madam?


Fulv. Does Mr. Tickletext drink hard think you?


Guiac. No, sure Madam, not hard.


Fulv. Nor Swear, nor Game, Doctor?


Guiac. Neither Madam, unless it be a Game at Put now and then, for a Bowl of
Lambswool.


Fulv. For a Bowl of Punch rather, I fear Doctor; ay, it is so, I know it by the
red tip of his Nose; the Parson hates Lambswool, he loves the Bowl, the Bowl,
the lusty Bowl; and there alas his poor Soul will be drowned.


Guiac. His Soul again, pray observe.


Fulv. Yet, what care I, I Am Mrs. of my own fate, let 'em drink, let 'em roar,
let 'em sing, what is it to me I Will do the same.

Sings. How vile are the sordid Intrigues of the Town,
Cheating and lying, perpetually sway
From Bully and Punk to the Politic Gown,
In plotting and sotting they wast the whole day.
Let me have Music, and bring in Orpheus there, O, my hard fortune!


Guiac. So now the Fit's almost spent, let them come in there, she sits down,
these are Lunaticks by me appointed on purpose to indulge the Humor, the one
was a Young hot blooded Officer that being balk'd in a Battle, against the
French in Flanders, fell mad upon it, the Woman cracked her Brain with Pride and
Malice, hearing her Lover say, another was handsomer and better dressed at a
^ourt Ball.


There Is a Song in parts, between a mad Man, and a mad Woman, then two other
mad Men, who sit down, then enter Numps and Quickwit, like a mad Man with a
Paper. Guiac. You may perceive by this, Sir Charles, the Frenzy will wear off
by degrees, -- but see, here comes my Lord.


Quick. Though Cerberus bark, the Cat-a-mountain howl,
Though Winds do roar, and Waves do roll,
Mopsa's my Life, Mopsa's my Soul.

grins. Numps. Worse and worse, ah, lack-a-day, ah, lack-a-day, O my poor
Master!


Guiac. His Distemper vents it self much in scraps of Poetry, which shows it to
be the more violent and dangerous.


Sir Char. Why so, good Doctor.


Guiac. Why Sir, Poetry is a kind of Madness in it self, and must consequently
make a very ill addition to the Patients Distemper. I Will speak to him, what
have you there, my Lord?


Quick. Treason, in black and white, -- Though Cerberus bark, the Cat*amountain
howl, I Will conjure for her, I Will go down below into the Devils dairy, there I
shall find her licking the Cream-bowls, or pressing Curds to make Beelzebub a
Cheese, -- Hark, ye Patron, are you the Devil?


Guiac. The Devil! not I my Lord, bless me, what a question's there.


Quick. Nor yet his Dam?


Guiac. Nor his Dam neither, I Am your Doctor, my Lord.


Quick. Bring Mopsa then, I Will drown my self in Tears else,


falls down. Numps. O, worse and worse! O that chave lived to zee this day,
odswokers, he had as notable a Pate, a Vortnight ago as ever a one in our
Shire; our Minister at home was a Bottlehead town, and now to zee the Case zo
changed, and hear un talk zo like a Vool, odswoker che cannot forbear weeping
vor the heart of me.


howls out T. Romans O prithee, Pox take thee for a Bumpkin, what a howling do
thou make; ah, my dear sweet Miss Ginger-bread, 'gad take me, I shall grow as
mad as they, if I am kept here much longer


kisses the Letter. Shink. There is fery goot moralities and observations to be
made in this place, look you Cousins, therefore pray you have patience.


Quick. Have brought her? that is my Boy, ay there she is, I know her now.

Starting up. Sings. By those Pignies, that Stars do seem,
Those Breasts as white as Curds and Cream,
Those Cherry Lips and dimpled Chin,
It Is Mopsa that shall be my Queen.

Guiac. She makes up to him now, the Distemper works now, they are curing one
another, the two mad Men rise and dance with 'em.


Dance. Fulvia Sings. Art thou the Crack-brain'd Fool thou seem to be?


Quick. Art thou a white-fac'd Ape as mad as he?
A foolish Female nice and shy,
That never yet trod shoe awry,
Nor suffered youngster by the by,
To have a singer in the Pie?

Fulvia. In spite of Rings and Bracelets gay,
Sweet Iunkets on a Holyday,
Or all that silly Men can say
I Am still of Vesta's Train a Maid.

Quick. It Is then for want of Humane Aid.


Fulv. No, no.


Quick. Ay, ay.


Fulv. No, no.


Quick. Ay, ay.


Fulv. I Am still a Maid.


Quick. O fie, O fie!


Fulv. In thought and deed, and so will die.


Quick. You are a Fool, or else you lie, -- but if thou art, go to the Queen
and beg me, for I must hang to Morrow for a Rape, committed upon fifteen
Richmond Virgins, thirty years old and upwards, that have stood the shock of
Mankind most miraculously, there is my Petition, read it and away.


gives her a Letter Fulv. By Heaven it is Frederick's Hand, and I find now, this
is all seign'd madness, and a Plot of his to bring me off, O ye dear witty
Creature,


aside. Quick. Cry ye mercy Sir, by that shaggy Eyebrow, and that pulls Guiac.
away grizled Phiz, I know ye now, you are the Recorder.


Guiac. Variety of Madness, he said I was the Devil just now, and now he takes
me for the Recorder.


Quick. There, there is your Fee, and pray defer my Sentence, I must not come to
the Gallows, I have Money, let friendless Fellons, Fools, and Beggars dangle;
I Will bribe thee well, I must not hang, I Have Money.


Sir Char. The mad Fool speaks now methodically, Money indeed will do any thing.


Quick. What do I see, a guard to bear me off, and before Sentence, nay then
have at ye, avaunt ye Slaves, ye Pultroons, scour ye Vipers, a rescue, a
rescue, fall on my Friends, down with 'em.


snatches a Sword from T. Romance and beats 'em. Sir Char. Ah, Plague of our
heedless folly to come Armed amongst mad Men, there is no contending with him.


Quickwit drives 'em about the Stage. T. Romans My Lord, my Lord, 'odsdeath what
do you mean?


Shink. Mean to a mad Man, that is fery simple by St. Davy, goot her Lord have
patience, Shinken was her friend and fery humble Servant look you.


Guiac. My Lord, my Lord, I am the Recorder you know.


Quick. beats 'em. Quick. The Devil thou art, down with 'em there, a rescue, a
rescue.


Guiac. Am I a Devil again, nay then there is no fence against a flail, I must
give way too.


Exit Guiacum and Quickwit locks the Door. Quick. Ha, ha, ha, so, if this was
not well played, I Will never Act part again.


Fulv. Thou art the best of Actors, and shall be rewarded accordingly, nor
shall honest Numps be forgotten neither.


Numps. Odswokers, che can make a Vool of vorty such Doctors as this is.


Quick. Your Ladyship would make an admirable Actress, faith Madam, to out-wit
the Doctor so artificially -- it is a Masterpiece.


Fulv. Ha, ha, ha, and before the grave Knight and young Fool's face too.


Quick. Ha, ha, ha, ha, and but reasonable Madam, what should a Fool do with so
fine a Lady.


Fulv. O, Sir your Complement some other time, come whilst we have this
opportunity let us into my Closet, and consult about the manner of my escape.


Quick. Which is contrived methodically in that Letter there, by your Lover,
who I hope suddenly shall be happy in his reward too.


Fulv. If faithful Love, and an obedient Wife can make him happy, he may assure
himself of me, I know his Merit, and have a Soul to prize it.

Nor shall the wretched Customs of the World,
That change the sweets of Love to a sordid Bargain,
Ever corrupt my Nature, wealth is a good addition,
And shall be given by me a Slave to virtue,
And wait upon the kind brave Man I love,
Who Weds a Fool, affronts her humane Nature;
Who can be kind to such a Brutal Creature,
It Is Wit with Love improves the Marriage Charms,
And such a Man is welcome to my Arms.

Exeunt. The End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter Cunnington and Marmalet. Cunn. VEL now, as you hope to be de Countess,
and keep your six Footmen and your Page, dis is all true vat you tell me.


Marm. Every syllable in troth Sir, O fie, upon my Integrity I would not tell
ye a Lie for the versal World.


Cunn. Ver good, vel den I will tell you the rest of your fortune, but first
fesh me de Almanac, dat I may tell de good day from de bad, dat is material
point.


Marm. Yes Sir, I Will bring it presently -- a Countess, why, well fare thy heart
old Ienny, six Footmen and a Page, odsme I Am overjoyed.


Exit Cunn. So, I have squeezed her as dry as a sponge already, the Heiress in
this House, that Sir Charles Romance designs for his Son, only feigns her self
mad, and Quickwit is by a Trick to get her away for young Frederick, ha, ha,
ha, ha, I warrant he thinks himself as secure of her now, as a Cat is of a
Mouse that he has between his Paw, ha, ha, ha, alas poor Fool, but if I aim
right, he shall find himself damnably mistaken, for what will I do now, but
privately go and discover all to Sir Charles, so get my self a swinging Reward,
and Quickwit a Plaguey beating, that shall stick by him this Month, ha, ha, ha,
'gad I love such a mischief with all my heart, how it tickles me, I grow even
fat at the conceit on it. O here comes my Countess, I must dispatch this old
Fool first, and then away -- Mum, now for fortune-telling.


Re-enter Marmalet with an Almanac. Marm. Here Is an Almanac and 't please ye.


Cunn. O let me see, June, June, June, July. Vere be de

changing his voice Dog-day, dat he de ver good time to make de Intrigue, let
me see, you say you ver born in July.


Marm. The fourteenth and shall please ye.


Cunn. Oh, Ver good, ver good, now shake your left Arm and your right Leg both
together, vich we call in Astrology de simple motion.


Marm. Is that right, pray Sir.


Shakes her Arm and Leg awkardly. Cunn. Yes, yes, dat vill do ver well, dat I
must needs say is de ver simple motion indeed.


Marm. But Sir, you tell me nothing all this while, pray Sir, what good fortune
shall I have? and particularly, I beseech ye Sir, to give me leave to ask that
question, that we Maids most desire to know, which is, when shall I be married,
and please ye?


Cunn. Cry Hymen vid a sigh, one, two, tree time so, now sit cross-legg'd, and
turn de Gnomon of your face, dat is your nose; pulls her Nose to de North East,
dat's right, now smile a little, smile foolishly like, right, now let me feel
your pulse; aw ver well, I see now you shall have for your Husband de ver
Gentleman dat vas to steal away your Lady.


She makes silly grimaces Marm. What Mr. Quickwit, and shall I be no Countess
after all this.


Cunn. Zoon Metresse have de patience and understand your good Fortune, he
shall live to be, let me see, Baron of Barn-elms, and if de Planet, dat I see
dear say right, he shall be Duke of Twitnam, Mortlack, and Brainford, go, go
presently, find him out, and make de Love to him, for I see by my Art, dat dis
is de Critical minute, and ver fit for your purpose -- go.


Marm. Well, I vow Sir, you have ravished me with your Words Duchess of
Twitnam, Mortlack, and Brainford; why, this is prodigious, Lord to see! how
preferment will puff up a body, methinks a Countess is too small a title now.


Cunn. Hark you, one word more, if he refuse you, take two, tree more of your
Female Friend vid good Cudgel, and beat him, vor de Star do appoint dat way to
make soft his Heart and Inclination, fear noting, beat him but soundly, and he
shall love you for ever after -- Adieu. I must get out and laugh somewhere, or
I shall burst.


Aside, Exit. Marm. Duchess of Twitnam, Mortlack, and Brainford, -- O Lord,
methinks I don't feel the ground I go on! Well, this is a most admirable
Person, as I Am a Christian, and of most profound skill, for he told me some
marks about me, as right, as if he had been by when I was brought into the
World. Well, if Cudgelling my Lover will make me noble, I Will get them that
shall lay it on with a good will In troth, for methinks, I long to be called
your Grace, your Grace. Lord, how it tickles me, pray Heaven my Brain stand
firm, for I Have heard these new honors are very intoxicating.


Exit. Enter Quickwit, Fulvia, and Numps. Quick. You Will be sure to be ready,
Madam, against twelve at Night.


Fulv. As punctual as the Minute, get you but the door open that can let us
into the Garden, and for the rest let me alone.


Quick. For that, let me alone, and do'e hear, Numps, be sure you take your
opportunity to slip out and acquaint Mr. Frederick, that the Coach may be ready
at the time, 'dsheart if we should fail in our business to Night, I should be
poisoned before noon to Morrow, with Pills, Powders, and confounded Potions,
which I see are preparing for me yonder: for Heavens sake, how came you to
'scape, Madam.


Fulv. Why, my being obstinate at first, has made the Fool take an opinion,
that he can cure me with specificks. It Is such a positive Coxcomb, that if he
once gets a notion into his Head, there is no removing it, tho never so absurd
or ridiculous. Come, Numps, come you along with me, you must carry a Letter for
me.


Numps. A Letter for ye, ah, would you were to be folded up into a Letter your
self, and I were to carry ye to Mr. Frederick, I Would trudge for ye heartily -- I
would odswokers, there is my word still.


Fulv. Well, Numps, he shall know the good service you would do him, but for
the present let us part, for fear the Doctor should be prying about my Lord de
la Fool -- your Lordships most humble -- ha, ha.


Exit. Numps. Oh, my poor Master, O, O! odswokers the job goes on rarely.


Exit. Quickwit Solus. Quick. So, I think I Am in as pretty a way now to get
five hundred pounds, as heart can wish, nothing but the very Devil or my Friend
Cunnington can hinder the happy conclusion now, and I think I have been cunning
enough to keep it out of his reach, I know the Rogue will envy my good fortune,
but that will breed occasion for more mirth hereafter, and when the Guinneas
are in my hand once, I shall have the better gust to rally and laugh at him --
O Mrs. Marmalet, your humble Servant.


Enter Marmalet, who curtsies to him and smiles affectedly. Marm. Yours, sweet
Mr. Quickwit, or rather, sweet my Lord, I mean not as in the former counterfeit
strain, but in very good truth and reality, I give you your title as it is to
be.


Quick. Say ye so, Mrs. Marmalet, I would I were to give you a new Gown upon
that condition.


Marm. Ah my Lord, your Grace must give me more than a new Gown before that
comes to pass, -- yet it shall happen.


Curtsies still. Quick My Grace, what a Plague does she mean, why hark'e, godd
moldy conserve of Quinces, I thought you had been more busy in packing up
your Ladies things, than to stand bant'ring here my Grace, what a Devil art
thou Mad?


Marm. No, no, my Lord, I am not Mad my Lord, you should find me perfect in
every part, if your Grace would please to try me.


Quick Zoons my Grace again.


Marm. In brief, great Duke it is your Love I seek, on which depends your
fortune, on which depends, my making or my marring, behold I stand here suing
for your liking, a spotless Maid, a Virgin Cabinet, that fifty years has kept
its treasure close, from Spiders, Moths, and from all other Vermin, till now
kind fate has given a key to you.


Quick. Cracked, downright Crazed as I live, this comes of living to be an
old-Maid.


Marm. Ah, dear my Lord, do not deceive your self, I have my senses right and
all things else thank Heaven.


Quick. Why, what a Plague do Lord me at this rate then? and talk to me of
Treasures, and Cabinets, and Spiders, and Moths, and making, and marring; why
ye Queen Elizabeth's Old Fardingale, ye dirty wrinkled worm-eaten Ruff without
Starch, ye tarnish'd old fashioned Picture of mad Hecuba in the Hangings, what
do cant of Love to me for?


Marm. Does not my Person nor my Merits move ye, know then, the Stars appoint
ye honors, if you Marry me, you shall become a Duke.


Quick. Become a Dog, Pox on ye for an old Carrion, is this a time for whimsies.


Marm. It is the time my Lord, the only time, I am told by Art, that if we
Marry, we shall both be Noble, I do beseech your Grace believe my Tears, there
are great Honors budding.


Quick. Honors and budding, what a Devil can this plaguey Hag mean by all this?


Marm. Good my Lord, Marry me I do beseech your Grace, rolent.


Quick. I wont ye old Fool, pox take ye, I wont I tell ye, and get ye gone, and
play your Oafs tricks somewhere else, or I Will kick ye. Marry her, I Would as soon
Marry a Lancashire Witch, that was sick of the Plague.


Marm. How, nay then since my hard fate, since no fair means will do, the Stars
must have their way.


Exit, and re enter presently with two other female Servants armed with
Cudgels. Quick. My Grace and my Lordship, and Marry, ha, ha, ha, 'gad I believe
the old Sibil has been regaling her self, with a gill or two of Brandy after
Dinner, and her frigid veins having gotten a little warmth, provoke her to
think of Marriage, Marriage with a Pox to her.


He turns his back, and she strikes him over the Shoulders. Marm. Dear Sir
excuse me.


Quick. Excuse ye, what a Plague's the matter now.


Serve. It Is all for your good, indeed my Lord.


Strikes him. Quick. 'Dsheart ye damm'd Iezabel, be quiet you had best.


Marm. It Is much against my good nature, but


Strikes him ages* Quick. But, what, ye Devil, but what -- are ye bewitched


^ubs himself* Serve. The Stars will have it so.


strikes him* Quick. -- Oons the Stars.


Marm. Do but consent to Marry me, and be a Duke.


Quick. Ye Crackbrain'd Idiot.


Serve Of -- Twitnam.


strikes him. Quick. Very well, Witch.


Serve. Mortlack.


strikes him. Quick. Fiends and Furies.


Marm. And Brainford upon my Honor, it is pity Love puts on so rough a visage,
but it is the fates decree; and I must,


beats him still. Quick. The Devil brain ye, 'dsdeath, stand off, for if I get
into ye, I will so rattle your bones, ye moldy, mischievous, withered,
worm-eaten --


Enter Fulvia and Numps in have. Fulv. Lost, lost, ruined undown, we are all
betrayed and discovered -- how now, what is the matter here.


Maid Servants run out. Quick. A Sibil, a Succubus. 'Gad it is well you came in
Madam, I would have tried what power that Witch would have, when I had drawn
blood of her.


Fulv. What Witch, what does he talk of, the Witchcraft is within yonder -- I
tell ye, you are all betrayed, Sir Charles has discovered us.


Quick. A Hag, a Nightmare, -- What Is that you say Madam, discovered, what is
discovered.


changing his tone. Fulv. We, we, all of us, some Devil or other has betrayed
us, and discovered all our design to Sir Charles, and the Doctor whom I
overheard just now, threatening such unmerciful punishments to you and poor
Numps there, that it almost distracted me to hear 'em.


Numps. Ralph, Tom, and Christopher, and all the Servants of the House are
called up for no good I fear, odswokers, look, look, see if that plaguey word
will leave me now, -- would I had never learned it.


Quick. So, I find that I have h^ yet, only a sample of Cudgelling, the main
payment is behind hand, I Am in a very pretty condition faith, but how could
this be Madam, 'dsdeath, who is ^his Devil of a discoverer, what is his name.


Fulv. That, Sir Charles would not inform the Doctor, being as it seems
enjoined him as a secret, yet thus far told him, that it was an old Comrade of
yours, and one of your own society.


Quick. Cunnington, as I live I find it now, it can be no Devil else -- O, Son
of a Whore! O, malicious Dog!


Fulv But how he came to know it, that is Witchcraft again.


Marm Ods bodiki^s, my heart misgives me, that I can best tell that, my
Con^^rers name was Cunnington, who promised me a Dukedom for the secret (...)
with a hundred Oaths to keep it, and sure a Conjurer has (...) to break his
Oath, I must go and be better (...) as I Am a Christian.


Exit. (...) (...) mere jest, a Fool to all the Town and Country, (...) know,
thrown into the Ho^sepond.

(...) some such thing, that is the (...) on it.


Quick. They do; nay, ten to one, or some worse punishment. Numps, prithee
contrive something to help at a Pinch; what shall we do, hah?


Numps. Why, truly my Lord de la Fool, if I might advise your good Lordship.


Quick. Nay, nay, Pox on it, no jokes now, thou know it is honorable enough
to assist Lovers, Numps.


Numps. Numps, Numps, what Numps, I Will be Numps no more not I, my Name's
Gregory Golding an Ale-house-keeper here at Twitnam; 'oons, I shall have my
Bones broke here about your Numps, and your honorable Lovers, would I were
well out on it, 'odswokers, plague take that word too, would 'twere hanged.


Fulv. I find Numps would hardly undertake me now folded up in a Letter.


Quick. 'Sdeath here they come, all contrivance is in vain too, I find I must
bear it.


Fulv. Nay, I am almost in as bad a Case, for I shall be tiez'd out of my Life,
by Sir Charles and the young Blockhead now; but come, let us Act it to the last,
my Lord, let us play our parts well however.


Numps. A vengeance on it, I shall make a hopeful part of mine I believe.


Enter Sir Charles, Guiacum, and Christopher. Guiac. Manage you your Daughter
Sir Charles, whilst I confront this Rascal. Your Servant, my noble Lord.


to Quickwit. Quick. Staring madly Is Mopsa come from the Black Stigian Fields,
where yearly range the Cows of Proserpine, Tib, Whitehorn, Colly, Redrose,
Smut, and Blincko; see where she sits stroking the swelling Teats, and takes
Infernal Cream in Pails of Agate.


Guiac. Rare counterfeiting Rascal.


Aside. Sir Char. How does my Daughter, do the Lovers tieze her still, where is
the Reve end Mr. Tickletext, and the Worshipful Mr. Alderman Niggle, ha?


Fulv. Staring too There, there he is, he shakes his Gold Chain at me, and
pulls out his hair purse with fifty pieces, thinking to bribe my virtue, ah *
I Will have none on it, ah * y' are an old Fellow, avaunt, avaunt, ah * ah *


shrieks out. Sir Charl. Oh strange! why Doctor, she grows worse and worse.


Guiac. Extremely. ill Sir, I have been very much deceived in her, I see now I
must be forced to tie her in her Bed, and give her a Purge or two of Sand and
Snow-water to abate this heat, -- she shall take it to Night.


Fulv. The Devil shall have you first.


Aside. Guiac. And as for my Lord there, I see his fit Increases too, and I
must be severe with him. Go, Christopher, get the Gives and Fetters ready, and
call the rest of your Fellows as I ordered, tell the Surgeon too, I Will have the
Skin of my Lords Head flead off, and rubbed with Salt and Vinegar.


Quick. Oh, Lord --


Aside. Guiac. His Lordship has a wondrous hot Pate; I Will cool it with a
Vengeance. You, Friend,

to Numps I think are somewhat crazed too; but it is but slight. A good sound
whipping three times round the Orchard will set you right, Numps.


Numps. Ah, no Numps, and't like your Worship, no Numps, I Am a poor, Twickenham
Man, merely drawn in as I hope to be saved.


Guiac. How does your Pulse beat now, my Lord, humph -- do'e know me yet; am I
a Devil, or a Recorder -- Speak, I know your Cure is perfect.


Quick. Why then, Faith, Doctor, I thank ye, I Am as well as ever I was in all
my Life.


Briskly. Numps. And I too, Odswokers -- again -- would the Devil had that word
--


Sir Char. But Fulvia there says nothing, her Distemper reigns still.


Fulv. No, Faith, now I think on it, I Am perfectly cured too;

in a brisk Tone. Come, Sir Charles, and Doctor, it is but a Frolic, a Trial of
Wit you see; hanged, pass it by for once, and give 'em their Liberty.


Guiac. Not too fast, good Madam. Within there ho,

Enter Servants. See these two well beaten, pumped, and tossed in a Blanket,
for fear of a Relapse, and then discharge 'em.


Sir Char. Let 'em be swing'd to purpose -- go get you in, I Will speak with you
anon.


Exit Fulvia. Quick. Nay, nay, Sir Charles, what for a Trick of Wit? 'Twas but
a Trick of Wit, Faith, Doctor.


Guiac. Oh, Sir, your Wit is out of its Sphere now; and to set it right, I am
obliged to cudgel ye by my Profession. Away with 'em.


Numps. This comes of Acting Numps, a Plague o'your Acting


They are pulled out. Sir Char. Ha, ha, ha, Farewell my good Lord de la Fool,
Ha, ha ha --


Guiac. 'Twas cunningly acted of the Rogues; but now, Sir Charles, what is to be
done with the Lady.


Sir Char. Keep her close up till you hear further from me: Take heed of
Visitants, and more mad Lords, Doctor; I Will go and prepare her once more for my
Son, and put the Case home to her, and her Ingratitude; it may be the Discovery
of this Plot, and her small hopes of serving her own Humor, may make her yield
to mine: But if she be stubborn,

She shall have Cause to curse each tedious hour,
And know too late by me a Guardian's Power.

Excunt. SCENE II.
Enter Sir Quibble, Stockjobb, and Cunnington. Stock. COme, come, 'twas but a
Joke, 'twas no more, Faith. Squire Thomas seems to be a very honest Gentleman,
and a Lover of Business. Prithee Sir Quibble come in again, and take the other
Glass, and so forth.


Sir Quib. A scandalous Fellow to say I was an Hermaphrodite, to make a
Monster, a Devil, I cannot tell what of me, to disgrace me before the Ladies:
But this shall not get the Heiress from me; I know his drift well enough, it
shall not do I Will say it.


Stock. Come, come, prithee, come in again.


Sir Quib. 'Pray excuse me, Sir, I promised my Mother to come home to Supper;
and I know her heart goes a pit a pat, if I Am never so little out of her sight,
for fear I should be stole or come to any harm; besides I must tell ye plainly,
I don't like the Company. I Will drink a Glass here with this honest Gentleman,
if you please, but I would not come in again for a 1000 l.


Stock. Well, my Comical Friend, do you entertain the Knight then, I must go
mind my Guests within: Hey, bring some Wine there --


Exit Stockjobb. Cunn. This is one of the silly Heiress stealers, of the other
side, I Will banter the Fool.


Sir Quib. Your Servant, Sir, by your Discourse within, Sir, I perceive that
you are a great Traveller.


Cunn. I have seen I tink dis Globe, I mean Europe, Asie, Africa, Americk, or
so; dat is all.


Sir Quib. That is all indeed, Sir, you must ride upon the Dogs-star, as the
mad Song says, if you would see more.


Cunn. Sire, I have seen much more, I have observe too de Globe Celestial; I
have been so high as to hang my Hat upon one Horn of de Moon, and have toush de
North Pole vid min Finger.


Sir Quib. With your Finger, Sir, your Servant again, Sir: Why that is very
strange I Will say it.


Cunn. Sir, I have live in de Moon-world some time, de Emperor is de ver proud
Monarch, and keep de subject in great awe; de people dear are like de Pigmy, de
man's and woman's not half yard high, but generally wise and ver great
Politicians.


Sir Quib. Ods diggers, this is a most excellent Fellow; and pray, Sir, don't
those Politicians of the Moon take us English-Politicians for mad Fellows, hah?


Cun. Yes, truly, dey do tink dat you be all mad indeed.


Sir Quib. Prithee what Women are there? Do they dress their Heads as our
Cocking Ladies do here, I wonder.


Cunn. No, no, de woman's dear have no head at all, de face stand vere de
Breast should, and de Mouth is de Navel.


Sir Quib. Oh, Lord, there must be strange kissing I Will say it.


Cunn. De Creation was ver wise in dat, no woman's is suffer to have head dear,
for fear she should plot Mischief.


Sir Quib. Ha, ha, ha, I Will say it an admirable Reason too. But pray, Sir, now
lets get down from the Moon a little; and since you have observed all the
People and Cities in the World, pray, Sir, when was you last at London?


Cunn. Ven de Sun came last Post from de Antipodi dis morning, dis morning.


Sir Quib. Ha, ha, ha, very pretty again, I Will say it: Why then, ten to one, but
you have all the passages of the Town at your Finger's-ends; and, I Will say it, I
long to hear 'em. Prithee what do they do at Court now, hah?


Cunn. Why de come, scrape, and look ver sharp, den whisper de friend in de
corner, and talk politic one half hour, den oagle Repas du Roy, and make ver
low Bow, den comb de Peruke, take Snuff, and scrape out again; dat is all.


Sir Quib. Ha, ha, ha -- that is very like a Courtier I Will say it* Come, come,
now for the City, what are our Men of Gravity doing?


Cun. Why fait dey follow still dear old Custom -- dat is, contrive to sheate
one anoder; dey dat have no stock for Trade, make use of de stock of Impudence,
and sign Policy to lay Wager, so make four, five sheating Bargain over night,
and ver fairly break, and run away next morning.


Sir Quib. Well said again i'^ackins; 'gad this is a plaguey sharp Fellow: But
come now, for our Places of Diversion; Prithee how go Humors at the
Musick-Meeting and Playhouse?


Cun. As for de humor amongst all de rest, I only observe tree sort, dat is, de
(...) (...) Coquet, and de F^dler: de Beau dear make de fine Song, ^o show his
(...) s^ she admire de Beau, but laugh behind his back; de Fiddler (...) ^usick,
take de Money, and begar laugh at them both.


Sir Q --. Ha, ha, ha, -- Well I Will say it I Will give my Mother the slip some
time or other, and go and see the Humors there I Am resolved; but come now, for
the Playhouse.


Cun. Noting, noting; dear is noting dear pour Railery, but de Whore and de
Critic, and two tree dozen of old musty Orange-Wench dat ride upon your Back
while de Musiick play.


Sir Q --. Odsdiggers, so they used to serve me, I Will say it: Well, but hark'e
now, let us be a little serious; -- I must know one thing more; heark'e, Do you
ever go to Church -- pray Friend?


Cun. Umph, Church!


Sir Q --. Ay, ay, Does Devotion thrive? -- I know you must observe something
of that too.


Cun. No fait, dear you pose me; for to speak truth, like good Christian, I
have not see de inside of one Shurch dis -- sixteen year, and begar I find de
Town ver mush of my humor; de People and de Priest make de grand difference;
he can say ver little or noting dat dey believe, and dey, Begar, vill do noting
vat he advise; so I never trouble de Shurch at all.


Sir Q --. I Will say it, an Admirable Persontoo! Well, dear Signior, you have so
much obliged me, that if you please to come to my House, you shall find every
day a Welcome that --


Enter Tom Romance, hastily. T. Romans Why Cunnington, Cunnington, what a Devil
art Speaks entering. thou doing?


Sir Quib. Is your Name Cunnington, Sir?


Cun. Yes 'saith, Sir; But I know I shall be welcome to your House for all that
Hah, ha, ha.


T. Romans Hah, ha, ha,! What has the Hermaphrodite been banter'd again? Ha, ha,
ha.


Sir Quib. 'Slid there is some Trick in this; Odsdiggers, come near my house,
and I Will set my Dogs at ye: A Plague, here comes more of 'em; I shall be
laughed to Death if I stay. I Will say, 'oons Cunnington, I should bave been
robbed or ravished in a weeks time.


Exit Sir Quibble. Enter Stockjob. Cun. You came a little too soon; for I was
just going to pump him about the Heiress.


T. Romans Phoo, Pox she is secure enough Boy, but I have some fresh play in my
head; now Stockjob's Wife, ye Rogue.


T. Romans Here she comes, 'gad take me I Will give her my Billet deux presently.


Enter Squeamish and Hotspur, and Mrs. Stockjob. Squeam. Oh horrid! Cousin, why
do you bring me into all this Company, especially where that Fellow is, for I am
certainly informed, 'twas that horrid Fellow that writ the last Lampoon upon
the Wells.


Mrs. Stock. Have de patience Cousin, me shall find out dat presently, hark'e
Sir, you damm English Pultroon, dare you abuse de Lady, dare you make de damm
Lampoon ha?


Cunn. Not I Madam, you are the most mistaken in the World.


Squeam. Not that I value the little malice, but to see the bestiality of the
Fellow; I kept my self so reserved, Cousin, all this Summer to avoid censure,
that I refused to receive visits from any Man under the Age of sixty nine, nor
ever went any whither but to Church, and if they did not Lampoon me for that
too, I Am no Christian.


T. Romans I must get the Rogue off, -- 'Gad take me, Madam, I have to Mrs. Stock
job such a value for your Wit and Beauty, that upon my Honor, I would not
deceive you in any thing, and I assure you he is innocent of the matter,
therefore let me desire you to turn the discourse, I Will inform you more
hereafter.


Mrs. Stock. Ah Monsieur, it is impossible for me to doubt a Person of such
merit, and so well accomplished as your self. Cousin, I am too Squeamish
inform, by dis Gentleman, dat we are under de grand mistake.


Hotsp. She informed by that Puppy, then they 're familiar I find.


Aside. Mrs. Stock. Sir, I beg your pardon vid all mine heart, I understand you
are de ver ingenious Person, and understand de Ladies affair.


Squeam. Nay, I cannot positively affirm he was the Person I confess; I only
grounded my suspicion the more solidly, because of his Satirical Phiz; O
horrid! methinks his Face is a mere Lampoon it self.


Stock. Come, come, slapdash, and so forth, let us reconcile all mistakes with a
Glass of Wine and a Song, I Have a Bowl of Punch ready within too.


T. Romans There spoke the Soul of the City and so forth, That was done now like
a Man of intrigue.


Puts a Note into Mrs. Stock job's bosom. T. Romans My dear, dear Charmer, 'gad
take me I Have had a passion for ye above this six Months, and if you don't
answer my Billet deux there, I shall dye that is certain.


Mrs. Stock. Dis is de ver agreeable Fellow, but I must show de cunning, and not
yield too soon,

Aside. -- O, fie, fie, Monsieur, I am sure you mistake me I am not de Person,
it is impossible dat I --


T. Romans Not the Person, by this dear hand, there is no Person in the World but
you, has the power to charm my heart, your Eyes have made me a very. --


Hotsp. A very fop, Rascal, Dogbolt, -- come, draw, draw, Buffoon, I Will teach
you to be saucy with Women in my Company.


Stock. Hey, slapdash, what a Plague's the matter now? keep the Peace there,
hey day, is the Devil in ye all, and so forth.


Exit. Fight here, and Tom Romance, and Shinken are beaten off, the Women
shriek and run out. SCENE III.
Enter Sir Quibble, Frederick and Quick wit. Fred. Death, and Consusion,
Cunnington, discover the Plot: Why how was it possible he should come to know
it?


Quic^ Nay that piece of Witchcraft I am yet to Conjure for, but I can assure
you the beating was substantial, and so had the Blanket been too, if some of
Sir Quibbles Gold, had not bribed off two of the Grooms: but come Si^, take
Heart, for though my Brains have taken occasion hitherto to disoblige my Bones
a little; I have another Plot left yet, not only to make my revenge perfect
upon Cunnington not; but to secure you the Lady, for since I have undertaken
it, you shall have her, though the great Devil, and all his little Imps
conspired against me.


Fred. Pox, what vexes me most is, it is grown the Common Town talk already,
they have it at the Coffee-house as familiar as the (...).


Sir Quib. Prithee how did do to Act the Madman? I Will say it, I Would have given a
hundred Guineas to have seen thee a little; Prithee how did look? and what
did say, I wonder? and when did the Lady come in with her Story? and which
way, and upon what account? and wherefore?


Quick. And wherefore good Sir come away quickly, and fetch the Guineas you
promised, for I shall have occasion for a Bribe or too, to carryon the Affair:
Farewell Sir, I see Company coming, stay.


Exit Sir Quib. and Dog. Enter Sophronia with a Book. Fred. Hah, am I fallen
into this Satirical Devils Clutches too, then I Am like to have a rare
Breathing, for I perceive by that malicious Smile with which she mocks her
self, that she has heard of this late business; and is as pleased I warrant, as
prosperous Malice can make a Woman, when she has an opportunity of being
revenged: Well, I am resolved to stand the brunt now, come what will on'^, I
see she is prepared for the Assault, and to beat her out of her Guard, I Will begin
first. What always reading, Madam, still affronting Mankind, by Invading their
Province of

To Her. Knowledge, ^ye, this is unnatural; a Lady should no more pretend to a
Book, than a Sword, neither of 'em are proper for het Sphere of Activity.


Soph. This, only excepted Sir, this is a Treatise proper for all degrees of
People, it is called, Sir, an Hospital for Fools, where the most dislempe^'d of
that sort shall be Cu^'d, or at least put into a good way. What think ye Sir,
shall I send it ye, you may chance to have some apish humor in your Brain, or
some foolish act in your Body, that may want a good remedy.


Fred. Oh I thank ye, Madam, but must beg your Excuse, to take a Recipe from a
Female Physi^ian, to cure a defect in the Brain, that is a good one Faith: Why
that is the way to make a Man stark Mad indeed: And as for my Body, I had as
lieve take an old Purblind Country Nurse, if I had a mortal Bruise, or Palsy,
and I were certain to have the scandal of a Cripple upon me all the days of my
life after.


Sophr. I don't know what you mean by your Bruise, or Palsy; but considering
your general distemper of Body, '^would be a greater scandal to the Nurse, to
take ye in hand.


Fred. Very fine, well certainly there is not another so vain a thing in
Nature, as a Woman that supposes her self a Wit; she fancies all the World must
truckle to her Wit, and admire her Person, and Wit; tho the Wit's as Envious as
a Witch, and often as Ugly.


Soph. That might be a fault indeed in the last Age; but in this I never met
with any of your Town Crew, that have Wit enough to cause Envy.


Fred. If there is any one, Fool enough to Love her, she will make him a mere
Changling, and like a little sullen Chit, of five years old, deny herself the
Morsel she Loves; only to Teize and Vex another, when at the same time her
mouth waters, and she is ready to starve for Hunger; this I think touches your
Ladyships Copyhold a little; but much good may't do ye with your sullen fit, I
know you will get a Husband, and a vast fortune by it.


Soph. Well Sir, not to be behind hand with ye, in your Frumps, much goood may
do you with your Rich Heriess, you will get a Wife, and a prodigious fortune by
her, I hear too.


Fred. Ah Curse on her, I find she knows all.


Aside. Soph. For m^ part, it were unreasonable for me, to expect you to be
constant to my s^all merit, when you had such a tempting Lump as Fifty thousand
Pounds to cherish your hopes withal; Fifty thousand Pounds, d'slife, there is
never a Beau from Covent Garden Church to the Tower of London, but shall give
his little Corpse to the Devil, every hour of the Day for it.


Fred. Nor never a Lady that frequents the Park, Playhouse, or the
Musick-meeting; but shall marry a thing one degree removed from a Baboon for
half as much.


Soph. By which I find Sir, you are not out of hopes, I dare swear you think
your self above one degree removed, tho your last Mad Plot upon the Heiress has
given the world some strange suspicions to the Contrary: on m^ Conscience you will
return to me again Sir, you will have some qualm or other come over ye shortly*
then yet drunk, and with a kind of maudlin Repentance, come to beg my pardon,


Fred. So far from it, that I rather fear I shall have ye at my Lev^e every
morning shortly, with a pitiful Petition, imploring my Charity, to bes^ow on
^e the remains of Matrimony.


Sophr. The remains, Sir, I have Arithmetic enough to know, that take nothing
from nothing, and there remains nothing: Besides a Married Town Bea^ keeps
always a Misers Table, there is so little for his own Family, that he will never
get thanks, or a blessing from any one that shall expect his remains, take that
from me Sir.


Fred. Very well Madam, rally on, rally on, and enjoy your Wit. You have my
free leave, whilst I Enjoy Fulvia, and fifty thousand Pounds, and so farewell;
and, d'sdeath, such another full thrust and I were gone to all Intents and
Purposes.


Exit. Fred. Soph. He Is gone, and tears my Heart Strings as he goe^*
Whilst I have only the poor Consolation
Of a feigned Mirth, to hide my real Sorrow;
For still I Love this base ungrateful Wretch,
False as he is, and full of all the Mischiefs of his Sex.
I love him still, and have no Peace without Him;
But can I Love a Man that scorns my Love;
That poorly offers up Wit, Beauty, Merit,
A Trophy to the ^ordid Idol, Money;
Can I Love such a Man, and own it too;
No, I will rather Poison, Stab, or Drown;
Revenge my self, on my unlucky self:
Do a thing Barbarous beyond my Sex.
Rather than this base Man shall know I Love him.
Eyes dry, dry your Tears, and keep the Secret in,
Whatever grief I feel, let none be seen,
Tho the strong Passion never so powerful grow,
I Will Choke with Love, rather than let him know.

Exit. End of the Third Act.
ACT. IV.
Scene 1st.
Enter Mrs. Sockjobb and Squeamish. Squeam. COme, Come Cousin, you must give me
leave to tell ye, I understand an Intreague as well as an older Person, to let
a young Hectorly Fellow, show he ha so much command over ye, as to dare to
quarrel, and expose ye in Company. Oh filthy, it shows a familiarity too saucy
for Civil Conversation; I hope Cousin you have not been particular with the
Fellow.


Mrs. Stock. Vat you mean by dat Cousin, vat is particular.


Squeam. Oh horrid, I hope you wont put me to the Fatigue of a Blush, by
telling the Nauseous meaning, that were to deserve to be Lampoon'd indeed; when
a Man is particular with a Woman, I think there is no great nead of a Sophister
to explain the meaning.


Mrs. Stock. Vel, Vel, Pox take the particular, dat is all one, I assure you I
have don vid him now, and vill encourage that fine young Gentleman, dat talk
and ^ow, and rally so vel en Francois; me no endure de Huff de Bounce, de
brutal way of Love no longer. Dear Monsieur Romance, is all French, all Talk,
all Air, all Gallantry, and de oder Gentleman dat speak de Welsh is ver fine
person too, who I presume Cousin has de extreme inclination to have de
Intreague vid you.


Squeam. An Intreague with me, Oh filthy Fellow, that is a worser abuse than any
has been yet put upon me, for he is the veriest Fop in Nature.


Mrs. Stock. Fop, Oh Mon deu! vat and worth twenty thousand Pounds, dats
impossible! Oh, he is de ver fine Person, and has the greatest tender for you
Cousin.


Squeam. Oh fogh, I shall be Lampoon'd about him in a Weeks time, i will lay my
Life on it: Oh horrid, i will go and l^k my self up; But are you sure he is worth
twenty thousand Pounds Cousin.


Changing Tone. Mrs. Stock. Assurement* and vill make good settlement, vich is
ver much as times go.


Squeam. See here dey come vid Monsieur Stockjobb, who I have wheedle so, and
make such great Fool, that he vill believe nothing against me vich my oder cast
of Coxcomb say.


Enter Stockjobb, Holspurr, T. Romance, Shinkin, and Singers with a Bowl of
Punch. Stockj. Come, Come, Let Us have no brawling nor quarrelling, but sit down
lovingly together, and help off with the Bowl, and so forth; what Pogry, my
Dear, my Fawn, my Pricket, -- and my Cousin Siss^ too; Hey, sla^dash, we'll all
sit down to it Faith.


Mrs. Stockj. -- Vat you please Dicky, ven de Husband Command de Wi^e must
always be Obedient, dat is but Reason.


Hotsp. Ah subtle Witch.


Stock. -- Come Squire Thomas, and my Welsh Friend, Pray sit round* Here Is some
Honest Friends of mine will give us a Catch in three Parts* Cousin Sisse,
Prithee sit down, and so forth.


Squeam. Oh horrid! Cousin, would you have me give such occasion to be
Lampoon'd, as to sit drinking filthy Brandy amongst Men?


Stock. Filthy Brandy; Twelve Shillings a Gallon, by this Hand, and will
certainly be the best Commodity in the whole Kingdom shortly, -- Harkee, Sisse,
such another Word, and if there be a Lampoon to be got in Christendom, and so
forth, I Will get one for thee.


Shink. According to Shinkins Observations, this is not Prandy, look you, but
Punch, which is fery goot to raise Ploods, and cause Plushes* and Pewtys in
fair Ladies, look you, therefore pray you sit down, I pray you now.


Squeam. Nay, Pray Sir, -- Oh Lord, -- Nay, if you will force me, What shall I
do? I am so ashamed, well if I do, I Will swear I Will drink in my own Cup then, --
Go, Ponade, and fetch it, it holds three quarters of a Spoonful just.


T. Romans Dear Madam, Let me be happy with your sweet Hand


To Mrs. Stock. Hotsp. You, -- (...),


Takes her from him. Mrs. Stock. Vat aile de Ruffian, --

To Holspurr. -- Monsieur, I am your most devoted.


To T. Romance. Hotsp. His most devoted, Oh rare Jilt, dee fleer Dog bold, I
shall have your Nose anon.


Enter Ponade, with a very little Cup. Stock. Come, Come, Slap-dash, No more
grumbling Will, but take your Cup, and then let us have the Catch, and so forth.

They sit down. Why, Cousin Sisse, What have got there, an Acorn Cup? why a
Flea may drink off that, prithee take one of ours, and so forth.


Strikes the Cup out of her Hand. Squeam. Oh horrid, not for the World, the
quantity of this is enough to suffocate my Spirits, as I am a Virgin.


Hear a Catch, in three parts, in praise of Punch. Stock. By the Lord Mayor,
very well performed Boys, Tholl, Loll, Loll, a^ dickins take it, it will not do
now, yet I could have Sung my Sol, Fa, when I was a Batchelour purely Faith, --
but these Wives, these Wives* spoil all our Parts; Come, Here Is Prosperity to
the City and Trade.


Holspur rises up, and goes behind Mrs. Stockjob^. T. Romans And as I was saying
Madam.


To Mrs. Stockjob. Hotsp. And as I was saying before Madam.


Pulling her from him. Mrs. Stook. Sir, I have nothing to say to you, you are
strangely troublesome, To Hotspur. Dat last again, I beseech you Monsieur.


To T. Romance. Stock. Who leaves his Place there, Will. Hotspur, What a Plague
do stand brooding upon my Wi^e there for, prithee come and take thy Cup, and
let the Squire alone, he has business with her, and so forth.


Hotsp. Business with her, Here Is a damned Cuckoldly Son of a Whore, and so
forth.


To Squeamish. Shink. When her is in Wales, look you, her could drink very goot
Metheglins with her Cousin Cadwallader, at the Three Red Herrings and C^een
Leeks in Mo^mouth; but now since her saw you, her Heart has done nothing but
thump, thump, and then her does sigh so sadly, Hey hoh, sighs. so that if her
is obdurates and cruels, and will not love Shinkin, why then, alas, there is
now way for her, look you, but Hey ho!


Hotspur teizes Mrs. Stockjobb, she rises, and call out her Husband. Squeam.
Love, Oh horrid! the very word is enough to fright me into an Apople^y, would
he would marry me, tho -- as I Am a Virgin.


aside. Mrs. Stock. By this Hand, I believe I could make Monsieur lay forty
Wager, and buy Stock every hour, if it were not for dat rude Fellow dat come
and disturb us.


Stock. Say thou so, Slapdash, Gad if I had known that, he should have found
this way to the Door before now, an uncivil Person to come to a Citizens Table
and be well entertained, and yet ungratefully endeavor to hinder Business, --
An idle Scoundrel, to stop the Sourse, the Lifeblood of the City, Trade, --
Gad I Will complain to my Lord Mayor immediately.


Hotsp. Now has that French Devil told some Lie or other of me, I Will lay my
Life, Harkee Di^k, art thou so very blind, as not to see thy self abused.


Stock. Yes, Yes, Sir, I do see my self abused, -- and so forth, -- Sq^ire
Thomas, prithee come hither, Lookee, Pogry has informed me, ye are a very
ingenious Person, and love Business, Lookee, what she does I Will stand to,
therefore pray go and Discourse her, she is at your Service.


Hotsp. Oh Witall Coxcomb, what does he mean.


Hotspur goes to hinder 'em, and Stockjobb interposes. Stock. Pray, Sir, no
interruption.


Hotsp. 'Dsdeath, to say publicly thy Wife's at his Service.


Stock. Upon the Score of Trade Sir, and so forth, I know what I do, I warrant
you.


Hotsp. The Devils grin at me, I have no Patience, Scoundrel, hands off.


hinders him again. Stock. Slapdash, hold her ^ast Squire Thomas, I give my
Authority, why this is a breach both of our Charter and Customs; that a Citizen
of London shall not have the Privilege to dispose of his own Wife, for a Hectorly
Fellow of the other end of Town; Gad I Will complain to my Lord Mayor, the first
thing I do.


Shink. To take the Wife from the Husband, before his Face, is more than you
can justify, Williams, that is very true.


Hotsp. Thou art a ^ery Ass, Pox on thee for a cracked Welsh Harp, Hold your
jarring, or --


Stock. No, No, I Will take a Course for this hereafter; In the mean time Pegry,
since this rude Masterless Companion disturbs us here, my Chamber within is
private, there you may settle Affairs, and so forth; Go, go in with her Squire
Thomas, and because no body shall disturb ye, I Will lock ye up d^ see, and keep
the Key my self.


Hotsp. 'Dsheart, I shall run mad, why dolt, Madman, will thou lock her up with
him too.


Stock. locks 'em in. Stock. Upon the Score of Trade, and so forth, I Will show
for once the Husbands Privilege, without your leave Sir*


Hotsp. Trade, Ay there is a rare Trade going forward; Oh intolerable Cuckold!


Stock. Come Sir, you are a Scandalous t*other end of Town Fellow, and my Lord
Mayor shall know it; you shall know that a Citizen of London understands what is
proper for Business: Cousin Sisse, take you your Gentleman into another Room;
nay, nay, no Squeamish trick now, but go, since ye are molested here, I will
have Business go forward in a place that is proper. -- Go, go you after Sir,
I Will be with ye anon.


pushes 'em in. Hotsp. Ay, ay, There Is the Trade going forward too, this is
Stockjobbing with a Vengeance.


Stock. Pogry will draw her Fool into some devise or other, I am sure, and now
I have finished this Affair so discreetly, I Will leave this Hector to chew the
Cud by himself, and go and drink a Dish of Coffee with a good Neighbor, a
Common Council-man, and Brother Stockjobber.


Exit. looking scornfully on Hotspur. Hotsp. Solus. A Curse on your City
Understanding, and Destruction seize that Jilt, that tortures me with Love, tho
I resolve to hate her, -- damned infamous Creature, that Yesterday, as common
as a Hireling, would have met my Appetite half way, and cherished it, now taken
with a young pert noisie Coxcomb, deserts me without Blushing; but this
senseless Wittall, her Husband, shall know, what a Snake he Fosters, before I
have done with him.

And whilst his City Iobbing he is pursuing*
I Will show him where*s another Iobb a doing.

Enter Quickwitt dressed like a Quaker, and Marmalet after him. Quick. So, I
think there is none of the Quaking Fraternity but will own I have mimick'd their
Dress well, and play but thy part right Child, that we may revenge our selves
upon this Cunning^on that has so abused us, and the I may chance to be no Duke,
I Will be a King to thee in my good will, my Love Child shall be beyond all
Titles and Preferment.


Marm. Ah sweet Mr. Quickwit, the Rascal has asked my Pardon since, but I shall
never forgive him for it; for, will you believe me, I have cried about that
Business till I have been as wet as if I had been dipped in a Pail of Water, to
think that I should lift up my Hand against --


Quick* Well, well, it is all forgot.


Marm. To dare Cudgel the Man that --


Weeps. Quick. Well, well, 'twas all Accident, prithee no Tears.


Marm. The Man I love so tenderly --


Weeps Quick. Enough, prithee enough, -- I believe thee.


Marm. So tenderly, so very tenderly --


howling out. Quick. A Pox o'your Tenderness, There is no Plague under Heaven
so tormenting as one of these old Cats, when she pretends to make Love; come,
prithee no more of this Foolery Child, but let us go on with our Plot upon
Cunnington; Let me see what is the Quakers Name that I Am to Act.


Marm. Zechiel, And't please ye Sir, my old Lord Fullworths Steward, my
Mistresses Father.


Quick. Zechiel, very good, and one that you say has been trusted with all the
Writings of her Estate.


Marm. He has indeed, at whose House, Sir Charles (having found her as he
thinks a little more pliant to his Sons Address) intends to meet her this
Afternoon, to discourse about the Marriage, and to that purpose has given that
Letter you have there to Cunnington to show the Doctor, who upon sight of it is
to deliver my Lady to him, and a Note for fifty Guineas, which Sir Charles has
ordered him.


Quick. Then you are sure Cunningman has seen this Letter.


Marm. Yes, An't please ye, and is merry beyond measure about his success of
out witting you, he left it with me only whilst he is gone to disguise himself
like a Quaker, for in no other Habit will Zechiel admit any one into his House,
I expect him every Minute.


Quick. Ay, ay Child, Let him come now as soon as he pleases, we are prepared
for him; and I think I am as much a Quaker as himself, or the Devil's in Iron
Gray, the rest remains in thee to follow my Instructions, do but this Business
neatly, and as for the other Business, thou worst of.


Marm. Ah Dear Sir, I swear you bring my Heart up to my very Mouth, I vow you
do now, and I warrant ye Sir, for my part I*ve my Cue perfectly.


Quick. First then, instead of this Letter of Sir Charles, give him this of
mine Child, to carry to the Doctor, it is sealed with a Wafer like it, and the
Hand is Counterfeited, I Am sure, so exactly, it is impossible for him to
discover that, then for the Contents let them operate at leisure.


Marm. With all my Heart Sir, and I rejoice from my very Soul that I can do any
thing to pleasure you, and be revenged of him; Hark, here he comes; away Sir to
your Close^, and when we go, be pleased to follow us, and you shall find me
punctual to the least particular.


Quick. Do it but Cunningly, and if thou art a Maid by to Morrow Night, why
then say, --


Marm. Ah sweet Sir, I understand ye to a Scruple, and Heaven bless ye; well I
swear, -- now my Hearts at my Mouth again.


Exit Dogget and Marm. Enter Quick. Hah, hah ha ha. I have been laughing at my
self above this half hour, to see what a Figure I am; I have been Agent in a
great many Intreagues in my life time, but never had any yet like this; this is
a Masterpiece, a piece of Wit like Hains; for here have I insinuated my self so
far into this grave Fool, Sr. Charles, by my subtle discovery of the late
Affair; that he has trusted me in this Habit, to prepare the Old Quaker about
the Writings, and afterward to bring the Heiress her self to him -- to him! Ha
ha ha ha, there is the Jest now; and to receive as a Reward fifty Guinea's, ha
ha ha! Alas poor shallow Knight! little does he think what is hatching in this
Brain of mine: for, what will I do now? but instead of carrying her to him,
keep her my self, and make her Marry me, or Compound swingeingly, which is all
one; there is Wit now! ha ha ha, there is Mischief! Gad I love Mischief dearly:
And when I have had her three or four Nights, let her hang me afterward if she
can, or any one else for me.


Call Quick* wit. Enter Marmalett. Marm. Come Sir, are ye ready? the Doctor's
just gone home, -- bless me, to see how Clothes will disguise one! Why? you
look like a mere Ananias.


Cunning. Ha, ha, ha, don't I? Methinks I am filled with the outgoings of the
over-flowing^, of the Bowel-yernings, and for the humh, and hah!

in a Cant. Let me alone. Come give me the Letter, and be assured, though I Jok'd
a litte the last time, yet I Will not fail to bring a better Business about, e're
long for thee.


Marm. Well, well Sir; go and dispatch your own first.


Cunning. An Heiress, and fifty thousand Pounds! Gad I Am a lucky Dog, ha, ha,
ha.


Exeunt. Reenter Quickwitt. Quick. Here Is a rare Rogue for ye; had not I
discovered the Plott, he had betrayed his Trust, and got the Heiress for
himself; but as things go, will miss of his aim damnably: Now for my Quaking
Faculty I must make one amongst 'em.


Exit. SCENE 2.
Enter Fulvia and Christopher. Fulv. Oh Love! How many strange, and different
ways
Do thou disturb the Quiet of our Minds?
If amongst all the Race of Male Deceivers,
With Curious search we chance to find out one,
That we can fancy Honest; some cross Doubt
Straight fills us, with a fear he may prove Haggard,
And then, Alas ^ we split against a Rock.
That ruins us for ever: I dream^ last Night,
Frederick was False, Sordid and Mercenary:
And that he only loved me for my Fortune;
I give no credit to sleeps Idle Whimseys:
But yet it strangely troubles me -- now Christopher.
What Noise is that within?

Christo. And 't please ye, some new Lunaticks last Night brought hither.


Fulvia. Prithee what are they.


Christo. A spindle-legg'd French Tailor; That ever since the Wars, being at a
loss how to get New Fashions for his whimsical Customers, Fatigued his Brain so
much, that he grew crazed upon it.


Fulv. What, others?


Christo. A superannated Maid of threescore and three; who being promised
Marriage by a young Fellow of one and twenty, at the very Conceit on it ran Mad
for Joy.


Fulvia Ala^ for her well who else?


Christo. A Covent Garden Beau, who being obliged to make a Song upon his
Mistresses Paraquite, and sitting up three Days and three Nights, not being
able to produce one tolerable Thought at the Conceit of losing her Favor,
lost the small remainder of his own Senses.


Fulvia. So, what more?


Christo. A kept Miss, who being discarded by her resenting Lord, fell
distracted, not for the loss of my Lord, but for her five pound a Week.


Fulvia. Go on. --


Christo. A Vintner whom his Customers had poisonned with making him taste his
own Wine -- besides a Quaker who is now coming* in here with my Master, of
whom he will give a better account himself.


Enter Guiacum, with a Letter, Cunnington and Marmalett. Cun. I hope Dr. you
need no further satisfaction in the truth of my Commission; be pleased
therefore to let the Lady get ready with all possible speed, and the Note too
for the fifty Guinea's; I shall have present occasion for


Guiac. Very well, Sir, I understand ye -- Christopher --


whispers. Cunning. Christopher! what has Christopher to do in the Business?
This is a strange, Old Formal Coxcomb: He cannot blow his Nose without his Man
-- Doctor, I must desire you to be as speedy as you can; for I Have another part
to act, as you may perceive by my Habit: And what a Character Sir Charles gives
me, I suppose you find in the Letter.


Guiac. Yes, Sir; yes; he has given ye a notable Character: here indeed*
Christopher, go presently, and bid the Barber come hither to shave his Head.


Cunning. Your Servant Doctor; no Faith; that will be a Courtesy a little
unseasonnable at present, by reason of my haste.


Guiac. Alas, Poor Fellow! yet stay a little Christopher, where is his Master?
Let him be called in First.


Cunning. My Master --


Marm. He is at the door an't please you; I Will go and fetch him; alas! I Will run
Ten Miles on my bare Feet, to do the poor fellow any good.


Cun. Hey day! is she bewitched too? what a Plague do they mean? come, come
Doctor, the Note quickly; and Madam Pray dispatch, I Have a world of business to
do, before Night yet.


Fulv. 'Dslife! this is the most comical fellow, I ever saw.


Guiac. Oh! the dellirium is very strong upon him; do you hear Christopher? bid
your fellows make haste to strip him, and get ready the Canvass Shape, that he
may have nothing to tear; and a pair of the strongest Fetters for his Legs;
do you hear? For Sir Charles informs me here, he is by fits very outrageous.


Cun. Fits, and outrageous? the Devil's in 'em all, sure: I know what is in the
Letter well enough -- come, come, this is no time for Jokes; Sir Charles will
be impatient till the Lady comes, ye trifle, ye trifle, 'dsdeath! I should have
bin with him by this time.


Guiac. This is a very Rogue, but I Will manage him presently.


aside. F^lv. Here Is like to be good sport if it holds.


Guiac. The Letter says too, he will be very Mischievous toward the Change
of the Moon, which is this Evening, but that is no great matter, I can disable
him from that by a good Whipping: He shall have 300 lashes upon the Belly*


Cunning. The Devil, I shall, -- 'dsheart how I tremble -- nay, nay, if you
pursue the Banter, and intend to affront Sir Charles, there is no more to be
said, I must Inform him, and there is an end on it; But that Letter to my
knowledge says otherwise: I Am sure I read it this Morning, the most sweet,
Civil Complemental thing on my side that ever was penned.


Guiac. No doubt on it, Sir, no doubt on it: Can you read?


gives him the Letter Cunning. Read; Ha, ha, ha! what a Pox does he take me for
one of the Black-guard? This Coxcombly Doctor's crazed himself, I Will be hanged
else -- read! yes, yes, you shall find I can read,


Guiac. Proceed then.


Cunning. Doctor, it is proper that I let you know, I have made another
discovery of a Plott, to carry off the Lady you have in Custody. This Rogue,
that I send here with this Letter.


Reads the Letter aloud. Guiac. Go on, Sir, go on: I perceive you can read
admirably, ( being one of the Principal Contrivers, -- this is VVitchcraft.
(...) believe my own Eyes.


* Reads. F^via. Really as you say, Doctor; for a Crazed Person, the Man reads
to a miracle.


Cunning. What Crazed Person, Madam? 'dsdeath! I shall run Mad indeed* if this
trade hold.


Guiac. Come Sir, to the next Paragraph.


Cunning. He was formerly a Sharper, and whither he be mad or no; I desire you
to use him as such, for he is one of the greatest Rascals in the whole World,
-- as his Master will better inform thee: -- (...) my Mr. again.


Read^. Guiac. Sir Charles gives ye a notable Character, you see Sir.


Cunning. 'Dsheart Doctor! it is all Villainy, Witchcraft, Cunjuration; I Am
abused.


Guiac. The Fetters quickly, Christopher, he begins to ^ave, oh! here is his
Master.


Enter Quickquit Mimicking, a Quaker and Marmalett. Cunning. Death, and Hell!
what Son of a Whore's this -- I Am at my Wits end.


Guiac. Come Friend, you must inform the Nature of his Madness, that I may
Minister accordingly.


Quick. Plainly, since that ungodly season, that I first perceived that the
Spirit of truth was departed from him, I relinquished him, often seriously
pondering upon his State of Reprobation, which plainly I find is worthy be
Comiserted by all the Brethren and Sisters of the faithful.


Cunning. Oh! Rogue, I know him now, -- Doctor you are abused, Imposed upon,
tricked, this is no more a Quaker then I am. This is an Arch Cheat this is --


Quick. Aw Satan, Satan! great, great, is thy power.


Bawls in a loud Canting Tone. Guiac. He Raves again, take hold of him, and
stop his mouth there.


Quick. The Tempter is very powerful in him, he turns and windeth him* which
way he lists, he goes into his mouth like a Ratt, with a great Head and a
long Tail, and exalts his voice within, in Curses and Exclamations hum! give
me the Engine Woman with which we used to resist the Tempter.


Marm. Here it is an't please ye; put this into his mouth -- and Satan can have
no Power.


they gag him here. Quick. Plainly, I have bin informed he has bin trained up
in the School of Sin vulgarly called the Play House, where the Devil Adorneth
himself with toys and trappings, where the Ears are misinformed and the Eyes
misled, where the frail Son of Man caresieth the Woman inordinately, where he
tempts her to Midnight Gluttony; and whispereth into her unhallowed things.


Marmalett whispers Fulvia. Fulvia My Heart is ready to leap out to thee for
Joy, for he does it so Naturally it is impossible he should be discovered, --
how the Fool the Doctor looks too?


aside. Quick. Moreover, observe, how outragiously the old Draggon teareth him.


Struggles. Guiac. Ay, ay, it is time to begin, -- away with him, and give him
the Lashes I ordered.


Quick. Plainly it behooveth thee Well, that the Spirit of Truth may once more
return; and the old Man be rooted out, -- now Rogue I think I Am even with thee
-- --


aside to -- who kicks and strives to speak Quick. Aw -- Satan, Satan, great is
thy Power.

Bawls out aloud and is hurried out. But now, to the remaining part of my
Charge, I am to Conduct a Woman from hence, a sinful Woman as it appears to
me, who causes with her transitory Wealth and Beauty, strange Appetites,
Boylings and Fermentings in the Heart of Man.


Guiac. Well Friend, no more enlarging upon that Subject; here is Sir Charles's
Order in this Letter, who it seems is at a Garden-House here hard by; therefore
Madam -- you had best make haste; you need no disguise but your Masque, for he
says there is a private back way to it which this honest Man has only knowledge
of.


Quick. Plainly, thou say it.


Fulvia. Was there ever so admirable a Fellow? I Am scarce able to contain my
self from laughing out.


Aside. Quick. Come, young Woman, and let thy steps be guided soberly* Give me
thy Carnal hand; hah! verily it is exceeding white, and has an alluringness in
the Palm thereof, which is, as it were, provoking: Hah! this is it now, which
stroaketh the Forehead of Transgression till it become Masterless* and girdeth
us into the Labyrinth of Misconstruction, from whence we seldom or never come
forth our selves.


Exit, leading Fulvia. Guiac. What an odd sort of a Canting Rascall's this? and
what a does here with one Woman that has Money? gad I Have a Daughter of my own at
home has sat pricking upon a clout at home this Seven Years, and no one has
come to her, but an Attorny's Clark, and City Groser; when this here is beset
with all degrees, Ages and Religions -- well, 'twill be always so; and where
the Honny is, there will the Gnatts, Hyes, and Insects be buzzing together, --
Christopher -- my Cloak, -- I Will take a little Air, and then see how -- the
Wedding goes forward.


Exit. SCENE 3.
Enter T. Romance and Shinkin. T, Romans Gad take me, this was the most Comical
adventure that ever the City was famous for, to lock us up with his Wife, and
Neice upon the score of Trade: why? it is an Action ought to be known to
Posterity and worthy to be Chronicled in the City Annalls.


Shink. Her Cousin Siss, was fery familliar too when her was alone; there was
no pish, nor fie, nor pray be quiet, look you -- only some little frowns and
repukes, put fery kind looks for all that St. Davy.


T. Romans If I had not bin obliged to meet my Father here, I would not have left
my little French woman this two hours, but he is so hot upon it to make me Marry
this Heiresse, that he spoils my humor of Intreaguing quite, gad take me.


Shink. Pray you see, where he comes yonder with the Lady that they call the
crete Wit of Richmond, she that talks, and discourses, and Jeeres, and laughs,
and makes Fools of all the Town by Cadwallader.


Enter Sir. Charles and Sophronia. T. Romans By this Light, she is a rare
Creature: 'dsheart I Am in Love with her up to the Ears already; why? she is
finer than my little French Woman by half: ay Gad or my Lords Daughter either,
or my Wife that is to be; or my Knights Lady at Cue; or Jenny in Lumbard
Street; or my Widows Daughter; or my Semstress, my Chambermaid or any of 'em:
I Will write her a Bilet deux immediately, Gad take me.


Shink. Hey Gadsplutt! her will have more Women than the crete Turk has at this
Rate, look you.


Sr. Char. Yonder Is my Son, Madam; and I am very glad to find you so well
disposed, to the Marriage between him and your Kinswoman; for tho she has
lately entertained some volatile Humors, which Youth may very well Excuse* Yet
the Principal Verbs, her Wit and Virtue, so far counterpoise that.


Soph. Her Estate you mean, Sir Charles does so far Counterpoise that --


S. Char. That the Candor of my Nature obliges me to dislike all other offers
for him that are not possessed with her --


Soph. With her -- Land and Houses.


Sr. Char. Good Qualities, Madam, having bin since my Noble Lords Death, her
Father, a true honourer of her for her Extraction, merit and --


Soph. And Money; is not that a Principal Verb too, Sir Charles?


T. Romans A delicate Rogue; what an Air and Shape she has? Cousin, Rise prithee
turn about a little.


takes out Pen, Ink and Paper, and writes on ^hinkin's Back Sir. Char. Money,
Madam! What the dirty Slave of our Convenience? She has hit it to a hair, gad
for all that; aside. can any Moral Man (...) has his Reason, build his Content
on such a Trifle.


Soph. Oh Sir, take this from me, since the Golden Age, the World has lost
those Moral Men you speak of: Money is now the Soul o'th Universe: The
Statesman, Commoner, and Countryman, Physician, Lawyer, Citizen, Priest,
greedily dam their own for it every day; the man that is Rich must be
accomplished too, his Apish Tricks are Gentleman like Carriage, his silly
speeches called refind and Witty, if he be Prodigal they style him generous, if
Covetous, a close, wise wary fellow, if he detracts or Lies, he is a fine
Courtier, if Blasphemous, a Wit, if finnical a Beau, if drunk, he is then a
merry Jolly Fellow, or if unmanly Lewd, a Rare Companion.


T. Romans Ah that dear Sweet little Honey prating Tongue, -- would I had it a
little here, and if a stranger may have privilege to affirm his passion; very
good, gad take me.


Read's his Paper, and writes again. Shink* I pray you now Cousins make haste,
for her has an Intreague too, look you, her has promised to meet her Cousin
Siss, at seven Precisely.


Sir Char. If Money has these flourishing attributes Madam, what then must
virtue have the chiefest good.


Soph. Faith, just, quite contrary, for virtue Sir is generally poor, and
Poverty can give no Bribe for Praise, the virtuous Man that is poor, must be a
Fool, a wretched sort of an uncurrant Coin, that few or none will deal with;
Tho he be wise, his best opinion is thought ignorance, his talk rediculous, his
Person hated, he still fares worst, yet pays the dearest for it; has he a cause
at Law? it shall be lost, has he a Claim in Love? he shall be Jilted, his
Ingenuity is worse than Witchcraft, and every venial Error past forgiveness.


Reads. T. Romans And if I Love ye not better than both my Eyes, may I be
poisoned like a Ratt at your Chamber door and be accounted the verriest Son of
Whore in the World, instead of your most passionatly devoted most humble, and
most obsequious Slave, Thomas Romance* gad take me, there I came off like an
Angel.


Sir Char. What a Devil is he making mouths at yonder, how now Tom what are you
doing there?


T. Romans 'D^life if he sees it I Am ruined; nothing Sr. I Am only casting up a
Tailors Bill a little, that the Rogue may not cheat me.


aside. Sir Char. A Taylor's Bill, prithee leave of those trifles and prepare
to entertain your Mistress whom I expect here instantly* with all you ought to
thank this Lady too, her kinswoman, who gives ye her good liking.


T. Romans Her good liking, gad, would I had it upon her own score; now what
would I give that it were sealed? this were A Rare time to clap it into her
hand. -- --


aside. Soph. That he has Sir. Charles, he may assure himself, or any one else
so that Traitor Frederick be disappointed, -- let me but frustrate his design
and let the rest fall ou't, as fortune pleases.


aside. Enter Guiacum. Guiac. Sir Charles here? they have dispatched their
business very quickly I see.


Sir. Char. Oh Doctor! welcome; you are come in Admirable time, but where is my
Daughter?


Guiac. I hope she is not far of Sir, you are a better guardian than to trust
her in ill hands.


Sir Char. Therefore, I recommended her to yours -- where, where, is she?


Guiac. Ha, ha, ha, this is fine merriment, why Sir? I desire to know, and
whether she seems pleased since I sent -- her to ye?


Sir Char. Sent her to me! 'dsdeath, what does he mean.


Guiac. Nay, what do you mean then? sye, sye, Sir Charles; am I a subject fit
to make a Jest on?


Sir. Char. Thou make me Mad, to hear thy Ridling; I sent for her by
Cunnington, dressed like a Quaker, who was to bring her to Old Zechiell, her
Fathers Steward, where we have waited long, but no one came.


Guiac. Why Sir? I gave her to that Quaker, and obeyed the orders in your
Letter here, for Punishing the Impostor, that had contrived to Steal her.


Gives him the Letter. Sir Char. Impostor, what Impostor? here is some Trick by
Heaven.


Soph. Read, Read the Letter, oh Confusion! how my Heart beats?


Sir Char. Tricked, Ruined, Cheated, abused; this is none of my Letter, nor any
of my orders; some subtle Devil has Counter-feited Cunnington, and on my life
carried her off to Frederick.


Soph. Destruction seize the World; to Frederick did ye say, to Frederick?


Sir Char. It must be so, he has doubtless given her to that other Cunning
Rogue, and punished him* I sent for a feigned mischief.


Guiac. What e're has chanced is Fortunes fault not mine; that Quickwit is the
Devil, and can Act in such variety of Shapes, Hell cannot balk his Cunning.


T. Romans Very fine; so I perceive I am like to lose my Heiress again; but it is
no great matter, for I Have another new Intreague, and that's all one to me, gad
take me.


Shink. Here is such Cousining, and Cheats, and Tricks, that Shinkin knows not
what to make on it by St. Davy.


Soph. Torture and Death; this is the greatest Plague, the feinds could e're
Invent to vex my Soul: he has her now and without doubt laughs at me.


T. Romans Hey, mettle to the back too, -- gad take me, I Will warrant her.


Guiac. The Fifty Guineas too, no doubt are paid by this time: this was a
damned subtle Rogue.


Soph. Nay never hide thy self, take one good wish first; may thy dull resty
Age increase diseases, the Palsy, Gout, Snattica, and Stone, and have no better
Doctor than thy self, as for the Attributes of Fool and Cuckold, I need not
grace thee with 'em; those thou have already, but may thou have none but
Sailors Wives for Patients, and those so Raving Mad that in their Fits each one
may long to have a piece of thee, and Tear thee as the Thracians, once did
Orpheus, or I could now, thou Paralitick insect.


to Guiacum, shakes him by the Collar. Enter Cunnington with a Quarterstaff,
his Face all smutty, and he dressed in Canvass. Cunning. O Villain! Dog,
Doctor, are you there? I Will knock his Head off.


Guiac. More Mischief yet! I shall be murdered now, that is certain.


Sir Char. How, this! is it possible? What, my Friend Cunnington? nay if he were
not an old Coxcomb, thou should have thy penny-worths out of him; that is
certain, for we perceive he deserves it richly; but prithee how gott'st thou
off; I was just sending to thee.


Cunning. Why, as good luck would have it, just before they had time to Chain
me, I made shift to climb up the Chimney; what kicks and Buffets I Have endured
for -- you shall know at more leisure: I (...) only now Breath and time to tell
ye, that if you follow me quickly, you may recover the Heiress again.


Speaks as out of Breath. Sir Char. Hah, -- what say thou?


Soph. Oh thou blessed Angel of a Fellow, go on.


Cunning. From the top of the Chimney, as I was trying to get down, casting my
Eyes to a little Garden house, not far off, who should I see? but that Rogue in
a Quakers habit, with Sir Quibble and Frederick leading your Daughter cross a
Gravel Walk into an Arbor.


Soph. And have thou marked the place, thou Charming Creature?


Cun. Most carefully.


Soph. Hah! and shall we get her? speak, speak, thou precious*


Cunning. I tell ye, ye shall.


Soph. What from Frederick? hah! what say thou? speak quickly thou Cherubin.


Cunning. Oons from Frederick? from all em: ye little Brisk pretty Black-ey'd
-- what a pox, will she Ravish me?


Sir Char. Thanks Fortune, that was unexpected.


Cunn. Which you should never have known if I could have carried her off my
self.


aside. Sir Char. Let Us away instantly and fetch the Constable and Watch; come,
Tom, and Cousin.


Soph, Oh Heaven! this is the happiest turn.


Exeunt. Guiac. For me it is upon a double Score,
I else had lost one Member, if no more.

Exit. SCENE. 4.
Enter Sir Quibble, Fulvia, Dogget and Marmalett Fred. This is the happiest
moment of my Life.


Embracing Fulvia. Sir Quib. And mine too, I Will say it.


Embracing her too. Fulvia That was a very close hugg; the Knight out does ye
Sir Extremely in his Carresses.


to Fred. Fred. Is not the Parson come yet? dull heavy fellow, how can he
loyter so.


Sir. Quib. Ay, what is his Name, pray Brother when is he to come, and what is
he doing all this while.


Fred. Rid^ulous questions! what shall I do with him Tom?


Quick. I don't know the Fool begins to smell the Trick and grows Impertinent
upon it.


Fulvia You must discover the truth to him, for he is so brisk upon me, there is
no enduring him.


Sir Quib. Why then, Madam? I Will say it, I believe you mistake your Man, this
Gentleman is my Brother; Madam, it is I am your Knight; Madam, it is, I am he
that is to do the favor.


Fulvia My Knight, ha, ha, ha.


Fred. Ha, ha, ha -- her Knight! Oh fie Brother, you know your self and the
Lady better sure.


Marm. Sir Quibble expresses himself very Comical in troth, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Sir Quibb. Hey da, why what do you laugh at all so, and where is the Joak? I Will
say it I can find none: Why, am not I to marry the Lady Mrs. Quickwit? and must
not I be then her Knight?


Quick. No, no, Sir Quibble there was another Design in it from the beginning.


Fulvia. Alas Sir, what should you do with a Wife? when do you think you should
get her to be of your side? where would you find an Humor that would be
suitable to ye? and why would you prove the Fatal Consequence of disagreeable
Marriage, Sir; there is four questions, now answer me quickly.


Fred. Ha, ha, ha, ha --


Sir Charles. T. Romance, Shink. Guiac. Constable. Sir Quibb. Pray, Madam, hold
your self contented a little; harkee Brother, have NOT I laid out a hundred and
fifty Pounds about this business?


Fred. Within a small matter, I think; why sure you don't grutch to do a small
kindness for your Brother?


Sir Quibb. No, but to part with ones Mistress to ones Brother, is a little too
much, though I Will say it; therefore I must tell ye plainly, Brother, I will not do it.


Quick* You see the Lady is uneasy, Sir Quibble.


Sir Quibb. Ay, it is all one for that, keep you your distance too, or I Will
say it I shall so tan your Quakers hide, I shall make ye act your Play but ill
when you come to it again else; why sure? though I have bin led by the Nose a
little, and laid out my Money, I cannot tell how, I will not lose my Mrs. -- ye
Lobrocks what a Plague I am not such a Fool neither?


Quick. If this blunt Fool should beat us both now, 'twould be a pretty jest?


Fred. Nay then, there is no time for delays; let go her hand and presently, or
I Will run my Sword into your Heart.


Sir Quibb. Why then, I Will run mine into your gutts; let go my Mistress: No I
an't such a Fool neither I tell ye: Odzooks I Will keep her in spite of ye, hoh
hoh.


He prepares to fight awkerdly, then Enter Sir Charles, T. Romance, Shinkin
Guiacum -- Sophronia with Constable and Watch. Sir Char. Will ye so, Sir?
that is more than you can promise long, and so have at ye.


Sir Quibb. Nay then, stand to it Brother; I Am of thy side again now, I Will say'^.


Fight here, and Fredericks Party is beaten off then. Reenter Sir Charles, T.
Romans Shinkin with his Head broke; Guiac. Cunnington, Sophronia, Constable and
Watch with Fulvia retaken. Sir Charles. So, you are ours once again, in spite of
Fortune. How now Cousin, what Wounded?


Shink A Plague take your Confounded English Customs, look you, that you cannot
get your Wives and your Marriages, but a Shentleman must have his Pate and his
Prains peaten out about it? well fare her own Country I say, the Prittains
have not such Pribbles and Prabbles, and broken Pates by Cadwallader.

When any Prittain pargains for his Spouse;
He prings so many Seep, so many Cows:
The Pridegroom tells the Pride his Loves intent,
And she kind Fool as quickly gives Consent.
No Swords, Cads plutt, nor Cudgells there prevails;
But kiss and Couple, that's the Way in Wales.

ACT. V.
Scene. 1.
Enter Frederick, Quickwitt, and Marmalett. Fred. HAD ever Man such Cause to
Curse his Fortune? to be so near the longed for happiness, and then to lose it,
doubles the vexation: Oh I could ou^rail now a losing Gamester; a ^ashier'd
Captain; or a Grumbler double Taxed.


Quick* And I, a Suburb Bawd just come from Garting: A Plague of my Quakers
shape here; if I had not looked so like a Rogue, on my Conscience I had thriven
better.


Marm. I Am sure my loss is irrecoverable, for I must ne*re hope to come into
Favor with Sir Charles again, but then the Consolation I have in your sweet
promise, Sir, does I confess allay --


to Doggett. Quick. O prithee good Spouse that must be; no more Love now, my
Bones smart a little too* much at present, to let me entertain any Amorous*
Motions -- Ah Plague of their Rusty Bills; that Rogue Cunningman took care they
should all fall on me still; but what is most Comical? As I was running off
after you, he comes up to me and with a grave Face, as if he had known nothing
of the matter, invites me to drink a stand of Ale with him this Evening at
Numpses.


Fred. Ha, ha, ha, ha -- and will thou go?


Quick. Ay by this Light will I; and if I can mould that dull headed Fellow
once more rightly, my Witty Antagonist shall have but little cause to boast his
late success -- come Courage, Sir; they shall make Paste of my Bones with their
Battoons e're I give up a Cause I Have undertaken, whilst my Brains lie in their
right place: This Evening will prove all, till then farewell -- If I get the
Dice once on my side -- the Golds my own yet; I Have Art enough to manage them
I Am sure.


Exit. Marm. I must follow him and put him once more in mind.


Fred. If Fulvia were Heiress apparent to the Universe, there could not be more
Wit nor diligence used obout her. This is the third time our Confederate Forces
have been repulsed: And Faith were I not sensible the Castle were stored: with
the best sort of Ammunition, tempting Gold? I think I should have long since
raised the Siege: I must confess my self to be of that Pagan Opinion, that
there is no one Quality belonging to a Woman, unless it be her Money that can
countervail a Man's playing the Fool in Courting her a Month for: This was my
Plea with Sophronia once, who has some simple passionate Papers of mine still,
that I wish I had out of her hands; my deserting was not so very just its true,
but then 'twas very profitable, and this damned Money has power to make a Rogue
of a Man, often times Constancy, that is most certain?


Exit. SCENE 2.
Enter Sophronia and Fulvia. Soph. Nay if you are in a Passion, I Will desist, but
if you will hear, I Will prove it?


Fulvia. What, that Frederick's false! Oh it is ridiculous Malice, and I Will not
believe it: I know she loved him her self once, and this is now the product of
her Poph.


Aside. Soph. False as Brieno to Olimpia in the Story, base, Mercenary, the
worst degree of Falsehood.


Fulvia. Ha ha, ha, ha! you rave, you rave, Cousin; I pity ye; pray go home
and let blood, you are dangerously distempered take my word.


Soph. Not with thy Disease, Child, I Am sure; I swear I would not have it for
the World.


Fulvia. You talk as if I had the Gout or Palsy, or a long Family Rhumatism,
that distinguished the Blood of my Relations for ten Ages: What Diseease is it
you mean -- take heed of Scandel Cousin?


Soph. Nay, do you take heed on it Cousin? for the Disease that I mean, has
generally some Infection that way, it is called a Masculine Calenture, or the
Plague of Man-loving; it often seizes upon. Creatures of thy Age, and is of
that strange Nature, that it dulls and Numbs the Brains as if they were froze,
which must be chased and warmed a long time by Reason and Argument, or else the
Patient will never return to her right Senses.


Fulvia. Lord, that is a terrible Disease indeed, but yet for all its violence,
I have Brains enough left to see a distemper in you too, Cousin; it is the
Plague of Greediness, and you use me as the great Sister in a Country Cottage
does the lesser; you would pack me to Bed without any Supper, because you have
a mind to my Bread and Butter.


Soph. No, no, Child, the Case differs between us extremely, some may feast
with a Rasher upon the Coals, whilst others ^eck at the very smell: And I must
have thy Stomach before I can be greedy of thy Diet.


Fulvia. Come, come, Cousin, you have stomach enough, nay indeed so much that
you grow sullen with it, and like a little Child, will not eat your Meal till you
see the Plate ready to be given away to another; for as homely a bit as you
make of that Rasher, if I am mot mistaken in the Morsel, you would be glad of
it to relish your Mornings Draught, and for all your Course Name of Rasher,
tartly think it a Gnatt or a VVheat-Ear.


Soph. If Frederick be the Wheat-Ear you mean? I had rather have an Old Caoon
at the latter end of July.


Fulvia. Ah, you shall never banter me with that -- you would think him a young
Pheasant at the latter end of October, if you had him, to my knowledge?


Soph. I think him, prithee if his Spesies were chnaged, and he were turned
into a Cormorant, a Buzzard, or an Owl, 'twere all one to me.


Fulvia Any thing but the Capon, Cousin, you were speaking of, I dare swear for
all your Anger, you have too much Charity, to wish him turned into that.


Sophr. It does so little concern my Charity, that I should like my Hen with
Eggs very well without any trouble, to know they should never come to be
Chickens, and consequently Cocks of the Game. Besides there is so much ill
Blood begot now a days, and so many Strains Crossed, that if, for the Future,
the Sex were all Capons, ^ question whether the King would lose e're a good
Subject by it.


Fulvia This is your Satyricall Vein now. Oh! how you Fatten your self with
this humor, just like a Noncon, that rails at Episcopacy, not or any just
reason, but through self willed Opinion, and rediculous Envy; else why is
Frederick still the Theme of Railing?


Soph. Oh! thou ungrateful Creature, have I not told thee? it is through
kindness to thee.


Fulvia To me, rather say through Hatred to him, because he Loves me*


Soph. He Loves thee not, his baseness does deceave thee; Mercenary Soul Covets
thy Fortune; thy Person is the least of all his wishes.


Fulvia Just so I dreamed indeed aside but it is* Barbarity to doubt a Lover for
an Idle dream; I Will not be so unjust, come, come, it is all Envy; and to deal
freely with ye, I now must tell ye, I take it as an affront, not as a kindness.


Soph. That Is always a Fools humor, when they have not Brains enough to know
the Courtesy, they term it an Affront.


Fulvia Well, for all your mighty Wit, this shall not get your Ends; I see your
Hatred and your Envy to him, and consequently judge his Love to me: I Will Marry
him in spite of all the World.


Soph. Thou shall not Marry him, tho all the World assist thee.


Fulvia How poor is this, and mean, because my merit appears above those in his
deserving Eyes; thy Heart breeds venom, and thy Slaundrous Tongue, dissension
between Lovers.


Soph. Lovers! Damnation, how She Tortures me? I tell thee once more thou
deceived poor Creature; he does not Love thee, nor cannot Marry thee if he
would, which is a secret; nothing but sweet revenge could e're draw from me.


Fulvia What, will you Cunjure? shall your plain dealing Faculty Convert it
self to Magic? or do you carry a little Familiar under your Girdle, to Enchant
us upon occasion; which way will you do this?


Soph. That e're the Clock sound Midnight thou* shall know; in the mean time,
let thy Young Hotbrain'd wild unthinking Head remember this from me.

Love may seem great, that in its self is small;
Looks cover thoughts and interest governs all:
When Damon to an Heiress speaks kind things,
It Is not for what she is, but what she brings.

Exit. Fulvia She has so much moved the passion in my Soul, my Eyes can scarce
contain it? what discovery she can make, I know not, but long to be resolved;
it is true, we have had so many lets and troubles in this business; as if
Providence it self disliked the proceedings; but still this is no proof;
besides he has Sworn his faithful Love so often, 'twere infamous and
dishonorable to doubt it.


Enter Sir Charles and Stockjobb. Sir Charles. Madam, I need not tell you my
resentments, nor how I relish your ungenerous dealings; you have reason enough
to guess, and after guessing, have wit enough to make me satisfaction.


Fulvia Well, Sir Charles, consideration you know, never comes too late.


Sir Charles. Right, Madam, and to show you that I practice it my self, I will
forget your late Discoveries, and once more address my self, an humble Suitor
on my Sons behalf.


Fulvia I will consider of it, mean time, believe this fairness of your Temper
wins me more, then all your plots and Stratagems before.


Stock. Come, come; Slapdash, twill be a Match faith, and so forth; gad I Will
say this for Squire Thomas, he is a Notable person, as my wife informs me; she
says he pushes forward into business mighty well; he will be a great incourager
of Trade, and so forth.


Sir Charles. I hope my Cander and my Love at last, will force ye to be
grateful, and to show how much I prize a Reconcilement; this Night we will
have Revells and a Ball, and I my self will drink one Glass the more, in honor
of the Marriage*


Fulvia Marriage, Sir, is a thing of weight; but as I told ye, Sir, I will
consider of it, and to that purpose beg the favor to retire a little.


Exit. Sir Charles. Do so, and rest your self against the Evening, for Tom
intends to lead ye a brisk measure in faith -- so I hope all will be right now,
she seems considerative, which is one great step to Sentiment and Knowledge


Exit Sir Charles. Stock. Pugh! Slapdash, the woman has it in her head; now Sir
Charles, all will go well I see it.


Enter Hotspur in haste. Hots. Now Sir, if you have any regard to your Honor,
or the Reputation of a Citizen of London, as you have formerly flourished upon,
come along with me, and you shall see what a Snake you have fostered up; or to
speak in plainer Terms, you shall see what a Cuckold you are.


Stock. Come, you are a rude Hectorly to'ther end of Town fellow, I tell ye^ pray
keep from my House: I a Cuckold because I promote business, and Manage my Wife
wisely for the honor of the City; Sir, I scorn your words, for Gadzookes, I
had rather be an Elephant.


Hotsp. But in the mean time, you are a Beast of another kind, which come but
along with me, shall appear; I will show thee such things, such Monstrous
things.


Stock. What you have seen Squire Thomas I warrant, go into my Wives Chamber
privately, or so; well what then? it is about business and so forth, she knows
what she does I warrant her.


Hotsp. Ay, but you don't know what she does to my knowledge; come, come* you
shall go, I have lodged 'em all yonder, the Welsh Fop, and his Skittish Devil
too; your Rooms are all taken up and managed for the honor of the City, and so
forth.


Stock. Why then they are managed according to my desire, and so forth. I defy
any Citizens Wife within the Wails, to have a better head for business than her
self; for I Will hold a Hundred Pounds, she has drawn one of 'em into some lucky
wager or other; nay, nay, prithee hold thy tongue; gad, if thou were one of
the Apostles, I Would believe nothing against Pogry and Squire Thomas, not I


Hots. Why then like an unbelieving Sotas thou art, come and use thy Eyes* nay,
nay, no drawing back -- by Heaven thou shall go.


Stock. To laugh at thee, which I know I shall do and Damnably too, I a
Cuckold, -- as I said before I shall soon be an Elephant I Am sure.


Exeunt. SCENE. 3.
Enter T. Romance and Shinkin. T. Romans Well, I believe I am an Orginal about
Intreague; I don't think there is the fellow of me in Europe; gad take me, for
now is my Father thumping his Brains, and plotting to get this Heress for me,
and here am I hunting about for Sophronia, upon another Intreague: I conveyed a
Letter to her just now, by putting it into the Service Book at Church, then
dogged her home hither, -- I must find her out, for I long to know the success
on it.


Shink. Well, Shinkins was not much behind her in Intreagues, neither look you,
for her Cousin Siss, was hide her self hereabouts too, who I find loves Corners
and py places extremely, where gadsplut if Shinkin can find her, her will put
her toot, for corners and py places are fery full of temptation; but for all
her putting toot, there shall be no Marriages in the Case by St. Davy, there
her will peg her Pardon.


T. Romans Why, that is spoke like a Man of Intreague, gad take me, would I had my
dear Angel here, that I am looking for in a Corner.


Enter Hotspurr and Stockjob listening. Hotsp. Softly, softly, take care they
don't see ye, she is gone I find at present, but I know will soon return; in the
mean time, pray observe the Dialogue between these two Coxcombs.


Stock. I shall observe to laugh at you Egregiously, that I shall and so forth.


T. Romans Pogry stays so long that I see I must leave her, and go and seek out
my new Charmer.


Hotsp. Pogry -- de'^ hear, Sir, he begins already.


a part to Stock. Stock. Well Tom Fool, what of that?


Shink. Fie, fie, to desert your intreague so soon, was to show falsehoods and
inconstancies, which is not like Man of honors, look you.


Hotsp. It Is intreague, pray mind that Hint too, Sir.


Stock. Jackanapes, what hint, ye Ass you, what Hint?


T. Romans Pox on it, her over fondness every day tries me more then a Match at
Tennis; here is a Locket she gave me this Morning, which it seems the Fool her
Husband gave her Yesterday.


Stock. Humph, -- humph.


T. Romans A trifle worth about Fifty Pounds I believe, she teizes me with such
Follies as these every minute almost.


Hosp. Lookee, Sir, so much for the encouragement of Trade, and so forth.


Stock. By the Lord Major, the very Lockett that I had of Sir Paul Poundage,
the Goldsmith, to let him have share in my Project of the Catskin, oh! I am
confounded, I cannot believe my Eyes.


Hotsp. Nay, pray Sir don't laugh too extravagantly, Squire Tomas is but
opening the Jest yet.


T. Romans But the jest best is, the Cuckold admits me into his Wives Chamber
every day, in hopes she will draw me in to lay wagers; when, gad take, me, the
only one that ever laid or intend to lay, was a Brass Shilling against a good
one, that her next Kid will be a Boy.


Hotsp. There Sir, what think, e of that wager too, has she not drawn him in
rarely?


Stock. Oh Villian! the other End of Town Bully to ruin business too, that is worse
then all; gad I Will speak to my Cousin Touchhole, a Captain of the Trainbands,
to lend me a File of Musquetteers to Shoot the Rampant Dog through the Belly.


Hotsp. Nay, nay, have patience Dick, and don't hinder Trade I say.


Stock. Trade, gadzooks, this is the Devil of a Trade.


T. Romans There Is a light in the next Room, and ten to one Sophronia's there a
lone, gad I Will go and see, Cloak and Hat lie you there; if Pogry comes in the
mean time, let her stay, I have her so much at command, she dares not be angry
with me.


Exit. Shinkin. Flimms and Flams, and put her toot, -- hey Slapdash, why, this
is Bawdy House fashion right, the Welshman's gone to tickle my Cousin Siss in
the next Room too.


Hotsp. Ay that is all one, it is all to promote Trade you know, and for the
honor of the City.


Stock. Oh Confusion to the City and all Trade, if this be the Fruits of
wagering and stockjobbing, I have no Patience: I Will go to my Cousin Touchhole,
immediately: I Will have a dozen Muskets at least.


Hotsp. Nay Faith, stay and see all now, for here is the good Wife coming
through the Garden, and here is the Eopps Cloak and Hat left as opportunely to
disguise thee, as if we had contrived it; here, here, on with it quickly and
Practice his affected Gate, I warrant, you make some strange Discovery.


Stock. puts on his Cloak and Hat. Stock. Na, like enough, but gad I Will send
her home again; if I do, she shall ship for Piccardy with the Next Wind -- A
Cuckold, Oons I had rather be an Elephant by half; but this comes of succouring
French Refugees, with a Pox to 'em.


Enter Mrs. Stockjobb with Jewels. Mrs. Stock. Ah dear Monsieur, I beg your
Pardon vid all min Heart, dat I stay so long, but now I speak of mine Heart dat
has bin vid you all dis while, and I only stay to take de Convenience of de
Fool my Husbands being out of de way, to bring off some small trifles of Gold
and Jewels, which are dedicate to de Joy of my Soul, my Hearts Blood, my
Treasure.


gives him the Jewels. Stock. Slap dash, here is a French Devil for ye and so
forth.


Mr. Stock. I am so fatigued vid dat Brute, dat I can have patience no longer,
and derefore come to trow my self upon you, vid whom I will henceforth live and
dye, and whom I will follow all de World over.


Stock. Why? well said Pogry, rarely done, Pogry, go and be hanged Pogry, good
Protestant Refugee, to Piccardy go, but the Gold and Jewels shall stay in
England, ye Jade.


Uncloaks. Mrs. Stock. Oh Diable, vat dam misfortune is this?


Hots. Nothing, nothing, Madam, I know your Interest with Dicky, will turn the
Scale immediately; this is all upon the score of Trade.


Stock. Oh Confound all Trade, Burn the Exchange, hang up all Wagerers and
Stockjobbers, and the Devil take all business out of my doors, ye Whore; you
are a Protestant, are ye?


Reenter T. Romance. T. Romans Gad take me, I had like to have made a damn'n
mistake yonder, for instead of Sophronia, who should I meet within there, but
my Father and the Heiress, whom he has just carried to his own House, and
Commanded me to follow -- Hah, Dicky! how do thou?


Stock. Why Dicky does wondrous well, Sir, as well as a Cuckold can Sir, that
had rather be an Elephant there; there is Pogry too, go, go, manage your Trade
together, lay another brass Shilling to a Copper one; Stockjob lay Wagers and
be damned together, honest Squire Thomas, and I Will go to my Cousin Touchhole
and get you mawl'd, Dogbolt, if I can, for all that, and so farewell t'e.


Exit. Hotsp. So now you may launch to Piccardy again, and follow your old Trade
of Basketmaking, Jilt; I think I have spoiled your Market pretty well here; for
your part Coxcomb, I Will go and inform your Father of your design upon
Sophronia, that I think will do your business too.


Exit. T. Romans 'Dsdeath if he does that, I Am undone for ever, I must after and
prevent it.


Exit. Mrs. Stock. Ah! dear Monsieur will you leave me then?


T. Romans Leave thee, ay gad if thou were a Cherubin, and I think that is a
Station remote enough for a French Refuge


Exit T. Romans Mrs. Stock. Vas ever hopeful Intreague so spoiled -- diable must
me go Weeps to France again too, by dis hand me vill deny dat, me vill Rob, me
vill Pick de Pocket, me vill drown, me vill hang before ever me leave Sweet
England, to go into France again, dat is certain.


Exit weeping. SCENE 4th.
Cunningman and Quickwit Smoking at a Table, with a Stand of Ale. Cunning.
Come all malice apart, prithee lets be grave no longer, but drown Animosities
in the bottom of the Pitcher; you are an Ingenious Fellow, and I Have a mind to
be reconciled to thee, and therefore contrived to meet at this Little Cottage
out of the way, where we may speak our minds freely, -- Come give me thy hand,
shall we be friends?


Quick. Prithee, thou can not be a friend to any Body.


Cunning. Ha, ha, ha, I know you are angry, but faith Tom I could not help it,
thou know it is natural to me to Love Mischief.


Quick. Come pull away then.


Drinks. Cunning. Come Faith the Heiress health, let us remember her that we
have had all this busle about; ye witty Rogue you, I Am damnably afraid you will
get her from us again, for all her Guardian has her so fast.


Quick. Very well Sir, insult, insult; you have the Dice, you may do what you
please, ha, ha, ha, gad I should lose another Brace of Fifties if thou
should, but I think I may venture her this once.


Quick. Ay, Pox on ye for a Witty Rogue, you have the better of me clearly, my
Brains are quite dulled.


Cunn. Then not to banter any longer, the Match betwixt young Romance is made
up, and we are to have a Ball at Sir Charles's House immediately: I wait here
for some Masquerading Habits, that I have sent a Messenger to borrow at
Twickenham; there is to be a little Ataque too of Pluto, Orpheus, and Euridice,
of my Composing, and the Music of Mr. Purcels -- here is the Design, I Will show
it thee.


Quickwitt. Ay hang ye, you used to be Ingenious enough at these things.


Enter Numps. Numps. There Is a Man without, with a Bundle, desires to speak
with ye, and 't shall please ye. --


To Cunington. Cun. Oh! that is well, it is the Fellow with the Habits, I must go
and take 'em.


Exit. Numps. Ah Master Quickwit, Numps was a damned sower part for me, it was
adswowkers, but do you hear, when am I to be paid for it, I was only thrash'd
confoundedly for acting so well, -- that is all I have got yet.


Quick. Why now the happy Minute's come to make ample satisfaction to us both,
and do but as I advise thee, thou shall get thy Twenty Pounds presently, and
Mr. Frederick shall have the Heiress into the bargain.


Numps. Odswowkers, how can that be, Master Quickwit?


Quick. Do know this Fellow that went out?


Numps. Not I, I never saw him in my life.


Quick. This is that very Rogue that betrayed us to Sir Charles, and the
Doctor, that procured thy beating, and has ever since frustrated our Plots upon
the Heiress.


Numps. 'Sbud, my Bones ache at the very thought on it; oh Dog Villain, is this
he?


Quick. This is the very Rascal, who is now gone out for some disguises to make
some Dancing Entertainment there this Evening; now if thou can but get two
or three of thy honest Neighbors to seize him, I Will contrive the Heiress for
Frederick and he shall have the Guinnies ready for thee.


Numps. 'Odzookes Master Quickwit, I Will do it immediately, for it never could
happen in a better time, for I have three or four Neighbors here drinking in
the next Room, that will do it for Mr. Frederick at a words speaking. --


Quick. Away then dear Numps, and call 'em instantly, -- now Fortune favor
this once, and be my Goddess for ever after.


Exit Numps. Re-enter Cunington with a bundle. Cun. Well, prithee tell me now,
how do like the contrivance, you must know I am to do Pluto there my self.


Quick* Nay, thou art the fittest Person to act the Devil, of any one I know,
that I Will say for thee.


Cun. Ha, ha, ha, prithee leave off thy frumps, thou can not forgive me
heartily yet, I see, come faith, give me thy Hand, I Will contract a Friendship
with thee.


Quick* Ay, that is likely to prove well, why, thou never yet could be a
Friend to thy self, much less to any one else.


Cun. Faith, the Heiress and I will drink thy health presently, but you shall
promise me, you will not get her from me again, you witty Rascal -- you shall
faith, ha, ha, ha. --


Enter Numps, and 3 or 4 Countrymen. Quick. We Are Catchpol'd Ioe -- I Will
promise nothing.


Cun. How now, what a Devil's the matter now?


They seize him. Numps. Come, Sir, you must go along with us.


Cun. With you, whither, forwhat -- 'Oons are the Men mad?


Quick. Alas, good Sir, why de'ye pull and haul the Gentleman so, 'Dshart,
what is the matter I say, what have I done?


1 Count. What has he done Brother? By the Maskins I cannot tell.


Quick. Tell him he has spoke Treasonable words against the Government.


Numps. Secure him as a Traitor, he has spoke some vengenable words -- against
the Government.


Cun. Who I, 'dsdeath, I?


Omn. Oh, Rogue, Villain, has he so, we'll hamper ye.


Quick. A Traitor, nay then there may be Treason in this bundle for ought I
know, I Will secure that.


Takes away the bundle. Cun. 'Sbud I have said nothing, ye are all mad sure, I
tell ye you mistake your Man, -- Brother, prithee put in a word for me.


Quick. No, Brother, no, Treason's a dangerous thing, I dare not meddle in it.


Numps. Come, come, away with him to Mr. Soakes the Constables, and then let
him deal with him.


2 Count. Ay, ay, away with him, away with him.


Quick. Pray remember to drink my Health with the Heiress, good Brother.


Count. Away with him, Gentlemen, away with him, ha, ha, ha. --


Cun. Ah, plague upon ye, help, help, Murder, Murder.


They haul him out. Quick. So, now I Will to Frederick immediately -- the Dice
are now on my side -- and if I don't thrive now by my Hand, I shall despair
hereafter.


Exit. SCENE Ultima.
Enter Sir Charles and Guiasum, Hotspurr, and T. Romance. Hotsp. You Will be sure
to keep your promise.


Romans Punctually, keep but my Counsel, and Five Hundred Pounds are thine at the
day of Marriage.


Hotsp. Well, Sir, upon that condition my Mouth is sealed up, and your Father
shall know nothing, but if you abuse my trust, Bilbo's the word, you know what
I mean.


T. Romans Well, well, not a word more, this plaguey hotheaded Fellow, -- may do
me mischief now, but when I Am once Married, I Will manage him as I see
occasion. --


Aside. Hotsp. Since Fredericks ill fortune has made him lose the Heiress, it is
some part of Revenge, to make this Fool pay soundly for it.


Sir Char. Come, where are the Music and the Dancers, -- Son Tom, why methinks
thou art lazy in the business.


T. Romans Mr. Cunnington is not come yet, Sir, with the Habits, but we expect
him every Minute; gad take me, my head runs so much upon Sophronia, that I can
get nothing else into it for the heart of me.


Guias. Well, I am glad to see things in so good a posture at last, by the life
of Gallen, all great advantages are acquired with great trouble -- she is an
Heiress and Rich, the more difficult still to be obtained, but -- Patience and
Industry make all things easy; I forgive her trick upon me with all my Heart,
and shall be well pleased to Tope a Bumper at her Wedding.


Sir Char. Oh, Mr. Hotspurr, you are welcome, I see my Son and you are
reconciled, and honorably I make no question, therefore shall be glad to
appear your Friend.


Hotsp. Friend, ay, just as the Friendship of the World is, he cares not
Threepence if I were Strapado'd; nor I three Farthings if he were Hanged. --


Apart. Enter Shinkin, and Squeamish with a Paper. Squeam. Oh horrid! to
infringe your Word and Honor, is a baseness not proper for a Gentleman, and
I Will discover it to your Uncle, as I Am a Virgin. --


Weeps. Shink. And Gadsplut, to Marry Wildcats, and Harridans, and her knows
not what, is like Fools by St. Davy, and her will discover that too.


Sir Char. How now, what is the matter, Cousin Rice, what is it occasions the
Lady's tears.


Squeam. I Will tell you, Sir Charles, though I confess the odious story ought to
be concealed, but since my* Honor is concerned, it must out.


T. Romans For now we shall hear a Welsh Intrigue, gad take me, I shall bring a
new method on it by degrees, in all the Countys about England.


Squeam. You all know my detestation of Lampoons, and the care I have always
taken, to prevent 'em, but you must know, this Gentleman, having long made an
honorable Address of Love to me* upon condition that he defended me against
scandal by Marriage, -- at last I consented.


Shink. Gadsplut her only talked of Marriages, look you to keep her from
squeaking and squawling, her intentions were quite other things by Cadway.


T. Romans Ay, ay, -- Madam, to my knowledge, my Cousin Rice hates Marriage, as
much as you do a Lampoon, you are mistaken in your Man -- gad take me.


Squeam. The more reprobate Person he, for Heaven knows, Sir Charles, how loath
I was to Intriegue with any Man, and to that purpose, have often ran up into my
Chamber, got into dark Closets, Cellars, Larders, and such by-places, where I
thought the mischief of Man, could not overtake me, as I Am a Virgin.


T. Romans Where you thought the mischief of Man would soonest overtake ye, as
I Am a Virgin.


Sir Char. Son Tom, Tace, proceed Madam.


Squeam. But in spite of all my industry, this wild Welsh Creature has still
found me out, and has published himself and me, in so particular a manner, that
here I am in a Lampoon again, and in so filthy a style, that I vow I Am ashamed
to read it.


Weeps. Shink. What signifies running into Closets, and Cellars, and Larders,
was not all her Doors left open, can her deny that?


Squeam. Alas, I had not presence of mind enough, to shut the Door upon him,
this is my deplorable case, Sir Charles, and if he does not Marry me, I must
never show my Face in the World again, I am utterly undone, as I Am a Virgin.


Shink Her has been as much undone; look you in Cellars, and Closets, fery
often before Shinkin's found her there, as report goes, and to be prief, her
shall not marry Harridans and Wildcats, and there is, there is the resolution of a
true Prittain, look you.


Exit Shinkin. Squeam. Never particular with any Person, since I was born
before, as I Am a Virgin.


Sir Char. Well, well, go after and teize him, this business must be debated at
a more convenient hour, for I see the Entertainment is going forward, here
comes my Daughter, -- now Tom mind your business.


Exit Squeam. Enter Fulvia, and Sophronia. Fulvia. Cousin, no more, the proofs
are clear and manifest, and as you relish my proceedings, second me.


Soph. Against the World, in such a generous action.


Enter Mummers, and Sir Quibble, disguised amongst 'em. Guiac. Pray, what are
these, Sir Charles?


Sir Char. Oh, these are Mummers, some of the young fry of the Neighborhood
that having a frolic this Evening, desire to give us a share on it, the Subject
is the stealing an Heiress, and the Figures are Love, Desire, Youth, and
Avarice, that all Court the Lady Pecunia, the design is pretty enough, come let
'em begin.


They Dance. SONG here. Then enter Frederick and Quickwit disguised like Pluto
and Orpheus, Marmalet following. Guiac. Here Is more, what are these?


Sir Char. Oh, this is Cunnington's contrivance, a little masque of Pluto,
Orpheus, and Euridice, pray let us observe.


Marm. They desire to practice with Euridice a little in the next room, and
then you shall see 'em do it perfectly. Come, Madam, this is the rarest
contrivance to escape that ever you had.


Aside to Fulvia. Fred. takes one of Fulvia's hands, Quickwit the other, and as
they are leading her off she turns back Fulvia. Hold, hold, are ye mad? why,
Sir Charles, and you Squire Small-brains, you will not suffer me to be carried
off thus before your faces, will ye?


Sir Char. But into the next room to practice a little, Madam.


T. Romans You are to act Euridice, you know, Madam, and they will only see if
you are perfect in your cue; Mr. Cunnington there, has shown me the whole
design.


Fulvia. And Mr. Quickwit, the witty Player here, has shown it me, Sir. Come,
Pluto, you must unmask.


Unmasks Quickwit. Quick. 'Dsdeath, Madam, what do you mean, you wont discover
us, and undo all?


Fulvia. Yes faith, Sir, I Have a fancy in my head that it is not lucky to be
stolen to day; therefore you Orpheus, otherwise called Frederick the constant,
you must uncover too, your singing will hardly get ye a Mistress to night, I
can assure ye.


Fred. She discovers us -- Death and Confusion! what new turn's this?


Soph. Methinks, Mr. Heiress-stealer, you look very blank of the sudden.


Fred. Ay, it is so -- this is the Female Devil that has done me this admirable
good turn, I find it now, and my disgrace approaching: Oh! damned! damned
Fortune!


Fulvia. What think ye now, Sir Charles? am I not very just to my Guardian?


Sir Char. This is such an affront, as nothing but my Sword can do me justice
in.


Draws. T. Romans Gad take me, the Devil's in 'em for plotting, I think; will
they never let us alone?


Guiac. That Devil Quickwit in the Plot again! I hope you will give him one good
thrust for my sake.


Fulvia. Nay, no fighting, good Gentlemen: Well, well, Sir, I understand ye,
but you are so hasty --

Sir Quibble endeavors ^o pull her aside, and she refuses. To Sir Quibble
Lookee, Sir Charles, here is another part of the Jest remains still, which this
Gentleman Mu^er is wittily concerned in too, who having no ill opinion of
himself, and consequently believing I had a very good one of him, sent me word
he was bailed, and his present design of mumming, bribing some of his Tenants
to act it, and help carry me off; and is really, and in specie, the very
numerical and amorous Knight, Sir Quibble Quere.


Guiac. Sir Quibble Quere too? why, here are all the Fools in the Nation sure,
concerned in this Plot.


Sir Quib. 'Dsheart, why will you discover me now, Madam? I Will say it, 'twas the
purest design that ever was laid, but I hope you will marry me for all this, for
you know I have laid out a pour of Money upon it, and have now a Coach and six
Horses ready at the Garden-gate for ye, I Will say it, you ought to consider now,
Madam; what a dickins, Conscience is Conscience all the World over.


Fulvia. Learnedly argued, Sir Quibble, and you shall see what Justice I Will do
you all presently; first you, Sir, that through the To Fred. baseness of your
sordid nature, and mercenary thirst of gain, abused me, take that as a reward
for your Ingratitude and my Eternal hatred for the future.


Gives him his promise of Marriage to Sophronia. Fred. My contract of Marriage
to Sophronia! -- this is the Thunderbolt I always dreaded, and it is fallen with
a vengeance.


Fulvia. Read there a base Deceiver's Character, and for thy sake may never
generous Maid, trust thy false Sex to be again betrayed.


Soph. Instead of Heiresses and blooming Brides with fifty thousand Pounds,
Stick to your old Doll Commons of the Town,

And cater as you used for half a Crown.


Scornfully. Fred. Peace, Witch, Fury, now could I eat that Satirical Devil
without Salt for my Breakfast! Torture and Death! to stay here too, and be
baited, is worse than breaking upon the Wheel! -- Hell take all Heiresses, and
all the Sex besides.


Exit Fred. Sir Quib. Ha, ha, ha, alas poor Brother, I see now I am to be the
happy Man.


Fulvia. Troth no, Sir, I must beg your pardon too -- your Estate is wasted
with disbursing Sums to go a Fortune-hunting; nor have you Brains enough to get
another, and to marry a Ninny, a Bankrupt, no, as you used to say, Sir, I a'n't
such a Fool neither.


T. Romans You may send home your Coach, Sir Quibble, you will have no use for it
here, Gad take me.


Sir Quib. Why then a Plague of all Intrigues: I Will go and get drunk, and
despise all Womankind, for I Will say it, I Will never hang my self about the
matter, but I Will have my Money again if there be Law in England, let the Women
go to the Devil, I Will not be choused out of that; what a Pox, I a'n't such a
Fool neither.


Exit Sir Quibble. Fulvia. Ha, ha, ha, -- thus far, Sir Charles, you see how
far I have discharged your Trust, do ye resolve therefore to deliver up your
Guardianship freely, that I may have generous liberty to pursue my Inclinations.


Sir Char. Madam, with all my heart, before this Company I declare you free to
choose a new Guardian where you please, and to confirm it, take there the Keys
where all your Writings are, and the Power left me by your Father, -- I see she
intends to give her self generously to my Son, and therefore to confine her,
were ungenerous.


Aside to the Doctor. Guiac. There stands the Gentleman, Madam, if you design
him happy, the quicker work the better.


Fulvia. That might have been done, indeed, Doctor, to oblige Sir Charles, but
the Gentleman you speak of, has made a better choice, as this can witness.


Gives Sir Charles a Letter. Sir Char. How Is this! a Letter of Courtship to
Sophronia!


Fulvia. Oh! and so full of Passion, Flame, and Darts, that it almost scorched
me when I read it.


Sir Char. Oh Villain! Dol^! Town-Fop! have I been racking my Brains all this
while to get an Heiress to thy purpose! what is the meaning of this, Sirrah?


T. Romans Why the meaning is, that I love all the Sex, gad take me, and can no
more confine my self to one Woman, than to one Suit of Clothes; if you don't
like the humor you might have got me a better, that is all I know of the matter.


Sir Char. Insupportable Coxcomb! I Will disinherit thee immediately.


Guiac. More turns and Plots, this is a very Comedy, by the life of Gallen.


Ho^sp So, I find I am like to Cudgel my five hundred Pounds out of my Spark,
for the Devil a pen^y ^e's like to get by the Heiress -- but stay, who the
Devil will she choose, -- if I should be the Man at last.


Fulvia. Since such a general defect of honesty corrupts the Age, I Will no more
trust Mankind, but lay my Fortune out upon my self, and flourish in contempt of
humane Falsehood: as for thy part that have been a main Acter in this business,
and with contriving wit well managed it, to let thee see the Ingenious still
gets Friends, I will with Gold reward thy Industry, nor shall honest Numps,
may, nor your Co^ade, be either of the^ forgotten, -- but be instantly brought
hither, and share a part of Bounty.


To Quickwit. Quick. It Is my Glory, Madam, to be outwitted by you, and if my
Brain did any thing uncommon, it was by you inspired.


Marm. Well, (...) Fortune has contrived the business, so I hope, Sir, you
think it time to remember me.


Quick. Oh, prithee, dear venerability, have patience a little, thou ^eest all
the Marriages are (...) at present, and it is not fit we should be singular, my
dear Antiqu^.


Marm. Alas, sweet Sir, but delays you km^w are dangerous, and if I should be
balk'd in my Expectation, my heart is so set upon'^ that I should anihilate
that very moment, I should dye, as I Am a Christian.


Fulvia. Well, Cousin, what think we now of my Resolution, have I not done
Justice?


Soph. Most generous Maid, thou art a dear Example for all the S^ to copy out
thy Virtue, for that a kind and tender heart like (...), molded for Love, and
softened with Endearments, should generously on the account of honor, resist a
Traitor, that with strong E^hantments of Vows and Oaths, had long time made
Impression, is a performance heightened to a wonder, and will be reverenced in
succeeding ages.


Fulvia. My eyes in contradiction to the World, have ever (scorning Interest)
fixed on Merit, and led by Love and Generous inclination, have strove to make
that Sentiment appear by a free present of my Heart and Fortune to one I
thought as nobly had deserved 'em. But, oh! the Race of Men are all Deceivers,
and my relief, is my resolve to shun 'em; it is, my dear Friend, as thou have
lately told me, which for instruction I will still repeat.

Love may seeem great that in it self is small,
Looks cover thoughts, and Interest governs all;
When Damon to an Heiress speaks kind things,
It Is not for what she is, but what she brings.

Exeunt. EPILOGUE
OF all the Critics met to judge this Play,
The Fortune-Hunters most are feared to day;
Who must be vexed that they have a Brother found
So odly balk'd of fifty thousand Pound:
And I confess they have some cause to rage;
The Spark has lost a tempting Equipage,
A Coach, a set of Barbs, such dazzling things,
Nay, six laced Footmen finer than the Kings;
Besides a fine bred Miss embroidered round
With a Rump Croshe^ worth five hundred Pound.
These Gem^ to lose of deep concern must be;
But yet considering the equality,
How often ye chouce poor Women, is it not fit
Once in an age the Biter should be bit;
To be so often fool'^ I think is civil,
But to be Changelings always is the Devil.
Besides, the truth is, we find out your Arts.
Love guilds your Tongues, but Money guides your Hearts;
In Songs you term ou^ Faces Charming fair;
But it is the gilt Charming face our Gold (...) ^ar,
That treats us with your Poetry and Air.
If (she is a swinging Fortune he the cry)
Then gad there is no such Angel in the Sky:
But should Smallpox, or Poverty invade,
Then, who would visit such a Pol^cat Jade,
And Plague upon her is your Serenade,
Of moderate Worth, or Wealth you will never allow;
She must be still the Eagle or the Crow:
This The^m occasions our new Scenes to Night,
To show a Woman (...) was in the right*
The Satyr's gentle, and I think it is (...),
And only meant to teach y^ to be true.
You should with patience bear the ^ling smart,
Kiss the kind Rod, and take it in good part*
But if you swell, and s^ew a stubborn Heart,
If in your Breasts ungrateful Passions s^ay.
And you should (...) at me, and at the Play;
May the^ (...) dire Revenge pursue ye round;
M^ (...) one that has such an Heiress found;
Lose her at last, and fifty thousand Pound.
FINIS.

