SEVERAL NEW SONGS.

By THO. D'URFEY, Gent.

SET TO AS MANY NEW TUNES, BY THE BEST Masters in Music.



LONDON,

Printed by J. Playford, for Joseph Hindmarsh (Bookseller to His Royal
Highness) at the Black Bull in Cornhill, 1684.

A SCOTCH Song, sung to the King at Windsor.
^ JUST when the young and blooming Spring had mel -- ted down the Win -- ter
Snow; and in the Grove the Birds did sing their char -- ming Notes on ev' -- ry
Bough: Poor Will -- ly sat bemoa -- ning his fate, and woe -- full state, for lo
-- ving, lo -- ving, lo -- ving, and de -- spai -- ring too; A -- las! he would
cry, that I must dye, for pret -- ty Kate of E -- den -- brough.

II.
Willy was late at a Wedding house,
Where Lords and Ladies danced all arow;
But Willy saw nene so pretty a Lass,
As pretty Kate of Edenbrough.
Her bright Eyes, with smiling Joys,
Did so surprise*
And something, something, something
Else that shot him through:
Thus Willy lies entranced in Joys,
With pretty Kate of Edenbrough:
III.
The God of Love was Willy's friend,
And cast an Eye of Pity down;
And straight a fatal Dart did send,
The cruel Virgin's Heart to wound.
Now every Dream is all of him,
Who still does seem
More lovely, lovely, lovely,
Since the Marriage Vow:
Thus Willy lies entranced in Joys,
With pretty Kate of Edenbrough.
The WINCHESTER WEDDING, Set to the King's Jigg; a Country Dance.
^ AT Win -- che -- ster was a Wedding, the like was ne -- ver seen, 'twixt lu
-- sty Ralph of Rea -- ding, and bon -- ny black Bess of the Green: The Fiddles
went crowding before, each Lass was as fine as a Queen; there was a hundred or
more, for all the Country came in. Brisk To -- bin led Rose so ^ fair, she
looked like a Lil -- ly of the Vale; and Ruddy-fac'd Har -- ry led Ma -- ry, and
To -- ger led bouncing Nell.

II.
With Tommy came smiling Katy,
He helped her over the Style,
And swore, there was none so pretty
In forty and forty long Mile.
Kit gave a green Gown to Betty*
And lent her his hand to rise;
But Jenny was jeered by Watty,
For looking blue under the Eyes.
Thus merrily chatting all,
They passed to the Bride-house along*
With Johnny and pretty-fac'd Nanny,
The fairest of all the Throng.
III.
The Bridegroom came out to meet 'em,
Afraid the Dinner was spoiled;
And ushered 'em in to Treat 'em,
With baked, and roasted, and boiled.
The Lads were frolic and jolly,
for each had his Love by his side;
But Willy was melancholy,
For he had a mind to the Bride.
Then Philip begins her Health,
And turns a Beer-glass on his Thumb;
But Jenkin was rated for drinking,
The best in Christendom.
IV.
And now they had dined, advancing
Into the midst of the Hall,
The Fiddles struck up for Dancing,
And Jeremy led up the Brawls.
But Margery kept a quarter,
A Lass that was proud of her Pelf;
'Cause Arthur had stolen her Garter,
And swore he would tie it himself.
She struggled, and blushed, and frowned,
And ready with Anger to cry;
'Cause Arthur with tying her Garter,
Had slipped up his hand too high.
V.
And now for throwing the Stocking,
The Bride away was led;
The Bridegroom got drunk, was knocking
For Candles, to light 'em to bed.
But Robin that found him silly,
Most friendly took him aside;
The while that his Wife with Willy,
Was playing at Hooper's Hide.
And now the warm Game begins,
The Critical Minute was come;
And chatting, and billing, and kissing,
Went merrily round the Room.
VI.
Pert Stephen was kind to Betty,
And blithe as a Bird in the Spring;
And Tommy was so to Katy,
And Wedded her with a Rush Ring.
Sueky that danced with the Cushion,
An hour from th'Room had been gone;
And Barnaby knew by her blushing,
That some other Dance had been done.
And thus of Fifty fair Maids,
That came to the Wedding with Men,
Scarce five of the Fifty was left ye,
That so did return again.
The JILTS; a Song sung to the King at Winchester.
^ ON a Bank in flow -- ry June, when Groves are green and gay; in a smi --
ling Af -- ter -- noon, with Doll young Willy lay: ^ They thought none were to
spy 'em, but Nell stood listening by 'em; Oh fie! Doll cried, no I vow, I Would ra
-- there dye, than wrong my Mo -- de -- sty: Quoth Nell, that I shall see.

II.
Smarting pain the Virgin finds,
Although by Nature taught,
When she first to Man enclines;
Quoth Nell, I Will venture that.
Then who would lose a Treasure
For such a puny Pleasure?
Not I, not I, no, a Maid I Will live and dye,
And to my Vow be true:
Quoth Nell, the more fool you.
III.
To my Closet I Will repair,
And Godly Books peruse;
Then devote my self to Prayer,
Quoth Nell, and -- use:
You Men are all perfidious,
But I will be Religious.
Try all, fly all, whilst I have Breath deny ye all,
For the Sex I now despise:
Quoth Nell, by G -- d she lies.
IV.
Youthful Blood o'respreads her Face,
When Nature prompts to Sin;
Modesty ebbs out apace,
And Love as fast flows in:
The Swain that heard this schooling,
Ashamed, left off his fooling;
Kill me, kill me, now I am ruined, let me dye:
You have damned my Soul to Hell;
Try her once again, cries Nell.
NEW MARKET; a Song sung to the King there.
^ THE Gol -- den Age is come, the Win -- ter Storms are gone; Flowers spread
and bloom, and smile to see the Sun: Who dai -- ly guilds the Groves, and calms
the Air and Seas; Nature seems in love, when all the World's in Peace. Ye
Rogues come saddle Ball, I Will to New -- mar -- kes scour; you ne -- ver mind
when I call, you should have been rea -- die this hour: For there are the Sports
and the Games, with -- out a -- ny plot -- ting of State; from Trea -- son, or
^ a -- ny such shame, de -- li -- ver us, de -- li -- ver us, Oh Fate! Let Us be
to each o -- there is a Prey, to be cheated be ev' -- ry ones lot; or chows'd a --
ny sort of a way, but by a -- no -- there Plot. Let Cul -- lies that lose at a
Race, go ven -- ture at Ha -- zard and win; and he that is bub -- bled at Dice;
re -- co -- ver it at Cock -- ing a -- gain. Let Jades that are foundered be
bought, let Jockeys play Crimp to make sport; for faith it was strange
me-thought, to see T^^ -- ker beat the Court.

II.
Each corner of the Town*
Rings with perpetual noise,
The Oyster-bawling Clown
Joins with Hot Pudding-pies:
Who both in Consort keep,
To vend their stinking Ware;
The drowzy God of Sleep
Has no Dominion here.
Hey-boys the Jockeys roar,
If the Mare and Gelding run;
I Will hold ye five Guineys to four,
He Will beat her and give half a Stone.
Gad Dam-me cries Bully, it is done,
Or else I Am the Son of a Whore;
And would I could meet with a Man
Will offer it, will offer it once more.
See, see the damned Vice of this Town,
A Fop that was starving of late,
And scarcely could borrow a Crown,
Puts in to run for the Plate.
Another makes Racing a Trade,
And dreams of his Projects to come;
And many a crimp Match has made,
By bubbing another Man's Groom.
The Townsmen are Whiggish, God rot 'em,
Their Hearts are but Loyal by fits;
For if we should search to the bottom,
They Are nasty as their Streets.
III.
But now all Hearts beware,
See, see on yonder Downs,
Beauty triumphs there,
And at this distance wounds*
In the Amazonian Wars,
Thus all the Virgins shone;
Thus like glittering Stars,
Paid Homage to the Moon.
Love proves a Tyrant now,
And here does proudly dwell;
For each stubborn Spirit must bow,
He has found out a new way to kill:
For never was invented before
Such Charms of additional Grace;
Nor had Divine Beauty such Power,
In every, in every fair Face.
Udsbows, cries my Countryman John,
Was ever the like before seen?
By Hats and the Feathers they would on
I took 'em all for Men:
Embroidered and fine as the Sun,
On Horses in Trappings of Gold,
Such a Show I shall nere see again,
Should I live to a hundred years old.
This, this, is the Country Discourse,
All wondering at the rare sight;
Then Roger go saddle my Horse,
For I will be there to night.
To SYLVIA; a Song set to a new Playhouse Tune.
^ STate and Am -- by -- tion, a -- las! will de -- ceive ye, there is no so --
lid Joy but the Bles -- sing of Love; Scorn does of Plea -- sure fair Syl --
via be -- reave ye, your Fame is not per -- fect 'till that you remove:
Monarchs that sway the vast Globe in their Glo -- ry, know Love is their
brightest Jewel of Power; poor Phi -- le -- mon's Heart was or -- dain'd to a
-- door ye, ah! then dis -- dain his Pas -- sion no more.

II.
Jove on his Throne was the Victim of Beauty,
His Thunder laid by, he from Heaven came down;
Shaped like a Swan, to fair Leda paid Duty,
And prized her far more than his Heavenly Crown:
She too was pleased with her beautiful Lover,
And stroak'd his white Plumes, and feasted her Eye;
His Cunning in loving knew well how to move her,
By Billing begins the business of Joy.
III.
Since Divine Powers Examples have given,
If we should not follow their Precepts, we sin;
Sure 'twill appear an Affront to their Heaven,
If when the Gate opens we enter not in.
Beauty my Dearest was from the beginning,
Created to calm our Amorous Rage;
And she that against that Decree will be sinning,
In Youth still will find the Curse of old Age.
A SONG on the late Victory over the Turks.
^ HArk! the thundering Ca -- nons roar, ecchoing from the Ger -- man shore;
and the joy -- full News comes over, the Turks are all con -- foun -- ded:
Lorrain comes, they run, they run; charge with your Horse through the grand
Half Moon, we'll Quarter give to none, since Sta -- rem -- berg is wounded.

II.
Close your Ranks, and each brave Soul
Take a lusty flowing Bowl,
A grand Carouse to the Royal POLE,
The Empire's brave Defender:
No Man leave his Post by stealth,
Plunder the barbarous Vizier's Wealth,
But drink a Helmet full, the Health
Of the second ALEXANDER.
III.
Mahomet was a sober Dog,
A Small-beer, drouzy, senseless Rogue,
The juice of the Grape so much in vogue,
To forbid to those Adore him;
Had he but allowed the Vine,
Given 'em leave to Carouse in Wine,
The Turk had safely passed the Rhine,
And conquered all before him.
IV.
Infidels are now overcome;
But the Most Christian Turks at home,
Watching the Fate of Christendom,
But all his Hopes are shallow:
Since the Poles have led the Dance,
Let English CAESAR now advance;
And if he sends a Fleet to France,
He Is a Whig that does not follow.
The KING'S-HEALTH, sung to Farrinel's Ground.
First Strain.
^ ALL joy to great Caesar, long Life, Love, and Pleasure; it is a Health that
Di -- vine is, fill the Bowl high as mine is: Let none fear a Fea -- ver, but
take it off thus Boys; let the King live for ever, it is no mat -- ter for us
Boys.

Second Strain.
^ TRY all the Loy -- al, de -- fie all, give de -- ni -- al; sure none thinks
the Glass too big here, nor a -- ny Prig here, or sneaking Whig here, of Crip
-- ple To -- ny's Crew, that now looks blue, his Heart aches too, the Tap will not
do, his Zeal so true, and Projects new, ill Fate does now pursue.

Third Strain.
^ LET To -- ries guard the King, let Whigs in Halters swing; let Pilk -- and
Shu -- be shamed, let bugg'ring O -- be damned; let cheating Pl -- be nicked,
the Turn-coat Scribe be kicked; let Re -- bell Ci -- ty Dons ne -- ver be -- get
their Sons; let eve -- ry Whiggish Peer that Rapes a La -- die fair, and ^
leaves his on -- ly Dear the Sheets to gnaw and tear, be pu -- nish'd out of
hand, and forced to pawn his Land* t'attone the grand Af -- fair.

Fourth Strain.
^ GReat Charles like Je -- ho -- vah spares Foes would unking him, and warms
with his Gra -- ces the Vi -- pers that sting him; 'till ^ Crowned with just An
-- ger the Re -- bells he sei -- zes, thus Hea -- ven can Thun -- der when e --
ver it plea -- ses.

Fifth Strain.
^ THEN to the Duke fill, fill up the Glass, the Son of our Mar -- tyr, be --
loved of the King; en -- vy'd and loved, yet blessed from a -- bove, se --
cured by an An -- gel safe un -- der his Wing.

Sixth Strain.
^ FAction and Fol -- ly, and State Me -- lan -- cho -- ly, with To -- ny in
Whig -- land for e -- ver shall dwell; let Wit, Wine, and Beau -- ty then teach
us our Du -- ty, for none e're can love, or be wise and Re -- bell.

LONDON's LOYALTY.
^ ROuse up great Ge -- nius of this po -- tent Land, lest Traitors once more
get the up -- per hand; the Re -- bel-Crowd their for -- mer Te -- nents own,
and Trea -- sons worse than Plagues in -- fect the Town: The sneaking May'r and
his two pimping Shrieves, who for their ho -- ne -- sty no bet -- ter are than
Thieves; fall from their Sov'raign's side to court the Mo -- by -- le, Oh! Lon
-- don, Lon -- don, where is thy Loy -- al -- ty?

II.
First, Yorkshire Patience twirls his Copper Chain,
And hopes to see a Commonwealth again;
The sneaking Fool of breaking is afraid,
Dares not change sides for fear he lose his Trade:
Then Loyal Slingsby does their Fate Divine --
He that abjured the King, and all His Sacred Line,
And is supposed his Father's Murderer to be;
Oh! Bethel, Bethel, where is thy Loyalty?
III.
A most notorious Villain late was caught,
And after to the Bar of Justice brought;
But Slingsby packed a Jury of his own,
Of worser Rogues than e're made Gallows groan:
Then Dugdale's Evidence was soon decry'd,
That was so just and honest when old Stafford died,
Now was a Rogue, a perjured Villain he.
Oh! Justice, Justice, where is thy Equity?
IV.
Next Cl -- ton murmurs Treason unprovoked,
He supped the King, and after wished him choked;
'Cause Danby's Place was well bestowed before
He Rebel turns, seduced by Scarlet Whore:
His saucy Pride aspires to high Renown,
Leather Breeches are forgot in which he trudged to Town,
Naught can please the scribbling Clown but the Treasury.
Oh! Robert, Robert, where is thy Modesty?
V.
Pl -- er now grows dull, and pines for want of Whore,
Poor Creswel, she can take his word no more,
Three hundred Pounds is such a heavy Yoke,
Which not being paid, the worn*out Bawd is broak:
These are the Instruments by Heaven sent,
These are the Saints Petition for a Parliament,
That would for Int'rest-sake destroy the Monarchy:
Oh! London, London, where is thy Loyalty?
VI.
Heaven bless fair England, and its Monarch here,
And Scotland bless your High Commissioner;
Let Perkin his ungracious Error see,
And Tony 'scape no more the Triple-Tree:
Then Peace and Plenty shall our Joys restore,
Villains and Factions shall oppress the Town no more*
But every Loyal Subject then shall happy be,
Nor need we care for London's Loyalty.
FINIS.

