The effect of Master Dury's Negotiation for the uniting of Protestants in a
Gospel Interest in brief is this
THe aim of Master Dury's Negotiations has been.

First, to remove mistakes and scandalous debates from among Protestants, from
whence their Divisions did arise, and by which they have been hitherto fomented.

Then also to bring their minds and affections by the acknowledgment of the
same fundamentalls of true faith, whereunto they are come; to the observation
of the same Rules of obedience, by a peaceable walking in the duties of
Christian moderation, and Charitable forbearance of each other in the things
extra-fundamentall, whereunto they are not come as yet.

To attain this aim he has put himself upon the work of studying the ways, and
soliciting the Counsels of Christian amity and mutual edification in Truth
and Peace, and has negotiated with all the Churches and the eminent men
therein, to gain their assent to those ways and counsels under the countenance
and with the permission of the civil authority. To which Negotiation he has
twice applied himself in two Periods of undertaking the work.

In the first Period, from the year 1628. till 1641 he dealt with the chief
leading men of both parties, and with sone of their assemblies in these
following places. viz.

In Prussia, at Dantzick and at Elbing; with the Minister and Professors of the
School.

In England with the godly learned Nonconformist Ministers, such as were Mr.
Cotton, Mr. White, Mr. Davenport, Mr. Nigh, and others; with the best of the
Bishops, such as were Dr. Davenant, Dr. Hall, Dr. Morton, and others; with the
best of the Prelaticall men, such as were Mr. Mede, Dr. Fealtly, and others

In Scotland, with the University of Aberdene, with the Ministry of Edinburg,
with the Scots Commissioners from time to time sent into England, and with the
general Assembly held at Edinburg.

In Ireland, with the Bishop of Armach, the Bishop of Kilmore, and the Bishop
of Ardack.

In the Low Countries, with the Synods of South and North-Holland, and their
Deputies when the Synods were not met; with the Synod of Utrecht, with the
Synod of the French Churches; with the Coetus and Classis of Zealand; and with
the University of Leyden, and leading men of those parts; such as were
Bogermannus, Festus Hommius, de Dieu, and others.

In Germany, with King Gustavus of Sweden at Wirtzburg, and his Divines, who
then were with him; with the Divines of Hessen at Cassell; with those of
Hannaw, of the Palatinat, of Deux-pont, of Anhalt, of the Wetteraw and of
Herborn; with those of the Assemby at Heilborn; with the Ministers at Franck
fort and at Mentz, (which then was under the Swedish jurisdiction) with the
Universities of Helmstat, of Jena, of Leipsick and of Strasburg; with the
Ministers of Nuremburg, of Brunswick of Hildesheim, of Zell, of Hamburg, of
Bremen, of Lunenburg, of Lubeck, of Stade, and other neighboring parts, and
with the Protestant States assembled at Franckfort.

In Switzerland, with the Antistes of Zurich, who in the name of all the other
Churches, and with their foreknowledg gave advice.

In France with the Ministry of Paris, of Mets, of Sedan and of Geneva.

In Sweden, with the Ministry of Stockholm, with the Diviny Professors of the
Academy of Upsall, with the College of Westerose, with the College of
Stregnes, and with the Synod held at Stockholm.

In Denmark, with the Divinity Professors of Coppenhagen, and with the King of
Denmark his Chaplain at Gluckstadt.

In Poland, with the Ministry of Vilna in Lithuania, with the brethren of the
unity of Bohemia at Lesna, with the Synod of the lesser Polonia at Oxa, and
with the Protestant Polish States at their Parliament.

In Transsylvania, with the general Synod of those parts, wherein all the
cases of conscience incident to the whole work were largely resolved.

From the year 1641. till 1654. the troubles of England obliged Master Dury to
study for Peace and Unity at home.

In the second Period of his Negotiation abroad, from the year 1654. till 1657.
he dealt to gain concurrence and assent to his proceedings.

In England, with the chief Divines of both Universities, and with the leading
Ministers in and about London.

In Switserland with all the Reformed Cantons, and their confederates, Zurick,
Berne, Glaris, Basell, Scaphusen, Appenzel. Saint Gall, Biel, Neustat, Geneva,
Lausanna, Mulhusen, Neuschastel, and the Grisons.

In Germany, with the chief Counselors of the Duke of Wirtemberg; with the
Agent and chief Divines of the Elector Palatin, whom he appointed to entertain
the Negotiation, with the Ministry of the County of Hannaw, with those of
Franckfort, with the Churches of Wetteraw in the Counties of Isenburg and
Budingen, of Solms and Witgenstein; in the Principalities of Nassaw at Herborn,
at Dillenberg, at Sigen, and at Diets. With those of the upper Hessen at
Marpurg; and with those of the lower Hessen at Cassell. With those of Anbalt at
Dessaw, at Koethen, at Berenburg and at Pletzkow. With those of Saxony, at
Weimar, at Gotha and at Isennack; with those of Brunswick at Minden, with those
of the County of Schaumburg at the Academy of Rintelen, with those of the
County of the Lip at Detmold, with those of the County of Benthem, at
Teclenburg, at Benthem and at Steinfurt; with those of Embden, with those of
Bremen; and with the general Synod of the Dukedoms of Gulick, Cleve, Berg and
the March held at Duysburg; and with the Council of State of the Elector of
Brandenburg ruling in Cleve.

In the Low Countries with the Synod of South-holland held at Dort, with the
Synod of Gelderland held at Harderwick; with the Synod of North-holland held at
Alckmaer: with the Synod of the Province of Utrecht held at Utrecht; with the
Synod of the French Churches held at Middelburg; with the Classis of Walcheren,
and the other Classes of Zealand: with the Divinity Professors of the
Academies of Leyden Utrecht, Franeker, Groaning and Duysburg, with the general
States of the united Provinces; with the States of Zealand at their Provincial
meeting, with the Deputies of the States of Utrecht: with the States of Holland
at their Provincial meeting, with the Deputies of States of Friesland, with the
Deputies of the States of Groaning; with the Deputies of the Cities of
Overyssell, Deventer, Campen, Swoll. With the Senate of the Court of
Gelderland: with the Ministry of Amsterdam; and with Prince Adolf the King of
Swedens brother, being at Amsterdam, with all these except only the two Synods
of Holland, (whereof the one had no time to consider the business, and by the
other it was referred to the civil Magistrates directory) there are
correspondents appointed to entertain with Master Dury the prosecution of the
work upon the grounds laid in this last Period of the Negotiation, So that from
hence forth it will lie upon us to see that these proceedings be not
interrupted, if we will answer our public professions and solemn engagements,
for the advancement of the Protestant Religious interest against the
adversaries thereof.

Which the Representatives of this Nation, and the godly party therein by Pole
has obliged it self unto, before God and the whole Christian world; in three
several Declarations.

First in the Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, published by the
Parliament in the year 1641. where the words in the close thereof are these:

We will labor by all offices of friendship, to unite the foreign Churches
with us in the same cause: and to seek their liberty, safety, and prosperity,
as bound thereunto by charity unto them and by wifedom for our own good: for by
this means our strength shall be increased; and by a mutual concurrence to
the same common end we shall be able to procure the good of the whole body of
the Protestant profession.

Secondly, in the National League and Covenant, the Godly party which has
entered thereinto, does in a most solemn manner declare, that our affectionate
desire is:

That the success of our proceedings may be deliverance and safety to all
Gods people, and encouragement to other Christian Churches, groaning under and
in danger of the yoke of Antichristian Tyranny, to join with us in the same or
like association and covenant, to the glory of God, the enlargement of the
Kingdom of Christ, and the Peace and tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms and
Commonwealths.

Thirdly, in the Parliament held in the year 1653. the Declaration published the
12 of July is full of this design:

For being addressed

To all Gods people, as well in neighbor Nations, as in this.

And expressing, A great expectation of the breaking forth of the Kingdom of
Christ in all the Earth.

They manifest their faith and hope concerning this business by these words:

That God will not suffer his people here to deal fasly with him in his cause,
till he has accomplshed his great work, and brought about his great ends

Whereupon their earnest prayer is put up unto him:

That God would unite their hearts unto himself, that they may be one among
themselves, and with all the people of God who are members of the body of
Christ; and that they may be fitted and used as Instruments in the hand of
God; for a more full and clear revealing of the Lord Jesus, and a right
promulgation of the blessed Gospel, and the true interest of his Kingdom, and
the advance thereof, that oppressing yoaks may be broken, and all burdens
removed: that his Tabernacle may be fully raised up; and his Temple built by
his Spirit, that all his people may have one lip, one heart, one consent, one
shoulder to bow down and worship him; that the envy of Judah and Ephraim may
be taken away; that they may be one, in one fold, with one shepherd; that the
swords and spears may be turned into plough-shares and pruning hooks, and the
Earth filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea

Now where so many solemn Engagements and Resolutions are taken up and made
known; as matters of conscience to be prosecuted in the cause of God, there
certainly God will expect some real endeavors for a performance, chiefly then
when the opportunity is so fairly offered as now it is, and not only so, but
when we are called upon to embrace it as now we are.

Sir Edwin Sands in his Book called Europae Speculum, or a view of the State of
Religion in the Western parts of the World. Page 183.
THe end (of these unhappy differences in Religion, between the Reformed, and
Lutheran Protestants) will be, that their enemies shall laugh, when themselves
shall have cause to weep, unless the graciousness of God, stir up some worthy
Princes of renown, and reputation with both the sides, to enterpose their
wifedom, industry and authority, for the uniting these factions, or at
leastwise for reconciling, and composing those differences in some tolerable
sort: a work of immortal fame, and desert, and worthy of none other, but of
them, of whom this wicked base World is not worthy.


