THE PROLOGUE TO Mr. LACY'S New Play, Sir HERCULES BUFFOON or the Poetical
Esquire
Written by THO. DURFEY, Gent.
Spoken by Mr. HAYNES. YE Scribbling Fops, (cry mercy if I wrong ye)
But without doubt, there be must some among ye
Know, that famed Lacy, Ornament of the Stage,
That Standard of true Comedy in our Age;
Wrote this new Play,
And if it takes not, all that we can say on it,
Is we have his Fiddle, not his Hands to play on it:
Against our Interest, he to do you right,
Your Foes, the Poets, has abused to night;
And made us like rude Birds our Nest Besh -- te.
We know,
If you would Write us Plays, they would lose their ends,
Kind Parties still would make your pains amends;
For there is no Fop but has a world of friends:
Who will like City-Whiggs help one another,
And every noisie Fool cry up his Brother:
No more then rack for Prologue or for Song,
Such Trif^^s, to dull Quality belong;
Nor Lampoon Ladies, that your Virtues trust,
That Bask in the hot Malls Pulvillio dust;
Whose low hung Fringes, with Attractive Arts,
Sweep heaps of straws, amongst Crowds of Lovers Hearts;
Subjects like these will never get you Fame,
Nor can you Write, if this be all your Aim;
More than a Rogue can Sing that sets a Psalm.
But if like Wits you would the Town oblige,
Write a good Comedy on some famed Siege,
But not in Rhyme, and if to please you mean,
Let Luxemberg be taken the first Scene;
Yet, now I think on it, choose another story,
Some Sparks that late went over to hunt for Glory;
Have spoiled that jest, and taken the Town before ye:
No wonder too, for who could stand their Rage,
Since they with Conningsmark-broad-Swords Engage;
I fancy you will turn Butchers the next Age:
For these new Weapons look that guard your Lives,
Like bloody Cozen Germans to their Knives:
I Will put a question to you, pray does the Writer
As times go, get most Credit, or the Fighter?
Wit is aplauded when with fancy dress't,
But to be knocked of the head's a cursed jest;
A fate in which your forward Fool miscarries,
No, it is much better, to ly sick at Paris;
Where we can Write, what the French King intends,
And storm a Town, in Letters to our Friends.
Another Inconvenience we must own,
There Is many a Fool is by a Bullet known,
That once passed for a Wit of high renown.
The proof of sense, lies hid in safety, here;
But when the Scull is broke the Brains appear.
Ah Sirs! if you to the rough Wars should follow,
How many Pates like mine would be found hollow;
Faith then take my Advice, stick to Apollo.
Write, and be studious in Dramatick Rules,
For should our Poets sound your shallow Sculls,
You were undone for Wits, and we for Fools.
LONDON, Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh, Bookseller to His ROYAL HIGHNESS, living
at the Black Bull in Cornhill. 1684.


