Licensed.

June 27. 1688. R. P.

A POEM Congratulatory ON THE BIRTH OF THE Young PRINCE, Most Humbly Dedicated
to their August MAJESTY'S KING JAMES, and QUEEN MARY.

Written by Mr D' URFEY.

Quo nihil majus meliusve terris Fata donavere, bonique divi, nec dabunt,
Quamvis redeant in Aurum Tempora priscum. Horace Lib. 4. Ode 2. LONDON,

Printed for Joseph Knight and Francis Saunders, at the Blue Anchor, in the
Lower Walk of the New Exchange, 1688*

A POEM Congratulatory ON THE BIRTH OF THE Young PRINCE.
I.
AS in a sullen Clowdy backward Spring,
The Husbandman as Clowdy does appear;
Mourning to see his Plants no Blossoms bring,
To Crown the Beauty of the ripening Year.
II.
The Sun of the sudden dissipates his fears,
From whose kind heat each Plant a Soul obtains;
His griefs are turned to Joy, to Smiles his Tears,
Seeing (though late) the Offspring of his Pains.
III.
So when your People, Sir, that wished your Fame,
And knew that Kings, though Sacred, Mortal are;
Doubted an Heir to your Immortal Name,
And Night might come without an Evening Star.
IV.
When Ominous Mistrust filled every Breast,
And Sadness there did like a Chaos show;
The Eternal dashed the Darkness from the East,
And said, Let there be Light, and it was so.
V.
Then kindled Atoms formed a Beam so bright,
The dazzling Joy three Kingdoms did adorn;
All Nature seemed to revel in delight,
That happy Minute when the Prince was Born.
VI.
Each friendly Star shot his propitious Ray,
And blessed the Morning of his Royal Birth,
Foretelling the Meridian of his Day
Would spread his Glory through the spacious Earth.
VII.
Amazing Pleasure the Beholders seized,
When Goddess Nature first exposed a Boy;
The Gracious Mother in her Pangs was pleased:
But who can speak the Mighty Father's Joy?
VIII.
Such was their Joy who by the Rainbow knew
The sinful World should deluged be no more;
Such hers, who at the Blessed Virgins view
Perceived the Mighty Prophet that she bore.
IX.
Hail then, Great Monarch, Parent of us all;
Glad Father of an Offspring now more dear:
Permit me groveling at thy Feet to fall,
And show my Hearts true Joy and Duty there.
X.
No hollow Sounds of Temporizing Love,
Nor biased Duty taints my Loyal Breast;
A solid Faith does my Allegiance move;
And what I now, I always have expressed.
XI.
Duty compell'd's an Artificial Cheat,
A Dull false Pebble closed in Metal base;
It Is Inclination always best can set
A Gem so proper for a Monarch's Grace.
XII.
A Loyalty, that Care nor yet Distress,
Nor Friends Allurements, Threats of Foes, nor Fear,
Not proffered Wealth, Reproof, nor yet Disgrace
Can alter, is the Gem we ought to wear.
XIII.
Since Kings can do no wrong, what strange Decree
Is that, which can Allegiance backward draw?
Duty Chief Point should of Religion be,
And an Obedience Passive should be Law.
XIV.
The Curr that snarls at Edicts of his King,
Methinks should straight set up a Monarch School;
And perfect in the knack of Governing,
Teach his Anointed Sovereign how to Rule.
XV.
Desire him to give up his Regal Power,
And veil his Judgment to Plebeian Tricks;
Thus let the awful Lion reign no more,
Because the Ass would vent his Politics.
XVI.
Let such as he repine at that blessed day,
That gave this best of Blessings to our view;
Whilst I in Hymns of Joy all Glory pay,
To Heaven first, and then, Great Sir, to You.
XVII.
Next, Hayl most bright, and most adored of Queens,
To whom all Sects do public praise allow;
Opinions most precise subdue their Spleens,
And Ave Mary's are most proper now.
XVIII.
To You by Heaven ordained the Sacred Mold,
That to Enrich us this bright Medal Coined;
More dear than Diamond Rocks, or Worlds of Gold,
What thanks, ah! what Addresses shall we find!
XIX.
Like needy Bankrupts wasted is our Store,
Which wishes to supply can never serve:
All Pens too worthless are, all Words too poor,
TO express the mighty Praise that You deserve.
XX.
Well have your strict Religious Vows been paid
To Heaven, since your chief Suit is granted there;
Who would not be by your Example led,
If Gifts like This are the Effect of Prayer?
XXI.
And who the Crowded Paths of Court has trod,
That your untir'd Devotion has not seen?
Adored by Men, and so beloved of God,
You more of Saint discover than of Queen.
XXII.
With Pity stored and every Royal Grace,
So well You Your Majestic Part have played;
What were great Bounty in another place,
To you seems as a Debt but justly paid.
XXIII.
Uncommon Virtue gains uncommon Grace,
Well may the Stoic grant her Life is pure,
Whose pious thoughts so firm in Heaven are placed,
No Worldly Pomp, or Grandeur can allure.
XXIV.
Who can too loud your Joy and Fortune sing,
A Joy that over all other far prevails;
Since Bounteous Heaven has sent the only thing
You wanted upon Earth, A Prince of Wales?
XXV.
A Rising Sun to influence this Isle,
Divinely formed, all Hero from the Womb;
Methinks I see the Royal Infant smile,
As if he knew his Glorious Fate to come.
XXVI.
A Fate that my Prophetic Soul Divines,
Over Foreign Nations shall extend its Power;
Whilst to Obedience Home-born Rage declines,
And English Rebels shall be found no more.
XXVII.
His very Name has proud Sedition hushed,
And Babbling Faction has no more to say;
His Infant Glory has their Envy crushed,
Whilst pressed by Fear dissembled Love they pay.
XXVIII.
Upon his Foes The Illustrious Babe does smile,
Though at his Feet pale Treachery bows down,
As if he knew and scorned each subtle wile
Designed against him, or his Fathers Crown.
XXIX.
Alcides so in his large Cradle lay,
Strangling Rebellious Vipers with his hand;
By Envy sent to oppose his future sway,
Who ere his Birth was modeled for Command.
XXX.
To Natures Care belongs the Common Mould,
Slight second Causes form Plebeian Earth;
But when a King is Cast, a Senate's called,
And Angels sit in Council at his Birth.
XXXI.
Wit, Valor, Beauty, Fortunate Success,
Each Heavenly Officer in order brings;
And by Command from the Eternal, Bless
This Mighty Offspring of the best of Kings.
XXXII.
Thus though your Reign, Great Sir, in broils began,
Till Phaeton came tumbling from the Sky;
Bringing the Stubborn Rabble Headlong down,
To Curse a Lunatic that soared too high;
XXXIII.
With real Joy may all your People see
What wondrous Blessings Heaven had in store,
That from Life's greatest dangers set you free
Of stormy Sea, and the more stormy shore.
XXXIV.
And now to Close all Blessings up in one,
And give your Royal Heart true Cause of Bliss;
Great Providence presents you with a Son,
And to your Kingdoms boundless Happiness.
XXXV.
All Joy to Caesar then, and to the Queen,
And to Augusta London.
, if true Joy she knows;
Though to her shame she has once Wavering been,
And to her Mighty Lord a Faithless Spowse.
XXXVI.
Pampered and Proud, of a true City Race,
Under Devotions Veil contriving ill;
Wrong is the Zeal Allegiance does not Grace,
And false the Church that teaches to Rebel.
XXXVII.
Our Holy Matron never such Doctrine taught,
Her Principles of Faith all Loyal are;
Founded on Truth, and from Tradition wrought,
Clear as the Light, and shining as a Star.
XXXVIII.
Enthusiastic Schism the humor leads
Of such as can no Monarchy endure;
Effects of sickly Brains, and empty Heads,
And Treasonous Railing is, they think, a Cure.
XXXIX.
The Wise man speaks no ill, but hopes all right,
Nor looks too near the Sun left sight should fail;
So the brave not Conquering his Foe in fight,
Allows it base behind his back to rail.
XL.
But Carping Momus in each Age must be
A Zany placed to make a Monarch sport;
The Fop and Parasite we often see,
Are two Essential Figures in a Court.
XLI.
Yet useful Law and Learning flourish there,
But above all the Soldier leads the Van;
Whilst humble Poetry brings up the Rear,
And ever to his grief is hindmost Man.
XLII.
Inspiring Poetry that decks the Mind
With Reasons richest Phrase to speak to Kings;
And as a Gift peculiar was designed,
To treat of Mighty Heroes mighty things.
XLIII.
Wits truest Mirror where it sees its Face,
Adorned with modest, as with Beauteous Charms;
And owned by all the Illustrious Roman Race,
Embellishment for Kings as well as Arms:
XLIV.
Now lonely walks with sad dejected look,
Whom Ignorance beholds with scornful Eyes;
As if it were a shame to know a Book,
And a disgraceful scandal to be Wise.
XLV.
But you, Great Sir, the English Muses King,
Cheer their Cold hopes with Beams of Royal Grace;
Else perished were the Famed Castalian Spring,
And wholly Ruined Great Apollo's Race.
XLVI.
A common genius common Souls Inspires,
Coined off in have, each to his post is hurled;
Poets have part of that Celestial Fire,
That makes a King contemn the sordid World.
XLVII.
With Wealth and Arms your Empire, Sir, is blessed;
With Noble Arts I hope will flourish too:
The English Imitate old Romans best,
And we the Famed Augustus find in You.
XLVIII.
And may this Royal Babe, Your Kingdoms Joy,
The Richest Gem, that does Your Crown Adorn,
His Youth by Grace and Virtue dignify,
That all may Bless the Minute He was Born.
XLIX.
May his Great Valor over the World be known,
Whilst blessed Success each Glorious Act Proclaims;
May History be filled with his Renown,
And the Fourth Edward the Black Prince, who won the Battails of Cressy and
Poictiers, etc. and took the French King Prisoner.
Edward Vail to the Third James.
L.
And may Your Sacred Self live long and Reign,
With Your Bright Consort sharing lasting Joy;
May Heaven inform the Genial Bed again,
And soon produce a second Royal Boy.
LI.
May Golden Peace with Pleasure guild Your Days,
From Rebels free, and Treasons Hellish Arts;
Health, Fame and Unity, Your Grandeur raise,
Kings then Reign best, that govern Subjects Hearts.
FINIS.

