THE SIEGE OF MEMPHIS, OR THE Ambitious Queen.

A TRAGEDY, Acted at the THEATER-ROYAL.

Written by Tho. Durfey, Gent.

Non fit sine Periculo facinus magnum and memorabile, Terent. LONDON, Printed
for W. Cademan at the Popes Head at the entrance in of the New Exchange in the
Strand, 1676.

TO THE TRULY GENEROUS HENRY CHEVERS, Esquire
SIR,
THe favorable aspect you were pleased to cast, upon this Poem (the first
fruits of an Infant Muse) together with the knowledge I have of your excellent
temper, and unaltered clemency, have sufficiently warranted my presumption of
throwing it at your feet, and by making it an humble present to a Person so far
above the common Sphere, secure it from the peircing Tallons of Eagle Eyed
Critics: I know it is a triffle that by the meaness of the style, the want of
good design, and the ill representation at the Theater, being Played to the
worst advantage, has got little credit with the World and consequently is far
unworthy your patronage, but if you consider the credit of a young Author lies
at stake, one whose design was only to please not offend, you doubtless will
be induced to a more favorable opinion of my presumption. The censures of
others will the less trouble me when you protect it, knowing how common it is
now to discant on Authors truly famous and worthy all applause, as well as
others of a far meaner knowledge and reputation It Is my desire, I confess, to
be free from malicious censures, and that my partial Reader would be so
favorable as not to be my Interpreter, but content himself with the Perusal,
according to Martial (Absit a jocorum nostrorum simplicitate malignus
interpres,) But since the humor of this Age tends another way, I must study
self satisfaction, and rely on the Patronage of a Person whose worth I am so
well acquainted with, that the criticisms of pretenders will appear as
ridiculous as they can endeavor to make this Poem, if they durst write
themselves.

SIR, Your obliged humble Servant. Tho. Durfey

PROLOGUE.
JUdges of Wit, you, whose diserning Eyes
Know the right path and nearest, to be wise
That never damned a Play, as a despite
To us, but always thought your selves in the right.
Our Rhymer swears it never shall corode
Upon his mind, since it is grown Al-a-mode,
Since great and powerful Sons of Poesy,
Have felt your pointed censures, why not he?
The Age is altered now, he that has Wit,
Never uses it abroad, but in the Pit,
There spreads it all, and e're one Scene does know,
Calls friend aside, Cries, Dammy. Jack lets go,
Not a Wench here that is worth the speaking to.
Others that want Wit, hither come to glean,
Seem to find fault and cavil at a Scene,
Because they understand it not, yet will
Dislike, because it is Modish, and Gentile.
Thus both ways we our Enemy's enclose:
The Wise and Fools are equally our foes,
It Is true some tender hearted Females come,
That want divertisement and trade at home,
But little's to be got by them, alas!
They bring good faces, but their moneys brass,
Madam, we cry, it is naught, she peeps through hood;
Cries, truth, my Lord did give it me for good.
Still this makes ill for us, such as do pay
Bring naughty money, such as do not, stay
Your Criticism's greater then your sins are,
And yet, you would laugh to hear, Old Cole of Windsor,
A bawdy Ballad, though with non sense crammed,
Will please ye when a serious Play is damned*
But do your worst for we resolve to try,
A proof now of the Ladies Clemency,
If they but favor us, you must obey,
Their frowns hurt you more then you will hurt our Play,
But should they hiss and our designs condemn.
It were an (...) them*
You are such Devils and so far exceed,
From you 'twere worse then to be damned indeed,
But in their heavenly breasts no rancour lies,
Their censures must be glorious as their eyes,
And he that hears, and follows not their rule,
Is impotent, I Am sure, if not a Fool.
Persons Represented.
Egyptians.
MElechadel, King of Egypt. Ptollomy, his Son Phillopater, Caliph and General
two Peers
Achmades Halem
Zichmi, Brother to Halem, and a Commander under Phillopater Zelmura, Queen of
Egypt Amasis, Sister to Zelmura Saphrena, Amasis Confident Messenges,
Soldiers, Guards, and Attendants, Men and Women.
Selabdin, Sultan of Syria. Moaron, his Son. Psamnis, Friend to Moaron.
Aldabar, Captain in Selabdins Army. Soldiers, Guards, and Attendants.
The Scene, Memphis besieged. THE SIEGE OF MENPHIS: OR THE Ambitious Queen.
ACT. I. SCENE I.
The Curtain being drawn, an Alarm of Drums and Trumpets are heard, the Scene
representing a Turret, besieged by Moaron, Psamnis, and Syrians; Zelmura,
Phillopater, Ziehmi, and Egyptians, appearing on the Walls defending, a
skirmish of Darts, which done the Scene changes to Melechadels Palace. Enter
Melechadel, Ptolomy, and Achmades. Mch. PErish the World e're I forsake my
Throne,
Or leave that City, which my Birth did own;
The Sun shall freeze, and Nights pale Goddess burn,
The Solid Globe to its first Chaos turn,
E're Melechadel fears: Draw up our Moors,
By Heaven I Will dare the utmost of their powers,
Kings are like Gods, when dauntless they appear,
But worse than Peasants, if their Fate they fear.

Achm. Great Apis Priests foretell our overthrow,
And Death comes winged like lightning from the Foe.
I speak, Great Sir, not as I fear to die,
For death's a bliss in wars extremity.
My loyal care mean doubts do far exceed,
Ill fare true Subjects heads, when Princes bleed.

Ptollo. Famine in the City now 'gins to prevail,
And from without Destruction storms like hail;
The tired Soldier, with weak glowing eyes,
Looks down upon the Foe, then falls, and dies;
As if like Basilisks they gave us death,
Not with their dreadful weapons, but their breath.
What can we hope for, wheresuch horror is!

Melech. Think on my Conquests past, then hope for this,
The Gods that made me Monarch, did creat.
My Kingly Soul to have a Kingly fate.
Have I not conquered the insulting Moors,
Buffled the Indian and Tartarian Powers,
When with my Troops I Legions have withstood
Of Daring Soldiers: whose warm Seas of Blood
O'reflow'd the Plains with Waves of crimson dye,
And fogs obscured the surface of the sky!
Have I not often with the Morning dawn,
Mounted my Chariot by famed Princes drawn
Through Memphis, whilst amazements charmed the throng
To see my glorious Triumph pass along!
And shall we now our fortune fear to try,
He deserves Conquest best, who best dares die.
Bring up our Infantry to the assault,
And see 'em straight conveyed through the dark vault
Under our Palace: Fly Achmades, fly,
Fate points us out this way to Victory,
Embrace occasion e're it be too late,
We Will snatch our Conquest from the Gripes of Fate.
How now, What news.

[ Exit Achmates. Enter Zichmi Zichm, The Fence grows thin, my Liege,
And the remainder hardly brook the siege,
Such numbers with their dreadful darts are killed,
The Trenches with their liveless Trunks are filled,
And those that yet remain, serve but to show
Omens of conquest to the daring Foe.

Melech. These fatal objects us more Courage teach,
Ptolomy, bring your Squadron to the breach,
Supply the Walls with Engines fit for spoil,
And on their heads pour Seas of flaming Oil:
But I forget my Souls far better half,
How fares the Queen, is my Zelmura safe;
Are the Gods kind, and still here death defer.

Zich. She lives; and all our hopes depend on her:
Upon the Eastern Turret of the Town
From whose high Battlements I saw drop down
Numbers of men, the Queen did dauntless stand,
Terror coucht in her eye, death in her hand:
The Heartless Crowd, woundring, look up to spy
This new Bellona ushered from the Sky,
And on their unarmed fates took the harms,
Which from the valiant Queen fell down in Storms,
By her Example your faint powers turned head,
And feeling now that courage which she bred,
Sent such a fierce greeting to the Enemy,
As forced 'em to treat, almost to fly:
But to their Rescue then, the Syrian Prince,
Their Nations Glory and unmacht defense,
The brave Moaron, best of Generals,
Came like Achilles to the Turret Walls;
Him, when the Queen had found, and envying now
The budding wreaths on his Triumphant brow,
With noble force dismissed a dreadful dart
Well aimed and levelled at the Princes heart,
But his propitious fate the shaft Reverst,
Whose point his fomy Courser's vitals pierced,
The beast expiring with a groan shrunk down,
And with the Prince fell side long to the ground,
Who straight arising* fired with raging Spleen,
Though to revenge, but when he saw the Queen
Like Palace stand, and knew that it was She
His rage soon quelled, he bowed his head and knee
As if he thankt her for the Courtesy.

Melech. His Soul was always noble, but proceed.

Zichm. After this Act, with more then usual speed,
The fight began a fresh, and life's dread foe
Placed a defiance flag on every brow;
The General was hurt in this last charge,
But was by the fierce Queen revenged at large
By joyntless men which on the reeking ground,
In heaps paid their last tribute to his wound,
What happened afterward my absence lost.

Melech. Let other Monarchs of their Subjects boast,
I have a Theme will fill the mouth of fame
His Trump resounding with a woman's name:
A Woman whose brave Spirit does presage
A happy fortune to Our latter Age,
The Noble Carian Queen whose fame flies far
For aiding Xerxes in the Persian war,
She, whose renown through our East confine Spreds
For Godlike virtues, and heroic deeds,
Would quit her fading claim did She live now,
And place her Laurel on Zelmura's brow.
Enter a Messenger. Thy cheerful looks some good event portend,
Say, the foes fled and style thy self our friend.

Messen. The Queen is sallied at the Postern gate
Meaning to prosecute victorious fate
She on the foe a fresh assault has tried,
And charged their vauntguard on the weakest side,
Who shrink a pace and now their most defense
Lies in the Squadron of the valiant Prince;
Like Glittering Mars, he their main Battle heads,
His Faulchion reeking with the blood he sheds,
His noble Soul raging to see them fly,
But all in vain they will rather run than dye;
So that by our brave Queen and General
The heartless Foe is beaten from the Wall,

Melech. The Gods are kind and Just and now I see
The love they bear undaunted Majesty,
There can no ill within their Mansions dwell,
But only this to make our passions swell
Give us brave Souls then teach'em to rebel

[Shout within Zichm. What means this shout that Echoes through the Sky

[Exit Zich. Enter another Messenger. Messen. The day is ours, great Sir, the
Syrians fly,
The Queen, our Goddess, that our hopes begun
Have broke their closest ranks and made'em run,
The Syrian Prince like Trojan Hector stood
His Gurace spotted with warm drops of blood,
He in our troops once made a doubtful fray
And maugre our resistance forced his way
Toward Nilus head
But now of thirty thousand only he
And one brave friend oppose our victory.

Melech. A glorious Conquest and as fortunate
As the brave Macedonian Monarchs fate,
Whose matchless fame by the Ignorants adored
Made the whole World pay homage to his Sword.
By fortune he, but I by power atcheive
A fate that shall new Laws to nature give,
And make my fame in future Ages live

[Exeunt SCENE II.
Alarm, Syrians run over the Stage, after them Moaron with his Sword drawn.
Moar. FLy slaves to Hell, and may that Devil fear,
That triumphs ore your Souls, torment ye there,
Ye frozen Earthworms, ye infected brood
Of some Claudestine Cowards that for food
Would curse their Parents, and like Sons of Earth
Betray the Nation that first gave'em Birth,
My infirm virtue would in vain appear
'Twould not be now thought patience but dull fear,
Since fortune to my Arms success denied.

Enter Psamnis Psalm. We are enclosed great Prince on every side
The envious tyrant fate has lodged us so
Within the bosom of the insulting foe,
That to escape
If we had thousands, as we are but two,
We well might say, we had too much to do.
With some few Horse I long their power withstood,
And fought with courage witness my dear blood,
But when their fresh supplies surrounded me,
Groan hoarse with shouts, and ecchoing Victory,
Feeling my strength decay, I then withdrew,
Ambitious of the Fate to die with you.

Moar. Thou have this day a matchless Valor shown,
And for thy noble deeds deserved renown
From Gods as well as men, but I am now
By Fortunes bateless malice fallen so low,
That I want means my Gratitude to show,
And though this day thou did me often relieve,
This is the sole reward I have to give.

[embraces him. Psam. Malicious Powers unfit to be adored.

Moar. Nay to disgrace me by a Woman's sword,
A Woman's act, -- oh -- 'dsdeath, that plagues me more,
Than all the griefs I ever felt before,
But e're I yield Heavens spangled roof shall fall,
And in Cimerean shades abscond us all.

Psam. In slighting Death your Princely mind appears,
Death nothing is, men's torments are their fears:
Death sits in Mists upon our fadeing eyes,
Follows our flight, but if we turn he flies.
[shout. That shout was near us, they with speed pursue.

Moar. Let Them redouble speed and courage too,
Here like Alcides on the Phrygian sand,
Rage in his eyes and thunder in his hand,
I will attend what Fate so ill designed,
And death with Fame and matchless Honor find.
My Courage shall surpass dull Natures bounds,
I Will fright the insulting Cowards with my wounds,
And when at last my life's Prey to Fate,
Upon their mangled heaps I Will die in State.

Flourish with Trumpets, then enter Zelmura, Phillopater, Zichmi, Achmades,
Halem, and Soldiers. Zelm. Yield, Prince; and that we favor may a ford
Pay homage due, and tender up your sword,

Moar. Yield! --

Phillo. -- does the word sound ill?

Moar. -- what must I yield?

Achm. Yourself: a Captive conquered in the field.

Moar. You have no conquest won till I am dead,
Unless you dare to lie, and say I fled,
It Is but ill Fate, when heartless Vassals run,
And till I Am slain, think you have nothing won.

Phillo. We have won all, Fate now rewards our toyls,
Our wearied Mules are laden with your spoils;
Whilst the pale Soldier, flying from afar,
Looks back to see the dismal Scene of War:
Your too proud Courage does your judgment wrong,
Grief and distraction sits upon your tongue.

Zelm. Fortune, to you, no succor dares aford,
What can your hopes depend on then

Moar. -- My Sword.

Achm. Your Sword --

Moar. -- Yes, this brave badge of Chivalry,
Fate and the Gods are trivial things to me.

Zelm. Since then the Deities you so despise,
Bow down and yield to me the Victors prize.

Moar. Were thou a God, as sure thou art not so,
I should rejoice I had so great a foe;
For they and I have strifes in all affairs,
They keep their blessings back, and I my prayers,
But since thou art no Deity relate,
What great extraction does thy pride creat.

Zel. I am Zelmura, Queen of these, and thee,
Bright wreaths of Conquest grace my dignity:
The Gods Vicegerent to dispose their Will,
I have their power to save alive or kill:
My smile's a charm, fierce death attends my frown,
Fortune enslaved stands fettered to my Crown:
The Frozen Islands of the North have seen,
And felt the power of Egypts potent Queen,
Whose furred Inhabitants with fear and shame,
Heard the resounding Echoes of my fame:
By me the Trees and Plants do spring and grow,
My breath can check our Nilus, ebb or flow,
Put present period to thy destiny;
Do all things like a God, this, Sir, am I.

Mear. These daring boasts betray what weakness blinds
The sense, and swayes insulting women's minds.

Zelm. He bears a noble Soul --
[Aside. -- this insolence
Suits not your Fate, nor can I brook it Prince.

Moar. Fate, Queen: Why, what has Fate to do with me?
I am controuler of my Destiny,
Let such as fear to die call chance unkind,
My Fate is as immortal as my mind.

Zel. In vain Disputes, too long the time we waste,
Yield or this present moment is your last,
Think my advice, Sir, was a favor meant,
Submission yet, may hinder the Event,

Psamn. Submission's only for base Cowards fit,
Dull sordid Souls, framed only to submit,
Rather than so honor my counsel draws,
That by the sword, we still protect our cause,
Who knows, but Heaven our forces may unite,
And give us back the Conquest through mear spite.

Zelm. I Will hear no more, this prolonged breath grow bold,
And I have been too tame --

[offers to fight Phillo. Hold, Madam, hold --
[interposes. It is my task, should you oppose, in this
All Nations would condemn our cowardice,
And say, that I did in presence the stand,
When Syria's Prince fell by a Woman's hand,

Zel. A Woman's hand, is that, Sir, such a shame,
That I must be upbraided with the name,
Let my brave Actions, that mean style control,
For though a Woman I Have a manly Soul,
Nor will I Honor for a word resign,
I say it is my right

Phillo -- it is mine.

Halem -- or mine

Zelm. It Is neithers: Your base arrogance recall,
Claim it again, by Heaven, I dare ye all,
Frown not, nor mutter, I bear too much sway,
Know it is a Subjects duty to obey --
Resign on your allegiance or expect
A certain death to follow such neglect.

Phillo By duty forced I to your will agree,
[bowing But what my honor stains I must not see.
[Exit,
Halem. Live then a wretch that durst his fame resign,
I am resolved by this to cherish mine

[offers to fight. Zelm. So valourous, young Sir, mild mercy hence,
Take there reward for disobedience
[Stabs him. So, now I Am sure thou wilt not usurp my right
Come Sir defend your self

[to Moaron. Moar. -- I will not fight.

Zichm, My Brother slain the Gods have shown their spite,
[aside. -- but I Will revenge

Zelm. Can words such fear impart,
Heavens! can a Prince retain a Peasants heart.
Whence Springs thy fear, what envious destiny
Dares thus control thy Courage.

Moar. -- thoughts of thee,
Were thou a man, had thou Achilles charm
Of being Sword proof, Strong, and free from harm,
Yet should my pointed vengeance conquest win,
Maugre the power of thy enchanted Skin;
But as thou art a woman, I am Crossed,
And all the hopes of my revenge is lost:
For to that Sex my honor makes me bend,
Not fight against but with my blood defend.

Zelm. Something so noble in his soul I find,
Has quite suppressed the tempest in my mind,
But my kind thoughts within my breast I Will crowd,
[aside Least my too good opinion makes him proud,
Bear hence the body of the Justly slain,
(Halem. And such reward may all such traitors gain.

Exeunt guards with Zichm. Traitor so tyrants call their best of friends
Down thoughts and looks cloud what my Soul intends.
[Exit.
Enter at another door Melechadel, Amasis, Ptollomy and guards. Melech. Mirror
of women Star of bright renown,
Protectress of my life and Egypts Crown;
What shall I render loudly to proclaim
New terms of Honor equal to thy same.
Thou life of all my power, it is to thee
I owe my thanks for this days victory:
The Gods were drowsy and their Actions slow,
It Was thy brave Sword made Fate her duty know;
For which least I ingratitude should want,
Ask any thing, and take my speedy Grant:
In two requests thy busied thoughts extend
And to perform my total power I bend.

Zelm. Your noble vote, Great Sir, I must extol,
It shows a glorious President to all,
Directs rightly how to act and when,
And difference shows 'twixt Kings and moral Men.
A little respite for my suit I crave.

Melech. Thou can not ask the thing, thou can not have.
In his defeat --
[pointing to Moaron. The fame of the Deities thou have made small,
And shown a God-like power above 'em all.

Zelm. My deeds deserve not half this vast applause,
You owe your Royal thanks to your brave cause.

Melech. The Cause being tried, and conquest our reward,
What means your Slave to stand thus on his guard?

Moar. Her Slave! by Heaven it is false! thou art her Slave,
Her soaring fortune did thy Empire save.
By all the Gods, proud King I am as free
As Heaven made Man at first, or Fortune thee.
Slavery some abject punishment should own,
But thanks to this I am obliged to none.
My sword has more of freedom than thy Throne.

Melech. Thy Sword is useless now, Fool, thou shall die,
Nor can the Gods dispose thy chance, but I.
I sit supreme and smile upon thy fate,
Whilst thy scorned Life proves Vassal to my State:
Thou shall imprisoned till my triumph be
And then released from enthrawl'd misery,
Thy death shall be my Scene of jollity.

Moar. You take large license to pronounce my death,
But think not what attends that fatal breath,
Fearless you may insuit over weaker foes,
But know my life is not at your dispose,
And it is most safe though not for your renown,
Instead of seeking mine to guard your own,

Melech. This insolence my honor cannot bear,
Guards go and bind 'em both --

Moar. -- Stir if you dare.
This ground is fatal, he that first comes on
Sets but the race, which thou at last shall run,
Covered with wounds, I will thy power oppose
In The midst and thickest number of my Foes,
Though fatal, yet some pleasure it will be
To see thy mighty God head stoop to me.
Let the blind Queen of Chance her Envy show,
And save thy life by some succeseless blow;
Denied all help, and passed defense, withstood,
I Will rip my breast, and drown thee with my blood.

Melech. 'Dsdeath, go, take, kill him.

[to the Guards. Zelm. Hold, he shall not die, --
[stopping the guards I only must dispose his destiny;
But that obedience to your will be shown,
[to the King Of my too great requests, this shall be one.
Soldiers retreat, I have the Kings whole power,
And leave me to appoint his fatal hour.

Melech. Ask Something else, this Suit I cannot grant.

Zelm. Your bound by Oath, take heed how you recant.

Melech. My Oath, what is that? go, go, once more take sieze.

Zelm. He meets his death, who his command obeys:
turning to Moarons side. Perjured, and poor, send now your forces on,
By heaven, we will cut the props from your weak Throne,
In his defense to my last drop of blood,
I Will meet thy power, though through a crimson flood
I wade to the atcheivement, to make known,
A faithless King's a traitor to his crown.
Unless immediately you pronounce peace,
And cause your factious multitude, to cease.

Melech. Retire a while --
[to Guards and Soldiers. -- Madam you have your will
But what cursed Feind seduc't you to this ill
Surpasses knowledge, but the Prince shall live:
Him you dare thus protect, I dare forgive.

Moar. Forgive, your words are still so arrogant,
Fit answers for such Epithites I want*
Forgive your slaves some impious offense,
Such as can crowch with humble penitence;
And know whilst valor in my breast does live,
She cannot me protect, nor you forgive.

Melech. Yet though your courage with your power concur,
You now are glad to take your life from her.

Moar. It Is false, my life is at my own dispose,
Sprung from the stalk on which my courage grows,
Nor would I for a slow destruction stay,
But boldly run and meet death half the way,
Honors broad path my soul so well has known,
That now to live or dye to me's all one.

Melech. The rugged path of death, few men would choose
Had they the licens't power to refuse.
Which death your ransom, Sir, shall now excuse,
Live fearless in our Court and free from ill,
I Am now your friend, though much against my will.

[aside. Zelm. This grant has back my good opinion gained,
He forfeits worth whom perjury does stain.
Honor the Souls of Monarchs best does grace,
Contempt and rigor only suite the base.
To morrow you shall know my last request,
'Till when it must be treasured in my breast.
You Will keep your vow.

Melech. My oath has made it good,
And if I fail infection seize my blood.

Zelm. Disperse, brave Prince, the cloud upon your brow,
To fate, not only you, but all must bow;
Heaven does mishaps for greatest souls create,
The bravest men are most unfortunate.

Moar. Heaven then is a cheat so are the Gods and fate,
If there no difference be in punishment,
A Traitor is as happy as a Saint,
And may as soon a glorious blessing share,
As he that spends his life in sighs and prayer.

Melech. Your rashness voted against heavens excellence,
Betray more haughty passion, Sir, than sense,
Motives of sorrows reign or love impure,
But in our Court, your grief may find a cure,

Amas. Spiritual affairs be the Zealots care,
persued by such as dote on their despair:
Your worth may, Sir, a fitter work improve,
Employed in Acts of honor, wit, or Love.

Moar That love must then be yours what charms are here
touching her hand. My beating heart much altered does appear,
And I the marks of unknown passion bear;
But I must hide it, Since proud fate to day
In my defeat its malice did display.
My life I Will cherish with design to prove
My soul the ills of Fortune is above.
The Plagues the Gods inflict with scorn I Will bear,
And I will live cause sat shall see I dare.

[Exeunt. ACT. II. SCENE I.
An Alcove: Discovers Moaron and Amasis. Enter Psamnis* Psam. MY happy wishes
good success have met,
Yonder the Amourous Lovers smiling sit,
How greedily their darting eye balls rove,
Each look displayes the ecstasy of Love,
I knew She loved him, though a modest Pride,
Which still with untaught Virgins does reside,
Made her conceal it, but of this no more
I must to Syria to renew our power,
The Prince did so command and I will be
Though not renowned, loved for fidelity.
[Exit
SONG within.
Begone dull fear, and servile duty fly,
Where mischeifs hourly rove,
Whilst here we own no other Deity,
Nor Monarch know but Souls ensnaring Love.
Love, whose refreshing Ioys such rapture brings,
Such life such charming power,
'Twould warm the sinews of enervate Kings,
And make 'em young once more.
II.
Let sordid Mortals toil for Earths increase,
And Glory in their gains.
We with new charms will one another please
And laugh to see the harvest of their pains.
In quiet let them share their happiness
With hope and fortune great,
Whilst we each day, each hour that Heaven possess,
Which they expect at last.
III.
Then feed my flame bright Deity of Love
With Lulling ecstasies,
That whilst I in this Orb of Beauty rove
I in conceit may Soar above the Skies.
Reasons a term by drowzy Zealots feigned
Which rapting bliss destroys,
Nature does always fiercest pleasures lend
When freely sense enjoys.
Moar. Not all the Odours of those happy fields,
Where Cassia grows, and the feigned Phaenix builds
Arabias treasures, or the choice perfume
Of India's fragrant entrals dare presume
'Ere to compare with thee thou softest fair,
Thy presence would extenuate despair
In all the Damned below, and make 'em live
In hope Hells worst of Torments to survive.

Amas. If I not knowing my own power, possess
So large a portion of controwling bliss.
The greatest mandate you shall ere fulfill
Shall an entreaty be to love me still.
But should my passion prove an injury,
I should not blame your will but I should dye,
And e're my death I Would one kind thought implore,
Then rest assured I could deserve no more.

Moar. Never, Oh, never, shall thou see that day
No sooner shall the Early Sun display
His beams about the World, but I will fly
To visit thee the Idol of my eye:
Where by thy side I Will sit for ever free,
And waste my life in endless ecstasy.
Thy looks my bodies hunger shall repreive,
For if Camelions blessed by Nature live
Only by Air, Air then shall be my food,
A diet fit for our o'reflowing blood,
Refresht with smiles my heart shall baffle death,
And surfeit on warm gusts of Rosy breath.

Amas. Oh no, for though great Love our hearts controuls*
It Is a repast fit only for our Souls;
A natural food our bodies it must supply,
And we refuting that shall surely dye,
And then the Gods too mindful of our fates
Against our souls approach will shut heavens gates.

Moar. The Gods perhaps their wrath will show on me,
But when they shall thy brighter spirit see,
They Are ill weighed rage they will conceive a sin,
And from their Thrones have to conduct thee in,
Then leading thee through the Celestial Signs,
Whilst at thy sight each envious Goddess pines,
They Will seat thee there in State, whilst I shall be
Seeing thee cherisht by each Deity
In Heaven, oppressed with Earthly Jealousy.

Amas. In vain your fears do such disasters bode,
Were I a Goddess you should be a God;
I would create new Laws in heaven for thee,
And never blush at the Impiety:
So great my love, so strong my constancy.

Moar. Blessed in each others arms we would despise
The troops of the Inferior Deities:
But let us now with soaring thoughts dispense,
And prove on earth loves precious influence.
Bear witness heaven, that now our Actions veiw,
How Little life I prize, compard with you.
You whose perfections can such blessings give,
That for your sake I only with to live.

Amas. And I your virtues, though I blush to tell,
Confess my Soul I love not half so well.

Moar. When to our bliss a pleasant Race we run,
How swift the minuits are how quickly gone,
The time seems envious of our happiness,
And strives to put a period to our bliss
By an unlookt for have, but let 'em fly,
Each project of cursed Fortune I defy.
And glorying in your heavenly presence prove
Noblessing e're can match the charms of Love.

[Exeunt. SCENE II.
Zelmura Sola. Zelm. IT shall be done, it must, nor can there be
A power but heaven to alter my decree,
And that I may have interest in heavens Love,
For a short time I will religious prove;
Kneel to the Gods, adore their power and state,
Be just and pious, merely to be great
I Am Egypts Queen my power like a huge stream
O'reflows small shrubs, yet I am not supreme.
My will is limited, my orders stand,
But as the Copies of the King command,
Who in security now tramples on
Those wreaths, which I in war with danger won.
Coheirs in Empire shines but dimly bright,
Whilst eithers luster darkens to others light,
But, I like Titan, fixed alone would shine,
And dare all other Beams to equal mine:
Nature begone, thou faint soft hearted thing,
What though he be my husband and my King,
Ambition is my Soul, and die he must,
And it is sufficient, that I think it just:
Had Providence ordained I should have been
A theme of Pity, a kind virtuous Queen,
I had submitted to that harmless name,
And followed Piety. But as I am
The Child of War, all Courage, and all Fire,
My deeds above the sense of good aspire,
Die then dull King, for since no way is known,
But by thy death for me to mount thy throne,
I am Resolved all thoughts of good to quell,
And reign first here, though I reign next in hell.
The cause of your unmanner'd have declare.

Enter Ptolomy hastily. Ptol. My news exacts your courage and your care,
The King has had some close intelligence,
How Psamnis sent to Syria by the Prince,
To raise new Powers, and get his Ransom paid,
Intends again our Nation to invade,
Knowledge of which has so provoked his wrath,
He swore a no less Rash then mighty Oath,
Before the mornings dawn to exault a flood,
And drown all Danger in the Princes blood.

Zelm. That breath has damned him, hell has not endued
The Fiends with half so much ingratitude;
He shall not, no his doom I will recall
By all the Gods if they permit his fall,
I will destroy the World, kill and disrobe
Nature of her perfections, shake the Globe
To its first Chaos, and by actions prove,
Nothing can match a Woman's hate or love.

Enter Amasis Amas. Ah! Sister can you thus your steps retard,
The noble Prince dragged rudely by the guard
Stands in the Presence bound,

Zelm. -- Bound, hell and death
Here me you powers above, and shades beneath,
You that on Thrones of Day abhor the Night,
And you whom horrors of cold death delight:
Hear and assist my haughty enterprise,
For since controwling fate wears a disguise,
Since Nature takes a Pride Mortality
To mould in Plots and Juggling villainy,
I am resolved my influence to show,
And fright the World with Natures overthrow;
Like some great conflagration I Will appear,
And first with smoky flateries charm his ear
Till I my hearts desire have obtained,
His his whole power by his promise gained,
That done from cloudy thickness I Will aspire
And Scorch opposers like consuming fire.

[Exeunt. SCENE. III.
Melechadel, Zichmi, Achmades, Moaron held by Guards. Melech. AM I to be out
braved, Gods has my fate.
Made me as often victorious as great,
Seated my Throne upon the conquered heads
Of those that seek the paths ambition treads,
And shall I now stand tame when threatened by
A weak low Object of my Clemency,
Wars vassal, no my rage shall tempests grow
And the fierce power of enraged Monarchs show.
Lead to the Scaffold, by my Crown I Will try,
If thus inspired you can submit to dye.
If in the Book of fate my doom appear
To be the next, I Will meet death void of fear
And smile to think thou art my harbinger.

Moar. Tyrant! not all thy tortures nor the Hell
Fixed in thy Conscience shall my Courage quell:
My Spirit shall contemn thy basest deed,
And spite of torments dare thee to proceed,
The Bright all-seeing Sun when I shall dye
From Reeking Mists will draw my soul up high,
Where on a Star I shall with Glory shine
And in infernal Caverns see thee Pine.

Melech. Dream on, dream on, of visionary joys,
Your fancy quickens with these pleasing toys,
Lead him away, alas, he weary grows,
These dull delays, but hinder his repose
His power would conquer Crowns beyoad the Sun
Did he not want a head to set 'em on,

Zichm. Pardon, dread Sir, I If presume so far,
To tell your Majesty the chance of war
Is incident to all men, Kings have been
The subjects of disasters not foreseen;
Blur not the trophies then of victory,
With the black stain of so much infamy;
Kings are like Gods when virtue they obey,
But that once lost, they are but common Clay*

Melech. Your Moral Phrase I cannot understand:
Virtue, does it not ly in my command,
What I decree is just, although expressed
A Miracle to an inferior breast;
Vent your dull sentences, where public wrongs
Lie brooding to be judged by public tongues;
My will the power of factious souls shall awe
A Monarchs mandate is his Subject Law.

Zichm. The beguiled Citizens will factious grow,
When they your doom and breach of Promise know.

Melech. Traitor these fears proclaim thy fell intent,
You wish those ills, you so well represent.
You mean, no doubt, to their weak aid to run,
And with your Courage lead the factious on,
But e're that happen

Zich. If my erring breath
Has given you cause, dread Sir to doubt my faith;
My life prostrate thus low I offer here,
[kneels. It Is only what I for your safety wear.

Melech. For your first Crime my Clemency may plead,
But such another word forfeits your head.
Take him away I will here no replies,
[to guards. He longs to sit on arches of the skies.

Moar. Thou never shall thy barbarous Conquest baost,
For day and night I Will haunt thee with my Ghost,
When reeking blood my spirit steems to air,
Into thy fatal Palace I Will repair:
Through all thy Guards I Will to thy presence Crowd,
And Sit before thee in my bloody shroud,
I will invent new shapes to vex thee more,
And in thy nightly visions make thee roar,
Till thou do feel by angry Pluto's doom
A Hell on earth as well as Hell to come.

Melech. 'Dsdeath drag him hence, guards let your faith be seen
Answer not, but obey.

[Shoutwithin. -- Room for the Queen, Melech. Hah! What cursed Demon brought her
to this place,
Her opposition will my power disgrace,
My luster is excelled when she is by,
Like a dim star, when Cinthia rules the sky,
Cursed Fortune does my meaner actions sway,
But like a Monarch I will rule to day,
Tears nor entreaties shall his life reprieve,
I have decreed it, and he shall not live,
Away with him --

As the Guards are carrying out Moaron, Enter Zelmura, Ptollomy, Amasis,
Phillopater and Guards. Zelm. Stay and bring back the Prince, What do I see,
Is this your love to honor Sir, and me,
Performance of the promise once decreed,
Your Kingly Oath forgotten, and my deeds;
Dare you act contrary to humane Laws,
A Prince's murder without right or cause,
And not expect heavens dreadful vengeance due
To all that dare such horrid crimes pursue.
If as a foe to good you guilt prefer,
Insulting over your chance, remember Sir,
Monarchs sometimes are forced to bend to fate,
Success not power makes men fortunate.

Melech. In whose stale works did you these morals find,
Oh damned Hypocrysie in woman kind,
How like a low Ebbed rivolet, you flote,
As if you scorned the applause my power has got
When in your own design your Gulphy pride
Outvies the force of the Seas swelling tide,
You seem to quake at actions done by me
But dare the Fiends of Hell when you decree,
As if the severe sentences of Death
Had only their dependence on your breath,
But from this hour I do your aid disown
One Monarch is sufficient for one Throne.

Phillo. I like that well, pray heaven that vote may stand.

Achma. The Queen's about to answer --

Zelm. -- The command
I bear in the state I can with ease resign,
My fear is only that the Powers Divine,
When they this horrid crime have understood.
Will shower their vengeance, but the Gods are good.

Melech. Yes now they are, but should they ere deny
Your suit, they then were statues of the Sky,
Let them increase in might, and sway above,
Rule only here does my ambition move,
To purchase which content, and excel you
I dare be proud and irreligious too.

Zelm. However my actions did my realm affright,
All know, dread Sir, I shone but with your light,
The power is yours, and you may quickly have
That luster rendered back which first you gave,
My taper is extinct when you are gone,
Like the black Zodiac when it wants the Sun.

Phillo. It Is past belief she cannot be thus tame
[aside. This fordid meekness does base fear proclaim.

Zelm. I aimed not Sir, your honor to defend
For my own cause, my own peculiar end,
My hopes and fears were always for your good,
In whose brave cause I freely shed my blood,
And since my words have set your thoughts at strise,
In being a mediator for his life;
Let this submission penitence supply
[kneels. Since it is your will, it is reason he should die.

Ptollo. Ungrateful Mother, Oh that I durst speak.

Phillo. Cease good my Lord passion is now too weak.

Achma. The King begins to melt, her policy
Already has atcheiv'd a victory.

Melech. Rise my Souls better half the Gods designed,
Thy excellency too good for humane kind.
Forget my censure, let thy gentle breast
Forbear to entertain so rude a guest,
What shall I do to gratify thy Love.

Zelm. Your Clemency all merit is above:
But since your Royal bounty deins to place
My actions in the Balance of your grace,
Though far unworthy an estate so blessed,
I will presume to unfold my last request
And the hid secret of my heart declare.

Melech. Do, and by all our mighty Gods I swear,
By Apis our most powerful Deity
Except his life, I nothing will deny.

[Pointing to Moaron. Zelm. Bear witness good my Lords what he has said,
It Is a Kings Oath and ought to obeyed,

Phil. It is as firm as Fate

Achm. -- nor lies it now
In his own power to infringe his vow.

Phil. Heaven grant your will prove healthy for the State.

Zelm. You in your doubts too much your fear relate,
My nature from my Childhood has bin free,
Gentle and mild as Virgin modesty,
Nor durst I ere have climbed ambitions Hill
Had I not thus bin licenc't by your will.
[bowing to the King. It Is true, I long have wished to reign alone
But till this hour I nere durst make it known;
Though with my Nature it did well agree,
So great an awe I bore your Majesty.

Melech. -- How Is this.

Phillo. Some powerful God reject my fears.

Zelm. But since occasion shows her silver hairs.
And bids me hold, since Heaven and Earth, or both
Avouch my will by your confirming Oath,
Like a kind Wife share in your griefs I Will own,
And on my own head fix your anxious Crown:
The Gods have destined you to live in peace,
To pass your term of life in rest and ease.
Oh happy state, that uncontrowl'd lives free
From the disturbing cares of dignity,
Whilst I, I fear am doomed to greifes unknown,
Few think what cares depend upon a Throne:
I durst not my intent so soon have told,
Had not your Kingly promise made me bold,
Nor should you my designs have understood,
But that I know it is for the Nations good:
Ordained above therefore I boldly stand
A suitor for the Kingdom, and demand
A Boon, which may perhaps your wonder raize,
The sole command over Egypt for three days

Melech. What heaps of wonders crowd into my breast,
Have you considered, Madam, your request,
The care is great and weighty as the trust
The People bloody, headstrong, and unjust.

Zelm. Their love or hate in me unsathom'd lies,
One I mislike, but the other I despise,
Nor doubts of Government will I dispute,
But only urge you to perform my suit.

Phil. Long my prophettick heart has feared this ill.

Melech. Heaven thou have done thy worst thy Lawless Will,
Proud of an unmatcht power has made me wrong
A potent Nation with a lavish tongue:
Madam, your Souls intentions have out done
My duller prudence, but like Phaaeton
Your fledged ambition will I fear too late
Reap the advice that might prevent his fate.
Be wise in time --

Zelm. -- let wisdom Zealots save.
My Heaven is to be fortunate and brave
I am resolved. --

Melech. -- Mount the Egyptian Throne:
My breath shall faster tie what cannot be undone,
To my past fatal promise I Will be just,
And will perform my Oath, because I must.
Affairs in the State determine and maintain
For three days space, I thus confirm your reign.
Seats her in the Throne. In your free votes be your allegiance seen.

Omnes. Long live Zelmura, Egypts mighty Queen.

Melech. I have but done, what others did before,
Ambitious deputies more Crowns have wore,
Then all the Caesar's, cloyed with Conquests bore
It Is a disport for Kings sometimes to free
Their tired necks from Regal Monarchy.
The rapting joys of Heaven too cheap would grow
Should we continual pleasures reap below;
But triffling thus my chief affairs I wrong,
And by delays his life preserve too long
[pointing to Maoron. Away with him his death my breast will clear
And rid my anxious soul from doubts and and fear

Moar. Can heaven permit thy insolence to act
This obcsene crime this base infernal fact:
Cursed Tyrant, traitor, Traitor that is too good,
The plagues of Stix lie reeking in thy blood:
If as a Monarch you decreed before
My death, your will was balanced then by Power;
But since with Power the Queen you have endowed,
You are now but one of the insipped crowd,
Whose slender fate to servile acts should bow,
I am a God, to what thy state is now.

Melech. Must I stand tame and hearthis insolence
Attack you first, seize and then force him hence,
To Zichmi and guards.
Zelm. He meets his Death that stirs,
[interposing. -- Slaves know ye me,
Place your attendance here, and set him free
Give up his Sword; do it without reply
[ To Zichmi My pleasure frees him, and he shall not dye
By whose authority officious Lord
They unbind Moaron. Did you thus saucily your aid afford
-- Ha, whose decree --

Zich. -- Reason an answer brings
To that demand, Madam, it was the Kings

Zelm. Kings Slave, what Kings? where does that Traitor live?
That dares encroach on my pretogative,
What sovereign power in Egypt is there seen
But I, Sure you forget I am the Queen.

Phillo. -- The Storm begins already.

Achm. -- Though this feed.
The growing flame, I Am glad the Prince is freed

Phillo. -- The King seems thunderstrook.

Melech. -- Unbound and freed,
What rash dull fearless fool has done this deed,
Am I not Monarch, he that dares deny
Damns his presuming Soul, who dares speak?

Zelm. I.

Melech. Art thou a God?

Zelm. -- No, but my soaring Fate,
Assumes a Godhead over thy humble state.

Melech. Thou art a Woman, and thou can not be
Equal with men, much less a Deity.

Zelm. Mankind my Vassals are, and Kings alone
The secure props on which I build my throne.
Thou, as an humble shrub, art happy made
By the cool umbrage of my Cedars shade,
And it is a clemency above thy fate,
That I thus long do suffer thee to prate.

Melech. Unheard of insolence, though now I grace
Your fate, there is reverence due to what I was,
And the vast power I am to bear again,
Sure you forget the shortness of your reign.

Zelm. It Is short indeed, and sets my thoughts at strife,
I would reign longer then, for term of life.

Melech. See how your high flown pride, your reason swayes,
All know your power extends but for three days.

Zelm. No more, in that then see my Modesty,
Yet Fate can stretch it to Eternity.
Let not large hopes too much your Judgment wrong,
For, Sir, perhaps you may not live so long.

Phillo. Mark that.

Melech. -- How not so long!

Zelm. Perhaps, I say.
Heavens power is great, you may not live to day.

Achm. 'Twas clouded well, thus policy invents
[Apart. And under fair words cover foul intents

Melech. I can no longer brook this insolence,
My honor must with my past Oath dispense;
Her haughty pride all Monarchy would shame,
But I betimes will quench this raging flame,
Your loyalty above my Oath prefer,
Be a Kings friend, and seize both him and her.

[to the Guards. Zelm. Stir not, you know my power.

Melech. Hah! not obeyed,
Can you be by a Woman's threats dismayed,
A Traiteresse

Zelm. Let my breath your duties wing,
Guards I command you straight to seize the King.
The King, How I his abject fortune grace,
Go straight and seize the King, I mean, that was.

Melech. Inhumane Tigress.

[Guards seize Melech. Zelm. By my fame I Will try
Who bears the greatest power, you or I,
All thoughts of what thou were, I blow to Air,
Thy humble Fate is now below my care,
For since all things subject to chance we know
In humane life, then why not Monarchs too,
His insolence declares himself to be
A Traitor to the State, the Gods, and me.

Ptollo. Yet gracious Queen.

Zelm. Who speaks in his defense,
Incurs my lasting hate, Guards bear him hence.

Ptollo. I cannot hold, Madam, if you proceed,
The Powers above will curse you for this deed,
The World

Zelm. Stop, his mouth, must I grow wise,
By the dull coldness of a boys advise,
A way with both it is my fixed decree
He for presumption, and for treason he,
Make no replies,

Melech. I have no breath to spare,
Unless to curse thee: May rank Poisonous Air
Infect thy blood, and blast thee every where,
May all the Plagues of Hell --

Zelm. -- Seize thee, What Is worse.
'Dsdeath go, must I allow him time to curse.

Melech. May all Diseases, Plagues, Pains, Tortures dwell
Within thy bosom

Zelm. -- Drag him to his Cell.
Exeunt Guards with Melech and Ptollomy. So looks a Gloud, whose sable Curtains
drawn
Includes the glorious Monarch of the Dawn
But when displaid to thin and purer Air,
The radiant eye of Heaven looks bright and fair:
Many there are that large dominions owe,
Yet only make a Pageant dazzling show.
But I the rights of Empire will maintain
And greatness show to him, that next shall reign.
Unactive Spirits from ambition free,
Live but to shame the joys of Monarchy.
I must see bended knees to State most due,
And such, my Lords, I shall expect from you.
Erring presumption has destruction bred,
But few prove Tyrants, if by all obeyed:
I will contemn my future dubious fate,
Creating pleasure in my present state,
In spite of Traitors that my fall presage,
I Will make my three days Reign extend an Age.

[Exeunt. ACT. III.
SCENE I.
Amasis and Saphrena. Amas. Does my affection then, her anger move.

Saph. She has had notice, Madam, of your love.
And on your deeds through a false glass looks down,
But fearless seems to wink on all her own,
Charmed with the state she is at present in,
She thinks herself too excellent to sin.

Amas. It Is well her Government so short appears.
How fares the King?

Saph. -- I dare not tell my fears,
It Is whispered he is to morrow to be tried
For treason to her Person.

Amas. Headlong Pride
Debased, an Angel, and will prove her due,
My Nephew too imprisoned?

Saph. It Is too true.

Amas. How do the Nobles brook her Tyranny.

Saph. As men in tempests, when the winds blow high,
Fearing by each proud wave to be destroyed,
With patience suffer what they cannot avoid:
So they that willingly would peace inherit
With choice respect feed her ambitious Spirit,
As if she were the Daughter of some God,
And not a Fabric built of flesh and blood.

Amas. Has she the Prince yet licens't to depart?

Saph. I cannot tell the motions of her heart,
But by her cloudy looks it might be guest
Her will did not approve of his request.
The blood in her pale cheeks strove to oppose,
Whilst like the tide her color comes and goes;
Doubtful to speak she his return delaid,
Pretending all his Ransom was not paid.

Amas. It Is strange such frailty should her breast inspire,
His going yesterday was her desire.
How looked the Prince at his hopes overthrow?

Saph. Like raging Neptune with a stormy brow,
Frowning he heard her words, his shaking head
Foretold his wrath, whilst rosy colored red
Flashed in his cheeks with daring look replied,
'Twas against the Law of Arms she him denied,
Which she should find: This answer raising doubt,
He shook his head, and sullenly went out.

Amas. I know she loves him, but her Cupids are
Mixed with soft passion, and the frowns of War:
She loves and scorns, though she in Secret own
Affection, she disdains to have it known,
But in my breast passions more dreadful move,
And Death sits coutch't on my despairing love.

Saphr. Let such suspicions meaner Souls convince,
You are above all fear: But see the Prince,

Enter Moaron. Moar. Madam, as some poor heartless Mariner,
By factious States impressed to wander far,
Hastes to salute the Friends he holds most dear
With a kind farewell, and a parting tear,
So I my hasty steps thus rudely move,
To bid adieu to her I only love.
The ambitious Queen, her promise has denied.
And my departure stopped through faithless pride:
It Is true my life I to her kindness owe.
But honor wronged no gratitude can show,
Therefore thus aided by the obscure night,
I mean to slight her will and take my flight.

Amas. Ungrateful Queen, and more ungrateful they,
That want entreaties to prolong your stay;
Your suit denied, her passion did express,
She would have granted had she loved you less.

Moar. Her love is then as dreadful as her hate,
And both to me as Messengers of Fate,
Besides the word from her sounds monstrous too:
Love has its beams and glorious dress from you.

Amas. Rather from you, my Lord, whose worth has shown
An excellence that Nature dare not own,
An Action in -- How often have I beheld
Your noble Person charging through the Field,
When the ambitious Sun have strove to grace
Your argent Arms with his refulgent face,
As proud to be an Ornament -- How often,
When flying Fame shouting applauses brought.
To my glad ears, my heart with joy did flow
To hear you conquered, though my Countries Foe.

Moar. Were you not lovely most excelling fair,
Sweeter than Balmy Gusts of western Air.
Had you not virtue to that large extent,
Would make a Goddess leave the firmament,
And pine with Envy, doubts my heart would move.
To think you flatter, where you cannot love:
But as you are, your phrases do but show
How much you merit, and how much I owe,
And I, unable yet to quit the score,
Am like poor Bankrupts, forced to borrow more.

Amas. How far your words do from Loves rules digress,
He needs not borrow that does all possess,
Though Misers bounty Obligation needs,
A bare Receipt in Love all Law exceeds.

Moar. When Love rests happy, free; and unconfined,
Led by the servent passions of the mind
To a safe Harbor: I confess the power
Is charming blessed, and the possession more.
But we, alas, a pair of restless hearts,
Fixed marks, where Fortune shoots her envious darts,
Fed with warm sighs must here unpitied live;
Denied what Nature does to Peasants give.

Amas. My love Surmounts all, for when you are gone
In silent groves, I Will waste my hours alone,
There court sweet Philomel to feast my sense
With the sad Theme of Tragic insolence.
I Will seek some widdow'd Turtle and debate
By that sad object my own hapless fate,
But when a thought of you my heart does bless,
In flattering dreams of what I cannot possess:
Though from the fading vision flow dispairs,
I Will sleep in bliss, although I wake in tears.

Moar. Bright Angels will from heaven their aid dispense,
With Joy to guard such charming excellence
But should the powers above deny thee aid,
And Fortune with disasters thee invade,
To desert Mountains I Would each Morn repair,
And catch the news from gusts of fluid air,
Then as a Cloud's dread issue breaking through
With pannick terrors charms Mankind below:
So danger and yourself I Would soar between,
And like fierce lightning scorch to death unseen
But see the early star with glimmering light
Foretells the quick departure of the night,
This kiss bright Empress of my heart, and then
Farewell, till the blessed hour we meet again.

Amas. Till this sad minute I no grief could tell,

Moar. And till this fatal night I never knew Hell.

Going to part severally are opposed at each door by the Queen and Guards.
Moaron seeing the Queen, starts. Moar. The Queen.

Amas. -- Betrayed, Oh Heavens!

Zelm. Yes Sir, It Is I,
The jealous Queen from whom you meant to fly,
Do you not wonder at these Guards and me,
You see the strong effects of jealousy,
But want the leisure to mind others harms;
In the safe harbor of my Sisters arms,
And though her beauties snares your soul entwine,
You may no doubt in secret vaunt of mine,
And vainly say, nay perhaps strive to prove
Saving your life was my chief act of Love,
But know, dull fool, my acts reputed ill
Sprung not from Love but to content my will,
My will, that now debars your liberty,
And when my will insites me, you shall dye;
Her punishment shall be some other time,
And such as suits the greatness of her crime.

Moar. A crime to Love, injurious Queen, you give
An end to Nature, 'twere a crime to live,
So gross an error past I must reprove
Souls are not Damned if they have grace to Love,
But blessed with charms are fixed on Thrones above.

Zelm. Since then for her you so much passion own,
I Will seat you where to vent your Love alone:
Her sight as fatal, men in feavors must
Be most denied, what most provokes their thirst,
Therefore your wonted temper to restore,
I am resolved you never shall see her more.

Moar. Nay then I Will die this moment for to breath,
An hour without her were a double death,
Send on your Bravo's, blood hounds that have known
How to snare lives and frankly pay their own.
For by the Gods, I will not fall alone.
My Sword above their slender fate shall sway
Confounding heaps that so my spirit may
When freed, have Souls to buffet by the way.

Zelm. In your defense observe what I designed
[to the guard. Attack you first, we will seize on him behind.
Fight, Moaron is enclosed by the guards and disarmed.

Moar. You basely, poorly, have the conquest won,
So shoals of flies obscure the radiant Sun,
But yet, you cannot glory in my overthrow,
Nor boast your fate against a single foe.
Oh spiteful Gods, and Nature too unkind
To join frail strength to an immortal mind.
Adeiw, fair Saint, if here we meet no more
[ to Amasis My spirit shall to some new Region soar.
There search some flowery grot where we alone
May meet in blessed Eliziums of our own.

Zelm. Away with him, have, fly, or stay your Death,
Exeunt with Moaron. Death,
My heart's not proof against such charming breath,
His words raise blushes that too much proclaim
My blinded passion and my growing shame,
You, from my clemency perhaps may find
[ to Amasis. A fate too gentle and reproof too kind,
But let not your too easy faith believe,
Though now I do, I always can forgive.
Despise the Prince and your past vows forget.
Goodness should die in them that would be great.
I am this hour to perform a deed,
Hell lmps may wonder at, but not exceed,
The Murder of the King, it is that alone
That Cements Romes strong Walls, must build my Throne.
[Exit.
Enter Saphrena. Amas. How came she hither, why were you so slow
That e're she came you could not let me know?

Saph. Could I have done it and have saved my life,
I had been happy to prevent such strife.
But the sad story will such truth declare,
Will show I wanted power, not will or care,
For in yone passage sitting in the Alcove,
Reading the story of Leanders Love,
I heard a rushing and then listening more,
The Queen came guarded to the Chamber door,
Who seeing me in that amazement start,
Straight sets her dreadful weapon to my heart,
Swearing by Apis, if a word I spoke,
Not all the Gods my ruin should revoke,
Fear charmed my tongue, alas, what should I do,
Betray my life, or els' be false to you:
I could not speak, so great was my surprise,
Till she was placed in ambush by the spies,
Who since I Have heard, forced by her Jealous fear,
Watching the Prince, observed him enter here.

Amas. Heaven has to Cruel been thus to prevent
A harmless Love, so true, so innocent,
Our equal passions only published this,
He still adored my virtues, and I his,
But the Envious Gods have mixed our bliss with cares,
'Cause our Elysium was more blessed then theirs.

[Exeunt. SEEN II.
Zelmura in state seated on a Throne, Phillopater, Zichmi, Achmades, and other
Lords standing beneath, guards waiting. Zelm. THough to the Gods above our
prayers we owe,
The Monarchs of the earth are Gods below,
Great Souls are Ideas of their heavenly might,
Sparks of their own ambition, rage, and spite,
And when we climb to Empires lofty ranks,
Engrossing Majesty we pay them thanks,
But on this Theme we have too long digrest,
You now have leave to offer your request.

Phillo. Most mighty Empress, thou resplendant Star,
Of Eagle Eyed perfection, Soul of War;
Thou glorious emblem of Divinity,
Bright as Apollo's beams.

Zelm. -- This pleases me,
This has some sound, and well befits my State.

Phil. Remember those that groan beneath their Fate,
Cursed in your wrath, let your Diviner breath,
Release 'em from the Mansion of pale death,
Gloomy despair their tired sense beguiles,
Deprived of the Radiant glories of your Smiles.

Achm. They have no doubt with sorrow purged the offense,
And cursed their sinning against such excellence,
The Gods whose power you scorn to imitate,
By this excel in mercy as in State.

Zichm. This were too great presumption were not we
Licens't by your confirming Clemency,
But Heavenly minds all Mortal thoughts exceeds,
The Sun's still glorious, though he shine on weeds
In your bright Aspect bliss and horror lies,
And Heaven and Fate triumph in both your eyes*

Zelm. Still this I like, the more they flatter me,
The more they publish my Authority,
Precedent Monarchs State too midly sought,
I am the first, men to subjection brought.
They dread like thunder my controuling breath,
And he that slights my frown, incurs his death,
Neglected duty fatal ruin bodes,
Whilst grand respect still equals us with Gods,
Whose boundless power does with my fate comply,
They can do what they will, and so can I
Do all your wills in this joint suite remain.

Omn. It Is all, great Queen, we covet to obtain.

Zelm. Heavens with what fear, the Motion they relate,
I am transported with my glorious state,
Mild Majesty abreviates its bliss,
But what that wants of Power I possess,
I have considered on your Joint request,
Your suits conjoyn to have the King released
Perhaps you think the conquests you obtain,
Are all disgraced in a weak woman's reign,
And weary of my Yoke, think it well done,
To wish a King to put more fetters on,
Like Aesops frogs you grudge your gentle thrall,
Yet sue for Storks that would consume you all,
But know I rise not thus, so soon to fall,
My power is yet unblemished, Lords, and know,
Since I am Queen, I still will keep me so,
Therefore I have decreed it constantly,
That e're the Sun decline, the King shall dye.

Omn. -- Yet gracious Madam

Zelm. Hold, I Have sworn his Death,
It Is dangerous to control my fatal breath;
His treason and the horror of the deed,
Justice would say, he does deserve to bleed
But if her Zeal this act as good denies,
My will shall weigh the deed, and Justice lies.
Zichmi in this be your allegiance shown,
Take this, and see the execution done,
[gives a Ticket. Yet that to your great comfort you may see,
You have a Queen oreflows with clemency
By virtue of this Ring, set my Son free.
[give a ring Haste and ere twilight see the Prisoner dead,
Or for a brave neglect forfeit your head.

Zelm. Your will, great Queen, is not to be withstood,
For done by you the worst of Crimes is good.

Achma, Since fate and ignorance permits us still
By errors to disturb your Godlike will,
Let us your grancious pardon share, since we
Incurred the fault through too much Loyalty;
Your wise regreet perhaps some ill does save
So Gods deny mankind the things they crave.

Enter Ptollomy and kneels. [shout. Zelm. Rise Sir, and let your future Acts
declare
You my high fate as well as courage share,
Your past offenses we will now forget,
But henceforth studdy things more brave and great.

Ptollo. Madam it lies not in the power of fate
To make me Coward or degenerate,
To heaven for health and knowledge thanks is due,
But haughty Courage from your blood I drew.

Zelm. My will unquestioned power shall express,
Hell shall not daunt nor heaven make it less:
What fools think pride my Judgment calls divine,
A Soaring essence, that like Jems does shine
In the Ambitiou's souls of such as love
Abliss from nature gleaned, not from above:
We should not differ from the common Crowd
Were not our greatness lycens't to be proud,
Though adoration to mortallity
Be counted vain by dull hypocrisy
I think it reason if adrest to me,
My state as worthy is of Sacrifice,
As Jove's with all his troops of deities.

Phillo. On what prodigious pride her Spirit soars,
That thus she dars blaspheme the heavenly powers.

[aside. Ptoll. Since then your Clemency is pleased to place
Me once more in the Sun beams of your grace,
Let me not too too insolent apear
In tendering a petition to your ear,
Whose grant my grateful heart with thanks will store,
And what I now admire, I shall adore.

Zelm. Haste to declare your Suit I will not say,
'Ts your unknown, but yet I think it may.

Ptoll. In your attention I am far more blessed,
Than in that vote by which I was releas't,
But can I in your favor basking lie,
Lul'd with delight, and see my Father die:
Unatural, unkind, and Cruel too.
Therefore thus low most mighty Queen I sue
To your reviving breath for a reprieve,
Though he be still confined yet let him live.
Think what a horrid Crime it is to shed,
[Queen Starts. His blood; who is the part'ner of your bed.
Kind nature cannot but dispute his Cause,
Plead his desert, Religion, and the Laws,
Besides his fortune may his Crime defend,
His Soul was great and knew not how to bend;
Brave minds like Palms do most themselves advance,
When most deprest by the strong hand of Chance,
And his uncurb'd Soul till that moment free.
Soon felt the shame in loss of Majesty,
The nations love will flow if your forbear,
But if persist they will only love for fear,
Cheer then their drooping hearts, and save the King.

Zelm. Away thou daring fool, base, fordid thing,
Gods can strong prison walls men virtue teach,
The Boy's grown Zealous, and has learned to preach,
And with grave Morals that all sense disown
Thinks from my lofty head to charm the Crown:
Did I this frozen Snake from bondage bring,
Warmed by my grace, so soon to show his sting,
Have I often nourisht him with my one blood,
To leave the track of glory and grow good,
Degenerate wretch what bliss could thou divine
From his reign that thou may not reap in mine,
What though he shared my bed without control,
His Rival, brave Ambition, shares my Soul,
And when brave spirits glory to be great
Religion's useless, and the Law a cheat.
The blessings others Covet I despise,
The Gods and nature equally I prize,
Had I with patience lived so long alone,
Till providence had helped me to this Throne,
In spite of all its power I might, I see,
Have mourned the loss of royal dignity,
But by ambition raised, my power I know,
And from my Throne dare laugh at all below.
Therefore recall that breath pronounced before,
And here a Pardon, instantly implore,
Or never stir from the cold Pavement more.

Ptoll. Prostrate beneath your foot I bend thus low,
[kneels. It is a Posture I in duty owe,
But to repent and my past suit recall,
Were abject, base, and most unnatural,
Nor can I quell my soaring thoughts so soon,
Let it suffice it was a fruitless boon.

Zelm. Though your denial insolent appear,
It shows you share my blood, despising fear,
Live, and your hearts ambition, to regain,
I give you leave to wish, nay hope to reign.

Ptol. Unconstant hope and full of flattery,
You are immortal, sure you cannot dye.

Zelm. Though Death proves vassal to my soaring fate,
My power is boundless and I may create,
I in your reign may disspate my fears,
My youth being past, and some few hundred years,
But could your tongue request the Kings reprieve,
Knowing I must not reign if he should live,
By his decease succession I dare own,
And by your nonage can command the Throne,
But had he lived, fate had my power beguiled,
Ill fare those Realms where Monarchs are too mild,
My will shall now the charms of greatness prove,
Respect and fear best shows a subjects love.
And women's courage by ambition warmed,
Dares laugh at danger, though all Hell stood armed.

[Exeunt. ACT. IV. SCENE I.
Zelmura, Sola. Zelm. He Is dead, and thus far my designs are blessed,
Since of the Throne, I solely am possessed,
The name of Goddess, bright divinely fair,
Has charmed me so, methinks, I am all air,
The Gods, why have not I more power then they,
Men dare not me, but most them disobey,
This head that never wanted a design,
To satisfy ambition, shall divine
Into the peoples hearts when factious grown,
And wrest out their intentions with a frown,
But whilst my mind in these affairs, I move,
I play the tyrant with my Smoother'd Love.
My heart with Passion for the Prince it warmed,
And he is with my Sisters beauty charmed;
But thrive my Plots that bud with tender growth,
And what he now admires he then shall loath.
Mileta,

Milet. -- Maddam.

Zelm. -- Set Amasis free.
[Exit Melet. And bid her wait me in the Gallery,
Shall theams of Virtue make Zelmura pine,
All ills of women's frailty I resign
I bear a Spirit brave and masculine,
My pleasures are my Gods, and passions birth,
Uncurb'd, and lawless is my Heaven on Earth.
[Exit.
SCENE II.
Enter Ptollomy, Phillopater, Achmades. Ptol. The injured peoples murmurs now
grow loud,
And many into Private factions crowd,
So looked the sick and fester'd state of Rome,
By mighty Julius Tyranny overcome.

Phillo. Their fate though bad was better far then ours,
Caesar and Pompey, though their fame and powers,
Were mighty and divided, ye both stood,
As potent Champions for the Public good,
But in Zelmura's actions it is made known,
She vallues no disasters but her own.

Achm. Unvallued Sumes of Gold she hourly heaps,
And by oppressing taxes treasure reaps,
Whilst helpless Age in holes unpittied lie,
Forced by the dearth of food to starve and dye.
Enter Zelmura and Amasis. See where she comes.

Zelm. -- Fate has decreed it so.
And I in vain should a resistance show.

Phillo, I read a storm in her reverted Eyes.

[aside. Zelm. How dare you interrupt my pryvacies,
[to them. Have we no passage free, this insolence
Merits the worst of my displeasure, Hence: --

Phillo. What throngs of Demons her ambition sway.

[aside. Zelm. What Is that your murmur.

Phillo. -- Nothing, but obey.

[Exeunt. Zelm. That I do Love him is as certain true,
As that he Loves, and is beloved by you,
And as the power is boundless, that is due
To my high state, so is my passion too.
Your glimmering Love does in small embers shine,
But a consuming Aetna, flames in mine,
Forget him then since mildly, at you hand,
I beg, what I have power to command.

Amas. A barbarous Power, that can so cruel prove,
To fright a Virgin from a virtuous Love.
A Love with mutual vows so firmly bought,
That Death lies coutcht in a dispairing thought.

Zelm. Despair no, that sad guest I will remove.
I give you leave to hope but not to Love,
A look methinks might satiate one so young,
Your growing Passion cannot yet be strong,
And though affection he on me bestows,
And Loves not you, yet you may hope, he does.

Amas. He cannot be unjust, his purity
Never lent attention to inconstancy,
Our Passions, like our virtues, equal were,
Though not too fierce, as much as we could bear.

Zelm, My nature does a swifter pleasure prove,
She hates dull virtue that does firmly Love,
Besides your pulse, so temperate and slow,
Inspires me to believe, your Love is so.

Amas. A temperate Love with modest passion graced,
Excel a feircer and will longer last,
A chaste heart to it selfe's a Paradise,
But Love if wanting modesty is vice.

Zelm. Are these Stale Morals, theams for you and me,
These Musty relics of dull Piety,
Know fool, that Virtue and Religion now
Is not embraced for practice but for show,
To sooth the vulgar errors of these times,
And set a shining Gloss upon our crimes*
If I were poor, I might have zealous been,
But Moral virtue is below a Queen,
And modesty with passions that aspire,
Agrees like water when comixt with fire.

Amas. Oh impious Age that licenses such crimes.

Zelm. Thou art a fool, I know 'em prudent times,
Few waste their breath in Prayer, but th'ignorant.
Piety suits not us, but such as want,
For to be Potent, rich, and zealous, too,
I think is more, then flesh and blood can do.

Ams. Of that I had but learning to dispute,
And the gross errors of your words confute,
But from the theme you wildly have digrest.
Come to the Point, and tell me your request.

Zelm. It Is this, that you would suppress your ecstasy,
And prudently resign the Prince to me,
Perform it well, and you my heart have won,
It Is somewhat strange but yet it must be done.

Amas. Resign' my Love! a horrid Cruelty,
Yet though I cannot do it, I can die.

Zelm. Die then

[offers to stab her. and by thy Speedy death remove
The only fatal Rival of my Love.
Amas. Oh hold, for though with death I am not scared,
Forbear a little, I Am not yet prepared.

Zelm. My rage brooks no delay, do it or bleed.

Amas. Hold, oh for pity, speak, declare the deed;
What must I do?

Zelm -- Visit the Prince with me,
And there renounce your former constancy.
Though Love he still endeavor to explain
Meet all his favors with a Coy disdain:
Shrouding your eyes in frowns, speak void of fear,
For I Will be placed where I can see and hear;
Be haughty, that no plot he may descry,
But if you fail that moment you shall die.

Amas. Such tyranny was never yet expressed.

Zelm. Of too great Evils you may choose the least.

Amas. Let me consider; yes, it shall be done.
[pawse. The power of fate may alter what is begun,
His hate to her, may Jealousy remove,
[aside And prove a means still to preserve our Love.
I will perform your suit, but in the deed
[to the Queen I give my self a wound will ever bleed,
As dying Pellicans their blood resign,
So to procure your bliss, I ruin mine.

Zelm. Lets thither straight, if thou perform'st it well
Thou bringst me heaven.

Amas. -- but my self a Hell.

[Exeunt. SCENE III.
Enter Ptolomy, Phillopater, Achmades. Ptol WHo* at the Tilt last night most
honor won?

Phillo. The noble Caliph, Micerenus Son,
Obtained the Ruby, he five Warriors forced*
To leave the field, and twice five more unhorst,
Himself unhurt still prancing round the place,
Managed his foamy Steed with ample grace,
When brave Cephrenes, hoping victory*
Charged him, whose fight I could not stay to see.
Enter Zichmi. Your haste does some unlooked for news declare.

Zich. To arms, to arms we are surpised, I fear:
For standing on the Eastern Tower, whose height
Makes the Skies frown, and Earth shake with its weight,
I saw the Beacons near the shore on fire,
Which to the Skies did in small sparks aspire,
And the next object, which my eyes did grace,
Were armed Troops, that moved toward this place.
The City trembles at these new alarms,
And in the Streets the stubborn faction swarms;
For by a Post new come report is spread,
They Are Syrian Troops, and by the Sultan led.

Ptol. Unlooked for mischief, oh, my boding fears.

Achm. Has the Qeen heard the news?

Zichm. -- There Is no one dares.
Possess her with it.

Ptol. Ha, not dares, yes I,
Were death the sequal, would the adventure try:
Let base and sordid spirits nourish fears,
My courage shall supply my want of years.
Straight raise what powers you can,
[ to Zichmi be it your care [ to Phillo. To calm the Commons, and prepare for
War.
Great Gods permit not Egypt thus to fall,
Revenge not private Crimes in general,
The blot in future Ages will remain,
And on your Godhead fix a lasting stain,
But ever our necks endure captivity,
Like Romans, our own swords shall set us free.

[Exeunt. SCENE IV.
A Prison. Moaron, reading. Moar. COntent is Pilot to a happy State,
And it is a bliss to be unfortunate.
A rigid Text, yet Seneca was wise,
He taught men how disasters to despise,
To purge their lives from ill, and learn to die
By occult Reasons in Philosophy,
But had he loved like me, he had confessed
No Hell like to a confined Lovers breast.
The branded wretch, that tugs the slavish Oar,
Spent with dispairs and wants controuling power,
Yet still contented, lives in hopes to see
Once more the long wished hour of Liberty:
But I, contemning my unhappy Stars,
Still waste my life in Labyrinths of Cares.

Enter Zelmura and Amasis at the door. Zelm. Yonder he sits, now boldly enter
here
And from this place* your words can reach my ear.
[Exit behind
Amas. Hold now my heart,

Moar. -- Has heavens, what is this I see,
Can prison walls shroud such divinity!

Amas. Do You, know me Sir?

Moar. -- Not yet, for Joys extreme
Persuades my fancy that I do but dream.

Amas. Awake then and believe.

Moar. Such was her hand,

[kising her hand And such the sweetness that did first command*
And fetter my rough heart, my doubts are gone,
But tell me, Sweet, how came you thus alone?
How could you escape the guards and not beseen,
By cruel Spies from the more cruel Queen?
Or did the Gods, Compassionating Love,
To yield me comfort, drop you from above.
Amas. My coming was not at so strange a rate,
But from the entrance of the Castle gate.
Through all the guards I had a passage free,
Who void of doubts gave me this liberty.

Moar. Unlookt for happiness.

Amas. -- hold Sir, you show
Too much of Joy, till you my business know.

Moar. What business can you have, but to remove
Doubts that molest us and renew our Love*

Amas. Grief ties my tongue, how shall I utter it.

[aside Moar. Silence, bright Soul, for Lovers is not fit.
Say, what ill news?

Amas. -- Aid me ye Deities:
Then briefly thus, our love with mutual ties
Of firm affection often has dared our fate,
And thereby made us both unfortunate,
This makes me (conscious of what griefs arise
From wilful love, what plagues, what Miseries.)
As friend to your good fortune to request,
That you would change. I cannot speak the rest,
[aside Love charms my utterance and denies me power.

Zelm. behind. Do it, or do not hope to live an hour.

Moar. To change my Love, how, do not give my sense
Cause to reprove such charming Excellence.
Your breath till now stand Roses in the bud,
The Western gales were not so sweet, so good,
But this request has soild your luster so,
What was divine does now but mortal show.

Amas. Let not vain hopes too much beguile your Youth,
Our holy Prophet never spoke more truth,
For to make kind our future destiny,
You may suppress your love, and so must I.
Live happy therefore and past Joys restore,
But from this moment never love me more.
It Is out, and now shroud me some gloomy cloud.
[Exit.
Moar. Such words the Gods durst not have spoke so loud.
Rend Earth in the midst, and split ye fatal Skies,
Whose Planets dare to appoint such prodigies.
To Caves immense let the Ellements retire,
And mix together earth, air, sea, and fire,
Till mingled in confusion, all may be,
As first they were, in natures infancy:
For since this age, does pristine ills surpass,
Oh happy Choas, where no falsehood was,
A barbarous Princess, who would beauty trust,
Who would believe in virtue or be just,
If virtue this allows in noble blood,
Virtue's a crime and vice it self is good,
The Gods themselves, if tamely this they see,
Are false and baser than mortallity.

Enter Zelmura. Zelm. What Demon Sir has altered thus your fate,
I met my Sister at the Castle gate,
Fire darting from her eyes, her lovely face,
So changed with rage, it banished all her grace;
Calling you base, perfidious, false, and then
Musing a while, she would fall to Curse again,
Such rapid frenzies posted from her breast,
I could no less then think she was possessed,
For she methinks whom passion did so blind,
Might have found words more gentle and more kind,
But ignorance of the truth me hither draws,
To know the reason, and enquire the cause.

Moar. The Cause, why Madam, 'dsdeath I cannot tell.
It Is the same Cause that damns the souls in Hell,
A Heaven lost for want of loving well.

Zelm. Come come, dissemble not, you slighted her,
That you to me your passion might prefer,
And though I Am haughty vassals, you
Shall find a temper that to Love is due,
If without more delays you prove your bliss,
And your long closely smoother'd Love confess.

Moar. What strange Chimera's, Madam, plague your mind,
Love you, by Heaven I hate all woman kind,
Not you alone, but all cursed Crockadiles,
Ye couch damnation in seducing smiles,
I Have lost my faith to think it is Heaven to Love,
My sense does now in the contrary move,
For if a Hell there be, as it is said,
It Is felt when highth of passion is delayed.

Zelm. Perhaps, you are loath the Guard your words should hear,
Whisper, Sir, speak it softly in my ear,
Your merits soon will weigh the balance down,
And make me cherish, what deserves a frown.

Moar. Frown on your amorists, that causeless dote,
For by the Azure Heavens, I love you not,
To be your slave, I never did consent,
Nor need I whisper what I never meant.

Zelm. Hah, never meant it, was it not for me
You slighted thus my sisters amity;
Could for meaner Causes faith remove,
Then the happiness that still attends my Love,
It Is contrary to reason, and you try
My utmost patience, if you this deny.

Moar. D'sdeath, Madam, do ye think I can be brought.
To cherish Passion, by persuasions wrought*
Bereaved of reason that should crimes reprove,
Forced to affect, and fooled into a Love.
Your eyes my heart do rather freez than warm,
And your addresses rather vex than charm,
Fate makes me to despise, what you propound,
If this be Love, I have a Mortal wound.

Zelm. Gods can I hear this tamely, die proud fool,
And with thy blood my boundless passion cool,

Goes to stab him, he wrests the Dagger from her. Zelm. Take it, and boast thou
have more strength than I,
But fixed it here, and see how I can die.

Moar. No live, and over such abject fate control,
You merit it, you have a noble soul.

Zelm. Oh, I could curse, but it will do no good,
And tear this burning fever from my blood,
But Love the prouder Tyrant conquers me.
Enter Ptollomy hastily. Hah whence proceed these sudden new Alarms.

Moar. Fate grant I guess aright.

Ptollo. -- To arms, to arms.
The Potent Syrians with a mighty host,
Are past resistance landed on our Coast,
The City trembles, and the factions swarm,
And with their uncurb'd shouts, augment the alarm.
Use some swift means, great Queen, to stinct this strife,
Least the unruly tumult seek your Life.

Zelm. Curse on the faithless slaves; but art thou sure
The troops approaching are the Syrian power.

Ptollo. Our Messengers affirm it, and we may
From Turrets easily discern it is they.

Zelm. They Are welcome, and they are coming does produce,
In me much Joy, my rusting sword wants use,
All low thoughts vanish now to empty air,
I will no leisure for dull passion spare,
War may perhaps from my brave heart remove,
The agony of this tempestious Love,
Whilst my heroic fate once known before,
Shall guide my sword to conquer 'em once more*

Moar. This happy news does with my wish comply,
And gives me present hopes of liberty.

Enter Achmades, Phillopater, Zichmi. Achm. The foe's already come so near,
that we
From our high towers may their banners see,
The people trembling with a sudden fright,
Run through the streets and Curse the fatal light,
But the factions I have with persuasions wrought,
And in good order to the Palace brought,
Your presence, Madam, their mistrusts will clear,
And make them dare the foe they late did fear.

Zelm. That satisfaction they shall reap from me.
I knew they durst not long perfidious be,
My breath can lift 'em up or cast 'em down,
Save with a smile, or Martyr with a frown,
Go, and with speed draw up the Cavalry,
[ to Achm. And in Battalia place the infantry,
[Exit Achm. Possess their minds with hopes of great reward,
And cull the choicest soldiers for my guard,
[to Phillopater. You to your charge, and Ptollomy take care
[Exit Phillopater. There be no tumult, that may stint the war,
Zichmi thy faith so noble has been shown,
In the defense of my exalted Throne.
That to thy guard my sister I resign,
By careful, and close prisoner her confine,
Till you my Signet for her freedom see.

Zichmi. I Will not dispute, but act your great decree.
[Exit.
Zelm. And now one act of honor I Will do more,
And therefore Sir your liberty restore,
Lead on your troops, brave Prince, nay all thanks spare,
Meet me in the Army's head, and thank me there,
You cannot braver gratitude afford,
Then nobly there to thank me with your Sword,
Charm me Belona with thy chiefest good,
And to meet fame I Will swim over Seas of blood,
Contemn black danger with a threatening breath,
And Grasp at honor in the jaws of Death.

[Exeunt Queen and Ptollomy. Moar. Gods, what a soul does that weak fabric
hold,
Such courage ill befits so frail a mould,
Her Spirit a whole Legion would inspire,
And turn cold cowardice to Glowing fire,
I envy her, methinks a heart so brave,
A mind so haughty none but I should have.
If man be the more brave and noble name.
Why should weak woman rob us of our fame,
I Will to our troops and try if I can prove,
A kinder fate then I received from Love.
If not the doom of Heaven I will reverse
And my own bosom with my own hand pierce.
[Exit.
Zichmi returns. Zichm. Her sister to my guard resigned, blessed fate,
That to revenge give so secure a state,
My too long smoother'd hate I now will show,
And to my aid invoke the Fiends below,
Dull Queen could thou believe I faith e're knew,
For her whose barbarous hands my Brother slew,
No, Murdress to his soul, I did bequeath
Thy tainted blood, and then decreed thy death,
But now thy sisters rape shall first begin,
The tragic scene, and broach a greater sin,
Then in thy blood my bliss I will obtain,
Revenge is sweetest then when most obscean.
[Exit.
SCENE. V.
Enter Selabdin, Aldabar, Psamnis, and Syrian Soldiers. Selab. THus far our
enterprise proves fortunate,
Favored by heaven and propitious fate.
Our happy forces with a noble have,
High rocks and barren Mountains have o'repast,
Of this parcht climate desolate and waste,
Proud Queen, success thou did but ill divine,
When thou my Son ignobly did confine,
Or that his fate e're long might turn to thine.
But by my deeds thy pride shall quickly see,
A Father's Courage, Love, and Piety.

Psamn. The King late murdered by her Tyranny,
Methinks should pluck down vengeance from the sky.
And to requite, the worst of torture's due:
Death will oblige her if received from you.

Adab. Heroes alone, by Monarchs hands should die,
Trophies most fit for sacred Majesty,
Which in this war your power might pursue,
Were the brave Prince but here to second you,
But till his sword we in our troops have seen,
It Is vain to think to captivate the Queen,
But we are tardy let us hence to night,
And charge their drowzy guards e're mornings light.

Selab. Brave soul yet stay such have our power may wrong,
Our men are tired, and the Journey's long,
Let therefore all our troops to night be drawn,
In order to be ready with the Dawn,
A mornings march will bring our army down,
To fix our tents in prospect of the town,
Amidst your bounty, Gods grant but this one,
Give but my age power to revenge my Son,
My incense smoke shall dim your azure skies,
And feast you with continual sacrifice.
[shout. What means this shout.

Enter a Messenger. Messen. May heaven, great Sir, your Enemy's destroy,
As it does now procure the general Joy,
The Prince.

Selab. -- Hah, what of him.

Mess. -- Thus low by me
In humblest duty greets your Majesty.

Selab. Thou dare not mock me.

Mess. -- Not, and hope to live,
But him you cannot hope for, there receive.

Enter Moaron and kneels. -- Selab. This Scene of Joy does my past griefs
assuage,
Welcome thou prop of my declining age,
Honor forget my weakness this blessed day,
If nature makes my eyes some tribute pay,
By say, what more then God did set thee free,
Or was it some transcendant Deity,
Whose power we know not, and must therefore pay
A reverence fitting so supreme a sway.

Moar. No Sir, the Gods, I have not found so just,
'Twas on a Cause much more miraculous,
No troops of daring Soldiers did I see,
Forcing their way through death to set me free,
Heaven for my succor no such aid decreed,
'Twas the brave Queen her self performed this deed.

Selab. The Queen, unheard of Nobleness.

Moar. -- 'Twas she,
That scorning fate pronounced my liberty,

Selab. Wonder invades my breast, but say what cause
From her proud soul this generous action draws,
Honor, or did her fear take safer course,
To render what my power e're long might force.

Moar. Her haughty courage only fame persues,
Contemning fortunes ills; for when the news
Of your arrival came no signs of fear,
Or dull mistrust did in her face appear,
But with a look that did her heart express,
She heard the story of your good success,
Then rising from her seat, and seeing where
Her Nobles looks betrayed their doubtful fear,
With an undaunted voice She strove t'inspire
Their freezing Courages with her own fire,
Her brave Oration past, she turned to me,
And with a dauntless generosity,
Voting my liberty spoke thus. --
Lead on your troops, and there your thanks afford,
Where the rough Language of the reeking Sword,
Disputes in honors cause, and only deeds,
Not words, for grateful actions intercedes:
This said she from my Presence did retire,
And left me there to envy and admire.

Selab. For this brave act all grateful thanks is due,
She does at once slight and oblige me too.
Good Heaven direct my actions how to pay
Her generous heart the best and noblest way,
And since the Gods decree no war in vain,
May the sublimest cause the Laurel gain.

Moar. He that in the Battle dares to second me,
Reaps from my heart a Brothers amity,
A Cowards soul destructive fears surround,
Whilst the brave Soldier smiles upon his wound,
With brandisht Sword he cuts his way before,
Not fearing numbers or mistrusting power,
Steel me thou daring God of Martial souls,
Whose blessed unbounded influence controuls
Over death despising Hero's, make my arm
Strong like my will to do and suffer harm,
That doing what a Natural power exceeds,
Proud death may gaze, and wonder at the deeds,
His rigor could not equal, but at last,
If through continued wounds my spirits haste,
To leave their Mansions. Grant me this kind fate,
Within this arm fresh vigor to create,
Till from my heap of victims gushing blood,
Make on the barren Earth a swelling flood,
That like a Conqueror, I may, when dead,
Swim to Elysium through the blood I shed.

Selab. Such virtue, Heaven must guard or cease to be,
What Mortals think, the seat of Piety,
If in this enterprise the Gods ordain,
A fate that puts a Period to my reign,
My happy Age shall yet this honor have.
To lie with victims pil'd upon my grave.

[Exeunt. ACT. V. SCENE I.
Zelmura, Phillopater, Achmades, Ptollomy, and Egyptian Soldiers. Zelm COmmand
our Moors the onset first to give,
And bring the Caliphs troops to their relief,
If you would purchase to your heirs a name
Ever adherent to the Parents fame,
Unsheath your willing Swords and follow me,
To fetch the glorious palm of victory,
Death's but a triffle unto those that dare,
Pain only seizes such as basely fear,
Slain in your Countries cause you shall possess,
The quintessence of heavenly happiness,
In green cool shady Grottoes you shall dwell,
And from your heaven see the Syrians hell,
That vexed with tortures shall in caverns pine,
For aiming at a fate so high as mine.

Ptoll. Let your free votes your willing minds relate.

Omn. Long live Zelmura, Goddess of our fate.

Enter a Soldier. Soldier. The foe great Queen is Marching within sight,
All resolute and ready for the fight,
The Soldiers only for your orders stay,
To try the happy fortune of this day.

Zelm. Now they are brave since Jointly they proclaim,
Their lives as vassals to immortal fame.
There is no bliss like honor, it is the Star,
That guides the noble Hero's from a far,
Draws him from earth where fear and horror swims,
To dwell with Gods, and radiant cherubims.
Whilst the poor soulless slave that does possess,
Nothing but earth to frame a happiness,
Pines here below for dross, and hourly dies
For what bright honor makes my soul despise.
Beat an alarm raize our Banners high,
In such a Cause it is a bliss to die.

[Exeunt. SCENE II.
Zichmi, Amasis. Zichmi MAdam in slighting thus my proffered Love,
You slight your bliss and happiness remove,
The Queen to me your person did assign,
With a strict charge to keep you still confined
But your desert such cruelty withstands,
And makes me slight her arrogant commands,
If, Gentle Fair, my Joys you would enthrone,
And grace my servent passion with your own.

Amas. Can Heaven such insolence unpunisht bear,
If by the Queens command, Sir, you appear
My rude controuler, and my Jailor here,
Perform your Duty with a careful breast,
But dare not thus my privacy's molest,
Least to my sister I declare at large,
How ill her Argus did perform his Charge.

Zichm. These threats are vain, the Queens whole power I slight,
She is preparing for the dreadful fight,
Involved in blood and horror, but I mean,
In Love to prove a more delightful Scene.
It Is true I am not lifted to that height,
To be a King and so reputed great,
Yet love makes me a Monarch in conceit.
And in your arms I shall be nobler far,
Then Romans in their greatest triumphs were.

Amas. My arms, was e're such arrogance yet seen.
Do You know me, Sir, I Am sister to the Queen,
A Princess, whose high fate you should admire,
And not molest with your abas'd desire.

Zichm. I know your high estate, and therefore move
My suite thus humbly to request your Love,
I will not say I merit your high birth,
That were to set a price upon your worth,
But passion keeps my senses from despair,
In Love and Death, all mortals equal are.

Amas. By that ill rule you half mankind deprave,
And make a Monarch equal with a slave,
Since both may Love, but can thou hope to be,
(Raised by unruly Love) equal to me,
Recant, dull fool, before it be too late,
And draw not on your self a certain fate.

Zichm. Fate afright those that fear some mighty power,
All firm allegiance I renounce this hour,
I hate the Queen, and dare declare it too
Thus boldly in my lawless Love to you,
My late observed fidelity was shown,
Not for the Nations profit but my own.

Amas. And can you hope to live, when this is known*

Zichm. My thoughts reach not so far, controuling Love
Usurps my heart and does all doubts remove,
I shroud a fire that surpasses Hell.

Amas. Cannot the thought of death your passion quel.

Zichm. Death no, let such base fears weak souls annoy,
I love you, and your beauty's will enjoy,
But I Am too tame, some women I have known?
Love to be forced, and perhaps you are one,

[goes to seize on her. Amas. Stand off, what Demon does thy breast inspire,
To use a Princess thus? --

Zichm. -- Love and desire,
Why do you look like one that is amazed,
takes hold of her. To see a fury you, your self has raised,

Amas. Guard me good heavens, have you no remorce,
to him. Think you I ever can be won by force,
mildly Good Gods what flinty natures men possess,
Cruel as Tigers in the Wilderness,
And hungry Lions thirsting after prey,
Though void of sense, more pity have than they,
Can you e're think if mildness you remove,
Your threatenings ever can increase my Love,
Love a soft peircing motion should bequeath,
Known by the pulse, an eye, or short quick breath,
But you the utmost bounds of Passion show,
And treat a Virgin as you treat a foe.

Zichm. Forgive me then, and think I did express,
Letting her go. My late rash words but through my love excess,
I now too late repent the insolence,
And beg thus low a pardon for the offense,
Fair, Lovely, Kind, I would be milder yet,
Can you my past unmanly Crime forget,
In other Acts our reason rules above
But proves a vassal to our haughty Love,
Remember, Madam, fates controuling Laws,
And let your charming beauty plead my cause.

Amas. This yet is something better, noble minds,
Humility not stubborn roughness binds,
Their uncurb'd souls forced down still upward tends,
Like unwrought steel that breaks before it bends.
Oh cruel fate, that thus can force my tongue,
Against my heart to extenuate a wrong,
[aside. Forcing my nature, driven to despair,
To cherish Vipers, that infect the air.
[Exit.
Zichm. So she begins to yield, when women pawse
A little Courtship, the agreement draws,
I Have long desired enjoyment of her Love,
But never till now durst my petition move,
Wanting occasion to perform my will,
And daring boldness for an act so ill,
Not that I own much passion, but my spleen,
This way revenges me upon the Queen,
The Queen, to whom I mortal hatred bear,
A hate deserved, unbounded, and severe:
Nor can a Petty Jar, an abject strife,
In the depriving of her single life
Abate the plague of my revengeful breath,
Her sisters rape must usher in her death,
That action will not only horrid be
But fix a stain on her Posterity,
It Is now the army's are engaged, if fate
Permits her once more to be fortunate,
And gain the conquest, this shall launch her breast,
shows a dagger. But if the foe is with the palm possessed,
I to her face this impious Act will own,
And to the Syrian King betray the town,
Till night I Will leave her to consult, but when
Black misty Clouds shuts up the day from men,
If by disdain she slights a milder Course,
Denied, like Roman Tarquin I will force.
[Exit.
SCENE III.
Alarm. Both Army's engaged, ( Egyptians and Syrians) after a skirmish the
Assyrians beat the Egyptians over the Stage. Enter Zelmura, her Sword drawn.
Zelm. SHame and confusion sieze 'em how they run,
Their slow feet now, outstrips the Postern Sun,
Oh Coward nature, that with fear controuls,
Over the better half of humane souls,
Your Sex be ever branded for this deed,
A Sex that only can in vice exceed,
Were I a man and consequently blessed,
With that excelling vigor they possess,
My Arm with Trophies should this realm have stored,
Of Monarchs that paid tribute to my Sword,
But henceforth let the title only frame
A lasting blot to men's eternal shame,
For if a woman's Courage can convince,
It Is fit the Sex should bear pre-eminence,
With smiles I Will meet with death but first set free,
My Captived soul from Griping Jealousy,
My Sisters death my fears shall soon remove,
I cannot dye and leave her here to Love.
And the brave Prince I know will soon consent,
But what I fear I will with haste prevent.
[Exit.
SCENE,
A Tent Royal. Selabdin, Aldabar, and Soldiers. Phillopater, Ptollomy,
Achmades, Prisoners. Selab. Sound a retreat to our remaining Powers,
Since fate now plainly shows, the conquest ours,
I'e it your charge to keep the Prisoners Close,
[ to Aldabar. Till at my leisure. I their fate dispose,
But see the Author of our happiness,
And brave disposer of our good success,
Enter Moaron, Psamnis, and Soldiers. Moaron kneels to Selabdin. This lowly
Posture does some suit express,
It Is thine what e're it be, thou can not want
A Boon that lies within my power to grant.

Moar. Encouraged then by awful Majesty,
I boldly ask these prisoners liberty,
And though this Land we have by conquest gaind
From hostile acts I beg you to refrain,
And still permit the noble Queen to reign,
In this a Fathers kindness will be seen,
This gives me power to gratify the Queen,
Who Goddess like, while I incompast round
With troops of Horse, when reeling on the ground,
Dispairing of all aid my Sword I held,
Up brandisht thus, to give a last farewell,
With an unmatcht command their rage appeased,
And from a swift destruction me released,
If then, dread Sir, my merits claim a Place,
In the unvallued blessings of your grace.
Give back her Kingdom set these prisoners free,
And by one act of generosity
Perfected, let your glorious deeds relate,
You excel all in honor as in fate.

Selab. To render back a Nation bravely won,
Honor sole Ransom and to please a Son,
In stubborn hearts perhaps regret might move
Where proud ambition swayes paternal Love.
But I so well thy mind and virtue know,
In a less act my Love, I cannot show,
Thy suit is granted, do what likes thee best,
Either to sign a Peace or still molest,
This act shall show to foreign Enemies,
How much I honor above profit prize.

Moar. This noble grant, all heaven does out do
The drowsy Gods can Monarchy bestow,
But to such fame their title is not good,
They give no Kingdoms won with loss of blood,
They Sit on easy Thrones and take delight,
Being far themselves from hurt, to see us fight,
But were they flesh and frail Mortallity,
As timorous and as prone as we to die,
They Would soon confess, a dear bought Nation given,
Would quite surpass the bounty of their heaven.

Phillo To souls so fraught with Honors Dignity's,
Vnbinds the Prisoners. The Gods do justly bestow victory's.

Ptollo. This act's so great it were too much to do,
For any Son of Glory less than you.

Achm. Since fate decrees our future Dignity,
Should the brave offspring of your bounty be,
We Will to the Queen this joyful news declare,
And from the peoples hearts vanish despair.

Selab. No tumult let on pain of Death be shown,
When we shall enter with our power the town,
And see that none my present deeds dispute,
This act of honor shall be absolute.

Moar. In this brave grant you doubly bless your Son.

Selab. It Is fit you should dispose a Crown you won,
My age Fame's Laurels never can better know,
Than when they nobly flourish on thy brow,
For when the Winter of my blood shall seize
My heart and chillness, usher a disease,
Thy fame resounding load, from every tongue,
Shall thaw my veins, and once more make me young.

[Exeunt. SCENA Vltima.
Zichmi, Amasis. Zich. THese dull delays do only bliss remove,
Coucht in the essence of united Love,
Madam, you too much time in thought have spent,
Dull thought a friend to passion never was meant,
Dispeirce those frowns that fatal storms presage,
And by consenting make this hour an age.

Amas. Consider, Sir what torments will succeed,
The Cursed persuance of so foul a deed.

Zichm. I have considered on my certain fate,
I know my death this crime must expiate,
But e're I dye in Heavens bright Sphere I Will rove,
And reach an immortallity by Love,
Each minuit will our bliss make more sublime,
And put new Sands into the Glass of time.

Amas. I cannot Love you thus, this rudeness bears
So strange a shape, it does increase my fears,
Calm your fierce passion let the Love you own
To my desert, in your respect be shown,
Be milder Sir soft kindness may proclaim,
My free consent, to what I dare not name,
But your impatience does my passion charm,
And against your hateful suit my fancy arm,
No succor yet approaching, no blessed aid.
Ye Heavenly powers relieve an injured Maid,
[aside. Hemmed in with horror, and past help distressed,

Zichm. In this your sexes frailty is expressed,
Thus you with glossing Phrases hope to blind,
And then deceive with falsehood half mankind,
But this gross pill must then be swallowed by
One that dotes more upon your face than I,
It Is true I Love you, but my grosser flame,
Burns not so clear, and has a Courser name,
Then that which dotards Court you with, a fire
Sprung from hot blood, and nourisht with desire,
And therefore I, that am not blinded yet,
Can look through the thin vail of your deceit,
And find that you my passion have delayed,
In expectation of some posting aid,
Perhaps because you do mislike my hair,
I am not as you wish me fat or fair,
For it is not virtue or dull modesty,
That makes your stubborn tongue my suit deny,
No sense of ruined Honor is embraced
But only grief the pleasure will not last,
Since then I know your Sex prone to be kind,
Since your denials plainly shows your mind,
I am resolved thus the effects to prove,
And make revenge my chiefest act of Love,

[goes to seize her. Amas. -- Help help, oh help.

Enter Zelmura. Zelm. -- Hah, our high blood defamed,
Sink Impious slave, to Hell, perjured, and damned,

Rushes in and e're he can get his Sword that leys on the Table wounds him
mortally. Zichm. It Is done, thy bloody Sword has forced its way,
Hell, and cursed fate still traitors thus repay,
Oh that I could but lift my arm so high,
To strike one stroke, though I were doomed to lie
Ever in flames, and in Hells Sulphur fry.
I would thy soul through thy life blood pursue,
And to revenge my Brother, stab that too.
But it is too late, I Am gone. --

dies. Zelm. -- Have then and die,
A horrid Scene of lasting infamy,

Amas. Oh, let me kiss the Sword, that did the deed,
And my dear honor from that traitor freed,
Heaven of my injured innocence took care,
'Twas the effects of a chaste Virgins prayer.

Zelm. Our base Egyptians, lives dishonored choose,
Whilst the fierce foe victoriously persues,
I only hither fled to thy defense,
Least you should suffer by their insolence,
It Is true I think the Syrian Prince retains
Of his late love, to you some small remains,
And might be brought his forces to remove,
And to restore the Crown, a prize to Love,
But deeds wherein your fame and honor lies,
I would do nothing without your advice,
Her secret thoughs will now be Straight expressed,
aside. And by this Plot I soon shall sound her breast.

Amas. Let not such blessed Events be then withstood,
My life's too little for the Nations good,
Instruct me sister what I have to do,
To save the State I Would fate it self pursue.

Zelm. No action our great danger can convince,
By your consent again to love the Prince.

Amas. To Love the Prince, what tides of blessings meet,
I love him more, than Angels do their Seat,
An ardent passion does my breast inspire,
My life is not so dear.

Zelm. -- Furies and fire. --

[aside. Amas. If that blessed action can extend your sway,
Lets hence, and see, how gladly* I Will obey.

Zelm. -- Oh horrid.

Amas. -- that all doubts I may remove,
I long to see the Object of my Love.

Zelm. -- Behold it then, --
[drawing her Sword. This is thy Lover, this relucent toy,
The latest bliss, thou ever shall enjoy,
Dull fool, my Jealousy, was strong before,
But this confession has inflamed it more,
I did expect, that when I had removed
Your passions cause, you would forget to Love,
But your late words have raised my fears again,
And in my heart caused an unusual pain:
A pain so feeling that compared to this,
Tortures are Joys, and Hell a Paradise,
Therefore prepare to die.

Amas. -- To die, oh, no.

Zelm. Stand firmly now, and bravely meet the blow.

Amas. I cannot, oh such horrid thoughts remove,
I will perform your will renounce my Love,
I Will hate the Prince his proffered Love defy,
Rail, slight, I can do any thing, but die,
Confine me to some Dungeon wanting light,
Whose obscure Walls enclose perpetual night,
Or place me here, do any thing to give
Your self a choice content, but let me live:
You in my death all cruelty surpass,
Alas, I yet never knew what woman was,
Take pity of my Youth and spare my breath,
Heaven knows, as yet, I am unfit for death.

Zelm. Unfit for Death, how vainly you remove,
My Cautious doubts, were you unfit to Love,
I might believe your argued policy,
But being fit to Love, you are fit to die,

Amas. Nature our hearts to passion does bequeath.

Zelm. But nature always must submit to death,
Within few years the tyrant will grow bold,

Amas. Then Sister do but stay till I am old,

Zelm. Oh fie, should life's reprieve so tedious be,
Your death would be an act of charity,
By dying young fame Laurels will provide,
And tell succeeding ages how you died.

Amas. A fatal glory that no fame can have,
But in the gloomy Mansion of the grave,

Zelm. Besides some comfort it is* you do not die
Alone, lot I will keep you company,
When my brave sword has sent thee to thy rest,
Warm with thy blood it then shall pierce my breast,
But should you live and fervently renew
His Love, that only to my merit's due,
I my revenge, in the other world would boast,
And daily haunt thee, with my restless Ghost,
But in your Death, I rest shall find, and you
A happiness unthought of shall pursue,
[shout. These shouts declare the Enemy's intent.
I must make have least fate the deed prevent,
Love guide my hand. --

[wounds Amasis. Amas. Hold, hold, look how I bleed,
Let this suffice, oh do not now proceed.

Zelm. Fond foolish Girl, why do retard thy bliss,
Had thou stood still thou had been dead e're this,
And free from danger, there

[wounds her again. Amas. -- will nothing do,
Gods must I die thus poorly, basely too,
Assist me Heaven.

[Runs and snatches up Zichmi's Sword and then comes to the Queen. Zelm. -- Is
your courage warmed?

Amas. So now, thanks fate, as well as you I Am armed,
Infernal fury come if I must die,
I Will give my self a noble destiny,
If death to nature, be a debt, we owe,
I Will meet it bravely, come, you move too slow.

Zelm. 'Twas bravely done this act I must commend
It saves your life if you can well defend.

Amas. It Is gone, yet in my Death my tongue shall move,
fight and Amasis falls. Upon no theme but my unspotted Love,
I feel my life in lukewarm streams depart,
And natures palefac't tyrant gripes my heart,
Take Cruel Queen, and by my death receive
In him the Quintessence of all that is brave,
Whilst I surrender heaven that life it gave.

[Dies. Zelm. Farewell, to pity thee is now too late,
A stubborn heart best suits a wretched State,
And I that scorned the ills of destiny,
Will dare its worst effects and fearless die.
But what is death, or whither do I go?
To heaven, or some dark Region placed below,
If any State or government serene,
Be where I am, should hell increase its spleen,
And strive to oppose yet I would be their Queen,
Stay thou bright soul of my dear sister stay,
And be my star to guide me on the way,
She Is cold as earth no greifs her Spirits seize,
Her pain is vanished and she sleeps in peace,
And I too long delay, now she is gone
But my past promise straight I will make known,
And thus revenge her Murder, by my own.

[Stabs her helf. Enter Selabdin, Moaron, Aldabar, Ptollomy, Psamnis,
Phillopater, Achmades, Saphrena. And Guards. Moar. entering. Hold, hold, Oh
baleful object dismal fate.

Snatches the dagger from her., Zelm. No Sir, it is done, your triumph comes too
late,
Too late you think my glory to defame,
And fix a blemish on Zelmura's name;
Besides, this hand that did but lately bear,
The lofty Scepter, ill would fetters wear,
These two my Sword did late from life remove,
Pointing to Amasand Zichm. One for his Lust, the other for too much Love,

Phillo. Unconstant chance that could permit this deed,
See here, great Queen, your Son and subjects freed,
Your Cruel hand has robbed you of your bliss,
For at Moarons suit you now possess,
Your fertile Land your Crown, is back restored,
By him that won it with his conquering Sword.

Zelm. To my lost fame they ill their bounty use,
To give what I for ever must refuse.

Moar. What envious demon, did your rage incite,
This to eclipse your sisters glorious light,
Oh, Cruel Queen, how could you pierce her breast,
In whose Angellick sight mankind was blessed,
Her excellence made heaven appear a shade,
And had not a frail mind her Mortal made,
She would have been a Goddess more divine,
Then ever in Starry robes does yonder shine.

Zelm. Let not your fancy faithless thoughts pursue,
Know Sir, she to your Love, was heavenly true,
It was my power made her your flame withstand,
Nor durst she disobey my fierce command,
So strong a jealousy my heart did greive,
I could not die in peace, and let her live,
But now I know no Rivals in my Love,
My daring Soul shall vaunt in the Clouds above?
Blow, blow, ye winds, and mount my spirit high,
Above the azure Mountains of the sky,
And* Since no longer I am mortal here,
Let Heaven translate me to a Goddess there,
Crowned in bright Cassiopeas Starry Chair,
Farewell the pleasing cares of Majesty,
Now lost for ever, late possessed by me,
The glittering pleasures that with state do dwell,
And crowds of crouching Vassals, all farewell;
I faint, methinks cold mists my eyes subvert,
And envious death sits crowned upon my heart,
But Tyrant know thy power, I still defy,
Thus dare thy greatest rigor, and thus die;

Selab. Farewell, thou type of never dying fame,
Whose lamp of honor shall for ever flame.

Moar. Injurious Gods, and too tyrannick fate
That give to noble lives so short a date,
That rob'st divine perfection of her store,
Which thus at wast consumed makes Nations poor
Was It not enough, Oh Envious, to subdue,
A Queen whose Second, Afric never knew,
But you must stop this Princess amber breath,
And proudly triumph in a Virgins death,
Heaven now, methinks, ungrateful does appear,
These deeds had never be done, had I sat there.

Selab. Reclaim, your passion, it is a Peasants curse,
That never quells our grief but makes it worse,
You, to my yet unquestioned power must own, to Phil. and Achm. Obedience and
pay tribute to my Crown.

Omn. Ye must obey our fate,

Selab. -- That done we will cease,
From hostile actions and conclude a Peace.

Ptollo. My Mother slain, my Country lost, and fame,
Take Gods that life you lend with so much shame.

Goes to stab himself but is hindered. Selab. Convey him hence, and him your
Monarch own,
And next successor, to the Egyptian throne,
Great Spirits in distress must Courted be,
Disdain or pity, augments misery

Omn. May heaven still your sword with conquest bless,

Exeunt Achm. with Ptollo. Selab. My age no greater glory can possess,
Then using Mercy when I may control,
Great deeds express the greatness of the soul.

Moar. From henceforth drossy passions I Will remove,
And guard my selffrom the Cursed baits of Love,
Honor shall be my Mistress now I Will try,
Remoter Regions where the dusky sky,
For want of Phoebus Luster hinders me,
Of light to grace a glorious victory,
Soft Passion feels afflictions smarting Rod,
Whilst glorious honor makes a man, a God,
Gives him a Will to dare, and power to do,
Strength to engage, and courage to pursue,
Lead to the Temple, and to Earth translate,
These mighty Trophies of must powerful fate,
That done in Glittering I Will to the field,
First wear a Cypress wreath and next a shield.

[Exeunt Omnes. FINIS.
EPILOGUE
EVen as a too fond Lover waits the day,
While his Proud Mistress frowns will waste away,
That fears, yet hopes, and all her scorn does bear
With a known patience great, as she severe,
At last to rage by her behavior moved,
Flies off, and hates what he so dearly loved,
So we, that have so often strove to raise
Your good opinions courted your with plays
New, and as we thought witty, but too late
We found your Censures, our rigid fate,
Are now resolved that this ensuing night,
We will your long continued envy slight,
If no true sense of Courtesy can make ye
Be favorable, why the Devil take ye
If you will be kind, as you must all confess,
You have kind to those deserved it less,
We Will thank you, and remit past grieviances,
If not, then I instead of praise will curse,
And wish with a full heart, but empty Purse,
That you may meet fresh rancour in your doxes,
And what I think can hardly be, more Poxes.
FINIS.

