Squire Oldsapp: OR, THE Night-Adventurers. A COMEDY: As it is Acted at His
Royal Highness THE DUKE's Theater.

Incidit in Scyllam qui vult vitare Charybdin, Juven. Written by THO. DVRFEY
Gent.

Licensed

June 28. 1678. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.



LONDON: Printed for James Magnes and Richard Bentley, in Russel Street in
Covent Garden, near the Piazza. 1679.

Drammatis Personae.
WElford, a wild, debauched, Town-Spark. Mr. Betterton. Henry, his Friend and
Companion. Mr. Smith. Lovell, Friend to Henry. Mr. Crossby. Squire Oldsapp, a
credulous, merry, old, debauched Fool, very infirm, yet keeps a Miss for the
credit on it. Mr. Nokes. Sir Fredrick Banter, a Foolish Knight, whose humor is
to banter every body. Mr. Leigh. Colonel Buff, a blunt old Soldier of the last
Age. Mr. Sandford. Pimpo, a sneaking Pimp, (Servant to Tricklove) seemingly
religious if not well rewarded, but else very vicious and mercinary. Mr.
Underhill. Madam Tricklove, Mistress to Oldsapp, deceitful, mercinary, and
cunning. Mrs. Currer. Christina, Wife to Henry. Mrs. Price. Sophia, Neice to
Christina. Mrs. Barrer. Cornet, Woman to Tricklove. Mrs. Norrice. Lucinda,
Woman to Christina. Mrs. Seymour. Constable, Watchmen, Chairmen, Masquers,
Servants, and Attendants.
PROLOGUE
By OLDSAPP. THough Modish Wit is now as public grown
As Common Women in this damned lewd Town,
Yet it is my Fate, however the World goes,
I Am sure I Am still a Fool in Verse and Prose:
Nay, Poets now ( fore George) are at that pass,
They raise their Wits by making me an Ass.
Our Scribler makes me act one of threescore,
A dull, unnatural Fop that keeps a Whore:
Poor silly Rogue -- an old Man waggish, fie,
It Is fitter for an Alderman than I:
However, to oblige and save the Play,
I Have undertook this Character to day.
I cannot choose but laugh though cause there is none, ha, ha, ha.
To see the Reverend habit I Have on:
And faith I fancy that in being thus fine,
I Am very like too sneaking Friends of mine.
One, Sirs -- you would laugh if you but heard his name,
Is one o'th Burly States at Amsterdam;
Just of my size, such hait and plodding look,
Such Doublet, such slasht Sleeves, and Knavish Cloak.
T'other's a Velvet blade of Watling-street,
Bred from his infancy to thrive and cheat;
So like me, that for him I Have often been took;
But only mines the more ingenious look.
But as vain Fop gives Gold to silken Whore,
Yet kicks the Threadbare student from his Door,
Just of that humor is this factious Fool,
And though for Sneaky he would disburse his Soul,
He Will grutch a poor clipped Shilling for his Pole.
Squire Oldsapp: OR, THE NIGHT-ADVENTURES.
ACT I. SCENE I.
A Bowling-Green. Enter Welford meeting Henry. Welford. WHat! Harry.


Henry. Dear Jack, thy humble Servant.


Welf. This was unexpected, in faith, Prithee when came thou to Town?


Henr. This Morning; and hearing at your Lodgings you were come hither, I had
hardly patience to stay and dine, for fear I should miss you, not coming time
enough.


Welf. 'Twas a happy fear, and argues friendly love. Well, and how fare all our
Friends at Bath? hah! are thy Tenants still thrifty? Does the Old Wood stand
where it did: But I think I need not question thee; for I heard of late thou
were grown a great Husband.


Henr. Why faith I am so much a Husband, as you call it, to understand that the
better the Care, the better the Purse; but my Steward can satisfy you in this
particular better than I; for I confess I am of the same temper with other
Young Gentlemen, newly come to their Estates, and do not so much consider what
I may spend, as what I can spend, still deserting the thrifty for the gentile
quality.


Welf. This was thy humor I know; but if I may credit Report; thou art now
quite altered: Besides, my words carry a double sense with 'em; and by calling
thee Husband, I not only meant as to thy Estate, but the other weighty matter,
Marriage: Hal. is it so? come, confess.


Henr. Why 'faith, I will; and therefore must ingeniously tell thee, one of
that soft delicious Sex has been too hard for me; for getting damnably drunk
one Night, I got damnably in love too; and was never sober till I was married.


Welf. Ha, ha, ha --


Henr. Nay! I expect now you will laugh at me, knowing my former humor of
mistrusting all Women's Virtue. But know Friend, this is such a Jewel of a
Woman, so witty, so modest, so charming, so observant, so --


Welf. Hold! hold! and prithee waste thy Breath in no more of these lavish
praises, till thou have strengthened my Faith, in what thou have said already.
Thou talk of Miracles, Hal. either of these qualities thou have mentioned is
more than ever any Lady yet had to boast of. But I see thou have got the
blindness of a Husband with his condition. Go home and say thy Prayers. Thou
art no Man of this World. Hal.


Henr. Yes! and of the next too Sir, let me tell you that, I have gone a good
step toward it already. Come prithee desert this roving humor of thine, take
a Friends counsel, grow solid, do -- grow solid, and marry, 'faith it is the
sober part of Man's Life -- I have considered it: you know I have rambled my
self ere now, and know what belongs to Mistresses, Garnitures and Fiddles; but
by the way, let me tell you, a Mistress breaks a Bone, but a good Wife sets it
again. There Is a Proverb for ye.


Welf. Well, so much for Marriage, Hal. that necessary Ill as many call it. But
to requite your Proverb, let me tell ye; a Mistress only cracks a Man's
Purse-strings; but a Wife his Heart Strings: Give me thy Hand, I have
considered that too.


Henr. Sir, I grant this may be true in some Cases, your jilting, wanton,
costly, squeamish mallapert London Wife, that will be seven years wooing, and
use her several Lovers according to her several Humors, I allow may deserve
this Character: but mine, although she was bred at Court, and is a Person of
Eminent Quality, yet as I have molded her, is now a pretty, humble,
good-natured, innocent Country Wife, one that will --


Welf. One that will lie with a Man at first sight, and never put him to a
seven years Court-ship.


Henr. Phoo! Prithee no more of this; thou art too severe: What a Pox do think
I have married a Messalina! a Dol Common -- This is as I feared -- but I Am
resolved he shall be ignorant of her being now in Town; I see he cannot leave
his old humor.

[Aside.
Welf. Well! to confirm the contrary, prithee let me see her; come, I know thou
have brought her to Town with thee.


Henr. To Town! That Is a good one in faith: Bring a young breeding Lady to Town,
that is the way to have her long for every thing she sees: no, no! I understand
things better than so -- Poor Soul, she is at home spinning. She --


Welf, Spinning! an excellent Employment; and as wholesome and necessary a
Debauch for a Woman, as Whoreing and drinking is for a Man. The Wheel is a kind
of an implicit Pimp; and while she is whirling it about to spin a fine Thread
for her Sheets, it gives her thoughts the liberty of imagining how she shall
wear 'em out: Then adding the blunt Stories of the Country Wenches her
Companions, and the relish of a Bawdy Song now and then; Oh! it is as necessary
an exercise as I would wish a Woman.


Henr. Hey! why thou art mad sure. Death, is there no difference in Women?


Welf. No faith! that ever I could find; blow but out the Candle --


Henr. Then let me inform you the contrary; for mine is the only happy Creature
that had power to make me forbear affronting the Sex. But hold --

Enter Pimpo. You were lately talking of pimping; I ha no skill in Phisiognomy;
but here is a Fellow making up to us; methinks has an admirable Face for such a
Business.


Welf. Hush -- He Is one of my Creatures, an Utensil I have now and then
occasion for -- Now Sirrah! what News!


Pimp. News, quoth a! sincerely I am ashamed to tell you; and my Heart bleeds
within me, to think you should have no more Consciscience in you. The my
Mistress be a weaker -- O, frail Woman! yet you should, methinks, temper your
Concupiscence -- Sincerely you should, Sir -- Fie, fie: I Am ashamed on it; and I
begin to think too, that mine is but a scandalous Employment, sincerely.


Welf. Sirrah, it is a noble one. A Pimp is both an Ancient and Honorable
Employ. What, Rascal, do you murmur at your Vocation? Come -- the business --
is the Frollick done to night?


Pimp. Lord, Sir, -- have you no Religion! no spice of it in ye: Why if not for
my sake, take care of your own Soul, Sir -- Take care of your Soul.


[Cries. Welf. Leave your howling, Dog; and tell your message quickly. Sirrah
-- you could speak softly the other night, when you took my Guinny. Rogue you
could.


Pimp. Ay! you know my blind side, sincerely: You know I am a mortal Man.


Welf. You talk of Religion, Rascal, Sirrah, don't I know you got a Wench with
Child when you lived with my Lord Acrelesse -- and afterward contrived to have
it brought upon the Parish.


Pimp. I, Sir! 'Twas my Lords Scullion got it: 'Twas none of me, sincerely: I Would
have you to know I scorn the scandal. I get her with Child! no: Thank my
Education, I am a Maid -- I --


Welf. A Maid! a precious one. Well, whether you did or no, tell me the message
quickly, or this shall search for it.


Pimp. Hold, hold, Sir, what you will not murder me, sincerely! will ye?


Welf. I know not! do not trust me. Come, Dog, there is half a Crown for ye; say
quickly now. --


Pimp. Well! adsniggs Mr. Welford, you are such a confounded Whipster, there is
no denying you any thing when you have a mind to know it. Lend me your Ear --


[Whispers. Welf. In the Grove behind my Lord Richlands --


Pimp. Ay, Sir; but you must make haste, for it is near the time.


Welf. You are sure the Old Fellow will not fail --


Pimp. Very sure, Sir; his discourse for above this week has been nothing but
hard Words, Charms and Conjurations, and has such a mind to be young again,
that he misses not a tittle, sincerely. -- You are wag to use him so, you are,
you are: but gad mend ye, gad mend ye.


Welf. Go, Sirrah; prepare every thing, and tell her I Will be there immediately.
Go, Rascal -- Ha, ha, ha.


[ Exit Pimpo. Henr. What, an Intrigue, Jack! I told you I knew that Fellows
Business by his Face.


Welf. Prithee, do not abuse the Poor Fellow; for he is as necessary in this
affair to me, as he that gave thy Wife at Church was to thee. But see, yonder is
Will. Lovel, and the rest of the Bowlers; there is some humors amongst them,
that will divert thee, Hall -- Prithee excuse me now, because I have a little
business -- But thou know my Old Lodging: to morrow I Am thine all day.

[Ex. Welf.
Henr. No; it is resolved he must not see, nor know my Wife, while she is in
Town.


Enter William Lovel, Sir Fredrick, Colonel Buff. Lovel. Hal; I am all wonder
to find thee here. I heard thou were married, and had resolved to desert all
thy old Friends in Town.


Henr. No such matter, Sir, a Wife will hardly get such power over me -- I am
my Friends all day, though I am hers at night, Will.


Sir Fred. Colonel, you were talking of Toledo's, here is one for you, look
upon it; look upon it again, Colonel; you have looked, you have surveyed it well?


Col. Buff. I have, Sir Fredrick.


Sir Fred. Well, now take it and run me through with it; pshaw, what a Man of
Blood, and sflinch -- Do it, I say. Run me through, I Have a trick in it --


Buff. By the Life of St. Gregory, Sir Fredrick; what mean ye, are you compos
Mentis?


Sir Fred. Look now: He has spoiled my trick, quite ruined my device, by King
Ieffery. Why Colonel, if you had run me through, gad I would have shown you the
most cunning trick, the most intricate sophistick matter, that ever Eyes
beheld: I would have caused Sack, Rhenish, and Claret to have gusht from the
Wound; I would have made you drunk by transpiration, with a box on the Ear made
you sober again, healed up the Orrifice in a trice, and then gone to Supper
with the Pox -- Not run a Man through, when he desires you?


Henr. Hey day! Here Is a pleasant humor in faith; prithee what is he?


Lovel. Why the only Buffoon of Town and Country, Sir Fredrick Banter; one that
has spent the best part of his youth in observing and practicing the ridiculous
humors of the age, and the more mimicry he has in his Actions, the more he
thinks himself accomplished: a great bowler: but amongst all his humors this
of bantring people he most delights in.


Henr. Bantering, prithee what is that?


Lov. I Will tell you, Bantring in his sense is divided two ways; one is a manner
of gabling, by doubling the Tongue; which makes you think they tell a story,
when they say nothing: And the other, is telling ye a prolix, ridiculous,
incredible story, with the face of truth, answering your question with a
tedious lie; and the jest is in amuzing you half an hour, in hearing an
impertinent, prodigious narration of wonderful matters, full of nonsense, and
far from the purpose -- See, he is at it, prithee observe him --


Sir Fred. Colonel, I know you are a Man in favor, and if you would but --
bublinshrundish -- the same again, the oblishbrutiglish would advantage the --
whishmstolshed in the greatest manner imaginable.


Buff. What would you have me do, Sir Fredrick?


Sir Fred. Why look you, I say you are a Man much beloved at Court: Now, what
were it for you to wshilbeminishiemdlidge the King, about infedgingldgninry
upon apprehension to usludingell grindidliddintolwish -- in kindness to your
friend.


Buff. I beg a Pention of the King, do you say?


Sir Fred. No, no: I don't talk of Pention, I say; pray observe me, I say were
it my case as it is yours; I would subberlinledge ningldruidge to any Friend,
and then, mergnmurgnledg and the worth prilugillux coming in! Gad I would.


Buff. What, Sir?


Sir Fred. What, Sir! why, what a Devil don't you understand me?


Buff. By the Blade, not a word, not I.


Sir Fred. Ha, ha, ha, do not! give me thy hand then, I have a little
imperfection! ha, ha. Will. did hear me?


Lov. Ay, ay, Sir. Now, is it not as I told thee?


Henry. Yes, and I find he is much taken with it! but, by Sir Fredricks leave
though, I should sooner break his head than stay so long to let him break his
jest, were I the Person. But prithee are there any. such people?


Lov. O many Sir, I assure you -- It Is a very Modish humor now adays -- That
other there is a Colonel of the last age, an honest merry blunt Fellow, a
little vain, if you get into his Element of fighting, but else a very good
companion -- But the best of our company is wanting, one 'Squire Oldsap, a
credulous merry old debaucht fool, one that though he be too crazy himself for
Women, yet he keeps a Wench for the credit on it. The pleasant'st threescore and
three thou ever saw -- Pla -- Faith this was good luck, yonder he comes,
prithee observe him, Hal.


Enter Oldsap with a Fools Cap on's head, and a Bundle under his arm. Oldsap.
Lovel, merry be thy heart Lad, my Son, Son of the Ooldsaps, I Will call thee so,
shall I? For a Man that keeps his word with me shall not only be my Son, but
my Sons Son, nay my Sons Sons Grandson! if affinity will do it -- hah, Sir
Fredrick, by the Marry Maskins I Will kiss thee too. Prince. -- Prince of the
Jokers, prithee let me kiss thy hoof, do -- let me, my Merry wagg --


Sir Fred. By King Iesfery, by no means, Squire. Well, but a pox on thee, how
do thou do, Old Jewstrump?


[Gives him a blow on the Head. Oldsapp. Very well, Sir Fredrick! Very well!
better and better! by the Marry Maskins, -- whoop, -- why who is here -- what my
noble old Friend Col. Buff too, let me kiss thee, old stump of honor: Before
George I could jump for joy to see thee: hah! old Lad?


Henr. Whirr! why this is Whirligigg.


Lov. The mock of Regeneration? but hush, we shall have more yet.


Col. Buff. Gramercy Squire in faith! I see thou art a merry shaver still, by the
Blade, thou hold'st out bravely. But prithee, my merry spawn of the Oldsapp's
what do thou mean by this, this Cap here? Thou art not going a
Morrice-dancing, art thou?


Oldsapp. A Morice-Dancing! why merry be thy heart Colonel, what Jokes upon me,
-- hah, -- before George it is well I am in have I should pound you else, by the
marry maskins I should -- This Cap, Sir, let me tell you, was --


Sir Fred. I Will tell you what 'twas Colonel. I was acquainted with it before
him. This Cap, Colonel, was the Cap of Fortunatus, the wishing-Cap. You have
heard of the wishing-Cap, have not you?


Col. Buff. Sir, I have heard of some such thing.


Sir Fred. Yes, yes, it is very well known abroad. It Is in the Chronicle. This
Cap Colonel; (Mercy upon us who would imagine it?) This Cap has been the death
of many a Bishop.


Col. Buff. A Bishop! Sir Fredrick! Marry Heaven forbid, how?


Sir. Fred. Why they died Sir, no one knows how -- but they died -- The very
lining on it had like to broke the Heart of two or three Queens.


Buff. It Is impossible! why, good Sir Fredrick? what virtue can there be in the
Lining of this Cap? --


Sir Fred. O wonderful, wonderful: 'Twill draw Teeth, that is one thing.


Buff. Teeth!


Sir Fred. Ay, or cure the Gout; the New Spring is nothing to it.


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha.


Buff. Pish, ye jest, ye jest, I Will never believe it.


Oldsapp. Well, said Sir Fredrick, you are full of your merry humors I see;
but take it from me, this is no jesting matter: for let me tell you, how
slightly soever you think of it, this same Cap here is worth Two Millions in
Money.


Henr. What the Devil does he banter how?


Lov. Two Millions! how, prithee Squire, how?


Oldsapp. How! why there is Magic in it. It Is full of Magic; 'twas the Cap of
Michael de Scoto: The Florentine Necromancer, and with the rest of his Robes,
which I have here in this Bundle, together with some Ceremonies which shall be
nameless, has power to convert Age into Youth -- You shall see me to morrow a
Spark of one and twenty.


Buff. Ay, you may fancy what you will, Mr. Oldsapp, but by the Blade I can
find no reason in what you say.


Oldsapp. Reason! before George, the Colonel is a little soft too. Why, it is
Magic: it is Magic, Man: it is above Reason: Lord, how dull he is.


Henr. Confound 'um, these are the most insufferable Coxcombs: I shall never
have patience --


Oldsapp. I have told my Sneaky on it already, and poor Rogue she is so overjoyed
-- she has such hopes of me, poor Queen. Well I Will about it instantly. And pray
believe that nothing but so pressing an affair could take me from my merry
Bowlers. But to morrow, like Jupiter, and Mars, and Mercury: Venus, Diana, and
the rest of the Gods, I will appear and frollick and frollick my merry wags; --
to try, to try, -- ah Rogues! well adieu.

[ Ex. Oldsap.
Sir Fred. Ah, go thy ways old Baboon. Well, by King Ieffry, it is a strange
thing men should be such Fools.


Buff. Come Sir Fredrick, let us go in and drink a Bottle before we bowl, in faith
my Westwhaphlia, at Dinner, has made me as dry as dust.


Sir Fred. With all my heart, Col. Will. Lovel, will thou go?


Lov. I Will follow you, Sir. Come Hal, will thou make one? I Am sure thou can
not meet with better diversion.


Henr. No: a pox on it, I am weary of 'em already: for I am as much tired with
the extravagance of a Fool, as with riding of a jaded Hackney. Besides I am
weary, and will go presently to Bed; but to morrow I Will see thee again.


Lov. Farewell, Hal.


[Exeunt. SCENE II.
Wood or Grove. Enter Welford, Madam Tricklove, and Pimpo. Trick. WELL, confess
now; art not you a wicked, lewd, debauched wretch, to hire a Fellow to put such
a trick upon the poor Old Man, and now to stay here thus with me, for any thing
I know upon some ill design.


Welf. And are not you a cunning, vile, deceitful Damsel, not to tell the Old
Dotard of the Cheat, when you knew of it, and could have betrayed me: but now
to dare to send for me; in faith I fear, intending some outrage upon my Person:
Hah, are not you a Wicked Wretch?


Pimp. Sincerely: The truth is you are both wicked Wretches: and I Am afraid the
Devil will have ye, that is in short. First, for cozening my old Master.
Secondly, for polluting your self. And thirdly, and principally, for abusing a
Man of such eminent parts as I am. But such whipsters as you, are too hot to
have any consideration, sincerely. --


Welf. Why, Dog! are you murmuring again? I have not had ashillings worth yet
of your moldy conscience for my half-Crown, and are you at your reproofs
already? -- but I Will --


[Draws. Trick. A treacherous grumbling Rogue! Cut's throat, cut's throat.


Pimp. Ay, ay! his throat. Carve him, Carbonado him. His throat, quoth a --
hold, hold, Sir -- what mean ye?


Welf. Sirrah! Swear! swear desperately too, to be true to the intrigue, and do
what you are commanded, or I will rip ye up from the Navel to the Nose.


Pimp. Hold, hold: I will, I will --


Welf. Swear then, not one of your sneaking equivocating Phanatick Oaths, such
as oddsniggs! by the Mass! odsniggers, and the like. But a good Heroic,
Romantic Oath. Sirrah, let me see, swear by the Sun, and Moon, and seven Stars.


Pimp. O Profane, Monstrous, Irreligious; is not the seven Stars enough, but
you must bring the Sun and Moon upon the Stage too? sincerely it smites my
Conscience: and I had rather swear Muggleton's Oath -- by Sodom and Gomorrah,
than swear by the Sun and Moon -- I had sincerely --


Welf. Do It, Sirrah; or expect what follows. Come say, by the Sun, and Moon,
and seven Stars.


Pimp. By the Sun, and Moon, and seven Stars --


Welf. I Will do it --


Pimp. Well, I Will do it; but odsniggars, Mr. Welford, if ever I take you at an
advantage --


Welf. How, Rascal, odsniggers after such an Oath? What an offense is this?


Pimp. Ay, a horrid offense indeed -- why, Sir, -- will you give a Man no
liberty of Conscience! sincerely, I did it to give a relish to my Mouth, after
the other lewd Execration.


[Noise within. Welf. A Pox OF your Chilblain Conscience. But hark, I think I
hear one coming.


Pimp. It Is my old Master.


Welf. So, I see he keeps touch; you have placed the Fellows ready, Madam.


Trick. All ready; I instructed them this Morning --


Welf. Come, let us be gone then: Sirrah, you know your Business.


Pimp. Ay, I do know my Business, and will follow it: I Will go home and read a
Chapter -- Sincerely you shall find Pimpo another manner of Man than you take
him for.


Welf. Why, Dog, Sun of a Whore, you will not forswear your self, will ye?


Pimp. Not I, Sir; I only spoke of the Sun and Moon in Cheapside; I did not
swear -- and sincerely, Mr. Welford, I do not understand your hide and seek,
not I: nor shall you impose upon my Judgment, Sir.


Welf. Your Judgment, Baboon! This damned Rogue knows he has me on the hip:
Well, Sirrah, there is another half Crown for you, see if you can afford me a
better Pennyworth now -- Come, let us go -- We shall be seen anon, and spoil all
--


[Exeunt. Pimp. So; this is something yet; it is a strange thing! now my
Conscience that was within this Minute as narrow as the Muzzle of a Trumpet, is
as wide as from hence to Aldgate: Certainly this mettle has Witchcraft in it --
for a Key of Gold shall open an Iron-Lock, though the Devil thrust his horn into
the Keyhole. Well -- I must do it -- here he comes, now for the conjuration --


Enter Oldsap. Oldsapp. O, Pimpo!


Pimp. O, Sir, I am glad you are come, sincerely; the hour is almost past.


Olds. Oh! I would not have it past for the World.


Pimp. Nor I neither, Sir; come unstrip, unstrip, have you got all your things
ready? --


Olds. Ay, ay, -- here in this Bundle: Oh, if the Charm be but strong enough,
Pimpo, I shall be made for ever.


Pimp. Ay, Sir, my Mistress will be overjoyed to find such alteration.


Olds. Ha, ha, ha; -- ay, so she will poor Rogue, I warrant she will be
transported.


Pimp. Ay, Sir.


Olds. Look, I have got all my things ready; first, here is my Circle, in this I
am to conjure up Concupisence in the likeness of a Water-Rat.


Pimp. Very well, Sir.


Olds. Then here is my dead Mouse, and my couple of Snails, to invoke the Queen
of Fairies. And this is my Sirrup of Cacademons, to anoint my Face with.


Pimp. So.


Olds. Then here is my Charm, and the Magician told me 'twould be more powerful,
and much the better, if I sung it to a Godly Tune; ha, what think'ft thou?


Pimp. Oh, Sir, have a care of that: sincerely 'twill spoil all; besides, Sir,
under favor, you have but a scurvy voice, and from you any thing will be like
a Godly Tune, 'twill be all one.


Olds. I think so too; for, the truth is, as thou say, Pimpo, my Voice is not
extraordinary. But come then, bind my Head and Hands, and anoint my Face, that
we may begin. --


Pimp. With all my heart, Sir -- so now kneel down, Sir, and wink -- nh nh --


[Kneels down, Pimpo blacks his Face. Olds. Keep it from my Mouth as much as
thou can, for though the Virtue on it be extraordinary, it has but an ill taste.


Pimp. There -- let me look on ye now: ha! odsniggs, what do I see? what
Miracles are these?


Olds Hah, what say thou, Miracles?


Pimp. Why Sir -- you are grown monstrous fair.


Olds. Ha, ha, ha, am I?


Pimp. Sincerely, I am amazed at it; how! how do you feel your self, Sir?


Olds. Why, before George, very brisk; and methinks four or five of the hairs
of my Beard are fallen away of the sudden.


Pimp. Well, Sir; There Is your Wand, and I Will go aside and pray for you.


Olds. Oh prithee do not talk of Prayer, Man; the Devil will be angry then, and
make me older than I am.


Pimp. Well, Sir, I Will be careful. Odsnigs I shall laugh out.

Oldsapp waves his Wand, and then sings. Draw near ye Spirits, that dispense
Your Powers over Concupiscence;
Bring all your Spells, and come along,
To make an amorous Old Man young!
Whose frozen Ioints, long since have cooled his passion,
But now he sighs, and blows, and puffs, for generation;
Come, come away; your assistance confer,
And then I shall be tho happ^est Old Cur,
The happiest Old Cur in the Nation.

Olds. Hark, now the great Devil is whistling the young Cubbs together -- Ohhow
I tremble!

Waves his Wand, and Pimpo, and they within, make a horrid whirstling. Loud
laughing within, and this Song. How frail is old age to believe
Their, Sinnews can even be strong.
or think that a heap
of Diseases can reap
The Pleasures of him that is young.

Chor. He plunges in care let him do what he can,
So wretched a thing is a doting Old Man.
2.
His Life has been spent in Debauch,
Till he comes to be sixty or more,
And so wenches on
Till his vigor is gone,
And then the Old Letcher gives over.

Chor. A passion that is sickly can never be strong;
And an old doting Fool is far worse than a young.

Omn. Ha, ha, ha.


[Danee. Olds. What Is this I hear? do they mock me?


Omn. Ha, ha, ha.


Olds. Oh, what shall I do? I have mist something now, and the Devils laugh at
me for it.


Pimp. Oh, oh, murder, murder.


[ Pimpo cries out as if he were hurt. Olds. That was Pimpo's Voice -- Oh I am
in an Ague.


Pimp. Whiz, buz, bough.


[Takes a Rope, and ties Oldsapp to a Tree. Olds. Oh, good Devil, avoid Satan;
sweet Devil, do not hurt; avoid Satan, avoid; Oh, oh, --


[Scene shuts upon him. Pimp. Oh, I Am murdered, I Am murdered, they have me by
the Nose: oh, oh -- So, there is Love tied to a Tree.

And now to my young Whipster, that lies yonder in the Bed of Honor; there is
half a Guinney more at least, Well, it is a pretty employment this, in faith -- if
a Man carries policy with it, and sincerely is more in use, than People
imagine. But they want my skill to wheedle and sooth iniquity -- ah, Signior
Pimpo is a brave Fellow at it.

For to connive at Crimes and vile Transgression,
Is the best rule for one of my Profession.
[ Ex. Pimpo.
The Second ACT.
Grove continues. Enter Henry, Christina, Sophia, and Boy. Henr. IF you would
give me no cause to doubt your love or obedience, be careful of this
particular, and let no one know of our Marriage, or that you are in Town, till
I give you further notice. I have some reasons, which I may not discover, which
force me to be thus strict with you: But, my Dear, 'tie for thy good, assure
thy self.


Christ. I confess, I am wholly ignorant of your design, and therefore can say
little to the Business: But what will my Friends think, when they know I am in
Town, and have not so much kindness as to come and see 'em; did not you promise
me I should have the privilege to see all my Relations -- and do what I would?
--


Henr. I acknowledge I did; but there has something fell out since, which has
made me alter my resolution: Prithee have but a little patience, and thou shall
see 'em all.


Soph. But hark ye, Sir, to come nearer to the matter, are not you infected
with the Epidemick Disease of Mankind, Jealousy?


Henr. Jealousy! prithee Cozen; what, I jealous?


Soph. This prohibition seems to imply as much; but, if you are, it is no Crime
as the World goes now: For, a Man of this Age can no more forbear being
jealous, (if his Wife be handsome) than one of the last could forbear living
from her, if she were old or ugly --


Henr. Faith a good observation; why, now I see thou have loved Songs and
Play-Books thus long for something: But, my pretty pert Kinswoman, give me
leave to tell you, I am no such jealous Coxcomb; I have too good a knowledge of
my person and sufficiency to be jealous, I thank ye --


Soph. I must confess that is an excellent rule for prevention; but, here is
another weighty question to be resolved: for, suppose now that she should not
be so well satisfied in your person and sufficiency; what then, Sir? what then?


Henr. Faith that is enough to make a Man jealous indeed: But, what say thou
to that, my dear?


Christ. I never doubted any thing; nor can any Disease (accident or
misfortune) whatsoever, abate any of my affection: I love ye so well, that it is
impossible I should ever think ill of ye, were ye never so wicked.


Henr. Ah -- poor Soul -- ay -- here is a Wise now -- well -- when thou art
dead, I Will have thee canonized for a Saint.


Soph. Hah -- when she is dead -- perform the part of a loving Husband; and to
convince her that you are not jealous -- constrain not your Wife to keep within
doors -- for, a Woman that is forced to keep her Beauties unseen, will spend ye
200 l. a year in getting Pictures drawn, in little, to send abroad to her
Friends.


Henr. Very well -- you have a great deal of Judgment, I see.


Soph. Ay, a little -- I have not read Songs, Romances, and Play-Books so long
for nothing, you know. Then, first, buy her a Glass-Coach that she may be seen
in; do; a Glass-Coach -- do, I say.


Henr. Bless me; this prating Jilt, will persuade me out of my Reason. Prithee,
impertinence, leave me: a Glass-Coach, in the Devils name! Come, come, my dear,
let us go.


Boy. Sir, here is Mr. Lovel coming down the walk, and another with him.


Henr. Death, he will see us presently; come, come away.


Soph. Don't go, Cozen; what, does he think to make Nuns of us? I say we will
see the Man.


Henr. But I say you shall not; do not provoke me -- but go --


Christ. Come -- prithee do not vex him --


Soph. Vex him! well I Will go; but if I be not revenged --


[Exeunt. Henr. Sirrah, go you home with 'em, and excuse my absence at Dinner;
and take a particular notice, who has access to 'em; and about nine a Clock at
Night, bid the Fellows bring the Sedan up to the Cock in Bow-street.


Boy, Yes, Sir --

[ Ex. Boy.
Henr. I think she is virtuous, and I have reason to think so. However, I am
resolved to keep her concealed, till my business is done, and then, watch her,
as I see occasion; but here comes Lovel, and the Devil I think with him; no
matter, I am for no drinking match these two hours. I have business.

[ Ex. Henr.
Enter Lovel, and Oldsapp as newly unti'd from the Tree. Lov. Ha, ha, ha; By
Heaven, Squire, this is the strangest adventure; all this Night tied to a Tree,
say you?


Olds. Ay, before George, have I; and been almost drowned with the Rain;
besides the fright the dancing Devils put me to, when they tied me up.


Lov. Faith, by your Face, a Man would guess you had been in the Devils
Company, that is the truth on it.


Olds. My Face! well, that makes me some amends however. -- And prithee how
is it, am I taking, hah -- how do like my countenance?


Lov. Oh, pray guess, Sir, guess; for my part, I have not wit enough to speak
my admiration.


Oldsap. Why, this is a Devil!


[Gives him a Pocket-Glass. Lov. A Copy of him, Sir.


Olds. And I am the same Old Fellow, I used to be, am I?


Lov. The very same, only a little altered in complexion.


Olds. Complexion in the Devils name --


[Looks in the Glass. Lov. Or else I see no difference.


Olds. Why then the Conjurer's a Dog -- and I Am resolved I Will go instantly and
take the Law of him.


Lov. Oh, have a care of that, Sir, the Law's chargeable.


Olds. I care not: I Will do it: for I Am as implacable as an angry Fish-Wife that
has caught the Fellow that picked her Pocket. For, first I Will have his Ears
nayl'd to the Pillory, for perjury: Then I Will bring him within the Statute of
Witchcraft; and have him hanged without benefit of Clergy.


Lov. 'Faith -- I must needs say 'twas a great affront, and a grand imposition
upon a Man of your quality; besides, I think, Sir, you are never the younger
neither.


Olds. Why no; would I were hanged if I find any alteration at all.


Lov. Why, what ill luck is that? but certainly, Sir, there must be more in
this business than you imagine: Nor does the affront only lie upon the Fellow.
Pray, Sir, who brought you to this Conjurer?


Olds. Jack Welford; thou know him, one of our Brother Bowlers.


Lov. There, there lies the plot -- it is plain, Sir; why, to my knowledge he
has been in love with your Mistress this half year and more, and who knows but
this may be a trick upon you, by his means.


Olds. What he in love with my Sneaky!


Lov. Ay, Sir, that I can assure you; why did you never take notice on it -- Did
you never see 'em together --


Olds. Yes, often, but I never doubted any thing: for before George, I always
took him for a very honest Fellow.


Lov. Why, Sir, who doubts it -- he is so -- a very honest Fellow; and though he
lies with your Wife, your Sister, your Aunt, your Kinswoman, your Mistress --
your --


Olds. The Devil and all -- my Mistress, before George: that word enraged me
beyond all patience: and he shall know, that invading a Man's Propriety in his
Mistress is Death by Wenching Law -- and he deserves the stab -- I Will murder
him instantly.


Lov. Sir, know me so much your Friend that if my Sword and Arm can do you any
service to revenge your wrongs you shall command me.


Olds. Sir, I thank ye; but I Have another way to work with him, which shall be
done suddenly -- and so farewell. But hark ye, if you will do me the favor to let
me see you at my House this Evening -- I have a secret to deliver to you, in
which you may sensibly oblige me: Till then I Will take my leave.

[ Ex. Oldsapp.
Lov. Sir, I will not fail ye. Happy minute!

Fortune in this is more my Friend than ever; for I have long loved this
Woman, but he keeps her so close, that I could never get access to her, and
that he should introduce me: it is a pleasant one in faith, my disclosing Welfords
Intrigue furthers my own design; for when he is removed, I have more freedom:
It Is not so like a Friend, but it is like a Man of pleasure, and that is the rule
I must walk by --

[ Ex. Lovel.
SCENE II.
Tricklove's Chamber. Enter Welford, Madam Tricklove, and Pimpo. Pimp. WHY,
Sir, I tell you once more: I found him gone, untied and gone --


Welf. How was it possible, Rascal, he could get loose if you had played the
faithful Servant, and tied him last enough?


Pimp. I know not what you mean by that; but if a new Rope, strong enough to
hang us all, could tie him fast enough, I am sure I did it -- ah would it were
to do again, I would think better on it sincerely --


M. Trickl. And so would I; you should not get such power over me if it were to
do again.


Welf. What has this notorious, dissembling Rascal, taught you a fit of the
Conscience too? Faith, I am more in love with the humor than ever; it shows
thee a discreet ingenious Woman; and such a one, if she has a scruple arises in
her Conscience, which is very seldom, it shall be sure to be after the business
is done, for then she is at leisure.


M. Trick. Well, I swear Mr. Welford, this insulting temper of yours will
lessen my love to you; what Woman could bear this, especially from a Man that
has had so many evident proofs of my kindness, as you have?


Welf. Nay, rather than put you to the trouble of squeezing out a tear, I will
confess my self ungrateful: but here is a Rascal, that though he looks like a
Fifth-Monarchy-Man, and talks like a Quaker, has a Conscience tougher than a
Buck-Skin; is a greater Atheist than a Bully that owns it his profession; and
for mischief --


Pimp. What mischief, Sir, what mischief, sincerely I am ashamed to hear you
talk thus; and wonder how you can have the face to abuse an honest, worthy
person thus: For, as great a Rascal, as you make of him; there are some
Gentlemen, that shall be nameless, are glad to keep him company, and thank him
too, when they have occasion to make use of his parts.


Welf. Ay, Sirrah; a Rascal, like a Bullet, is then only necessary when we
intend to do mischief: but what excuse can thou have for thy last pranck:
did not thou tie thee poor old Gentleman to a Tree? was not that a great
Crime?


Pimp. And did not you in the mean time lie with his Mistress? was not that a
greater Crime?


M. Trick. How, Sirrah, with me, why thou impudent, ugly, impertinent,
sneaking, dissembling, cheating, lying, Son of a Whore -- ud's life, lend me
your Sword, that I may cut his Nose off --


Pimp. Nay, nay, if she be provoked, it is time to run; sincerely I had rather
lie at the mercy of a Thunderbolt -- and less harm 'twou'd do me.

[ Ex. Pimp. running.
Welf. Ha, ha, ha -- it is such an old Rascal: but I think it is best for me to
consider of my safety; for if the old Fellow is got loose, there is no staying
for me here; thou know it is now almost Night -- and he cannot be long absent
-- besides I want Linen.


Enter Cornet. Cornet. Madam, Sir Fredrick Banter, and Colonel Buff, came into
the House unknown to me, and are just coming up.


M. Trick. Pox take Sir Fredrick, run and tell him I am not within.


Corn. Madam, I did tell him so -- but he told me I ly'd; he heard your Voice.


M. Trick. A Devil of your diligence.


Welf. Sir Fredrick! Oh for Heavens sake, Madam, let me go; I would not have
him see me here for the World --

[ Ex. Welford.
M. Trick. Death and Confusion! what makes him here to disturb me?


Enter Sir Fredrick, Col. Buff, and Pimpo. Sir Fred. Madam, sweet Madam, your
humble and devoted Servant. Colonel -- come, now your Honor.


Col. Buff. Your Servant, Lady --


[Makes a clownish bow. Sir Fred. Well said, the Colonel is a Soldier, Madam,
you must pardon his behavior.


M. Trick. Any thing, Sir, rather than give you the trouble of repeating it.
You, Rogue, are the cause of this --


[Aside to Pimpo. Pimp. Ah! I see by her looks she is vexed at their being here;
but it is all one, she shall find I can resent an affront: She shall, sincerely.


M. Trick. Sirrah, do you think that I Will ever put up this injury?


Pimp. And do you think that I Will exercise my learned faculty for nothing?


M. Trick. Nothing, Rascal, do all mine and Mr. Welford's Gifts amount to
nothing? bedsies the Sallary I give; which, since you can forget, Sirrah --
I Will give you some cause for it, and from this moment will pay it no longer.


Pimp. Well, if you will pay no longer, sincerely -- I Will pimp no longer; and
so your Friend and Servant: But, hold, now I think on it, I Will stay till Mr.
Welford comes, because he owes me an Angel.


M. Trick. An Angel! for what?


Pimp Why for some service done Yesterday; Lord, you are mighty forgetful:
Come, come, Madam -- places are not so scarce, that a Min of my industry should
want; here is a Person of Quality not far off, that to my knowledge will be glad
of me, and give my Function due recompense; there is Madam.


Sir Fred. Madam -- my carnest desire to see you, with a little other Business,
which the Colonel in due time shall deliver to you, made me guilty of this
rudeness.


M. Trick. I am in such a confusion, and so tortured in my thoughts for Welford
-- I hear not one word they say -- what were you saying, Sir Fredrick?


Sir. Fred. Why, did you not hear me, Madam, did not you hear me? Faith I Will
banter her -- why I was saying, Madam, that if Mr. Welford had made his address
to the Mogul, before the Cattamountains of Padua had taken their degree, the
Alarm had been given to the Swedes, from the Swedes to the Switzers, and then
the Pomegranates had straight been taken out of the mouth of the Turks, and
given to the Germans, a plain case; and then Champaign had been twelve-pence a
Bottle by this time.


M. Trick. No Minute; but just at such a time: Well, Sir, and what then?


Sir Fred. What then? hey day -- if she should banter me all this while, 'twere
a good jest --


M. Trick. Pray, Sir Fredrick, that again; I confess my thoughts were a little
busy.


Sir Fred. You are melancholy, Madam; I see you are out of humor, I can guess
the cause too; but fear nothing, Madam, all shall be well again: Pray be merry
-- Come the Colonel shall give you a Song, do old Pot-gun; sing the Battle of
Mardike.


C. Buff. Oh no more of that, good Sir Fredrick; for my part I am no Songster
-- that is a good one indeed -- why, when did you know a Soldier sing well,
unless it were to a Trumpet, or a Drum?


M. Trick. Was ever Creature so tortured? Pray then, Sir, since you cannot
sing, and that I know the business of you Men of War with Visitants, is only to
divert 'em with a Story; let me desire the favor to hear from your own mouth,
your own actions in the War, I know it is the best thing you can talk of, and
the strangeness of it I doubt not will divert me too --


Sir Fred. Now, Colonel, charge her, she is in thy Province, charge her I say,
old Pollux; hark ye; show her the Shot in thy Groin.


C. Buff. Pish, Madam; leaving the story of my life for some fitter
opportunity, give me leave first to inform you of something that concerns you.


M. Trick. Concern me! sure this old Mortar-piece knows nothing of my Intrigue,
does he? Concern me!


C. Buff. Nearly, Madam; Mr. Oldsap is this night engaged in a Rencounter; Sir
Fredrick and I heard of it at the Tavern just now from Will. Lovel -- who I
believe is concerned?


M. Trick, A Rencounter! if my Welford should be there now; oh how my heart
aches --


C. Buff. But the main person aimed at, is Mr. Welford --


M. Trick. Oh, Gods! what do I hear?


C. Buff. For my part, they are both my Friends; and therefore I would have a
prevention -- Pray, Madam, view this Sword --


M. Trick. Hell and Death, I am distracted; who is within there? who is there?
are you all deaf?


C. Buff. Madam -- by your leave a little, pray handle this Sword --


M. Trick. Burn the Sword, would it were rusty to the Hilt: Oh this Witch too;
whither is she gone?

[Ex. M. Trick.
C. Buff. What Is that, rusty -- ha, ha, ha -- but I must bear with her, she is a
little simple: rusty quoth a -- 'Sbud, the Nation would be in a fine condition
if this Sword were suffered to be rusty.


[ Sir Fred. is bantring Pimp. all this while. Pimp. From the Moon say you, Sir?


Sir Fred. From the World in the Moon.


Pimp. A Whale as big as all Garnsey.


Sir Fred. Bigger, bigger.


C. Buff. Ha, ha, ha -- he is bantring the poor Fellow.


Pimp. Mercy upon us; what prodigies are these? and yet I warrant, maugre all
this, our wilful Nation will keep on in their sinful courses still.


Sir Fred. Ay, the more's the pity; but it is well he is taken -- for he has done
a world of mischief.


Pimp. Has he so?


Sir Fred. Oh, ay, he had like to have swallowed the Isle of Wight.


Pimp. The Isle of Wight, sure never was the like known -- I never heard a word
on it till now -- it is not in Muddiman's Letter.


Sir Fred. Oh no, he is lazy, the Gazet out-does him; but you shall have some
Figure-flinger or other cast the Nativity on it; when new Almanacks come in
season.


Pimp. Very strange! but pray, an't like your worship, How comes this Whale
hither?


Sir Fred. Why, in a Hand-Bakset.


Pimp. Sir --


Sir Fred. A Hand-Basket! look, look, thou starest now! Spinola's Hand-Basket
-- Fool Made purposely in the Moon for this occasion. And some Astrologers
hold, that this is Spinola's Whale too -- and designed by the Mogul of the
Moon, a present to the French King, that his Army might have Oil to their
Sallets --


C. Buff. Ha, ha, ha, -- by the Blade -- a pleasant humor.


Pimp. Well, this must portend something; for I never heard of a Whale in my
Life, but that some body or other died presently after.


Sir Fred. Come hither, and give me thy hand; Colonel, your company too -- hum
do thou see this here --


[A snuff Box. Pimp. Yes, Sir.


Sir Fred. Within this little Vessel is contained Steruntatorium Mivaculosum,
or, The Powder of Sciences -- have a mind to be learned, will thou speak Greek?


Pimp. Not I, Sir, it is not for my profit to be a Scholar.


Sir Fred. No! Well then, do thou love singing?


Pimp. Oh extremely, Sir.


Sir Fred. Do thou? here, take then, take, thou shall do it to a Miracle:
Tarlton shall be nothing to thee. Come, snuff up -- there -- come now, begin,
try, try -- oh -- weak, weak; the other touch --

[Gives 'em Snuff. There now, sing, ha, ha, ha, go thy ways I Will warrant thee
for a Songster.


[Sneezes. Pimp. Sincerely, methinks -- it is but a scurvy -- tune -- though --
of my Nose -- my Nose --


[Sneezes. Enter Cornet. Corn. Oh, for Heaven's sake go and part 'em; yonder is
my Master and Mr. Welford fighting in the Street, and my Mistress is run out
like one distracted,


[Noise within. C. Buff. It Is so; come Sir Fredrick, I am resolved there shall
be no foul play --


[Exeunt. SCENE III.
The Street. Enter Welford, pursued by Oldsapp, and more. Welf. NO Sense of
Honor, Dogs?


Olds. Down with the Traitor, down with him; kill him, kill him.


[Fight off. [ Henry is carried in a Sedan cross the Stage. Henr. Hold, set me
down -- hah, fighting at this time of Night; it may be one of my Friends is
beset -- stand ye here till I come, I am resolved to go and see --

[ Ex. Henr.
Enter Will. Lovel, with the Constable and Watch. Lov. Yonder, they are; go
quickly, and do your office --

[Ex. Constable. Though Welford is my Rival, he is a Gentleman, and it is baseness
to suffer him to be beset: But I must keep this from the Old Fellow's knowledge
-- lest it spoil my design --

[Exit.
[Noise of fighting within. Enter Welford. Welf. 'Twas well the Watch came and
dispersed 'em, I had certainly been mauld else: This Old Fellow has discovered
my Intrigue with his Mistress; and, if I should consider seriouly of the
matter, this affair of his is neither contrary to Reason nor Justice. Would I
were at home -- I am very dry, and very drowsy; and it is so dark, that I
hardly know the way to my Lodging -- how now, what is there a Chair! ay, it is
so, and by those Fellows standing there, it should be empty too -- I Will make
use of this opportunity -- It may be by this means I may light on some pleasant
adventure, to recompense my Nights trouble -- I am resolved to venture.


1 Chairman. Iak, Jack, Master's come back again.


2 Chairman. Is he come! then let us make haste.


Welf. So, they take me for their Master; thus far I am right: now Fortune be
propitious --


[They carry him off. Enter Henry. Henr. The Bullies are surpised by the
Watch, and the Gentleman has made his escape; who it was I know not, but by his
demeanor, he should be of quality. Dogs! Night Rogues! is this a time for
Rencounters -- Here -- Hey! where are ye? bring the Chair hither -- Hey -- what
gone? What damned Rascals are these? afraid I believe the Watch should seize on
'em -- what shall I do? I shall never find the way home, it is so dark: How now,
who is this?


Enter Madam Tricklove. Trick. Who Is there?


Henr. Ha!


Trick. It Is he! it is he. Oh my dear, how glad am I to find thee! ye naughty
Rogue to leave me so; but see what comes on it: yet for all that, I am glad with
all my heart I have thee again. My dear, dear --


[Kiss. Henr. Ah, it is a loving poor Rogue, who ere it is; and I hope young.


Trick. Come, come away with me, for the Old Fellow and a Company of Bullies
are watching for thee; and I love thee too well, to have thee killed.


Henr. Who it is I know not, but such a tempting occasion I must follow --


Trick. Come, come in with me, and I Will hide you in my Chamber, till the search
be over.


Henr. Dear Matrimony, thou must pardon me; for this is such a pleasant
adventure, that I cannot choose but be in love with --

But tho I to the Banquet hungry go,
'Twould spoil my Stomach, if my Spouse should know.

[Exeunt The Third ACT.
Carlo's Bedchamber. Enter Christina, and Sophia. Christ. I swear I tremble to
think on it.


Soph. Expect never to be happy then: Prithee Cozen, take my Council, and
believe that a jealous Husband, that takes all the liberty imaginable, and
allows his Wife none, will at last pretend a suspicion of your Intrigue, only
to keep you from the knowledge of his.


Christ. I have considered it, and am resolved to let him know, I have enough
of the Woman to resent such an injury.


Soph. For my part I Will assist you in all your proceedings, and if we two han't
enough of the old Serpents subtilty to confound the Intrigues of one weak
unthinking man; it is pity but our Sex was changed, and we made the dullest of
Creatures --


Christ. It distracts me to think on his behavior: what business can he have
out thus late --

Enter Boy. How now! is he come?


Boy. Yes, Madam, the Sedan is just coming in at the Gate.


Christ. Go then, prithee Cozen, be not seen to Night, it may be he is in drink,
and a reproof now will signify nothing.


Soph. True: for a drunken man is as perverse a Creature, as an opinionated old
man -- whatever he is advised, he is sure to do quite contrary: Therefore, it is
best to leave him till the morning qualm -- for then a little impertinence will
teaze him more than ordinary --

[ Ex. Soph. and Boy.
Christ. Now to prepare my self with a little policy -- I must pout and seem
angry, as, if considered rightly, the cause requires; for, to live as singly
after we have ventured upon Marriage as we did before -- in truth is
unreasonable. Here he comes.


Enter Welford. Welf. Madam.


Christ. H^! a stranger! Heaven! what means this?


Welf. I have now reason to bless my adverse fortune, since it has requited me
with so beautiful an Object; and I see there are some happy Stars that --


Christ. Pray, Sir, no more of this; but tell me where my Husband is, and by
what means you got possession of his Chair?


Welf. Her Husband! that is well --

Faith, Madam, y' have done me an injury in interrupting my thanks to Fortune
-- I was horribly afraid I should have rambled all Night -- and truly such a
Lodging deserves a little acknowledgment.


Christ. A Lodging! truth, Sir, you are deceived: you are like to get no Lodging
here -- But where have you left my Husband -- you look not like a Murderer --
or else I should think you had killed him, to put some horrid design in execution
--


Welf. Not I faith -- I found the Chair empty, and went into it; and being
mistaken by the good, honest, purblind, Sons of Whores the Chair-men for
another -- I suppose, am brought hither instead of your Husband -- and I am
resolved I Will not baulk my Fortune -- I --


Christ. Then, Sir, let me desire you to be gone before he comes, for his being
left so, must needs make him very angry; and then his finding you here, will be
enough to make an everlasting breach betwixt us -- good Sir, go --


Welf. Not I -- faith Madam -- I must beg your pardon -- I will not stir --
come what will on it -- it is a pretty place -- this -- and yonder is a good Bed,
I see -- your Servant Madam; to morrow morning command me any thing --


[Sits down, and unbuttons himself. Christ. A strange blunt Fellow this.

Pray, Sir, no more trifling, but go; my reputation is more dear to me, than
your inconvenience; therefore be gone, or I am resolved to cry out. --


Welf. Nay, now I am sure you will not; for I Will no more believe a Woman intends
to cry out, that says she will, than I Will believe a Man has courage to duel me,
that draws upon me in the Playhouse --


Christ. A strange confidence this; what do you intend, Sir?


Welf. 'Faith, to go to Bed; I want no waiters in these cases: I am a true
adventurer, Madam, and like a Knight Errant am contented with my Quarters,
wherever I find 'em.


Christ. Why, sure you will not go to the Bed that is prepared for my Husband?


Welf. Yes, but I will -- and be thankful too, I like the place very well.


Christ. Nay, this is rudeness unheard of; good Sir, consider my condition, and
what danger I am in, if my Husband comes, as I Am certain he will to night --
kind, sweet Sir --


Welf. Pox on her, she has mollify'd me: Well, Madam, two conditions observed,
perhaps I may depart. The first is, to tell me who you are? and secondly, to
permit me to wait on you to morrow.


Christ. Sir, the latter of these I will consent too; but to discover my name,
for some private reasons, I am bound not to do.


Welf. Then here I pitch my Tent -- pugh -- you cannot be so cruel, to turn me
out of Doors at this unreasonable time of night, when nothing is abroad but
Owls and Weezles.


Christ. What shall I do?
If he is found here, I am ruined --

Welf. I Will love you dearly, my life's service shall be devoted yours, prithee
be kinder -- How now! Who Is that?


[Noise within. Christ. My Husband! my Husband! for Heavens sake away, Sir,
I Will wait you here to morrow.


Welf. Will ye, in faith? will you not fail?


Christ. Upon my life I will not.


Welf. I Will trust ye then; adieu; a pox of this Husband --

[Exit.
Enter Lucinda. Lucin. Come, Madam, it is in vain for you to wait longer: My
Master I am certain will not come home to Night.


Christ. Go, get my Night-Clothes ready, I Will follow you --


[Exeunt. SCENE II.
Garden. Enter Oldsapp and Lovel. Olds. THus, Sir, depending upon your care and
secrecy, I have told you my concerns.


Lov. Sir, you shall never have any cause to doubt my fidelity.


Olds. I believe thee, in troth -- before George, thou have an honest Face of
thy own, that confirms it: Therefore, prithee give thy attention -- I confess I
am old --


Lov. O, Sir, not old.


Olds. Yes, faith, the Women think me so; and to deal faithfully with thee, I
am somewhat above threescore --


Lov. Oh, a small Age, that, Sir -- for a healthy Man --


Olds. But, I confess to thee, though I am old, I cannot choose but love a
Wench, as well as a younger Fellow. Well, before George, I know not what is the
matter -- but methinks I am never well without one.


Lov. It Is a sign you came of a good Family, Sir. I shall laugh at this old
Fellow --

[Aside.
Olds. Yes, the truth is, I came of a notable Generation; my Father and Mother
were swingers -- but let that pass -- you know my Sneakie is about twenty one.


Lov. Much about that Age, in my Opinion, Sir.


Olds. Yes, yes: nay I can tell to a Day her Age -- but would you believe me
Friend -- I dare tell you, though to another I should be ashamed, when I am with
her, sometimes, the arch Jade will play upon me strangely -- she will call me
Fool almost at every Word. Ah, it is a witty Queen.


Lov. Ha, ha, ha. Then it seems, Sir, she is angry with you sometimes; and how
do you do to pacify her?


Olds. Why, you must know, Sir, I allow her a Hundred Pound a Year, and that
makes up the business very well.


Lov. Oh --


Olds. No faith we never quarrel -- now, Sir for this reason I attempted the
Charm you know of, thinking that would make me young and fit for her --


Lov. And yet to be never the better! faith 'twas ill luck.


Olds. The better! nay, before George, I think I am the worse for it.


Lov. Why, that is worst of all, Sir. But pray come a little nearer to my
business. What would you have me do?


Olds. I Will tell you; the Story you told me to day of Welford has so tortured
me -- that I am grown damnably jealous; and I fear, I may have some cause if
the truth were known; For I had certainly mauld him to night, if by some device
or other she had not conveyed him away.


Lov Very well. Sir.


Olds. And though I cannot possitively say she did, I fear the worst -- Now it is
in your power to do me a signal favor.


Lov. Command it then, Sir -- you know I am your Friend.


Olds. You can counterfeit Welfords Voice -- I have heard you do it; you
therefore shall go to her instantly, and personate him, she is in the dark,
which makes me suspect she waits for some body, believing me absent -- and to
prove all, you shall court her as if you were him -- and so find her
inclination, then you discovering the truth to me -- I shall know the better
how to use her hereafter.


Lov. Faith, Sir, you must pardon me, if I refuse to serve you in this -- I am
sensible of the inconvenience, Sir. I shall not be able to contain my self --

[Aside.
Olds. Inconvenience! how, prithee?


Lov. Oh, Sir, you that are so jealous of every one, I have just reason to fear
will be so of me, should I do this: I am resolved not to hazard the loss of so
good a Friend about so trivial a matter.


Olds. Jealous of thee! what, of a Brother! a dear Friend that I have picked out
amongst Men to trust a secret with -- jealous of thee! Why, thou do not take
me for a Fool, do thou? Come come, no excuse, thou shall do it --


Lov. It cannot be, Sir, what will she think? 'Sdeath this is the simplest
Fellow --

[Aside.
Olds. She think! why, she shall not know it, Man; there lies the jest, she
shall be ignorant of it -- and think it is he still; for you are to come in the
dark -- Now, here is my plot -- by this means she taking you for him, will
discover her Intrigue, and I shall know whether she is a Jilt or no?


Lov. Nay, Sir -- If I can do you any service, you know I want power to deny --
Was ever such a Coxcomb --

[Aside.
Olds. Thank ye heartily, dear Friend, before George thou art an honest Fellow
-- well, I Will go instantly, and see if she is there -- and then conduct you to
her, and an hour hence --


Lov. Ay, Sir, sooner if you please --


Olds. No, no, not sooner: Well, have a little patience, I Will be with you
instantly --

[ Ex. Oldsapp.
Lov. Ha, ha, ha, -- This is the pleasantest adventure that ever Man had: and
thanks to my Stars, my pains shall now be rewarded; for above these six Months
have I laid plots, and studied daily how to obtain this Woman's Company, and
could never prosper; and now in a moment, when I least thought on it, to be
brought to her Chamber; and by her Keeping-Fool, that has been jealous of every
body: Oh, my Joys -- methinks every Hour's an Age -- till he comes -- and then
to bob Welford of his Mistress too, ha, ha, ha, -- it is a happy chance -- Well,
I see some Men are born to strange Fortune.


[Lyes down. Enter Welford. Welf. Where the Devil am I? this is the first door
I found open, and I am resolved to enter, be it where it will. Hah -- this
Garden should belong to my dear Tricklove's Lodgings, by that Belcony there --
ay, it is so -- Now, if I could but contrive to make her hear me -- I am certain
she would overcome all difficulties to let me in -- but how shall I do it? Knock, I
dare not, lest the old Fox should hear? Well I was a Fool to forsake my other
Lodging -- but when they cry how can you be so cruel, rather kill me then
proceed, and the like, I have not the heart to touch 'em. But see, the door
opens, and a Man is coming out. I hope she has heard me, and sent one of the
Servants --


Enter Oldsapp. Olds. Hist, hist, Come Sir -- she is in her Chamber; and in the
dark, as I told you: Therefore there must be some close business in hand --
good Sir, make haste --


Welf. Oldsapp, as I live! Death, if he discovers me, I shall be murdered --
but I Will withdraw in time -- I hope the darkness will obscure me --


[Is going away, and Oldsapp holds him. Olds. Nay, Will. what do mean? what
do go backward for? fie, flinch from thy Friend in such an affair. Come back,
for shame; come back, I say.


Welf. What shall I do -- he does certainly mistake me for another, and I shall
at last be discovered -- whither, Sir, would you have me go?


Olds. Whither! what a forgetful Fool it is -- why, have I not told thee already
to my Sneakey -- to my Sneakey Man; pugh, it is the modestest Fool this -- go;
prithee go; she will do thee no harm, I warrant --


Welf. No, I dare swear she will not.

[Aside.
Well, this is so quaint an Intrigue, that though I may be betrayed to infinite
danger, I have not power to resist it.

Olds. Before George, I Will thrust you forward -- if you will not go: why, thou
art the dullest Fellow I ever met with -- if Welford were here, he would not
have been thus backward; a pox on him, he is ready at all times, would I had him
here -- 'Sbud I Would give twenty pieces I had him in this Garden: But come away --
thou art such a Ninny --


Welf. What will become of me, I know not -- but, let it be hanging, stabbing,
drowning, or what 'twill, it is so happy an Intrigue, that I am resolved to
venture, come what will on it --


[Scene shuts. [Exeunt. SCENE III.
Enter Henry and Tricklove. Trickl. WHat ever merit, Sir, you can propound to
your self, had I known at first you were not my Love, you had not purchased my
company so easily.


Henr. Madam, though I am not the happy Person you mean, yet I am one extremely
sensible of your kindness, and would willingly gratify -- but, what shall I
do? you say the old Gentleman is just coming up; I hope you have more sense of
Honor, than to betray me.


Trick. I confess your behavior has won so much upon my heart, that I should
be loath to see you wronged here; but you will forget me, when you are gone, I
warrant.


Henr. Never, Madam; don't doubt me -- faith a Courtesy was never lost upon me
yet; and that it should now is impossible: but hark, he is coming -- for Heavens
sake, let me not be surpised


[A Noise. Trick. Well, get you in there, at the end of that Gallery; there is a
Door that opens into the Garden: but be sure you keep touch with the
assignation.


Henr. If I fail, wish me impotent, and that is plague enough for one Man.

[ Ex. Henr.
Trick. Welford, cloyed with my love, has of late slighted me; but, now the
happy means of revenge is come, and I am resolved to right my self this way;
since he is so dull and neglectful --

[Ex. into her Chamber.
Enter Oldsapp and Welford. Olds. Here, this is the Door; go boldly in, boldly,
as I used to do; hum -- what, still hanging an Arse -- I think the Devil's in
thee -- go, I say.


Welf. Was ever such a Night as this -- if I come off but well, I Will have this
Nights Adventure put into the Chronicle.

[Exit.
Olds. So, he is gone at last; it is such a bashful young Fool, that faith, once
I thought I should never have brought him to it -- Well -- I Will wait her --


Enter Henry. Henr. I have been groping up and down this half hour, to find the
Back-Stairs she talked of; but the Devil a Place, or Stairs, or any thing can I
find to get out by -- Ah, Plague 'o these Night-Rambles; the trouble a Man gets
in finding his way home after 'em, is more by half than the pleasure he gets by
'em.


Olds. 'Slife, he is come back again already, and ten to one will spoil all --
why, Will, Will, is the Devil in thee, what do mean to come away so soon --
gad forgive me, you will not ruin my design, will you? get ye gone, get you
gone, I say.


Henr. Death, what shall I do? this is the old Squire; he certainly takes me
for some other; therefore I Will bear all patiently, and say nothing.


Olds. She wonders I warrant, why he stays so long; away, away -- I never saw
such a lump -- no Life in thee.


Henr. What a Devil he means, I know not; but I must go, to avoid further
danger.


Olds. It may be, thou can not find the right Door again; come, I Will show
thee -- ah thou art a Novice.


[Exeunt. Enter Welford and Tricklove. M. Trick. How durst you come back so
soon, after I had shown you the way out, are you not afraid of the old Fellow?


Welf. So -- she mistakes me for another too -- well -- this has been a Night
of Wonders -- Why, Madam, do you not know me, sure the intimacy betwixt you and
me, deserves not this forgetfulness.


M. Trick. Oh Heavens! are you Welford! are you indeed! and have I then been
mistaken? [ aside] But why would you use me so -- why would you speak in that
same tone to fright me?


Welf. Ay, here has been another adventure: but this is no time for questioning
-- Hark, prithee my dear, let us have no disputes now, but go and see what the
old Fellow is doing; for though he has been very kind to me to night, yet to
say truth, I am not much in love with his company.


M. Trick. Kind! yes, great kindness indeed: his kindness was shown in
besetting you -- where, had not my care conveyed you hither, you had been
murdered by this time.


Welf. Thy care! why, prithee art thou mad? I tell thee he brought me hither
himself -- just now, within this two minutes; who he takes me for, Heaven
knows, not I.


M. Trick. Ha, then I was not mistake -- that was not Welford that was with me
first -- I Will seem ignorant, and recover all again -- why, then you did not see
my Woman that I sent to seek you?


Welf. Not I -- but prithee waste the time no longer in talking; but go see
what the old Man is doing -- for I am in an Ague still for fear of him.


M. Trick. Stay there then, till I come back --

[ Ex. Tricklove.
Welf. Now am I very certain some adventrous traveller has been with her to
night -- and to finish his design made use of my name and quality -- Well, for
a night of Intrigues let this be put in the Calender -- I have been exquisite at
night-walking this seven years, and never met the like, What a pox the old
Baboon should mean by his proceedings to me, I cannot imagine; suppose he does
take me for another; why should he bring me to his Mistress! Well, let the
Devil that knows all discover all -- it is beyond my apprehension --

[Exit aside.
Re-enter Henry. Henr. Oh, what a quaking fit has he put me into! shall I never
find the way out -- I have gone I believe through twenty Rooms, and never the
better -- I got into a Closet just now, and groping about thrust my Hand into a
Mouse-trap, and was pincht severely -- and the worst is, the Devil of any one
there is up in the House to direct me -- I must even go and awake her, and get
her to assist me. This, by his directions, is her Chamber -- hist, hist my
dear; my dear --


Welf. Here, here; sweet, well -- what say thou? where is he? hah.


Henr. How now! what is this here? a Man's Voice, pox o'nt I am mistaken again --
Damned Fate! what shall I do?


Welf. If he be coming up, prithee convey me out; for I know he will never have
patience. Prithee what is he doing of?


Henr. What a Devil does he mean? hark, prithee honest friend show me to the
necessary house --


[Aloud. Welf. Death, have I been talking to a Man all this while? ten to one,
one of the Servants -- who has discovered me, and stands here to watch --


[Retreats. Henr. He Is gone again; they are all Fairies sure in this House: Oh
fortune! fortune! some deliverance I beseech thee.


Welf. No way to escape! well, this comes of rambling. 'Sdeath, would I had
been sighing at home, rather than sweating here.


Enter Tricklove. Trick. Where are ye? oh! ha, ha!

[Gets hold of Hen. I have been to see for the old Gentleman, and coming softly
through the Hall -- found him sitting alone in the Porch: and I believe he has
been there all this Night; but for what reason I cannot imagine.


Henr. So, I am glad I found her at last -- there let him stay if he pleases --
But dear sweet Creature, show me the way -- for I have been rambling about ever
since, and cannot find the way down -- besides, here is some body in the Room
too, prithee who is it.


M. Trick. What cursed luck is this? he come back again! -- ha, I swear you
frighted me -- but speak softly -- (who is it) why it is, it is -- the Chaplain --
don't disturb him -- he always studies in the dark, it is his custom.


Welf. Sure I heard a whispering; now are they plotting together to cut my
Throat, it must be so.


Henr. Come, prithee let me be gone instantly; for if he discover me I shall
certainly be murdered.


Welf. Hah! -- what is that, murder? oh these cursed Women; what dangers they
bring us to?


M. Trick. Follow me, Sir, and tread softly --

[ Ex. Tricklove and Henry.
Welf. What, are they gone? nay then I grow cheerful: a pox on it, what a
Fever have I been in?

If I can find the way out now, all is well: if not, it is but staying till she
comes back, and then, I Am at liberty.

[Ex.
SCENE IV.
The Garden. Lovel solus, clapping himself as if he were a cold. DAM this old
Rascal: what does he mean by making me stay thus long? sure he dares not do it
to abuse me -- and yet it may be so, for the cause of his bringing me hither is
so ridiculous, that the truth is, I had not faith to believe it at first -- my
patience is quite tired: And besides, the Air is so cold and piercing, that if
I stay a little longer, I shall be mortified for any Woman these three Days.
'Sdeath, am I thus baffled -- I Will carbonado this old Rogue; a Dog, a Son of a
Whore, no one to affront but me -- besides all my hopes of seeing that sweet
Creature is disappointed -- 'Sdeath, I Will murder him in the next Tavern I meet
him.

Enter Tricklove and Henry. Trick. This is the Garden, Sir; and yonder at the
end of the walk, is the back door that leads into the Street. I dare go no
further, least I am seen -- farewell, Sir, -- fail not to meet me to morrow.


[ Ex Trick. Henr. I will not, sweet: so now there is some hopes.


Lov. Oh, yonder, I think he comes -- I thought the old Fool durst not affront
me so -- harkee! Sir, Sir.


[Pulls Harry. Henr. What now? 'Slight! have I met him again?


Lov. Is it time to go yet, Sir, I thought you had forgot me, you staid so long.


Henr. What the Devil shall I say? how long have you staid, Sir?


Lov. How long! why by Heaven above this hour and half; come, come, Sir:
dispatch, dispatch: if you stay a little longer I shall be very unfit for the
service you intend me.


Henr. This is not he, this is another; and a new adventure I Will lay my life.


Lov. Why dee not answer, Sir?


Henr. It Is so: I Will banter him a little -- Sir, the cold Air will season your
complexion.


Lov. How, Sir? complexion!


Henr. Ay, Sir, I have heard, the Switzers lie naked in the Snow to make their
Skins the tougher: a politic Nation, Sir, and by my faith, 'I think hardly to
be conquered -- for take it from me, Sir, they are --


Lov. What a pox care I, Sir, what they are; art thou mad old Fellow? what do
prate to me of Snows and Switzers?


Henr. Ay, but, Sir, the Nation deserves --


Lov. Damn the Nation, Sir; is this a time for a description of it: prithee
speak to me of the Present Affair: Shall I go to the Woman yet? what a Devil
did thou bring me hither for?


Henr. For Air, Sir, for Air; it is now very delightful and cool --


Lov. I shall cool your Coxcomb, Sir* 'Sdeath shall I be baffled thus by an old
Badger?


[Draws. Henr. Not so old as you imagine; and since you are for that sport,
have at you --


Lov. Ha! I Am mistaken, this is not he all this while -- but no matter -- I Will
take such an affront from no Man --


[Fight here. Enter Oldsapp. Olds. How now! what Noise is this? hah, fighting
in my Garden at this time of the Night -- hey, within there -- murder, murder;
Thieves, Thieves; Rogues! Lights here; bring Lights --


[Exeunt fighting. Enter Tricklove and Welford. Trick. You are still so tardy;
why did you not come sooner? for now he is below in the Garden, it is impossible to
convey you out, but he will see you -- the best way is to cry out Thieves with me
-- and make as if you came to our aid, hearing the outcry --


Welf. No, I dare not do that, he knows my voice; I Will try if I can steal by
him --


Olds. How now! who is there?


Welf. Oh -- a friend, Sir, a friend -- Oh how I shake!


Olds. Oh, Will. art thou come off undiscovered? that is well -- before George
this was carried handsomely now. Come, I Will show thee the way out before the
lights come; and to morrow thank thee as the cause requires --


Trick. My dear, my dear; Thieves, Thieves; call the Watch, there is Thieves in
the Garden --


Olds. Where dove, where? There Will. there; that is the Door: Where are they,
dove, where are they -- go, go out -- at that Door there -- Lights -- Lights --
there, away, away --


[Thrusts Welf. out. Enter Servants with Lights. Serve. We have searched all the
Garden, and can find no body.


Olds. No! why then they have killed one another, and the Devil has fetched 'em
away -- To prevent further trouble -- for I Am sure I found 'em fighting --


Trick. Well, let 'em go. Come, prithee, my dear, let us go in --


Olds. With all my heart -- I Will smother my resentments all to morrow, and then
I shall know all --


[Exeunt. SCENE IV.
The Street. Enter Welford. Welf. SO; I am got off at last -- and thanks to an
unexpected chance with all my Limbs too -- which, as my case stood, be little
less than a Miracle. But for that he should conduct me out, that two hours
before would have murdered me, is a wonder past my apprehension: I confess I
have been frighted, damnably frighted, that is the truth on it; but a pox it is
nothing, when it is over: and I begin to think now, that there is no Fate that
keeps an honest, drunken, Whore-master up the Wall -- when the judicious,
reserved, sober Fool, is thrown into the Kennel -- Well, I am resolved -- I Will
pursue the Intrigue to morrow with my new Mistress; gad she is a rare Creature
-- and I hope her Husband is not so kind as he should be.

In Modish Love, the allowance may be small;
But Marriage, like a Miser, covets all.
[Exit.
The Fourth ACT.
SCENE I. Christina's House.
Enter Christina, and Sophia. Soph. DID I not tell you, he would not come to
night: I know a Man of his humor can no more forsake company he likes, to come
to his Wife, than an Usurer could forsake a Purchase of Land when he has it for
half the value.


Christ. I confess it vexes me; but had I been of the same humor, you know I
could last night have been even with him.


Enter Lucinda. Lucin. Madam, here is a Gentleman below, that enquires for his
Cozen; I desired to know her name, which he says he is ignorant of; and says,
she is a Relation a-far off; but by his description of her, he doe^ certainly
mean you.


Christ. It Is he; I knew he would not fail: go, bring him up; and prithee
Cozen, let us put a trick upon him. Do you step into the next Room -- when you
hear us entered into discourse, and that he leaves you as a spy over me --


Soph. I Will personate it to the life; but the jest will be to hear what a
company of lies he will tell when I question him about his Visit --

[ Ex. Sophia.
Christ. Ha, ha, ha -- away, away -- he comes.


Enter Welford. Welf. Madam, though the Night to me has been as dark and
comfortless, wanting the light of your Eyes; yet this joyful Minute dissipates
those horrors -- and makes me happy to excess; ah Madam, I have been --


Christ. Where? or what have you been, Sir?


Welf. Where? why in my Lodging ever since I left you -- and what could I be
but the most melancholy, despairing, restless, uncoath Creature in the World --
I breath not as I did formerly, my Heart pants, my Eyes roll -- all my
Faculties are disturbed: In a word, Madam -- I am desperately in Love, and with
you; have mercy upon me, I beseech you.


Christ. But, what help, Sir, can a Woman in my condition bring you: You know,
I told you last Night I was married.


Welf. Ay, Madam, and the memory of it brings me all the joy imaginable -- for
it is only a married Lady that has the ability of helping me. My Disease is of
that singular Nature, that all other are helpless and unnecessary --


Christ. A strange Distemper indeed -- but hush; here comes my Sister --


Enter Sophia. Welf. A Sister! a pox, shift her off, Madam -- she is not for
our company.


Christ. O! I dare not for my life, Sir; she is my Husbands Sister, and one set
to watch me.


Welf. A fine Woman in faith, the Devils in it if I miss both --


Soph. A handsome Fellow, I swear -- who is this Gentleman, Sister, a Kinsman of
yours?


Christ. Yes, Madam; a Cozen removed: speak for your self, Sir --


Welf. A little out of the way, Madam; and hearing she was in Town* I could not
pass by without giving her a Visit; I had ever a dear love for my Relation --


Soph. A very good quality, Sir; and if I am not mistaken, a thing very little
in use amongst young Gallants; for they rather visit their Mistresses than
Relations -- nay the Wives; it is a strange World, Heaven mend it; pray are you
married, Sir?


Welf. Yes, Madam, and have seven Children; a pox on her --


Christ. So, that is a sound one -- now he begins --

[Aside,
Soph. Seven! as I live a jolly company -- indeed, Sister, I am angry with ye,
for not bringing me acquainted with your Relations; you know my Sisters Father
I presume, Sir.


Welf. Very well, Madam; the old Gentleman and I are very intimate -- What a
Devil shall I do?

[Aside.
Soph. And pray how does he?


Welf. In health; in health, Madam -- he is a lusty Man of his Age, Heaven bless
him --


Soph. How, in health, Sir! he was dangerously wounded in a Rencounter, not
above three days ago; it is impossible he can be well so soon.


Welf. So, I am snapt* 'twas given out, a dangerous Wound, Madam, but 'twas
only a scratch; a very slight business, believe me --


Soph. And his Son at Oxford, how does he, Sir, Mr. -- what do you call him?


Welf. Ay, what indeed?


Soph. Mr. -- Sir, you can tell his name: Mr --


Welf. What, Gregory?


Soph. Fie, fie, Gregory! no: Mr. -- Lord, it is strange you should not know his
name!


Welf. Know him! alas, I know him, Madam, as well as I know my self; but I have
such a confounded memory -- his name quickly; I am foundered.


[Aside to Christ. Christ. She means my Brother Alexander.


Welf. Alexander! I was sure I was near it -- why, he is the same brisk Fellow,
Madam, he used to be -- all Spirit -- (pox on him, would he had been hanged
seven year a go, so I had escaped the trouble of finding out his damned name.)

[Aside.
Soph. It Is strange he should be so altered, he used to be of a very sober,
morose temper -- Then, I suppose, Sir, you know his Sister, Mrs Phebe.


Welf. Ay, I have some reason to know her, Madam, if you knew all -- why she
has been my Mistress a great while --


Soph. How, Sir, your Mistress!


Welf. Ay, the business was almost concluded on -- I had like to have married
her about a Month a go.


Soph. Married! why, Sir, you say you have a Wife already, and seven Children.


Welf. Death and the Devil -- I had forgot that -- I see a Liar had need have a
good memory.

[Aside.
Christ. Ha, ha, ha, my Cozen, Madam, is a little involved in a mistake, ha,
ha, ha.


Soph. I believe he will prove a salse Kinsman at last --


Welf. I find it now, this is a plot upon me -- well I shall have a time -- why
then, the truth is, Madam, I am a damned lying Rascal, and have not spoke a
word of truth -- since I came in --


Soph. Ha, ha, ha, ha --


Enter Lucinda. Lucin. Madam, my Master is just come home, and I believe coming
up.


Christ. Here, quickly take this Kinsman of mine then, and convey him down the
back way -- a word in your Ear, Sir -- write me word when you will come next,
that I may be better provided -- and so your Servant good Cozen.


Welf. So, that is something however; to night about twelve, I Will not fail you
-- your Servant Ladies, your Servant -- I Will see if I can have better luck in
my Evenings Ramble --

[ Ex. Welford.
Enter Henry. Henr. How does my dear, sweet, precious Wife, hah? Nay, I know
thou art angry now at my staying out last Night; but prithee consider, my dear,
I had business -- business must be done you know -- come prithee let us kiss and
be Friends.


Christ. This kindness adds to my suspicion; for, he is never kind to me, but
when he has been rambling --


Soph. An Infallible Sign -- for, to you he gives only false Fire --


Henr. Come, what is the meaning of this whispering; prithee my dear don't mind
her; she is as envious as a Nonconformist Parson, that has lost his Benefice.


Soph. And you are as false as an Accomptant at the Custom House -- nay, if you
out do me at a simile --


Christ. 'Twas wonderful business sure, that could make you out all Night, pray
let us here -- what business?


Soph. Ay, come, the business, the business.


Henr. You know my dear, when I left you I went to visit Counselor Fee-Simple
-- to know how my suit goes in Chancery -- and to have his advice.

Enter Lucinda. My dear, I must beg thy pardon for a little while, I must to my
Lords again; the Case is to be determined to Night.

Christ. You Will stay till to Morrow again, I warrant.


Henr. No, no, I will not; I fear it will be somewhat late, but I am resolved not
to stay all Night: adieu, my dear Rogue. So -- Now to my assignation --

[ Ex. Henry.
Christ. There must be something in this: Lucinda, go and dog him.

Still I must doubt; for he that weds betimes,
Makes Marriage often a Cloak to hide his Crimes.
[Ex. Christ.
SCENE II.
Table, Chairs, and wine. Enter Sir Fred. Col. Buff, and Oldsapp. Boy. Olds.
COme, the Kings health, Colonel: There it goes.


Buff. Come round with it: Sir Fredrick, to you.


Olds. Faith, I did not think you had past through so many dangers, Colonel, as
you say you have.


Buff. Ah* little does the World think, what I have suffered, Sir --


Sir Fred. Ah, the Devil and all; why, the Colonel has been killed three times,
have not old stump?


Buff. That I have, Sir Fredrick, above forty times, I assure you.


Olds. What, killed!


Buff. Not downright killed -- but very near it, as near as you can thrust a
Knife. Oh, I have escaped by Miracle.


Sir Fred. I think thou told'st me too, that thou have a demi-cannon Bullet in
thy Belly, did not?


Buff. Oh no, no, it is a mistake, several Ounces of Pistol-shot, I may tell
you, but no Bullet, Sir Fredrick; no Cannon Bullet, I remember an accident once
at Plymouth fight; I was then one of the Dragoons in the Brigade that lay
before the Town: The Battery being raised, Sir, I mounted -- I had not been
there two Minutes, but I received six several shots upon me; two went quite
through me -- and one sticks here in my Throat, pray put your hand here -- feel.


Olds. Before George, here is something, that is the truth out.


Sir Fred. Ah, this is nothing -- why, the Colonel was one of the six that made
a Dish of Tripe, of a pair of old Boots; and a handful of Gunpowder served for
Mustard to it.


Olds. Gunpowder! it is impossible; why, 'twould blow him up Man, 'twould blow
him up --


Sir Fred. What, a Colonel blown up! a Colonel! I grant it might blow up a
stingy Corporal; or such a Fellow: but a fat Colonel! ah, there is no danger
on it.


Buff. Nay, by the Blade we have been put to our shifts, that is certain; but no
matter, at the long run, we did our business well enough.


Olds. Ay, I think your Consciences were asleep, that is the truth on it; the
Devil had a kindness for you, that is certain; or else you could never have
proceeded so; for you know, Colonel, yours was the wrong Cause.


Buff. Cause! why prithee, we had no Cause, we had Money; that is the Cause of a
true Soldier -- Money! Money -- I served beyond Sea too in the low Countries
-- I have traveled in most parts of the World, and observed the Customs.


Sir Fred. Oh, that was my delight too. Did thou ever observe the Customs in
Catalonia Colonel?


Buff. Oh curiously, Sir. I sojourned there some Months.


Olds. And pray what Customs do they use, Sir Fredrick?


Sir Fred. Oh wonderful! wonderful!

Why, it is the Custom in Catalonia, for the Women to bear Children at seven --
and to dye decently at eleven -- and for the Men to marry at fourteen, and hang
themselves at twenty one -- a barbarous Custom -- but it is for prevention of
Diseases --


Buff. Ha, ha, ha, nay, nay, Sir Fredrick.


Sir Fred. Hush, thou shall see me balder him --


Olds. Before George, that is the way to prevent Generation, as well as Diseases.


Sir Fred. No, no, it is a hot Country, and they breed accordingly; -- the poor
people that eat nothing but Thistles and Barks of Trees -- it is true produce
but one at a time: But, your better fort that feed on March-pane, and Yolks of
Eggs -- will bring ye five -- six at a Birth, more or less, according as they
are in humor.


Olds. Good lack! well, this traveling is a rare thing: why, who the Devil
could have believed this now, but you that have seen't.


Sir Fred. Then near the Bosphorus, the back part of Thrace, live a sort of
Hogs that are skilled in Philosophy.


Olds. Hogs!


Sir Fred. Ay; they are good Scholars, and understand the Sciences very well;
but that immoderate Crime of Wenching undoes 'em.


Olds. Indeed!


Sir Fred. Ah rots their Memories; spoils 'em; undoes 'em quite.


Olds. Why what a strange thing is this; but why don't they marry then, Sir,
why don't they marry?


Sir Fred. Why it is thought they would; but it is against the Law, and your
Hogland-Law is very strict; very strict --


Olds. Before George, it is very strange -- but prithee Sir Fredrick be plain,
are they really Hogs -- or a sort of Hoggish-Men like Hogs?


Sir Fred. Really Hogs -- prithee ask the Colonel; Colonel, what say thou?


Buff. Ha, ha, ha, -- a Banter, a Banter; ha, ha, ha.


Sir Fred. There I was with thee, faith Boy, ha, ha, ha. There Is news for thee;
tell it thy Mistress, do, put the banter upon her; give her a balderno, do I
say --


Olds. Phoo -- before George, it is a very silly humor this, Sir Fredrick, a
Man knows not where to find you now adays with your shams and tricks -- gad
forgive me, I hope you do not take me for a Fool, do you?


Puff. Oh no Anger, Squire; thou know it is his humor; he will sooner loose
his Friend than his Jest; and 'twere to his Father 'twere all one --


Olds. Nay, pox, not that I care a Pin; but I speak only that we might have a
right understanding betwixt us. Here, Boy, the the other Glass, Sirrah.


Buff. By the blade, I wonder where the Lady is all this while, Sir Fredrick.


Sir Fred. And so do I too; for the truth is, Colonel, the main design of my
coming hither, was to see her.


Olds. Sir Fredrick, a Bumper -- Prithee lets be merry and cast away care Man,
come I Have a little Utensil within shall give thee a Song. Within there, Ienny.

Ienny comes in and sings. Close in a hollow silent Cave
Young Damon sleeping lay,
Himself one hour from grief to save,
And from the scortching day --
He Celia loved, whose Fate and wit
Did every Shepherds sense control,
Whose every hair was Loves soft Net,
Whose every glance a Heart did get,
And every smile a Soul.
2.
But see the Balm Loves Monarch keeps
To ease a Lovers pain,
As he in that dark Mansion sleeps
It fiercely began to rain.
Fair Celia wandering through her Farm,
A straying Lamb from hurt to save,
Which got she folds in her white Arm,
And glad to save it from the storm,
Straight slips into the Cave.
3.
The drowzy Swain begins to smile,
To see his Heaven so nigh,
She doubts and fears; and all this while
The Lamb stands bleating by.
No Breath is left her to complain,
She now a Captive to surprise,
And fears approaching Ioys or Pain,
Thus at the mercy of the Swain,
The charming Virgin lies.

Olds. What think you now, was it not well sung?


Buff. By the Blade, 'twas a pretty matter, and has some relish in it; in faith I
like it well.


Enter Lovel. Olds. Hah, Will, dear Son, thy humble Servant.


Lov. A word with you, Sir! Sir Fredrick, pray give me leave; I have some
business with him.


Sir Fred. With all our hearts, Sir -- we were just going. Come Colonel, let us
go; here is nothing to be done to Night -- Hark in thy Ear.

[Lovel takes Oldsapp on one side. We'll go seek out the Fellow that waits on
her, and make him a little drunk, and the business is done.


Buff. Agreed, with all my heart; Squire your humble Servant.


[Exeunt. Olds. Prithee, Will, what do thou mean by this? before George I am
an arrant Ass, if I can guess at it.


Lov. Not Know my meaning: Come, Sir, I Will refresh your memory, since you are
so forgetful. Did not you bring me hither last Night, to go to your Mistress?


Olds. Yes marry did I.


Lov. Very well, Sir: And why was it not done then? why did you not come and
conduct me as you promised? hah --


Olds. Ha, ha, ha, you wag, you wag, will you flout; will you jeer your Friend
-- fie, fie -- before George this is unkind: What you did, you did -- I know
well enough how things were carried -- and I am contented -- but in faith it is
ill done to upbraid me with it.


Lov. What, what is all this? But, Sir, I am not contented till I have further
satisfaction -- I tell you I did not see your Mistress all Night.


Olds. No: Cause you were in the dark -- Ah -- you are a wag.


Lov. Sir, I mean I was not in your House at all, but stayed expecting you at
least two hours -- and at last fought my way out with a Bully that I found in
the Garden.


Olds. Then in my Conscience I put him in, instead of you: for one I Am sure was
with my Sneaky at least two hours.


Lov. It must be so -- For I saw him come out of the House -- [Aside. Pox on it
what damned luck had I -- Well, Sir, since I see, Sir, you designed no affront
-- I am satisfied; your Servant, Sir. I have an affair to night; or else we
would confer longer about this business --

[Ex. Lovel.
Olds. Was ever such a mistake! 'Sbud, that I should be so blind too; not to
know another Man from him? yet though I could not distinguish, ten to one she
might -- she has her haunts I find. Who Is within there?

[Enter Boy. Sirrah, is your Mistress come home yet?


Boy. No, Sir.


Olds. Ah, Sir, here is rare doings; but I am resolved I Will be revenged on her
however. Sirrah, go you to the Constable here at the Corner of the Street, and
bid him keep diligent watch about my Door; and if any Persons attempt coming
in, bid him seize 'em; go -- begone -- Now shall she be taken by the Constable
like a Harlot as she is, and punished, till she comes upon her Knees to
acknowledge her fault, and me her superior --

[ Ex. Olds.
SCENE III.
The Street. Enter Henry, Madam Tricklove, Pimpo and Cornet. Lucinda at a
distance. Henr. NAY, dear Madam, let me wait on you home.


Lucin. That Is his Voice: he is here, and a Woman with him: This is as my Lady
suspected -- I Will stand aside and watch --


[Retires. Trick. By no means, Sir; pray take my advice and be gone, least we
are seen -- but be not far off -- and I Will not fail you.


Henr. But how shall I know the happy Minute, Madam?


Trick. Thus, Sir, it is requisite I go to him -- but lest Sleep should overcome
my Senses too -- I Will tie a String with a Bell to it -- which shall lead from
the Balcony into the Street -- and when you hear all still, come and ring that
Bell, and your kind Conductress shall be ready to wait on you.


Henr. Ah dear, sweet -- how shall I gratify thee? Well, I Will be watchful --
your Servant.

[ Ex. Henry.
Trick. They are all very still methinks, pray Heaven he has heard no Stories
on me to Night, and is gone to Bed: Sirrah, go and open the Door, you have the
false Key.


Pimp. Not I, sincerely, I was afraid to bring it -- Oh Lord, will you never
leave these tricks -- never leave buzzing and whizzing about the World like a
Flesh-Flie; by gadsniggs, let me tell you roundly, Madam, you are a greater
Jilt than the Whore of Babylon, and have more tricks, sincerely --


Trick. What tricks, Sirrah, what tricks?


Pimp. Why is not two enough; but that you must jilt them to make room for a
third; sincerely, you are more unreasonable than a Country Parson -- that
thinks he never has Tithe enough, and yet deserves none --


Trick. Rascal, is this a time for your moldy reproofs: Sirrah, let me have no
more lies; but go and open it, and softly too, you know the danger else -- go I
say --


Pimp. It Is well the Watch are coming -- and that I am afraid my person may be
in some damage, for being in such lewd company, Pimpo should be refractory
else, I assure you.

[Opens the Door. Oh! now does my Hand shake so with the sense of the Crimes
you have made me commit to Night, that I am not able to find the Keyhole --


Trick. Give me the Key: Cowardice is a greater Crime than any, and that I am
sure you have enough of. Cornet, what excuse shall I make? he is grown of late
so jealous, that I Am afraid he will never believe me --


Corn. Ay, and all your Kinsmen have been sick so often too, that if you go to
bring it off that way, it is ten to one but he finds you out.


Trick. Oh, don't speak of that: if he finds me out I am undone --


Pimp. This comes of caterwawling.


Trick. So, it is open; Sirrah tread softly -- I Will make him believe I have been
within all this Night -- and lay in another Room, being not well -- and afraid
to disturb him.


[Exeunt. Lucin. So, he is gone in with her -- here is your constant Husband: But
I am resolved, for my Ladies sake, to spoil his Intrigue to night; it may be I
may get ten Guinneys of him to hold my Tongue too; I Will try my Fortune.


[Knocks. [Oldsapp looks over the Balcony. Olds. Oh, she is come, it is she, her
Bully* has turned her off at last -- 'Sbud, have I nourish't this Viper in my
Bosom so long for this -- Where the Devil is the Constable and Watch now -- Oh,
I think I hear 'em coming, now for my revenge.

[Exit.
Lucin. He cannot for shame deny it; and to excuse his coming will be to no
purpose, because she is a Woman of the Town*

[Knocks. Hah, and as good fortune would have it, here comes the Watch too --
This makes well I am sure for me, for they know him -- and he will be willing to
give any thing rather than be so disgraced -- Oh, the Door opens.


Enter Oldsapp, and takes hold of her. Olds. Ah, Mistress! have I caught you
in faith! this is your visiting, with a pox to you -- Hoa -- the Watch there --
hoa -- I Will order you now, Madam -- I Will teach you to abuse your Patron -- I
will ye Jilt, I will --


Enter Constable and Watch. Constable. Seize on 'em; seize on 'em; if they resist
knock 'em down.


Olds. Thank ye, Mr. Constable -- do so, take her away; Carry her to the
Round-house; away with her --


Enter Tricklove and Pimpo above. Constable. I shall, Sir, and you too, I assure
you; you shall even house together to Night --


Olds. How Is that? I too; what do you mean? why do you not know me?


Constable. Know you! no; nor desire to know you; not I --


Trick. This was a design upon me, I find -- but I Will fit him: Sirrah, when
they are all gone, tie the Bell here, and then go to Bed.


Olds. Why, what a Devil do you mean; it is a mistake, I am not the Person, it is
she here, this Jilt: Death, what is here, a stranger -- what will become of me
now?


Lucin. Sir, you may well be ashamed of this rudeness: Heaven knows, I came
hither only upon a message.


Constable. Come, come, away with 'em, away with 'em.


Olds. Hold I say; what are you mad? I tell you we are not the Persons.


Constable. Ah, Sir -- that shall not do: I was charged to seize on all Persons
that attempted to come in at this House; if you are not the right, you may
clear your selves to morrow, for my part I must do my duty.


Olds. Your duty! poxo' your duty -- I think the Devils in the Fellow: I tell
thee once more, it is all a mistake: This is my House, and 'twas I that sent
that message to you, with design to seize upon a Jilt -- that I have some concern
with; but this is not she.


Enter Tricklove below, Cornet. Trick. And pray, who is that Jilt that you have
such concern with, Sir, hah --


Olds. Hey day! what more Miracles? How the Devil got you in?


Trick. In! what do you mean, Sir? is it not enough, base Man, to bring your
Wenches home to the very Door here, and make the whole Town witness of your
lewdness, but you must be jealous of me too? she knows here I have been sick
a-Bed all this Night.


Corn. I can assure you that, Sir, and in a very violent Fever this hour.


Olds. This is strange! but where was she, I am sure she was not in my Chamber.


Trick. No, I left that empty for you, and your Wench there.


Olds. My Wench! before George I never saw her before.


Trick. Pray let me speak with her a little; Had you any business here, Madam
-- I suppose 'twas you knocked at the Door?


Lucin. Yes, Madam; there came a Gentleman home with you that I am concerned
with, and my business was to speak with him.


Olds. How, a Gentleman! what a Devil then you were abroad it seems.


Trick. A Gentleman with me! thou monstrous Impudence: with me, that have been
in Bed sick to death, all this Night! but this is your plot, Sir, to let her
slander me, base Man as you are -- I see it now.


Olds. As I hope to be saved, not I -- I am so confounded, that I know not what
to think of neither side,


Lucin. Nay, if I am not mistaken; and if you are not the Lady --


Corn. Oh, if she is not; do you mark, Sir, is it come to that?


Olds. Ay, this is rare Impudence; pray Mr. Constable, take her away; of my
Conscience, this is some Jilt that owes us a spite, and designs to make a
separation; but it shall not do, Mistress -- away with her I say --


Constable. Sir, I beg your pardon for my mistake: Come, Madam, you must go -- but
for your Masters sake, whom I have the Honor to know, you shall have a
Watchman home with ye -- but pray no more of these Night-walks.


Lucin. This is very strange; but I must be patient --


[Exeunt. Olds. Come, my dear, let us go in again; before George I am afraid
thou will catch cold --


Trick. Sir, this shall not serve your turn; and, though I am too weak now to
express my Anger, never think I Will put it up so; I will have satisfaction I
assure you, Sir: this was well-carry'd --

[Ex. Trick. and Cornet.
Olds. Satisfaction; now ten to one but I shall be duell'd about this business
-- I must put a stop to that; for my capacity of fighting, like that of loving,
is I think, past the best now. But I Will watch her a little more. This may be a
trick --

[Exit Olds.
Pimp. They are all gone at last -- and now to my Employment: This Bell is to
give the Alarm to the Damsel when the Giant sleeps, and the adventrous Knight
approaches; so, this will be a Guinney in my way at least to morrow.

[Hangs the Bell down from the Balcony. Hark -- I think he is come already --
it is a little too soon; but, no matter, I think all is well, for the old Man is
gone into his Chamber --

[Exit.
Enter Henry. Henr. I am afraid I Have overstay'd my time, and made her wait for
me; but the damned Constable and Watch, yonder, stood so directly in my way, I
could not get by 'em. It Is a witty Rogue, what a pleasant contrivance she had
-- ha, ha, ha. Well, little does my poor Matrimony at home think that I am a
Batfowling -- but she is ignorant, poor Soul, that is one comfort --


[Gropes about. Enter Welford. Welf. Never Man had such damned luck as I; The
Devil sent but two prizes in my way all this Night, and neither of 'em worth
hanging -- Well, however, I have one plot holds; it is now neat the time I
promised Christina, and I Will thither -- How now? What Is this?


Henr. Where the Devil is this String? a pox of these dark, envious Nights;
there is never any Stars out, when a Man has occasion for 'em.


Welf. What Is here? a Man! and an Intrigue toward. This I think is Oldsapps
Window; ay -- it is so: Here Is another Adventurer, driving into my Harbor --
but, this shall prevent him --


[Strikes, and draws. Henr. Hah -- are you at that sport; my Sword's as good as
thine, I Am sure, and I think the darkness is equal --


[Fight. Watch within. Past twelve a Clock.


Henr. It Is best for me to retreat, till the Watch be past -- I shall know this
Bully another time --

[Ex. Henry.
Welf. 'Twas well you run faith, gad I had spoiled your Intrigue else; but the
Watch are coming, I Will stand close behind here, till they are gone.

[Retires, Exit.
Constable and Watch cross the Stage. Enter Oldsapp above, Pimpo. Pimp. What is
the meaning of this, sincerely if he should be killed now, and I lose my
Guinny, 'twould be fine work.


Olds. What Noise was that? I thought I heard one whisper; the clashing of
Swords -- but 't may be, 'twas only the Watch passing by. Well, I Will make haste
to Bed, and to morrow reconcile my self to my Dove -- it may be I am
misinformed -- and have done her wrong, I must know the truth on it. How now!
what a Devil have we here, a String tied to a Bell

[As he is going he stumbles at the string. That hangs from the Window into the
Street? I Will see what this means I am resolved, here may be another discovery;
before George it is so: Here Is another plot going forward, I Am certain on it --
But I Will be even with her, for I Will watch -- I Will see what this New Project
means.


[ Pimp. stands close in the Corner of the Balcony. Welf. returns below. Welf.
So, they are gone at last; and now to find this Bell that my young Gallant was
speaking of; I am resolved to defer my Intrigue with Christina so long. This by
the quaintness of it should be a plot of Trickloves; and I Will see what welcome
I shall have, that come unexpected -- oh here it is -- now Fortune --


[Pulls the string. Olds. Some body pulled the string, and the Bell rung --
list -- ha, again -- ay it is some Rascal -- and I Will be his Porter immediately
--

[Exit.
Pimp. Oh how I shake! oh, oh -- Madam, Madam, we are undone, discovered, oh,
oh --


Welf. The Bell is taken in -- a sign I suppose of her coming, so fall, all is
well.


Enter Tricklove and Cornet above. Trick. Death and Hell; discovered again!
cursed fortune: Sir, Sir, sweet Sir, begone -- begone, our Intrigue's
discovered, the old man's coming, away, you are lost else -- Cornet, do you run
out and stop him at a distance, till I have made up the business within, and
then privately convey him hither, for I Am resolved not to lose him so.


[Exeunt. Welf. The old Man! a good caution; and I Will follow it, though, I see
'twas meant to another --

[Ex. Welford.
Enter Henry. Henr. The Coast is clear once more -- I think the Devil and his
Imps are abroad to Night, with an intent to hinder honest Night-walkers -- I Will
try once more --

[Olds. comes out at the Door. Oh Heaven! what the Door open, and my dear
Creature ready to receive me? a thousand thanks to Fate for this blessing. Ah
my dearest.


[Kisses Oldsapps Hand, who leads him in, the Scene being changed returns.
Olds. Ah Rascal -- now I think I have snapt you finely. Within, Lights, Lights,
Lights, bring the Musket and two-handed Sword hither quickly, Lights, Lights.


Henr. Surpised! oh I am in an Ague, what shall I do? will my damned Fortune
never leave me?

[Aside.
Enter Tricklove below. Trick. Oh Heaven! he has not heard me -- but is come
in! This is the most spiteful of all Minutes: However I Have a trick left --

[ Ex. Tricklove.
Olds. 'Sbud, are you all dead? what hoa, Lights here, Lights.


Henr. Never a Chimney, nor Window, nor nothing to make my escape? God's Death!
caught like a Mouse in a Trap.


Olds. Why, when you lazy Dogs; when I say?


Enter Tricklove with Pimpo, below, Night Clothes. Trick. Do it well;
counterfeit your self drunk, and feign as if you mistook him for Cornet, and
five Guinnies are thine.


Pimp. I Will warrant you: Five Guinnies! odsniggers, I Will venture hard for it;
there, there is the Closset-Door; away, Sir, away --


[Guides him to Trick. and goes and stands in's place. Olds. Why Rascals, Sons
of Whores, will you never come? before George I Will make a Bonefire of ye:
Drowzy slaves -- come, Sir, [Enter Servants with lights: Gives a light into
Oldsapps hand. Where are you? How, Sirrah, what makes you here --


[ To Pimpo. Pimp. By Fortune, sincerely, mere Fortune: Prithee let me kiss
thee, sweeting; odsnigs I Will lie with thee for this kindness.


Olds. Away ye drunken Rascal -- but where, where is this Night-Walker -- I Am
sure the Door's locked, he cannot be gone.


Pimp. Prithee, dear Rogue, lend me thy Candle to go to Bed.


Olds. Away, ye saucy drunken Rogue; why Sirrah, are you blind, don't you know
your Master?


Pimp. How, my Master! I hope not so -- Well, if you are my Master, thank you
for letting me in, sincerely -- I Will see if I can find the way to Bed in the
Dark, and so good-boy to you.

[Exit reeling.
Olds. What a pox can this mean?


Enter Tricklove in a Nightgown. Trick. So; I Will second this, it begins well:
What still more disturbances! will you never be quiet? I wonder what the Devil
you untied the Bell for -- Oh my side --


Olds. What the Devil did you tie it there for?


Trick. What! old jealous Brains! I Will tell you for what: The poor Fellow asked
me leave to go and be merry with some of his Friends; and because he should not
disturb you, nor none of the House with his knocking to come in, I contrived
that Bell, and ordered Cornet to let him in; and you must take it away, and
make a bustle here for nothing: Ah you are a muddy-pate.


Olds. Why did not the Rascal speak to me then? before George, I took him for
another; go get you to Bed again.


[Exeunt Servants. Trick. No; 'twas your jealousy, your jealousy, ungrateful
man; Oh my side! my side -- [Weeps. But come hither, I Will try you once more;
and if ever you suspect again, I am resolved for ever to forsake ye -- Mr.
Welford has long courted me without any return: but to be revenged on his
importunity, I made an assignation with him this Night to meet him in the
Garden.


Olds. Very well.


Trick. You see what haste I make to him; and I had told you of this before,
had you not vexed me so to Night -- Now do you put on my Night-Cloaths, and go
thither instead of me; in my shape you may easily have opportunity of snatching
his Sword -- and then be sure to beat him soundly. And when you have revenged
your self sufficiently -- Consider, ungrateful Man, what reason you have to be
jealous? Oh my side!


Olds. Well, before George, thou art mine again; and this discovery has made
amends for all, and thou stands as clear in my thoughts as ever -- My dear,
dear Rogue, prithee forgive what is past -- Come the Night-Cloaths -- for I Will
thither instantly, I Will swinge him -- faith --


[Puts on the Gown, etc. Trick. To be jealous without cause, is the worst of
Ingratitudes, but you know my good nature -- Oh sick! sick.


Olds. Alas, poor Rogue -- so, so I do in troth -- well have but patience till
I come back, I Will let thee see how much I think my self obliged -- ah, a
watching Rascal -- I Will be even with ye presently --


[ Ex Oldsapp. Trick. Ha, ha, ha; so, farewell threescore and three; and now to
my frighted Friend yonder in the Closet -- I am sure not to be interrupted
these two hours -- and when he comes back again, I Will tell him Welford's coming
might be hindered by some accident -- I Will wheedle him into a belief of any
thing -- but I am tardy: Now to my new Lover -- I am sure he expects me --


[She's going out, and Cornet comes and overtakes her. Enter Cornet. Corn.
Madam, I have brought the Gentleman.


Enter Welford. Trick. What Gentleman? Death and Confusion, Welford! Oh
Distraction! what cursed Fortune is this?

He Is the only Man I would have avoided; for he is as dull to me now as a
Husband. What shall I do, I am at my wits end now.


Corn. Mr. Welford, what a mistake is this? by Heaven I thought it had been the
other Gentleman.


Welf. Madam, you sent for me.


Trick. Well the Devil has played his part, I have it once more -- I did, Sir,
and if ever you will oblige your self or me, do what I shall direct you -- I
have told the old Gentleman, intending to put a trick upon him, that I was to
meet you in the Garden to Night; and he in my Gown and Night-Cloaths is gone
thither and expects you: Now if you love me, go into the Garden, and as if you
spoke to me, call him a hundred Whores and Jilts -- for abusing so good a Man
as Mr. Oldsapp, and at last beat him soundly. This will make him ever have a
good Opinion of you, and our Intrigues hereafter shall be less suspected.


Welf. Ha, this will defer my other Intrigue with Mrs. Christina: But come,
it is but half an hour lost -- I Will do it. [Aside. Well Madam, I Will go and do as
you have directed; but though I am the happy Man now -- there was a Bell hung
at your Window, not long since, I Am afraid for another -- besides a meeting
last Night.


Trick. Heaven! how came he to know that! Oh I Will tell you more o'that
hereafter: Go, go, you lose time -- There is a Lover provided, and Marriage is
going forward -- I Will tell thee all another time -- but prithee go and swinge
him soundly first -- do my dear, dear, sweet, honey Rogue, do -- [Thrusts
Welford out. So once more all is well; and in spite of the letts and hindrances
that envious destiny could invent I am free: Come, Sir, you may come out now --


[To Henry in the Closset. Enter Henry. Henr. On your Commands I dare do any
thing; but this methinks is a little strange. Where Is your Dragon?


Trick. Ah, gone, gone, Sir! blown into Air? Fie, fie; a young Gentleman and
ask questions --


Henr. I will no more: Come, let us go in, and laugh at him --


Trick. To drowzy Souls Love shoots his Darts in vain,
But happy Joys that Woman does obtain,
That gets her Lover by her working Brain.

[Exeunt Ambo. The Fifth ACT.
Clarendon House. Enter Welford with a Dark Lanthorn and a Battoon. Welf. WELL,
if ever a beating did a Man a kindness; my old Gallant is obliged to me for
mine; it has quite changed his Nature, and from a rough, waspish -- rude
unmanner'd Fellow, made him as mild, a well-humour'd, sweet-condition'd person,
as a Man would desire to keep company with -- Ha, ha, ha -- He thinks I meant
her the blows, though he felt 'em -- and from that belief, calls me Dear Friend,
and swears he shall never make me amends for his wrong Opinion of me; so that
Intrigue is secure: Now, for my 'tother Mistress, this is the House, and I Will
hide my Lanthorn, lest I am seen by some prying Puppy at a VVindow -- Now good
luck toward me.


[Knocks softly. Enter Sophia. Soph. Hist, hist, come, Sir, come --


[Leads him in. SCENE II.
Carlo's Bedchamber. Enter Christina and Lucinda with a Candle. Lucin. I had
discovered more, but the Constable and Watch hindered me. But hark, Madam, I
believe Mr. Welford's come.


Christ. I know it; and therefore am resolved to be prepared for him: Whatever
my Husband is, I am sure my Virtue was grounded on a better Foundation, than to
be so easily o're-thrown -- I Will cure his rambling humor -- he shall find
there are some virtuous Women. Is the Moor a-Bed?


Lucin. Yes, Madam, and looks more horrid than ever, for her Age and Ugliness
are now plainly discovered -- she seems very well pleased -- and says, though the
World is grown ill-natured now; she has known the time when she has been called
a Foil to set a Jewel in -- and been kissed with appetite.


Christ. Ha, ha, ha -- she will fit him rarely -- how now Cozen?


Enter Sophia. Soph. Yonder he is -- I Have let him into the Parlour. I suppose
he took me for one of the Maids, for he began to be very Rhetorical; but I
swear methinks it is pity to use him so.


Christ. Pish -- prithee spare thy pity for a Subject: Now Lucy -- be sure you
carry the plot politickly -- and tell him at first I am not well, and will have
no company -- and so by degrees consent to let him know I am in Bed -- and
telling him that is my Chamber, send him to the old Moor.


Lucin. The Jest will be to see how reformed he will look in the Morning when
he awakes, and finds the Devil a-Bed with him --


Christ. Nay, we shall have sport enough -- but come, let us begone -- I Will
instantly to Bed and leave my Door open -- that when my Husband comes, he may
make the less Noise. Sure this will appear a proof of my constancy to him.


Soph. If he has faith, it will -- but I am afraid he is an Infidel.


Christ. Come, away, away. Now Lucy, mind your business.


[Exeunt severally. Enter Welford. Lucin. O Sir, I was just coming to you.


Welf. I am glad I have prevented that trouble: Well, where is thy Lady, my
pretty Emissary, hah --


Lucin. Sir, she desired you, by me, to excuse her to Night -- for she is very
ill, and is gone to Bed.


Welf. Not well -- gad my Company shall make her well. Come, there is Money for
thee, prithee let me see her.


Lucin. Well, you will never be able to make me amends, when you know how I Have
employed my wits to serve you --


Welf. Have thou -- and igad I Will not be ungrateful, for I Will serve thee too: I
love not to sleep always in a Palace: A thatch't Cottage, and a Straw Bed, is
sometimes more pleasant to me, than Embost Roofs, or downy Couches -- but to
the purpose -- how goes my affair?


Lucin. Why, Sir, my Mistress loves you --


Welf. There Is more Money for thee.


Lucin. Extremely, Sir, beyond all others.


Welf. More still.


[Gives her more* Lucin. And fills her Husbands empty Head with Scoffs and
Fancies, hers being full of you.


Welf. There Is all I have -- and gad were not my Pocket now empty, more yet
were at thy service for that conceit; but come, which is her Chamber, tell me
that, and I am thine for ever --


Lucin. Oh Lord, Sir, I dare not -- her Chamber! marry Heaven forbid: I hope
you do not take me for a Bawd, do you?


Welf. A Bawd! fie, no; a little harmless Emissary, that goes on Loves Messages
for Charities sake -- Come -- I have another Purse for thee at home, prithee
discover --


Lucin. In good truth I dare not, Sir.


Welf. Nay, still a denial. Come, no more on it, I Will stand between thee and
whatever danger happens.


Lucin. But I am so afraid you will do some mischief or other to her --


Welf. Pugh, what mischief? it is impossible.


Lucin. Well, that is her Chamber Door, Sir -- but I Will be gone, I Will be no
accessory -- I Will have no hand in it --


Welf. No, thou shall not -- come give me thy Light.


Lucin. A Light -- gad forgive me -- what do you mean, Sir; is it manners think ye
to go into a Ladies Chamber at this time o'Night, and disturb her with a Light?


Welf. Well, I Will have none then; pox on her she will awake her presently with
her chattering --

[Exit. Welf.
Enter Sophia. Soph. Is he gone?


Lucin. Just gone, and as eager as a Student at his Commons: he gave me all
this -- and I swear had he given the other half Crown, I believe I should have
relented -- for I began to feel some Motions of pity.


Soph. Nay, I swear I believe thee; but in the mean time you are a fit Jewel to
be trusted -- a Mercinary Waiting Woman is a worse sort of Creature than a
common Strumpet; for she only forfeits her own reputation, but the other first
sells her Ladies honor, and afterward her own, that she may be sure not to go
to the Devil without Company.


Lucin. But I hope, Madam, you see I am a Woman of better Principles --


Soph. I do -- and for thy own sake am glad on it: But come, let us to Bed --


[Exeunt. Enter Welford with a Strong-water-Bottle and a shoe. Welf. Sure I am
haunted by Fairies, that lead me into Dens and Caverns, where none but Witches
inhabit; gad I know not what to think on it -- For going to begin the first
Complement of Love to my Mistress as she slept -- the first thing I laid my
Hand on, on the Bolster, was this -- which by the feeling and smell -- I guess
to be my Grandams Implement, a Strong-Water-Bottle: And in faith a Man would
guess by her look to Day, she had little need of Restoratives. But here is
another that is worse -- for steping back -- I stumbled upon this -- a Shoe I
think; but if she owns it, though she is an Angel by her Face -- she is a Devil by
her Hoof -- I am resolved to inform my self -- come what will on it -- I very
happily left my Lanthorn in a Corner without -- and now 'twill do me excellent
Service.

[Exit, and reenters with a Lanthorn. So, now I shall see what manner of
Female I ha got.

[Exit, and reenters. By all that is good, a Moor, as black as the Devil's
Grandmother; and I find it now, this is a plot put upon me -- this Woman is
damned honest -- but I am glad I mist my Witch of a Bedfellow however -- stay,
now for a Project to be even with 'em -- Here Is another Chamber, the Door's
open too -- and I think that is her Gown upon the Table -- it is so -- Fortune I
thank thee -- now I am sure I am right --


[Ex. into Christina's Chamber. Enter Sophia with a Candle. Soph. I cannot rest
and let this trick pass upon Welford; methinks there is something within me,
that taxes me with great Ingratitude: For, I am afraid, I love him more than
consists with my quiet, which induces me to imagine him worthy of a far better
Bedfellow. Why did I then consent to it? my Cozen's a married Woman, and it is
but Reason in her, but I swear it is Barbarity in me! the height of incivility;
and I Am resolved I will not suffer it. I Will instantly discover the plot to him,
it may be so good an Office may commence a passion in his heart for me too, and
that I am sure would be very agreeable: Hark, what Noise is that?


[Shreek within. Enter Christina followed by Welford. Welf. Nay, Madam, since
you can act Daphne so well, you shall see that I can act Apollo too. I shall be
too swift for you --


Christ. Help, help there; I am undone else. Help, help --


Welf. All that shall not do -- I must be so unmerciful to stint this Noise --
and since I Have ventured so hard for it, am resolved to try the difference
between the old, the Devil yonder my intended Bedfellow -- and Lady Venus, my
now happy purchase -- smile Madam -- and bless your Fortune: Oh my full Heart,
Come, come, I Have not a Minute more to spare, nor have you to consider, nay no
struggling, it must be so --


Soph. Hold, hold, Sir, a word or two with you first.


Welf. 'Sdeath, she here! a plague, and double plague on opportunity, she
always jilts us most, when most we need her --


Soph. This is a wonder to me, prithee how came the plot discovered?


Christ. I know not, the Devil I think owed me a shame, and sought to pay it
this way: But, I am glad thy care prevented it --


Welf. Nay, nay, Madam; there is no going out -- I am resolved to make better
use of my good fortune, than by such a neglect. It Is true, I have no occasion
for a Witness at this time, but since it happens so, I must fortify my self as
well as I can -- come, come, Madam -- Hey -- what do I see Raymond here?


[Starts. Enter Henry. Henr. Jack Welford here, and at this time of Night?
Death and Confusion! what means this? How now, Sir, what business have you here
with my Wife.


Welf. His Wife -- gad I am in a fine condition?


Henr. Sir, answer me, and quickly -- lest I force it from you another way;
what, you designed an Intrigue with her to Night I warrant, and mistook my
House for your Ordinary in Durham-Yard.


Soph. I Will venture, this must do or nothing. How, Sir, an Intrigue with her --
pray be no longer guilty of such a mistake, I assure you, Mr. Welford's
business here is with me.


Henr. With you?


Soph. With me, Sir; and a business of weight too; I can assure you; for he has
this Night given me a promise of Marriage.


Welf. Death! what is this -- Madam, what do you mean, I know nothing of the
business?

[Aside.
Soph. Next week say you, Sir -- fie, I swear 'twill be indiscreetly to marry
so soon -- (a word more and you're undone!) No, no -- I think it is fit we
consider a little -- a Month hence will be time enough; indeed, Sir, next week
is too soon.


Welf. Faith and so it is, what a Devil shall I do in this case?


Henr. Nay, if he comes to my Neice all is well again -- he has a good Estate,
and will be a fit match for her -- but gad I thought his business had been with
my Wife when I came in -- but see how Men may be mistaken --


Soph. Pray Uncle salute him kindly, do it as to one that is shortly to be my
Husband --


Welf. What Husband, Madam! gad I must not let this pass --


Henr. What Husband, Sir? do you begin to recant already, nay then I suspect
something. Come, Sir, repeat your Promises to her instantly before me -- or my
jealousy will give me cause to believe my wife was concerned here -- it will,
Sir -- if otherwise, you need not study I am sure, for she has six thousand
Pound, and merits you every way.


Welf. Six thousand Pound! gad this is better than I expected, a pretty Lady
too! hah -- I think I need not stand out indeed -- six thousand Pound!


Henr. Come, what say you, Sir?


Welf. Say! why I say, Sir, if she has six thousand pound, I will confirm my
promises to her, I Will marry her at a minutes warning.


Henr. That was spoke like a Friend -- let me embrace thee, and give thee
thanks for making our knot of Friendship stronger by this Alliance -- Come, my
dear, let us leave 'em together; they have a thousand things to say, I know --
and it is rudeness to hinder 'em; farewell -- I believe it is near break of day
-- I Will -- take an hours rest, and then Neice -- I Will go to the Alderman, and
speak to him to get your Money ready -- (So, this gives an opportunity of
visiting my new Mistress again, according to my promise;) Come, my dear, this
plaguey business does always so disturb thee -- but --

[ Ex. Henry and Christina.
Welf. I swear, Madam, this was a cunning cruelty, I have not heard of -- to
challenge me un-arm'd, and take my Heart by surprise; methinks in Conscience
you should have given me an hours warning.


Soph. If you think me cruel, Sir, I can release your promise: nay, would choose
to do it, rather than give you occasion to boast of my kindness -- I know you,
Sir, and am acquainted with your humor.


Welf. I am glad on it faith -- for, when I was as well acquainted with your
person -- who can imagine the blessing that will follow -- In brief, Madam, I
am resolved to pursue what is so well begun, and will marry ye indeed -- for
the present I Will leave you to consider, and go to settle some affairs of my own
-- but believe I would not loose the hopes I have in thee, nor the possession
of the joys that are in prospect -- for all the wealth of the World --


Shop. Nor I -- I swear --


[Exeunt severally SCENE III.
Table, Chairs, and Bottles of Wine. Enter Sir Fredrick, Lovel, Colonel Buff,
and Pimpo. Sir Fred. I WILL lay any Man five Guinneys upon my Bowls to day;


Will. Lovel, what say thou? will thou take me?


Lov. Not I, Sir -- but is she at leisure now, think thou? Come, thou art an
honest Fellow, I may trust thee.


[ To Pimpo. Pimp. Sincerely I know not, Sir -- I hope you take me for a more
conscientious Person, than to have any thing to do in Women's Affairs. There Is
no Money stirring with him, he shall know nothing.


Sir Fred. Come, Lovel, take your Glass; hark you, Pimpo, I am your Friend --
keep her Affairs from these, and let me know all -- 'twas I that sent for thee
-- when is the best time to wait on her, ha? softly, when, I say -- come, I am
thy Friend I tell thee.


Pimp. Ay, ay; your Servant, Sir; a Friend quoth a -- (he has no Money
neither.) Well -- there is a number of Consumptive Knights now adays; good, Sir
-- do not tempt me: Sincerely, I am a Man of better Principles I tell you --
and if this be the thing you sent to me for --


Sir Fred. Dam him; this is a zealous Rogue -- I Will banter him -- hark'ee,
Elubu bizeldoclaman -- bila, shaw!


[Speaks Gibberish. Pomp. Sir --


Sir Fred. Carlid donzal. pulin tack lillikaw -- do prithee.


Pimp. Do what, Sir; I do not understand one word you say.


Buff. Ha, ha, ha, he plays the wag -- he does in faith -- Well, Sir Fredrick --
you will never leave this humor -- but honest, worthy Gentleman, pray a word
with you.


Sir Fred. Honest, worthy Gentleman; mark the Colonel's Complement: I warrant
he has been studying all this morning for it.


Buff. Do not trust a secret in these slight Bottoms; they leak presently: mine
is the same business -- the Lady, the Lady -- thou understand'st me -- by the
Blade she is a dainty one -- and I think I am the fittest for her -- hah --
come -- when is the time? serve me but in this -- and if ever thou have a mind
to be a Soldier -- I Will stand thy Friend -- I Will do thy business for thee


Pimp. So -- here is another Friend -- and consequently no Money, for it is a
Maxim -- that he that professes most Friendship to you, will be sure not to
lend you Money -- a pox I Will have nothing to do with such sneaking Fellows --
not I -- for like my honest Brethren the Quakers, though I am a Rascal when
there is Money to be got sincerely, I Will be a Saint when there is none.


Enter Oldsapp. Lov. Hah, Squire! what brought you hither this Morning? hah --


[Strikes him on the Shoulder. Olds. Oh! no more of that, Sir; before George I
am very sore about the Back and Shoulders -- I Will tell thee what, Will. I was
beaten last Night Man, swing'd confoundedly -- ha, ha, Jack Welford did it --
well say you what you will, I am confirmed he is the honestest Fellow in
Christendom --


Lov It Is much to hear a Man say so of one that has beaten him --


Olds. Ah -- I Will say it again, and again -- his honest beating has much
obliged me -- and I am his humble Servant in black and blue for it -- things are
cleared Man -- all doubts and suspicions vanished -- hah -- I could jump -- I
am so merry --


Sir Fred. Hark'ee, Squire -- prithee come hither a little.

[Takes him aside. I have in Essex a Manor of Land, and I would know whether,
Elblizzelmontablementa blisigonable -- now you can tell --


[He banters. Olds. What say you, Sir Fredrick?


Sir Fred. Why look you, Sir -- my Land is -- deelishable, etc. now you can
give me information --


Olds. Of what? what a Devil is it you say? before George I cannot understand you.


Omnes. Hah, ha, ha --


Olds. Well, you play the Wag with me, I warrant -- but no matter, I am in so
good a humor now, that I Will take any thing; and if we meet at the
Bowling-Green anon -- the Glass shall go round merrily, in faith -- till when,
your Servant, I have now a little business --

[ Exit Oldsapp.
Sir Fred. Come, Colonel; shall we go and dine?


Buff. Not I, Sir, I have some business must be done, pray excuse me.


Pimp. Now to make amends, for once I Will condescend to strain my Conscience for
ye, therefore go and stand all ready at the Back-Garden-Gate, and I Will see if
the Old Man be safe, and come and convey ye into the House, and bestow ye
conveniently -- and then he she likes best is sure to have her company --


Lov. Rare Rogue! do this, and I am bound to thee for ever.


Sir Fred. And so am I.


Buff. And I -- by the Blade I believe he is a very honest Fellow --


Pimp. Oh is it come to that? a rare Wheel -- go then, and be sure you miss not
the hour -- for I Will be ready for ye.


Buff. I Will warrant thee -- a very honest Fellow in faith.


[Exeunt. Pimp. Ay, ay, a very honest Fellow -- ha, ha, ha: Am not I a cunning
Rascal now, by gadsniggs I am -- For I will make all these that think to serve
themselves in this business and fool me, fool themselves and serve me -- By
abusing them, I shall get my self into my Mistresses favor again, who I know
hates 'em -- They must be Ferreting -- well -- sure this is the most immoderate
whoring Age that e're was kown: No matter Signior you fleece your self
indifferently amongst them -- Ha, ha, ha -- of my Conscience I have made up
more wanton matches, than ever Mosely did -- And what then? why it is my Trade,
and the frozen Zealots will allow a Man to labor in his Vocation -- Besides I
employ but my Deputy.

For since all Crimes with profit come off clearly,
It Is Profit is the Pimp, not I sincerely --
[Exit.
SCENE Ultima.
Cardinal State. Enter Henry and Tricklove. Trick. NEver argue to the contrary,
for you shall stay and dine here. The old Gentleman is now in so good a humor,
that I can pretend you are my Kinsman, or any thing -- I am sure he will not
suspect.


Henr. Do not think my dear, it is possible for me to be weary of thy Company;
but I fear some Inconveniences may happen which we think not of; besides I
promised faithfully to come home to Dinner, and I have a Friend or two that will
stay for me.


Trick. You may if you please satisfy that with a Letter; make no more
excuses, for I command you stay, and if you had rather serve a little
insignificant business before obeying my commands, you may do what you please.


Henr. No, thou have Charms enough to make a Hermit obey, one that never knew
what Love or Beauty meant; but prithee did the old Fox suspect nothing -- if he
had come into the Closet where I was locked up last night, what should I have
done then?


Trick. He! poor sneaking old Fool, he never mistrusts when there is an
occasion, but when there is none: For, observe this, your old, doting,
impotent, keeping Fool -- if ever he be jealous of his Mistress, it is so much
to his loss; for she will still augment it, and by that means get one of his
Bags, or a snip of his Estate for her plot at last, the cause shall always fall
on her side, and then he is sure to pay soundly for his jealousy, though he has
never so much cause for it.


Henr. Why, well said; and in faith, if I could bring my reason to dispense with
any rules for Love and Intrigue but my own, I Would sooner take thine, than any
Woman's in Christendom --


Trick. There Is a Book within in the Closet will teach you more, prithee go
fetch it.


Henr. That I will, if it be only for the curiosity of knowing the Author --

[Exit.
Enter Welford. Welf. Madam, though your last plot has reconciled me to
Oldsapp, I am not yet satisfied in point of Love -- I must know more of this
new Rascal -- and I think this a very fit opportunity.


Trick. Again interrupted, and by him too? why what a madness is this of you,
Sir, to come hither to me at so unseasonable a Minute -- though the old Man has
retained a good Opinion of you, do you think 'twill not make him suspect afresh,
if he sees you here alone with me -- go -- for Heaven's sake go, go.


Welf. The old Man! why where is he?


Trick. Hush! where is he -- why there, in that Closet there -- go, go: nay go
I say -- hark, don't you hear him?


Welf. Nay, now I am sure I Have found you out -- for I saw him not a quarter of
an hour agon, go into the Devil Tavern -- and I am resolved to see who inhabits
that Closet before I go.


Trick. Oh Devil chance, taken thus! hah, you are so jealous! let me go, and I Will
open the Closet Door --


Welf. No, no, Madam, I Will have patience --


[Holds her, and whilst she is struggling -- Enter Henry with a Book. Henr. Oh
dam him, Madam, this is an insipid Fellow: he writes -- Death, Welford here?


[Both start. Welf. Raymond! why could the Devil find none to affront me in
this nature, but one of my own Tribe, a Kinsman --


Trick. How, his Friend! what a mischievous plot is this!

[Aside.
Welf. Gad, I begin to understand the plot now: So, Sir, I see you are the Man
of Intrigue still: You were the person the Bell was let down for last Night --
but you may thank Fortune you are to be my Kinsman, and that the value I have
for this trifle makes me think her not worth my Sword, or else this should not
pass so --


Henr. Ha, ha, ha, I am glad of this, was it his Mistress all this while? pass
as it will, Sir, all I can say, is, that I was ignorant you were concerned with
her, and if that is not enough to satisfy you, Sir -- I wear a Sword as well
as another --


Welf. Well, the Devil did take his progress last Night, that is certain: but
you may take her, Sir. [Oldsapp standing at the Door. And though you boast your
self beforehand with me, in winning her from me -- I knew her first -- there I
was beforehand with you --


Henr. With all my Heart, Sir, I have known her too -- when perhaps you have
been locked out -- since you go to that --


Olds. Oh, the Devil! what is this I hear? What, both known her!


Trick. Death -- I am undone! here is the old Man: Nay, Gentlemen, be not so
cruel to ruin me -- do but second me, and I Will bring all about yet.


Henry. I Will do any thing, what is it?


Welf. And I, for thou art a damned Jilt, I Will be charitable to thee, thou
shall have one Cully left.


Trick. Mind what I say then: You known to her -- fie, I wonder you are not
ashamed to talk so; but this it is, when poor innocent Gentlewomen venture
their reputation in such Hands. Now answer --

[Aside.
Welf. Why, Madam, why should you speak for her, you know her not --


Olds. Ha! what is this?


Henr. You are not concerned with her, I hope?


Trick. I dare swear you were hardly ever three times in her Company, and yet
like impudent Creatures you dare say you are known of her -- Ah it is a wicked
Age this.

[Aside.
Olds. Oh, they mean some body else; but before George, at first, I was afraid
they spoke of her; and gad my heart was at my mouth -- Dear Welford, your
humble Servant; welcome in faith -- who is this Gentleman, a Friend of thine?


Welf. Yes, Sir, and one that will be very proud of your acquaintance.


Olds. Before George, I shall be proud of his too: Sir, your most obedient
Servant -- Here, hey, Boy -- bring half a dozen Bottles of Claret.


Enter Lucinda, with Christina, Sophia, masked. Lucin. See, Madam; there they
are, and with her, I told you I could not miss the House.


Christ. It Is so, Oh Heaven! is this the Fate of Marriage?


Soph. Welford here too -- if he keeps this custom, I find I shall buy his Loaf
at a dear rate.


[Lucinda goes and whispers Henry. Henr. A Lady speak with me, say thou?

Tell her, I am at her service -- I hope some new adventure --


Christ. Sir, I desire a word in private with you?


Henr. In private! with all my Heart, Madam: this Room, I confess, is too
public for any business -- if you please, Madam, I Will wait on you to your
Lodging.


Christ. No, Sir, mine is a public business -- you will guess it so when you
see my Face. Now, what think you, Sir?


[Pulls off her Mask. Henr. My Wife!


Welf. Nay, Madam, since my Friend is entertaining your Companion, be pleased
to give me the Liberty of making my address to you -- faith I must kiss your
hand -- Death my Mistress!


Olds. What are these Women, my Dear, do know 'em?


Trick. Not I, do you think I am acquainted with Town Women? Rare Gallants!
they have their haunts I see.

[Aside.
Christ. Is this your Alderman that was to pay the Money, Sir?


Henr. Nay, prithee sweet, I Will give thee a reason for my being here.


Soph. And is this your preparative for Marriage, Sir?


Welf. Preparative! prithee, what do thou mean? why that Lady there is my
Aunt -- I hope you will give a Man leave to visit his Relations.


Soph. Your Aunt! yes; so that Lady was your Cozen once, do you remember that?


Henr. Well; then in brief, we'll give you full satisfaction at home, but no
more words of it here -- you see we are observed; and 'twill be for neither of
your Honors to make discovery: In the mean time, believe your Jealousy always
gives you the wrong end of the prospect -- but hush, more of that anon --


Enter Pimpo. Pimp. Sir, now I Will give you cause to say, I am a Man of Wit and
Design; ha, ha, ha -- sincerely I have played such a pranck, such an exploit --


Olds. What, Sirrah! you are upon some new sham, are you?


Pimp. Sham, O Lord! when I talk of Wit -- he talks of shaming: Madam, pray do
you be more credulous -- and hear me. Sir Fredrick, Mr. Lovel, and Colonel Buff
-- you know have long loved you?


Olds. How Is this?


Pimp. You, I know hate them; and though I have been often solicited by 'em
severally to bring 'em into your Company, I never did; but sincerely, to show
my duty to ye, I have now put a pleasant trick upon 'em.


Olds. Have thou! well said; prithee what is it?


Pimp. Oh no, Sir, you need not know; I am upon the sham, am I?


Olds. Well, well, I was mistaken; but prithee, dear Rogue, let us hear it.


Pimp. Why, I have brought 'em all into the House, and placed 'em very
conveniently. One of 'em stands there in the Pantry tied up in a Meal-Sack --
and another sits sneaking in a Corner of the Wash-house -- hid between two
stinking Half-Tubs clapped together -- and the other is in the 'Cellar, all waiting
for the Watchword. Now stand all close and be silent, and you shall see rare
sport betwixt 'em.


Olds. Ha, ha, ha -- faith so 'twill -- Gentlemen and Ladies, pray stand close.


Pimp. First, for my adventrous Lover in the Cellar here -- hem, peugh --


[Whistles. [Lovel peeps up without his Perriwig. Lov. Is he gone, Pimpo -- ha
-- is the old Foel gone?


Pimp. Ay, ay, Sir -- Come, come up quickly --


Lov. This was a cunning contrivance, I swear; but pox on it I have lost my
Perriwig here; and it is so damnable dark I cannot find it; prithee get a
Candle, for you know to be seen by her without a Perriwig --


Olds. Will be a great hindrance to your Intrigue; hah --


Lov. How! betrayed! Oh this damned Rascal --


Pimp. Ha, ha, ha -- But sincerely, Sir, it is none of my fault; for you know I
often told you, what a Cause without Money must of necessity come to.


Olds. You are a precious Friend indeed; but I shall take care of ye hereafter.

[A Noise within. How now! what is that makes a Noise in the Pantry. Let Us see
-- Sir Fredrick!


[Opens the Sack and discovers Sir Fredrick. Sir Fred. Oh! I Am almost
smothered: Oh that Rogue! by King Ieffery, I am almost choakt with Meal --


Buff. within. Oh, oh, oh.


[Noise. Welf. Hark! there is another voice -- I think.


Enter Colonel Buff, (his Hair wet.) Olds. Hey! what my old Boy of the Bilbo,
Colonel Buff too; before George, this is strange; nay, nay, no flinching now;
why what have thou been a swimming old stump -- hah --


Buff. Where is this Rogue? this Dog? I Will cut him into Morsels --


Pimp. Colonel, you know you are my Friend, Colonel -- ha, ha, ha -- and are to
help me to a place -- ha, ha, ha --


Olds. Let him alone, it is a wag -- but prithee how came this mischance?


Buff. Why, Sir, the Rascal hid me in the Wash-house, between two Tubs -- and I
suppose you know upon what design; and hearing the whistle, making haste to get
out, I stumbled headlong into another Tub full of Water, which I believe the
Rogue had set there for that purpose; but I shall find a time --


Olds. Ha, ha, ha -- a Tub of Water -- 'faith 'twould have been hard, that you
that have been in the Army where so many Bullets have whiz'd about your Ears,
should have died like a Rat in a Tub of Water -- But Colonel --


Buff. Pray, Sir, no more, I am not in a condition now to answer questions;
only this I Will say, I can resent such an injury, and so farewell --


[Ex. Colonel. Henr. This was a pleasant discovery, faith Squire; but see what
Love is.


Sir Fred. Sirrah, did my kindness to you, and all my promises, merit no better
reward than this?


Pimp. Why, sincerely you did not carry it well, Sir; for had you had but
patience till the case and quiddits of the proposals determined, or to be made
plain betwixt Sir Anthony and Sir Rowland, had been first fetched over with a
whim-wham for the better contriving of the business, the Intrigue had been
settled, fixed, ratified and confirmed, to order or declare a nonsuit as to
matter of moment, significant with all propositions that should concern and
persuade you, touching the great Cham of Tartary, or the Grand Signior; do you
conceive me?


Sir Fred. Impudent Rascal! what, a Banter too! nay, then it is time to hide my
self --

[Ex. Sir Fredrick.
Olds. Ha, ha, ha -- the bantring Fool is gone off in a rage: Well, Sirrah, for
this piece of service, Sneakey and I here forgive your past faults -- Come,
Gentlemen, lets go in and be merry. Lovel, thou shall go too; thou have been
treacherous it is true, but Love makes many a Man so: Come, I forgive thee --


Welf. Will thou never leave this mad humor of intriguing, Will. sure Age will
wean thee from it.


Lov. Prithee, do not tell me of Age; there is no such thing in Nature; for he
that is old as thou call'st it, never thinks himself so; at least I shall not as
long as I can drink a Bumper, what say thou, Bully -- hah?


Olds. No, before George I Am of your Opinion; it is impossible for a man of
Spirit to be old, especially if he has such a Cordial as this by his side; hah,
little Pigs-nies? gad I can hardly forbear kissing her before company: Here Is a
Jewel Gentlemen -- here she stands that is not only the most constant Woman in
Christendom, but there is never a Wife in all Europe has such honest principles
-- and so give me thy Hand, I Am thine for ever.


Welf. Put a right value on her then, Sir; for give me leave to tell you, Sir,
such Jewels are very scarce now adays --


Pimp. Well, if ever the Devil sat brooding to do Mankind an ill turn, 'twas
certainly in a Woman; They are made up of nothing but mischief: If they are
Wives they Cuckold ye; if Maids they beggar ye; if Whores they jilt ye: Every
way you are sure to loose if a Woman be concerned in your business: Well, did
not Interest tie my Tongue, I could say something, but mum, let it rest, all
will out one day.


Olds. Come, come, we waste the time, pray let us go in; and to divert ye an
hour or two -- I Will relate to you the Intrigues that past between Sneakey and
I, at our first acquaintance; 'twill make ye laugh 'faith; and I think I have a
pretty way of telling a story too; besides, I can teach you a secure way to
keep your Misses constant; can I not, Sue.


Trick. Oh, without doubt, Sir, they see you have given proof of it.

But to forge plots in an extremity,
Let every Mistress henceforth learn of me.

[Exeunt omnes. EPILOGUE
Spoken by Mrs. Currer. LIKE some true Friend that makes a willing Feast,
And him he loves does still invite his Guest;
Although his Treat prove course, is sure to use
A hearty welcome, and a kind excuse:
So the Poet fearing this his Case may be,
TO excuse the Play's Defects has chose out me:
But I, swear, am loath to venture it,
You deal as ill with Women now as Wit:
And like true Gallants of this wicked Town,
Debauch 'um first, and after cry 'um down --
Ah, happy were the former Antique Days,
When Love and Wit, were taught in Schools, not Plays:
When Formal Grandees priviledg'd the Creature,
Allowed Intrigues, and called 'um Scapes of Nature --
When Plays would do, without Sing, Show or Dance,
And Critics slept in Native-Ignorance:
But now, about the World they spread amain --
Like Numerous Weeds that choke the Prosperous Grain:
However, though I know it is against the mind,
Yet, Gallants if you please* you may be kind,
Prove so -- or may this Curse your Torture be;
May you all live, till you are as dull as he;
And all your darling Misses prove like me.
Point. to Olds. But if you change your damning tempers, then,
As Heaven knows I love kind natured Men,
May there inconstant prove not one in ten.
Not peevish -- proud -- bit mild and silent all*
If our Sex has faults blame the Orignal,
For all our frailties came by Adam's fall.
FINIS.
A Catalogue of some PLAYS Printed for J. Magnes and R. Bentley.
TArtuff: or, The French Puritan. A Comody acted at the Theater Royal, by their
Majesty's Servants. Written in French by the Famed Wit of France, Mounsieur
Moliner, and made English by Mr. M. Medburn.

Plays written by Madam Behne.
The forced Marriage: or, The Jealous Bridegroom. A Comedy acted at the Dukes
Theater.

Abdelazzar: or, The Moor's Revenge. A Tragedy acted at the Dukes Theater.

The Town-Fop: or, Sir Timothy Tawdry. A Comedy acted at the Dukes Theater.

Plays written by Mr. Ia. Howard.
All mistaken: or, The Mad Couple. A Comedy acted at the Theater Royal, by
their Majesty's Servants.

The English Monsieur. A Comedy acted at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's
Servants.

Plays written by Mr. Crown.
Calisto: or, The Chaste Nymph. A Masque, acted at Court by the Lady Mary, the
Lady Anne, and many other Persons of the greatest Quality in England.

The Country-VVit. A Comedy acted at the Dukes Theater.

The Destruction of Jerusalem by Titus Vespasian, in two Parts, acted at the
Theater Royal, by their Majesty's Servants. Price 2 s.

Plays written by Mr. Lee.
The Tragedy of Nero. Acted at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's Servants.

S^phonisba: or, Hannibal overthrown. Tragedy acted at the Theater Royal, by
their Majesty's Servants.

The Court of Augustus Caesar, or Gloriana. A Tragedy acted at the Theater
Royal.

The Princess of Cleve a famous Romance, in the Press.


