A DEMONSTRATION Of the Necessity of settling some Gospel-Government Amongst
the Churches of Christ in this NATION; Held forth in an Answer to a Querie,
whereby Mr. Saltmarsh did once endeavor to hinder the Settlement of all
Church Government in the NATION.

Written in the Year 1646. by Mr. John Dury, Minister of the Gospel.

And now Published for the present Use of these Times, wherein it may be
seasonable to be taken into Consideration, for the preventing of further
Confusion and Disorder amongst the Professors of the Gospel;

LONDON, Printed for Richard Wodnothe in Leaden-hall-Market, next door to the
Golden Heart, 1654.

To the READER.
Christian Reader,
I Have thought good to publish at this time, this Answer of Mr. Dury's to Mr.
Salt-marsh, though written some years ago, viz. in the year 1646. because it
may be now happily more seasonable, then when he first did Pen it. It was not
published then, because some other Answers were then put forth, which did seem
to give satisfaction to the multitude, though they were not written so
Impartially, and with that moderation of Spirit: But seeing the times seem to
be now ripened for some kind of Settlement, and the inconveniencie of the
Delay, which Mr. Saltmarsh did then plead for, is more fully discovered then
was then foreseen; hence perhaps it may fall out, that the way of
Vnprejudicate Orderliness, which is here held forth, may be thought worth some
due Consideration amongst the Churches, and by Gods blessing may prove some
help to such as are willing to Associate themselves without any pretense to
Worldly Power to impose the same upon others, but only to make use amongst
themselves of Gospell-Ordinances for mutual Edification. Mr. Saltmarsh did
then stumble at the pretense of Power to settle the Churches of the
Presbyterian Way, with Authority over others, which perhaps might be in the
thoughts of some Ministers; but I suppose it is now evident, that none do any
more affect any such Dominion over their Neighbors as he apprehended; yet that
there ought to be some Orderly Way of Government in the Societies of Saints,
which are the House of God, I suppose will be without all dispute; and how far
that may be settled amongst the Saints, and approved by a State, this Treatise
will in some measure I hope manifest. And that Mr. Duryes meaning may not be
mistaken, as if he would have the Magistrate to impose by Humane Authority, the
Ordinances of Christ, which he counts such, and suffer none to have liberty but
such as practice the Way which he approves: I have added unto this Treatise, a
Discourse which the Author sent unto me upon another occasion to be
Communicated unto Captain Coysh of Worthy Memory, wherein he opens himself
concerning the Magistrates Duty as a Christian in advancing Church Government
as it is National, which perhaps may at this time also be more seasonable then
formerly it could have been, to work Peace and Unity amongst the Professors of
the Truth: and that it may work somewhat toward this effect, I offer it unto
Thee, and beseech the Lord to bless it, in whom I rest ever,

Thy faithful Friend and Servant, Samuel Hartlib.

Faults escaped in Printing.
Page 5. line 5. for a Kingdom, read the Kingdom. p. 3. l. 5. f. happiness
unto, r. happiness of. p. 21. l. 24. f. 4th. Chapter r. 14th Chapter p. 28. l. 26. f.
is to Gods will, r. is according to Gods will. p. 35. l. 20. f. hot, r. not.

An Introduction to Mr. Samuel Hartlib. Showing the End of Mr. Saltmarsh his
Querie, and the Heads of the Answer to be given to it.
Loving Friend,
YOu know you can command the discovery of my judgment in all things, which
have any reference to the advancement of Truth, and the Counsels of Peace.
Therefore although Mr. Saltmarsh his Pamphlet is scarce worth the Answer, yet I
shall not leave your desire unanswered, so far as my poor Talent can be useful
in this kind, and time will permit. Some scrupulous Consciences (as these times
are) may be staggered with his Suggestions: and there is a Method of Error in
that way of starting matters which he has followed, fit to seduce and entangle
the ignorant, and such as are partially prepossessed against their Brethren;
and yet he perhaps himself without any set purpose may be unawares led into
it; for a deceived heart does turn men aside, that they cannot deliver their
own souls. Sure I am he is full of prejudicate thoughts, and by reason of the
same has lost his true Aim, and the way of Resolving his own Querie. For he
that makes a Querie, should at least seem to make a doubt thereof, and then
endeavor either to show, or to seek the way how to resolve it without
partiality. But Mr. Saltmarsh seems not to intend any such thing; because his
whole Discourse is framed only to raise doubts in the weaker, and not to crave
the opinion of any, or to receive the resolution of his Querie from the Wiser.
Perhaps some good opinion of his own Sufficiency, (sure is was no fear of
insufficiency) to determine so weighty a matter, has made him thus forward to
persuade the continuance of our Unsettlement in Government. But I suppose his
ingenuity may be such, that although he made at first no doubt of determining
his Querie; yet his Determination thereof may be made upon after thoughts
doubtful to himself. Therefore I shall endeavor as briefly as may be, to let
you see how a Doubt of this nature should be resolved.

But before I enter upon this Task, I would desire him (if I were acquainted
with him) to Answer a Question, whereby he would perhaps clear a doubt of mine,
touching his Ingenuity in handling this Querie; which when I have done, I shall
tell you how I purpose to proceed in Answering it.

My Question is, Wherefore in the place of the Scripture, 2 Cor. 10.8. (quoted
in his Title Page) he has changed the words of the Text, putting in stead of
Edification, the word Instruction? There is no likelihood that this is a fault
of the Printer; or if it had been his fault, that it would have been left
uncorrected, the words being so much different. But every one that reads Mr.
Saltmarsh his Discourse, and takes notice of his Aim, will easily find that
the one word is purposly put for the other, to forestall the mind of the
unwarie and simple Reader, by whom Quotations are not examined, with a Notion
as from the Word of God, which may prepare him to receive without scruple that
which he intends afterward to insinuate and deliver. Namely that it is fit the
Ministerial Charge should be restrained by the Civil power only to Teaching.
If this be not his aim, I would pray him to let me know ingenuously how the
alteration does come? But if he had this subtilty in his Aim, as a man may
suspect he had; then I must tell him ingenuously, that I wonder he durst do so,
not only in a matter of such consequence, but chiefly in respect of the Word
of God. I say again, I wounder he should dare to do so in respect of the Charge
which the Apostle gives him, To hold fast the form of sound words delivered
unto him, 2 Timothy 1.13. For if this be his practice to alter the sound words of
the Spirit, I would tell him that in so doing* he does make his first words of
his Title Page to be found falls; wherein he does pretend the advancement of
Truth and Peace. For if he dare presume to corrupt the Word of God, for the
easier Introduction of some opinion of his own; what Truth can we find to be in
him? or what Peace can he expect from any that perceives this deceitful
dealing, and how will he answer it to God, that says, Add thou not to his
Word, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar, Prove. 30.6. He that does
allege the Word falsely, will have no great care to divide it rightly, and
apply it truly. I speak this upon a supposall, which I would have him to take
away, by showing how the Word of the Text comes to be Changed. For I rejoice
not in iniquity, but in the Truth as Charity does command me to do, 1 Cor. 13.6.

Now I will tell you how I purpose to proceed in Answering his Querie, if God
permit.

First, I will reflect upon the Question in it self, as a matter of serious
Deliberation, which may be considered for the advancement of Truth and Peace.

Secondly, I intend to reflect upon the Question, as he does handle it, to
observe what Truth is in his Decision, and how far the Way which he does
suggest, is like to produce Peace.

Thirdly, I will endeavor by Gods Assistance, to sughe^ a Word of Advice upon
the whole Matter, which may be useful to prevent the increase of Error and
strife.

The first Part.
The Querie is,
Whether it be fit yea or no, according to the Principles of true Religion and
State; to settle any Church Government over a Kingdom hastily or not: and with
the power commonly desired in the hands of the Ministers?

LEt us look deliberately upon this Querie, and to that effect let us take it
into pieces. The parts thereof are three.

First, The thing whereof the Question is made.

Secondly. The Question which is made of that thing.

Thirdly, The limitations of the Thing and Question.

The thing whereof the Question is made, is, of Church Government over the
Kingdom.

The Question made hereof, or the thing sought after, is to know; Whether yea
or no it be fit, that any such thing should be hastily settled?

The limitation of the thing whereof the Question is made; is, Whether the
Government should be, with the Power commonly desired in the hands of the
Ministers?

The limitation of the Question is; Whether that Settlement can be, according
to the Principles of true Religion and State?

If now any will enter into a serious deliberation upon the Matter, to resolve
himself without partiality in this Question; he must go orderly to work by a
Rule, and not let his mind rove at random, to snatch at incident thoughts:
Therefore in the first place he must needs understand, what is meant by all the
words of the Querie: for without this foundation all will be in vain, because
the matter not being known which is to be spoken unto, nothing can be said of
it to any purpose.

And in the second place, he must be able to compare the particulars understood
orderly, one with another if need be, but chiefly with the intent of the
Question, to find out by the result of the comparison, what is to be answered
upon the whole Matter.

Let us then endeavor to follow these ways.

First, I conceive that by the word Church, is meant a certain number of Souls
called out of the world to be Saints; and joined together in the true
profession of Christianity. Or thus: The Church is the Company of Souls, as
they are Christ's subjects in the world.

I reflect here upon Men as souls, not excluding their bodies; because the soul
is the immediate subject upon which Christ does work; and because men as they
are bodies and have outward estates, are properly the immediate subjects upon
which worldly Kingdoms work. Yet I do not deny but souls are also in some kind
subjected to Superior Powers, Romans 13.1. but that is only in relation to the
bodily life which they have: and so are Bodies in like manner subjects unto
Christ; namely in respect of that spiritual life whereby they are acted through
their souls. So we see that one and the same person is two ways in subjection:
one way to Christ, another way to the Civil Magistrate; and if the distinction
of this twofold subjection be rightly understood, and the true foundation
thereof cleared, many doubts otherwise insoluble will easily be decided
concerning the limits and joint consistence of the Civil and Ecclesiastical
Powers. For as the Soul does relate the Body in spiritual matters, so does
Christ's power in the Church relate to the subjects of a State: and as the Body
does relate to the Soul in outward matters, so does the Civil Power relate to
the Church of Christ, that is to Men as they are his subjects. The properties
of these relations will determine the Spheres of these Powers, according to the
extent of the influence of their virtue each upon other; and according to the
subordination of their ends unto the happiness unto the Whole.

Secondly, I conceive by that which is called Government in General, that is
meant the right ordering and guiding of Subjects in the course of their life
toward the proper end thereof; and consequently by Church Government in
particular, I must conceive the right ordering and guiding of men's souls by
Christ's power in the course of their spiritual life, tending to settle them in
a perpetual communion of happiness with God the Father and Himself.

Thirdly, By the Kingdom I understand the society of English men, as they are
united in their outward life under the Government and Laws which are settled
for their Peace and Safety therein.

Now when the Question is of a Church Government over this Kingdom; the
meaning is of a Government that should be settled in and throughout the
Kingdom, namely in all the Churches thereof; and not over and above the
Authority and Power of the Kingdom. For as the Soul is not properly over the
Body, but in it, and this not under the Soul, but united to it, and both are in
the same person: so we may conceive of the Church and Kingdom; that as the
Kingdom is a worldly Society, the Church is not over it, nor it under the
Church, but both are united together in one Christian State; as the life of the
soul by the Spirit; and of the Body by the outward senses, are in one and the
same Man. Thus then the words are to be understood in respect of the matter of
the Question; in respect of the Scope or Thing questioned, we must also
understand what is is meant by a Settlement, and by a hasty settlement, and by
that which is called fitness.

I conceive that by a Settlement is meant here, an Authoritative Determination
of all things belonging to the Government of Souls, as they are to be practiced
throughout the Churches of this Kingdom: so that in case of disobedience, such
as are refractory against that determination, and disturb the public Peace
by disorderly walking, shall be liable to suffer what the Power of the State
shall inflict upon them.

By the hastiness of this Settlement, I conceive is meant, not any rash or
unadvised speed; but the suddenness of that determination without further
delays, proceeding from debatements and deliberations concerning the same.

And by the fitness of such a Settlement, I suppose is meant the convenience,
and usefulness of the thing, for the public good both of Church and State,
and the private benefit of souls therein.

As for the limitations added to these parts of the Querie, I wish they had
been more plainly set down, for I doubt of his meaning therein; but that You
and He may not doubt of Mine, I will declare it; that if I take not His aright,
He may (if he think good) rectify my mistake.

I conceive then by that which he does call, Power commonly desired in the
hands of the Ministers; that he does mean the way of Judicature in
Church Matters, as the Assembly has desired it to be settled in this Kingdom;
of which that he may have a right Character (for I doubt he is mistaken, and
not rightly informed of the way.) I will tell you briefly, that it is a Power
of Order and Discipline in the House of God; that this Power is not in the
Persons, and hands of the Ministers alone; but in the Office of the Eldership,
wherein the Minister is the leader of the rest: that this Eldership is made up
of Men, gifted, and freely chosen to and for the Congregation by the Brethren,
and appointed with the Minist^r over all matters of Church-concernment. That
their Office and the Power belonging to it, is not otherwise desired in common,
then as the word of God does warrant it to be practiced, and the example of the
best Reformed Churches has showed it to be practicable.

By all which you see that I must understand his Querie, as concerning the
matter thereof thus. Namely that the thing whereof he does speak, is concerning
the ordering and directing of spiritual matters belonging to the souls of men,
which by Christ's power over his subjects, is to be executed in the Office of
the Eldership, according to the Scriptures; to bring the Congregation of Saints
to a perpetual communion with God, which is their happiness.

Of this thing he does make a doubt; Whether it be fit speedily to settle it in
this Kingdom or no? But the doubt is not absolutely of the thing in it self;
(for who will call that in question?) but of the fitness in respect of the
limitation annexed, which is to be determined according to the Principles of
true Religion and State.

It had been worth his labor to have made a description of those Principles,
that we should not mistake him in the main matter whereby he would have us to
regulate our thoughts in the decision of the doubt: for except He and I
understand one another in the same Principles of Religion and State, we shall
never be able to square out the conclusion of fitness or unfitness after the
same proportion: for if he measure not his cloth by the same ell which I have;
or I by that which he has, He and I shall never agree in the length and breadth
thereof. I Will then tell you my thoughts, which if he reject not, we may come to
agree in.

By Religion, I understand a tie whereby the Conscience is bound to subject the
soul to God in his true worship.

This tie of Conscience is made up of a Threefold Coard, which cannot be
broken or untwisted without the overthrow of the substance of Religion.

The first is the Doctrine of Truth; by this the Understanding is bound to know
God, and believe him.

The second is the practice of Godliness; by this the Will and Affections are
bound to love God, and yield themselves to him in obedience.

The third is the Confession and Profession of both the former before Men. By
this the whole Man in his bodily service is made a living and acceptable
sacrifice unto God, Romans 12.1.

The two first Coards are twisted together in one by the Apostle, when he
styleth his Apostleship a service of God, according to the Faith of his Elect,
and the acknowledging of the Truth after Godliness, Tit. 1.1. Where we may
observe how these things lie together. 1. The Apostle is Gods servant for his
Elects sake; namely to bring them by the Preaching of the Gospel, to the
obedience of Faith, as he expresses it, Romans 1. 5. and 16.26. 2ly. His
preaching does this by the proposal of the (...) which i after Godliness; and
this Truth when it is acknowledged, begets Faith. 3ly. Observe the cennexion
of this acknowledgement with Godliness, to be this; that it is not only
inseparable from it, but that the Truth begetting Faith, is measured by
Godliness, and commensurable to it. So that as nothing is to be counted
Godliness, which does not proceed from the acknowledgement of Gods Truth; so
nothing is to be counted a Truth begetting Faith, without the practice of
Godliness. But when Gods Spirit does twist both these together upon the
conscience of the Elect, then the obedience of Faith is begotten in them, which
is the proper name of our Christian Religion, as it is inwardly before God in
the heart: whereunto if the outward profesion or confession of the mouth before
Men, be joined, which is the third Coard of this tie; then Religion is fully
completed in the whole man. And this third Coard is joined by the Apostle unto
the two former, as a means no less necessary to salvation then they. This you
have, Romans 10. 9, 10, 11. where speaking of the sum and substance of our
Christian Religion; he says thus. If thou confess with thy mouth the Lord
Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart that God has raised him from the dead,
thou shall be saved: for with the heart man believes unto righteousness; and
with the mouth confession is made unto salvation: for the Seripture says,
whosoever believes on him shall not be ashamed.

He shall not be ashamed in two respects: First in respect of the event and
effect of his Faith, that without fail salvation promised shall follow upon it,
and he shall not be frustrate of his expectation. Secondly, In respect of the
duty by which his Faith is to be operative toward salvation, namely by
confessing the truth of his Faith and Obedience: for if he does deny this Truth
wherein Christ does reveal himself unto him, and be ashamed of Christ; then
Christ will deny him before his Father, and be ashamed of him also, Mar. 8 38.
Luke 9. 26. Mat. 10.33.

These three things then make up the Truth of Religion; and except all three be
taken together, the tie of subjection unto God is not complete.

Thus I have told you as briefly as I could, what I mean by true Religion; now
we come to the Notion of Principles.

By the Principles of Religion and State, I suppose he does mean the
fundamental Maxims, Positions, and Rules of Doctrine and Practice, upon which
Christianity is grounded; and whereupon the peace and prosperity of the
Commonwealth is settled.

Now what these Principles are, by which the whole point of doubt is to be
determined, he says nothing expressly to any purpose, but only insinuates the
matter suspiciously; and as it seems to me for little instruction or
edification.

I must then let you know, that the Principles of Christianity must needs be
Threefold, according to the three ties of Conscience hereafter mentioned;
namely Principles of Truth in Doctrine: Principles of Practice in Godliness;
and lastly, Principles of our public Profession of both these.

The Principles that are fundamental in Doctrine, are all such Truths and
Positions which bear a Character of Necessity, or are specially recommended to
our Faith, as matters of great importance; as that of 1 Timothy 3.16. Without
controversy great is the mystery of Godliness: God was manifested in the
flesh, justified in the Spirit etc. And that of 2 Timothy 2.8. Remember that Jesus
Christ of the seed of David, was raised from the dead according to my Gospel,
and such like, which may have a twofold Character of Fundamentality, either by
some express words declaring their absolute necessity; as when Christ says,
Joh. 3.5. Verily, verily, except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; or by the importance of the matter in it
self; though without any intimation thereof in the expression; as when it is
said, The just shall live by Faith, Romans 1.17.
it might be inferred from the innate property of justice, and of life
depending upon Faith; that Faith is absolutely necessary for salvation,
although the Apostle elsewhere had not said, without Faith it is impossible to
please God. Heb. 11.5.


These Characters of fundamental Truths, I thus briefly hint at only; to show
what must distinguish a Principle from another Truth, in case we should have
need to judge of some Positions: Whether they be Fundamental or not; and it is
good to walk by known Rules, for otherwise we walk not in the light.

And as in matters Doctrinall, so in matters of Practice there are fundamental
Duties, such as is that of Luke 13.3. Except ye repent, ye shall all perish:
and that of Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with all men and holiness, without which
no man shall see the Lord; and from that which the Apostle says, 1 Timothy ^.5.
concerning Charity, That it is the end of the Commandment might easily be
concluded; that Charity is a fundamental Duty, although he had not said
elsewhere, If I have not Charity, I am nothing, 1 Cor. 13.2.

And as in the inward Truth of Faith and Godliness; so in the outward
Profession, there are Fundamental Rules to walk by, which in this case I
suppose will be most considerable: because I think that in matters of Faith and
Practice, so far as these relate to the New Creature in the inward frame of
the mind toward God, there will be no cause of dispu^e amongst us. But in the
outward Confession, Profession and exercise of Religious Duties, as they are to
be upheld by way of Government for Gods glory amongst men; I suppose the chief
doubt of this Question does lie.

Therefore to resolve the same, the Principles of this kind are more distinctly
to be thought upon: and to this effect, I conceive that the outward Profession
of Religion is the Public Witness-bearing and opening of our selves, to
manifest the Truth of our Faith and Obedience due to God toward Men; which can
be done only two ways, by Word and Deed.

We bear witness to the Truth by word of mouth two ways: First, when we
worship God publicly, calling upon his name in Christ the Lord, Phil. 2.11.
and giving praise unto him through Christ, Romans 15.9, 10. Heb. 13.15. and when
we join with those that call upon him out of a pure heart in the profession of
his truth, and say Amen to that which is professed by them, 1 Cor. 14 16.

Secondly. When we give an account to every one that asks a Reason of the
Hope that is in us, 1 Pet. 3.15. We bear witne^s to the Truth in deed, in three
sorts of Actions. First, In the Actions whereby we show that we are in Covenant
with God through Christ. Secondly, In the Actions whereby we maintain Communion
with the Saints, the Members of Christ. And thirdly, By the Actions whereby we
maintain Communion with the Ministers of the Word, the servants of Christ in
their Ministerial Charge toward Us.

In the first of these, our Actions are considered as single between God and
Us. In the second, they are considered as coordinate to our Brethren: In the
third, as subordinate unto the Ordinances of God in the Gospel.

In all these Respects, there be certain Fundamental Duties and Principles of
Walking, which if a Christian does not know and conscionably intend, he does
sin against the Truth of his Profession.

In respect of the first, we are commanded to walk worthy of God as dear
Children, and followers of him, as being called to his Kingdom and Glory, 1
These. 2.12. Ephe. 5 1. Mat. 5.44, 45, 46, 47, 48. to do all our matters without
murmurings and disputings, being blameless and harmless in a crooked
Generation; and holding forth the Word of life, Phil. 2.14, 15, 16. and to this
effect, all that are in Covenant with God through Christ in their professed
subjection to the Gospel, must intend two main things.

First, As his Disciples, to be baptized into his death, to serve him by
bearing his Cross, and by being crucified thereby unto the World, Romans 6.3.
Gal. 6.14. Mat. 16.24.

Secondly, Such as thus serve and follow Christ, must walk openly in the light
before men, and not closely and in darkness, Joh. 3.20, 21, 22 and 1 John
1.17. Mat. 5.16.

In respect of the second, we are commanded to serve others through love, not
using our freedom to give occasion to the flesh, Gal. 5.13.

To walk in all lowinesse and meekness, forbearing one another in cases of
offense, and endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace, Ephe. 4.2, 3. and to bear one another burdens, Gal, 6.2.

And to this effect: To consider one another, to provoke each other to love and
to good Works, Heb. 10.24.

Not to forsake the Assemblies, as the custom of some was, Heb. 10.25. And
still is to partake in the Assemblies the Ordinances in an orderly way, 1 Cor.
11. per. totum.

To remember the Poor, by distributing to the necessities of the Saints, Gal.
2.10. Romans 12.13.

To avoid such as make Schisms, Romans 16.17. or bring another Gospel, 2 John
9.10. Gal. 1.8, 9.

To admonish and warn such as are under sin, and give offense, Levit. 19.17.
Mat. 18.15. and 1 These. 5.14. and Ephe. 3.14.

In respect of the third, we are commanded to submit to the Rulers that are
over us in the Lord, and watch for our Souls, Heb. 13.17. to hearken unto their
preaching, and admonitions, with respect unto them for their Works sake, 1
These. 5.12, 13. and 2 Timothy 4.2. to join in Prayer with them in public, 1 Timothy
2.1, 2. Act. 6.4. To partake of the Sacraments, Mat. 28.19. and 1 Cor. 11. 24,
25, 26.

These are the Fundamentalls of our public Profession in the common practice
of all men: some things there be which belong to the practice of Ministers in a
peculiar manner, whereby they are bound to manifest the Truth of Christianity in
their special Callings, which are chiefly these:

1* They must be called as Aaron was, and not take the honor of the Ministry
to themselves, Heb. 5.4.

2. Being called, they must keep the Charge of the House of God, Zach. 3.7. and
1 Timothy 3.15. By Preaching, Praying, and Overseeing the Flock, and Judging the
same, and doing all things that Christ has commanded them, orderly, and to
edification, without preferring one thing before another, 2 Timothy 4.2. Act. 6.4.
and 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. and 1 Cor. 5.12.13. Mat. 28.18, 19. and 1 Cor. 14.26, 30.
Mat. 28.19, 20. and 1 Timothy 5.21.

According to these Principles and Maxims, the public profession of Religion
must be maintained in the World: As for the Principles of State, I will not
reflect upon the Interests of worldly men in State-Matters, which are constant
in nothing, but in the changeableness of Circumstances. But looking upon a
State, as it is a Nation united together by Laws for their own Peace and
Safety, the main Interest thereof is this; That the Mutual Duties of
Magistrate and Subjects, be rightly performed.

Now I take the Ground or Principle of the Magistrates Du^y and Authority to be
this; that he is Gods Vicegerent over Public Societies, to administer
Justice, and see good Order settled and observed therein, that Peace may be
maintained, and Confusion the cause of strife prevented.

As for the Subjects Duty, it is to be in subjection to the Magistrates civil
Ordinances; and to assist him with necessary means for the execution of the
same, Romans 13.

And in respect of the Church, the Magistrate ought to be a Nursing Father and
Protector thereof, Isai. 49.23.

Thus I have briefly looked upon this Querie, so far as it seems requisite
to discover the properties of the matter which it contains, that from thence
the decision of this doubt may result, by comparing and laying matters together
to find their due proportion, toward that which is principally intended to be
found out. The points then where the doubt lies, are these Three, so far as
I can understand the matter.

1. Whether yea or no the Right Ordering and guiding of Men's ways under
Christ, according to the Scriptures, by the Eldership, to bring them to
Communion with God; should be approved, and without further delay,
Authoritatively set Up, and determined in this Kingdom?

2. Whether such a Determination does stand with the Fundamental Maxims of
saving Truth, of Godliness, and of the public Profession of Christianity, as
a thing convenient and useful for the Churches?

3. Whether or no by the Fundamental Duties and grounds of Justice and good
Order settled in this Kingdom, such a Determination be not profitable for the
maintaining of Peace and avoiding of Confusion in the State?

Now all the stress does lie upon the suddenness of the Determination; Whether
namely, that be expedient in all these respects yea or no; where again we must
call to mind, that by suddenness, is not meant a rash hastiness without
deliberation; but only a suspension of further Deliberations, to fall orderly
to the execution of that which is already determined, and needs no further
debate in the Parliament.

Therefore to come to the Comparison of these Matters, with this point of
doubt; we must see what the Consistencie or Inconsistencie will be in every one
of the forenamed particulars with this kind of Settlement.

First then we reflect upon the Right Ordering and guiding of Men's ways under
Christ, (which is the proper work of Church Government.) And does not this
deserve to be set a foot as soon as may be? is there no danger in delaying
without cause a thing of so great concernment? does not this tend directly to
the salvation of mankind, to Gods glory, and to the good of his Church? why
then if it may be settled in any degree, as in some degree it now may, should
it be differred? is it no dishonor to Christ to neglect, or refuse to settle
his Ordinances? If then the Right Ordering and guiding of Men's ways under
Christ, is rather inconsistent with a further delay, then with a sudden
Settlement; I may refer it to himself to conclude what ought to be done.

But you may perhaps say; No man ever doubted of this; that the Right Ordering
and guiding of souls under Christ should not be delayed, but rather speedily
settled when it may be had: but we are not sure, that the Government sued for,
is the Right Ordering and guiding of Souls under Christ, therefore we may
suspend the Settlement. I answer, if this be the exception; then he ought to
have showed Us rather wherefore he makes this doubt: then wherefore all
Government should wholly be made void and unsettled? For when a Question is
made of Church Government in General, no body will otherwise conceive of it
then under this Notion; that it is to be taken for the Right Ordering and
guiding of Men's lives under Christ; and this being granted, who dare say that
it is not fit, that such a Government should be settled without delay amongst
those that sue for it? But let us admit of the exception, as it may come under
the limitation which is made of Power commonly desired, etc. And upon this
ground, let the Question be thus:

If the Power commoly desired, be not in the hands of the Ministers alone (as
formerly has been declared) but in the Office of the Eldership, and that
according to the Scriptures; then Querie, Whether this be inconsistent with a
sudden Settlement, yea or no? Whether the Right of Guiding and Over-seeing Men's
Souls, be committed in the Scripture to any but unto the Eldership? Whether in
Nature, it can belong to any more properly then unto them? Whether a free
chosen Eldership, is not to be trusted with the Charge of Souls in ordinary,
rather then any other sort of men whatsoever? and if all this be so, what
inconsistencie then is there between this Power, and a sudden Settlement? Where
is the danger? nay, is it not rather dangerous and unjust, to refuse it by a
needless delay? But now his expression running under the General Terms of
Power commonly desired in the hands of the Ministers, does infuse a prejudice,
and mis-inform people of the Ministers desire: whereby he does maintain a
jealousy in the minds of the simple against his Brethren; and if by this means
a disrespect is cast upon the Ministry it self; and if he in so doing, does
strengthen the hands of a profane and dissolute Generation, which seeks
nothing more, then to reject wholly the Yoke of Christ, and live without
control in all disorderly ways: If I say by this manner of dealing in this
matter, he does all this; I leave it to the serious disquirie of his own
Conscience; whether or no he ought not to repent, and use means, to redress
these evils whereunto he gives occasion.

As for the Fundamentalls of Truth and Godliness; is it any way inconsistent
that there should be a present Settlement of Eldership, which cannot be
imagined to be without power to deal by Scripturall ways, and lawful means
with such persons as overthrow the Faith, and are heretical, scandalous, and
disorderly?

Does not the Apostle enjoin Timothy in the very first place, to take notice of
those that Teach other Doctrine; to charge them not to do so; that is with
Authority to repress them? 1 Timothy 1.3. Is there not a Woe denounced to those
that give Scandalls? Mat. 18.7. And is there no cause to grieve for the
Abominations committed without control within the Church, Ezekiel. 9.4. and if we
should grieve for them; should not means also be used which God has appointed,
to take them out of the way? 1 Cor. 5.2. why then should we hinder a Settlement
of those Means? Is there any danger in a speedy course to repress profaneness,
to rectify disorderliness, and to cure ignorance? and what benefit can redound
to Godliness, by deferring the Discipline and Order by which it should be
upheld? Truly it is so far from thence, that even a great and doleful
disadvantage does come thereby to the Gospel, to the weak in Faith and simple
ones, and to all the upright in heart, who are made fad by these Distractions:
and that any who bears the name of a Minister of Christ, should help to
increase their sorrows by obstructing the remedies, and dissolving all ways of
Government; is a double grief to Godly souls.

And if in the Nature of Truth and Godliness, there is nothing to be found
inconsistent with this Settlement, but all does call for the hastening of it;
what shall we conceive of the public Profession thereof? is it to be
imagined, that the Fundamental Maxims of the Religious Profession of
Christianity, should afford any thing whereby a Settlement of Government in
the Church of God should be diswaded? Is not God the God of Peace and Order,
and not of Confusion? Nay, does not every part of that Profession call aloud
for a Settlement of Government with all possible speed?

First, look upon Christ the Apostle and High Priest of our Profession, is He
not upon his Throne, and in his Kingdom, to Order it, Heb. 3.1.
and to establish it with Judgment and with Justice? Isai. 9.7. Has he
hitherto showed no judgment to the Gentiles? Mat. 12.18. And if we do
acknowledge him the King of Souls, and our King to whom we have given up our
Consciences in the Covenant of Grace, and with respect hereunto in a National
Covenant one with another. And if we make this our greatest glory to be counted
his Disciples, and to be under the Government of his Discipline: shall we
deliberate yea or no, whether we should suffer his ways of judgment to take
place amongst us? will he not be angry if we demurre upon the Matter? and shall
we escape perdition if we lie under wrath? Psalm. 2.12. Truly there can be no
cause so pregnant to kindle his anger against a Nation, as is this very neglect
of giving him his due over Men's souls.

As for the Duties of this Profession, whether requisite in the Members or the
Ministers of the Church; do not they all highly oblige us to further a speedy
settlement of Government? are they not all either wholly interrupted in some
places for want of it; or every where under contempt and in disorder, because
no Government is no where settled?

For if all are bound to follow Christ Professedly even under the Cross; are
they not then also obliged in conscience, even though they should suffer
persecution for it, to further the Settlement, of that power wherein Christ may
Rule over them by his Ordinances? And if all are bound to walk openly and
orderly in the public light; and if this cannot be done in a society of
Saints, without an agreement and some settlement in the ways of Christ's
public Ordinances (wherein every one that is called by his name, and does
glory in his service, may find directions how to approve himself, without blame
in the midst of a crooked Nation; Phil. 2.15.
) then it is evident that every one is bound in conscience to desire this
agreement of Saints in Government; and the settlement of their ways in the
Ordinances of Christ without delay: but the first is true; therefore also the
second.

And if we are also commanded to endeavor to keep the Unity of the Spirit in
the bond of Peace without delay; and this cannot be brought to pass
effectually, without an agreement for settling of Church Government; then
certainly we are all bound in conscience to seek this Agreement without delay;
but we are all commanded to endeavor the first, without delay; and it cannot
be had without the second; therefore we are also bound in conscience to seek
for the second without delay.

Again, If Christians in their public Profession, are bound to consider one
another as Members of the same body, to provoke daily each other to love and to
good works; and this cannot be done without the settlement of their
Comembership under Christ in his Government; then the Settlement of this
Comembership under this Government, is to be intended without delay; but that
ought to be done daily, and cannot be done without this; therefore this
Government ought to be settled without delay.

If Christians should come orderly to the Ordinances of the Covenant, and renew
the Memorial thereof in the House of God as often as may be; for the
strengthening of their Faith, and mutual Edification in love; and this cannot
be done comfortably, without the advancement of Church Government to a
Settlemen; then the Government should be settled without delay: but the former
of these Duties is requisite, and cannot be done without the latter; therefore
the latter is to be put in execution without delay.

Furthermore all are bound to preserve themselves from the guilt of Schism,
and to avoid such as give occasion thereunto; but without the Settlement of
some wa^es, and agreement in Government, it is not possible to do this
effectually, or to avoid the scandals of Division; therefore the Settlement of
the way of Government, is to be intended without delay.

And concerning the Duty of mutual Admonition, to rectify the unruliness of
Brethren, and to take away public Offenses; is it possible to perform it to
any purpose of Edification, without an agreement and settlement of the ways of
Brotherly Relation, under the Government of Christ in his Ordinances, of
Judgment? and if without this, that cannot be done: are not those guilty of
all the Offenses which now are Remediless in the Churth and State for want of
Government; who dissuade the Settlement thereof?

Thus we find nothing in the things which all ought to do in the public
Profession of Christianity, which is any way inconsistent with the Settlement
of Church Government; but contrariwise every thing does mainly require it: and
if we look further upon the things which are Fundamentally to be done by the
Ministers in their public Profession of the Gospel, either in general for
the keeping of the Charge of Gods House, or in particular, for the Preaching of
the Word; for the Ruling of the Flock, for the setting forth of the Worship, by
laboring publicly in Prayers, and administering of the Sacraments without
disorder and confusion: If I say we look upon these Duties of the Ministerial
Profession, to see what their consistency is with a Settlement of Government
without delay: do not all these Duties utterly loose their edifying virtue, and
become a kind of reproach and derision to the profane World, for want of this
Settlement of Church Government amongst Us? And does not this neglect of Gods
House bring a guilt upon the State; because we will have our own worldly ends,
before we give Christ his spiritual Righ^^ over us? Therefore nothing does
more require this sudden Settlement of Government, then the Ministerial
Duties of the Public Profession.

As for the true Principles of State, which can be none other then these. 1.
That Justice ought to be maintained by wholesome Laws and Statutes. 2. That
good Orders ought to be settled in all Public Societies. 3. That Confusion
and the causes of Strife and Divisions, ought to be prevented. 4. That the
Means of Peace, of Love, and Safety, ought to be procured and settled by
public Authority: I say, in respect of all these Maxims, if a needless delay
of settling Church Government, be wholly contrary to their sense and purpose;
then I suppose it will not be thought good Policy to defer that Settlement
any longer, then it is impossible to establish it: But there is no such
impossibility now, for the State of this Kingdom; to settle by their Authority
the Ordinances of Christ's Power amongst their Subjects; therefore it is wholly
inconsistent with the true Principles of State, as well as of Religion to
defer any longer the Settlement of the so much longed for Church Government.

I love not to play the Statesman, and to reflect upon the Interests of
Parties, to show the Advantages which each might reap (so far as their ends
are laudable) from this Settlement of Christ's Power amongst us: nor will I
enter upon the Consideration of all the dangerous Consequences which the long
discontinuance and unsettlement of Church Government does threaten the State
withal from within to weaken it, and from without to betray it to cunning
Adversaries that lie in wait to take advantages: I say, I love not to dive much
into these things, although the last might to good purpose be insisted upon
here, (chiefly in respect of the Designs of Papists and Prelates, who will
never gain ground upon us again, but by our inward unsettlement.) But one thing
I will say; that as it is a high dishonor unto God, and the greatest that a
State can do unto Christ; not to allow him to Order and guide his own House, by
his own Laws within their Territories; and by his own Officers rule his own
Subjects, which are the souls which he within their habitations has bought,
and does call unto himself; so he will no doubt severely revenge such an
injury with deserved judgments; and put down the Power and Authority of those
in this World, that will not suffer his Power and Authority to take place in
his Mount Sion. Psalm. 2.
He will break them with a Rod of Iron, like a Potters Vessel all to pieces:
Therefore be wise now O ye Kings, and be ye instructed ye Rulers of the Earth.

And if the Tenor of the National Covenant has been judged a true Maxim of
State, to unite and settle the Kingdoms both jointly and severally in Peace;
and is to be observed Conscionablely by all, as a thing sworn unto by the
Members of the Representative Body of the Kingdom, who in the presen^e of the
Great God of Heaven and Earth (who will not suffer those to be unpunished that
take his Name in vain) have bound themselves to perform it: Then I suppose that
the needless (that is to say, the mere Political, Subtle and Cunning) delay
of settling that Church Government which is most Consonant to the word of God,
and the example of the best Reformed Churches, will not be found expedient, but
very hurtful to the whole State and the Members of the Houses: for if their
Oath has made this endeavor of settling this Church Government when it can be
done, a necessary duty unto them in respect of the State; then I hope that
they will understand thus much, that he who knows the Secrets of all hearts,
will be able to discern the purpose and aim, for which the performance of such
a Duty when it may be performed, is deferred, no State end will give him
satisfaction in this matter: and we all (I say, we chiefly that are
Remembrancers on Gods behalf to Men of their Duties) should let the Magistrate
as well as others, know what God requires of them: we are bound to put them in
mind of their Duty in this case; namely that God expects a performance of
vows made unto him without all delays; and that he does not allow of any
By-ends, in a business to which the Conscience has bound it self toward the
Lord: Therefore the counsel of Gods Spirit in Ecclesiastes, is to be laid to
heart, which says thus, Chap. 5.4. When thou vowest a vow to God, defer not
to pay it, for he has no pleasure in Fools; pay that which thou have vowed: In
a word then to persuade the Magistrate to defer the payment of his Vow to God
upon State Considerations, and Politic intents, is to persuade him to play the
fool and to be guilty of the judgment denounced in that Woe, which is
threatened them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight,
Isai. 5.21. Let therefore no man deceive himself; if we are Christians not in
Word, but in Deed, we must believe that all the wisdom and State Polity of
this World, is mere foolishness with God; because it is written, That he will
take the wise in their own Craftiness, 1 Cor. 3.18, 19.

I have done with the First Part of this Discourse, wherein I have endeavored
to show you an Unpartiall Way of resolving the Doubt which he has preposed:
Now I come to the Second Part, wherein I am to look upon his Manner of
proceeding for the Determination thereof, to see how far it does reach the
Aim of advancing Truth and Peace.

The Second Part.
The Querie.
Whether it be fit according to the Principles of true Religion and State, to
settle any Church Government over the Kingdom hastily or not; and with the
Power commonly desired in the hands of the Ministers?

I Have hitherto delivered my Sense of this Querie, and by way of Deliberation,
showed what answer should be given to it. Now I purpose to reflect upon the
Answer which he does give to observe what Truth is in it; and how far the Way
which he does suggest is useful for Peace.

To find out the Truth which is in his Discourse, I must examine his
Reasonings; and to this effect I will set down in his own words so near as may
be, the Arguments which he does use, (and that in their full strength) to make
good his Conclusion: and then I will compare the point of Doubt, with that
wherein the force of the Reason does lie.

His Reasons lie in several Aphorisms or Sections, without Method or
Coherence. He is brief and dark, and does presuppose some things which must be
expressed in the examination of the Matter. Now I hate Confusion, and therefore
(without doing him wrong) will reduce his Reasons to certain heads, under which
all shall be brought in, which he does allege in such order, as his Matter
will admit of.

He endeavors then to prove; that it is not fit that any Church Government
should be settled hastily in this Kingdom, from four heads of Arguments.

1. From the Unfitness of the People, and of Parochial Congregations, to
admit of Government, Sect. 1.2, 6. 2. From the Practice of Christ, and of his
Apostles, and the fault of Reformers in latter days, Sect. 3.4, 5. 3. From the
Unfitness of the New Clergymen, to administer Church Government, Sect. 8.9.
4. From the Interests of State, and of the Dissenting Brethren, Sect. 7.10.11.
Concerning the first.
In the first Head I find two Pre-supposalls which he takes as granted.

The first is this. That which a People is not fit to receive, by reason of
their ignorance, or want of sutablenesse; is not hastily to be imposed upon
them.

The Second is. That which a People ought to receive by reason of the
Unlawfulness or Uselesseness of the thing, that ought not to be imposed upon
them.

The first Assertion, is the ground of his first and sixth; and the Second of
his second Section.

But the first is not to be granted without a limitation; for ignorance and
want of suteableness in a People, (except it be found altogether invincible)
does not excuse them from Obedience: Nor should good Laws and Government,
whereby a People may be instructed, and made suitable to perform necessary
Duties, be left off, because formerly they have not been well taught. Nay in
humane Government, the contrary may be asserted for a Truth; namely that where
a People is ignorant of their Duty, and does want sutableness to perform it
toward Superiors, there Government ought to be constituted without delay;
lest their Unruliness and Unteachableness become Habitual: for the want of
Government does make a People wild. Thus then the Assertion is not Universally
true.

But perhaps he will say, That in matters of Religious subjection, it will hold
true; because the word of God does bind no man further to practical obedience
and subjection to Government, then he does understand the nature and grounds of
that Government to be of God. For it is said, Romans 14.5. Let every man be fully
persuaded in his own mind, and verse. 23. Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.
From this place he inferres, That if a People be not taught the nature and
grounds of that Government, it should not be imposed upon them: How this
Consequence does follow, we shall see anon, when we examine the Reasoning of
his first Section: But here I will intimate only, that the Apostles words are
not given as a Rule of Subjection, relating to Government; but as a Rule of
Freedom, relating to Discretion, whereby every one is to look to his own
private ways: For in that 4th. Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, the
Apostle does teach Christians Rules of mutual Forbearance and Moderation, in
judging one another for matters of Indifferency, such as are meats and days:
in these things he forbid; the strong to despise the weak, and the weak to
judge the strong, ver. 2.3, 4. And he wills every one to be fully persuaded
in his own mind concerning that which he does, that he may not do it either
with offense to others, or doubtingly within himself: if either of these
befall him, the Apostle declares it to be a sin, from verse. 4. till the end
of the Chapter, and chiefly concerning the Man that doubts in the last Verse
of the Chapter, he says; That if he eats not with Faith, he is damned,
because whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin. Thus we see that the Apostle speaks
clearly of a Rule, by which every one is to govern himself in his own private
actions: namely that he ought to abstain from that which he cannot do in Faith,
and whereof he is not fully persuaded in his mind. Now how from a Precept of
this kind, a Consequence will be rightly drawn to conclude: that it is not fit
that any Church Government should be hastily settled in this Kingdom, is not
clear to me at the first sight; for, because a Christian may abstain from doing
that whereof he is in doubt, and ought to be fully persuaded in his own mind,
that what he does is lawful; that therefore no Church Government should be
settled in this Kingdom, seems to me no good inference. For if the Romans
to whom these Rules were given, were under Church Government (as is apparent
they were by Chapter 12.4.5, 6, 7, 8.) and if this doubting in private Cases of
practice was incident unto them, and did not exempt them from that Obligation,
nor did make Church Government a thing unfit for their edification in
Godliness; I know not why it should exempt this people from the same
Obligation, or be unfit for their Public Edification.

But let us come to his proof of the Conclusion, drawn from these Rules.

In the first Section, he says thus; That no Church Government ought to be
settled upon this People: because, if any be settled, it will bring this People
either to a necessity of sin against God; or of misery in the World: His
general ground then is this; Whatsoever may occasion a People either to sin
against God, or to become miserable in the World, is not fit to be brought upon
them.

This he takes as an Universal Truth, and does presuppose it as a thing
undeniable: but to show that it is a false ground, and not to be admitted
without limitation: I may conclude from it in his way of Reasoning, as well that
the Gospel is not to be offered to a People, as that no Church Government is to
be settled amongst them. For if the Gospel be preached, and Christ offered to
a People in the Covenant of Grace, they are brought thereby under a necessity,
either of sinning against God if they receive not Christ, or of being
persecuted and miserable in the World if they receive him. For it is said, That
all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution, 2 Timothy
3.12. and the world is condemned of sin, if it believe not in him, Joh. 16.8,
9. So then seeing God has appointed this necessity to follow the Gospel
preached, or the preaching of it; it is no Truth to say; That whatsoever
brings a People on a necessity, either of sin or misery, is not fit to be
brought upon them, for the preaching of the Gospel does this; and it is absurd
to say, that the preaching of the Gospel is not fit to be brought upon them.

But he will say perhaps, that the Case is different; either that there is a
greater necessity of Preaching, then of exercising Church Government; or that
the Cause of this necessity is not proper, and per se, by it self following
the nature of the Gospel, but only accidental in respect of the world.

I answer, That he will never be able to show a greater necessity of the one
then of the other; he may perhaps show that the one may go before the other;
na^^ly that Teaching must be first; but that upon Teaching, the Observation of
all Christ's Commandments (under which the Commandments of Church Government
are comprehended) must needs follow, is clear, from the Fundamental Commission
given to the Apostles, Mat. 28.20. and he that does charge Timothy to preach in
Season, and out of Season, 2 Timothy 4.2.
does also charge him in the same place to watch; and elsewhere with no less
earnestness to observe all the Rules of Government, without preferring one
before another, 1 Timothy 5 21. And we have seen heretofore, that the Principles
of the Outward Profession of Religion, are no less essentially requisite in
Christianity, then the Principles of Faith, although the Principles of Faith
are first in Order. So then he cannot plead a greater necessity of the one,
then of the other.

But then when he says, that the Gospel is not by it self a proper Cause of
Persecution and Misery, but only accidentally, by reason of the evil world
which hates the Godly without a cause. I say, that herein he gives himself an
Answer, concerning the matter of Government: for the settling of the Government
which Christ has ordained, is no cause either of Sin or Misery by it self; but
only accidentally by reason of the ignorance and wickedness of our corrupt
nature: from whence you see that the general ground of his Reasoning in the
first Section, is not true, as he does presuppose it; namely that whatsoever
does necessitate a People either to sin, or to be miserable, is not to be
imposed upon them: but to make it true a limitation is to be added thus;
Whatsoever in its own nature and property, and not accidentally, does
necessitate a People either to sin or misery, that is not to be imposed upon a
People: but then if you express according to this presupposal, the Assumption
or second Proposition of his Argument, thus: Now the settling of
Church Government does in its own nature and property, and not accidentally,
necessitate a People either to sin, or to be miseable; this you see is
evidently false, and therefore the Conclusion which he intends to infer, does
not hold true; namely that no Church Government ought to be settled upon this
People.

Thus you see that the very ground of his Reasoning is a hidden fallacy, fit
to deceive ignorant people, and plausible to a natural man's Capacity, but no
ways agreeable with Gods Truth and counsel in the dispensation of the
Gospel. For God has determined that all men shall be brought to this
necessity in some degree more or less, for the trial of their Faith and
perseverance.

But you perhaps will say, that he makes not this the chief ground of his
Reasoning; but that he seems only to touch it as an inferrence following upon
the precedents, to show the inconveniencie thereof. I Answer; If it be no
inconveniency in Gods Counsel, then his Counsel to reject all
Church Government upon this ground, is contrary to Gods Counsel; and he speaks
in this Matter as a natural Man to please Men, rather then God.

Having thus discovered the deceit of his main ground of Persuasion, you may
easily perceive that the Superstructures will fall; but that we may further see
the force of his Consequences, and the Coherence of Matters which he lays
together, let us proceed to set all his Arguments in their Order distinctly.

Thus then he does Reason.

That which brings upon a People a necessity of Sin or Misery, is not to be
imposed upon them. The settling of any Church Government will do this, Ergo, no
Church Government is to be imposed upon them.

The first Proposition of this Argument has been now examined, and found
false; his Discourse runs upon the proof of the Second; namely that the
settling of any Church Government, will bring this People to the necessity of
sin. Thus.

That which will put this People upon the Practice of that wherein it is
impossible they can be fully persuaded in their minds, will put them upon the
necessity of sin, Romans 14.5. But the settling of any Church Government, will
put them upon the practice of that wherein it is impossible they can be fully
persuaded in their minds: Ergo, It will put them upon the necessity of sin.

Here again the Major or first Proposition, is not to be admitted without a
Restriction, thus

That which in its own nature, and by it self, will put this People upon the
Practice of that wherein it is impossible they can be fully persuaded in their
mind, will put them upon the necessity of sin, if they do it; now with this
Restriction the second Proposition is false: for it is not true, that the
settling of any Church Government whatsoever, will in its own nature, and by it
self, put them upon the Practice of that wherein they cannot be fully persuaded
in their minds. Therefore this Conclusion is false, namely that the Settling of
any Church Government whatsoever, will put them upon the necessity of sin.

Here again you see plainly the falacie; but he not observing this, has gone
on in his Reasoning to prove the other Proposition; namely that the settling of
any Church Government whatsoever, will bring the People upon the Practice of
that wherein it is impossible they can be fully persuaded in their minds; and
to make this good, he Argues thus.

A People that is generally untaught in the nature and grounds of all
Church Government, will be brought upon the Practice of that wherein it is
impossible they can be fully persuaded in their minds, if the settling of any
Church Government be brought upon them. But this People is generally untaught
in the nature and grounds of all Church Government; Ergo, they will be brought
upon the Practice of that wherein it is impossible they can be fully persuaded
in their minds, if the settling of any Church Government be brought upon them.
Although all this were granted, yet the former grounds not being sound, the
Consequence by which his main Conclusion is to be inferred, will not hold: But
let us now examine the Truth of these Propositions also in themselves.

First then, I do not see that the first Proposition of this Syllogism is
true, and that this is a good Consequence; namely because a People is unraight,
and not able to judge of the nature and grounds of Church Government, that
therefore they will be put upon the Practice of that wherein it is impossible
they can be fully persuaded, in case they be brought under Government. I say,
that there is no necessary Coherence of the first part of this Proposition with
the latter. 1. Because the settling of the Government may be such as shall
bring its own light with it, and convince those that receive it of the nature
and the grounds thereof. 2. Because the settling of it may be such, as will not
put them upon any Practice whereat they shall scruple: For both the Government
and the way of settling it, may be so Moderate and Suitable to tender
Consciences; that they shall not be constrained to any thing whereof they
cannot be fully persuaded. 3. Because it connot be made out, that every one who
is to be under Government in the Church, must needs understand the whole nature
and grounds of the Government; or else be obliged to refuse all obedience
thereunto, for fear of being put upon the practice of something whereof they
cannot be fully persuaded: Is it not enough to be assured that the Government
shall not urge any such Practice upon them? And if they know that they shall
not be led with Rigor, but with Judgment; that the Lost will be sought, the
Broken bound up, the Sick strengthened, Ezekiel. 34.16.
and that which was driven away, brought back; will not this be satisfactory? I
do not intend to dissuade any from endeavoring to satisfy themselves, to the
utmost of their abilities in any thing whereof they doubt, but rather wish that
all may be as the B^reans were, Noble in searching out all Truths.
Nevertheless I do not see it either needful or useful, that men should walk so
scrupulously and partially as this Position seems to allow: For the wisdom
which is from above, is without Partiality. 4. Nor do I see that the place of
Scripture, wherein the Apostle does exhort every one to be careful of his own
private ways, to do all in Faith, and with a full persuasion of mind, does
oblige him that has this care of himself, to judge also the actions of
Church Governors in the ways of Government, so narrowly that he must needs
know all what they do, or else be subject in nothing. It is another thing to be
fully persuaded in mine own mind of that which I must do; and another to be
fully persuaded of the nature and grounds of Duties belonging to the
Government, which is entrusted unto others: I may do the former, and satisfy
my self in what concerns my self, and yet may be safely ignorant of the latter.
So then I do not find this to be a Truth, that the settling of a
Church Government upon me who am not fully informed of the nature of it, will
put me upon the Practice of that whereof I am not fully persuaded, except I be
obliged to administer the Government which I understand not, (for then I
confess I am put upon the Practice of that whereof I am not persuaded.) But if
I be not obliged to do this, and am left free to do what is good for me to do:
How is it true, that by the settling of Government, I am put upon the Practice
of that whereof I am not fully persuaded? If you say, although you be not
obliged to Practice the Government, as one to whom the Duties of Government are
entrusted; yet you will be obliged by way of obedience, to Practice that which
the Government shall enjoin you to do, and that may be for ought you know,
something whereof you are not fully persuaded. To this I Answer; that it is no
Charity in me, to suspect that the Government will put me upon any such
Practice* but if it does, then it will be time to show my grievance; in the
mean time I think it not just, because I may think that some such thing may
fall out; that therefore I should dissuade all from admitting of any Government
whatsoever, till all my Apprehensions be cleared. Do not I in this case not
only want Charity, but also take too much upon me, to have all unsettled till
I be satisfied? why shall others that desire to be under Government, and are
satisfied in the nature and grounds of it, be deprived of the benefit thereof
for my sake? or why should I put fears and jealousies in their minds, to
alienate them from the love of Government? is not this to seek my self more
then the Public?

But his Assumption or second Proposition, says, That this People is generally
untaught in the nature and grounds of Government; and therefore it may be said,
that he seeks not himself in this so much as the Public.

To this I Answer, That I desire not to judge him in his particular Aim, God
alone does know the Secrets of Hearts; but two things I must add: First, That
the Nature and Property of his way of Reasoning may have such an aim; and
therefore that he gives cause to suspect that he may perhaps be guilty thereof.
Secondly, I say, That I see no Cause to believe that the thing which he says
of this People, is true in the sense which his words tend or seem to insinuate.
For I am persuaded that this People does generally know, that there is a
necessity of some Government, and that the best Government is that which is
settled according to Gods will, and consequently that it ought to be so
settled; and that it belongs to the Ministry to have the Administration of
it; and that they ought to obey and submit to those that are set over them in
the Lord: and that as the Minister is not to Rule over them according to his
own will, but according to Gods will revealed in the Word; so that they ought
to yield to every thing whereof they shall be convicted from the Word, that it
is to Gods will. I say, I see no Cause to believe but that this People is
generally thus much taugh, or at least so much advanced toward the
apprehension of these Truths, that if they but hear them delivered; they will
sincerely assent thereunto: and this I conceive is enough to make them capable
of Government. Therefore although I will not deny, but that many are untaught
in the particular way and grounds of that Government which God has appointed
in his House: yet I cannot be so uncharitable, to think, that whenever it
shall be made known unto them, they will be incapable to understand it. For
besides the grounds which they have already received in the common way of
Protestancie, which certainly have brought them thus far; we have large
promises in the Scripture, and particularly in the 35. of Isai. to assure us,
that when the Kingdom of Christ shall be settled in the Earth, the Blind, the
Deaf, the Dum, the Lame, and such like, shall be enabled to see, to hear, to
speak and to leap; and that the way shall be made so plain in Holiness, that
the Wayfaring men though fools, shall not err therein, verse. 8. Therefore
although it may be true, that the greater part of the People is untaught of the
nature of the Government; yet I am persuaded, that so many as have any
knowledge of Catecheticall Principles, though but general, will be capable
instantly of all that which is needful to be known to admit of the Government:
therefore it is no Consequence, because the multitude is not yet fully taught
and made to understand the Reasons of Government, that therefore no Government
should be settled upon them: for the very settling of that Government which
Christ has appoints, will carry light with it, and make them all to
understand the nature of the thing, better then all the Discourses which either
He or I can make of it. For these Causes his whole Discourse in this Matter, is
wholly impertinent; nor does it follow at all, that although this People were
wholly untaught in the nature of the Government, that therefore it ought not to
be settled upon them.

Thus I have done with his first Section; to let you see the Unreasonablenesse
of his Reasonings therein.

In the following Sections, I shall not need to be so exact and large, because
I will not meet with any thing that does reflect so much upon Conscience as
this does: or is so plausibe and likely to entangle the thoughts of the Simple.

The sixth Section is to be considered in the next place, because it has
greatest affinity with the first. For the first takes the Argument from the
Peoples ignorance; and Sixth, from their want of sutablenesse to yield
Obedience. But his Words and Sense are so obscure, as if he were afraid to be
Understood, and did speak to some body in the Clouds of the Air* for he says
thus.

It is against the nature of Christ's description of himself, and against the
sutablenesse which he does press for, amongst all such as should submit to his
Commandments. And to make this appear, he does allege places, where it is
said, that Christ does not cry nor s^rive, Mat. 12.19. and that his yoke is
easy, Mat. 11.29. and that his Commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5.3. and
that he puts no new Wine in old Bottles, Mat. 9.17. then he ends with these
words, All which cannot be fulfilled in the Parochial Congregations.

What is his meaning? is it this; that to settle a Church Government in the
Churches of Christ, is against the nature of Christ's Description of himself;
and against the sutablenesse that de does press for in his Subjects? can any
thing be said more falls then this? For is it not the very end of
Church Government, to make Men's lives conformable unto Christ, and to make them
suitable to submit to his Commandments? But if he means not to speak of
Church Government, as a thing inconsistent with the life of Christ, and the
submission to his Commandments, he says nothing to the purpose of his Querie.
And if the settling of Church Government according to the Scriptures, is one of
the most effectual Means to take Men off from striving and crying in the
streets, to make them find Christ's Yoke easy, and his Commandments not
grievous, and to put them in a new frame of life to become new Bottles, wherein
the Wine of spiritual wisdom and comfort may be kept without spilling; then
the settling of Church Government is no ways against the nature of Christ
life, and the properties of subjection due to him: but the settlement of
Church Government according to the Scriptures, is one of the most effectual
Means to do all this; therefore the settling of Church Government, is no way
against the nature of Christ's life, or Description of himself, and against the
properties of subjection due to him, or the sutablenesse which he does seek in
those that are to submit to his Commandments.

But his meaning is perhaps, that the Constitution of Government over
Parochial Congregations is against all this: or as he says, that all this
cannot be fulfilled in any Parochial Congregations. If this be his meaning, he
might have spoken plainer, and ought to have given some proof thereof. For he
could not be ignorant of this, that many Godly and zealous Ministers will say,
that they have experience of the contrary; namely, that in some Parochial
Congregations all this is done; when with the faithful Dispensation of the
Word, the Discipline and Charge of Gods House is carefully kept by the
Minister: and it is apparent, that one of the chief causes of Striving and
Crying, is the want of true Government, which makes Christ's Yoke uneasy to
Men's souls: and if he appeal to experience, it will not be found that in the
Parochial Congregations hitherto settled in the Reformed way, so much
Division, such crying out and striving, and such Disturbance of good Order has
been, as in the Churches which are called Separatists, or Independents. And the
reason is clear, why it falls out to be so; because their Principles of
Government lead them rather to walk by themselves, and at a distance from all
others, then to keep the Unity of the Spirit with their Brethren without
partiality. The name of a Parochial Congregation, because it is of old in Use,
perhaps is taken for an old Bottle, by way of allusion to Christ's speech; but
an old Parish in Name, will be a new Congregation in Substance, when it is cast
into another frame of Government then formerly it was in: and it will be found
that nothing is done in any Congregationall Church, for Orderly Government of
Men's ways under Christ, which in the Reformed Parish-Congregation, can not be
done with less stir, and as effectually, if the Government were once settled.

So then in this Section I find no Argument at all, but a bare Assertion,
wherein is so much obscurity, that it seems to me, he did either not intend to
be understood, if he speaks to his Question: or if he speaks not to it, but
would take the liberty to speak somewhat to no purpose, or to some other
purpose then his Question, he might have been more intelligible if it had
pleased him, and not left us to guess at his meaning* Men that would convince
and persuade, should not walk in darkness.

The Second Section is also reduced to the first general Head, because it is
taken from the Unlawfulness or Uselessenesse of bringing the desired
Government upon the People.

The Argument runs thus:

That which is dangerous to bring a People under a Popish implicit Obedience,
by forcing on them a Practice of that which they scarce know, or know but in
part, and conseqently is contrary to the National Covenant, ought not to be
settled upon them; but the settling of any Church Government hastily, as it is
commonly desired, does this, and is contrary to the National Covenant: Ergo,
it ought not to be settled upon them.

The Answer is; That the Church Government desired, such as we have formerly
described, does none of all this, and therefore may be set up without danger:
and the Godly Ministers of this Kingdom will call this a false accusation
against them, and injurious to the Government desired: nor does he give any
proof of what he says, but as if it were enough to have said so; he does
allege only the Peoples inclination to that which the State sets up; saying,
that experience shows, that the Peoples Consciences does resolve it self in
this Querie; Whether the Religion be established by Law or no? If hi^ Argument
is this; that because the People does scarce know, or knows but in part that
Government which is to be settled, that therefore the Government will bring
them under a Popish implicit Obedience; I deny the Consequence: for although
the People be ignorant, or inclined to do things by an implicit Faith, yet it
is no fault in the Government that they are so, nor will the settling of the
Government make them to be so; but the contrary will rather follow. Isai. 2^.18.
For where Christ's Kingdom is erected, there the Deaf are made to hear the
words of the Book, and eyes of the Blind are made to see out of obscurity,
Verse. 24.
and out of darkness. There they that erred in Spirit shall come to
understanding, and they that murmured shall learn Doctrine: For the promise is
clear; that when the King of Righteousness shall Reign, Isai. 32.1.2.
and his Government shall be as a hiding place from the wind, and a Covert from
the storm, and as Rivers of waters in a dry place, and as the shadow of a
great Rock in a weary Land. Verse. 4.
That then also, the heart of the Rash shall understand knowledge. From whence
it is clear, that Christ's Government does take away this implicit ignorant
Obedience; and therefore it is a gross inconsequence to say, because the
People know but in part; that therefore the Government will confirm them in
ignorance. But he says, the Government will force a Practice upon them without
knowledge: I say, that he does in this Calumniate his Brethren, and traduces
the Government desired without cause, to strengthen the prejudices and unruly
affections of some that hate all Settlement of Order. Nay, but the People
resolves their Conscience in this Querie* Whether the Religion be settled by
Law or no? even now the fault was in the Government, that it would force them
to practice what they knew not; now the fault is in them that will not practice
till they know that which is warrantable by Law; whence I can gather none other
Argument but this: If the People does too much respect the Authority of the
State for the settling of Church Government over them; then no Government
should be settled by the State; but the People does so: Ergo, Who will admit
the Consequence of the first Proposition? and yet except this be presupposed,
nothing can be made of his Discourse. But he will perhaps say, they do not
only respect their Authority, but they are superstitiously devoted to it. I
Answer, Dum vitant stulti vitia in contraria currunt, Fools are always in
extremes; because some extremely affect humane Laws and Authority; will you
therefore have no divine Ordinances settled? and does this follow; that the
State ought not to settle any Government, because the People is too much
devoted to their Authority? ought they not rather to be so much the more
careful of their duties? ought they not rather to make use of their interest
in the Peoples affections, to settle that Government which Christ does require
in his house? As for the People their error to respect man too much in divine
Matters, must in due time be rectified; and this can be done more
advantagiously when the Government which Christ has appointed is settled, then
when nothing is settled, but all is in Confusion.

Thus you see, that having found so much falacie in all these Arguments, and so
little Coherence in them with the main Querie; I have no Cause to give any
assent unto the Negative which he does assert; namely that it is not fit that
any Church Government should be settled hastily, and with the Power commonly
desired in the hands of the Ministers.

But before I leave this Head, I must observe that the whole strain of these
Arguments does run beyond the Querie, and intends to make good rather this
Assertion, that no Government at all should be settled, then that which the
Querie does mention. For if the Peoples ignorance of the nature of Government,
and their want of sutablenesse to be conform to Christ's Description of
himself, be sufficient causes why Government should be suspended; then not
only the Government commonly desired, but all other Government whatsoever may
be suspended upon the same grounds; and perhaps the aim is rather to hinder
all, then that which is desired: For the way of Reasoning does not so much aim
at the resolution of the doubt proposed, touching the Fitness or Unfitness of
the Government commonly desired, as to take off men's thoughts from the
Necessity of any Government at all. Nor will it serve his turn to say, that the
General is made good only, to the end that the Particular may be inferred the
more strongly. For I say, except it be his opinion that No Government at all
should be settled in the Church, neither in respect of God nor Man* neither in
Spiritual nor in Natural Actions, which relate into the inward or outward
state of Souls: I say, except he be of this meaning, he ought not to have shot
beyond his mark; and if he be of it, then he ought to have put his Querie in
other terms. But if he means not to strike at all Government, then he should
have been so ingenuous as to remove this stumbling block, which every one that
reads with attention, his Discourse will instantly meet withal.

Thus I have done with the first Head; now I come to the Examination of the
Second.

Concerning the Second.
In the Second Head, Arguments are taken from the Practice of Christ, of his
Apostles, and of the Authors of the last Reformation.

The general Argument is this.

That which Christ and his Apostles practiced in their way of settling
Church Government, we ought to follow; and that which the first Reformers of
Religion failed in, we ought to avoid. But Christ and his Apostles practiced a
slow, and not a hasty way of settling Church Government: and the first
Reformers failed in making too much have, therefore we ought to follow a slow,
and not a hasty way of settling Church Government.

The Answer to this Argument is, that all may be granted which it concludes in
some sense, if namely slowness and have be taken in a right sense; that is, if
by slowness, be meant not a lingering, but a considerate delay; and by have, not
an inconsiderate, but a prudent speed; then the Conclusion is true. And I
suppose that hitherto this counsel has been followed, and will be followed by
those that are in place of Authority. But yet because the premises according to
his sense are doubtful, and may be misunderstood; yea and cannot be rightly
understood as they relate his scope; to make it good, therefore we must take
them into Consideration.

I say then, that the first Preposition is to be granted with this limitation;
namely, that we ought to follow the Practice of Christ, and of his Apostles, in
that wherein the Cases are alike, and their Actions not extraordinary, but of
an ordinary nature and imitable. Now then if he can make it appear, that in the
settling of Church Government, our Cases and theirs are alike, and that their
Actions were hot of an extraordinary nature, but imitable by Us in all things;
then he will say something to the purpose, and may infer that their slownesse
and ours ought to be of the same extent. But then if we reflect upon the second
Proposition, as it relates to his purpose in hand, and as he intends to apply
it. I suppose that his sense of slownesse and hastiness, will not be applyable
either to Christ and his Apostles, or to the first Reformers of Religion in our
times. For the slownesse which he seeks, is a Dilatory and lingering off
putting of matters ready to be done: and the hastiness whereof he accuses the
first Reformers of our Religion, is an inconsiderate Precipitation whereof I
doubt they were not guilty. I suppose then he will be found in an error, either
in respect of the Cases, or in respect of the Application of them to us.

Three Sections belong to this Argument; the Third speaks of Christ: the
Fourth, of the Apostles; and the Fifth; of our last Reformers.

In the proceedings of Christ and the Apostles, he supposes there was a
Dilatory slownesse in se^tling Church Government, which I suppose was not at
all therein: and he condemns the first Reformers for too much hastiness, which
I conceive he has no reason to do: Let us then consider the Particulars.

Concerning Christ, he would insinuate that he did proceed in a Dilatory slow
way, by this Argument, applied from his Practice to us.

If Christ did not settle his Government by Miracle hastily, and over a People
not enlightened; then there is no Moral Necessity of settling it so soon as may
be; according to the desire of some. But Christ settled not his Government by
Miracle, nor over a People not enlightened therein: therefore there is no Moral
Necessity of settling it so soon as may be, according to the desire of some.

The Answer is, that the Major Proposition, is a Non-sequitur: For it is no
consequence. If Christ settled not his Government by Miracle: Ergo, the
settling thereof by Ordinary Means as soon as may be, is not necessary: for it
was not expedient to be settled by Miracle, but by the Ordinary Ministry of the
Apostles; and yet it appears to have been done as soon as could be without
all Dilatory slownesse. For the Prophets tell us, that the Settlement of the
glory of the Church under the Gospel, which could not be brought to pass
without the Settlement of Government therein, should be hastened in its own
time, Isai. 60.22. and that the promise of the way wherein the Just should live
by Faith, should not ^arry, Hab. 2.3, 4. Now that which is said to be hastined,
and not delayed, cannot truly be said to be slow: for nothing is properly slow
which comes at his time appointed. And to make this yet more apparent, viz.
that Christ would settle as soon as could possible be, the Government of his
Church: let us consider that which in Isai. 42.4. is said of him, viz. That he
shall not fail, nor be discouraged, till he set judgment in the earth. This
promise does assure us of two Things: First, That Christ would not differ by
faint-heartedness, or want of strength, the execution of his Work; and
consequently, that he would not be slow in it. Secondly, That the issue of his
Work should be to settle judgment in the Earth, which is the effect of
Church Government: whence we may directly conclude, that the Settlement of
Government in the Church, is a matter of Primary and Moral Necessity; because
without it, Christ could not settle judgment in the Earth, which was one of
the ends of his Ministry amongst Men.

Diverse other things might be Answered concerning this example of Christ, and
the way of his Ministry amongst the Jews (as that it was not his proper work in
the flesh, to settle another Church Government amongst the Jews, then that
which his Father had settled; but that he was to be to them a Minister of the
Circumcision, to confirm the promises to the F^thers, Romans 15.8. And that the
Change of Government was the proper work of the Spirit, by which Jews and
Gentiles should have one access to the Father, Ephe. 2.18. And therefore could
not be done till after his Resurrection, when the Spirit was to be sent forth)
but this will suffice to show that it was primarily necessary in him to
establish his Church Government as soon as could be in the ordinary way of his
Ministry; and if Christ was not slow, but made all the speed he could in his
way; then every one that is to have a hand under him in the work, is to do the
like; and therefore in this persuasion of his, I do not conceive that Mr.
Saltmarsh is a Workman approved unto God, that needs not to be ashamed, or
that this persuasion does come from him who has called him to the Ministry.
And besides this persuasion, whereof I think he ought to be ashamed, he does
allege Mr. Colemans Opinion to confirm it in such a way, as is very
unbeseeming to him to do; who being of a different opinion from Mr. Coleman,
not only in that wherein he does allege him, to make it probable that Christ
was slow, but also in the main and fundamental Tenet of Erastus (whom Mr.
Coleman follows) concerning the Power of the Civil Magistrate in
Church Matters, which I suppose Mr Saltmarsh holds to be None at all and Mr.
Coleman to be All in all. Who (I say) being thus different in opinion from him,
yet seems to snatch greedily at the Shadow of a passage in his Sermon, which is
to strengthen an imaginary probability, not so much of a Dilatory slowness in
Christ's settling of Church Government, as of the Unsettling of all Spiritual
Government, which Mr. Coleman aims at, to make the Civil Magistrate an
absolute Church Officer. And by this also it is clear; that his Aim is rather
to raise then resolve doubts.

The fourth Section has this Argument: If the Apostles in the New Testament,
settled no Gospell-Government upon any, but upon such as first were brought
under Gospel Obedience by the power of the Word and and Spirit, then no
Government should hastily be settled in this Kingdom. But the Antecedent is
true: Ergo, the Consequent also.

Now to make good the Consequence of the Antecedent: he says, if thousands of
Co^gregations in this Kingdom, are not yet brought under Gospel Obedience by
the power of the Word and Spirit; then the Gospell-Government ought not to be
settled hastily in this Kingdom, but thousands of Congregations are not
brought under Gospell-Obedience: Ergo, etc.

Here observe again, that his Argument runs directly against
Gospell-Government it self, and not against the supposed Government desired,
to be in the hands of the Ministers.

But the Answer to the Argument is this: Although never so many Thousands of
Congregations are not yet brought under Gospell-Obedience; yet it does not
follow, that such as are brought under that Obedience, should not be allowed by
the Magistrate to have that Government settled amongst them, so far as his
Authority can advance it: and if he does but give way to the Ministers to set
up Christ's Government in his House, and for the outward manner of proceeding
therein, does behave himself as a Patron of the Work; then he does all that is
required of him: But it seems Mr. Saltmarsh would dissuade him from doing this:
and why? Because says he, the Apostles settled not Gospell-Government, till
Gospell-Obedience was wrought: Indeed this Argument may be applied to Ministers
in their Charges, when they have to deal with a People which does not yet
profess the Christian Religion. But it is not appliable to a Magistrate, who
is set over a People professing Christianity. For the Magistrate being
required, is bound in Conscience to give way to the Kingdom of Christ, and
without delay to further the Government thereof so far as he can, as soon as
he is convicted of the Righteousness thereof. Do not you think that
Nebuchadnezzar and Darius did well in publishing their acknowledgement of the
true God, and in commanding all their Subjects to fear and reverence him, Dan.
3.29. and 6.25. although their Subjects were not instructed to know him? And
did not Artaxerxes well, in Authorizing Ezra to settle Government in the
Church, Ezra 7. He should then have considered, that the duty of the Civil
Maigistrate in settling Church Government, is quite another thing, then that of
the Minister, and he contrary to his Ministerial Duty, intending to dissuade
the Magistrate from his Duty; does allege that which is proper only to the
Minister, and involves it with that which is proper to the Magistrate: thus a
Spirit of Confusion does as with a Whirlwind, drive all his thoughts to mix
di^orderly and deceitfully things of a different nature together, to lead
himself and others by some appearance of light, into the ways of error.

And as for the Second Proposition, that there are Thousands of Congregations,
which are not yet brought under Gospell-Obedience by the Word and Spirit, how
far this is true I know not; but I suspect that he may be mistaken in some
sort herein also; not that I intend to lessen the opinion of great want of
knowledge in many Congregations; but I suppose he means by Gospell-Obedience,
something which truly I do not condemn him for seekimg after; but yet cannot
think it so absolutely necessary, that before all manner of Government be
settled any way, it must be had in such a way as he does imagine; and till that
be so had, all that otherwise know Christ, should be counted as Heathens and
Unbelivers. That which I would say, is this: It is true that the Doctrine and
the Conviction of the Spirit, must go before the settling of Government in a
Ministerial way, that every one who is to be governed by the Gospel, may out
of Conscience free willingly submit himself, as it is promised it shall be in
the day of Christ's power, Psalm. 110.3. But yet it is as true, that the many
thousands of Congregations in this Kingdom cannot be counted so ignorant, and
so wholly destitute of the Spirit, that they should be utterly incapable of all
Gospell-Government. It is well known, that they all know Christ by name, and
that there is no Savior besides him, and that upon this ground they offer
themselves to be his Subjects, and desire at least in the outward profession,
to be under his Ordinances and Government. Now if this much Gospell-Obedience
be not some common fruit of the word and of the Spirit, I would fain know of
him, whence it does proceed? Can any man say with any measure of conviction and
knowledge, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost? 1 Cor. 12.3. And how
is the Spirit effectual in us? is it not by the hearing of Faith, Gal. 3.2.
and if the word of Faith, and the work of the Spirit, be but in the meanest
degree effectual to work this knowledge and Conviction: if it be but as a
grain of Mustard Seed, to bring a poor soul to offer it self unto Christ, to
call him Lord; dare he reject it from the Ordinances of Christ's Government
belonging to his Ministry? And if he should be called to a whole Flock of such
souls, that desire to be under Christ's Government, although they know not
distinctly what the nature and grounds of it are; should he dare to cast them
off? Truly I should not dare to do so, lest I should offend not only one of
the little ones, but whole flocks thereof. What do I say then? is the
Government of the Gospel to be set up without preparation? should all in the
Congregation be promiscuously admitted to all Ordinances? I say not so, but
such as have a Fundamental knowledge of the Truth which is according to
Godliness; and being Unblameable in their lives, oblige themselves professedly
to walk in all Gods ways that shall be made known unto them: such, I say,
offering themselves to be instructed and governed, may not be despised or cast
off, though very mean in judgment and other gifts, chiefly when they profess
a desire to belong to the visible Society of Saints: and you have nothing after
trial to except against them: For I suppose that God does allot to every
degree of Gospell-Obedience, a proportionable degree of Gospell-Government.

As for the comparison of a Material building, I admit of it, and say, that if
they be so qualified, as I have said they should be; good Government and pains
to Teach and Catechize them, will without noise of the Axe or Hammer, whereof he
speaks, fit them in due time to their own places in the building. Now I am sure
all is in a confused heap, and it is not well possible, that matters can be
worse then they are, except all hopes and endeavors of advancing a Reformation
be taken away: nor is it the ignorant multitude that causes the noise of the
Axe or Hammer, but it is the wilful Disputant that declines all Government,
and would have nothing settled, that he may not be under any Relation, but such
as he himself shall set up, or cast down as he pleases.

The Fifth Section takes an Argument from Experience, as is supposed, thus;

That which in former times made the Reformation take little root, save in the
outward and formal Obedience, is not now to be practiced: but the speedy
Settlement of Government upon the Nation by the Power of the State, without the
power of the Word, did this: Ergo, this is not to be Practiced.

I Answer, that such speed is not made in the Settlement of Government, that it
should proceed from the power of the State, rather then from the Word; because
a course is taken that all matters shall be fully debated, and determined
according to the Rule of the Word, before the power of the State does meddle
therewith; and then when the State does order any thing to he Practiced, it is
settled not as a Law of Man, but according to the Doctrine, and by the
Direction of the Word.

In former time, when this Nation came first out of Popery, the Word was not
plentifully known, the Vision was precious in those days; and there was none
that had power but the State to settle any Government; and if the State had not
done it, it is not likely that we should have had at this time any Church at
all.

Thus you see that our present Case, and that of former times, are different;
and that the Matter which he lays to the Charge of our first Reformers, is
mistaken.

Hitherto he has played the Divine, drawing Arguments from matters of
Religion, and how rationally he has done this to my apprehension, I have
declared: in his following Sections, he plays the Politician, drawing
Arguments from matters of State, and how wisely he does this to my
apprehension, in like manner I will let you know. Nor will I here insist to
examine all after a Syllogisticall way, to see how exactly he proves his
Conclusion: For in matters of State it is the medium of Prudency (which here he
pretends unto) which must give the Concusion; therefore we will not expect
Demonstrations, but just and well grounded Allegations and Probabilities.

First then, His 8th. and 9th. Sections (which I have made the third General
Head of his Discourse) speaks of our New Clergy (as he is pleased to call
them) and endeavors to make the State jealous of them.

In the 8th. Section, he says, he has not yet any experiment of the New
Clergy; he fears that they may incline too much to the Episcopal way: because
many are branches of the old Stock; Ergo, it is not safe to trust Power into
their hands too far.

I Answer, that nothing is so difficult to Conquer, as State-Jealousies, when
Men make it a Principle of State Prudencie to be fearful: what then is
imagined whether true or false, that is to corrupt worldly Wisdom, a
sufficient ground of Resolution to take a course to prevent it by any thing
that will do the turn, whether just or no. Now in true Christian Prudencie this
is not lawful; for Charity does not suspect evil, 1 Cor. 13.5. and evil
furnishings are fruits of the flesh, and follow upon such Controversies as
these times produce, 1 Timothy 6.4. whereunto I would be sorry that any body
should too deeply engage himself; therefore when he shall have considered the
way wherein he sets himself, better then hitherto he has done; I hope he will
see that it does not become a Minister of the Gospel, to fortify this corrupt
Principle of State in the hearts of Statesmen; chiefly against the Ministry,
to hinder them in the exercise of their Ministerial Charge. If the Aim of
hindering a Settlement of Church Government, be not (as I conceive it is not)
lawful, then I must take leave to tell him; that it is not safe for him who is
a Minister of the Gospel, to strengthen the hands of worldly Men, to cross the
ways of true Government in Christianity, by giving to them sinister
impressions of his Brethren. I find that the Christian Wisdom of the State,
has Prudently without any such uncharitable grounds of evil surmising
Policy, secured it self from the danger which he does represent unto them.
For the Covenant does oblige all Ministers to whom any power of Government is
committed, to abjure that inclination to Episcopacy, which he suspects in his
Brethren: except then he will be so Uncharitable, as to suspect them of
Perjurie as well as of Ambition; he has no just cause to be so worldly wise, as
to to persuade Statesmen to violate the Tenor of their Covenant in one thing,
to prevent the breach of it in another.

The ninth Section draws deeper, and speaks plainer: He tells us, that
Experience shows the remainders of Prelacy in many; that some strive for
Pre-eminencie, as the two Brethren did; that the hottest Controversy is for
Power, that this discerns dispositions. Hence he draws two Politic Conclusions.
1 That it is not good to part with the Stakes, till the quarrel be ended. 2.
Nor to give one of the Parties cause to think it self injuried, if all Power
should be given to the other.

I Answer, if he will stay to settle all Government till there be no ambitious
and aspiring thoughts in some of the Ministry, he shall never settle any in
our Age, nor perhaps in the following; and what although there are some who
strive as the two Brethren did for Pre eminency; is it therefore expedient,
that the State should not suffer any Minister to have the just power of
Government belonging to his Charge? This Policy is too profound.

Indeed if he had alleged some Experiments of the Government which he
disswades, to show that where it has been set up, since the beginning of the
Reformation in Europe, it has incroached upon the just Power of any State: or
if he had showed that the Fundam^ntall Constitutions and Properties thereof,
are destructive to Civil Jurisdiction, as may be made good of other ways of
Church Government; (I say) if he had been able to allege and show any of these
things, then indeed he had said something for Caution worth the hearing: but if
the contrary of this may be made apparent; namely that the desired Government
(if rightly settled) is so far from aspiring to that Power which belongs to
the State; that to keep all aspiring Spirits in awe, by the Curb of an
Authoritative equality, and to keep all Anarchicall Spirits in Order without
prejudice to Christian Liberty; there is nothing in this World so fit, as that
very way of Government, which is sued for: then surely he is very injuriously
Politic in his persuasions, and cautions; but I suppose this may be made
apparent very easily, therefore I excuse him not from injury.

But I beseech you, what is the Power sued for by the Ministers here? Whether
is it a State Power, or a Spiritual and Congregationall Power? if it be none
other then that which all the Congregationall Church Governors challenge to
themselves by Divine Right; why is it made a matter of greater jealousy in
these Ministers th^n in Others? is not the same Power as dangerous in the one
Party as in the other? what assurance can He or the Congregationall
Church Governors give, that they shall not abuse their Power so much as the
others will do, seeing they will stand in all Church Matters by themselves
alone, and not acknowledge any Ecclesiastical Judicature over them in
doubtful Cases; and I doubt they will not make the Civil Magistrate an
absolute Judge in Church Matters? what assurance then can they give, that they
shall not abuse their Authority? how shall the Subject be relieved from his
grievances, if he be wronged by his Congregationall Brethren in his right to
the Ordinances of Christ, or under a Religious pretense in some matter relating
to his comfort, or his good name? He has no competent Judge, but those that
have wronged him: Now the Presbyterian Government does yet admit of Appeals to
another Judicature: viz. a Classis, or a Synod. And whatsoever Mr. Saltmarsh
may apprehend in the depth of his Political Jealousy, I weigh it not; but I
am very confident, that the New Reformers never thought of that which he lays
to their Charge here; namely, that they desire a share of State-Power to be
committed to their hands, and that they have a quarrel about this matter with
the State, is a heinous Accusation. But whiles he endeavors to cast this
aspertion upon others, he does manifestly accuse himself, and involves those
for whom he pleads to be really guilty, even of that whereof he injustly
accuses the Reforming Ministers: else how can he pretend on their behalf, that
they have a right to this Power as well as others? and that they will think
themselves injured if not given? if others have no right to this Power, why
should they for whom he pleads pretend to it? and if they may think it an
injury to be deprived of it, then they clearly suppose, and he grants it that
it is their due; and if so, why may not others as well as they pretend unto it?
Here then in this Case, you may perceive that he mak^s himself and those that
he pleads for, pretenders to that which he allows not in others; and by his own
confession herein, they and he have more of the Prelatical Ambition then can be
showed in any Minister that he knows. He says well, that it is to be feared
there is too much of Man in these Contestations; for this Spirit which is now
in him, does covet to envy; For he would have Power denied to the Party he
affects not, not so much because it is not due to them; but because he would
not have them to have it, when it is not likely that he himself can obtain it;
therefore he pleads, that no Power at all may be permitted to any, to settle
any Church Government at all. For which I suppose, none of the Churches of God,
whether of the one or other way, have cause to give him thanks: The Papists who
watch for our Dissolution, and Libertines whose part he Acts, will thank him.

I have done with his first point of Policy, which is to stir up jealousies
against the New Clergy. The Second Point is Interest, which is twofold to
Power and in Persons: the Interest to Power, has two Considerations in his
Discourse; the one is in 7th. the other in the 10th Section.

His seventh Section tells the State, that there is danger in erring, if it
suddenly involve it self into the designs of Ecclesiastical Power; he says,
there is no danger in the not sudden incorporating the two Powers; because
Moses is not alive to bring the Pattern from the Mount, and a new Star may
arise which yet appears not.

I Answer; his Policy leads him here to be a Sceptick in Religion: For he
Reasons thus; something may hereafter be discovered, which shall be better then
what is now offered: therefore what we now allow, is not to be made use of. May
not I say as well some New Truth may be discovered; Ergo, I will not profess
what I now know? some Star may arise, is less then what the Jews Tradition
says Elias will come. His ground is not so sure as theirs, he tells us only
doubtfully that he may come; and then would make this a warrantable ground to
suspend the Settlement of an allowed Government. And is there any Reason in
this? But what if no new Star arise? what if these Confusions grow greater, and
become habitual? will not then this Policy prove folly? the silly Proverb
might instruct him, that it is better to have half a Cake, then no Bread. But
then he says, there is no great danger in the not sudden incorporating of two
Powers: he takes it as granted, that the two Powers should be incorporated, but
that is but his fancy, and neither true Divinity nor good State Prudency: the
thing he aims at, is a Delay; but I may tell him, that wiser Statesmen then
either He or I, will say, Nocuit differ paratis, those that are ready loose by
delays: and seeing in all this, he speaks a language which I never heard
before in any Reformed Ministers mouth, speaking of the Reformed Ministry;
therefore I must again observe that his meaning is to grant, that both Powers
may be in one hand; and that the Ecclesiastical may have Designs, and be
abused to break the Civil Power. I confess, that if the Powers be as he calls
them incorporated, they may be abused, whether they be in the hand of the
Civil or Ecclesiastical Minister: but if they be kept distinct in
Administration, as they are in nature, and coordinate in Authority as they are
in virtue, and mutually subordinate to each other in Fundamental
Constitutions, as they are in their Ends; then all this fear will vanish: For
this being granted, and Matters thus settled, the Eccle^^asticall can have no
design upon the Civil; but as long as he grants the incorporating of both into
one and the same hand, he will never avoid this. True it is, the Papal and
Prelaticall State does incorporate both; but if he can show wherein the
Reforme^^ do it, he should have done well to have laid it open, and suggested a
better Remedy then the Dissolution of all Government, which is so far from a
Remedy, that it is worst of all Diseases; and truly it is clear in this his
Discourse, and perhaps in his whole way that he practices for his own part, the
mixture of Political and Ecclesiastiall designs, to make his Pen serve Men's
turns, which how he will answer to God one day, I would wish him to consider
sadly if I knew him.

The tenth Section, shows that there ought to be some Proportion in the two
Powers, and some Compliance; so that the establishing of the one, does draw
with it some motions in the other. He tells us, that it is hazardous to
dis-interest any in the Civil part, he does allege France for an example, etc.

All this is rather against his main Conclusion, then for it* For if there
should be a Proportion and Compliance in both Powers; then he must allow the
Church Government at least so much Settlement, as he does the Civil, except he
will postpose the Kingdom of Heaven to the State of the World; and if he
thinks it fit, that the Ecclesiastical State should be Unsettled, it may upon
his grounds be rationally inferred, that in some proportion he thinks it fit,
that the Civil also should be wholly Unsettled; and how justly this may be
intended by any that have sworn to God to endeavor the Union and Settlement of
the Kingdoms in Peace, I will not now debate. But all this tends in his Aim,
to make way for the following and last Section; wherein he recommends the
Interest of the dissenting Brethren to the State, and gives advice to suspend
the settlement of Government so, as not to determine too suddenly into
Heretics and Schismatics, in hope that their affections and judgments may be
drawn to Unity; whereof in the Close he would give us some Conjecture of
possibility.

This I do not at all dislike, but rather approve, that if any thing should
move and persuade to any delay of Settlement in Government, it should be the
Hope of Union betwixt the Reformers and their dissenting Brethren; and because
this is now under trial, how far the Unity of dissenting Parties in the
Assembly may be gained; therefore I think it very Rational and Answerable to
the Counsels of Peace, that nothing be settled in that matter wherein the
difference is, till a full trial be made of the Means of Composing the same:
yet to delay the Settlement of other Matters wherein there is no difference at
all, is no point of Wisdom, except it be thought wisdom to gratify the
designs of Papists, and hopes of Libertines: Nor is it Justice to refuse the
Settlement of a Government allowed, and Voted by the State to those that desire
to be under it, because there are some of a different way that decline it:
Shall all be kept in suspense and in disorder, because either there is no
agreement in some few things, or because some few decline all manner of
Government? the Apostles counsel is, That so far as we are come, we should
be like minded, Phil. 3.16.
and walk by the same Rule. The Interest against a Common Enemy, is not a tie
strong enough to Unite some Spirits in matters concerning God: chiefly when
such stinging Pamphlets blow the Coals of Dissension, and, without control,
asperse injuriously their Brethren with false Accusations, to entangle the
simple consciences with scruples to foment jealousies, to flatter Worldlings
into deceitful Policies, and to strengthen the Unruly affections of the unruly
Multitude, against the respect which is to be had unto Order and Government,
even with a colorable pretense of Religion. And although I will judge
Charitably of the Man's intentions in this Matter; yet truly his writing cannot
be excused from guilt in this kind: I hear he is not a very stayed man, and I
conceive he is led in his heat, faster then he is able to discern his way, or
to judge the Spirit by which he is led, which in this business is very
necessary to be done with great advisednesse; and those that in humility mind
not themselves in meddling with these Matters, are far from that temper which
will advance Truth and Peace; whereunto I beseech the Lord to direct us in all
meekness. For from these we are all strangers by nature, therefore we grope
like blind Men for the wall, we stumble at noonday as in the night, and while
we look for Judgment there is none, and for salvation it is far from us. The
Lord be merciful to Us, and teach us to strengthen the things which Remain,
which are ready to die, for our Works are not found perfect with our God. The
Lord deliver us from the Line of Confusion, which seems to be stretched out
upon us, and heal our Breaches for Christ his sake. Amen.

Of the Third.
I Have done with the Two former Heads of this Discourse, which in the
Introduction I did propose unto my self to handle: the Third remains, wherein
I shall endeavor to be exceeding brief: for you have seen the Positive
Decision of the Question in the First Part; wherein the Necessity of settling
some Church Government amongst Christians in a Gospell-way, is made no less to
me then Demonstrative: and you have seen the Answer to the Negative Decision of
the Question, in the Second Part, wherein the Sophistry of the contrary
Arguments, and the deceitfulness of that persuasion has been laid open with
all meekness and without partiality. Now if in the Third place I should follow
my design, to suggest upon the whole matter, a word of Advice to prevent the
increase of evils, which are like to come upon us, if Mr. Saltmarsh his
suggestions take place: I must first give you a Prognostic of the Evils which
I apprehend may ensue thereupon; and then tell you what may be advisable to
prevent the increase, or the issue of the same.

The Prognostic is this; That if the Magistrate of this place, who does
profess the name of Christ, and by that profession is obliged in his place to
own Christ in his Ordinances, will not appear for the Settlement and
Countenancing of the same effectually; that he shall be unsettled and cast out
of his Power and Place with utter disgrace: and if the Ministers, who pretend
to administer and uphold the Ordinances of Christ's House amongst the Professors
of his name, will not keep the Charge of his House according to his Word,
without partiality for self ends, and without the affectation of worldly power
to constrain Men that are not in their way, to submit unto their wills; they
also shall be unsettled, and all manner of contempt and disgrace shall be
powered out upon them. And by the means of these two Unsettlements of the
Magistracy, and of the Ministry, all the foundations of all other Order and
Government will be removed from the Nation, and the Changes and the Distresses
thereof will be remediless and endless, till the Candlestick thereof be
removed, except God in mercy for the Elects sake, prevent the same by some way
which as yet cannot be foreseen.

By this Prognostic, I pretend not to have any Spirit of Prophecy, which is
more then ordinary; for this thing is Demonstrable from the way of Gods
Judgment, in punishing the sins of Magistrates and Ministers of this kind,
and from the state of a people in such a Condition.

The way of Gods Judgment is evident, in that which was done to the House of
Eli, 1 Samuel 2. verse. 27. till the end where the Reason of cutting off with
utter disgrace the House of Eli, from the place which it had in the Government
of Gods People, is alleged to be this; that they minded their own Interest to
make themselves fat with the good things of Gods People, rather then to
discharge the duty which was committed by God unto their trust; for which cause
it is threatened that they should be deprived of their Charge, and become
contemptible, because the Justice of God did determine, that such as Honored
him, God would Honor, and such as despised him, should be lightly esteemed,
ibid. verse. 30. from whence we may infallibly conclude, that if the Magistrates
and Ministers of this Nation mind themselves, and their own worldly Interests,
more then the trust committed unto them by God in their places, that they shall
certainly be punished as Eli, and his House was: and J beseech the Lord, that
as in the execution of this Judgment upon the House of Eli, he suffered his
Ark (the glory of Israel) to be in the hands of the Philistims; so the
spiritual Philistims of this Church and State, may not have the same advantage
against us to triumph over our Glory, which is the Visible upholding of his
Gospell-Ordinances in the purity thereof. This Prognostic then is very
certain, and easy to be made by any that lays Gods ways to heart.

As for the other ground of the latter Part of the Prognostic, relating to the
Misery of a People under such Governors; it is clear in the view of all
rational Men, that can look upon a People without a Magistracy and a Ministry,
what their State can be: for it is certain that all the foundations of Civil
and Church Government being removed, they will either remain without all
Government in an Anarchicall state, wherein every one will be given up into the
hand of his Neighbor, to be oppressed and devoured as the Fishes of the Sea
devour one another; or else (which will be a kind of Mercy) they will be
brought under the Arbitrary power of some Party that will be most Potent and
able to overruled all the rest, by whose means God (if he has any favor in
store toward the Nation) happily may produce some Settlement which will free
us from the confusion of an Anarchy, till his Judgments in some other way be
executed upon us.

Thus you have my Prognostic, and the grounds thereof, in case Mr. Saltmarsh's
Suggestions take place, which is not unlikely they may, in respect of the wild
frame whereinto God suffers Men's Spirits to run now adays, and in respect
that the Reins of Government begin to be loosened every where, and because I
believe that Mr. Satlmarsh has not shot these Arrows against all Settlement of
Government, so much out of his own private Quiver, as out of the Sense and
Counsels of a Party, which does strongly Act by those Principles (wherewith
they have prompted him, and to vent which they make use only of his Pen)
toward our utter Unsettlement, by a Method of deceitfulness, which upon the
whimsicall humors of this Age, may become prevalent to disturb all other
resolutions and attempts of all Orderly Courses and Establishments.

Now to suggest a matter of Advice, either to prevent the increase, or to
divert the small issue of these evils; I shall do it as briefly as I can,
because I dare not take upon me to go beyond my line.

To prevent the increase of present Unsettlements in Church Government, the way
is not for the Ministry to get power from the Civil Magistrate, to press all
the Sanctions of the Assembly of Divines, without any abatement upon all the
Congregations of the Nation, so that none shall be suffered to have any
Religious liberty of professing the Gospel in Public, that come not under
this Rule by way of Conformity, which seems to be the clear Design of our
Brethren of Scotland, and of that Party which in the House, and in the Assembly
of Divines, does go along with them: I say, that this is not, and will not be
the way of Settlement; because it is not the Gospell-way which Christ has
instituted, to which only he has promised a blessing: and because the
forwardness of this Party to settle things in this way, comes not from a pure
zeal to Religion, but involves a State-Interest, which those of the House
intend to carry along with it, which an opposite Party has discovered, and
will oppose to the uttermost, though all should be Unsettled and go to rack by
this means; and who knows whether Mr. Saltmarsh's Query, is not the effect of
that Resolution, which is taken amongst them to cross the Designs of that
other Party; therefore the prosecution of a Settlement in that way, will produce
rather strife and opposition, then any other effect.

Nor will the way of Settlement in Church Government be, that which some others
seem to press with no less earnestness; namely to give all the Power of
Church affairs up into the hands of the Civil Magistrate, qua Magistrate; that
he may Order the spiritual Concernments of Gods House Authoritatively, as he
shall think good; and that no ways of Church Discipline should be administered
by any, nor means of Edification set a work but in his name: I say, this will
no more then the other produce a Settlement in Church Government; because all
Parties that are most intelligent in the way of Godliness, and zealous for the
liberty of the Gospel, will jointly oppose such an absolute power in the
Civil Magistate over the Churches which are to be ruled by none in matters of
Conscience, but by the Laws and Orders of Christ, and upon a free willing
account, that the Members of the Churches should without constraint give
themselves up thereunto, according to that of Psalm. 110.3. In the day of thy
power they shall be willing in the beauties of Holiness: What way then soever
is taken, which does not work the Professors to a willingness to come under the
power of Christ in the beauties of Holiness, is not that which will be
effectual to bring about a Settlement. So that it is neither by the power in
the hands of the Ministers, nor in the hands of the Magistrates that will do
the Work; but it must be by a clear and gentle leading of Men's Spirits, to come
willingly under the Yoke of Christ; and except the Godly Ministers can agree
amongst themselves, to hold forth the Duties of the Profession, and the Rules
of Discipline, as they are in the Word evidently set forth, and leave of
Contesting about the Outward Circumstantials and Prudentiall way of acting, to
permit a latitude to each other, and consent to a mutual forbearance therein;
and so upon the account of Charity make up the differences, and mind the same
thing one toward another, and jointly desire the Countenance of the
Magistrate, by way of his approbation only, and not by way of Delegate Power
to constrain others unto their way; except I say, the Godly Ministers amongst
themselves can thus accommodate their Matters, the Unsettlement of the
Government will never be prevented; and if there can be no agreement of this
nature procured amongst the Ministers themselves, without the Politic actings
of Statesmen, who have always some worldly Designs to Byas their Resolutions;
the issue of the Unsettlement, will either be a total Dissolution of all the
bonds and ties of Church Fellowship amongst the Professors, or the opening of a
door to all Adversaries to break in upon their Societies, and to all
licentiousness, to break forth amongst themselves without control, the issue
whereof will be the utter contempt of all Ministry and Ordinances; and
therewith the breaking in of all damnable Heresies, which will make way for the
increase of Profaneness of Idolatry, of Popery, of Atheism, and of all
Blasphemous abominations.

Now if no agreement can be found amongst the Ministers themselves, to prevent
the Unsettlement from whence these evils will certainly spring up, (which is
the only Advice that I can give in this present Case) then to divert the issue
which these evils will produce unto the Nation, I know none other Remedy, but
that the Civil Magistrate should by way of foresight, establish Moral Laws
to repress gross dissoluteness of life by corporal punishments, to restrain
open profaneness in violating the Lords Day, to inhib^t superstitious and Popish
Rites in the Public Worship, to punish the Authors and Publishers of
Blasphemous and Atheistical Tenets, which fret as a Gangrene, and lead the
Unsettled minds of ignorant people to all Uncleanness and Impiety, to all
Brutish Sensuality and desperate Courses in wickedness, which in the end will
bring the Nation to utter Ruin, if God does not in mercy prevent the current
of these evils, by wakening the Spirits of Magistrates unto Righteousness, and
a Resolution to be faithful unto their Trust, that what can not be prevented
by the Unity of the Spirit in the preaching of the Gospel, may be diverted by
the Power and Authority of Humane Laws, and Bodily punishments over those that
are disobedient, not so much to the persuasions of Religion (which cannot be
propagated by Humane Power) but to the Dictates of Reason: for although no
outward constraint can make Men Virtuous, yet an outward restraint may keep
them from being so vicious, as to destroy the safety and well-being of Humane
Societies, which Civil Magistrates are bound to procure.

This is the Advice which at present I am able to give upon the whole Matter; I
shall leave it with you, and with such as you shall think fit to impart it unto
to peruse, or to make what other use thereof as you shall see cause; for in
these and all other things of this nature, you know that you have power to
dispose, for the Edification of the Saints, and the Public good of Mankind,
of all the endeavors of

Your faithful and affectionate Friend in Christ, John Dury.


A Letter once written by Mr. Dury to Captain Coysh, wherein he opens himself
concerning the Magistrates Duty, as a Christian in advancing Church Government
as it is National.
SIR,
I Rejoice greatly to see the fram of your Spirit so Answerable to the Rules of
our Holy Profession: Mr. Hartlib has acquainted me with the real effects of
your Godly zeal toward the Public Good, and every good Work, for which you
are much to be commended, and on your behalf, such as know You (considering how
few there are of such a temper now adays) ought to give thanks unto God for
your forwardness, to further the Means which may be useful to advance his
Glory. Amongst other good Effects of your pious inclination, the thoughts which
you entertain, to further the ways of Peace, amongst the distracted Churches
of this Land, are not the least commendable; would to God we could find many of
your temper, who have some interest and influence upon the Churches: but the
Truth is, that none are now regarded, but such as follow particular Interest,
and make it their work to bring Fuel to the Fire which does consume us, by
matters of complaint or reproach cast upon their Neighbors; all sides in every
thing striving for victory, none for gaining others in the manifestation of
Truth, through love and forbearance.

The Aim which you have in the Discourse, which Mr. Hartlib has sent me, is
exceeding good; although I had some difficulty to read your Hand, yet I made a
shift to understand your meaning; and I shall willingly give my approbation to
your Proposals, if we can find out the way to obtain the effect thereof, which
I conceive to be an Unblamable Freedom in some matters of Difference, which are
Extrafundamentall, grounded upon a real acknowledgement of an Agreement in all
matters which are Fundamental. You have set down the Heads of things, which
you judge Fundamental and necessary for salvation to be believed, and Overtures
concerning Duties of Forbearance in some doubtful Practices which occasion
much debate amongst those that love to abound in their own sense; and
concerning the observance of some inquestionable (...) berty for any side, to
practice what is good in their own eyes; but that has not made any side truly
peaceable, but rather increased the Divisions, by the abuse of their Liberty,
in crossing, opposing, and offending others in their different ways; whence
Scandals are multiplied, bitter Disputes, Complaints, Irritations, and
Heart-burnings increased. Now how to prevent in time to come this Abuse of
Liberty, which according to your Proposals should be granted, will be the main
and most difficult work of all; and I find nothing suggested in your Paper
concerning this, and without some Remedy to this distemper of our Spirits, I
cannot perceive that our Maladies can be cured.

Hitherto I have made doubts, and showed you what I apprehend as an Impediment
to the effect of your desires. Now I shall also suggest something, which may
tend to the removal of these Doubts, and Impediments of this Work, which we
desire to advance.

I must lay this as a Ground, that in matters of Outward and Public
Concernment to the Society of Mankind; the Magistrate is Principally to be
respected, and to be sued unto for his assistance: but in matters which concern
the Conscience immediately, the Word of God is alone to be made use of. If
therefore Men in their Outward Actions mis-behave themselves, and do things
prejudicially unto the Peace of their Neighbors; they fall under the
Cognizance of the Civil Power, who may make Laws to restrain them from giving
offense unto their Neighbors: but if they walk orderly, and offend no body;
and yet foment pernicious Errors, and spread them secretly or openly, to the
disturbance of Men's conscience, and the seduction of the weak, they cannot be
otherwise dealt withal, but by the Word of God; and the Magistrate ought to
see this done effectually, till they be Converted or Convicted to be
incorrigible; and then he is to do further, as his Conscience shall direct him.
The Magistrate has a Right to Over-see all Men's outward Actions, and may call
them to an account of their proceedings in what they do, as Men; and may
restrain them from doing that which he does think prejudicial to the Peace of
other Subjects: but the Magistrate has no Power to impose upon any Man's
Consc^^^^e any thing by Law; only he may and ought to use Means to Convict Men
by the Word of God; and he should Countenance and Over-see the Regular ways of
settling those Means a work. For God has made him a Nursing Father to his
Children; therefore as such he ought to have an insight of all their ways, to
protect them from harm, and to advance unto them the comforts of their life.
Now the life of Gods Children, as such is the freedom of their Spirit, to serve
him conscionably according to his will. Whatsoever then does deprive them of
this Freedom, he may not impose upon them, for this were to bring their Spirits
in bongage under his will: now he is not the Father of their Spirits; (that is
Gods alone Prerogative) therefore he may not do any thing to hinder, but ought
to do all things to further their free acccess toward him. All his care must
be then, as he is a Nursing Father of Gods Children, to provide for these
things. 1. First, To know who are the Children of God, whom he should Nurse,
that he may distinguish them from strangers. 2. What the proper work of his
Nursing Duty is toward them; that is to say, What his Aim as a Christian
Magistrate should be, above which he should not presume to take upon him. 3.
How he should endeavor to perform the Duties subordinate unto his Aim. To
speak in a word my sense (that if you please you may confer with me about
them.) I shall say of the first, that he must know and discern the Children of
God from strangers, by this infallible Token; Whosoever does acknowledge Jesus
Christ to be come in the flesh, and does hear the Words of his Apostles, and
does submit himself to be guided in his profession of Christianity by their
Directions, and does wear in all his walking Christ's Livery, which is Love,
Holiness, and Meekness, he is to be counted a true Child of God, as to the
Outward Profession of Religion; and whosoever does not this, he is to be
counted a stranger to it. And this badge of Religious Profession, may make a
National Church as to the Magistrate: for I do not see, that a Church can be
counted otherwise National, but in reference to him; nor ought he to discern
Professors by any other token, but by this: this then is the Character of a
National Church to me; namely if a whole Nation does make this Profession; and
if he that is the Magistrate of that Nation, does make the same profession; he
cannot but look upon himself in his Charge, as a Nursing Father to them all
alike: for whatsoever their particular differences otherwise may be amongst
themselves, which destroy not this foundation, they are to him no more but as
the several Statures or Features, or Lineaments of those Childrens bodies and
faces, which in his Nursing Care must make no material difference.

As concerning the Second, which is his Aim above which he may not presume to
take upon him in the discharge of his Nursing Duty; I conceive it should be to
Over-see their ways in the Visible Profession, that the freedom due to all may
be maintained in every one; and that the Unity of the Spirit of Christ, and the
love which ought to be amongst Brethren, Children of the same Father, may be
upheld without disturbance in all. Above this, I suppose he may not presume,
nor take upon him to prescribe any thing of Faith, or of Worship
Authoritatively; or to restrain Authoritatively the Exercises which may be
servicable thereunto. For he is not the Judge of the Childrens Faith, and of
their respect unto their Father, that is between God and them; for the Powers
of the Spiritual life, by which Men's souls act toward God, are not committed
to his Nursing Care; Christ is their Tutor in this thing, but the oversight of
the Outward Profession in the Body, is committed and recommended to him.

As for the Question, What he should do with those that are strangers, and what
his relation is unto them? how far he is to look unto there Profession, and to
what end? I will not mention it now, for it does not concern our present purpose.

The Third thing belonging to his Nursing Care; is, to know how the Duties
should be performed, which are subordinate unto this Aim. The Duties are
mainly Two: First, To take away the Lets and Disturbances of the Public
Freedom, in the profession of the Name of Christ, and of the Obedience due to
his Ordinances. Secondly, To supply all Comforts, all Helps and Encouragements
which may further the growth of the Professors in Knowledge, Unity, and Love
one toward another; and the way to endeavor these Duties, is to be
Nurse-like, with much tenderness of affection, without harshnesse or
imperiousness to overawe their Spirits; and without Worldly and Politic
Aims, to put a snare upon them, or make use of them, and of their Profession,
for Humane Advantages and worldly Designs.

I have enlarged my self upon this Discourse, to lay it as a Ground of what I
am to advise for the Cure of our Distractions, and the prosecution of your Aim
in the Discourse which is sent me.

I conceive then, that the Magistrate should be Petitioned by all that profess
the Name of Christ; for that Liberty which is necessary for their Edification
in the use of Christ's Ordinances, and not offensive unto any. Unto this
Petition, the Magistrate should give his Approbation, and promise his
protection to all such as shall show him, that they endeavor to walk without
blame in the ways of Christ by the Word. And upon this Declaration, he should
invite all those that make the Word their Rule, to offer unto him from the
Word, the substance of their Faith, and of their practice Positively: 1 Pet.
3.15
by this invitation every one will be bound to lay himself open; for all
Christians are obliged to walk in the light, and to be ready to give an Answer
to every one that asks of them, a reason of the Hope that is in them.

Here observe, that I would not have the Magistrate to impose upon any, that
which he does think Fundamental in Faith or Practice (for that belongs unto
him no more, then to a Nurse to shape the face of a Child committed to her
Care, otherwise their God has made it;) but he is only to take notice of that
which others think to themselves in their way, according to the Scriptures to
be Fundamental. Here then your Discourse might be presented to him, for your
self and others, that should resolve to make it the Platform of their
Profession; but for him to propose it unto all, or to discountenance all that
should not resolve to follow it, that would be somewhat beyond his Commission
as I conceive.

Now when all the Parties shall have given up the positive Declarations of
their Faith and Practice, which they conceive agreeable to the Word; and when
he has satisfied his own Judgment therein, that there is nothing in them
destructive unto Godliness and the public Peace; he ought to give them a
strict charge, not to be injurious and offensive one unto another, but to seek
Peace and follow after it, threatening such as shall be disturbers of the Peace
of others with just Correction, after the first and second Admonition. By this
means he will discharge the First part of his Duty, which is to secure the
Liberty of Gods Children in the service due unto him, by protecting them from
injuries in their several Ways: but if he does think himself bound in
conscience to endeavor also the Second part of his Duty, which is to supply
unto the Churches of God, the Helps and Comforts which may fu^ther their growth
in Knowledge, Unity, and Love, (which I conceive, the Parliament of England
more solemnly obliged to endeavor, then ever any Christian Magistrate in this
world has been;) if I say, our Magistrate does think himself bound to this,
not only by the property of his Calling, but by special Covenant toward God,
and with their Neighbors; then I would advise him to take this Course. 1.
First to allow of Regular Meetings, between Parties for Public or Private
Conferences, wherein all offensivenesse of speech or behavior, should be
strictly prohibited under severe Penalties. (as for the ways how to Order
these Meetings for Edification, that may be spoken of at another time* 2ly. To
employ some fit persons from among themselves, to persuade the rest, or to stir
them up to consider of Ways how their differences may be Composed, and the
Unity of the Spirit more clearly manifested, and the bonds of Peace and Love
more firmly established amongst them, then by the mere Authority of a Civil
Sanction. For it is a shame to Christians, who are called to be Members of one
another, that nothing should be able to untie them, but the restraint of Power
keeping them from mutual injuries.

3. Thirdly, I would advise him to require of every Party, that they should
declare that wherein they agree with others in Doctrine, and in Practice: and
to make kown the Rules by which they desire to walk toward those with whom
they agree in Fundamentalls, for their mutual Edification, that the Communion
and Uniformity which ought to be amongst Gods Children, in the service of one
Master, may not be neglected so far as it can be entertained.

4. Fourthly, when these Declarations are given in to him, he should set some
of the choicest Men of each Party, one or two a work, to gather out of all
these Declarations, the Tenor of the common consent and Agreement of all
Parties, so near as can be in their own words, or fully in their own words by
way of Harmony: and to consult about the things wherein there is a Difference
remaining how it may be taken away; or to give Reasons from the Word of God,
why that it ought not to make a breach of Unity in the affections of
Professors, and when this Harmony; these Consultations and Reasons should be
perfited, they might be discreetly imparted unto the several Churches, to be
considered for the End whereunto they were made.

Here again you see, that I would have the Magistrate to be very active and
zealous, but yet still within his own Sphere and line, as a Nurse, and not as a
Commander and Master of any Man's Faith and Religion: as one that leads them,
and encourages them all alike unto the observation of clear Duties, which they
themselves shall acknowledge to be observable; and not as one that imposes his
own Will and Statutes upon them as a Yoke. And by this means, the engagement
which is upon him in the National Covenant, to procure one Confession of
Faith, Leiturgie, Catechism, Form of Worship, Government and Discipline may be
without difficulty discharged, and the things already done by the Assembly of
Divines, may stand in their own place, and be of force for the use of such as
will own them; and others shall be free from Constraint, and at a due Liberty
to walk in their own light, only with this Proviso, that they shall not molest
any, no more then they desire to be molested; and that they shall declare their
Fundamental Agreement with their Brethren, and their Resolution to walk in the
Unity of the Spirit with them therein, which will be a means to discharge the
Conscience of the Parliament, also in (...) the Second Article of the National
Covenant.

By this Method and way of proceeding, I suppose all the Difficulties which in
the beginning of this Discourse I did mention, may be avoided: Only this will
for the present remain to be thought upon. How to waken the Conscience of the
Magistrate to Resent these Duties; and how to insinuate these Suggestions so
unto him, as that they may come without prejudice to be Considered and
examined; and by faithful Agents brought to some effectual Result. Now the
God of all Peace and Comfort, lead the Children of Peace in his Truth, to be
unblamable until the Day of his appearing, and make us servicable unto the
Kingdom of his Son, with all our Talents in our Generation. I Rest in Him.

Your Servant, John Dury.


FINIS.

