A SERMON Preached before THE ARTILLERY COMPANY, AT St. Andrews Undershaft,
August the 30th 1670. And at their earnest Request, PUBLISHED.

By WILLIAM DVRHAM, B.D. Rector of St. Mildreds Breadstreet, London.

Rei Militaris virtus coeteris praestat virtutibus; Multo plus adfert
dignitatis Res Militaris, quam Juris Civilis Gloria. Cicero. Honestas idoneum
militem reddit: Verecundia, dum prohibet fugere, facit esse victorem. Vegetius
de re Milit. LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Samuel Gellibrand, at the Sign of the
Golden-Ball in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1671.

TO MY Very worthy, and much Honored Friends, The Honorable Sir John Robinson
Knight and Baronet, Lieutenant, of his Majesty's Tower of London, Alderman, and
President of the Artillery Company. Sir Joseph Sheldon, Knight and Alderman,
Vice President. Sir Thomas Player Knight, Leader. Colonel John Mews, Treasurer.
Sir John Robinson Knights and Aldermen. Colonel John Mews Stewards. Sir
George Waterman Knights and Aldermen. Capt. George Peryer Stewards. Sir Thomas
Davies Knights and Aldermen. Major Tho. Gunston Stewards. Sir John Smith
Knights and Aldermen. Capt. William Cooper Stewards. And to the whole Court of
Assistants, Field-Officers, Captains, and Gentlemen, Professing and Exercising
Arms in that Famous and Honorable Society.

SIRS,
'T Was with much Reluctance that I prevailed with my self, to Preach this
Sermon, but with much more, to Print it. Not but that I had a great willingness
to serve you in both; but because I judged my self unmeet for either. I was
never, when Younger, fond of such Public Employments; Nor valued my self so
high, as to think this busy World at leisure to concern themselves with any
thing that I could publish. Much less can I cherish such vain thoughts now,
when broken (to say nothing of hard usage) with Age and Infirmities. Might I
have been left to mine own Beloved Privacies, you had never had the trouble,
either to have Heard or Read this. But as I affect not Popularity, so I
perfectly hate Incivility and Ingratitude. Your great kindness has obliged me
to gratify you in what I may; and your Importunity has prevailed to have it
Preached and Published. Importunity prevails with God; and what am I that I
should stand out against so many Gallant men, and good Friends, who have pressed
me till I was ashamed?

May it find but the like Acceptance with you in the Reading, as it did in
Preaching, it will be encouragement enough to skreen it, against all the
Censures it may meet withal.

But I am very little sollicitous for its defense, so long as Les Gens d'Armes,
the whole Artillery of this Royal City, have invited and undertaken its
Patronage. Indeed, not to defend so much it, as their own Judgments, who have
pleased by their approving and desiring it, to make it their own. If it prove
acceptable to you, and in any measure Serviceable to the Public, it will be
abundant contentment and satisfaction, to

Gentlemen, Your much obliged Friend and humble Servant, William Durham.
October the 12th 1670.
A SERMON Preached before the Artillery Company, at St. Andrews Undershaft,
August the 30th. 1670.
I COR. XVI. 13. Watch ye, stand fast in the Faith, quit your selves like men;
be strong.
THough Religion in it self be the sweetest thing in the World, all whose paths
are pleasantness, and all her ways are peace; yet the Exercise of it in a
Christian life is usually set forth by such things as are accompanied with
pains and danger.

A Christians life is compared to that of a Husbandman, who must endure all
weather, the Summers heat, and the Winters cold; he must be at pains to Plow
and Sow, if he intend to Reap.

To a Travelers, who must expect all ways; sometimes he meets with high and
craggy Rocks, and sometimes with swelling Brooks, and dirty Sloughs.

To a Merchants, who ventures himself on the merciless Waves; now tossed as high
as Heaven, now tumbled as low as Hell (as David speaks) always within an inch
or two of death.

To a Soldiers life, which is ever attended with fears and dangers; he walk^
perpetually at the points of Swords, and mouth of Cannons, and always bears
his life in his hand.

A Christian life, then, is a spiritual Warfare, which is of all Wars the most
dangerous; the Enemy being numerous, potent, subtle, within us; and that which
lies at stake, the Soul, being infinitely more worth then all Alexanders
Conquests; and in this lies our present Work.

The terms of the Text are Military all, and so, suitable enough to the
occasion, however they prove in the handling.

You must not expect that I should deal with you at your own Weapons, having
(as David said of Saul's Armor) never proved them.

Not that I should read a Military Lecture, being utterly unacquainted with the
Learning of the Tacticks, and never having (that I know of) so much as seen
that Book of Jasher, which teaches the use of the Bow.

If I can only make the Offices and Duties of a Soldier conduce to the
illustration of our Christian Warfare, it is as much as I aim at, or can be
reasonably expected from my Profession.

And if herein I fall short (as it is more then probable) you have nothing to
blame, but your own misguided choice.

Miles Emeritus, a superannuated Soldier, was by the Law of Arms, exempted from
public service. But being overruled in this Plea, I have no way left, but
being short, to gratify you or my self: You, in relieving you from the
inconvenience of your own Error; and my self, who being by your kindness,
adjudged to run the Gauntlope, am obliged to make what haste I can in mine own
defense.

There Is a Climax or Gradation in the words, each word importing more then that
which went before it.

1. Watch ye, be vigilant, which is the least that can be expected of a
Soldier; if he fail here, he certainly miscarries.

2. Stand fast; Stand to your Arms, keep your Ground, maintain that Post,
that is given you to defend, which is likeliest done by being Watchful.

3. Quit your selves like men; Not only stand fast, but fight, and worst your
Enemies: Keep your own Ground, and win theirs.

4. Be strong; Go on to complete your Conquest, and having once subdued your
Enemies, keep them under.

I begin with the first of these;

1. (...).
Watch ye; A Metaphor taken from Sentinels in an Army, whose office is to be
upon their Watchtower, to observe the motions of the Enemy, that there be no
sudden assault or irruption into the Camp or City, and to give the Alarm of
any approaching danger. Indeed Watchfulness becomes every Soldier upon Duty; he
must have his eyes in his head, not sleep at his work.

When an Enemy is near the Camp, or Beleagures the Garrison, it becomes every
Soldier not only to be awake, but to be circumspect and attend the Motions of
the Enemy.

Vigilance is requisite in a Soldier, nothing more. What a great oversight and
what a desperate hazard it is to be found sleeping, we may see in the case of
Saul and his Army, when David came and took away his Spear and his Pitcher, 1 Samuel 26.
while he and his men were all fast asleep: Where we may observe by the way,
Though God is said to have delivered Saul into David's hand, and this sleep to
have fallen on the people from the Lord; Verse. 8.12.
though David might have stuck him to the Earth with his own Spear, and spilt
his blood, as easily as have powered out the water on the Ground, yet he neither
would nor durst, but judges them worthy to dye for their negligence, in keeping
no better the Lords Anointed.

Had he (as Abishai councel'd him, Verse. 8.
and other have done since) followed the Conduct of Providence, he might have
quickly eased himself of his Adversary; but he had a more certain Rule to walk
by, the unerring word, for who (says he) can lift up his hand against the
Lords Anointed,

The Church is an Army too, Cant. 6.4.
an army with Banners; The Lord of Hoasts is both her Van and Rere; Esa. 52.12.
2 Cor. 10.4.
her Soldiers are Angels, Martyrs, Apostles, all Christians; her Weapons are
not Carnal, but mighty; her Order and disposition Safe and Decent: Ezech. 3.17.
She has her Watchmen too. Son of man, I have made thee a Watchman over the
House of Israel. These are the Pastors and Ministers that Watch over their
Souls; their Office is to foresee dangers, and to give warning; if he do so,
and they will not heed it, they shall perish in their sin, but he has
delivered his own Soul. But if he give no warning, the peoples blood will God
require at his hands. When the Church is resembled to an Army, then the
Ministers are called Watchmen; when to a Flock, they are styled Shepherds. He
does but ill discharge the Office of a Watchman, who is never on the Guard but
on Pay-dayes: nor he the Office of a Shepherd, who never sees his Flock but at
Shearing time. An Army has no greater Enemies then such Watchmen; nor can a
Flock meet with verier Wolves then such Shepherds.

It Is these men's Duties in a Special manner to Watch, but not theirs only;
therefore what I say unto them I say unto all, Watch. Luke 13.37.
This is the first thing required of us in our Spiritual Warfare, and that not
without the highest reason; For

1. Inimicus obsidet.
We are incompast with Enemies which Watch all advantages against us to do us
mischief. If you ask, who are they? The same that we abjured, when we were
first listed into Gods Artillery Ground, the Flesh, the World, and the Devil.

The Flesh, an inbred and secret Enemy, and is thereby capable of doing us more
mischief. The World batters us with Cannons on all sides, temptations of all
sorts; temptations in our meat, drink, apparel, company, every thing. And the
Devil who manages both these to his own advantage; would you know what an Enemy
he is? Hear S. Paul, the Major General of the Heathen-Christian Army. Ephesians.
6.12. We wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, (terms of weakness and
diminution) but against Principalities and Powers, against Spiritual wickedness
in high Places. For their Number they are many, the words are all in the
Plural, their Name is Legion; for their Condition, they are Great,
Principalities and Powers; for their Nature, they are Spirits, who have got the
advantage of the ground too, they are in high places; where as the Historian
once said, Salust.
Non solum cum boste, sed cum loco dimicandum est.

The Devil is an Active Enemy; he has his Methods, wiles and stratagems of
War; he is restless and indefatigable; when he is beaten off from one Gate, he
assaults us at another; he flies from one extreme to another; when he fails in
drawing us to one sin, he offers the contrary. There was much reason then in
that Exhortation of St. 1 Pet. 5.8.
Peter, Be Vigilant and sober, because your adversary the Devil goes about
night and day, like a roaring Lion, seeking whom be may devour.

2. Sopo obrepit
We are apt to be dull and drowsy in our best services. What between this
indisposition, and the charms of the Devil, we are apt to sleep at our best
duties. In that last and great conflict which the Captain of our Salvation had
with the Prince of darkness, those great Commanders, Peter, James, and John,
who had the honor and happiness to trial a Pike under his imediate conduct,
were drowsy and fell asleep; though the spirit was willing, (the searcher of
hearts being Judge) yet the flesh was weak, and therefore there was great
reason for that following admonition; Mat. 26.41.
Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation.

3. To which let me add, Imperator inspicit.
That the General himself duly walks the Round, and observes in what posture
his Soldiers are. Militibus Imper ator, potius quam hestis ^etuendus est. Val.
Max.
He is always in the midst of the Golden Candlesticks, his Churches. He knows
your works, your tribulation, patience, watchfulness, what they are, and will
suddenly come to give every Soldier his pay, according to his works. The hour
of his coming is uncertain, and therefore it behooves us to be still upon our
Watch. He comes like a Thief in the night; and if the good man of the house had
known at what hour the thief would have come, he would have watched. Such shall
the coming of the Son of Man be. If he find you on your Guard, happy are ye; if
not, you must expect what sleepy Soldiers use to suffer: Therefore Watch,
because ye know not at what hour the Son of Man comes, whether at midnight, or
at the Cock-crowing, or at the dawning of the Day. Mat. 24.42.


Give me leave only to touch upon the duties which are usually joined with
Watching, and I shall dismiss this point.

1. Watch and be sober; the best means to preserve our selves is to be
vigilant; the best way to be watchful is to exercise sobriety, sobriety is a
most necessary duty for a Soldier. A drunken Soldier cannot watch; and a sleepy
Watchman betrays himself and his trust. What if the Trumper give an Alarm to
Battle, and thou have not an care to hear it? What if thy General should come,
and thou have not an eye to see, nor tongue to answer him? What if the Enemy
should approach, and thou have neither a foo^ to stand, nor a hand to fight?
Take heed therefore least at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and so that day come upon you unawares. Luck. 21.36.
-- Watch ye therefore, that ye may be able to stand before the Son of man.

2. Watch and Pray are usually joined together, we cannot subsist without
prayer, we cannot pray without watchfulness. We stand not by our own strength,
but must fetch supplies from him who sets us on work; Psalm 18.29.
We never go forth in our own strength but we are worsted; seldom in his, but
we prevail. It was by his help that David leapt over the wall, i.e. conquered
all difficulties; when his Enemies thrust sore at him that he might fall, God
was his strength, Psalm. 118.30.
and that supported him. There Is no man more obliged to prayer then the
Soldier, because none conflicts with greater difficulties and dangers;
therefore above all men they ought to continue in prayer, and watch in the same
with thanksgiving. That Is the first part of a Soldiers Duty, Watch. Coll. 4.2.


2. We come to the second; [Stand fast in the Faith.] (...): The word imports a
firm and stable standing; it behooves the Soldier to keep his ground, to stand
stoutly to it, and rather then fly, to dye upon the Turf. A duty, then which
nothing is more frequently commanded to a Christian Soldier; Stand fast in the
liberty wherewith Christ has made you free. Stand fast in one spirit. Gal 5.1.
1. Phil 21.1. These. 3.8.
Stand fast in the Lord. And here, Stand fast in the Faith.

1. In fide Deodata; In that Faith which ye have given and plighted to God.
There was among the Romans a Military Oath given to all their Soldiers,
obliging them to be faithful to their Generals and their Cause. We have all of
us taken Sacramentum Militiae; Our Baptismal vow ingages us to be faithful
Soldiers to God, and to renounce the World the Flesh and the Devil. Contestamur
nos Diabolo renuntiare, pompae and Angelis suis, says Tertull. We have made our
public protestation, and solemnly abjured the delights of the Flesh, the Pomps
and Vanities of the World, with the Devil and all his works; and all this we
are engaged to, not only by promise, but by a solemn Vow made to God, before
Angels and Men; we were not only unjust but forsworn, if we should not keep it.
Remember that the Oath of God is upon you: Who is more odious then a Renegado
who is sentenced as a Skellum, and hanged in effigy? What greater
persidiousness then for a Soldier, transire in castra inimicorum, to run from
his Colors into the Enemies Camp, and to become a Soldier and Vassal to them,
1 Samuel 22.7.
whom he has solemnly: abjured? What Saul said once to his People, Can the Son
of Jesse give you Vineyards, and make you Captains of thousands? I may say on
better grounds, Can the Devil give such rewards as God can, that you forsake
God to serve him?

What will you answer when the Devil shall plead with Christ for your souls at
the last day? as Saint Cyprian brings him in, pleading his title to those who
professed themselves Christians, and lived not answerable to their profession;
the Question was, Whose they were, Gods or the Devils, and to whom they did
belong? The Devil he urges; Lord, they say, that thou art a righteous Judge,
and I appeal to thine own Judgment, whose these Souls are, thine or mine; for
my part, Non crucem pectuli, non cruorem fudi, non coelum promisi, etc. I never
suffered upon the Cross for these men, never shed one drop of blood for them,
never promised them Heaven; nor did they ever promise or engage to be my
Servants. All those things thou have done for them, and this they have done to
thee. Yet no sooner could I hold up my finger, but they would break all thy
Laws, forget all their Vows and Obligations, and serve me, before thee: Be thou
thy self a just Judge, and give sentence, whose they are, Thine or Mine.
Consider, I beseech you, what defense you can make against such a Plea!

2. Stand fast] In fide a Deo accepta; In the Faith that was once delivered to
the Saints: This is that which is chiefly meant in all the former Scriptures,
and which Saint Jude bids us earnestly to contend for. Verse. 3.
Be ye steadfast and unmovable, says Saint Paul, as to points of Faith; and as
to matters of practice, 1 Cor. 15. Ult.
always abounding in the work of the Lord; this is that he presses on the
Ephesians, Chapter 4.14.
that they be not as Children, tossed up and down by every wind of Doctrine; by
the slight of men, and canning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive;
but grow up into him in all things who is the head, even Christ.

I have read of one Philetas, Symsons Cron ^ad. An. Mundi 3721.
an excellent Poet and Critic (who flourisht in the days of Alexander the
Great, and was Schoolmaster to Ptolomeus Philadelphus, that great Lover and
Advancer of Learning) that he was so thin and spare of body that he was fain to
sole his Shoes with thick Plates of Lead, least every puff of wind should
overturn him. How many are there that want such a poise and balance in matters
of Religion? Perfect Moons-Men, who hardly appear two days in the same shape,
of the same mind. Now they are of this persuasion, then of that, at last, of
none; they begin in Skepticism, and (which is the genuine product) end in
Atheism: But for you, being rooted and grounded in the Truth and the Love of
it, hold fast the profession of your Faith firm unto the end. But,

We must take notice, that it is not to be obstinate in an Heresy, to be stiff
in a Schism that is here enjoined us: A man may be steadfast in his own opinion,
peremptory for his Party, and yet fall short of this Duty; nay, if he happen to
be in the wrong, the more tenacious he is, the greater is his sin. Constancy is
an excellent thing if well placed; Perseverance an excellent Grace, but must
still be engaged in that which is good.

It Is no commendation to an old-Thief, that he will not be reclaimed from his
former courses and company. Nor do I value the sufferings of a Romish Priest,
though he has the hardiness to dye at Tyburne; he is not punished for obeying
God, but for disobeying the just Laws of his lawful Prince. 1 Pet. 4.15.
A man may suffer as a Busie-body, or as an Euil-doer, and he has the amends
in his own hands, he has his reward. It Is in vain to talk of sufferings,
unless the Cause will bear it; it is not the suffering, but the Cause that makes
the Martyr.

3. Stand fast; (...), in that Order, Place, and Station, wherein you are set
by your Great General; which I add, because I find it joined with stedfastness
of Faith, Col. 2.5. And the Apostle was much pleased to observe their Order, as
well as their Stedfastness in the Faith. Elsewhere we find him troubled to see
some that did walk disorderly. (...). 2 These. 3.6.
It Is a Military word; they kept not Rank and File, nor regarded the Word of
Command, as Soldiers are obliged to do. (a) Nihil magis in acis custodiendum
est, quam ut omnes milites ordinem incedendi servent: Periculum enim ab
hostibus semper gra^issimuin sustinet divisus and inordinatus exercitus. --
Vegetius de re Milit. l. 7.
If through ignorance, negligence, or perverseness, a Soldier forsakes his
place, and breaks Discipline, he casts his Division, it may be the whole
Company into Confusion, and makes an easier entrance for the Enemy. Mannius
Curious, when Consul, was wont to say, Non opus est Reipublicae eo milite qui
parere non potest. The Commonwealth had no need of that Soldier who knew not
how to obey Orders. When the Holy Ghost would describe an Army that should be
invincible, and bear all before them, Jul. 2.7.
he says, that they should march every one in his way, and none should break
their Ranks.

The Church (as you heard) is an Army, and a terrible one too; Cant. 6.4.
but it is while she marches with Banners, while due Order and Discipline is
maintained, and every Soldier keeps his own place and station; so long the
Gates of Hell shall not prevail against her. But when these are neglected, or
trampled under foot, she is quite another thing (like Samson without his looks)
she may be a Multitude, a Rout, but will hardly bear the name of an Army.

Believe it, Sirs, Order is a precious thing, and Government a rare Jewel,
which we ought to acknowledge as the greatest Blessings; without which all
things would run into present Confusion, and the whole World would be nothing
else, but Magnum Latrocinium, a great Nest of Thieves and Robbers.

It Is not in our choice to stand where we will, and do what we list in Gods
Army; but must faithfully discharge that Duty, and manage that particular
place, which is committed to our trust. Every private Soldier must not snatch
at the Leading-Staff, nor usurp a Command not regularly put into his hand.

Every one that can Moot a Case at Law, may not presently erect a Tribunal, and
pass sentence upon men's Lives and Fortunes; but he only who can answer that
Question, Quis te constituit Judicem? Who has made thee a Judge?

Every one that can Exercise a small Party, may not presently Beat up his Drums,
Array, and lead men to the Field, to destroy whomsoever he fancies to be an
Enemy, till he have received a Commission. And yet how Common has it been for
one that has gotten but the gift of the Tongue, a knack of talking, with a
large stock of Confidence, to invade the Pulpit, and make himself an Officer
and Teacher in the Church? He that was never so much as a Corporal in the
Schools, will be a Captain in the Church, and every Lansprizado thinks himself
a Colonel. He will obey no Orders but those of his own making; nor them long,
it being as bad as death to him to be limited and confined. When he is
commanded to March, he will Retreat; when to Wheel to the Right, ^^s. Ep 49.
he will be sure to do it to the Left. As one once-complained, Ordo Militum
nunc est Ordinem non tenere: As if the excellency of a Soldier consisted in
contradicting and thwarting the Command of his Superior Officers.

3. But we go on; It Is not enough for a Soldier to stand his Ground, but he
must behave himself valiantly on it; it is not enough to defend his own Post,
but he must endeavor to force his Enemies from theirs. (...).
He therefore adds, (...), Quit your selves like men; an expression we find 1 Samuel 4.9. where the Philistims encouraging their Men to Battle, use these
words, Be strong, and quit your selves like men, O ye Philistims. Estote Viri,
so it is usually translated; (...) is translated by Vir, and both Words in their
several Languages signify not any mean or ordinary Person, but a Man of Worth,
Valor, and Prowess; so says David to Abner, Art not thou a Man, a valiant
Man, 1 Samuel 26.15.
a worthy Person, there is none like thee?

But the Words import more; and are more properly rendered by others, Estote in
Viros, a known Hebraism; As, ero tibi in Deum, I will be unto thee for a God;
that is, Truly and effectually to all intents and purposes; so here, Be ye for
Men, stand not for Ciphers, fill not up only the place of Soldiers, but be
what you appear to be indeed.

A form of speech, much like those frequently used in Scripture to excite and
stir up, to animate and encourage Soldiers to behave themselves manfully and
with undaunted Resolution. Thus Moses to Joshua, Be strong, and of a good
courage; Jos. 1.6. 2 Chr. 32.7.
thus Hezekiah to his Captains; Be strong and courageous, be not afraid nor
dismayed. There is some thing that is the peculiar virtue of every rank and
condition of men, and that in a Soldier is Valor; Viriliter agere, to Act like
a man, and that two ways, 1. Passively. 2. Actively.


1. Ferendo, in sufferance and bearing, 1. Hardships, 2. the impressions and
assaults of his Enemies.

1. He must quit himself like a man in bearing hardships; Sufferance, which is
a well compactedness and ability of Body, and a natural stoutness and
resolvedness of mind, to bear hardness, is the first requisite to the making of
a Complete Soldier. He must be able to feed low, to lie hard, to endure heat
and cold, hunger, thirst, and nakedness. Effeminacy may sneak in a Court, but
must not be admitted into the Camp. He that cannot sleep but in a Feather Bed,
not eat but at a French Ordinary, nor break his sleep, will never do much
service in a sharp War. He that spends his time between the Comb and the Glass;
and (as Seneca said of such Carpet-Knights) Mallet rempublicam turbari quam
comam, had rather an Army should be routed, than his Perriwig be discomposed,
will do no great feats nor service in the Field.

2. A Soldier must behave himself like a man, in receiving the Assaults, and
bearing the Impressions of an Enemy; not like those delicate Youths in the
History, who were no sooner touched in their tender Faces by their Enemies
Weapons but they threw down their own, and runn away. Psalm. 78.9.
Nor like the Children of Ephraim, who being harnassed, and carrying Bows,
turned their Backs in the day of Battle. But like that Order of Ancient Knights
in France, a part of whose Military Oath it was, That they should never turn
their backs upon their Enemies. The Lacedemonian Women were wont to charge
their Sons when they went out to Battle, Vt aut vivi cum armis in conspectum
earum venirent, aut mortui in armis referrentur; that they should either return
with their Arms, or dye in them, Val. Max. l. 2. c. 2.

Even the tender Mothers amongst the Romans, would not lament their Sons that
fell in Battle, but rejoiced when their Wounds were in their fore parts and
not in their backs.

2. Feriendo, Disce feriri, Disce Mori; syllaba una brevis aut longior tua
facta variabit, vel occides vel occides, ad utrumlibet horis locisque omnibus
te paratum exh^be. Fr. Petrarch.
in smiting; He must quit himself like a Man in Fighting too; he must be as
reato give as to receive blows: Their Commission runs, To Kill, Destroy, and do
to Death: Like Samson, that Smote his Enemies hip and thigh; or like David's
Worthies, whose exploits, Judge. 15, 8. 2 Samuel 23.
were they not recorded in Scripture, would stagger our belief. In these lies
the Gallantry of a Soldier, in Bearing hardship, enduring blows, and hewing
down his Enemies.

And in all these, the Christian Soldier must show his valor too.

1. ^ Tim. 2.3.
In sufferance of Hardship; Thou therefore endure hardness as a good Soldier
of Jesus Christ. They must and will submit to any terms; be fed and clothed
as their General pleases. No place so far, no ways so foul, no weather so
sharp, but they will March, if their Commander give the word. No severities of
Religion, how great soever, whether they be fastings, mortifications, pulling
out of Right Eyes, cutting off of right hands, giving up their bodies to
torments and to death it self, can terrify or affright them. They can live upon
any thing, upon nothing, but a bare promise, and never mutiny for want of
present pay.

2. He must show his valor too, in bearing the Impression of Enemies on every
side; they are not daunted with the approach of Enemies but (like David toward
Goliath) run half way to meet them. If temptations come, persecution come, death
come, welcome what God sends; they stand their ground, receive and bear all
with invincible courage. As Tertul. says of his Soldier. Russatus suo
sanguine, totus de Apostolo armatus, Donativum Christi in Caelis expectat.
Being dyed red in his own blood, Armed at all points with the Apostles Armor,
he stands ready to encounter all difficulties, expecting his reward from Christ
in Heaven.

Lastly, He must show his valor in fighting too. Ephesians. 6.11.
A Christian must take to himself the whole Armor of God; He has his
offensive as well as his defensive Weapons; his Sword as well as his Target,
the sword of the Spirit as well as the buckler of Faith, and the Helmet of
Salvation, whereby he may be able to stand and to withstand in the evil day. 1
Pet. 5.9.
It Is not enough to defend our selves, but we must also repulse our Enemies:
Jam. 4.7.
not only be vigilant against the wiles of Satan, but resist him too. And for
our comfort St. James tells us, that he is but a Coward, if we bear up to him;
Resist the devil and he will fly. We must fight if we expect the Crown. In all
those Epistles to the seven Churches where Heaven is promised under several
Metaphors, still, Vincenti Dabitur, Rev. 2.3.
the hidden Manna, the white stone, etc. is given to him that overcomes.

4. But I hasten to the last thing in the Text, (...), (...).
show your selves strong by keeping your Enemies under, (...) is fortiter
impero, to command and rule, like a man of wisdom and courage. Having subdued
his Enemies, the Soldiers next and greatest care must be to Rule them, and
keep them in obedience. It Is as much skill to know how to use and enjoy a
Victory, as to obtain it. Neither is it less virtue to defend what we have
gotten, then to get it.

Hence it has been the care of all Prudent Commanders so to settle their new
acquisitions, as to take away all possibilities and hopes of future
insurrections and rebellions. When the Philistims had conquered Israel, 1 Samuel
13.19.
they left them neither Sword nor Spear, nor so much as a Smith amongst them to
sharpen their Axes or their Ox goads. So Cyrus in Justin, having conquered the
Rebellious Lydians, and arma and equos ademit, took away both their Horses and
Arms, and effeminated their Spirits, by employing them in mean and sordid work,
that they might neither have courage nor advantage to give him further trouble.

And this also must be the great care of the Christian Soldier; Romans 8.15.
Being delivered from the bondage of Corruption into the glorious liberty of
the Sons of God, he should stand fast, and not be entangled again with the yoke
of Bondage; 2. Pet. 2.19.
For if after he has escaped the pollutions of the World, he be again
entangled therewith, his latter end is worse then the beginning.

Have thou been a Swearer, Drunkard, unclean person? has God opened thine Eyes
to see thy faults? Given thee a heart to repent of them, grace to break their
yoke from off thy neck? now make use of thy best wisdom and valor to keep
them under. Be not again entangled with them, nor overcome by them, 2. ^et.
2.21.
For it had been better not to have known the way of Righteousness, then after
thou have known it, to turn aside from the holy Commandment.

Of all Postures, none so ill becomes the true Convert, as Faces about, and as
you were, which is but according to the Proverb, to return with the Dog to his
vomit, and with the Sow to her wallowing in the mire.

Keep a watchful eye over your Corruptions, and let not your lusts get head
again. Withdraw all incentives and fuel, keep ammunition and provision, from
these Enemies, and starve them out. For these are your greatest Enemies. The
Devil indeed is a cunning and sore Enemy, but he could not so eassly hurt us,
were there not a false party in our bosoms, which were ready to invite him,
and to open the Gates to let him in.

Consider, I beseech you, how unreasonable a thing it is, that Man, a Noble
Creature, made after the likeness of God, should so far degenerate, is to have
his ear boared, and become a willing slave to the Prince of darkness.

How unseemly a thing it is to see Hercules spinning at Omphale's distaffe?
Samsons head lolling in Dalilah's lap? and him, who could snap asunder the
strongest coards like twine threads, held captive with one of her Locks? how
unmanly a sight it is to see him who can command men, to be conquered by women?
and those who have subdued Armies, to be mastred by their own brutish Lusts.

And now me thinks, it should be time to sound a Retreat: Give me leave only to
make one running March over the ground, read over my Text again, and then we
shall Lodge the Colors.

Gentlemen Soldiers, You who are under God and the King, the Walls and
Bulwarks of the City, and that Famous Nursery, whence have sprung so many Noble
Souls; and may every year add to their number, that may serve God, their King
and Country in the present and Succeeding Generation!

1. Watch ye, (as I doubt not but you will) against whatsoever Enemies to the
Public Peace, Ne aliquid detrimenti capiat respublica, that the Commonweal
incur no damage, as far as lies in your place or power to prevent it.

Be Watchful over your own Hearts and Lives; Beware of the Stratagems and
Ambushments of Satan; Lest, when you have been Instruments to preserve the
Nations Peace, you break your own; and when you have saved others, your selves
perish.

Stand fast, in your Faith given to God when you were first listed into the
Muster-Roll amongst his Soldiers. There Is nothing more ignominious to a
Soldier than to break his Paroll.

Stand fast, in that Faith which was once delivered to the Saints, which is as
purely professed here as in any Nation in the World. Count every Article of
Religion as well worth contending for as a Crown, and that it would be your
honor (should you be called to it) to follow the Noble Army of Martyrs, which
is marched before you, giving Testimony to the Gospel, by their dearest blood.

Stand fast in your Faith and Allegiance to our Gracious Sovereign, and become
not upon any solicitations or pretenses, either Authors or Fauters of any
faction. Meddle not with those who are given to change.

Quit your selves like men, in all your undertakings; Let not rashness hurry
you to any thing that is unjust or misbecoming you: Nor let pusillanimity
withhold you from any necessary Duty. Conquer your selves first, (which is the
greatest conquest.) And bring down every high thought to the obedience of
Christ. Receive the Impressions of your spiritual Enemies with Patience, and
repel them with courage; Put on the whole Armor of God, get into Gods way,
and keep there; and then you may say with David, Though an host of men were
encamped against me, yet would I not fear, or (as he once) though every Tile in
the City were a Devil, you need not be afraid.

And be strong; strong in Faith, strong in Gods grace, and in the power of his
might; in Conquering go on to Conquer. Having once routed your Enemies, let
them rally no more; having dismantled their Garrisons, let them lie under the
Curse of Jericho, and never be rebuilt, Judge. 6. Ult.
but Rule over them with a Rod of Iron; while you are doing such work (which is
purely Gods) to use Hezechias words, you need not be afraid, nor be dismayed,
but be strong and courageous, for the Lord your God is with you to help you,
and to fight for you.

Thus fighting, you may live with Comfort, and dye with Confidence, and say
with St. Paul, I have fought the good fight, I have finished my course, I have
kept the faith, henceforth is Laid up for me a Crown of righteousness; The
Conflict may be sharp, but the Reward is great and certain. We must run ere we
can win the Garland; Fight and Conquer, ere we can receive the Crown.

There Is nothing more August and splendid in the Eyes of men then a Crown. What
will not an ambitious man venture, what will he not do to gain it? He will
venture Limbs, Life, Estate, Friends, Body, Soul, all. He will break faith with
God and man; he will dig his way to it, through the Bowels of his nearest
relations; and swim to it through a Sea of blood.

Yet this is the reward of every good and faithful Soldier in Gods Camp.

Every Soldier that fights in Earthly Battles, wears not a Crown, nor must he
expect it. There must be many hands to win that Crown, which one only Head must
wear. But here every Soldier shall have a Crown. The Crown is not only for me
(says the Apostle) but for every one, that fights and conquers?

And what manner of Crown is it? It Is not,

A Crown or Chaplet of withering Flowers, Tertull. de Corona Milit. c. 13.14.
such as were wont to be given to the Victors in the Grecian Games; Not,

A Crown of Grass, which was to be given (amongst the Romans) to him that had
raised a Siege and delivered a City; Anlus Gellius. l. 5. c. 6.
Not,

A Crown of Oak, which was given to him who had rescued a Roman Citizen when he
was taken Captive, and slain him that took him in the place: Not,

A Crown of Myrtle, which was given in their Ovations; Nor of Laurel, which was
given to their greatest Conquerours, in their most stately triumphs: nay
further yet. Not,

A Crown of Gold, which is usually bestudded with anxious thoughts, and does
not so much adorn the head, as overburden, with Cares, the heart of him that
wears it. But what is it then? It Is,

A Crown of Righteousness, a Crown of Life, a Crown of Glory.

To the enjoyment of which Crown, he of his infinite mercy bring us, who is the
Captain of our Salvation, who was Crowned with Thorns, and suffered death for
our sakes, even the Lord Jesus Christ, God blessed for ever; to whom with the
Father, and the holy Spirit, three Persons and one God, be given, as is due,
all Honor and Glory, Now and for Ever. Amen.

FINIS.

