DV VERGERS HVMBLE REFLECTIONS UPON SOME PASSAges of the right Honorable the
Lady Marchioness of Nevvcastles OLIO. OR AN APPEAL FROM her mes-informed, to
her own better informed judgment.

PRINTED AT LONDON. M. DC. LVII.

THE EPISTLE TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE MARCHIONESS OF NEWCASTLE.
MADAME,
Your delicious and exquisite OLIO which you have generously exposed to regale,
and feast a whole world of people, by the favor of a noble friend, happend
into my way, who am not accustomed to feed of such dainties, so delicatly
dressed, seasoned, set out with all that seems rich in nature, especially
where a hand so noble, so illustriously skillfull, had daigned to be the cook.
And howeuer my ordinary poor fare uses not to pass some one single dishe,
yet where I observed a kind of unbounded magnificence, and bounty, had been at
the charges to make a common banquet for all, I could not conceive my self
excluded, how ever homely. M A D A M E, I must ingenuously confess that at the
first onsett, my sharp appetite greedily took down those unaccustomed cates,
and that with much satisfaction, and delight (eying in it the honor of our
nation, and sex, wherein we have had but few arguments of such ability) till I
had past a great part of that which first offered it self. But w en I came so
far into your OLIO, that Monastical life discouerd it self, I must not lie
to you, I met with mortels so wallowish and unsound, that I may not say, wholly
corrupted, that my stomach began to rise, and loathe, what formerly it so much
liked. And albeit even those parts too relished, in some degree, the delights
of your skillful hand, yet I could not but suspect, what I found true, that you
had met with fraudulent Caterers, (in whom you were but too confident) who
abused your credulity, and goodness, and spoiled your feast, by stealing their
ftale, and corrupt ingredientes upon your Honor, to the dishonor of what was
otherwise excellent. MADAME, I will make it my business, with your Honors
leave, to make them, and their stuff appear to your Lasp. And all the world,
such as indeed it is, stale, unsound, corrupted. And this, to pay a duty to
truth, with all the submission, and respect to your Honor imaginable.

A MONASTICAL LIFE.
THE OLIO. Page 28.
1. SOme dispraise a Monastical life 2. and say they are the droanes in a
Commonwealth; to suck out that honey they never took pains to gather, 3. and
that they are an idle, lazy, and unprofitable people, for say they, 4. they go
not to wars to adventure their lives, or haz and their lives, hut live free,
and secure not troubled with the noise of the battles, only listen to hear the
success, wherein they may give their opinions, and censures, then that they
never cultiuate, or manure the lands for increase, but eat of the plenty,
pretending beggary, but ingrosse all the wealth; 5. and for the women, there
are as many kept barren as would populate whole nations.

But they in their own defense, say, that they cast off all pleasures of the
world, lie cold, and hard, eat sparingly, watch and pray, and not only to pray
for dhemselues, or for the dead; but for those that are encumbered in wordly
cares; besides say they, it is profitable to the Commonwealth, for men that
have small estates, and many children, not being able to maintain them
according to their qualities, and degrees, may run into many errors; for want
of means, which may disturb not only families, but whole states, where a
Monastical life, a small portion, and a little will serve the turn, only to
keep soul and body together, in which their lives are peaceable, and full of
devotion; but the Laytie answers, that the third part of the wealth of
Christendom goes to the maintenance of the Church, only in consideration of
younger children, that will be content, and some are forced in; yet after that
rate there will be little for the eldest, which remain without, nor will be,
if they go on to lay such burdens upon men's consciences, and such sums upon
those burdens to buy them out; neither is there any sort of men more busy in
disturbing the Commonwealth; for those that have not active imployement,
either in the ordinary affairs of the world, or extraordinary affairs in the
Commonwealth, their thoughts corrupt being not exercised in action, they grow
factious, which causetb distractions; for there is more war amongst the
Christians about their opinions then upon any cause else. This says the one
side, 6. but their enemies say that they are not only the covetous, but the
greatest cheaters in the world, and all under the name, for Gods sake; for say
they, 7. they bring in ceremony for gains, in that 8. they set all the mercies
of God to sale, for what sins cannot be bought for money; as adulterery incest,
murder, blasphemy, and sins past, and present; 9. as for whores they permit
them to live loosly withont punishment, and allot therein streets and houses,
to increase their sins, in which 10. they do authorize sin for a sum, for they
pay tribute to the Church, and not only sins past and present, but to come:
11. as witness the years of jubilee; besides the head takes upon them, the
power of damnation, and salvation, as witness the excommunications, and if not
out, and in of hell; yet out and in of Purgatory, which Purgatory is a great
revenue to them; yet they have a countenance for their coueteousnesse, which is
12. that the offendant must have a true contrition, or their sum of money will
do them no good, no more then will a true contrition without the sum; 13. but
surely Monastical lives, are very profitable to the Commonwealth,
whatsoever it be for the soul, for it keeps peace and makes plenty, and
begets, a habit of sobriety which gives a good example, and many times draws
their own minds, though naturally otherwise disposed, to follow the outward
carriage, for the custom of the one, may alter the nature of the other, and in
that they keep peace, is, because they live single lives, not for the quarrels
of marriage, but in not oppressing the Kingdom in ouer-populating it; for those
kingdoms that are very full of people, grow mutinous, and run into civil
wars, where many states are forced to war upon their neigbours; for no other
end but to discharge the stomach of the Commonwealth; for fear it should
breed incurable diseases. Besides, a Commonwealth may be over slockt, like
grounds which causes great dearth and plagues, in a Commonwealth, so that
those states which have more traffic then men, are rich, where those that have
more men, then trade, are poor; and Civil wars proceed not so much out of
plenty, as out of proud poverty: the next cause for plenty, they are of a spare
diet, and most of what they eat or should eat, by their order, is Fish, Roots,
and the like; but if they do get a good bit, one may say, much good may it ao
them, for they get it by stealth, and eat it in fear, at least not openly to
avoid scandal; but if they do not spare in the matter of meat, yet they spare
in the manner, which cuts off all prodigal superfluities of the feasting, or
open housekeeping, wherein is spoiled more then eaten, neither does it relieve
the hungry, by the Almes-basket; so much as it ouergorges the full: and
Ceremonies keeps the Church in order, and give it magnificency: besides it is
beneficial to the State, for it Amuses the Common people and busies their
minds, and it is, as it were a recreation and pastime to them, as Saints days
and the like; nay they take pleasure, and make a recreation to have fasting
days, so as they have much to think on, and employ their time in, as
fastingdayes, Processions of Saints, Confessions, Penance, Absolutions, and the
like, as Mass and Music, and shows, as at Christmas, Easter, our Lady day,
and on many days of the year, and these not affording one and the same, but
varieties in all; besides, every Saint having power to grant several requests;
it will take up some time to know what to ask of them, and all these one would
think, were sufficient, to keep out murmur and discontent, which is got by
idleness, which is the cause of rebellion. Thus the Church busies the people,
and keeps their minds in peace, so that these Monastical men, which are the
Church, is the nurse to quiet the people, or the Masters to set them on,
wherein they never do, unless it be in the deffence of Christian Religion, in
which all good men ought to follow; and surely it is beneficial to the
Commonwealth, whatsoever it be for the soul, and for their souls, 14. although
rationally one would think that God should not take delight in shaven heads; or
bare and dirty feet, or cold backs, or hungry stomachs, in any outward habit,
but in an humble heart and low desires, a thankful mind, for what they have
sorrowful sighs, and repenting tears, fears of offending, admiration of
wisdom, and pure love of his good nesse, and mercy, thanks for his favors,
and grace, obedience, charity, and honest wordly industry, and to take as much
pleasure, as honest and virtuous moderation will permit; 15. for we might
think that God did not intend man more misery, or less of this world then
beasts; but alas, all mankind is apt to run into extremes which beasts are
not, either to bar themselves quite of the lawfall use of the world, or to run
riot, which of the two, the last is to be shunned, and avoided, wherein this
kind of life is most secure, neither must we follow our reason in Religion, but
Faith, which is the guide of our conscience.

The places reflected upon are 15. marked by so many figures: and are to be
found as follows.

Reflection. 1. page 7. R. 2. p. 75. R. 3. p. 77. R. 4. p. 78. R. 5. p. 80. R.
6. p. 89. R. 7 p. 94. R. 8. p. 104. R. 9. p, 112. R. 10. p. 113. R. 11, p. 119.
R. 12. p. 131. R. 13. p. 145. R. 14. p. 147. R. 15. p. 151.

THE FIRST REFLECTION OF MONASTICAL LIFE.
SOME [begins your Honour] disprayse a Monastical life. Page.1 of our OLIO.
And this, Madame, is one of the stale dishes they have obtruded into your
dainty Olio. Stale, I may well say, for it was served up 12. or 13. hundred
years ago, to S. Hierosme; S. Basile, S. John Chrystome, and Saint
Augustine: who, when it was even fresh, and new, rejected it with horror, as
we shall afterward see. The same has been served in again by wiclife etc.
and others of his followers. And Luther too, who is better known to the world
by his facrilegious love to Monastical livers, then Menasticall life, served
it up again in his cupps to the loose appetites of this last age. And
certainly Madame this cibus bis terque coctus which is loathsome to all
appetites, had even in that name [had it been reflected vpon] been secluded
from your rare Olio, which, I dare well say, aimed at nothing but what was
fresh, and new, [if not in matter, and substance, at least in the dresse]
beseeming so noble a person.

Madame had you but looked back, this chaste, and grave matrone, would have
discovered herself unto you with such a religious countenance of venerable
antiquity; guarded with such troops of ancient Fathers encomions, laden with
such ripe fruits of sanctity, and learning: so fenced on every side by common
sense, and reason, that you would never have permitted your noble, and
harmless hand, have been made an instrument to have thrown others
corruptions upon her.

THE II. REFLECTION.
Of the antiquity of Monastical life in general.

THE I. PARAGRAPHE.
MADAME the skillful pensils of best times represent her to your view, no less
ancient then the newborn son of the old of years to say nothing of a
higher or gine she is made by some to draw from the Prophet Elias, Eliseus,
the Nazareans, and others of the Prophets, ho were separated from the vulgar,
lived without wives, without wine, with shaven heads, and that by vow too [for
a space at least] which I the rather advance, because I know what rates, such
noble souls as yours, putts upon antiquity of blood, though far from being
of so long a standing; and indeed deservedly, that being a thing that
bespeaks I know not what kind of veneration, and respect; and fayles not to
find it in all well borne hearts. Nor is it any wonder that that is given to the
antiquity of blood, which is not denied to the antiquity of brass, or
marble, framed into the shapes of men only by some ancient and skillful hand;
which we see passes with more approbation among men, then all that after ages,
which may seem to be times declining estate, are able to produce.

THE II. PARAGRAPHE.
THIS religious Lady [Monasticall life] may say with truth, of her profession,
what the great S. Paul some times said of the Apostle ship he exercised; to
wit that he had it Not of men, neither by man, but by Iefus Christ: for from
that sourse of living water it was indeed, that this heavenly profession
originally flowed, and conveyed it self through the veins of all the
following generations, even till this day. It was I say by Jesus Christ, the
Son of the Living God, that the world was first taught this holy profession;
who being asked by the good young man, saying: Good Master, Matthew 19.21.
what good shall I do that I may have life everlasting? he answered: if thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments: who answering that all those he
had kept from his youth: Jesus said unto him: If thou will be perfect, go sell
the things that thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure
in heanen, and come follow me. Behold one thing is here commanded; another
counseled. If thou will enter intolife everlasting, keep the Commandments.
And it is an absolute command to all men. But if thou will be perfect, or
observe the same commandments more perfectly, and more securely: if thou will
not only have life, but have it more abundantly, go, and sell all that thou
have etc. And it is a free counsel. That, is commanded under pain of eternal
damnation: this, counseled under hope of an hundredfold in this life, and life
everlasting in the next, That is extended by way of comma^de to all, this is
proposed, and counseled to such generous souls, as by Gods grace, and their
own free cooperation, under, and in virtue of the same grace, render themselves
capable of it: which yet certainly would never have been counseled by wisdom
it self, had it never been to be followed by man: nor would Truth it self
have said: there are some that geld themselves for the kingdom of heaven, if
never any such were to have be^^ Or he that can take it, let him take it, if
none could ever take, none undertake it, (...)(...) (...)capable of it, in
fine, if it were impossible, as diverse sectaries would persuade us.

THE III. PARAGRAPHE.
IT is not then, Madame, as you see, a will worship, or a human invention
taken up upon fancy, [to which noe great credit were due] but a dictamen of
the holy Ghost, a counsel of heavenly wisdom, delivered from the mouth of
truth it self. And was that seed of heaven to meet with noe good earth,
within all the lardge extent of Christ's possessions? Was this word of God
fruitlessely to fall to the ground, and to pass over, without any effect, of
which it is said: heaven, and earth shall pass, but my word shall not pass?
So would it appear indeed by those bablers, who as they hate our Catholic
Mother, so they blaspheame her pious practices: none of them giueing obedience
to the Words of her Spouse: none leaving all to follow Christ in poverty: none
pretending a virginal state of life: none even endeavoring to prove eunukes
for the kingdom of Heaven: none presseing to emulate these better gifts: none
among them disputing us these titles of piety, but willingly leaueing them,
branded with as much infamy as malice can invent, to the children of the
Catholic Virgin Mother alone, confirming that ancient truth, that none but a
Virgin Mother, is the Mother of Virgins. None but the Catholic Church ever
aiming at a virginal state. As though our Savior had dropped down an
unprofitable counsel which could never be performed by any And thence S.
Athanasius, who hued in the fourth Age, putts this practice of a virginal life
for a proof of the truth of our religion, when speaking of virginity, he
says: this is a great argument that true religion is with us. In his Apology
to Constantius.

THE IV. PARAGRAPHE.
BUT far be it from Christian hearts, to think that the words of wisdom met
with none but deaf ears, or that his sacred counsels found noe heroical
hearts in earth who were ready to embrace them. Noe noe, we may hear S. Peter
presently give the lie to such unworthy thoughts Behold, says he, we, [he
speaks for all the Apostles] have left all, and followed thee. We, who? we
Apostles have left all. Who says all excludes nothing we have left all. All we
possess, all our hopes of possessing. All; yes all, I say, their poor
fortunes, such as they were, their aims, inclinations, ways, their wills, yea
their wives. as says S. Hierome.

And that too under vow, as they had learnt by our B. Ladies leading practice
S. Augustine confirms it of them both. Of our Blessed Lady: speaking of that
passage of S. Luke: Because i know not man L. 17. of the City of God. c. 4.
which certainly, says he, she had not said, had she not formerly vowed to
remain a Virgin. And of the Apostles; saying: for those mighty ones had
said; behold we have left all, and followed thee, this vow had those Mighties
vowed: but whence had they this vow but from him who gives vows unto those
that vow: for none can vow any settled thing to God, but he must have it from
God. And by their holy example all the young Christian Church at Jerusalem
which was yet as it were in her cradle, conspired into one great congregation,
to wit the multitude of Believers had but one heart, and one soul, neither did
any say that ought was his own of those things which he possessed, but all
things were common unto them, etc. neither was there any needy amongst them.
Whence S. Augustine inferres, saying: therefore they [to wit the Apostles etc.]
first heard that of the Psalmist, Lo how good and pleasant a thing it is for
brothers to live togeither. They were the first indeed, but they were not
alone. For this love, and brotherly union descended not only down upon them:
but that exultation of Charity, and vow to God, came down to posterity etc.
Yes these young vine-branches which newly sprouted out of the true vine whose
wine begetts Virgins, fruitfully branched and spredd themselves out all the
world over, beginning first at Jerusalem, thence to Alexandria in Egipte,
where those fuitfull. Deserts were turned into Paradises, and were peopled
with humane Angels, or Angelical men: thence into greece witness S. Denis
of Arcopage, who makes the description of them as you shall hear in the next
reflection: finally all the habitable world over, as Phylo one of the most
learned of the Jews, tearming them Therapeutarum genus, worshipers or
Physicians of souls. And this is so well, and solidly auerred by ancient
Authors, that there lies no way open to any specious contradiction.

In the first place let the said Philo be heard, who speaking of those
worshippers or Physicians of souls, says: this kind of people is spredd all
the world over (to wit Greece and even barbarous nations too were to partake
in this perfect Good) but the greatest multitudes of them are in Egypt,
especially about Alexandria; as may be further seen by what S. Hierome relates
out of the same Author.

Add to him S. Hierome, who speaking of S. Mark, says, Mark went into
Alexandria, taking with him the Gospel which he himself had written, and
established a Church there with so much doctrine and continency of life, that
he even compelled all Christ's followers to imitate his example etc. And then
speaking of Philo the Jew, he adds: I therefore place Philo the Jew native of
Alexandria among the Ecclesiesticall writers, because he writing a book of the
first Church established by Mark the Evangelist at Alexandria, speaks in the
commendations of our men, not mentioning those that were there only but even
many other places also, tearming their habitations Monasteries: whence it
appears that their Church who first believed in Christ, was such as Monks now
endeavor, and desire to be: so as that none has any thing of his own proper:
none among them is rich, none poor, their patrimonies are divided among the
poor, their employment is praying, and singing Psalms, learning and
continence, such as Luke represents the first Believers of Jerusalem.

The same is frequently asserted by other holy Fathers, as S. In the ^^. c. of
his Monastical Institution.
Basile, speaking of Monks, these, says he, remain the true and perfect
followers of the Institutions, of our Redeemour, and of his life when he was
conversant amongst us: for as he haue'ng called his Apostle together into one
society made all things, and even himself common among them: so these also
(who at this day rightly observe the prescripts of his life) obeying their
Prelate, imitate the Apostles, and our Saviors manner of liueing.

T ^^ 11 Hom. upon the Acts.
S. Chrysostom, Monks live after the same manner that all the Christians of
the Frimitiue Churchliued at Jerusalem. And again in the 3. book he writing
against those that dispraysed Monks, affirms that the Monks in his days
performed the same things which the Apostles had performed.

Possidonius affirms in plane terms that In the life of S. Aug.
S. Augustine begun to live according to that Rule, and form which the
Apostles themselves had instituted.

Madame did I not fear to prove too Sponde iu has Epitome of Baronius.
teadious to your Ladyshipe, I could, with a wett finger, bring even multitudes
of like testimonies, which are to be seen in the french abridgement of
Baronius, as Gualterus in his chre, Earbosa collec. tit. 35.
also in Gualterius a French Jesuit. And what is said of Monks or religious
men, is also verified of religious women, or Nuns; according to the learned
Pennottus, Tambu rinus did. 4. quest. 4. n. 4. putting it down as an
undoubted truth
saying: that in the very same manner that the Institution of the Canon
Regulars proceeded from the Apostles, so also the institution of the religious
Canonesses sprung from the very prime birth of the Church, as well under S.
Mark at Alexandria; as under S. James at Jerusalem. Where that most religious
Emperesse our Country woman S. Hellen, that greatest glory of our Land, and
happy Mother of that greatest Emperor of the world, Constantine the GREAT,
did not only serve the nuns So Daiberlus Patriarche of Jerusalem.
at table with her own hands, 1300. years a go, but even consecrated
herself to God among them, dyed, and was buried in their holy habit, that is
the very same which the Canonesse all over the world use till this day,
Pennottus prouinge that the Religious of the holy sepulcher both are now, and
ever were, one, and the same order, as well with the other Canon Regulars, as
with those very Canons, which were restored by S. Augustine, but instituted by
the Apostles themselves.

THE III. REFLECTION.
Of the high encomions which Jesus Christ, and the Ancient Fathers gave to
Monastical life.

THE I. PARAGRAPHE.
WHENCE can we either more solidly, or more fitly, begin the commendations of
Monastical life, then in his words, from whose mouth, and example (as we have
already seen) it took its origin? And to what end can emore justly, and
fruitfully do it, then that the good giver of it, and all good gifts, who is
worthy of all praise, may be praised by all things, and in all things, since
it is not indeed by our own wit, worth, or merit, but by his gift, that we
are, what soever we are laudably.

Jesus Christ, then, the wisdom of his heavenly Father, who was the first
counselor of this blessed life; putt also the first and most effectual
comme^dations upon it, when he said: Amen I say to you, you who have followed
me, in the regeneration, when the son of man shall sit in the seat of his
majesty, you also shall sit upon twelve seats judging the twelve tribes of I
srael: and every one that has left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father,
or Mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my names sake, shall receive an
hundredfold, and shall possess like everlasting. If then we judge of the
greatness of the work by the greatness of the reward; and measure the
profession by the promises, what greater commendations could be putt upon
Monastical life? All the right of judicature was given by the father to the
son, and yet the son will not exercise it alone, but will have those to
share in it, who shared with him in abandoning the world It Is an absolutely just
retribution, cries out S. Bernard, that they who here below contemned the
glory of humane greatness for Christ's sake, Of this sense is s- Aug also and
S. Gregory S. Tho. says that this sitting in judgment was promised to
Evangelicall poverty n his (...) te aganst th seth ^^^^^^^^ fr^^(...) lig c 6.
and 7.
should there sit togeither with Christ, being sin gularly glorified with the
quality of judge; etc. And we must know, says he, that not only the
Apostles, but even all those that for Christ's sake, by the Apostles blessed
example, left all and followed him, shall become judges with him. O singular
familiarity! o highth of honor! o privilege of confidence! o prerogative of
perfect security. O divinely happy state which renders men so secure, yea
even so glorious in that Wonderful clashing of the elements, in that dreadful
discussion of merits; and that most doubtful, and daunting expectation of
judgment. This security is the pecu liar reward of those Eunukes which geld
themselves [that is, to speak with S. Augustine, of those who vo e chastitie]
for the Kingdom of Heaven: of those poor of Christ, who follow poor Christ:
of those obedient sheep who know, and follow the voice of their pastor, and
that too not in point of his commands only, but even in his counsels.
Finally, says In his book of Virgini t e in the ^^^^^
S. Augustine, let us hear our Lord [Christ Iesus] pronouncing a most evident
sentence in this behalf for when he had spoken divinely, and terribly of not
separating man and wife, save only f r fornication, his Disciples said unto
him: if the case of a man with his Wife be so, it is not expedient to marie. To
whom he replied, not all take this word, but they to whom it is given: For
there are Eunukes who were borne so from their Mothers womb: and there are
Eunukes which were madeby men: and there are Eunukes which have gelded
themselves for the kingdom of heaven. He that can take, let him take. What
could have been said fuller of truth, and light? Its Christ that says, truth
that says, the power and wisdom of God that says, that they who out of a
pious resolution conteyne themselves from marriage, geld themselves for the
kingdom of heaven, And on the contrary side, humane vanity by an impious
rash. nesse contends, that they who do so, do only eschew the present
necessity, and troubles, which accompany a married life, but shall not have
any whitt more then others. And yet, I pray, of what other Eunukes does our
Lord speak by Isaye the Prophet, [to whom he promises to give a peculiar
place [locum nominatum] in his house, and in his walls, far better then that
of Sonns, and daughters] but of those that geld themselves for the kingdom of
heaven? Christ, goes he on, praises those that geld themselves, not for this
world, but for the kingdom of heaven: and shall a Christian contradict him,
affirming that [to wit such gelding] it is only profitable in this life, but
not in the next. Nor has [saith he] the holy Ghost been silent upon this
subject, but has delivered something both evident, and strong enough against
those impudent, and frantic wranglers, and withal powerful enough by
impregnable Fortresses to repulse their barbarous attempts against his flock
for whereas speaking of Eunukes he had said, I will give them a peculiar place
in my house, and in my walls, much better then that of the sonns, and daughtes,
least any should have conceived that some temporal thing was to be hoped for,
he immediately added: I will give them an eternal name, nor shall it ever
fail: as though he had said why do thou wrangle impious blindness why do
thou wrangle? v hy do thou obscure the light of truth with the clouds of
peruersitie? why do thou in the midst ofthe great light of the Scriptures,
seek darkness wherein to deceive? why do thou promise a temporal, rea ard
only, to continent Saints? I will give them an eternal name.

Let that divine Denis of Areopage, S. The ^^ Age. In the Hierarchy of the
Church c. 6.
Paul's Scholar, speak for the first Age after Christ, and deliver as well
the truth, as the manner, and excellency of the thing, according as he is
made speak by Gualterus the 1. Age, and 8. Truth. The priest after some
prayers, turns toward him who is ready to forsake the world: asks whether
he renounce all terreane, and transitory things: declares to him the
perfection of that kind of life, and having heard his promise [of renouncing
the world] e signs him with the sign of the Cross, and cutts of his hair,
inuokes the holy Trinity, turns of his old, and putts on a new habit: salutes
him with a kiss, [as the assistantes also doe] and makes him partaker of the
divine mysteries. A little before he says. The highest In the same chap
order of those that are to be perfected, is that of Monks, which is adorned
with all virtue, purity, holy conversation, and heavenly contemplation.

Let S. Ignatius who lived in the same age succeed him. O Virgins possess
Jesus Christ in incorruption, not so as to esteem marriage ill; but to embrace
a better thing, not to blame a married life, but to meditate the law of God.
And in another place: Honor Virgins as being consecrated to Jesus Christ.
Conserve them as precious levels of Jesus Christ.

Hear Tertulian. What agreat prerogative, For the and. Age. The 9. chap. of
leyling of Virgins.
says he, does she merit far above her condition, who being a Virgin
resolves to consecrate her body to God? Therefore has she permission to receive
the veil, that she may be illustrious, and renowned in the Church, and show
the honor of her sanctity, or purity, by her veyled, and privileged head.

Again add the examples of our sisters whose names are in the book of life,
who prefer purity before husbands, [to wit they choose rather to be married
to God] being neither induced to it by want of beantie, nor otherwise by their
age. They are beautiful to God, they are handmayes to God: They live with him,
they have conference with him, he is the subject of their discourse both day,
and night There book to his wife the 4.6.
They consigne their prayers to their Lord, and Spouse, as their dowries, and
in conterchange they obtain favors of him, as presents from a Spouse,
whenever they desire them.

S. Cyprian writing to certain Nunes The 3. Age. In his books of the Habit of
Virgins
of his Age, gives them these prerogatives. Now let me speak to virgins, of
whom my care is greater, as their glory is higher, They are the flower of the
Church her flowishing branches, the honor, and ornament of Spiritual grace:
they are sincerely cheerful, a perfect and uncorrupted work of honor and
praise: the image of God, representing the purity of our Lord: the most
glorious, and illustrious portion of the flock of Christ. By them it is that
she rejoices; in them it is, that the glorious fecunditie of our Mother the
Church does plentifully flourish: and still as fruitful virginity increases
in number, so does the joy of our Mother Church receive greater, and greater
increase.

Make good, O Virgins, make good what you have begun to be, and have an eye to
what you are about to be. Great is the reward which attends you, great is the
recompense of your virtue; great the gift of chastity etc. You are equal to
the Angels, as being the children of the Resurrection; you pass through the
world without being infected with the worlds contagion: while you persevere in
chastity, and virginity, you are equal to the Angels.

Eusebius in Constantines life, The Emperor, The 4. Age. In Constaintins life.
says he, [to wit Constantine] did great honor to those that had dedicated
their lives to heavenly Philosophy (so was monastical life first called) and
there upon he did constantly reverence the most holy compaignie of perpetual
virgins: because he believed that God, to whom they were consecrated, did
dwell in their hearts.

Great is the virtue of continency, great is S. Athanasius in his book of
Virginity.
the glory of purity, great is the Virgins praise. O Virginity draynelesse
riches! O Virginity thou crown which fadest not! O Virginity thou temple of
God and Mansion of the holy Ghost! O Virginity which art a precious pearl,
which vulgar eyes discouers not! and are found but by few! O continency loved
by God, and preached by the Saints! O continency odious to many, but
respected by such as are worthy of it! O continency which conquers death and
Hell, and art possessed by immortal tie! O continency joy of the Prophets,
and glory of the Apostles! O continency life of the Angels, and crown of
the Saints! Happy is he that keeps thee, happy he that hardens himself to
the sufferance of thy labor, because after a short labor, he shall receive
great content by thee.

The same Age.
Saint Basile in a sermon which he Sermon 10. touch ing Mo naflicall life.
made to his monks upon these words of the Gospel (come unto me all you that
labor and are laden etc.) says: these words are the words of God, which
whether they be understood of the refection of this life, or they signify the
refection of the next, it is manifest that we are exhorted thereby to embrace
monastical life, and to carry the Cross, having first, on the oneside,
forsaken and distributed the load of superfluous riches to the poor, and one
the other side, cast of the almost innumerable multitude of our sins (by
alms deeds, and Confession) which the desire we have to heap up riches
draws upon us.

S. Basile. I term that Communion of life most perfect, from which all private
possession of any thing is excluded and banished: as also all dissension, all
perturbation, all contention and brawles. Nay contrarily, where all things are
common, hearts, souls, bodies, and all the things which are in any wise
requisite, or belonging to our liuelyhood. One common God, one common commerce
of piety, common salvation, common conflicts, common labors, common rewards
and crowns of gained victories; where many are one, and where one is not
alone but with many. What, I pray, is found comparable to this profession of
life? what can be expressed more blessed? what can be devised more agreeable
then this conjunction, unity, and dearness? What can be imagined more
delightful then this mutual temper of hearts and manners? That people coming
out of so many nations and regions, should have melted, as it were, so
absolutely into one, by an exact similitude of life and discipline, that there
appears but now, one soul in many bodies, and many bodies appear but the
instruments of one mind. He that suffers any bodily infermitie, has the
hearts of many sharres in his infirmity. And he that is sick and afflicted
in mind, has continually many present with him, to encourage him, and cure
his grief: being by an equal right one another servants and masters; and
while they enjoy an absolute liberty, they exercise a most exact servitude to
one another, by the tie of Charity, which makes them of freemen mutual
subjects. Such people, are indeed true and perfect imitatours of the life, and
institutions of our Redeemour, while he was conversant amongst us. For as he
having gathered together a company of the Apostles, made all things, and even
himself common to them: so these too, obeying their Prelate, and duly
complying with their vocation, do imitate the life of the Apostles and Icsus
Christ himself.

These, I say, if they diligently observe the community in which they live,
do emulate the life of the Angels. There is noe strife, noe contention, noe
controversy among the Angels: but whereas every one has the things which
all possess, yet every one conserues his own riches entirely to himself.

My aim is not to exagerate, I fear rather to lessen things truly great in
themselves; but only to endeavor, according to my weakness, to prosecute and
demonstrate the dignity, and excellency, of so glorious a profession, which
of itself excites to virtue. For what, I pray, can we compare to it, which in
an equal judgment, will not fall far short of it. For where there is but
one father, who strives to imitate the heavenly Father; and many children, who
mutually strive to out-strippe one another, in the greatest testimonies of
singular love and benevolence toward the same father: children I say, who are
lincked in the closest bands of concord and unity, and by the most laudable
exercises of virtue, as it were by so many arms stretched out, receive that
common Father into their bosom, and solace him thereby: Nor do they ascribe
the cause of that dearness to nature, but taking reason, which is stronger
then Nature for the guide and conseruer of that conjunction, they chain
themselves to each other by the band of the holy Ghost. What sufficiently fit
similitude are we able to find in earth, to express the excellency of this
their blessed employment. None certainly, the earth has none, heaven can only
furnish us etc.

S. Cyrille of Jerusalem. As to temperance In his 4. Catechism.
observe principally what is said of it by their order who make profession of a
solitary life, and by the Virgins who lead a life equal to that of the
Angels. Great is the crown which is reserved for you brethren. Sell not away
a great dignity for a short carnal pleasure. Give ear to what the Apostle
says. Is there any among you unclean, as was Esau, who sold his inheritance
for a mess of potage? And thou who art enrolled in the Evangelical books by
thine Institution of continency, be wary thou be not blotted out by luxury.

Saint Ambrose makes noe difficulty In the same Age.
to compare religious Virgins to the Angels, and will have none to wonder at
it neither. Let none admire, says he, that they are compared to Angels, who
are married to the God of Angels.

S. Hierome. The Martyrs purely praise our Lord in the land of the liueing:
Upon the psalm ms.
so also the Monks which singe Gods praise day and night ought to have the
same as Martyrs have, seeing even they are Martyrs 100: for what the Angels
do in heaven, the Monks do in earth.

In very deed, says he again, the Quires of Monks and virgins or Nunns,
are certain flowers, and most precious stones among the ornaments of the
Church.

In the ^. Age.
S. John Chrysostom speaking to the professors of Monastical life says.
Virginity is a good thing: I confess it. Nay it is better then marriages I
grant that too. And I will add withal, if you please, that it outstripps
marriage further then the heavens do the earth, and Angels, men. Yea, if I
might dare to say it, and more too.

Again. Mankind being naturally inferior to those blessed Spirits, strives
with all it force, and affection to overtake them, as far as possibly may be.
And how this? The Angels neither marie nor take wives Nor does the Virgin?
They are always present to God, and do In his book of virginity c. 11 12.
him service. So also does the Virgin etc. Do you observe the excellency of
Virginity? It consistes in this that it makes earthly in habitants exercise
the same functions with those of heaven: equalises those that have garmenss of
flesh and blood, to incorporall Spirits, and makes men emulatours of the
affections of the Angels.

That the solitude (of a monastical life) having In his books against the
dispraisers of Monastical life
first heaped many blessings upon the just in this life, conductes them at the
end of the same full of joy, and jubilee to the Tribunal of God our Savior, at
which time especially it is, that we see a great part of those that ruled in
high place, tormented with huge pains for the sins they committed in this
life.

If there be question of examining what time In the ^, book etc.
of night it may be, we shall find the Monk who is excellent in serving of,
and praying to God, singing long before the coke crow, having the Angels for
his conuictours, parling with God, and inioying celestial blessings.

They (to wit Monks) have made choice of a life and conversation wholly
celestial. They stand noe otherwise disposed them the Angels. For as the
Angels are subject to noe inequalities, while some of them neither extolling
nor glorifying themselves in their good success and happiness, nor others of
them groan under extreme vexations and diffi ulties, but contrarily all of
them unanimously retoyce in the same felicity and repose in that souueraigne
and heavenly glory, so also will you find it fares in Monasteries. There, none
is more splendide in riches then his fellow. Mine and thine, which is the
absolute overthrow of all things, is quite banished thence: for all is common
with them, their table, their house, their clothes. And which is yet more
admirable, they have but all one heart. They are all noble with the same
no-bilitie; all servants in the same servitude ^ and free with the same
liberty. All enjoy the same riches which are the true ones, and the same
glory which is true glory. To wit their fortunes consiste not in names, but
in the things themselves. There is but one and the same delight, one only
pleasure.

If any will go at this hour into the solitudes (...). 8. upon S. Matthew.
of Egypt, he will find all that Heremitage more excellent then any Paradise;
and meet with assemblies of Angels without number shining in mortal bodies
etc. the Armies of Jesus Christ are spread all that region over, and those
admirable Royal troops, as also a heavenly conversation illustrating the
earth. A bringht splendor which is not seen in men only but even in women
also etc. The heavens sparkle not with so many different stars, as Egypt is
distinguished with inn merable habitations of Monks and religious Virgins
etc.

Have patience, I beseech you, till I disclose unto you, and set before your
eyes to the life, the lives of Monks and crucified persons, which you do
ordinarily judge the most irke some and disagreable while it is indeed far
more pleasant and delightful, then that which is esteemed the most delicate,
soft, and delicious. And I will take noe other then your selves to nitnesse,
who sometimes in your dangers wish for death, least you should fall into
calamities and miseries, truly and from your hearts tearming themhappie who
reside in mountains and dens, who lead single lives, and are not engaged in
affairs etc. They flying public places, towns and tumultes, chused rather to
pass their time, in mountains, where they have nothing common with those
secular affairs; where they have noe trouble with any humane thing, noe
sorrow, noe grief, noe anxious cares, noe perils, noe ambushes, noe envy,
noe dishonest love, nor any of those miseries, but meditate already, and
aforehand, what belonges to the kingdom to come.

The same Age. S. Augustine. Who knows not that the multitudes of Christian
people, who keep an extreme continency, do daily more and more spread
themselves all over the world, but principally in the east, and in Egypt,
which is a thing which you cannot be ignorant of? I will say nothing of those
whom I have mentioned a little above, who being wholly sequestered from the sight
of men, inhabit most desert places, contenting themselves with bread alone,
which is brought them at certain times, and water; where they enjoy heavenly
conferences with God, to whom they wholly adheare with purity of heart, being
most happy in the contemplation of his beauty, which can only be seen by
the purified minds of Saints. I will not, I say, speak of those, because
some are of opinion, that they have but too much abandonned humane affairs,
while they understand not, how much their mynds, may advantage us by their
prayers, as their lives also by their example. If those others seem to pass
our abilities, who will not admire preach and praise those who having contemned
and cast of the allurementes of the world, and being gathered together in a
most chaste and holy common life, pass their years together in prayer and
reading, being neither puffed up with pride, nor wax tu bulent by stuborne
adhearance to their own sense, nor eaten up with envy, but are modest,
bashful, peaceable, offering to God (by whose mercy they merited to obtain
all these virtues) a life full of concord, and wholly attentive to his service,
which is a most grateful present to his divine Majesty.

And this is the life of women too, who serve God with solicitude and
chastity, and living at a distance from men, as far as decency requires,
they are only united to them, by charity, and the imitation of their virtue.
Noe young people come near them, nor even aged persons neither, of what
gravity and approved life soever they be, save only to the out-gate to bring
them their necessaries.

They that vow Virginity to God, how ever they are in a higher degree of
honor and sanctity in the Church of God, are not for all that deprived of
marriage, since they togeither with the whole Church, belong to the marriage
where Jesus Christ is the Bridegroom.

Run on therefore, O you Saints of God, young men vnd maids, men and women,
batchelour and unmarried people, hold out perseuerantly to the end. Praise our
Lord more sweetly, whom you think of more frequently; hope in him more
happily, whom you serve more instantly; love him more ardently, whom you please
more attentively. Expect our Lord coming from the marriages with girt loins,
and burning lamps. You shall bring with you a new Canticle to the marriage of
the lamb, which you shall singe n ith your Harpes. Not such an one as the
whole earth sings, to which is said, let all the earth singe a Canticle to our
Lord but such an one as none but your selves shall be able to singe. For so was
it seen in the Apocalips by one that was beloved of the lamb, by special
privilege, above the rest, who was accustomed to repose in his bosom, and
thence drunk, and delivered, heavenly wonders of the word of God. He saw you
one hundred forty four thousand holy Harpers, all of an vuspotted Virginity
in body, and of an tuuiolable truth in heart. And because you follow the lamb
wheresoever he goes, he wrote of you. Whither do we think this Lamb goes?
Into what pastures and meadows? where I believe the grass is heavenly
delights, not the vane delights of this world, which are frantic lies: nor
such delights neither, as others which are not virgins shall enjoy, even in
the kingdom of heaven, but delights formally distinguished from all those
others, delights of the Virgins of Christ, in Christ, with Christ, after
Christ, by Christ, for Christ, in a word, the proper and peculiar delights of
the Virgins of Christ. And not those of sich as are not Virgins, though
otherwise of Christ. For others have other joys, but none have the like.
Spring on into those joys, follow the lamb, for his flesh too was Virgin
flesh.

S. Gregory the great, speaking of Monastical In the 6 Age.
persons, adornes them with the great prerogative of sitting judges of the
world with Christ, saying: There are others which are not judged, but reign,
who also by the perfections of their virtues, outrun the commandementes of the
Law: who are not one ly content to complie with what the Law commands to all in
generalt, but spurred on wit a more generous desire, strive to perform morthen
they had heard by the general commandments. To such it is said by the mouth
of Christ, you that have for saken all things, and followed me, when the son
of man shall be s^tt in the seat of his Majesty, you, I say, shall also be
seated upon twelve Thrones; to judge the twelve Tribes of Israel; It is of them
too, that the Prophet says: our Lord will come to Judgment with the Ancients
of his people. And Solomon speaking of the spouse of the holy Church, Her
husband is honored in the Gates, when he is set with the Senators of the
earth. Wherefore it is they who are not judged at the last judgment, but
reign, because they too come in quality of Judges togeither with their
Creator. And the reason is, because for saking all things, they executed more
by a prompt devotion, then they heard commanded in general. And in very
deed, it was by a special command, that that was said to a small number of
the more perfect; and not generally to all, which the rich youmg man heard, go
and sell the things, which thou have, give to the poor, and thou shall have a
treasure in heaven, come, and follow me.

THE IV. REFLECTION.
Of the fruits of Monastical life.

THE I. PARAGRAPHE.
MADAME, Believe the works, was the maxim of a wise man: and that other of
wisdom itself ex fructibus eorum cognoscet is eos, comes home to the same
thing. To this sure trial I am here to inuit your prudence. Let not your
more impartial judgment be so much swayed by what they say, or even what we
say, but by what our Lord says: you shall know them by their fruits. What
they say ( to wit our enemies, as your Honor has the goodness to tell us) we
shall hereafter, with justice protest against, as foul calumnies: and howeuer
we can scarce hope, that what we say, should pass for payment; yet sure we
are, that what our works say, ought to be the wise man's satisfaction. Please
then to know monastical life, and livers, by their fruits.

And may not we say to that effect without fearing to meet with any specious
contradiction, that Monafteries have produced such multitudes of ripe fruits,
fruits I say of piety, of learning, of conuersions of nations, that had not
our prodigal slaunderers loved empty husks better then the pure, and solid
bread of their fathers house from which they fled, they had found delightful
variety enough to have fed their thoughts upon. But as S. Augustine could
tell the world 12. hundred years ago. It is noe wonder that they hate the
name Monk or unity, who have cut themselves from the unity of the Church.
And that the name of Monk, stands in their way, since they will not live
together with their brethren, but by following Donatus etc. quitt Jesus Christ.

What a large field would a learned pen have to labor in, and what pen so
learned as would not even be oppressed, should it undertake to point out the
fruits of pictie which have sprung from the Alumnuses of Monastical life?
Sure I am it is a work so far out speakinge my small ability, that I ch^fe
rather tymely to strike sail, then to give into so uaste an Ocean. I will
therefore say nothing of those huge fires of devotion, which our Basiles,
Hieromes, Augustines, Benets, Gregory's, and thousands more of their disciples
(even to this day well known to the whole world) left behind them to inflame
Christian hearts.

Nor will I adventure to relate what great lights and ornaments Monastical
life brought out in later ages, as Aquinases, Bonauentures, Albertus Magnuses,
Bernards, and multitudes more whose learned monuments the whole world
venerates, and admires, till this day. Nor finally attempt the particularising
of those Monastical persons who have either been blessed authors, or
instruments, of the conversion of a great part of this known world, and even
of almost all the new (which none can question) to the faith of Christ. I will
only confine my discourse, to our own little world, togeither with some near
neighboring nations.

Madame, What do we own of Christian religion, which we must not originally
ascribe unto them? What of piety, wherein their sacred cells had not a great
part? What of learning divine and human, whereof their Schools may not justly
challenge the deepest share? What of ancient history whereof they were not the
chief and almost only authors? Was the light of Christ his benignity and
humanity to shine to those that sat in darkness and in the shadow of death,
even to us shutt out from the world? Gods providence makes use of one of those
for the work, who in the Acts 4. had but one heart and one soul, to plant at
once in the heart of our Land, as well Christianity, as fraternity, and to
teach us how good and pleasant a thing it is for brothers to live in unity
and community, I mean that famous Decurio S. Joseph of Arimathea, who had the
honnour, and happiness to bury our Blessed Savior accompaigned with cleauen
other Saints, begun that renowned Abbey of Glostenburie, that Mother of
Monasteries, and Saints.

Was that tymely light obscured or extinguished? two monastical persons, to
wit Phaganus and Deruuianus, Monks, are sent from Rome to re-kindle and
restore it, at king Lucius instance to Pope Elutherius.

Does religion in England for a second or third time fall into decay? Rome, in
S. Gregory the Great his person, comes in to our aid: and Religious persons
are made the instruments of our Happiness, to wit S. Augustine and his
companions.

And was not scolland and Ireland made happy by the like means. Rome sent,
and Monks were the men, and by those holy workmen, Patrike, Palladius etc. the
blessed work of the conversion of those two Nations was accomplished.

Noe less can be ascribed to them, in point of devotion and piety. For who
ever so largely contributed to it, and made themselves so manifestly known by
their fruits? Witness S. Anselmes treatises of piety, Hiltons Scala
perfectionis, that vnparelled piece, Tauleres, Harpius, Susos, Ruisbrochius,
and Thomas a Kempis, all their admirable works. All Monastical persons, or
Monks (for I take the word in its latitude as it is extended to all religious
persons) and our near neighbors, in or about the skirts of Germany. What is
more divinely inflaming then those of S. Anselmes? What more solidly and
Christianly perfect then that and many other pieces of Hilton? what more
sublimely mystical then those of Taulere, Harphius, Suso, Ruisbroke. What more
full then that of Maubornus? What more heavenly simple and more aduantagiously
coming home to every ones use, then Kempis his works? They afforde honey and
milk to the least children, and yet prove solid food to the most manly
appetite. As many lines, as many pious sentences; and as many sentences as many
fiery darts to pierce the most hardened heart. Should I endeavor highly to
commend them, I should not much fear to offend any, since the worlds
iudgmenthath long ago past upon them, and given them to be the best of
spiritual books; and withal, being in every ones hands, they speak the
language of heaven more profitably for themselves, by their effects. Thus much
in short, according to my purpose, to give a small taste of the delicious
fruits of monastical piety, which would yet have been much better proved by
their lives then by their lines, could they have been of so large extent, and
perpetuity. Now to fruits of Monastikes learning; which, as I humbly confess
to your Lasp passes my abilities, as being shutt up in Latin, wherein my
knowledge it but slender, and therefore I had recouse to an honest friend, who
took the pains to bestow upon us what follows.

Mr Howeuer I must confess you have made noe happy choice, in addressing your
self to a man who has spent the least part of his time in histories, and
who, when he is taken at the best, passes for nothing among men of learning:
yet being called upon by Mrs du Vergers, who is known to be a lover of
learning, and a very vertuoso in antiquities, beyond the rate of a woman: and
that too, in order to a noble person whose abilities belyes her sex, to
furnish her with better characters of Monastical life, then it seems she had
formerly met with, I should judge it a crime to suffer the truth of a fact lie
a bleeding, for want of contributing some few hours of my time to make Iome of
our Latin Authors speak english in that behalf. And indeed what is not
offered to one in that kind by our English historians, both friends and enemies
vt inimici eorum, sintiudices, to make ourverie enemies our Judges. And what is
not willingly acknowledged by foreign nations, who have fedd, and to this day
do feed of the fruits of it with singular approbation. Certainly if I
sparingly pay any expectation in this behalse, it is plenty that makes me
poor, there being noe nation under heaven (I think I may confidently affirm
it) that more flourished in this behalf, or afforded a more ample subject of
praise? where Monasteries were not so much free schools of some, as
Universities of all kind of learning. Where monks were noe less Angels in
their Celles, then Masters and Apostles at home and abroad when Charity called.

To begin then to complie with your religious desires: was it not a thing
worthy of admiration, that one Monk (venerable Bede I mean) borne, and
brought up, in the very skirts, and remotest corner, of this little world of
ours, shutt out from the greater world, should have come to such a highth of
all kind of knowledge, that Sixtus Senensis, and Posseuine should leave this
famous testimony of him, saying: he was excellent in all kind of discipline,
being skillful in the greek and latinc tongues; being a Poet, a Rhetoritian,
Histriographer, Astromomer, Arithmetician, Chroniologer, Cosmographer,
Philosopher, Divine, and that so admirable an one, in that time, that it grew
into a proverb among the more knowing of that Age, that a man borne in the
remotest corner of the world, out stripped the whole world besides in wit etc.

And Baleus, who is known to be noe great friend to Monastical life, adds yet
to the former testimony, and says: he was esteemed by many to excelle
Gregory the Great, by reason of his exact knowledge in the greek and latin
tongues. Thereis nothing in all antiquity worth the reading, which we meet
not with in him, in their due places. Had he lived in Hieromes, Augustines, and
Chrysostomes Age, I am confident he might have entered into comparison with
them. He putt out many works replenished with all kind of learning.

The like testimonies might be brought from Baronius, Bellarmine, the
Magdeburgians, Fox, Camden, Cooper and many others, were it not to abuse the
readers patience. Wherefore leaving these testimonies of words, I will rather
pass over to his own works which give yet a better testimony for him, and
for the singular fruits of Monastical life. This great and venerable light
then, did not only illustrate his own Monastery, and all that utmost corner
of the world, but even all England, with his admirable learning and piety. Nor
were yet those glorious talents of his, buried within the too narrow compass
of that Island, but even passed the Sea, and were distributed to France and
Italy. For he made and sent out his learned schoollers to instruct them both.
Witness that most famous University (Paris I mean) of the whole world, which
drew its Origin from them. And the University of Pauie in Italy, which
acknowledges the same Authors. To wit Charles the Great, at the instance of
his delicious Master Alcuine, one of S. Bedes scholars (as that most renowned
Emperor was wont to style him) pleased to erect the University of Paris under
his direction. Whereupon he sent into England for some of his chief scholars,
by name, John Scot, Glaude, and Clement, whom he constituted the first Masters
there, to instruct the children of the gentry, and prime Nobility of all
France, and to season them in piety, faith, religion, good manners, and every
best kind of literature. So that whatsoever the French have subtle in
Philosophy; of gentile and civil in their comportement; and solid in
divinity, and matter of faith, they owe it to the English, and particularly to
this delicious Master of one of the greatest Emperors that ever the world
knew, Alcuine, togeither with his forenamed companions, and Disciples.

Further what glory did not redound to Monastical life, and to all our
nation, in the person of Alexander Hallensis, who had the honor to be master,
to two of the greatest Masters (and they Monks two) that ever the Church of
God had in school divinity, to wit Thomas Aquinas, that Angel of the
School, and S. Bonauenture.

And who does not hear the names of those other great heroes of learning and
piety, and vnparelled ornaments of Monastical discipline with a kind of
astonishme^t. I mean Aldelmus, Scotus, Occham, Holcot, Bacon, Weldensis,
Bridlingtonus, Capgrauius, Richardus Victorinus, Ealredus, with whole troops
of illustrious writers to the number of 700. and odd, out of each of their
orders, to wit Augustinia^ Benedictian, Carmelite, Cistercian, Dominicane and
Franciscan. Whereof some were continually employed in writing and teaching, and
became the admired ornaments of both universities, as the learned monuments
they have left behind them, are to this day the richest gemmes of their
Libraries, and the chief or only rarities which delightfully draw strangers
out of other nations to behold them with veneration. Where doubtless they
^onder to find more commentaries upon divinity (and for the most part by
Monastical persons) of the same nation in this little world of ours, then
happly they find in all the world besides: one hundred and Sixty famous
school men (as Pits is my warrant) having written upon the Sum of
DiuiOthers, (the light of whose singular learning and the odor of whose
virtuous life could not be contained within the walls of a Monastery) were
called by Charity and sent out of their Celles by obedience, and placed upon
the Candle stick that they might give light to the whole house of God. Hence
the forenamed Pitts gives us a Catalogue of 220. Archbishopps and Bishops
famous for learning and sanctity, whereof the greatest number were Monastical
persons, togeither with such as had drunk wisdom from their religious
fountains. This is a truth which needs noe proof, it being avouched by all
our English Historians, as well by adversaries as friends. Howbeit those holy
Monks were not so much invited to leave their celles as to change them: nor to
forsake their Monasteries, which Were removed from the world, as called to more
famous ones, Cathedral Monasteries, to serve the world and charitably to
communicate to it the blessed store which they had treasured up in their
solitude, following the order which S. Gregory gave to Candidus Bishope,
willing him in the time of want of parish Priests, to visit the Monasteries in
his Diocese, and take such Monks as were worthy to be made Priests out of
their orders and Monasteries, and make them Parish Priests. And that of S.
Hierome so live in the Monastery that thou may deserve to be a Priest:
learn a long time that thou may teach afterward etc. since according to S.
Augustine, a good Monk does scarce at length prove a good clergy man. So high
a rate putts he upon that state of life, which ought not only to endeavor each
ones salvation in particular, but that of others, the gayning of souls being
truly, and properly an Apostolical employment, which issued immediately from
Christ; as he himself issuing from his heavenly father, was sent for noe other
end. As my living father sent me so I send you: and therefore going out into
the universal world, preach the Gospel to all creatures etc.

But our famous, fruitful, and holy Monastical seminaries, had not only well
ordered troops enough to people our Bishopes seas, and to fight against vice
in our own Land, which Berinus perfected at home with huge success; and
Egbertus in Scolland, but afforded also plentiful reserues, to make head
against paganism and to plant the faith of Christ in foreign Nations. There
are yet Wilfredes. Willibrords, Suibertes and Bonifaciuses with many holy
companions left at home, to be sent abroad in Apostolical mission, to convert
externe and adjacent neighbors. To these do a great part of Germany,
Holland, Zeland, Saxony, friseland and others, owe the happy beginings of
their Christianity.

In Germany Boniface labored for the space of 30. years so successefully,
that, witness Gregory the third, he baptized one hundred thousand of them,
converting withal, Franconia, Noricum, Bauaria, Turingia, Hassia, some part of
Saxony, Dacia, Slauonia, and Fresia. And thece deservedly had the title of the
Apostle of Germany.

S. Suibert preached the word of God to all the Couutrie round about Mastricke,
to Holland, Loraine, Denmark, Westphalia, Saxony, and in a more peculiar
manner purchaced the Apostle ship thereof. And this not without huge labors,
and prodigious miracles, which were crowned with admirable success, and a
happy accomplishment.

Wilfride won the other Saxons from Idolatry, and instructed and baptized
many thousands of them leaving the work to be completed by willebrord etc.

And finally by the labors of S. Willibrord, Frise, the nearer Saxony,
Wesphalia, Guelderland, Cliuia, Iuliers, Holland, Zelande, were all converted
to the faith of Christ. By these christian and Apostolical fruits, let
Monastical life be known, and live in eternal memory.

But while these great things were happily performed abroad, by 4. holy Monks
of S. Benets order, what was done at home? Marry while these were converting
infidells to the faith, the holy Bishops with their holy Monks at home, are
laboring to improve the faithful. While these feed their tender Catecumens
with milk, they, (the Bishops etc.) confirm the stronger sort with more
solid food. Finally while these reconcile sinners, they make and Canonise
Saints. (as We shall see hereafter) so that to speak with Venerable Bede. In
those days, the whole solicitude that those Dotours had, was to serve God, not
the world: their only care, to nourrish the soul, not the belly. Hence it
was that the habit of religion was as had in great veneration at that time. In
so much that whersocuer any clergy man or Monk chanced to come, he was
received by all with much joy, as a servant of God; yea if they happened to
meet him going abroad, the people flocked to him, and bowing down their
heads, they were ouerioyed either to receive the sign of the Cross from his
hand, or a Benediction from his mouth.

Would you rather have the assurance of their good employment from a mouth
less subject to suspicion. Take it then from Spelman, who is as faithful in
relating antiquity, as little studious of Catholic advantages in it. The
Clergy, says he, was In his (...) at Epist. to the Counsels and c
pious and diligent in frequent fastes, prayers and divine worship (according
to their manner) but in alms deeds, and works of charity, and in the
advancement of the Church of God, it was in very decde wonderfully illustrious.

Truly, goes he on, a little after, all the Clergy was in a igh esteem of
honor both with the common people, the nobility, and the English Saxon kings
themselves, which too, they inioyed not upon a title at preasure, but it was
even confirmed upon them by the Laws The Priest that celebrated at the Altar
was equal to the Lord of the Village, held in the same teneur with him, and
had the like honor done to him. The Abbot, or chief Governor of the
Monastery, was principal among the Barons: as the Bishope was also amongst
the chief Countes, who inioyed a whole County, and the committements thereto
belonging. The Archbishope was above a Duke, or Peer, or Governor of a most
ample Province, which contained many counties etc. To wit the kings heartily
loved, and looked upon, the whole Clergy with a gracious countenance, and
always chused out of it the first of his privy Council, and the chief
Minister of state for in those Ages the keys of learning and knowledge was
only in their hands, and so it come to pass, that the Priests mouth was the
peoples oracle; and the mouth of the Bishope, the Oracle of the king, and
common wealth. The Bishope therefore satt in the first place in all the assizes,
sessions, and Courts of the kingdom: in the kings Palace with the Peers of
the Land: in the Counties, togeither with the Count and justice of peace of
the County. In the Vicountie, with the Vicounte: in the hundred with the Lord
of the Hun dred: in such sort that the one sword mutually helped the other in
promoting instice, and nothing was done without the Priests advise, who was, as
it were, the balance to the ship.

To these let us add the noble testimony of the great Baronius, saying with a
kind of astonishment: so great was the fervent zeal of the primitive Church of
England to holy religion, that by the multitudes of Monks, who applied
themselves to the study of divine Phylosophie, the whole Island was replenished
with Monasteries, wherein the very kings (who had shown themselves Lions in
wars) became presently most mylde Lambs, enclosed with in the walls of a
sacred solitude; whence we may gather from the judgment of those kings, that
what was auerred of old, by most holy, religious, and prudent persons, was most
true, to wit, that Monastical life ought to be preferred before the life of a
king, since many of them, as is evident by our best historians, being
exceedingly renowned for their great prudence; illustriously glorious in the
world, and flowing with riches, did yet out of the esteem they had, that
Monastical life was a greater good, vnderualuing all those in comparison of
this, they quite abandoned those, and made choice of this by preference.

Hear Spelman again, howeuer an adversary, in this behalf. If we descend to
kings of following Ages, who will not stand amaysed at the admirable piety,
the incredible fervor, the incomparable Almes-deedes, the multitudes of their
works of mercy, their excessive bounty and liberality heaped upon the
Ministers of God, and their stupendous and magnificent profusion, in building,
adorning and enriching Churches. They count upon about 30. kings and Queens,
within the space of two hundred years, who casting of the the pomp and
splendourof an earthly kingdom to take the kingdom of heaven by a holy
violence, betook themselves to a religious solitude, to wit 15. kings (or
more) became Monks, or pilgrims to Rome: 14. Queens Nunns: and twelve kings
suffered Martyrdom by infidells, and ten more canonised for their wonderful
sanctity. So that one says: It was a wonder in those days to see a king who
was not a Saint: and another in his Cronicle affirms, that he found more
kings Saints in Ingland, then in any other Province of the whole world, how
populous soever. I pass over the great multitude of the Royal issue to
speak of kings alone.

Yet what he passes over, who was tied to the laws of an Epistle, others make
it their business to prosecute at large, and to putt down their names and
number; their F. Watthewes in his Marty rologe.
professions, lives, and sanctity, numbering up 25. (besides 14. or 15. more
of the blood royal) who of sonns and daughters of Kings, became humble Monks
and Nunns, and the most of them famous Saints. Adding withal to his number of
Religious Queens, seven more to make up 21. Might not then Baronius affirm
of the Church of England in those days, that it was, a Paradise of our Lord
abounding with the lilies of holy Virgins, and the violets of the multitudes
of holy Monks?

Thus to complie with the brevity you prescribe me, have I rather heaped
together, then exposed the glories of our Nation sprung from our English
Monasteries, those blessed and and fruictfull nurseries of Gods Church. I have
reduced, I say, great things (were they set out to show) into a little Map,
which as it brings the advantage of making many and vast objects, obuious to be
discovered with one cast of an eye: so brings it this disadvantage, that they
appear not in their true light, luster, and bulk, but incomparably less
then nature, less then what indeed they are, whereas particulars (had they not
been too long for this design) were fitter to strike the senses more lively,
and to feed the eyes and heart with far more delight and satis faction. For
the rest, my knowing friend, if the little I have said fall short of your
expectation, I assure you, you may well pardon me, since I even starued my
self, to please you, out of a friendly fear I conceived, that the too much I
might have said, should have passed your desire, and oppressed you with
plenty; Otherwise, what glorious particulars might not have been easily
produced? what prodigies might not have been said of that Land of God: that
first Land of Saints in England; that beginning and fountain of all Religion
in England: that tomb of Saints, that mother of Saints: whereby England is
rightly styled the parent or Mother Monastery of all Europe. As the Theater of
greater Britain stiles^^.

Thus far goes my friend, Madame, in the behalf of the singular fruits of
Monastical life, where your honor will observe, his greatest pain was rather
to crude up a most plentiful harvest into a little space, then to expose it to
a full and satisfactorie view. And yet, happily, taken even at that
disadvantage, it appears more then any equal proportion of all the Christian
world besides is able to paralelle. And now, Madame, laying by, as it were, the
advantages which Monastical life justly draws from Antiquity, Authority of
fathers, and the ripe fruits it brings forth, lets try whether reason alone
may not prove preualent enough to make it appear superlatiuely laudable, and
free it from the preiudices it is made lie under.

THE V. REFLECTION.
The excellency of Monastical life made good by Reason.

MADAME, If in what state of lif soever we live, this transitori life, is only
lent us by following the way of truth, to attain to essential and per manent
life, or life everlasting; by follow ing the ways of truth, which is the end c
man's creation, and every thing is perfected by attayning to its last end,
which none can attain to but by the guidance of Truth, and walking in the
ways which it chiefly points out. Certainly it seems consequent enough to
me, to give pre-eminence of excellency, to that course of life, be it which it
will, which of its own nature, sticks closest to the ways which Truth marks
out, or, which is the same thing, that makes best use of life to arrive at the
end for which it was given.

Now whereas all the Rules that Truth ever delivered, even all the law and the
Prophets, are by that truth reduced to one, according to that of the Apostle,
the fulness of the law is love, it follows evidently, that that kind of life
is most excellent, which most conduces to love, and putts love and charity
into a most absolute and sovereign reign, since that alone comprises all the
Rules or ways which Truth ever taught.

And indeed, Charities blessed and sweet reign, would be always peaceable,
settled, and sovereign, did not cupiditie, her corriuall to man's heart, disturb
her peace, and take off from her sovereignty. That life then which of its own
nature, and by her holy practices most curbes and takes off from cupiditie,
adds most to Charity; and consequently, is the best and most excellent kind of
life, as being most happily employed by advancing the reign of Charity, to
arrive at the end for which life was lent.

But whereas it is not by one single Cupiditie that Charities reign is laid
at, but by innumerable multitudes which make their assaults under three
colors, concupiscence of the flesh, concupiscence of the eyes, and pride of
life, that kind of life must needs be most excellent, which makes it its whole
business, to study and endeavor the total ruin of Cupiditie; which Were it
once entirely subdued, Charity would so soueraignly reign in man's heart, that
he would be restored to a near resemblance of that happy state wherein man
was created.

Now what life is it, if not monastical life, which of its own nature, most
absolutely follows the ways delivered by truth, wholly to adheare to God,
which is done by Charity but Monastical life? What life does most remove the
impediments by which the groth and reign of Charity is hindered and disturbed,
but Monastical life? what life does so totaly sacrifice itself up to God, as
Monastical life? Lets examine the truth of each particular. What were the
ways which Truth marked out by his own example, but abiection, humiliation
poverty, chastity, and obedience? To which also he continually exhorted by
his word, saying: He that hates not his Father, and Mother, and wife, and
children, and brothers, and sisters, yea, and his own life besides, he cannot
be my disciple, etc. Again, he that does not renounce all that he possesses,
cannot be my Disciple. And what life does so formallie and absolutely lead to,
and express this example and doctrine, as Monastical life, which is indeed
noe other thing, then a state and profession, of subjection and obedience,
with a kind of professed hatred against all that is dear in nature, an open
war against flesh and blood, and a perfect dispossession and abandonment of
all things.

I know what I have been always taught that it is but the common obligation of
all Christians to love God above all things: yea, and for his sake, in some
circumstances to leave all things, together with life itself, since Truth
itself assures us, that he who loves life better then him, is not worthy of
him. I know it was not said to religious persons alone, by our sweet Savior,
but to all the world: He that does not renounce all that he possesses cannot be
my Disciple: I know what the great Apostle delivered generally to all men: That
they that have wives, should be as though they had them not, and they that
weep, Cor. 1.7.29.
as though they wept not: and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not:
and they that buy as though they possessed not: and they that use this world,
as though they used it not. Yet are all these passages to be understood with a
grain of salt, not in an absolute rigor, as words intimating and exhorting to
a decent moderation to be used in them without to much engagement, not putting
an iniunction of an entire forsaking and abandonement of them: a renountiation
in the resolution and preparation of the mind, not in act: in affection not in
effect; save only in such coniunctures, as either they or God is to be left.
Whereas monastical life actually and indeed forsakes all, not leaving her
professors any thing at all in propriety, at any time, in any coniuncture.
How far are her Alumnuses from the inordinate use or abuseof wives, when the
lawful use of them, or even the power to have them is quite taken from them;
they remaining like to the Angels of God etc.

And how truly do they use the world as though they used it not, who fly from
it, and shutts it out from them? To wit, they have heard from S. John, and
given credit to him, that all that the world can brag of, is but the
concupiscence of the flesh, the concupiscence of the eyes, and pride of life:
pleasures, riches honors, and all those they know to be the treacherous
Rebels which Cupiditie imployes to raise up the city of Babylon, even to the
contempt of God. And against these they proclaim and vow a holy war, which
is to last as long as life lasts. Not that only which all Christians are
bound to fight; by fasting, to subdue the concupiscence of the flesh, or
carnal pleasures: By Alms deeds to quench the inordinate thirst of riches:
and by prayer to vanquish the swelling desires of honors and pride of life.
But by a more admirable and resolute one turning themselves quite naked, that
the enemy may have noe hints to catch hold of. Does (may they seem to say)
concupiscence of the flesh attempt upon the love I owe to my Lord, by dividing
the bed of my heart, which is but too too narrow for him alone, upon the
diuersiaie of lovely obiectes, which may indeed allure and illude, but never
sociate it? But this is an injury to my Spouse, a disloyalty to the Lord I
resolve to love alone: I will not only then chastise that wanton, (which may
be subject to love, or to be loved, where I like not) and bring it into
servitude following the Apostles practice; but according to his counsel too, I
will cut of all pretention to any commerce in that kind, by the vow of
Chastity.

Does the jove of base lucre, strive to steal away my heart to the insatiable
pursuit of those staruing riches, which never mount to so great heaps but
that my incensed desires rise to greater, waxing still less happy, by how
much I possess more of that which I esteem my felicity? voluntary poverty
shall quench that unnatural thirst, which plenty could not; in want will I
find that satisfaction, which abundance could never afford. I will not only
by the help of alms deeds endeavor from time to time to allay those
hydropicall humors, but by relinquishing all at once, that I either have, or
may hope for, I will dry up the sourse of those afflicting desires, which make
me equally want that which I have, and that which I have not: so that having
nothing, with the world, I may possess all, with the richly poor Apostle.

Finally does the restless prosecution of the empty fumes of honor, that
consumption of the brains, to find still more and more access to new
dignities; that gaping after, and graspingat, and leaning upon the vanishing
winds of other men's mouths, which blow both hot and cold in a moment, hinder
me from paying the tribute of all honor, and glory, to my Lord, to Whom it is
wholly due? To tread down that empty vanity, I will not only send up the
incense of my prayers to God, but by obedience cast my self down at the feet
of another, to whom I otherwise I owe it not, to live at his disposition, and
discretion, upon free choice: to have the actions of my life directed by his
impartial hand, not misled by self flattery; and to have the restless
sallies of my mind kept in by his care, and prudence, from galding abroad after
vanities, deluding lies, and afflictions of Spirit.

In a word, all that I have, (and it is as much as ever man stood possessed
of) is goods of fortune, goods of body, and goods of mind; all which I freely
offer up in Holocaust to the good Donor, without reserve, or clause of
redemption, to live ever after as one dead to the world.

All this, Madame, is noe more then the prescript of Monastical life; this is
that she inioynes, and imposes upon all her forter-children indifferently. If
any perish because they follow it not, let them not father the fault upon the
good physician who prescribed life; nor putt aspersions upon the Sovereign
receipts, which never fail of wished effects, where it finds obedient
patients. Her generous renouncing of all, to follow naked Christ naked, is
truly Evangelical. Her humble obedience is worthily preferred before a
sacryfice. Her community of purses, and unity of hearts, is evidently
Apostolical. Her continual praying and singing Psalms before the Throne of
God, and purity of body and mind, is noelesse, according to the ancient
Fathers phrayse, then Angelical, or, in a corruptible body, a work of
incorruption. Ought all these fair ornaments and advantages to be besmeered
by the personal crimes of some few transgressors? Must a little chafe
preiudicate the plentiful store of pure wheat laid up in Christ's grenaries?
This is but, as S. Augustine observed in his time, to sit, and spy upon other
men's lives, yea to catch and carpe at what is most deformed therein; and if some
B shope, or clergy man monk or Nun chance to fail, to make it their business
to insult, and triumph, earnestly endeavoring to have all the rest be
conceived to be persons of the same alloye. While yet even they, neither reject
their wives, nor accuse their Mother, though some married woman should happen to
be overtaken in adultrie.

Madame, if this were all that our adversaries aimed at, to find some
Monastical persons as black as their neighbors: should you have discourse
with some of the most religious Monks, they would have humility enough to
give more, then such adversaries could easily prove.

That how holy soever their profession is, they meet with many profane and
unsanctified subjects.

That notwithstanding they are sequestered from the world, and have the most of
their conversation in heaven, yet they bear mortal bodies about with them,
which weigh down the soul.

That though they have put in, and ride in the safest harbor that this
malignant world can afford, yet find they not themselves secure, since many
have suffered shipwrake, even in the haven.

That, happily, they humbly confess with S. Augustine, that as they never
found any better then such as profit and make progress in Monasteries, so
never found they any worse then such as live not according to their holy
profession, the corruption of the best proving always the worst.

Noe, Madame, there is none among us so impudently proud, as to sanctify all
our Cellites. None strives so to blanch them, as to leave noe spot in them? who
dares affirm he is not a sinner, will not fail to be found a liar. But we
rather all, humbly; that is truly; that is Christianly, confess with S.
Augustine, that how watchful soever the discipline of his house may be, yet he
is a man, and lived among men, nor dare he arrogate to himself that his house
is better the No's arch, where amongst eight persons one was found a reprobate.
Or better then Abraham's family, where it was said, cast out the handmayde, and
her son. Or better then the house of Isaac, to whom it was said touching his
twinns: I have loved Jacob, but have hated Esau. Or better then the house of
the said lacob, where the son incestuously defiled his fathers bed. Or
better then David's own family, whose son committed incest with his own
sister: and where his other son proved a rebelle against his fathers so great
and holy graciousnesse to him. Or better then Paul's cohabitation, who, had
they been all good among whom he lived, had never said: wars abroad, and
fears at home: nor Would he speaking of Timothies sanctity and faith have
said: I have none that has a brotherly care of you: because every one seeks
their own, not what belonges to Jesus Christ. Or better then Iesus-Christs own
society, wherein eleauen that were good, tolerated the perfidous theife Judas.
Or better, finally, then heaven, whence the Angels fell. For in simplicity of
heart I confess unto your charity, in the presence of our Lord God, who is
the witness of my heart, that since I first began to be the servant of God, as
in my experience, I have hardly met with any better, then they that made
progress in Monasteries, so have I not experienced Worse then such as fell in
Monasteries. So that I have conceived that of the Apocalips (let the just wax
more just, and the filthy more fill thie) related to this. For the rest, though
we are contristated by the corruption and filth of some few: yet are we
comforted in many who are great ornaments. Do not then, in regard of the
lees, `which offend your eyes, deteste the Press, whence our Lords sellars
are replenished with the fruitful store of oil which affords a most clear
and pure light.

A SHORT REPLY TO the Objections.
THE I. OBJECTION.
Like drones they suck up the honey, they never took the pains to gather.

THE VI. REFLECTION.
MADAME, if you have plea sed to take the pains to pervse the premises, you
will have seen these light objections vanish away, as darkness disappeares
upon the approach of light; and apprehend time misspent that might be employed
in the particular refutation thereof. For what indeed are those barkers, but
scritchowles compared to those eagles. And what are their objections, but such
as might be equally cast upon the idle Minister, as well as the idle Monk.
(Must he, his wife and children be forced to perish, because howeuer he
preaches and prays, yet he takes not the pains to gather what he and they
eat?)

Nay even upon the Apostles themselves and Apostolical practices of the
primitive times, at whose feet the primitive Christians put down the prices
of their possessions without their labor. Must they too be termed drones
because they sucked up that honey which they never took the pains to gather?
Or rather must not the Apostolical Oracle be found proof against these
ungrounded allegations. Know you not that they which work in the holy place
eat the things which are of the holy place: and they that serve the Altar
participate with the Altar? so also our Lord ordained for them that preach the
Gospel, to live of the Gospel. So true it is, that they that neither set, nor
sow, nor reap, may have a good title to a liuoly hoode. Or else not only the
Lord Abbot, and Abbess; but even the Lord Count, and Countess, were either to
practice a lesson they never learnt, to steal, or to starve.

THE II. OBJECTION.
They are an idle lazy, and unprofitable people.

THE VII. REFLECTION.
MADAME, were this as absolutely proved by those Calumniatours, as it is
absolutely denied by those that are concerned, as being rashly throw en out, not
accompanied with any proof or truth, yet what just censure could that fasten
upon a profession so ancient, so holy, so innocent, as you have seen
Monastical life described; of which yet your honor undertook to speak, not
of Monastical livers? Ought the idleness of Christians to stayne the
holiness of Chistianitie? Must faith suffer because the faithful prove
loyterers and truands? Must the Gospel be sandaled because its professors
practice it not? I dare well appeal and stand to your honors judgment in
this behalf. You are too knowing not to see the injustice of such a
proceeding: Too noble, and good, and just not to pronounce accordingly. But,
Madame, the assertion is rash and impudent, and conteynes noe truth in it, as
to those Monastical livers, who live according to the prescript of Monastical
life who ever were since Christ, and are still till this day, in great
multitudes. Let not then the mixture of some chafe make us miskenne, or
undervalue the good wheato. And please for a full solution to look back into
the 4. Reflection.

THE III. OBJECTION.
They go not to wars to adventure their lives.

THE IX. REFLECTION.
THIS objection comes on with so marciall a face, that it might seem absolutely
to bear down all the poor Monks before it. Whence we cannot suspect that it
comes, with many others, out of Luthers or Caluines tents, who were as willing
to sleep in a whole skin, as any the most fearful Monk or Nun of them
all. This must certainly be the exception: of some gallant who judged nothing
worthy of men, but being enrolled under Mars his colors, leaving noe place
for feminne merit; and upon that score spent so much of his time in the field,
that he never took leisure to look home, and see what was behoofefull there.
Where he should have found the grave Senators in their gowns, not
unnecessarily employed in ordering his marches, motions, and attempts; and
concluding that the sword ought to give place to the gown, Cedant arma togis:
and that wars prove fruitless abroad, if they be not guided by counsel taken
at home. How, Madame, must the Priest needs now, as of old, imbrue his hands in
a bloody sacryfiee to pass without censure? Must the poor friar needs sell
his frocke to buy a sword, or else pass for a coward, or an unprofitable
servant? Must men of all professions run to the wars, or have war made
against their possession? Well dare I pawn my credit upon it, this never got
into your Olio with any great approbation from your better judgment.

THE IV. OBJECTION.
And as for the women there are as many kept barren as would populate whole
nations.

THE X. REFLECTION.
AS the last ingredient was too new and unmortified, so is this, too stale to
do any grace to your dish. This is indeed as ancient as the old heretic
Vigilantius and Iouinian, who seemed affrayd in their time that mankind might
have failed, forsouth, and yet thus mnay Ages after him, the world neither
wants Virgins, nor wives. What S. Augustine replied to them then, may now
serve for our answer to the present objection, who spoke thus to Virgins of
his time: continue your course, run perseuerantly that you may comprehend, and
forciblely draw all that you can with you into the same course, as well by the
good example of your life, as by your pious exhortations: and permit not your
selves to be diuerted from that earnest endeavor, (whereby you excite many to
follow your footstepps) by the clamours of vane fools, who say, how should
mankind subsiste, if all were continent? as though, forsooth, this world were
retarded for any other end then that the number of the elect might be
accomplished, which being once accomplished, certes the world will presently
have an end. And how happy were it if it might so end? Hear this holy Saint
speak again, in an Epis. which he wrote to Proba and Iuliana, two noble
windows congratulating with them at Demetriadis her receiving the holy veyle
of Virginity. With confusion to those sons of the earth whose thoughts are so
wholly buried therein, that they dream of nothing but plantations and
populations: who is able to express in words, says he, who can worthily set
out, how incomparably much more fruitful and glorious it is that Christ has
had women, who were Virgins of your blood, then men who were Consuls. For if
it be found noble and illustrious, to have their Monumets in after times marked
with the dignity of your names; how much greater, and more famous a thing is
it, to outstripe those praises by the purity of body and soul? Let therefore
that maid who is noble by birth, but more noble by sanctity, much more
rejoice that by her marriage with her heavenly spouse she shall attain to a
more illustrious place in heaven, then by marriage with a man to bring forth an
illustrious child. For the Anician posterity has made a more glorious choice,
to bless that illustrious family of theirs by not knowing marriage, then to
multiply it by bringing forth children; and remaining in flesh to imitate the
life of the Angels, then of their flesh still to be increasing the number of
mi serable mortals. It is a more fruitful and happy fertility, to have a
great soul, then a great belly: to have a white heart, then a while milkie
breaste: to bring out heaven by prayers, then earth out of our bowels. Enjoy
in her, o my most worthily honored Lady daughters, what you want in your
selves: may she the while persevere to the end, by adhearing to that marriage
which has noe end. Let many maids imitate this Lady Mistress, being but of a
mean condition follow this noble soul, being but abiectly high, this
illustrious abject: let the virgins that aim at the Anician splendor and
renown, espouse their sanctity. Whether they ever attain to that, though
they prosecute it never so greedily, it is doubtful: but this, they presently
have, if they fully desire it.

Hear S. Ambrose, ho before him spoke to the same effect. If any conceinethar
mankind is deminished by the Consecration of Virgins, let them considere that
where there are few Virgins, there are fewer men, and where there is greater
press after Virginity, there also men are in greater number. Observe what a
number of Virgins the Church of Alexandria, Africa, and all the East, does
yearly consecrate. There are not so many men borne here, as there are Virgins
consecrated there. The 3. book of Virg. Observe, Madame, how these great
servants of God, and faithful stewardes differr from your deceiptfull
pourueyours. They appear carnal; these wholly spiritual. They have their eyes
wholly turned upon the earth, these aim specially at Gods interest: They are
busy about peopleing the earth, these to people heaven. They dehorte, these
earnestly exhort to Virginity, that angelical ornament of Monastical life.
If any be so blind as not to discern which of the two ought rather to be
followed, I commend him to Gods mercy, and leave him to his plantations: for
certainly (to speak but sparingly) he is more fit to people earth the^ heaven.
I leave the dead to bury the dead. While I take the boldness to look a
little farther into your Olio.

Calumnies objected.
But their enemies say they are not only the Covetous, but the greatest
cheaters in the world: and all under the name for Gods sake. For say they, they
bring in ceremony for gain; in that they set all the mercies of God to sale;
for what sins cannot be bought for money; as adultery, incest, murder,
blasphemy, and sins past and present. As for whores they permit them to live
loosely without punishment, and allot them streets and houses to increase
their sins; in which they do authorize sin for a sum, for they pay tribute
to the Church; and not only sins past, and present, but to come: as witness
the years of Jubilee. Besides the heads take upon them the power of damnation
and salvation, as witness the excommunications and absolutions. And if not out
and in of Hell, yet out and in of purgatory, which purgatory is a great
revenue to them: yet they have a countenance for their covetousness, which is,
that the offendant must have a true contritio^ or their sum of money will do
them noe good noe more then a true contrition without the sum.

THE XI. REFLECTION.
THE I. PARAGRAPHE.
HERE, Madame, provisions are brought so thick in upon you, that you have not
leisure left to reuew them, but all goes in topsie turuie, hand over head
(They say, they are covetous, cheaters, sellers of ceremonies, Marchands of
Gods mercies, brokers of adultery, incest, murder, blasphemy, past present
to come, streets established to increase sin, and make money of it) And all
this certainly without either election or approbation of yours. For here not
Monastical life only enters, of which you undertake to speak, but Catholic
religion in general; not only the Monk, but the Bishop also is got into
the potage, and they smell high, and change your dainty Olio into a confused
Hodgpog, that I may not say, death is in the pot, with the Prophet, mors est
in olla.

You please to tell us you had these corrupt provisions from our enemies, and
We easily believe it without an oath, that they were enemies to us, and truth,
and noe friends to your Lad. to furnish you with such a rabble of stinking
stuff, whose noble design was to have given a wholesome and grateful
entertaynement to all the world. They seem to throw stones about them, like
mad blind men, hit where they will. They hurl calumnies about our ears as
thick as hale, following, it should seem, that pernicious maxim. Calumniare
fortiter, semper aliquid adhaerebit. Calumniate boldly somewhat will always
stick: and indeed it is hard enough to claw of the dints of bold lies, cloked
in generalities, and conveyed from enemies tongues to enemies ears which lie
but too open to the whisperings of such serpents. Marry were those bold
Assertours, putt to the law of Talion, either to prove the imposed crime, or be
liable to the punishment due to it, as all justice would have it, which
presumes every one to be good, unless they be (not suspected, or accused, or
slaundered to be badd) convinced to be badd, we should need noe apology at
all, which I ingenuously confess in this case is a hard task, where we are to
deal with negatiues, which noe man is bound, as indeed hardly any man is able
(save in some cases only) to make good.

THE II. PARAGRAPHE.
AND how hard it is, Madame, I appeal to your own judgment. We will suppose
some base foul mouthed fellow, had gale enough to degorge upon all womenkind
in general, these impudent and false aspersions; that they were all naught,
that they desyled their husbands bedds, putt their honors to sale, that their
seeming devotion were clokes of hypocricie, that they farmed out their
daughters sins etc. Or that he should cast as much dirt upon the reputation
of the consort or wife of some King, or Lord in particular, as here is cast
upon the immaculate Spouse of the Lord and king of heaven, and that merely upon
suspicions conjectures, rash judgments, because happly some among them is noe
better then were to be wished. What means is left for this single Queen, or
Lady, to purge her self? She behaues herself fairly to the eyes of the
world: her comportments are modest, her gate grave, her eyes soberly cast down
to the grownd, she has the good reports of her neighbors, and servants, the
approbation of her husband. I but for all this (goes the calumniatour on) she
is reported to be a whore, and who knows etc. If she failed not at one time,
she might at another. Why, but she prays much, fares poorly, lies hard, flies
not only naughty, or suspected, but even almost all compagnie. Nay to avoid,
not only danger, but suspicion too, she shutts herself up within four walls,
and lives under the shelter of many grave and vigilant eyes. All this matters
not, forsooth, she is said to be a whore. Madame, if our honor were thus at
stake, and at the mercy of an impudent vilaine, how should we possibly purge
ourselves? And yet, Madame, the inuentours; and renewers of these reports putts
the venerable state of Monastical life, and even the chaste Spouse of Christ,
into the like straites, not with standing they have as much, or more to say for
themselves, as the supposed Queen or Lady produced.

THE III. PARAGRAPHE.
BUT, Madame, though as I intimated before, the burden of the proof, by all
justice, equity, and reason, ought to lie upon the affirmer; and that by the
same laws the defendant is as absolutely freed from that burden, as cleared of
all crime, unless conuincing proof be made against him, yet relying upon the
assistance of a good cause, I will adventure to try what satisfaction my
weakness may afford, in the behalf of my Catholic Mother, and her best
children, who stand accused without any proof at all.

THE I. CALVMNIE.
Their enemies say they are not only the covetous, but the greatest cheaters
in the world.

THE XII. REFLECTION.
MADAME, in the first place, please to esteem I speak to those that have
abused your honor and us, not to your self.

THE I. PARAGRAPHE.
THEY, (to wit Monastical persons) are not only covetous etc. This is said
with as much facility, as hardly proved: and God be thanked, it is as easily
denied as affirmed. What grownd in reason then has the Calumniatour got hereby
but the mark of a bold follow, who is as forward in aduanceing as slow in
proving.

THE II. PARAGRAPHE.
THEY are not only the covetous. They. Which they, I pray? it is a word of so
large an exte^t that I believe you never meant to make it good. If they extend
to all of that profession, you have taken a huge work in hand. They are
dispersed all the world over. Asia wants them not. Africa is not unacquainted
with them. Europe is full of them, in every Kingdom, in every Province, in
each good Town, all the country over. I pray you have you had commerce with
them all to discrye their covetousness?

THE III. PARAGRAPHE.
THEY have further penetrated into the other world: they are spread all over it:
and by good right, since by their labors, and danger, and blood, and death
they converted it to the Catholic faith, and found wives enough to people a
great part of it (without the help of nuns in the way of your counsel?) have
you traveled thither too? I suppose not; for I guess by your language of what
tribe you are. I conceive you are of that little flock which keeps at home in
a corner; and never have occasion to brag of the nations you have converted
into Christ's fold, or do in your next suggestion to my L. New castle, declare
which they were. Honor your profession by naming them. If not, well take it
for granted that you cannot; and conclude you Calumniatours.

THE IV. PARAGRAPHE.
WAS it happly by report that you heard this bad news of your neighbor, whom
you never saw nor knew? Its probable you took them up too lightly, and he that
easily believes is held light of faith. Charity would have taught you rather
to have suppressed such bad reports, which tend to your Christian brothers
prejudice, and rather to have believed the best till you had known the worst.
Its easy you know to mistake, misreport, and lie at a distance; and
trauellours are held subject to that desease.

Had you limited this vaste word They to some one or a few persons, or at least
fastened it upon some one, or a few orders, or countries, you might have gained
some credit with such as have credulity enough to take your bare word for good
payment, and perhapps we should not have disputed a thing which might have been
incide^t among so many: but to strike at all at once, without bringing the
least evidence against any one at all, is a thing certainly which sober
persons will take for such as it is, a mere calumny.

But to go to the ground of things, in all probability this aspersion can
have but little truth in it: for this supposed covetousness must either be
verified of Superiors, or subjects. If of subjects, there is truly but little
appearence of it, they having nothing that they can either dispose of, at their
own pleasure, or even term their own: what better means, could even
wisdom devise to banish all covetousness? And what reason is there then to
induce them so earnestly to thirst after riches? If of superiors, me thinks,
it might be more charitably termed a just care to provide for, and conserve
those great families of the poor of Christ who are entrusted in their hands,
then covetousness etc. since according to S. Paul, he that has not care of
his own, and especially of his domestikes, he has denied the faith, and is
worse then an infidel. Indeed had they had wife and children to provide for,
and the free power to dispose of what by their covetousness they could
procure, as your Ministers have, one might have had better grounds to have
suspected them, according to the great Bacon, in his Essaies. But Monastical
persons, who by solemn vows have abandoned all that they either have, or
might hope for: they that have noe such clogges upon them, as have your
Ministers: they that can have nothing in propriety without having at the same
time the Churches excommunications and curses upon them, as is evident in her
ancient Canons: That they, I say, should be so eager after riches, is a
paradoxe, which such are only capable of, as have least reason, and most
malice for their guides.

THE II. CALVMNIE.
They bring in ceremony for gain.

THE XIII. REFLECTION.
THEY etc. which they again? Does this they refer to some one order, or to
all orders? and that over all the world universally; or in some part of the
world only? Or else are all the professors of the Catholic faith meant by
that short word they? Again they bring in ceremony? Which, where, when, how?
not a word of all this. To wit calumniatours love to trade in generalities,
wherein lies are not so easily discovered. Should they point out any one order
in particular, which has general approbation in the Catholic Church, they
would find the youngest of them to be older then their Church: and thence it
is, that they neither name the thing, the time, nor the place. That so they
may be sure not to be caught, but where the calumny falls there it should lie
without possible control And putt case some ceremonies were anciently brought
in (nor do we contend they were all from the beginning) might not a more modest
interpretation have been putt upon them by a Christian then an aim of lucre;
Might they not have been esteemed useful to set of Gods service with more
decency and Majesty? Things that are of homely, common, and vulgar use, are
also but of a vulgar esteem, and quickly run into contempt with the people.
Saint Augustine could make a better construction of the Ceremonies of his time,
to Wit, that they were a certain mute eloquence, delivering wholesome doctrine,
suited to move the affections of the unlearned, conueying their hearts from
things visible to invisible, from corporal to spiritual, from temporal to
eternal things. And says excellently in another place: that those that pray,
fit the parts of their body to a posture beseeming a suppliant, as when they
kneel upon their knees, spread out their arms, or cast themselves prostrate
upon the ground (ceremonies or pious practices which Monastical persons and
the Catholic Church is well acquainted with) or any action which they perform
visibly, howeuer their heart is otherwise known to God, who needs not those
external actions to have their minds ly open to him, but man rather needs
them to excite himself thereby to pray and groan with more humility and
fervor. And I know not how it comes to pass, that whereas those corporal
motions are noe otherwise caused then by the preceedant motion and order of the
mind, yet they being visibly performed, the interior invisible motion which
caused them, is reciprocally increased, and thereby the affectien of the heart,
which preceeded to cause those effects, because they are performed, is
augmented. Here you may observe a better use of ceremonies, a spiritual gain
apparently aimed at. And how, I pray, came they so well acquainted with the
consciences of Monastical persons as to know their harees intention? I durst
be sworn they were never at confession with any such profane Priests, as take
it for their task to decrie their lives and ceremonies.

THE II. PARAGRAPHE.
MADAME, I believe there is but too much said to people that speak in the
air, without any limitation at all neither particularising the ceremonies, nor
persons which use them. If they mean of the ceremonies of the Catholic Church
in general, I shall own that glorious crime and as willingly grant they are
used, and that in great number, as absolutely deney, and reject as a calumny
that they have either been brought in of late, or used for gain; but
contrariwise most decently and religioussy, to serve that great Majesty in the
comliest way we are able, and to keep up the memory of the life and passion
of our blessed Savior, (they being a continual expression thereof exposed to
the eyes of the people) we confess we are lovers of order, as being the
beauty of the universe. We know that what comes from God comes with order and
decency. And therefore we profess that we hate that anarchie and confusion,
which old Tertullian set out to the life, saying.

I will not omit to describe the manner of proceeding amongst heretics, how
babbling and indecent, how low and earthly, and how sauering of flesh and blood
it is: without gravity, without authority, without order or discipline, as
being suitable in very deed to their belief. In the first place, it appears
not among them, who is a Catecumene, and who one of the faithful: they go
pell mel togeither, and hear the same service; and say the same prayers. Nay
should even a pagan chance to come, they will throw holy things to dogs, and
gemmes (though otherwise false ones) to swine. They term simplicity an
overthrow of discipline: and our desire to conserve it, an affected allurement.
They communicate promiscuously with all sorts of people. For though they be of
diverse opinions; it matters not, so they conspire all togeither to the
overthrow of truth. They are all swelled up with pride: all of them promise
knowledge. They are perfect Catecumenes before they be instructed. How malepart
are the very heretical women, having the boldness, to teach, to dispute, to
exorcise, to promise cures, yea happly to baptize in public. Their manner of
giving orders is light, rash, inconstant. Sometimes they prefer Neophites,
sometimes secular persons and sometimes again our very Apostates, that they
might oblidge them at least by glory, whom they cannot by Truth. A man never
meets with preferment with more facility then in the tents of Rebel's, where
their very being there, posses for worth and merit. Hence one is Bishope to
day, and to morrow another: today a Deacon, to morrow a Lector. Today a Priest,
to morrow a Layman. For they impose Preistly functions upon lay people.

THE III. PARAGRAPHE.
MADAME, this excellent description of an Heretic was Tertullians who lived
and putt it down 1400. years a go, while he could neither be suspected of
thinking of aduantageing ourcause, nor preiudiceing yours. Yet had we not named
the Author of it, who would not have thought it had been divised to point out
the miserable times wherein we live, so absolutely does it come home to what we
daily see among the sectaries? Is there any thing more abject, earthly, and
fleshily, then the beggarly way wherein God is served among them; while they
make a jest of our grave, graceful, and ancient ceremonies? Their practices
are accompaigned with noe gravity, noe authority, noe discipline: so that any
honest gentleman is served with more state in his private house, then God there
publikly in his temple. Does not the Priest appear just such as the people?
mounting into the pulpet noe otherwise accoutred then though he were to walk
abroad about some ordinary affair, with his cloak, his hatt, and his gloves
on; unless you would say he is differenced from his flock by his inbrodded
nightcappe and velvet cussion, and so is fitted rather for an after noones
nappe, then a good instruction. Do they not all run promiscuously to the same
Church, and the same service (unless their zeal lead them rather; into some
tubb, or chimney corner to babble) as well the Caluinist, as the Lutheran; as
well the Quaker, the seeker, and the expecter, as the Brownist, the adamite,
and the familist of love, with all the rest of the confused tribes, without any
visible means to discern them, or to discover what they hold, or what they
practice. May not the Jew, and gentile, and cuen the Turk himself step in
amongst them, and fall to such fare as he finds upon the table without ever
being questioned who he is, or whence he came? (they says Tertullian
communicate indifferently with all sorts of people) see how bountiful they
are while we are the Covetous, and what an open house is kept, where all enter,
eat, drink, and welcome, without paying a penny. We, say they at least, sell
our ceremonies, and they, (grant we with Tertullian,) give away, or cast away,
their very Sacraments, gratis they cast their holy things to dogs. We,
forsooth, make money of all: while they throw gemmes even to swinne.

THE IV. PARAGRAPHE.
THEY laugh at our simplicity, as being destructive of discipline. And their
wisdom ought surely to be magnified, who keep it up so gloriously, as you
have already heard. They laugh, I say, at the simplicity of the poor, blind,
credulous, mislead Catholic, (they qualify them as they please) because they
be leeue what they understand not, though they were long since taught by S.
Augustine, that not the viuacitie of under standing but the simplicity of
beleiuing, is the peoples greatest security. They laugh at the silly
Catholic, I say.

Because they captiuate their understanding to the obedience of faith by S.
Paul's counsel.

Because they stick to authority, to which they owe their belief, howeuer S.
Augustine assures them; that they owe their belief to authority.

Because they walk in the footstepps of their fore fathers, conseruing the
same Doctrine, sacrifice, Sacraments, and ceremony, which ancient tradition
delivered into their hands. O happy and gloriours errors!

They, the while, with their proud promises of knowledge, have indeed taught
the people wit enough, not to give credit, even to themselves, who are but men
and may lie; and so having broken down the hedge, and enlarged the Fathers
bounds, they have exposed the doctrine, and discipline of the Church, to be
torn in pieces by the people, who deliciously feast themselves with their
own inventions, while they interpret all that they read in Scriptures, and
that those new masters have taught them, to their own fancies, as those new
masters also delivered to them what they had invented, and composed after their
own fancies. If Luther and Calvin took to themselves the Privilege to forge
new opinions, why should not the Lutheran, and Caluinisticall Ministers
inherit that prerogative? And if they enjoy that liberty of coining, why
should not a part of the power descend upon the flock, that the improuement of
the doctrine may sinypathise with the sourse whence it took its origin? In
the interim they have brought their hogs to a fair market. But we must not
laughed at them; nay rather ought we to lament, and commiserate their misery.

THE III. CALVMNIE.
They set all Gods mercyes to sale: for what sins cannot be bought for
money, as adultery, inceft, murder, blasphemy, sins past and present.

THE XIV. REFLECTION.
HERE enters more lies then lines: five many slanders vented with one breath.
You Will pardon me, friends, I cannot believe you. Especially when you deliver
your selves in such vaste generalities: that all Gods mercyes should be set to
sale, all without exception: had it been but some few of them, and by some few,
we might have looked upon it with some fear, that there might be yet some
Judas amongst us, who would not only sell Christ mercies, but even Christ
himself: or some Simon, that would have bought or sold the gift of the holy
Ghost for money; but that the practice of the whole Catholic Church, should be
to sell all, or any, of Gods mercies, I cannot believe you. I my self have
been a Catholic these many years, and yet I was never taught it. We have
store of Sermons at Paris, and yet I never heard it. We have Catechismes, in
great number, and yet I never read it. We have the Council of Trent which
delluers many things that are not much aggreeable to your dainty palates, and
yet you cannot point it out there neither. But contrarily, had you had as much
mind to discover truths, as to publish falfities, you might have there met
vith as much care as men assisted by the holy Ghost might easily have put
down, to have prevented, or at least, punished, all covetousness, and base
trading in holy things, as appears by the 21. sess. the 1. cap. Whereas
Ecclesiastical persons ought to be free from all suspicion (not only for the
thing) of covetousness: Let neither Bishops, and others who have power to
confer orders, nor their servants under what pretext socuer, take anythinge
for the conferring of any orders what soever, though but the first tonsure. Nor
yet for their dim ssorie letters, testimonialls, the seal, or any other cause
what soever, yea though it were even freely offered. Marry the Notaries (in
those places only where the laudable custom of taking nothing is not in
vigor) may receive for every Dimissorie or testimonial letter, the tenth part
of a crown and noe more, so that they have noe set stipend for executing
their office, nor any emolument accrue to the Bishope out of the Notaries
profits, by reason of the collation of those orders, either directly or
indirectly. For in case they have any stipend, the Council does decree that
the Notarie is bound to give his pains wholly gratis; forbidding and
disannulling all other taxes, statutes, and customs, though of time out of
mind, of what places soever, which ought rather to be termed abuses, and
corruptions which savor of simoniacall wickedness. And let them that do
contrary to this, as well the giuers as the receivers, incur de facto,
besides the divine wroth, the punishment inflicted by the Law.

What more exact care, or even a kind of pious solicitude, could be expressed
in words, especially by men who stand here indibted to be marcha^ts of Gods
mercies. Certainly wife and modest men will judge, that this was the way
rather to shut up the shope for ever, then to inuit customers, where they were
like to spend their money not in buying Gods mercy, but in drawing his curse
upon their heads.

In the 24. sess. 18. Chap. You might have read (and have profited by it) what
care is used by the Church of God in the choice of good Pastors, and what
provision is made to prevent base trading as well in them, as in those that are
deputed to examine them, which are to be Masters, Doctors, or Licenciates etc.
who swear upon the holy Gospel, that they will faithfully discharge their
duty therein without any humane affection or respect. Let them be wary, says
the Council, to take any thing in respect of this examination either before
or after. Otherwise let them, as well the taker as the giver incur, or be
held guilty of, the crime of Simonie, from which they cannot be absolved, till
they dismiss those benefices, which they had obtained before in any way
whatsoever, and they shall become incapable to obtain any benefice for ever
after. And be they oblidged to render an account of all these primises, not
only in the presence of God, but also in the Provincial Synod if need
require.

Here one would think, that hands, and purses, and consciences were so
absolutely tied up, that none that pretended either to religion, or public
honor, or even his own advantage, should be given to such base, irreligious
and gainelesse tradinge, where he runs an evident hazard to loose more then he
can probably gain, and his soul to boot. So far, in all probability, are
Catholics above all others, from being liable to the base slanders which are
put upon them of setting all Gods mercies to sale. Whereof were they otherwise,
some of them, guiltic, yet were the Church free from crime, which used all
possible means to prevent, and punish the same.

In the 22. sess. in the Decree de Missa you might have found more endeavor
used to shut up all passages by which base trading might be suspected to creep
in. The holy Synod (says the Council) does decree that the Bishops who are
Ordinaries of the places, should use all possible endeavor, as we oblidge them,
to prohibit, and absolutely take away all those things, which either
covetousness, service of Idols, irreuerence, which falls not far shert of
impiety, or superstition, that false imitatrice of true piety, has brought
in. And to comprehend many things in a few words: to begin, in the first place
with covetousness, let them absolutely prohibit all conditions, pacts and
bargains of what kind of reward soever, and what ever is paid for saying new
Masses: as also all importune and unbeseeming (...) base exactions of alms,
rather then humble requests for the same, and other things of the like nature,
which do not much differ from the stayne of Simonie, or at the least from
fordide lucre.

What, I pray, can be added to this care? or what more should be said, to make
you see; (if malice shut not both your eyes and understanding at the same time)
you have said amiss of those that deserve it not, and have set the sadle upon
the wrong horse. Avarice is quite banished from our Mansions. Whether it may
not reign in your small Conuenticles, where the Minister is oblidged
(according to my Lord Bacon that great light of England his observation
intimated above) to water more holes then one at once, (to wit to provide for
his wife and children) look you tot, I love not to recriminate.

But if you will needs turn a deaf ear to all this, and go on with your
slanders by way of interrogatorie what sins cannot be bought for money, as
adultery etc. [as though it were so visible as none could but see it; and so
demonstratiuely evident, as none could deny it, while you bring not one word or
piece of a word, or even a specious lie to make good the greatest calumnies
that can be cast upon an innocent] What place of defense is left us, but
appeal to the world, whether there be any safety for Innocence, if bare
accusations pass for proofs? and to the right which Justice deneys none, that
while noe proof is made of an imposed aspersion, the accused may legally purge
himself, by protesting an injury is done him, as all the Catholic Church
protestes. Where, in the name of God [for I have still a curiosity to hear
what malice, being put to it, can inuent] where was it that this supposed
adultery, incest, murder blasphemy, should have been bought and sold?
speak out, men, or hold your peace for ever; the crime is too great, the world
too just to take your bare word fort: can you not, at least, hyre some knight
of the post to swear it? That passes for lawful among some of your Saints,
as I have heard, and yet we are not so unjust as to cast the buying and selling
of perjury, much less all other sins, upon your whole Church, as you do
upon ours. You are told you lie; because you make my innocent mother, a
huckester of sin, a chaferer in adultery, incest, murder: a bawd in
blasphemy. I would not use that offensive word did not the world see I am
concerned in honor and duty, and that indeed there is noe fence against a
bare affirmation, but as bare a negation.

Speak at least being provoked, play the men, and defend yourselues; or all
honest men will take notice, that you cannot, and because you cannot, you are
calu^niatours. In what part of the world was this infamous trading driven? In
what market, was this vile merchandise exposed to sale? who were the sellers,
and who the chapmen, and upon what price did they agree? and for what quantity
of this corrupted stuff dealt they? Were the buyers, and sellers, and market
place, and all invisible? then happly you may say, they lay inuisibly skulking
in the bosom of our Church, as yours was said sometimes to have done, and so
were invisible indeed, but yet were, as well as your Church truly was, when
none could find it by looking behind Luther. Credat Iudeus Apella: But for my
part, believe me, though we Catholics pass for the most credulous, yet have
not I weakness of credulity enough to fall into such a fancy, as to believe,
that you (though you have an impotent power of seeing what none else can see;
that yet you, I say, have eyes to see what is invisible; that is, to see what
cannot be seen; that is, to see, what is not. If you have any eyes, you will
see the truth of what I say; and if you have any shame left, you will hold your
peace.

THE IV. CALVMNIE.
As for whores, they permit them to live loosely without punishment, and allot
them streets and houses to increase sin.

THE XV. REFLECTION.
HERE, Madame, comes in a medlie of mixed merchandise, paucheto de l'vn, and
paucetto de lautro; some sound, some corrupt, so unhappily iumbled togeither,
that there needed noe more to spoil the whole, and to make the assertion a
calumny. As for whores they permit, or tolerate, them to live loosely: thus
far, as for me, it should have past for granted: because I have often heard
it reported, howeuer at the first blush it seems to have noe good face: But
when they add, without punishment, I smell a ratt, and cry corruption. They
allot them streets (or a street at least) to increase sin, This again I am
forced to cry against, as the naughty leaven, which spoils the whole lump
or batch.

Here, Madame, they may seem to leave the body and aim at the head: knowing
well that their malice will be derived upon them both. They strike at my
father, hoping to wound both father, and mother, and children with the same
blow. We have heard of a dume child restored to speech, upon an apprehended
danger toward his father. And should I be struck dumme, contrarily, upon this
assacinate, where both fathers and Mothers, and mine own destruction, are
equally aimed at? I confess a woman's words, especially so inconsiderable as I
am, are but a poor defense; yet where I was not able to speak a perfect
defense, in a matter of fact which I knew not perfectly, I found I was able
enough to cry for aid. The truth is, I had recourse to a friend, very
intelligent, and honest beyond all exception, who had diverse times been an eye,
and ear witness of that fact etc. and he had the goodness presently to take
his pen, and putt down, what I found full satisfaction; and I hope, such will
your honor, and all lovers of truth, find it. And certainly it will afford
light enough, to lead you out of that mist, wherein many have stumbled at a
molehill and strayed: and discover how ill you have been dealt withal herein.
Please then, Madame, to hear my noble friend, who (having been three several
times for a good space togeither at Rome) delivers the fact as follows.

THE I. PARAGRAPHE.
MISTRESS, I cannot but smyle all alone in my country chamber, at this sodden
surprise, where, while I inioye the delights of a high peace, you call me to
wars, in the defense of our common father, where an equal duty oblidgesme to
an equal readiness. You seem to be in some little disorder; But fear not
woman, it is but a false Alarm, there will be noe hurt done. Rome stands at a
great distance far enough beyond their Canon shot, what need we to fear
their squibbes and slinges then? Its a strong town, and well guarded The Pope
is a good man, and frequent reports give him to be a Saint: be consident his
holiness and innoce^cie of life, will be found proof against their malice;
the reports of the whores, if they be rightly reported, will be able to fasten
noe staynes upon him, or upon the chair which he does illustrate. But lets
laugh a while in our sleeue togeither, before we begin. What? Is our
adversaries fury run out to so low an ebb, that it can bear nothing of
weight or bulk? Have they spent all their shot upon our impregnable
Fortresses; and now fall they to small play rather then sit out, by fireing on
our out works with flashes of powder only; which gives crakes, but hurtes
not; serves to terrify children, but makes men laugh, to observe, that their
pride and splenne is great indeed, but their horns short. Et vana sine
viribus ira? So that having in vane spent their powder and shot, they fall to
child's play. They lay down their swords, and muskets, and pikes, and fall a
throwing the dirt of other men's vices upon us; that at least, they may besmeere
their clothes. whose bodies they are not able to wound. Well let them vanely
went the rest of their collar, while we deliver the truth of the fact to such
noble souls, as would hold it a crime to detayne Truth prisoner in mistakes.
And so lets to the great business, upon which, you would say, the fortunes of
Greece depends.

THE II. PARAGRAPHE.
MISTRESS, The Protestants [or who else they may be who will needs stumble at
something which their imagination gives them, lies in the way] are mistaken in
the fact: for it is most certain, that the Pope takes neither fine, nor tax,
nor rent, nor yearly tribute, to permit, or tolerate sin, much less to
authorize, or increase it for a sum, which is falsely reported. So that while
they affirm, and yet prove nothing, one short Nego, is all that is due to
them for an answer. He gives no leave [I confidently auerre it] nor
approbation, nor countenance to that filthy commerce of the whores. But
contrarily, discountenanceth, dehorts, punishes them, and hinders their
increase with great care, watchfullnesse, and cost. All that know Rome know
this to be most true, if they be owners of any brains to have made
observation, and honor, to speak the truth. I appeal to their ingenuitie,
whether those naughty women, be not discountenanced, curbd, and kept short, by
what care civil government can suggest For.

First, they are prohibited to come to any public meetings, or assemblies,
where women of hononr meet, as at the Course and other places.

2. They are prohibited to go in coaches, or stir out of doors on the night.

3. They are prohibited to live in common one with another, least they might
encourage one another in their wickedness: and are forced to live separate and
alone, left single to the melancholy horror of such a solitude, as is only
accompaigned with a bad conscience (a home bred punishment) which a wise Poet
will have to pass the huge torments of Busyris his burning brazen Bull. Having
much leisure to hear God speak to their hearts, many of them enter into
themselves, and change their abominable, and even painful lives; confessing
with the Wiseman, that they are worn out in the Ways of iniquity.

4. They are prohibited to use any allurement by words or signs: that is,
either by calling in passingers, or making any uncivil or tempting signs with
hand or head.

5. In holy times, as Lent etc. they are forced to go to sermons, where
greatest diligence is used to dehort, and deter them from that damnable
course of life, by thundering Preachers placing death, judgment, heaven and
Hell fire, before their eyes, with the greatest force and life that pious
eloquence is able to set them out, as being the most powerful arguments to
strike such rebellious hearts with fear, the beginning of wisdom; and
consequently, the most effectual means to reclaim them.

6. They are not only, dehorted discountenanced etc. but they are also
punished both corporally and spiritually: both in soul, body, and fortunes. In
their life, they are forbidden all the Sacraments, or excommunicated etc. At
their death, unless they be changed from their badd life, they are not
permitted to make their last will and Testament, but all their goods are
confiscated. Stay -- not to the Popes coffers (which our antipopes were gaping
after) but to the Hospitalls: and their bodies are refused Christian burial,
being thrown into a place near the walls of the City, hard by the Porta del
populo, Where, in detestation and punishment of their sin, they have noe
other then the Asses burial.

And that the said restraintes might not be proiected only, but punctually
executed: there are public officers who have continually a watchful eye over
them, and other malefactors, that they might not transgress against the
former prohibitions, or otherwise. And to perform their office more
effectually, they take a list of all the whores names, that they might know
who they are, and where; and be able to force them to the Sermons appointed,
should they at any time be found negligent.

4. The Pope does not only discountenance, dehorte, punish, and put a strict
watch over them, to see all the premises observed. But, yet further, his
Holiness endeavors to hinder the increase of them by his own great care and
cost: for first he causes young girls, not yet marrigable, to be taken (at
ten year old, or there about) from their poor parents, least they might be
tempted by poverty (quoe cogit ad turpia) to prostitute those innocents: and
these girls he causes to be carefully brought up in a cortaine hospital
purpose y designed for that pious work. And when they come to be of riper
years, they are provided with sufficient portions, either to espouse God or
man, that is, either to choose Monasteries, or Marriage.

For this purpose there is a most solemn and devout procession made every
year to the Dominicans Church, by three or four hundred of these young
girls, all clad in white (and those that will be Nuns, have little crowns upon
their heads, and white wax candles in their hands) to the Dominicans Church,
where his Holiness expects them in person, and gives every one of those poor
girls a purse full of money, to enable them either to become Nuns or Wives.

Is this, Madame, as they basely obtrude upon you, and falsely impose upon the
Pope, to permit whores to line loosely without punishment? Is this, to allot
them streets and houses to increase sin? Is this, to authorize sin for a
sum? Is this, to pay Tribute to the Church? Or rather is it not one of the
fowlest and falsest imputations, that ever can be cast upon a Souueraigne
Prince, and head of the Church? And one of the most base, unworthy, and
unchristian actions imaginable, to make use of the ignorance of a fact, at a
great distance (wherein few are able, and fewer willinge to take the pains to
disabuse themselves) to beget badd impressions in all those [wherof the world
is but too full] who eatily lend open ears to such scandalous reports, to the
prejudice of their Christian brethren whom they are bound to love? Is this, I
say to permit them to line loosely without punishment? since in very deed
they are punished in the civil liberty which other women inioye; in their
reputation, being marked out, and known to all the world for such as they are:
in their consciences, being deprived of the Sacraments. In their purse, not
having power to dispose of that Mammon of iniquity which by their infamous
commerce, or otherwise, they might have gained. Finally in their body or dead
corpse, it being denied Christian burial. Is this to allot streets and houses,
to increase sin, to withdraw the young grouth [the poor girles] whereby they
might have probably been recruted? Is this to authorize sin for a sum, to
employ large sommes for the conversion of those that are already unfortunately
fallen into that abominable tradinge, and to hinder others to follow their
wicked example? So far is it from truth that the Church receives any tribute
by them, that it imployes the vigor of good government, much care, and cost,
to reclayme them.

So that we may justly conclude, that the whores at Rome are not permitted
without punishment: Which yet our enemies affirmed; and we put it down for the
first CALVMNIE.

That they have not streets allotted to increase their sin; which our
enemies auerred: and it is their second CALVMNIE.

That sin is not authorized for a sum; which our enemies asserted; and it
is their third CALVMNIE.

That they pay not tribute to the Church: as they falsely imposed, and it is
their fourth CALVMNIE.

Deal fairly with us; put down all these in capitale letters for Calumnies;
and let them be fixed upon the Calumniatours foreheades, and we will more
cheerfully go on to the ensuinge charges.

THE V. CALVMNIE.
They authorize sin for a sum etc. and not only sins past, and present,
but to come. Witness the years of Jubilee.

THE XVI. REFLECTION.
THAT there is noe sin at all authorized by the Pope, or the Catholic
Church, either past, present, or to come, as to the whores, has been already
proved, and the contrary is marked down for a calumny, if right be done us.
But whereas that which they bring for a proof of it (to wit witnesses the
years of Jubilee) seems not to relate to the whores alone, but is even
extended though most unjustly, to the whole body of the Catholics, it ought
not to pass without giving some better account of it self, nor shall it.

THE I. PARAGRAPHE.
MADAME, had the year of Jubilee indeed, this strange unheard of, boundless
power, of not only pardoning sins past and present, but withal of authorizing
sin to come for a sum, I must needs confess, it were a great Jubilee
indeed, and we should never need more then one, unless we were madd not to
make so comfortable a provision, when so fair an occasion is offered. But
since the Catholic Church does not only disowne, but even detest, and protest
against it as a most abominable Calumny.

I scarce know here whether I should rather vish to be Democritus or
Heraclitus. Democritus, to laugh at their blind ignorance to adventure to
speak of things they are so little versed in: Or Heraclitus, to weep at their
intolerable malice to speak point blanke against their knowledge and
conscience: and to force in a witness by head and shoulders, to stand up in a
cause which he never either saw, or heard, or even dreamed of: witness, say
they, the years of Jubilee. This is the highth of baseness. Yet hold on, do
your worst, we defye you; use what violence you can, you shall never be able to
wrest a word out of our Iubilies to your advantage which publishes justice and
peace indeed to the repentant sinner. But makes noe Outcrye, or open sale of
authority to sin for a sum. Speak for your selves if you have any
relics of worth, or wit, or even impudency left you, which you have not
already degorged. Your honors are at stake, and should you bring noe apparent
proofs at least, after such prouocations your own very friends would leave
you for impostours. In what Council of ours, in what Catechism, do you find
it out? Read it out of some of our Divines, or controuertistes, who have
written large volumes of the power etc. of Indulgences: Read, I say, that
sins past; present and to come, are authorized for a sum in the years of
Jubilee. And the world will see you lied not gratis, and Well all put a curse
upon that Rock of Scandal, upon which you stumbled. Look back to former
times, if you list, and read it out of some of our sworn enemies, and even
that will plead a part of an excuse. Run back to the Waldensians those
blindbeggers of Lions, the first visible opposers of Indulgences and beg some
poor aid from them. Indulgences, say they, which the Pope grantes, are
nothing at all worth. But this falls far short. Run to Wicklife that homebred
Monster Its a fond thing, says he, to give credit to the Popes and Bishopps
Indulgences. This does partly outvie these others, yet comes not home. Run to
Luther, heir apparent to those illustrious ancesters, and best improuer of
that noble inheritance, Who was as foul mouthed an Apostle, as one would wish,
if we believe S. Thomas Moore who leaves him cacantem cauatumque. Which words
as any one may easily guess by the affinity they have With the french, mark
him out for a beastly fellow.

THE II. PARAGRAPHE.
INDVLGENCES are the most impious deceipts, of most wicked Popes whereby they
cheat, and loose the goods and souls of the faithful. This is to speak out,
in my conceit, and yet we hear not of authorizing sin past, present, and to
come, for a sum. So that this testimony is most due to you, and you shall
not want it, that through you be but younger brothers, you have yet outstript
all that ever went before you in a lawless impudency.

But what you cannot find in our authors or Church (should you even burst for
it) to wit sins past, present, and to come, authorized for a sum in the
years of Jubilee: What if I should find in yours, and cost you nothing, noe
sum at all. Look toward Luther, hes a good fellow, and will deal more
liberally with you. Look upon him, I say, and you shall not only find a
Plenarie Indulgence, far more ample then ever Pope durst grant it, for sins
past present and to come, but even an absolute sauegard from all danger to
boot, save only infidelity. A Christian, or baptized person, says he, is so
rich, that, although he would he cannot loose his salvation by any sin, how
great soever, unless he will not believe. Or if you live nearer France go to
Calvin, and there too you may have the Pardon of the Jubilee years for sins
past present and to come, without paying a penny. At what time soever, says
he, we be baptized, we are at once washed and cleansed for all our life. In
baptism is obtained perpetual and continual forgiveness of sins even unto
death. These are gallant men, Madame, and find ways to save their followers (in
a manner will they nill they) without all the pains, and care, and cost, which
we Catholics are wont to be put to, as your Ho will please to hear; for now I
am resolved to leave those Calumniatours, and deliver to your La in all
sincerity what I have been always taught by my Catholic Mother in this
behalf.

THE III. PARAGRAPHE.
PLEASE then to know, Madame, and be it known to all those that may have
received bad impressions by the foresaid slanders, that the Catholic Religion
teaches not that sins past, present, and to come can be pardoned, much less
authorized for a sum, either by Iubiles or otherwise but protests against it
as a Calumny.

2. That our Jubilee years, and our Indulgences, neither puts a penny into
the Popes purse, nor takes a penny out of ours, but such as we freely and
without constainte give charitably to the poor, or bestow in other pious
uses: And this I affirm absolutely upon mine own knowledge, never in fifty
years space having met with any iniunction or practice to the contrary.

3. That noe sins at all are pardoned, nor pretended to be pardoned in our
Iubilies, independently of the Sacramental absolutions we receive in the
Courts of Penance, to which the sinner is remitted to have pardon for his
sins, as they were remitted by our Savior Christ, and his forerunner Saint
John: Do every one of you penance: and again: unless you do penance, you
shall perish all togeither.

4. That sins are neither remitted in the Court of Conscience, nor by our
Iubilies, save only by the Sacrament of Penance, consisting of Contrition,
Confession, and Satisfaction that is, by sorrow to have offended so divine a
Majesty; by an humble and sinceere confession of our faults in the ears of a
Priest approved, and satisfaction according to his iniunction, or the measure
of our crimes. This is our faith, this is our common and approved practice.
Which is indeed so rational and so satisfactorie, even to common sense, that
I cannot dream what the most critical brain can have to say to it. A person
of honor is offended by injurious words, or actions etc. The offender
conceiues hearty sorrow for it; he expresses that sorrow by a sincere, and
humble Confession of his fault, he testifies himself ready to give what
satisfaction may be judged competent, to the worthy person offended. What more
can be desired by any man. And yet, Madame, if the Catholic practice be
pretended to go at any less, it is either taken up upon credit, or gathered
from some particular Authors within the large compass of the Catholic
Church, whose single and loose practices, are neither believed nor approved by
the same Church, and consequently are unworthily imposed upon her, and her
dutiful children.

THE IV. PARAGRAPHE.
NOR is this, Madame, (as they falsely say) to have a countenance, forsooth,
for covetousness. But to have a second and sure table after the shipwrake of
sin, which is bought by noe other sum but the repentant tears, of a
contrite and an humbled heart, which being stamped by Gods grace, are by all
Catholics held to be current money in the sight of God, without the addition
of any other sum, as is basely asserred, and imposed upon Catholics, without
all ground of truth, saying: (as it were in the person of a Catholic) That the
offendants must have a true Contrition, or their sum of Money will do them
noe good, noe more then will a true Contrition without the sum. Let those
slaunderers produce at least one Catholic Author, who holds this abomnable
opinion, (and the Catholic Church will anathematise him) to free their credit:
or it will be taken for granted, that it is more then they can do, and noe
less indeed then an absolute Calumny, unless it be a sum that ought to be
restored to the right owner, before the sin can be absolved, according to
that ancient Maxim; non absoluit^r peccarum nisi restituatur ablatum, Such is
the Justice of Gods Church, of hich there is noe practice among those that live
without, as your Honor well knows, and noe protestante can deney.

Thus far have I delivered what is not taught by, but falsely imposed upon,
the Catholic Church, to remove all such causeless Calumnies. Now, Madame,
with your permission, will I pass on to put down what I have been always
taught in the same Church. That you may clearly see from what sourse that
power of Indulgences is derived, and how ancient they are. And with what
effects and fruits they are practiced amongst us.

And wherasnow, while I writes ese things, it has pleased God to send us a
Jubilee, which all Paris is endeavoring to gain, I have judged it not out of
the way of our present discourse, to bring you acquainted with the form and
teneur of it, word for word as it lies in the Popes Bull; which being, in some
passages, attended with short observations, may happily prove more
satisfactorie, then any other thing could be said upon that subject.

The Universal Jubilee granted by our holy Father Pope Alexander, by the
divine providence the seventh of that name, to implore Gods grace and
assistance in the present necessity of the Church.

ALEXANDER Pope the seventh to all faithful Christians to whom these
presents shall come, health and Apostolical Benediction. Casting the eyes of
our soul, from the most eminent Sea of the Church, upon all the parts of the
world; and attentively considering the continual calamities which afflict the
flock wherewith we are entrusted from above, we are not able to repress the
frequent sobbs which burst out from the become of our heart, nor the tears
which flow from our eyes in abundance. For what heart of iron would not be
sensibly touched, with the present miseries which ouerflow the Christian world?
War is set on foo^e, and grows every day more and more obstinate among
Catholic Princes, and to appease it, all the inventions of humane prudence,
have hitherto proved vnprofitalle. In the East, the countries which were
subject to the power of a most pious common wealth, are infested by the turkish
wars of ten years continuance. In the North, a part of the kingdom of a
most Catholic king, is invaded by heretical arms: and the frontiers of the
rest, is not safe from their malice and power. In the south parts, a cruel
plague is begun, which depopula es the neighboring nations; and horribly th
eatens this capital City of the true Religion.

All is full of the terror, and just apprebensions of the miseries which
inuirone us. So that now more then ever, we resent the hand of God to lie
heavy upon us, because our crimes provoke his wroth: to appease which, though
we cease not to imploye our own sacryfices in particular, and those of others,
togeither with the oblations of prayers it out intermission, yet we judge that
we shall more promptly receive the effects which we hope from Gods mercy, if
the Prayers of all faithful Christians were joined with ours, their souls
being first purged of the sins which defile them, by the wholesome remedic of
sinceere Penance: for our good God is myld, and merciful, and pardons all
that inuoke him in sincerity of heart.

THE I. OBSERVATION.
MADAME, you will observe, that we meet with nothing yet that seems any
thing to Savor of that base trading, which our enemies would impose upon us,
nor will there any other appear in all the Bull. Marie this appears, and is
made visible and intelligible to all that have eyes to see, and ears to hear.
That ehaue a good Pastor who sleeps not, but is vigilant over all his
universal flock. That he wants not care to consider, nor bowels of mercy to
commiserate his childrens calamities, which by compassion he makes his own. He
knows that his sheep which he calls, are spread all the world over, and they
hear his call to the furdest corners of the earth, and know him, and
acknowledge him by their prompt obedience He calls them not to enrich himself
with the fleese, but to enrich them with the blessings of remission and pardon,
the fruits of Christ's Passion, entrusted in his hands. He calls them to
fasting, praying, penance, works of mercy, use of Sacraments etc. and his
order is hardly distinguished from the execution thereof: they all run: the
Emperor, King, Prelate, Prince, Priest and people, with unanimous hearts, and
joint endeavors, to make violence against heaven; and force, as it were,
necessary blessings from the hands of Mercy.

The Pope goes on. Now that all these things may be done with more fruit and
profit, and accompaigned with more fervor of Spirit, we have thought good,
following the ancient custom of the Roman Church, the Mother and Mistress of
all the rest, to open, communicate, and distribute the treasures of the same
Church, whereof we are made the Dispensers by the grace and authority of our
Savior Jesus Christ. And to this effect, on the behalf of Almighty God,
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, by Apostolical authority, withal fatherly
affection, we request, admonish, and exhort in our Lord Jesus all faithful
Christians in general of both sexes, as well those of this our holy City, as
those that are out of it, in what place soever, that they would devoutly set
upon and accomplish the things following, and that they would beseech God our
Savior, by the bowels of his mercy to vouchsafe to protect the Catholic
faith, and defend it, against the attempes and ambushes of her enemies: to
extirpate heresy: to grant peace to Christian Princes, togeither with a true
and profound tranquillity: to deliver such as are already infected with the
plague, and preserve the rest: and to succor the Church in the present
necessities which she groans under.

THE II. OBSERVATION.
WHAT appears yet but good and virtuous, and well beseeming that common
Father? He neither speaks of selling, or even giueing, out of any store of his
own, but out of the common stock of the Catholic Church. Or by any other
authority but that which was left by Jesus Christ to the Church, and derived
upon his person by lawful succession even from the Chair of Peter, erected by
Christ Jesus. Nor does he make use of this authority upon a slight occasion,
but in a general and crying calamity Nor yet does he imploye this common
treasure for any sordide lucre, or otherwise badd end, or by such indulgence to
make Christians less careful to perform good works etc. But for a most
laudable and Christian one, to thend, says he, that their fastes, prayers and
penitential practices, to which he exhortes them, may be done with more
fruit, and fervor of Spirit. Therfordoth he open, communicate, and distribute
the treasure of the same Church on the behalf of Almigh tie God, Father, onne,
and H. G. Nor does he take upon him to begin a new thing never before heard of
in the Church of God: but proceeds according to the ancient custom of the
Roman and Mother Church. Which is delivered in the Council of Trent as
follows.

Whereas the power of granting Indulgences was conferred upon the Church by
Christ; and that she used this kind of power, delivered unto her by the divine
providence, in the most anceent times; the holy Synod does teach, and
command, that the use of Indulgences, which is very profitable to all
Christians, and made good by the authority of holy Counsels, should be
retained in the Church, and does anathematise or curse all such, as either
affirm that they are unprofitable, or deny that the Church has power to
grant them. Howbeit the Council desires that moderation be used in granting
them, according to the ancient and approved custom of the Church; least
otherwise Ecclesisticall discipline might be shaken by too much facility. And
desiring that the abuses which were upon have creptin, whereby the fomous name
of indulgences is blaspheamed by the heretics, should be corrected and
amended, it orders in general by this present Decree that all base lucre for
the gayning of them, which has been a great cause of many abuses among the
Christian people, should be utterly abolished.

THE III. OBSERVATION.
HENCE you may see, Madame, that the Pope goes not along without Counsel and
authority: nor did the Council of Trent begin any neW thing, but continued
an old: running still secure in the foot stepps of Ancesters, and ancient
Counsels. But whereas neither Pope, (proceed he never so fairly, fatherly,
and Christianly) nor ancient Fathers. nor Counsels, will find any great credit
with our Souueraigne Adversaries, who may seem to say with those arrogant
persons described in the 11. Psalm The (...) (...)se of our Indulgences, is,
that power, of loosing and binding, left by our Savior to the Chuch Math. 16.
a d John 20 The practice of them Corinth 1. and 5 and 2. Cor. 2. chap.
Tertullian ad Mar. c. 1. S. Cyp l. 3. Epist 15. or ^1. in some Editions Nicene
Coun. Canon or 12. with many later ones.
(We will magnify our tongue: our lips are our own, who is our Lord) and
upon that proud account, will be their own, and the worlds great judges, I
will only out of respect to your Honor, and other lovers of truth, point at
the authorities in the margent, taking up with one passage out of S. Paul,
which me thinks should satisfy all men, and give them occasion to reflect,
that the Churches and Popes proceeding, in point of Indulgences, was drawn
upon that Original.

This holy Apostle then, Corinthians 1. and 5. planely exercises the power
which Christ S. Matthe the 16. conferred upon his Apostles, and in them to his
Church as to the first part of it, to wit, to retain sin etc. upon the
incestuous Corinthian. I indeed absent in body, says he, but present in
Spirit, have already judged in Spirit, him that has so done, in the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ etc. to deliver such an one to Satan for the destruction
of the flesh, that the Spirit may be saved in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Behold the offender excommunicated, or cut of, from the Communion of his
Christian brethren, and kept in penance for his crime. But as to the second
part of remitting or loosing etc. in the 2. to the Corinthians 2. being moved
to compassion by Tymothie, Titus, etc. he grantes him an Indulgence or pardon,
and remits the rest of his penance. For my self also that which I pardoned,
if I pardoned any thing, for you, in the person of Christ, that we be not
circumuented by Satan. Nor is the Popes Indulgence any other thing then a
remitting, or pardoning, part of Penance or satisfaction enjoined for, or
otherwise due to sin; and that too in the name, person, or by the authority
of Christ, the guilt thereof being already pardoned.

The Bull again. Wherefore we confiding in the mercy of Almighty God, and in
the authority of his blessed Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, in virtue of that
very power which we have received of our Lord Jesus Christ without any merit
of ours, to tie and untie, do grant and give by the tenure of the presents
most plenarie Indulgences, and remission of all the sins (as it is wont to be
granted in the Jubilee year etc.) to all faithful Christians that are in our
said holy city, who within the space of a month after the dare hereof, shall
fast one of the frydayes of the said month; and having first confessed their
sins, shall reverently receive the most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist. And
(least by the great concurse of people, should they visit Churches after the
ordinary manner, the infection might be increased) deuoutely say their the
Rosarie of the Blessea Virgin Marie, or the seven Penitential I salmes, with
the Litanies and prayers following, at home in their own particular; and
prayed for the foresaid purposes, and given alms to the poor as their own
charity may suggest to each one in particular. As also to all others in what
places soever without our said city, who are in places where there is noe
suspicion of the plague (which we leave to the judgments of the ordinaries of
the respective places) shall visit the Churches appointed by the said
Ordinaries, their Vicaires, Officialls, or by their order; or in want of them,
by such as have charge of souls in those places, presently after these
presents are come to their knowledge etc. The rest of the Bull I omit, as
containing only the style of the Court, togeither with the Privileges granted
to all Priests approved by lawful authority, to absolve all reserved cases:
irregulariries, Censures, changing vows etc. and permission for all Penitents
to make free choice of any Priest so approved.

THE IV. OBSERVATION.
AND, I beseech you, good Madame, hat can malice meet with in all this, I do
not say, justly liable to so black calumntes, but even not worthy of highest
commendations. A general care in a common father to excite his children to
Penance, and the practice of works of piety, and Christian charity. A
general obedience and concurrence in the children, upon their fathers call, to
complie with the said works, thereby to amend their lives, and appease Gods
wroth. He is moved by a most just cause, the common calamity, whereby he
conceiues the divine Majesty highly offended. He suggests the best means to
remove it, even that which he learnt of our Savior Jesus Christ and S. John,
Penance, and the acts thereof, fasting, praying, and alms deeds, which
extinguish sin, as water does fire. And all this, in the name, authority,
and person of Jesus Christ, as S. Paul did. And they (howeuer they are
confident of his authority) hopeing for nothing by the Popes concessions,
unless, first, by their own endeavors, and good dispositions, with the help
of the Sacraments, they be in the state of grace. In which state, and noe
otherwise, they are hopeful, in Gods mercy, to receive the effects, or fruits
of the Popes pardons; to wit, full remission of the pains, or satisfactions,
due to their sins. And yet in the name of God, what a bugge bear is this made
to deter the ignorant from pope and papist; as they please to qualify us
Catholic? As though, forsooth, he undertook to save and damme, and sell mercy
to whom he pleased: while notice is not taken the while, that the least
Minister (greater then all the popes putt togeither) arrogantly takes upon him,
to preach plenarie pardons from both the guilt and pains of sin to all
offendants, be their crimes never so ennormious (at least if not public)
without resetue, without satisfaction, without restitution, only upon a bare
repentance, which is but one part of the popes injunctions, and that only to
remitt the pain due to sin. O what a vaste, blind, prodigious bounty is
this? which renders Christians so rich, that they cannot even perish if they
would, unless they leave of, to believe: as the teneur of pope Luthers vaste
Indulgences bear.

And now, Madame, in some measure, agreeable to my weakness, having purged my
Catholic Mother, in point of the foul Calumnies cast upon her, and
vnhansomely foisted into your feast by our enemies, me thinks I am recovered
out of a foul passage, and restored to a fair plane, where I meet with a
more gentle air, and delightfully do I walk too and fro on it. For surely,
say you, Monastical lives are profitable to the common wealth: because it
keeps peace, and makes plenty, and begetts a habit of sobriety which gives a
good example, and many times draws their own mynds, though naturally
otherwise disposed, to follow the outward carriage: for the custom of the one
may alter the nature of the other etc. The next cause for plenty, they are of a
spare diet, and most of what they eat or should care by their order, is fish,
roots. etc. and the like.

Madame, Though by this discourse, your gentleness gives us enough to appear
glorious in the eyes of the world: and makes us fit subjects to find more
favor in protestant common wealths then we could ever hitherto meet with
(since we alone practice a profession, which keeps peace: makes plenty:
begetts a habit of sobriety: we use ceremonies which keeps the Church in
order, and gives it magnificence. Besides it keeps out murmr, discontent,
and idleness, which are the causes of rebellion) yet, under favor whereas, in
conclusion, you seem to doubt whether it may be any advantage to the soul
etc. we must not sit down content with these half payementes, (and the
worse, halfes too) we must not take up with driblets for consideration, with
loss of the principal. The chief aim and end of Monastical life is the
ornament, beauty, and felicity of the soul; or to say all in one word, the
perfection of charity, so far forth as it can be attaynd to in this life.
Those other temporal benedictions which acrue to the world and themselves
(intimated by your La.) from that holy profession, are but parts of the
hundredfold promised by our heavenly Master in this life, to those that
abandonne all for love, life everlasting being reserved to the next, for the
soul. As I hope your Honor will have found convinced by reason in the fourth
Chapter above; as well as by authority in the first, second, and third, where
it is made appear a tymely production of Primitive Christianity in the first.
In the second, it is graced with angelical prerogatives by the holy Fathers
unanimous votes. And in the third, laden with admirable fruits of Spirit, by
the undeniable testimonies of ancient Histories. How comes your Honor then to
go on as follows, saying.

Although rationally, one would, think that God should not take delight in
shaven heads, or bare and dirtie feet, cold backs, hungry stomachs, or any
outward habit.

THE XVII. REFLECTION.
MADAME, I cannot but look upon this passage as aremnant of the old leaven,
noe production of your better seasoned soul. This is certainly some fume
belched up from the too full belly of some fat Epicure in the middst of his
devout prayers and pious resolutions, of lets eat and drink, because to
morrow we shall dye. For this strikes not only at the bare back, and hungry
stomachs, and durtie feet of the poor Monk or friar only; but at all the
penal actions and satisfactorie works for finne, so highly praised, and
frequently practiced, by all the ancient fathers, Martyrs, and Confessors of
the primitive times. That I may not say it has a lash too even at Christ his
sacred and torn shoulders, at his laborious and paynefull actions and passion.
I am not ignorant that those libertines doctrine, and pleasures is, that his
sufferance sufficed for all, and freed us from further sufferance: but as they
are not taught this even by faith it self, which is not now the question; so,
much less are they able to persuade it by reason, which is the thing in
present agitation: for rationally one would think that God should not be
delighted in his sonns bare shoulders, his ignominious humiliations, and
public abandonment. And thence it passed for a scandal with the jews, and a
folly with the gentiles, though it were indeed the love, and mercy, and
wisdom of God.

Why should we then, Madame, ouermatche ourselves in struing to discover by the
twye-light of reason what God may be delighted in and what not, and by that
means put rocks of scandal in the way for licentious souls, which perceive
not what belongs to Spirit, to stumble at, while we have better stars to walk
by? whereas there is nothing more wholesome and secure in Christianity then
that the authority of Scripture should preceede and conduct reason, as your
La. also concluds when you leave your self purely to the guidance of your own
second and better thoughts, concluding, neither must we follow our own reason
in religion but faith, which is the guide of our conscience. Whether then
reason lead us to it or not, God may be delighted in bare shoulders etc. if
faith guideys to it; which yet can never be without reason, howeuer it may be
without the reach of it. And as for the reach of my reason, I ingenuously
acknowledge it to be of so small an extent, that I should not be able so far
to look into that hidden God his counsels, as to discover whether he may be
pleased or displeased with any of our actions at all: since I should not think
that Eagles stowped to the flight of flies: that tapers could add light to the
sun beams: that less then a drop could swell the Ocean: that nothing
compared to All could appear something: that that inconsiderable and vanishing
vapor, Man, could afforde delight to the divine Majesty. Noe contrarily I
should apprehend pleasure to be a kind of addition, by the attaynement and
fruition of some good. Which we begin a new to possess and displeasure to be a
withdrawing and privation of the same. Whereas, God, as he is his own being,
so is he his own happy being from all eternity, his own content, his own
Sovereign and superadmirable delight, and felicity. Being neither subject to
addition, nor diminution. And thence it should seem the Royal Psalmists
reason moved him to conclude God to be his God, because he needed nothing that
was his, to make some new accession of delight or happiness. And Lucretius,
though, otherwise an Epicure, said of God, that he abounding in his own
riches, stands in need of none of ours. So that, happly, should we consult
reason alone, we should hardly find out how he could be delighted (not only in
bare backs etc.) but even in those better things wherein you place his
delights (nor do we deny it) as in an humble heart, and low desires, a
thankful mind, sorrowful thoughts, repentant tears etc. And so by the weight
of flesh be borne down upon that other unworthy thought which you presently
after express, but approve not, saying, for we might think that God did not
intend man more misery, or less of this world then beasts, Madame, had not
this production of rationalitie been better stifled in the Conception, then
brought out to light, since there are but too many that do not only think
it, but practice it also, without any other inuitation, then impecauted reason,
or corrupt nature bowed down to bestialitie? for man when he was placed in
honor, understood it not, and so n as compared to brute beasts, and was made
like to them. Hence such as measured their actions by this crooked rule, said:
come therefore let us enjoy the good things that are, and let us quickly use
the creature as in youth, let us fill our selves with precious wine and
oyntements; and let not the flower of the time ass us. Let us crown our
selves with roses before they wither. Let there be noe medowe which our riote
shall not pass through. Let none of us be exempted from our riotousnesse:
every where let us leave signs of joy: because this is our portion, and this
our lot.

See, Madame, into what precipices man rushes down, when quitting the royal
way prescribed by faith, he adheares to his own brain absorpt in sensuality.
And when Spiritual and holy things are waighed in deceiptfull balances, not
with the sanctuary waightes. Gods Providence and mercy has graciously
furnished us with better rules, surer warranties, which according to S. Peter's
Counsel, we should do well to attend to, as to a candle shining in a dark
place, until the day dawne, and the day star arise in our hearts And in the
interim, according to S. Paul's, not to be wiser then we ought to be, but to be
wise to sobrictie.

Taking then faith, or the word of God for our guide, we cannot doubt but God
is delighted in man, the masterpeece of all his divine workman ship here
below. Since he has left it put down by the pen of the holy Ghost, that his
delightcs are to be with the Sons of men. And what does he chiefly desire in
man, but his heart, which he seems to sue for, son give me thy heart? And what
does he aim at in his heart but his love, whose seat it is? All then, Madame,
that is love, for love, or conduceing to the service and advancement of love,
is agreeable, or delightful, in the sight of the divine Maiestic; since that
is the fullness and end of the law and prophets.

So that, Madame, ask Hilarion why his back and whole body is naked, and he
points you out the Gospel, that Divine Robber, for the Author of that
blessed crime, saying it was that book which stripped me.

THE II. PARAGRAPHE.
ASK the poor Friar why his feet are bare and dirtie, and he presently
answers, it is for the love of his Lord and Master. Ask him again, whether of
the two he preferrs, a cold back, or an humble heart; and he replies with
smiling, that you quite mistake him, if you conceive he places perfection in
shaven hcades, dirtie feet, cold backs, hungry stomachs, and course and
simple habits, which did they not proceed from love, and lead to love, he
would value at nothing, as apprehending those exterior things alone, little
grateful in the eyes of heaven. But since we are made sure by faith, that God
is a Phylantropos, and a heavenly Pigmalion, who falls in love with the pieces
of his own hand, and loves man's mutual love, as being the end of his law, his
labors, and passions, reason easily leads us to infer, that rationally too
he must needs love the means to the same end, (as every rational man uses to
do, and that so much the more effectually, by how much he desires the end more
ardently) such as we conceive these in part to be, if not immediately, at least
mediately by removing things opposite to it. For (goes the Friar on) we have
heard from S. Augustine, that two loves have built two cities: self love, in
contempt of God, an earthly one^ the love of God, in contempt of ones self, a
heavenly In the City of God englished by Crashaw.
one. The first seeks the glory of men, but the latter desires God only as
the testimony of the conscience, the greatest glory. That glories in it
self, this in God etc. That boasts of the ambitious conqueror led by the
lust of Souueraignetie. In this every one serves other in charity, both the
rulers in counselling, and the subjects in obeying. The wisemen of that follow
either the goods of the body or mind, or both, living according to the flesh.
But in this other, the heavenly City, there is noe wisdom but the piety that
serves the true God, and expects a reward in the society of the holy
Angels and men, that God may become all in all. That first love must be
subdued, that this may get grouth: the decrease of that being indeed the
increase of this, as the utter ruin of that, is the perfection and reign of
this.

And (vrges the Monk or Friar) is this like to be done without labor, where
we all experience in our selves, what we heard from S. Paul, a continual
civil war in this mortal body of ours, where the rebellious flesh makes
head against the Spirit? Is it enough to talk of humbled hearts, lowly
desires, thankful minds, sorrowful sighs, repenting tears, and fear of
offending, without vseing any effectual means to procure them? Or can we be
so desparatly left by common sense, as to conceive, that powdered heads, and
paumpered feet, daintily covered backs, and cramd bellies, should be a more
conducing means, then those others which we embrace, whilst they are looked
upon by you with contempt and scorn, as things irrational?

THE III. PARAGRAPHE.
IT was not thus that the Prophet Jonas, who was sent from our Lord, preached
to the Ninevites. It was not thus that the King and people understood him;
who, besides that they believed in God, proclaimed with all a fast, and were
clothed in sackcloth from the greater to the lesser. And when the word came to
the King he rose out of his Throne, and cast away his garment from him, and
was clothed with sackcloth, and sat in ashes: some Courtier might have thought
that this low bodily posture was not suitable to Majesty, and that God
rationally should not be delighted in his sackcloth and ashes, but in the
humility and lowlynesse of his heart etc. yet it pleased God to testify he was
pleased in it, since the holy text says, that God saw (not their hearts
only) but their works, that they were converted from their evil way, and had
mercy etc.

The good Job too reprehends himself, Cap. 42.6.
and does Penance in imbers and ashes making use of an abject posture of body,
together with an humbled heart, what ever mistaken reason might have suggested
to the contrary.

The kingly Prophet also went on in the same way, put on cloth of hair, and
humbled his soul in fasting, employing good means to procure better effects.

If examples out of the new law do better please, look after S. John Baptist
in the wilderness: where you shall find him practicing and preaching penance,
in a rugh garment of Camels hair (not woueninto fine chamlet at Bucerus
blusheth not to putt it) with a girdle of a skin about his loins, whose
food was locustes and wildehonie; making himself the Prince and president of
dirtie feere, cold backs, and hungry stomachs. I mean a blessed patron of a
solitary and austere life and profession. Of whom our Savior said to those,
who went out to see him, that they went not out to see a man clothed in soft
garments etc.

THE IV. PARAGRAPHE.
OR if you had rather look upon him, who came after him, but was made before
him, the lachet of whose shoe he was not worthy to untie; that only begotten
son in whom his heavenly father was well pleased, saying: hear him. Let at
least his sacred words be laid up in our, hearts, and let his example be putt
down for a sure Rule. Unless, faith he, you do penance you shall all
likewise perish. But what penance must this be? Certainly that which his
wisdom taught us, not that which our iniquity feyned to it self. That which
his painful examples pointed us out: not that which our own licenciousnesse
pleases to admit of. Because he suffered for us, leaving us an example that we
might follow his steps. And says he, woe be to thee, Corosaim, woe be to thee
Bethsaida; for if in Tire and Sidon, had been wrought the miracles that have
been wrought in you, they had done penance in hair cloth and ashes long ago.
See what kind of penance he points at, not humble hearts, and sorrowful
thoughts alone; but such as inuolues the joint endeavors both of body and
mind: humiliations, abiections, chastisements, and mortifications of our own
members, that we may bear about with us a sound and pure soul, in a sound
body, that is, to thend we may become holy both in body and in Spirit,
according to S. Paul.

And if this were his preaching, his practice swarued not from it. For he
confesses of himself that he was in labors from his youth. He lived in the
wilderness, watched, fasted, prayed whole nights long, while he had neither
sins of his own to satisfy for, nor judgment to dread, but only for our
crimes, and our example. I have left you an example, faith he, and how, an
example which I would have you to follow: because, who follows me walks not
in darkness, but shall have the light of life. Which while we have, by his
grace, let us confidently walk in it, least being left to run at random, and
grope out our way by the fallible light of reason, darkness so overtake us,
that we shall not know whither we go, and so vanish in our own knowledge.

It was not thus that the great S. Paul followed him, who came not to us in
loftiness of speech, or of wisdom, but in the simplicity and ignominy of
the Cross of Christ, judging not himself to know any thing among us, but
Jesus Christ, and him crucified; that is, suffering the greatest corporal
pains, the greatest poverty and nakedness, and the greatest abiection and
confusion imaginable: thence teaching us by bodily mortifications and pains,
to vanquish the flesh: by poverty and nakedness, to conquer the concupiscence
of the eyes; and by confusion and ignominy, to subdue the pride of life. This
was the humble knowledge that the great Apostle affected, Jesus Christ, and him
Crucified wherein he placed all his glory. Thus to live wholly to God, he was
nailed with Christ to the Cross, and lived he, now not he, but Jesus Christ
lived in him.

THE V. PARAGRAPHE.
FINALLY to putt this business in its true light, let us look into the
circumstances of that admirable Apostle. Never had any the virtues which your
La. speaks of, in a greater measure. Never did any putt a greater rate upon
pure love and charity then he; who should he have spoken with the tongues of
men and Angels: should he have had all Prophecy, knowledge of all mysteries,
all faith even to the removing of mountains: should he have bestowed all his
substance upon the poor; and even delivered his body to burn, and yet have
wanted charity, he esteemed himself nothing, nor conceived any advantage to
acrue to him by all those other things.

Never had any humility of heart, and low desires, in a greater degree then
he: who pronounced himself the least of the Apostles, and one not worthy the
name of an Apostle. As reputing himself te first or greatest of sinners.

Never did any more admire Gods wisdom then he, who leaving reason, betakes
himself to highest admiration, crying out. O the highness of the wisdom, and
knowledge of God: how incomprehensible are his judgments, and how inscrutable
are his ways.

Never did any breast harbor more sorrowful sighs then his; who testifies of
himself, that he had great sadness, and continual sorrow in his heart,
wishing himself to be an Anathema from Christ for his brethren.

Never did any more undervalue himself, and magnify the mercyes and grace of
Christ then he, who assured the world that what ever he was, he was by Gods
grace: who wrought in his heart both the will and performance: and that of
himself, as of himself, he was not able to think one good thought; but that
all his sufficiency was from God.

THE VI. PARAGRAPHE.
AND yet he, Madame, he I say, who was so diuinly charitable; so incomparably
humble; so great an admirer of Gods wisdom; so dauntingly sorrowful cuen for
brethren crimes. So excellent a magnifier of Gods mercyes, and vnderualuer of
his own abilities; was not content with all these heavenly endowmentes alone,
nor thought himself in safety thereby, unless he added his own endeavors to
them by corporal and penal aids. I chastise my body, says he, and bring it
into servitude, least perhapps when I have preached to others, my self become
reprobate.

Ah, Madame, where cedars are not proof against the blast of Gods wroth, where
should quiuering reeds shrude themselves? How should we Lambs tremble, and
what penalties should not we undertake, to help to secure our poor souls;
while the guide of the flock, the Doctor of the Gentiles; that sacred vessel
of Election, as he was published by the mouth of Truth it self, must so
labor, and punish himself, least preaching to others he himself might become
reprobate?

He was not ignorant the while, that Christ dyed for him, since he assures us
he dyed for all men; and since he himself says in particular: he loved me,
and delivered himself up for me.

He was not ignorant, that he had laid down a treasure which was able to
discharge a greater debt then we were able to contract.

He was not ignorant, that he had plentifully powered out precious streams
sufficient to wash and purify, even thousands of durtie worlds.

He knew well, and taught us, that that Lamb of God who was slain for us, had
with his sacred blood wiped out the handwriting of the Decree that was made
against us, and fastened it to the Cross. All this he knew, and yet he ceased
not to work with his hands, to watch, to preach, to pray, to chastise his
body, and to bring it into servitude. All this he knew, and yet he fears not
to tell the Colossians, that he rejoiced to suffer for them, and to accomplish
the things which want of the Passions of Christ in his flesh, for Christ's
body which is the Church. Was there some want of Christ's Passions then? Noe,
Madame, none in the worth and value of the price of a plentiful redemption,
putt down in his own precious blood: none in point of sufficiency; none as
though they were to borrow something of our poverty to accomplish them.
Finally none on Christ's side, but on the part of us Christians, who ought to
share in his sufferances, that we may have a part in his glory: who ought to
express his blessed life and Passion by our lives and passions, or
compassions, as it becomes members to be conformed to their head, not leaving
him disloyally to tread the wine press alone, and lead, the while, delicate
and licentious lives, deuoyde of all pain and sufferance. Noe, Madame, the
Passion of Christ was not all to end upon the Mount Caluarie, but was even to
last till the end of the world: for as he it is that is honored in his Saints,
when they are honored as they ought to be honored: and loved in his Saints,
when they are loved by us, as they ought to be loved: as he also is fedd in the
poor, and clothed in the naked, so does he suffer in all those that suffer for
justice: and thence it is, that while Paul persecutes his members only, he
cries out from heaven, that he is persecuted. Saul Saul why do thou
persecute me? To wit, Madame, the head, Christ, and his mystical body, the
Church, make but one entire mystical body, one whole Christ; and so the
Passions of the head, and the sufferances of the members, make but one
complete bulk of Passions, all which are said to be Christ's; and from him, and
his blessed Passion upon the Cross, all our humiliations, mortifications and
sufferances, have all the virtue, value and forcethey have to become
meritorious, and satisfactorie for sin. And albeit there is noe
insufficiency in the actions and Passions of Christ the head, yet his wisdom,
will, and justice requires and ordaines, that we his members should be fellows
of his Passions, as we hope to be sharers in his glory; and that by such
suffering with him, and according to his example, we should apply to our
selves and others, the general and sovereign Medicine of Christ his merits
and satisfactions: nor ought this to appear strange to any Protestant, or be
otherwise esteemed by them derogatorie or injurious to his plentiful
redemption upon the Cross, since they, as Well as we, hold it necessary to
apply that great price by the Sacrament of Baptism, for example etc.

For this, Madame, (I mean, to make this application of the merits of Christ's
actions and Passions to our souls: or express his blessed life, as far
forth as possibly we may be enabled by his grace, by ours: and by the joint
sufferances of the head and members, to make up the plenitude of his passion)
all the austerities, watchings, fastings, prayers, Sacraments and Sacrifices,
which are used in the Church, are employed.

For this, the Priests and Monks shaven heads: for this the Nuns vows,
solitude and silence: for this the Heremites wildernesle: for this, the poor
friars bare and dirtie feet: for this, all the peoples hungry stomachs: all
which, as we humbly acknowledge, were of noe worth or merit, did they not
issue from, and were they not sanctified in, that sourse of all merit, so
would they prove of noe effect neither to the atrayning of eternal felicity,
were they not referred, as all our blessed Saviors sufferances were, and in
virtue of the same, to his eternal fathers honor and glory, as to their last
end who as he is the beginning without beginning, so is he the end without end,
or the endless felicity of us all, and of all things which he created of
nothing. And yet we (who out of the abundance of his free mercyes, are taken
into the communication and participation of the infinite merits of his actions
and Pasnons) by imitation, may truly say, (yet with all humility, and due
acknowledgment, not glorying in our selves, but in our Lord, the Author of all
our good) All is ours: but we are Christ's; and Christ Gods, that God may be all
in all.

Amen.
(...)

