THE HISTORY OF THE Thrice Illustrious Princess HENRIETTA MARIA de BOURBON,
QUEEN OF England.

LONDON, Printed by E. C. for Philip Chetwind, 1660.

TO THE Paragon of Virtue and Beauty, her Grace, The Duchess of AUBEMARLE,
etc.
May it please your Grace,
IN imitation of the Inscription of the golden Apple that Paris had to
distribute among the Goddesses, which was, Let it be given to the fairest, as a
gift which only the greatest beauty was worthy of; I humbly present to your
Grace this small Mirror of Feminine yet Heroic Virtues, as a glass wherein
none but the most virtuous are capable to dress themselves: A pattern not to
be imitated by the Vulgar.

Your Grace may herein see briefly, yet fully displayed, the frailty and
inconstancy of humane greatness, and the height of goodness. A Princess of
the greatest Extract, the greatest Alliance, the greatest Virtue, that this
Western World has for many years boasted of; reduced to the utmost of those
miseries wherewith an adverse Fortune could afflict her; yet in all of them
bearing her self up with an unbyassed soul.

It Is easy, Madam, whilst our Fortunes are constant to us, to be constant to
our Virtues. That Pilot must certainly be very unskilled, who with a fair and
prosperous gale, shall steer an indirect course. Afflictions are the greatest
trial of a Noble Spirit; and patience in them the chief of Virtues.

Yet was it not the greatest of this Queens unhappinesses, that she was
unhappy, but that some men by malicious Scandals strove to make her guilty of
somewhat they thought deserving so great Afflictions; as if to be miserable,
must likewise include being wicked.

But were happiness, Madam, always appropriate to goodness, or did Virtue
continually carry it is reward along with it, we might have just reason to
suspect and believe that some horrid wickednesses lately perpetrated amongst
us, were rather Pieties in the highest degree.

But her goodness and patience have overcome all scandals; and as she has
lived the Mirror of the latter to all the World, so she may be a pattern of the
other to succeeding generations.

In the mean time, that the Rising Sun of your GRACES Virtues and Honors may
still soar higher, but never know a declension, is the earnest prayer of

Your GRACES Most Humble And Most devoted Servant, JOHN DAUNCY.

TO THE READER.
THIS late Age has had so infinite Examples of Vices made Virtues, and Virtues
Vices, that a clear display of actions in their true and genuine colors will
hardly find credit: So long has scandal had the predominancy over men's minds,
that the continual reiterating of them, has grounded in them (as it were) a
serious opinion of their truth, whilst they were Zealous to believe what was
represented, rather then what really and truly was.

This Illustrious and thrice Noble Princess has not had the least share in
this ill humor of the times, whilst the basely employed industry and
disingenuity of some men has endeavored to represent her under a black Cloud
of guilt, who never knew how to wear other then a pure, white and Angel-like
Vest of Innocence.

Yet so powerful were those scandals which were thrust upon this serene Queen,
that none durst adventure to convince them of falsity, by demonstrating that
the purity of all her actions were above the reproach of the blackest tongue,
for fear of running himself on Scilla or Charybdis, of hazarding himself on the
Rock of an Arbitrary Power, or plunging himself in the gulf of a discredit; so
firmly had scandal rooted an ill opinion of her Majesty in the minds of most
people.

I need not now fear to fall upon the Rock, and doubting not but that I shall
escape that other inconvenience: I have endeavored to represent her as she is
(that is) barely by her actions, by which if I cannot persuade men to a belief
of her goodness; yet let them at least believe that character which was given
her by him, who of all men must needs know her best, her Royal Husband.

Reader, it is the greatest uncharity in the world to give credit to that evil
which malicious tongues would persuade us to be in any person, and never
inquire into those goodnesses wherewith they are really endowed: For most
certain it is, Qui causam statuerit, part in audita altera,
Aequum licet quod statuerit haud aequum est.
Who judges ere he hear another tell
His cause, may judge right, but shall nere judge well.


And that makes me the more confident, that this small piece will find a
clearer reception, whilst like the Welcome Sun it clears light out of
darkness, and makes that appear truly fair (as it is) which was before
spitefully beclouded.

THE HISTORY OF Henrietta Maria, QUEEN of ENGLAND.
THat Philosopher certainly was either Foolish or Frantic, who determined (or
at least started it as a question) that there could be no Heroic virtue in
Women, no Age in the world having been deficient of some of that sex,
completely furnished both with Magnanimity, and all other Virtues, which might
adorn the most Noble spirits; some illustrious women having in all times left
their precedents to the world, of Valor, Wisdom, Chastity, Courage, and
Magnanimity: All Histories, even the Holy Writ it self, bearing witness of the
Virtues of some of that sex, whose Fames have endured, and are to this present
age recorded with honor and admiration.

Nor has our age it self been wanting in examples of that nature; but more
particularly in that Phoenix of our times (whose life I intend to treat of)
Henrietta Maria de Bourbon, a Princess, as of incomparable Virtues and
endowments, so of a mighty Birth and Alliance, having been Daughter, Sister,
Wife, Aunt and Mother to Kings: Daughter to the thrice Illustrious and renowned
Prince Henry the Great, King of France, and Sister to his Son Lewis the
Thirteenth: Wife to Charles the First, King of Great Britain and Ireland: Aunt
to Lewis the Fourteenth now King of France: And Mother to our present most
Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second. To so many Kings has she been
so nearly allied.

But before we proceed to our story of her, it will not be impertinent to touch
something of her Fathers Virtues (though not always) being often inherent to
Posterity. A Prince he was in whom nothing of worth was wanting, a pattern of
all that Heroic Nobleness which could accomplish either a Man or a King: Not
known to be subject to any Vice, except that which overcame the strongest,
holiest and wisest of men, too great a love to Women.

His wonderful acts, both in time of Peace and War, had deservedly gained him
the Title of GREAT: By the first he enriched France with a greater proportion
of Silk and Wool, (by augmenting and encouraging a Foraign Traffic) then
ever before she was Master of, besides adorning her with many famous
Structures, and accommodating her by cutting Navigable Sluices from River to
River; by the last he cured her distempers, and by his Valor quieted those
Civil Wars which had for near twenty years distracted and disturbed that
Kingdom, having been victorious in Four main Battles against the Guisan
Faction; and at length rooted out all those whose affections were more swayed
to the Spaniard then to their natural Prince: Yet was he in the end (see the
instability of humane Glory and Greatness) by an obscure Villain in one of the
principal streets of his chief City of Paris, stabbed to death in his Coach, in
the midst of those triumphs which were prepared for his Queen, the Illustrious
Maria di Medices, who then newly had her brows begirt with the Royal Diadem of
France, and when he had lain in readiness a Potent Army in perfect Equipage,
and composed of stout and able old soldiers, which made his Neighbors round
about to tremble (none knowing on whom the effects of so potent a Force would
fall) his intended design continuing a riddle to this day.

He was at his first coming to the Crown very much inclined to the Protestant
Profession, in which he had for the most part been nurtured; but the necessity
of his affairs, and the strength of the Papists enforced him to make a public
Confession of the Roman Catholic Religion, and condescend to them in
Ecclesiastical affairs; notwithstanding which he was soon after by a young
Jesuit (who after the fact, confessed he did it because he thought him not yet
well settled and grounded in the Catholic Faith, but too much wavering toward
the Hugonots) stabbed in the mouth with a knife: Which made one of his
Confidents prophetically to tell him: Sir, You may see how just and punctual
GOD ALMIGHTY is in his Judgments: For I hope you have denied the Religion you
were first nurtured in, but from the teeth outward, so he has struck you
there, but take heed your heart go not from it, for he will strike you there
the next time: Which proved exactly true.

The Villain which murdered him could by no extremity of Torments be induced
to confess any other then himself abettor of his Crime, which he did (as he
said) out of an inward motion he had, that King Henry was not yet fully
confirmed in the Roman Faith, a belief whereof he gathered out of the great
benefits and Liberties still continued to the Protestants.

'Twas but a very short time before his violent death, The Queen born.
that his youngest Daughter and last Child the Princess Henrietta Maria was
born: So that she had neither the felicity to be an eyewitness of those
extraordinary Virtues wherewith her Father was endowed, nor the means to
imitate them, otherwise then as by an everlasting fame they were left to
Posterity.

Yet falling under the care of the Illustrious Maria di Medices her Mother, (a
Princess of most rare endowments, to whom likewise the Charge of Government was
committed till the succeeding King Lewis the Thirteenth should come to age) she
was educated suitable to her birth and greatness, and those Virtues cherished
in her, which seemed to be innate, as appearing almost in her very Cradle.

Nor was she less accomplished in that other adorner of Women, beauty, which
though it outshone not her Virtues, yet it made them shine with the greater
luster, whilst they likewise seemed to set it forth, and blazon it like a
clear and unclouded Sun.

She was about the age of Fifteen years when Prince Charles first taking that
Adventurous, Prince Charles his Voyage to Spain.
and therefore Renowned Journey into Spain, to endeavor the conclusion of a
Match between himself and the Royal Infanta, in his passage through Paris, he
incognito beheld this Paragon of Virtue and Beauty, and though he were then
going about a business which must necessarily obstruct his inclinations toward
her, yet he seemed very much to like her, nor was she in her affections less
propense to him, being reported to have said after she had heard about what
business he was gone into Spain, That he need not have gone so far for a Wife.
So that it seemed that this Match was concluded on in Heaven, which no worldly
endeavors could obstruct.

For after the fruitless endeavors of Prince Charles in Spain, His return.
to regain the Palatinate (without which he could not accept of the Infanta for
his Wife, King James always saying, That there should be no Match unless that
were likewise restored, for he would not marry Prince Charles in joy, and leave
his Daughter the Princess Elizabeth in tears) was with safety to the great joy
of the People returned into England, and in stead of an Alliance, a War
proclaimed with Spain; Lewis the Thirteenth King of France sent two Letters
fraught with extraordinary expressions and strains of Princely love, tacitly
inviting some overtures of a Match with France, to which King James returned
answer thus.

MOst High, K. James his Letter to the K. of France.
most Excellent, and most puissant Prince, Our most dear and loving good
Brother and Cousin, and ancient Ally:
Although his late Majesty of happy memory was justly entitled the Great, for
having in effect re-conquered by Arms his Kingdom of France, although it
appertained to him as his proper Inheritance; nevertheless you have made a
greater Conquest: For the Kingdom of France, although it was regained by the
Victorious Arms of the King your Father, yet belonged to him by Right, and he
therefore subjugated nothing but what was his own. But you have made a greater
conquest, having by your two last Letters, so full of true Cordial courtesy,
overcome your good Brother and ancient Allie, and all the Kingdoms appertaining
to him. For we acknowledge Our selves so overcome by your brotherly affection,
that We cannot render you the like; Only We can promise and assure you upon the
Faith of an Honest man, that you shall have power not only to dispose of Our
Forces and Kingdoms, but of Our Heart, Our Person, and the Person of Our Son,
if there be cause. Praying you to rest assured, that We shall be so far from
thinking to cherish, or give any countenance to any of your Subjects, of what
profession of Religion soever, that shall forget their natural Devoirs toward
you, and if We can get the least light of any thing, you shall be most
faithfully advertized: And you may promise your self in like case, or in any
other that may tend to the honor of your Crown, that you shall have power to
dispose freely of Our assistance, as if the cause were your own, and upon this
truth that our Interests shall always be common, We pray God, Most high, most
excellent and most puissant Prince, Our most dear and most loving Brother,
Cousin and ancient Allie, to have you always in his protection.


This Letter was soon after followed by Letters both from King James, Letters
sent to the Princess Henrietta Maria.
and Prince Charles, to the Princess Henrietta Maria, which she refused to
read, till she had her Mothers leave, which granted, she put King James his in
her Cushion or Cabinet, but Prince Charles his she placed in her bosom; which
made King James say, That though he would denounce War against her for not
reading the Letters without her Mothers approbation, yet he must return her
thanks for her after ordering them; intimating thereby, That she would rely and
rest upon him, but lodge his Son in her heart.

But before the Conclusion of this Treaty, King James his Death.
it pleased the Almighty to put an end to King James his days; a Prince who
all his life had kept this Kingdom in a continual Peace and quietness, and had
often been an Umpire in the difference of Neighboring Princes, who were in as
continued Combustions about him, whilst himself was never plunged in any War,
till now lately in one with Spain for the Restitution of the Palatinate.

Prince Charles upon the death of his Father is immediately declared his
lawful Heir and undoubted Successor, Prince Charles succeeds.
whereof by his several Ambassadors he immediately acquaints all the
neighboring Princes: But to the King of France he sends over the Earls of
Carlisle and Holland, not only to acquaint him with his Fathers death, but to
treat of an Alliance with the Princess Henrietta Maria; which Negotiation was
concluded in fewer months then Spain had spent years in her Treaty.

And soon after Letters of Procuration (or Proxy) were sent to the Duke of
Chevereux of the House of Guise for espousing his Mistress and making her his
Consort, Letters of Proxy to the Duke of Chevereux.
the Ceremony of which was celebrated on Sunday the First of May according to
our style, but the Eleventh according to theirs, in the Church of Nostre-dame
at Paris, with a great deal of pomp and magnificence, she being given to the
Duke of Chevereux in behalf of the King of England by her two Brothers the King
and Mounsieur.

About a fortnight after the Duke of Buckingham put in Commission with the
English Ambassadors there, Buckingham and others sent to fetch the Queen.
is with a train of the best quality to accompany him sent to attend the Queen,
and to bring her over to her Spouse in England, K. James his Funeral.
whilst in the mean time, King James's Funeral on the 14 of May, was
magnificently solemnized at Westminster, King Charles himself contrary to the
old custom attending the Obsequies.

On the second of June, The Qu. sets forward.
the now Queen of England set forward from Paris, and at the Town of Amiens
staid fourteen days, by reason of the Queen her Mothers sickness, and
indisposition, who would willingly have accompanied her to the Sea side, but at
length was forced to leave her here, and so with her Brother the Mounsieur, she
set forward toward Bulloigne, a longer passage by sea to England then that of
Calais; but the infection there forced them to accept of this.

Here the Queen received the Duke of Buckinghams Mother (with a Train of very
many Ladies of quality from England) whom Mounsieur so much honored as to
condescend to give her a visit at her Lodging, for no other reason but her
being Mother to the King of Englands chief Favorite, and the Duchess of
Chevereux that great Princess both of Match and Blood was forced to give her
the precedence.

The King had commanded a good part of his Navy Royal, The Queen puts to sea.
one and twenty Ships to attend the Queen, on which she imbarques, but in her
passage finds the same rough and tempestuous weather which Mary Queen of Scots
found when she was wafted over from Calais: This some interpreted as an ill
omen, and have since taken it as a token of the succeeding tempests of her life.

Yet on Trinity Sunday the 13/23 of June, Arrives at Dover.
she arrives at Dover about seven a Clock at night, his Majesty the next
Morning coming from Canterbury to meet her, with joy received her at the top of
the Stairs, whilst she on her knee endeavoring to kiss his hand, he seeming
as it were surprised, takes her up in his arms and salutes her with reiterated
kisses. And so conducting her into an inner Chamber, after his congratulation
of her safe arrival, and expression of the sad fears of her danger at Sea,
(finding her somewhat surprised, and to let fall some tears to see her self now
in the hands of a stranger, whom she had never before seen) he tells her, That
she was fallen into the effects of Gods Divine Providence, to forsake her
Kindred and cleave to her Spouse, professing that he would be no longer Master
of himself, then he was a servant to her.

The Ceremony here was accomplished, The King and Queen set forward to Londen.
and the Duke of Chevereux having rendered her up to his Majesty's bosom here,
and to his bed the same night at Canterbury, they the next day set forward
toward Gravesend, the whole way being laned with millions of people, who made
the very air thunder with renumerated Echoes of God save their Majesty's; they
were likewise accompanied with a most gallant Train of the English Gentry, who
came from all parts of the Kingdom to wait upon their Majesty's at so great a
Solemnity.

At Gravesend on the Thursday after, their Majesty's entered into the Barge of
State, and accompanied with an infinite number of other Barges and Boats, went
by water to Somerset House, whilst the Ships all the way being placed in ranks
on both sides the River, did volly out wellcomes to these two Princes.

The Third after their arrival at London, The Marriage proclaimed.
their Majesty's appeared in State to the Nobility, both having seated
themselves upon their royal Thrones. And soon after the Marriage was publicly
proclaimed with excessive joy to all: And from thence their Majesty's by reason
of the great infection then in and about London, removed to Hampton Court:
Where, and in all other places, they for many years lived in the greatest
content and enjoyment of conjugal love that possibly could be: The King most
singularly indulgent of his Royal Consort, and she correspondent with him, not
only in personal affection, but also in bringing him forth a Progeny of Royal
Princes and Princesses: The best for Alliance and Stock that ever the Earth
had, being immediately descended from the blood Royal of England and France,
allied to the Emperor, Kings of Spain and Denmark, and all the most potent
Princes of the Western World. So that if ever any, these might most properly be
said to be sprung de semine Divum, of the seed of the Gods.

Yet there happened an accident on the first of July, Occasion of discontent
between the King and Queen.
in the year 1626. which not only created a difference betwixt Lewis the
thirteenth King of France, and his Majesty of England, but might likewise have
caused a breach between him and his dearly beloved Queen and Consort, had not
her incomparable prudence taught her how to submit to her Husbands pleasure.

The King had several times been informed of misdemeanors committed by some of
the Queens Domestiques, The Qu. Servants dismissed.
toward her person, and his Majesty; and therefore on the first of July,
having the same day sent a Message, commanding all the Queens Servants to be
there in readiness, he came to Somerset House attended by the Duke of
Buckingham, the Earls of Holland and Carlisle, and other principal Officers,
and tells them,

Gentlemen and Ladies,
I Am driven to that extremity, as I am personally come to acquaint you, that I
very earnestly desire your return for France: True it is, the deportment of
some amongst you, has been very inoffensive unto Me, but others again have so
dallyed with my patience, and so highly affronted Me, as I cannot, I will not
longer endure it.


This accusation (though not determined to any particular) made all guilty,
Bishop of Menes and Madam St. George, offer a defense of themselves.
and every single person was concerned to clear himself: Whereupon the Bishop
of Menes answered,

Sir, If this accrimination be levelled at me, let me, I beseech you, know my
fault, while I am here to make defense.

And Madam St. George said,

Sir, I make no question but the Queen will give me a fair Testimonial to your
Majesty.

But the King replied no more then, I name none: and so commanded their speedy
return to France.

This sudden action of the Kings, The Qu. extremely disturbed at the sending
away of her servants.
overwhelmed the Queen (whose tender years were not yet fit for so harsh an
encounter) with a great deal of impetuous passion against the King, she at
first taking it as the greatest extremity of unkindness, that having so small a
company of her native friends and servants to attend her, they should in an
instant be all cashiered, and in lieu of them she to expect, not a Train of
Honor, but a Guard of disaffected persons, not so much to attend her as her
actions, whereby she should be treated more like a Prisoner then a Princess:
That there could not be a higher affront put upon a Daughter of France, or
Queen of England.

The King observing her transportation, The Kings endeavor to pacify her.
endeavored by all sweet and gentle persuasions to pacify her, but finding
her inexorable, he resolves to be so too, and therefore the beginning of the
next Month the French were all sent packing, having their Salaries paid them to
a penny, and some of them large Gratuities given them contrary to that scandal
of a Modern French Historian, who writes, That they were dismissed without
their Wages and appointment. Yet the doom fell heavy upon some of them, who
having sold all they had in France, out of hopes to raise themselves Fortunes
under the Queen in England, were by this cashierment almost totally ruined.

Their misdemeanors were of several sorts: The French misdemeanors.
The Ecclesiastics stood charged with imposing several unhandsome and
unbecoming Penances upon the Queen, as particularly, the forcing her to make a
Progress barefoot to Tyburn, there to present her Devotions, which action (the
King said) could have no greater invective then the Relation. The Bishop of
Mends was blamed likewise for contesting with the Earl of Holland, about the
Stewardship of those Manors which were settled upon the Queen as her Jointure,
that Office being conferred on the Earl by the King, whilst the other claimed
a Grant from the Queen.

Madam St. George was accused for having endeavored by cunning insinuations to
beget a disaffection between the King and Queen, wherein she had gone so far,
that whatever she suggested, found more credence with the Queen, then
whatsoever the King could allege; an affront not to be comported. And it
appeared clearly after their departure, that the Queens frowardness proceeded
not from any natural disposition or inclination of her own, but from their evil
counsels, and the products of their malicious spirits; for ever after the Queen
comported her self with so loving a complacencie and compliance, that the whole
world could not afford a couple more mutually endeared to one another.

Yet notwithstanding, King of France resents the sending away of his Sisters
servants.
the Majesty of France highly resented the sending away of his Sisters Servants
and Domestiques, who filled his ears with many lies and scandals, one of which
was the aforementioned, That they were sent away without their Salary: Whereas
they had not only their full Debenters paid them, but large Rewards besides.
Yet King Lewis his ears were so open to their complaints, Ambassadors sent to
demand their restitution.
that he dispatches the Marshal de Bassompiere extraordinary Ambassador to the
King of England, to demand the restitution of the Queens Domestiques, taxing
our King with breaking the 14th Article of the Matrimonial part, by which it
was agreed, That all the Domestique Servants which the Queen should bring over
into England should be natural French, and Catholics, chosen by the most
Christian King: And in case of death she to choose other Catholics of France,
provided the King of Great Britain should assent.

Yet this Embassage proved vain and ineffectual; But in vain.
for it could not be expected, but that although by the Articles the King of
France was to choose the first set of Servants for the Queen, yet they could
not bind the King not to turn them away in case of misdemeanour; for if so,
his power was so restrained, that those Servants might take upon them to
contradict his Majesty. In sum, their readmission was utterly refused:
Whereupon King Lewis proceeded to an utter breach of the peace between both
Kingdoms, by seizing and securing the English Merchants Ships in the River of
Bourdeaux, and by employing the Vantguard and the other six Ships (formerly
lent to the French) against Rochell, contrary to Articles, and their first
Predestination.

This War proved unfortunate to the English, War with France unsuccessefull.
for their first, second, and third attempts were all unsuccessefull; and the
Great Duke of Buckingham, who commanded in chief, in the first Expedition for
relief of Rochell, being to set forth again upon the same design, was by one
John Felton an obscure fellow, stabbed to death at Portsmouth.

The Qu. in the Spring of the year 1629. was delivered of a Child, The Queen
brought to bed before her time.
which coming somewhat before its time lived not much above an hour, yet having
some life in it, the Priests which attended the Qu. were very earnest to
baptize it, but the K. stepping in prevented them, and commanded Dr. Web, one
of his Chaplains, to officiate, and name him Charles; which immediately after he
had done, the Child expired.

But on the 29th of May in the Year ensuing, Prince Charles born.
was her Majesty delivered of a Son both living and lively, to the surpassing
joy and exultation both of the Court and whole Kingdom, Heaven it self seeming
to rejoice: For at the time when the King rode to St. Paul's Church to give
thanks to God for the Queens safe delivery of a Son, though it were then near
Noonday, there visibly appeared a Star in the Firmament, upon which these
Verses were presented.

Rex ubi Paulinas accessit gratus ad aras,
Immicuit medio lucida stella Polo.
Dic divina mihi tractans aenigmata coeli,
Haec oriens nobis quid sibi stella velit?
Magnus in occiduo princeps modo nascitur orb,
Moxque sub eclipsi regna Orientis erunt.
Thus Englished by Mr. Sanderson.
When to Pauls-cross the grateful King drew (near,
A shining Star did in the Heavens appear:
Thou that consults with Divine Mysteries,
Tell me what this bright Comet signifies:
Now is there born a valiant Prince in the West,
That shall Eclipse the Kingdoms of the East.
On the 27 of June following was the Prince baptized at St. James's, The Prince
baptized.
with most refulgent pomp and Princely Ceremony, and named CHARLES: the
Godfathers and Witnesses at his Christning, were the King of France, and Prince
Elector Palatine, represented by the Duke of Lenox and Marquess Hamilton: The
Godmother was the Queen Mother of France, whose Substitute was the Duchess of
Richmond.

But the more to bind the affections of this Pair Royal, Princess Mary born,
to a firm tie of Conjugal love, on the fourth of November she blessed his
Majesty and this Nation with the birth of her eldest Daughter, the Princess
Mary, whereby she gave him pledges of both sexes, which afterward she
increased to a more numerous Issue.

For on the Thirteenth of October, And Duke of York.
1633. she was delivered of her second Son, Christened James, and by the Kings
command styled Duke of York, and so afterward created by Letters Patents.

And on the 28 of December, in the year 1635. was the Queen delivered of her
second Daughter, the Lady Elizabeth, whose birth was congratulated by the
United States of the Netherlands, with a present of a massy piece of
Ambergris, two fair and almost transparent China Basins, a rare Clock of
very excellent Art, and four very admirable pieces of painting, the Originals
of Tintinet and Titian, those incomparable Artists.

Thus far had this Queen lived in all peace and prosperity, enjoying the full
and endeared love of her Royal Consort, which there were no outward
obstructions to hinder; they enjoying all things wherewith peace and prosperity
could cherish them, besides a blessed Issue, the delight of their eyes; so that
Fortune seemed to blow a gale upon them beyond their desires or expectations;
till unconstant as she is; she turned the scale, and involved them in as great
a gulf of sorrow and misery, as they had before been in the height of glory and
greatness.

Yet the hard Fortunes they were subjected to, did but the more illustrate and
set forth those virtues, which whilst their brows were encircled with
prosperity were scarce discernable to vulgar eyes and judgments. For though to
bear ones self with even and noble spirit in the height of happiness and
greatness, be praiseworthy and admirable, yet afflictions are the only trial
of a great and magnanimous soul.

And that this Queen was a person of so great and magnanimous spirit, none can
doubt, who shall consider with what a settled spirit she waded through those
Afflictions with which God was pleased to chastize her and her Royal Consort.

The first time that she had occasion to show herself ready and willing to
endure a part of her Husbands afflictions, The Queen raises a Benevolence
amongst the Catholics.
was when his Majesty by reason of the Scots second Rebellion, in 1639.
(notwithstanding his gracious Pardon and Pacification granted them but the year
before) was constrained by force of Arms to seek a course to reduce them to
Obedience, but by reason of the unwillingness of Parliaments to supply his
extraordinary wants then, and the great Charge which would accrue by his
raising an Army to oppose them, who were then ready to enter his Kingdom of
England, was forced to desire a Benevolence of those his Loyal Subjects of the
Nobility and others, who were willing to contribute toward his Necessities.
The Queen out of her mere motion, and free will, by her Substitutes, Sir
Kenelme Digby, and Mr. Walter Montague, negotiated with the Catholics, for a
free and hearty Contribution.

And so free were those (who though they were termed Recusants in point of
Religion, The Catholics free supplies.
yet were not so, but rather examples to others in point of loyalty) few
Catholics then in the Kingdom, that almost as great a sum was gathered from
them, as from the more numerous Protestants, many of them proportioning their
affections beyond their abilities.

Yet those Instruments The Collectors of her Majesty's Benevolence questioned*
which she had employed for the raising of those free and voluntary
Contributions, were after questioned by the House of Commons, and their
Collections, though voluntary, adjudged illegal; there being a Law in England,
restraining all public Collections, but only what were made according to such
and such Forms and Commissions, which were to issue forth in Cases of such a
general nature, and though those Collections (as was alleged) were rather
Free Gifts then Collections, yet the Collectors were like to have been
punished. Which together with the scandal cast upon her Majesty, That she had
been an Incendiary betwixt the King and his People, and objections taken at the
residence of the Popes Legate in England; she by Letter acquainted that House,

That she had always used her best endeavors for the removing of all
misunderstandings betwixt the King and his People: The Qu. message to the House
of Commons.


That she had effectually, both by Letters and express Messages persuaded him
to convoque that great Assembly.

That whereas there were exceptions taken at the residence of the Popes Legate
in England, she would take care to remove him speedily, though he were here
merely for her own Conscience.

That touching the Collection, if any thing were illegal in it, it must be
imputed to her ignorance of the Law, being carried thereunto out of a dear and
tender affection to his Majesty, her Royal Spouse, in so pressing an occasion,
but she would be more cautious hereafter, not to do any thing but what might
stand with Law.

That she was desirous to employ all the power she had, to unite the King and
People: Therefore she desired them to look forwards, and pass by such mistakes
and errors of her Servants: which respect of theirs should be repaid with all
good Offices, whereby they should find real effects.

This complacent and gentle Message of the Queen mitigated the Parliaments
resentments against her Collectors, and upon further consideration all
proceedings against them were suspended.

At the beginning of those second ^roubles in Scotland, The Qu. Mother arrives
in England.
the Queen Mother of France, who by the overreaching power of the Cardinal
Richelieu, by her means and power, advanced to that height wherewith he then
swayed, was not only expulsed out of her Dominion of that Kingdom, but being
likewise ignominiously led about the French Army, in the manner of a Prisoner,
was after suffered to escape thence, which she did, first to the Cardinal
d'Infanto Governor of Flanders, and afterward to the Prince of Orange, from
whence she was by our Queen her daughter, compassionate of her miseries,
invited over into England, where she arrived on the last of October, 1638. just
before the beginning of our sad and miserable troubles, her coming over being
upon unknown grounds imputed as a presage of all our future distractions, she
being accounted ominous to what place soever she came, till the middle of the
year 1641. (when we began more visibly to be involved in our troubles) she
staid here, when accompanied with the Earl of Arundel, she took her leave, and
journeyed through Zealand to Collen in Germany, Her death.
where soon afterward overwhelmed with age and miseries, in a melancholy
condition to see that Cardinal Richelieu, whom she had raised from almost
nothing, to the whole administration the affairs of France, this mighty
Princess expired.

During the being here of that Illustrious Princess, Duke of Gloucester born.
the Queen was brought abed of a third Son, who entered into the world on the
twentieth of July, 1640. and was Christened Henry, and after created Duke of
Gloucester. She had before been delivered of her third Daughter on the 17th of
March, 1636. who was Christened Anna, and died before her Father.

And shortly after the Duke of Glocesters birth, in the same year, The Marriage
of the Princess Mary with the Prince of Orange.
the Ambassador Leiger of Holland made some overtures of a Marriage between
the young Prince, William of Nassau Prince of Orange, and the Kings eldest
Daughter the Lady Mary: Which Overtures were willingly assented to by the King,
and likewise agreed upon by the Parliament, who expressed much joy at the Kings
inclinations to marry his Daughter to a Protestant Prince, though somewhat
inferior to her in birth and nobleness. So on Sunday the second of May, the
Marriage was with a great deal of Solemnity performed in the Kings Chapel at
White Hall.

Notwithstanding the Parliaments former suspension of all proceedings against
the Kings servants who collected the Benevolence amongst the Catholics, The
Qu. accused of High treason.
for the Kings necessary supply in his Expedition against the Scots; yet a
strange report after there was, of the Parliaments intentions to draw up
Articles of High Treason against her. And indeed some resolutions there were of
the Parliaments, (upon a fond conceit that the Queen had so much power with the
King, as to misadvise him) either to persuade her to withdraw her self aside,
by some fears wherewith they would possess her, or else to drive her away
perforce; which the King finding, and thinking the first the surest course,
thought it better to have her go as it were voluntarily, and therefore
acquainted the Parliament,

That he was pressed by the States Ambassadors, to send the Princess Maria
into Holland, to her late Espoused Husband, and that the Queen desiring it, he
had given her leave to go with her.

And so the good Queen was got out of their Clutches, The Queen goes for
Holland.
the King accompanying her and the Princess to the Seaside at Dover, and she
carrying with her all the Jewels belonging to the Crown, the Pawn of which
afterward (with some additional supplies from the Prince of Orange, assisted
the King in his extremest necessities.

The King was extremely troubled at the Queens departure, which made him fall
into this rare Soliloquie of her, in which because he (who knew her best) gives
the best Characters of her that possibly can be given, I shall here insert it.

ALthough I have much cause (says the King) to be troubled at my Wives
departure from me, and out of my Dominions; yet not her absence, so much as the
scandal of that necessity which drives her away, does afflict me. That she
should be compelled by my own Subjects, and those pretending to be Protestants,
to withdraw for her safety: This being the first example of any Protestant
Subjects, that have taken Arms against their King, a Protestant. For I look
upon this now done in England, as another act of the same Tragedy which was
lately begun in Scotland; the Brands of that fire being ill quenched, have
kindled the like flames here. I fear such motions, so little to the adorning of
the Protestant Profession, may occasion a further alienation of mind, and
divorce of affections in her, from that Religion wherein we only differ.

Which yet God can, and I pray he would in time take away, and not suffer these
practices to be any obstruction to her judgment; since it is the motion of
those men (for the most part) who are yet to seek and settle their Religion for
Doctrine, Government and good manners, and so not to be imputed to the true
English Protestants, who continue firm to their former settled Principles and
Laws.

I am sorry my relation to so deserving a Lady, should be any occasion of her
danger and affliction, whose merits would have served her for a protection
amongst the savage Indians, whilst their rudeness and barbarity knows not so
perfectly to hate all virtues, as some men's subtilty does, among whom I yet
think few are so malicious as to hate her for her self, the fault is, she is my
Wife.

All justice then, as well as affection, commands me to study her security,
who is only in danger for my sake. I am content to be tossed weather-beaten and
shipwrackt, so as she may be in a safe harbor.

This comfort I shall enjoy by her safety in the midst of my personal
dangers, That I can perish but half, if she be preserved, to whose memory and
hopeful Posterity I may yet survive the malice of mine enemies, although they
should be satiated with my blood.

I must leave her and them to the love and loyalty of my good Subjects, and to,
his protection who is able to punish the faults of Princes, and no less
severely to revenge the Injuries done to them, by those who in all duty and
Allegiance, ought to have made good that safety which the Laws chiefly provide
for Princes.

But common civility is in vain expected from those who dispute their Loyalty:
Nor can it be safe for any Relation to a King to tarry among them who are
shaking hands with their Allegiance, under pretense of laying faster hold on
their Religion.

It Is pity so noble and peaceful a Soul, should see, much more suffer the
rudeness of those, who must make up their want of Justice with inhumanity and
impudence.

Her sympathy with me in affliction will make her Virtues shine with greater
luster, as Stars in the darkest nights, and assure the envious World, That she
loves me, not my Fortunes.

Neither of us but can easily forgive, since we do not much blame the
unkindnesse of the generality and Vulgar; for we see God is pleased to try
both our Patience, by the most selfpunishing sin, the ingratitude of those who
having eaten of our Bread, and being enriched by our bounty, have scornfully
lift up themselves against us, and those of our own Household are become our
enemies. I pray God lay not their sin to their charge, who think to satisfy
all Obligations to duty by their Corban of Religion, and can less endure to
see, then to sin against their Benefactors as well as their Sovereigns.

But even that policy of mine enemies is so far venial, as it was necessary to
their designs, by scandalous Articles, and all irreverend demeanor, to seek to
drive her out of my Kingdoms, lest by the influence of her example, eminent for
Love as a Wife, and Loyalty as a Subject, she should have converted to, or
retained in their Love and Loyalty, all those, whom they had a purpose to
pervert.

The less I can be blessed with her Company, the more I will retire to God and
mine own Heart, whence no malice can banish her. Mine Enemies may envy, but
they can never deprive me of the enjoyment of her Virtues, while I enjoy my
self.

Let the world then judge by this noble character given her by him who of all
men in the world best knew her, how ill she deserved those many scandals and
reproaches upon her, which even malice it self could hardly be induced to
believe.

The Parliament had before the Queens departure endeavored to clear themselves
from any intention of drawing up any Articles against her, The Parliaments
endeavor to clear themselves.
and that it was only a scandal put upon them by some malicious Incendiaries:
To which excuse of theirs, the Queen mildely returned answer,

That there was a general report thereof, The Qu. answer to their excuse.
but she never saw any Articles in writing, and having no certain Author for
either, she gave little credit thereto; nor could she believe that they would
lay any aspersions upon her, who had ever been very unapt to misconster the
actions of any one person, and much more the proceedings of Parliament: And
should at all times wish a happy Union and understanding between the King and
his people.

However the King thought it the best course to send her out of the way.

During the Queens absence, The breach betwixt the King and Parliament.
broke out those irreconcilable discontents between the King and Parliament:
The first endeavoring to maintain the Fundamental Laws of the Land, the true
professed Protestant Religion, and his own due and proper Rights and
Prerogatives; whilst the latter endeavored to subvert all of them, by
infringing and eclipsing that Royal Prerogative, which had for above three
hundred years adorned this Monarchy, endeavoring to settle an arbitrary Power
in themselves, by subverting and overturning at pleasure the fundamental Laws
of the Land, making new ones according as their designs served them; taking
away from the King all power over the Militia, his undoubted and inherent
right, surprising and engarrisoning his Forts and Castles, robbing him of his
Ships and Navies, denying him entrance into one of his own Towns, and disposal
of his Magazine of Arms and Ammunition there, though bought with his own Money,
and intended to be employed in reducing the Irish then in Rebellion, for the
general good of these Kingdoms, and all this under the large pretenses of
Reformation of Religion, removing the King from (such as they pleased to call)
evil Counselors, making him a happy and glorious King; whilst indeed in
stead of him, as the event proved, they intended to constitute themselves so
many petty Athenian Kings, to Rule and Domineer at pleasure over these three
Kingdoms.

And to this effect they first raise Arms, The Parliament raise Arms.
persuading the People, That their intentions were only to bring the King again
to his Parliament, from whence by the violent proceedings of some Members in
the Commons House, (who suggested jealousies and fears into the Suburbian
Rabble of the City of London, and induced them to come to his Court, in
tumultuous manner, and threaten him at his very Palace-gate) he was forced in
honor to go away, and retire himself to York, where (after many messages and
solicitations to the Parliament to come to an accord and agreement) he
likewise endeavored to put himself into a posture of Defense.

But the Parliament having both the Magazine of Men, The King likewise arms.
Money and Ammunition (the City of London) in their hands, were extremely
beforehand with him; though the Queen used her utmost endeavors in Holland, by
the assistance of the Prince of Orange, and those Jewels she carried over with
her, to raise him both supplies of Money, Arms and Ammunition, by means of
which, and the Contributions and assistance of those Subjects which still
continued loyal to him, he gathered such an Army as was able for some time to
oppose his enemies.

And on the sixteenth of February, 1642. The Queen comes to England.
the Queen her self imbarques for England, but was the first time by contrary
winds and foul weather beaten back again into Holland: But fearing no storms
for her dear Consorts sake, puts to sea again, and on the nineteenth, she with
some hazard anchors at Burlington Bay, and safely lands, the two and twentieth,
with some supply of Officers, Munition and Money. But though she got safely to
shore, yet she endured there as great a Tempest, if not worse then any she had
done at Sea, of which she thus by Letter acquaints the King.

THE next night after we came to Burlington, The Qu. Letter to the King about
her escape at Burlington.
four of the Parliament Ships arrived without being perceived by us, and about
Five a Clock in the Morning they began to ply us so fast with their Ordinance,
that it made us all to rise out of our Beds, and leave the Village, (at least
the Women.) One of the Ships did me the favor, to flank upon the House where I
lay, and before I was out of my Bed, the Cannon Bullets whistled so loud about
me, that all the Company pressed me earnestly to go out of the House, their
Cannon having totally beaten down all the neighboring houses, and two Cannon
Bullets falling from the top to the bottom of the House where I was; so that
(clothed as I could be) I went on foot some little distance out of the Town,
under the shelter of a Ditch, (like that of New Market) whither before I could
get, the Canon Bullets fell thick about us, and a Serpent was killed within
twenty paces of me; We in the end gained the Ditch, and stayed there two hours,
whilst their Canon played all the while upon us: The Bullets flew for the most
part over our heads, some few only grazing on the Ditch, covered us with Earth,
etc.


Yet, notwithstanding their strenuous endeavors, it pleased God to preserve
this Illustrious Princess from their disloyal violence, which they had not yet
given over, had not the ebbing of the Tide, and some threats from the Admiral
of Holland, forced them to desist in the further pursuance of it.

The Queens Majesty was at Burlington met by the Earl of Montrose, The Qu. goes
to York.
and the Lord Ogilby, who with two Troops of Horse, conveyed her to York, where
she uses her utmost diligence in promoting his Majesty's affairs, and in a
short time raises a pretty considerable force, which with an Amazonian courage
she undertakes to command in person.

And with these Forces thus raised, Advances to Newark.
she first advances to Newark, from thence to Weston, and so to Ashby, where
she resolves to think upon what might most conduce to the benefit of his
Majesty's affairs, having received intelligence that the Enemies Forces from
Nottingham were retreated into Leichestershire and Derby-shire, to join with a
greater force to oppose or intercept her Majesty's passage, which she
endeavored to make toward the King, to conjoyn their powers.

But yet before she goes forward, she takes a prudent care of preserving those
Countries which she left behind her, and therefore she leaves Sir Charles
Cavendish brother to the Earl of Newcastle, with the command of three thousand
Foot, Arms for five hundred and twenty Troops of Horse, to secure Lincolnshire
and Nottingham-shire, the better to preserve those who were already loyal, from
the enemies violence, and to keep subject such whose volatile spirits were too
subject to fly from their Allegiance, as likewise to keep in awe those
thousand Foot which the enemy had left engarrisoned in Nottingham.

And so her self marches forward, Her Majesty's Forces.
accompanied with three thousand Foot, thirty companies of Horse and Dragoons,
six pieces of Cannon, two Mortar-pieces, and one hundred and fifty Wagons of
Money, Provision and Ammunition. Mr. Jermin (now Earl of St. Albans) as Coll.
of her Majesty's Regiment of guards, commanded in Chief over the whole
Squadron, Sir Alexander Lesley (who since, and indeed ever proved himself a
traitorous, murderous, perfidious and cowardly Scot) had the ordering of the
Infantry, and Sir John Gerrard commanded the Horse, Capt. Leg the Artillery,
and her Majesty's self Generalissima, with an undaunted and more then Womanlike
resolution in the head of her Army.

But let us look a little into her Majesty's native Country, Card Richelieu
his death.
where that famous or rather infamous Politician, Cardinal Richelieu, having
by his Policies dipped his hands in the blood of so many innocent Peers of
France, is forced at length himself, fato succumbere, to yield to that Fate
from which no subtilty could reprieve him.

He was born at Paris, His birth, extract and Character.
of Noble extraction, and took his Orders at Rome, where Pope Paul the fifth
then sitting in the Pontifical Chair, and looking with earnestness upon his
physiognomy told him, That he should become the greatest Cheat in the World.

He was by the Queen Mother first preferred to be Bishop of Larone, and then to
the Kings Counsel, whom she afterward commended to the Pope, who sent him the
Cap, and after the famous siege and forcing of Rochell, by his policy and
industry became the prime Minister of State in the Kingdom of France, and the
King growing up to age, insinuated so much into his favor, that he postponed
filial duty and brotherly affection to his love toward him, so his Policy
taught him to be ungrateful in the highest degree to those breasts which had
first cherished and advanced him.

His mind was esteemed by most to be of the same color with his habit, wholly
sanguine, and much of the temper of that Spanish Cardinal, who affirmed, That
Gunpowder in the field gave as sweet a perfume as Incense at the Altar.

He was observed to be of an irreconcilable nature, where he once hated he
hated ever, pardoning none from whom he either had or judged he might receive
an injury. The Marshal of Marillacks, and many other prime Peers of France, are
examples of his revenge.

Yet his Counsels have been by many great Politicians esteemed of high
conducement to the affairs of France; for by them the Hugonots were suppressed,
who were looked upon as one of the greatest Weaknesses of France; for by them
either Forain Princes cherished their Invasions, or potent Peers their
Rebellions: A great scourge he was to the Spaniard, but greater to the Duke of
Lorrain, whom he chased out of his Country to seek another habitation.

He was looked upon as the greatest Incendiary and Fomenter of the Scottish and
English Rebellions and Disturbances. A man he was of an infinite contriving and
sedulous spirit, as solid as subtle, a thing rare under the Gallick Clime,
insomuch that many have termed him the wonder and Prodigy of Prudence.

A mighty Change there was expected to follow in the Government of France upon
his death, but he had so well instructed his Pupil Mazarine, that things went
on still in their former frame.

This Mazarine who succeeded in that grand employment was a Sicilian by birth,
Mazarine succeeds him.
(and are a wily subtle generation) of mean Parentage, but an highly extended
Genius; he was first servant to a German Count at Rome, who much frequenting
Plays, (at which he was an excellent Artist) his servant Mazarincs quick spirit
soon learned the Trade, and Fortune likewise favoring him, in a short time he
raised himself to a Stock of a thousand Crowns, when leaving his Master, he
gets into the service of Cardinal Barberino, then chief in the Court of Rome,
by whom being soon observed to be of a nimble wit and tenacious judgment, he
was first employed in a small Legateship in Italy, which place he performing,
even to admiration, and the Court of Rome wanting a person whose cunning
policies might circumvent Richelieu's designs in France, he is by the Cardinal
Barberino's means chosen and sent Legate thither, but finding himself outwitted
here, he thought it better to join with Richelieu, and become his Pupil, to
learn more, then lose that opinion already had of his judgment.

And under him he so perfected his experience, that it will be a hard question
to determine, whether his Predecessor before him, or he since, have managed the
affairs of that Kingdom with greater subtilty.

Not long after the death of his Royal Favorite, Lewis 13. dies.
Lewis the 13th (brother to the Queen of England) and surnamed the just,
returning out of Catalonia, extreme sad and melancholy, bid adieu to the World,
having yet left behind him two Heirs Males, Children, born (to the wonder of
the world) after twenty three years barrenness in his Royal Queen, and Consort,
Infanta once of Spain, when he despaired to have seen a Child of his own Heir
to the Crown of France.

He was a Prince, of himself of a very quiet and peaceable temper, by which
means Richelieu had the greater opportunity to carry on affairs of State as he
pleased. At his death he declared the Queen Regent or Governess of his young
Son the King, till he came to age, recommending the Cardinal Mazarine (whom she
had long before received) to her for counsel.

But let us return to the Queen, The Qu. and King meet at Edge hill
whom we left marching toward the King, and whom we may now expect to have met
him at Edgehill: The first time which his Majesty had had the happiness (for
so I dare affirm he accounted it) to see her, since her forced departure to
Holland; what joy and congratulations there was at this meeting, I leave the
Reader to judge.

In the mean time, Ambassador from France.
Monsieur Harcourt came over Ambassador from France, to treat of an
accommodation between the King and Parliament; but his Negotiation was by many
rather looked upon as a flourish from the Policy of Cardinal Mazarine, to pry
into the actions of this great difference, he being likely rather to widen that
breach which was the Masterpiece of Cardinal to make, then any way endeavor
to close it.

The Queen being by the King conveyed to Oxford, The Qu. at Oxford.
stayed there till the beginning of the next year, whilst the Kings affairs
went on in a very hopeful posture; for the same day that the Queen entered
Triumphantly into Oxford, Sir William Waller routed.
was Sir William Waller the City General totally routed at Roundaway down, and
no Army in the field to oppose him, had he not unadvisedly set down before the
siege of Gloucester, whilst in the mean time Essex raised another Army, and Sir
William was recruited by the City, the Scots invited in to assist their
Brethren of England against the King, when had his Majesty directly marched up
toward London, he had found no force to oppose him, and so might have utterly
quasht the Rebellion, which had been better policy then the in vain attempting
that beggarly and disloyal City.

The Queen now drawing near her time, The Qu. intends to journey to the West.
and it being generally believed, that the Earl of Essex with his Forces had
some aim at Oxford, as the Seat Royal of the King, the residence of his Court
and Council, and the Sanctuary of a considerable part of the Nobility, Gentry
and Clergy, it was thought fit that the Queen should remove to Exceter (lately
taken in by Prince Maurice) as a place more free from the power of the Enemies;
and not far from the Sea, by which she might take shipping for France as
occasion served.

Yet was it not fear that persuaded her magnanimous spirit to depart from
Oxford, Queen proclaimed traitor.
(though the Parliament at Westminster had proclaimed her Traitor, and belched
forth many scandalous falsities against her,) but over-perswaded by those who
had a greater care of her safety then her self, she went.

And on the sixteenth of April she began her journey toward Exceter, Sets
forward toward the West.
conducted by the King, Prince, Duke of York, and most of the chief Nobility
and Gentry as far as Abingdon, where she took her last leave of the King,
though neither of them without doubt had the least presage that that parting
kiss should be the last that ever they were like to give each other.

Being parted from the King, she was Convoyed on her journey by a sufficient
strength of Horse purposely appointed for her security, and at her arrival at
Exceter was received by that City with all possible magnificence, where soon
after she was safely delivered of her fourth Daughter, Delivered of a daughter.
who was christened Henrietta.

The weakness and sicknesses incident to Childebearing being passed over, the
young Princess was committed to the charge of the Lady Dalkeith, Daughter to
Sir Edward Villiers, one of the half-brothers of the Duke of Buckingham, and
Wife to the Lord Dalkeith, eldest Son to the Lord Morton; which having done,
she took Shipping at Pendennis Castle, on the fifteenth of July, 1644. and so
passed into France, Queen passes into France.
there to negogotiate, according to instructions received from his Majesty, for
some supplies of Money, Arms and Ammunition for the advance of his service; in
which if she could not prevail, yet however to continue in the Court of the
King of France, till his his Majesty's Affairs here might be brought into such
a capacity, that she might return again both with honor and safety.

In the mean time the Kings affairs in England went on with a great deal of
seeming prosperity; Waller and Essex routed.
for not long after the Queens departure, he gained a signal Victory over Sir
William Waller at Cropedy-bridge, and then marching after Essex, who was with
the other part of the Parliaments Army gone into the West, to reduce those
Counties to their obedience, he followed him so close at the heels, that at
last he brought him into that straight, that himself with Sir Philip Stapleton,
and some others escaped away in a Cock-boat, leaving the whole Army to his
Majesty's mercy: The Horse taking the occasion of a dark night, made their way
through and escaped, but the foot came to Capitulation, and had liberty to
march away, but their Arms, Artillery, Baggage and Ammuntion, were left to his
Majesty's dispose. Several other successes the King had by taking in of
Garrisons, etc. and several Messages notwithstanding his success he sent to the
Parliament, for peace and accommodation, but could not be hearkened unto.

But a hard destiny attended this pious King, Nazeby fight the Kings ruin.
for whilst he solicites the Parliament with continual Messages of Peace, they
make all possible preparations for War, and the next year, viz. 1645. on the 14
of June, at Nazeby, gave the King his fatal and final overthrow, making
themselves masters of his Camp, Carriages and Cannon, and amongst the rest, of
his Majesty's Cabinet of private Letters which had passed between him and the
Queen, which to their own disgrace they published in Print: A barbarity which
very Heathens would be ashamed to be guilty of.

The King saved himself by flight from this battle, and gathered together as
many of his scattered Troops as he could, but was never after able to make head
against the conquerors, but still losing one place after another, was at last
reduced to have Oxford only for his shelter, where finding himself not safe
without a Field Army, The King disguised leaves Oxford.
on the 27 of April, 1646. he in disguise leaves the City, and throws himself
upon the Scots Army at Newark, who having taken that Town, carried him to
Newcastle, where they kept him in restraint.

The Queen after her departure from England, The Qu. desires to procure Lorrain
to assist the King.
had long time, and with great industry labored to bring a design to effect,
which was the procuring of the Duke of Lorrain, who being at leisure with a
rambling Army, and Money in his Purse, was in a capacity to assist any body who
stood in need of him. The Queen of England therefore treated with him for his
assistance: Many Debates there were, which way his Forces (which were then near
Collein) should pass to the waterside, through France or Holland, and where
they should land in England, Westward or Northward; but all came to nothing,
though there were hopes of his aid, till the very time that the Kings ruin was
consummate, by his trusting himself with the Scots, who had before been so
basely treacherous to him.

And now the Parliament make their Victories over the King and his friends
absolute. Oxford taken.
Oxford is yielded up to the Parliaments General, Fairfax, and in it the Great
Seal, Privy Seal and Signet, as likewise the Duke of York, and the Princess
Henrietta, who were both sent to Westminster, but both shortly after escaped,
the last conveyed by the Lady Dalkeith into France, and the first by Capt.
Bampfield, in Woman's apparel, into Holland, the Prince having before escaped
thither from the Scillies.

The next design of the Parliaments was to get the King into their hands, The
Scots sell the King.
which Money was likely enough to effect; three hundred thousand pounds does
the feat, and so his Majesty is delivered up into the hands of the English
Parliaments Commissioners, and with a strong party of Horse hurried from
Newcastle to Holmby, and so about from Prison to Prison betwixt Army and
Parliament, till at length the Independent Army having selected a choice Juncto
of their own Gang, and by force thrust those who accorded not with their
murderous designs out of doors, instruct these to vote, That a High Court of
Justice should be erected, to try the King, as a Rebel and a Traitor: A design
so horribly traitorous, as not to be paralleled in all preceding ages.

The Queen at Paris, The Qu. Letter to the King.
hearing of their wieked determinations, writes to the King, and with much
diligence gets her Letter conveyed to him by one Wheeler, servant to Major
Boswell: Wherein she expresses, The deep sense and sorrow which she had of the
Kings miserable condition, in which the bonds of nature and affection enforce
her to bear more then an equal share, wishing with all her heart, if it pleased
God, that she might die for him, without whom she cannot, nor will not live,
yet in the mean time will use her utmost power and interest by all ways
imaginable to help him.

She likewise sends another Letter to the French Ambassador resident, And to
the Lord Fairfax.
to be delivered to the L. Genesis which she directs, To her Trusty and
well-beloved, Tho. Lord Fairfax, General of the Parliaments Forces: Therein
imploring his aid and assistance, to come over to the King her Husband, to see
him before he should be proceeded against by any Trial or Charge; and to have
a Pass for her secure coming and returning. This Letter was by the L. Genesis
Fairfax sent to the House of Commons, but they not so much as deigning to take
it into consideration, laid it aside.

And on they proceed in their intended traitorous design against the King her
Husband, The King beheaded
condemning him by their pretended High Court of Justice, to be murdered, by
severing his head from his body, before his own Palace-gate of White Hall;
which accordingly they executed on that black day, (for ever to be rased out of
the Calendar) Tuesday the 30 of Jan. to the astonishment of the whole World,
and grief of all good men.

But with what unexpressible grief and sorrow to his Royal Consort, must be
left to imagination, no pen being able to express that black cloud of
distractions which so sad an accident must necessarily involve her in: and
certainly had she been of the same Religion that those noble Roman Women were,
who scorned to survive their Husbands, her magnanimous spirit had certainly
followed their example.

But since her Religion (though it could not restrain her sorrow for her
murdered King and Husband) restrained her from following him in death, The Qu.
goes into a Monastery at Challons.
she is resolved to spend the rest of her time in Religion, and therefore
retired her self to the Monastery of Challons, where she ceased not daily to
lament both his and her own hard Fortune, his in coming to so untimely an end
by the treachery of his Subjects, and her own in surviving him. Till at length
overcome by the importunities of the King and Qu. Mother of France, she came to
keep Court (though with the most obscurity that could be) in Palace Royal, a
Palace built by Cardinal Richelieu at Paris, yet never interposing in any
matters of Estate, except what might be for the Promoting of the interest of
her Son King Charles the Second, who not only lost his Father, but was deprived
of his Kingdoms by his Fathers Murderers, till it pleased God of late to
restore him, which sure does in a great measure comfort this disconsolate
Princess, though Worlds cannot repair the loss of such a Husband.

A Prince he was of an incomparable piety, and so rare a pattern of Conjugal
love, that he commanded the Princess Elizabeth, the day before his death, to
tell her mother, That his thoughts had never strayed from her, and that his
love had been the same to the last. Nor were her Virtues less resplendant,
which should I undertake to Characterize, I should wrong what King Charles
himself has done. I therefore only conclude with this Wish: May England ever
be happy in such Princes, but may never Princes of England be so unhappy in
their Governments, as the Malice and Rebellion of some men made Them to be.

FINIS.

