THE HISTORY OF THE Last Campaign IN THE Spanish Netherlands. Anno Dom. 1693.

WITH An Exact Draught of the several Attacks of the French LINE by the DVKE of
WIRTEMBERG, with the Detachment under his Command. Done upon Copper.

By EDWARD D'AVVERGNE, M. A. Rector of St. Brelad in the Isle of JERSEY, and
Chaplain to Their Majesty's Regiment of Scots Guards.

Tunc tua res agitur paries cum proximus ardet Angligena!

LONDON, Printed for John Newton, at the Three Pigeons, over against the Inner
Temple-gate, in Fleet Street, 1693.

Imprimatur.

EDWARD COOK.
December. 11. 1693.
TO HIS GRACE The DUKE of ORMOND.
MY LORD,
THe Author of this History, who is my Countryman and my Friend, having
committed the Printing and Publishing of it to my Care, I now humbly present it
to YOUR GRACE, whose Illustrious Name is more than once mentioned in it, with
just and deserved Honor.

We have had such slender Account of the Transactions of the Last Campaign in
Flanders, that this History, promised by my Friend when he Printed his Relation
of 1692, has been impatiently expected. It is now done even to a Niceness, as
to all Circumstances of Action, and carries with it such an Air of plain and
modest Truth, as suits with the Profession and Character of Him that writes it.

Our Author has been very careful all along to Right those Gallant Men of our
own Nation who have distinguished themselves in this Summer's Service, and to
whom Foreign Prints have not given the full Commendations they deserve. Among
those Gallant Men, YOUR GRACE holds an Eminent Rank, in this History. Those
Honorable Wounds which You took in the Great Action at Landen, where You
headed our foremost Squadrons, and with admirable Courage fought among the
thickest of the Enemies, are Noble Proofs of the share You had in the Dangers
of that Day. What may we not promise our selves from such early and blooming
Valor, trained up under the Conduct, and led on by the Example of the Greatest
King and General this day in Europe?

MY LORD, The Way you tread in, is that which leads to certain Glory. It Is the
same wherein Your Renowned Grandfather, and Your Brave and Heroic Father, have
walked before You: And They were in their Time the Honor and Ornament of the
English Nation; the Support of the Crown; the Love and Delight, the Wonder and
Admiration of Mankind. May Your growing Virtue equal one day, and, if possible,
surpass Theirs! May You, in that Great Field of Triumph and Victory to which
You are returning, reap a Harvest of the most Verdant Laurels! But may You
gather them died only in the Blood of our Enemies, and without Tincture of one
Drop of Your own! I am,

May it please YOUR GRACE, YOUR GRACE'S Most Humble, and most Obedient Servant,
PHILIP FALL.

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
LAst Year I Published a small Narrative of this Kind, to give an Account of
the Campaign for the Year 1692. I did not in the least design such a Work when
I was in the Field, and so was not very careful to inform my self of each
particular. When I came to London, I undertook that Relation for a private
Library, but without any thought of making it public; and though it is exact, as
to the truth of the Matter contained in it, I could have made it more perfect,
if I had been more curious and Inquisitive in the Field. This is also the
reason that the Style is not so Correct as it might have been; and as Winter
was already far spent when I resolved to have it Printed, the Bookseller made
such haste to have it out, that a great many Errors have crept into the Print,
especially in Foreign and Proper Names. Such as it was, I found it had the
acceptance of the Public, and that the Book was not altogether unwelcome: If
it please God to give me Life, another Edition shall make it better.

This, with the Promise I then made to the Reader, had engaged me to undertake
a just Narrative of the Last Campaign; and the Advantage both of the English
and French Tongues, has made me curious and inquisitive all along the Campaign,
both among Friends and among Strangers: Therefore I believe the Reader will
find this Account more Perfect than the last, as I have made it more my
Business to get Intelligence, and to inform my self of several Matters: So that
for the most part of what I say, the Reader may believe that I have it from
good Hands.

When we fought at Landen, I was then with the Earl of Bathe's Regiment in the
Duke of Wirtemberg^s Detachment, Encamped almost under the very Walls of Lisle;
and therefore I ought to let the Reader know what Credit he may give to my
Relation of that Engagement, which I did not see: As for the Manner how the
French attacked us, and the Order of their Battle, I have drawn it out of their
Relation printed at Paris, as the Account given of it* to the French King: And
for the Manner how we sustained their Efforts, and the Disposition of our own
Army, I have taken it out of the Relation printed at the Hague, which bears the
Title of His Majesty's Account of it to the States of Holland: Both which are
the most exact that have been published, and agree together in every particular
(as the Reader will find) except in two or three Cases which I have remarked in
this Relation, viz. In the Attack of our ^ost at Neerlanden, the French Account
gives out that they had the Advantage there, and ours, that we clearly repulsed
them: At their Second Repulse at Neerwinden, the French Account pretends that
we had a considerable Relief from our Body of Foot, and ours says the contrary:
The other Difference is in their Sum of our Losses. I shall not stale the
Truth of the Matter here, which the Reader will find in this History: For the
rest, they agree so exactly together, that the Reader finds them both made up
in this one Relation, which I may therefore say without Vanity, is the most
Perfect that has yet been published. I have added some Particulars which do not
alter the Substance of the Thing. I have them from such Persons that I dare
assure the Reader of the truth of them.

As for the Duke of Wirtemberg's Expedition into the French Conquests, I have
been an Eyewitness of most of what I say, and therefore need make no farther
Apology. The Reader may believe me if he pleases. I shall only desire him to
correct one mistake: I have said, That the little River Espiers went through
the Fosse of the Line of Wymbergs, and Alfeld' s Attacks; but 'twas not so, it
went before, as upon our Attack at the Left; only at Wymberg's Attack 'twas so
narrow, that they easily made a way to pass over with their Fascines, and at
Alfeld's Attack there was a good Bridge to go over. Since I have made this
Relation, I have been presented with a Draught of the Three several Attacks,
which is very finely and very exactly done.

I must add concerning the Siege of Charleroy, that most of what I say, is the
News and Advice we had in our Camp. The French have not yet published a Journal
of it. What I say likewise of the Baron de Renesse the Commandant of Huy's
having been suspended by a Council of War from his Employments, it is the News
that have been published about him; They may be true, or they may be false, for
any thing I know. I have also omitted the Regiment of Saxe Gotha of Horse,
which the Reader will be pleased to insert in the List of the Reserve under my
Lord of Athlone.

And thus I present to the Reader my History of the Last Campaign, writ I dare
say impartially, as to Matters of Fact: As for the rest, the Reflections upon,
and Conclusions from these several Matters, are such that the Reader is left to
judge whether they are just or no. And this is the only thing in which I can be
taxed of Partiality, which so far I am sure is no Crime. I do only express my
Zeal and Affection for the Cause in which I am engaged; and I should be very
sorry to have writ this Account so as to leave the Reader in suspense, whether
I am for French Slavery or English Liberty.

I design, if God grants me Life and Health, to give another Relation of the
next Campaign. And I heartily pray God that the Allies may be so earnest and
zealous in their Work, that it may be the Last; but above all, that we may
every one of us, both Allies and Enemies, so endeavor to amend our Lives, and
appease the Wrath of God kindled against us, that he may have pity upon the
present Distractions of Christendom, and restoke among us all the blessings of
Peace.

Bruges, November. 13/23. 1693.
The Reader is desired to observe, That I go in this Relation by the old or
Julian Account used in England.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
THere is now in the Press, and will be speedily Published, An Account of the
Isle of JERSEY the greatest of those Islands that are now the only Remainder of
the English Dominions in France. By Philip Fall* M. A. Rector of St. Savior,
and late Deputy from the States of the said Island to Their Majesty's, 8vo.

Lately Published: A Letter to D^. South, upon occasion of a late Book,
Entitled, Animadversions upon Dr. Sherlock' s Bock in Vindication of the
Trinity.

A Discourse of Natural and Revealed Religion, in several Essays. By Mr. Tim.
Nourse*

Next Term will be Published, The Anatomy of the Earth, Dedicated to all
Gentlemen Miners. By Tho. Robinson, Rector of (...) in Cumberland.

All Printed for John Newton at the Three-Pigeons over against the
Inner-Temple-Gate in Fleetstreet.

THE HISTORY OF THE Last CAMPAIGN IN THE Spanish Netherlands, Anno Dom. 1693.
MY Relation of the other Campaign, for the Year 1692* finished with the
Fortification of Furnes and Dixmuyde (both which Places we possessed our selves
of, by a Detachment from the Army at Granimen, under the Command of Lieutenant
General Talmash, which afterward joined the Duke of Leinster, with Fifteen
Battalions of the Transport Troops under his Command, that had Landed at
Ostend) and with the Marquis de ^^^fflers's and the Count de Montal's joint but
fruitless Attempts upon Charler^y, which they abandoned, after they had
Bombarded the Lower Town, situated on the other side of the Sambre, for two
days together; after which, both Armies separated, and went into
Winter Quarters. But before we enter upon an Account of the Operations of the
Last Campaign, 'twill not, I believe, be amiss to say something of what
happened in Flanders, during the last Winter Quarters, which may serve for a
Connection between the History of the Last and This Campaign.

The French, who seldom miss an opportunity of doing something when it offers
it self, endeavored the last Winter to make some Profit of those Advantages
which the taking of Namur had given them, in the Prince and Bishop of Liege's
Territories; for which end, they gathered together a Body of Men to Besiege
Huy, situated on the Maes, between Namur and Liege, and actually Invested the
Place the 16/26 of December last, and they went on so far in this Design as to
make themselves Masters of that part of the Town which lies on this side of the
River; but the Forces of the Allies, Quartered upon and about the Maes, made
such diligence to gather themselves together, to make a Head against the Enemy,
that they were obliged to raise the Siege, and to quit their Undertaking. The
French Sycophants, who would not have their Invincible Monarch miscarry in any
thing that he undertakes, to palliate this ill Success, made it afterward pass
only for a Feint to amuse the Allies, and to make their Designs upon Furnes
more successful. But if a Man will consider of what Importance Huy was to the
French, who are so desirous to persuade or to force the Bishop of Liege to a
Neutrality, that they may have the Passage free to Attack the States General in
their own Dominions, and to make themselves Masters of Maestricht, their most
considerable Garrison: I say, if we consider this, we must rather think that the
Feint (if any where) was at Furnes, particularly since the Taking of this Place
was not followed with the Siege of Newport. However, whether it was a Feint or
no, Count Horn took it for Earnest.

This Place was Invested by the Marquis de Boufflers, December ^9/19, who
Encamped in the Downs between it, Newport, and the Sea side. The Weather was
then so extraordinary bad, that it is the common belief there was no necessity
of Surrendering the Place at that Time; for though the Body of the Place was not
the best Fortified, having but two weak and small Bastions, toward the Downs
or Sand-Hills, that their Angle flanked was too sharp, and the Flanks but
small, and an overlong Courtin between them; yet this defect was at that time
supplied by a very good Fosse, well supplied with Water. The Ravelins and
Half-Moons which covered the body of the Place, were much better than the
Bastions, and more Capacious, the Counterscarp and Cover'd-way good and well
Pallisado'd. The Weather was so extraordinary bad at this time, that our Forces
which went out of the Garrisons of Ghent, Bruges, and Ostend, for its Relief,
could hardly March, the Ways were so deep and bad, that several Soldiers went
almost to the middle in Dirt, and several Horses remained stuck in it; and it is
very probable, that a League or two difference could not make such a change in
the constitution of the Weather, as to make it more favorable for the Enemy
than it was for us. However, the Marquess de Boufflers, notwithstanding the
badness of the Weather, made a shift to open the Trenches on New-Years-Day,
New-Stile. The third, in the Evening, he fired some Cannon against the Place,
and the next Morning Count Horn Capitulated, and the Garrison marched out with
Bag and Baggage to Newport, consisting of five Battalions. As I remember, they
were Count Horne's own Battalion. Noy^lle's, S^heltinga, Wey, and Marquet.
Dixmuyde which was now hardly tenable by the Neighborhood of the French on
both sides at the Knock and at Furnes, was abandoned by the Dutch Commandant,
in the absence of Count Horn, who had both Governments. The Garrison of this
Place consisted of Si^ Battalions, of which Colonel L^^der's was one, which
Regiment afterward went to Garrison in Ostend.

The French continued very quiet in their Quarters the remaining part of the
Winter; and though 'twas expected they would be very busy in the beginning of
the Spring, yet it passed without any undertaking, till both Armies took the
Field. We did at least expect that the French would Form the Siege of
Charleroy* very early, and before the beginning of the Campaign, to pull this
Thorn out of their Foot, which Place did most Incommode them whilst their
Armies were in the Field, by the frequent Attacks it made upon their Convoys,
and very often successful: So that for this particular Consideration, we may
conclude this Siege would have been more for their Advantage if it had been the
Prelude of a Campaign. Doubtless the reason why it was not Attacked in the
Spring must be because of the great Rains we had then, which hindered their
Troops from so early taking the Field; but why they did let it alone at the
beginning of this Campaign, and why they did let it remain in our Hands to
plague their Convoys, when the French King came to Head his two numerous
Armies, no other reason can be given, but that the French King had greater
Designs in undertaking this Journey, than the reduction of the weak Garrison of
Huy, or the taking of Charleroy.

As the French King's Designs upon this Country were very great for this
Campaign, and far greater than the Success he has had in it: So our
Indefatigable Monarch has been no less Active and Vigilant to thwart and oppose
them. To this end His Majesty came over from England the latter end of March to
the Hague, to conferr before the beginning of the Campaign with the
Plenipotentiaries of the Allies, and to settle with them the most effectual
Methods for opposing the French Power, that the Forces the Allies had then on
foot could afford; whose Number is far from being so great as we could wish it,
for the Benefit of the Common Cause. Afterward his Majesty went to Loo to take
the usual Divertisement of the Season; but still ready to take the Field upon
the first opportunity of the Weather, or as soon as the French began to make
their Motions in order to take the Field.

The French made very great Preparations this Campaign to attack the Remnant of
Flanders with all Vigor, and greater than they had made hitherto during this
War. His most Christian Majesty prepared two Powerful Armies to invade this
Country; which, besides himself in Person, and the Dauphin, were to be
commanded by four Mareschals of France, (viz.) Luxembourg, Boufflers, Joyeuse,
and Villeroy: The first of these two* Armies had its Rendezvous at Givry,
between Mons and Binch, under the Command of the Marshall Duc de Luxembourg,
with the Mareschals of Joyeuse and Villeroy: The second, commanded by the
Marshall de Boufflers, had its first Campment between Antoing and Mount
Trinite, within a Mile of Tournay. At the same time the Confederate Army began
to rendezvous in several Bodies; the most considerable at Degham, between
Brussels and Louvain, and within half a Mile of Vilvorde; which place, with the
Canal of Brussels, remained in our Rear. On the 12th of May the King, who had
left Loo to come to Breda, arrived at the Camp, where his Majesty was met by
the Elector of Bavaria, who conducted him to Brussels, where they held a
Conference with Prince Vaudemont, and Chief Officers, about the present State
of Affairs; and some days after Prince Vaudemont, who is very much troubled
with the Gout, left his Command in Flanders, by the King of Spain's leave, to
go to the Bathes in Italy, where the Physicians gave him hopes of a better
Health: And his Majesty took his Quarters near Degham, in a Castle belonging to
the Prince of Tassis, Master-General of the Post Office at Brussels. At the
same time that part of our Army rendezvous'd at Degham, another Body gathered
together near Ghendt, under the Command of the Duke of Wirtemberg, and
Lieutenant General Talmash, consisting chiefly of the Garrisons of Ghendt,
Bruges, and Ostend, where they were very well posted to observe the Marshall
de Boufflers, in case he would have attempted any thing in Flanders. My Lord of
Athlone commanded likewise a Body of Horse between Tongres and Maestricht,
drawn out of our Garrisons upon the Meuse. As for the Infantry, they remained in
Quarters for the Conservation of our Towns upon that River; and such a Body was
left in Liege, for the Guard of that place, that the French (though they were so
big with their Expectations upon this City) yet they have not thought it
convenient to insult it. Lieutenant General Tettau was left to Command in
Maestricht, with a considerable Garrison; such was the Care that was taken for
the Safety of our Towns upon the Meuse. Most of our English Infantry encamped
near Ghendt, except what quartered at Mecklen, and the two Battalions of the
Royal Regiment, Sellwyn's and Stanley's, which joined the Army at Degham.

The French, May.
who had rendezvous'd in two several Bodies, began to move; and Boufflers who
commanded the Second, marched the 20th. from the Neighborhood of Tournay to
Leuze, the 22d. to Cambron, the 23d. to Oboure. The French King, who had left
Versailles the 5th. to come in Person to Command his Armies in Flanders,
arrived at Quesnoy the 15th. where he was stopped some few days by reason of an
Indisposition, for which he was twice let Blood; but upon his recovery he
joined the Marshall de Boufflers the same day at Oboure, and the same day saw
the Army march before him. The next, he reviewed those Troops which the
Marshall had there under his Command. Upon this Motion of the Marshall de
Boufflers from the Scheld toward Mons, to join the Army commanded by the
Marshall de Luxembourg, the Army near Ghendt, under the Command of the Duke of
Wirtemberg, and Lieutenant General Talmash, had Orders to march, to come and
join our main Body, which continued encamped at Degham; and accordingly they
came the 20th. to Dendermond, and after they had marched the 22d. to Stanhoff,
and the 23d. to Hamme, on the 25th. they passed the Canal of Brussels at
Vilvorde, and encamped in a separate Body between it and our main Army.

The same day the French King had made a review of his Army under the Command
of Boufflers, Luxembourg decamped with his Army from Givry, and continued his
march toward Nivelle, and encamped at Falay the day following; and the French
King, who now headed Boufflers's Army, came the 26th. and encamped at
Herlaymont-Capelle, upon the River of Pieton, between Mons and Charleroy, and
within two or three Leagues of the latter. 'Twas now expected that the French
King would not suffer this Garrison to molest any more the Convoys that came to
his Army, and that he would set down before it; but he had greater Designs in
his Head than the reduction of this small Place, and so marched on to
Gemblours, where both his Armies joined, and made a formidable Body of 119700
Men, both Horse and Foot; computing, as it is always done the first opening of a
Campaign, every Battalion to consist of 600 effective Men one with another, and
every Squadron of 150 Maitres one with another. Boufflers had in his Army 52
Battalions, 117 Squadrons. Luxembourg 78 Battalions, 161 Squadrons. Total of
Battalions 130, which makes 78000 Foot. Total of Squadrons 278, which makes
41700 Horse. Total of Horse and Foot 119700 Men; which made more than double
the Number of our Army: So that if it had not been for the special Care of His
Majesty, and the Elector of Bavaria, the disproportion between our Forces and
the Enemies was so great, that the French King could think of nothing less than
the forcing the Bishop of Liege to a Neutrality, the making himself Master of
Brabant, and the overthrow of the Allies. There have been a great many Lists of
this numerous Army printed both in England and Holland, according to the
Original published at Paris, nevertheless because a particular List may very
much contribute to the understanding of the following Account, especially that
of the Battle at Landen, 'twill not be amiss to insert it here, where it has
its most proper place.

Note, That those Regiments that are marked with an Asterism * are those which
were detached afterward toward the Rhine, with the Marshall de Boufflers,
under the Command of the Dauphin.

The Marshall de Luxembourg's Army.
Right Wing of Horse.
Marshall de Villeroy.
First Line. General Officers under him.
Lieutenant General Fenquiers Rohan. Marshall de Camp, (i. e.) Major General
Duc de Roquelaure.
Second Line. General Officers under him.
Lieutenant General Vatteville. Marshall de Camp Duc de Monmorency.
Brigades. Regim. Squad. Grammont Dragoons Colonel General 4 De Grammont 4
Roussy -- Gensd'armes * 8 Dalon Cavalry Du Roy 4 Bourgogne 4 Bourbon 4 Villeroy
4 Chalons 4 St. Simon Cavalry Gournay 2 St. Simon 2 Orleans 4 Cravattes du Roy
4 Total 48 Brig. Regim. Squad. Massot Dragoons Massot 4 Lomaria 4 Rotembourg
Cavalry Lavaliere 4 Rotembourg 3 Fienne 4 Levi 4 Presle Cavalry Nassau 4 Presle
4 Total 31

Body of FOOT.
Marshall de LUXEMBOURG.
First Line.
Lieutenant Generals, The Prince of Conti The Duke of Berwick.
Marshall de Camp The Count de Mailly.
Second Line.
Lieutenant General, Rubantel. Mareschals de Camp. Count de Solre. Sarsfield
Lord Lucan.

Brig. Regim. Batt. Navarre Navarre 3 Humieres 2 Lyonnois Lyonnois 2 Maulevrier
2 Bourbonnois Bourbonnois 2 Provence 2 Crussol Crussol 1 Greder Allemand 2
Lauzonois 1 Guiche Guiche 2 Royal Ital. 1 Beavoisois 1 Thiange La Couronne * 2
Thiange 2 Rousillon Rousillon 2 Vermandois 2 Haynaut 1 Orleans Orleans 2 La
Saure 1 Foix 1 Piemont Chartres 1 Piemont 3 Total 38 Brig. Regim. Batt. Anjou
Anjou 2 Royal Danes 2 Nice Nice 1 Pugey 1 Perigueux 1 Moulin 1 Artois Artois 1
Solre 1 Berry 1 Blaisois 1 Montenay 1 Harbauville La March 1 Charoloys * 1
Harbauville 1 K. Jam. Guar. 2 Reynauld Suisse Reynauld 4 Scheilberg 2 Salis
Suisse Greder 4 Salis 4 La Chatre Limoge 1 Launois 1 La March 1 La Chatre 2
Total 37

Left Wing of HORSE.
Marshall de Joyeuse.
First Line.
Lieutenant Generals, The Duke of Bourbon Marquess de la Vallette.
Mareschals de Camp, Conte de Marsin The Duke d' Elbeouf.

Second Line.
Lieutenant General, Ximenes. Marshall de Camp, Pracontal.
Brigades. Regim. Squad. Montfort Curassiers 4 Roussilon 4 Chartres 2
Furstemberg 2 Carabiniers 8 Phelipeaux Celainvillier 2 Pralin 2 Dauph. Strange.
4 Mestre de Camp-General 4 Precontal Drag. Bretoncelle 4 Fimarton 4 Total 40
Brig. Regim. Squad. Rassaut Rassant 4 Pracontal 4 Manderscheid 4 La Bessiere La
Bessiere 4 Chatillon 4 Montreuil Drag. Dignon 4 Count Tesse 4 Montreuil 4 Total
32 Reserve Dragoons. Squadr. Bellegarde 4 Asfeld 4 St. Fremond 4 St. Hermine 4
Total 16

Battal. * Royal Artillery 3 One Battallion with the Dauphin.
A List of the Marshall de Boufler's ARMY.
Right Wing of HORSE.
First Line.
Lieutenant General, Duc de Maine. Mareschals de Camp, Lanion, Lignery.

Second Line.
Lieutenant General, Tallard. Marshall de Camp, Vaudeville.
Brig. Regim. Squad. Cailus Drag. Regim. Royal 4 Cailus 4 Chantreau 4 Reneville
Granadiers 1 Life-Guards * 12 Gensdarmes 2 Chevaux legers 2 Blainville
Carabiniers * 5 Total 34 Brig. Regim. Squad. Blanchefort Anjou 2 Bouflers * 4
Bezons 4 Courtehonne Clermont 4 Glisy 4 Courtebonne * 4 Total 22

Note, That there were Three Squadrons of the Life-Guards, and Two of the
Carabiniers only detached with the Dauphin.

Body of FOOT.
The Marshall de Boufler's.
First Line.
Lieutenant General, Count de Montchevreuil. Marshall de Camp Marquis de
Crequi.
Second Line.
Lieutenant General, Monsieur de Gasse. Marshall de Camp Baron de Bressy.
Brig. Regim. Batt. Champagne Champagne * 3 Boufler's * 2 Cadricus Dauphin * 3
Poulouse 2 Guards French Guards 6 Suisse Guards 4 Chavaux La Reine * 3 Perigord
* 1 Du Roy ou Turville Le Roy 4 Total 28 Brig. Regim. Battal. Cavois Poitou 2
Cavois 1 Dantin Languedoc * 2 Montrouy 1 Fontenay * 1 Zurbeck Suisse Stouppe 4
Zurbeck 4 Surlaube Surlaube 2 Lignery * 1 Sauterre 1 Theroy Du Pas 1 Theroy 1
Du Maine * 2 Total 23

Left Wing of HORSE.
First Line.
Lieutenant General, Maurevers. Marshall de Camp, La Motte.
Second Line.
Lieutenant General, Busca. Marshall de Camp, Nassaw.
Brig. Reg. Squad. Bole. Royal Allemand 3 Berry 2 Conde 2 Roguespine 4
Villequier 2 Conat. Rohan 2 Aubusson 2 Conat 3 Du Maine * 2 Commis. Genesis 4
D'Asfeld D'Asfeld 4 Drag. Dauphin 4 Total 34 Brig. Reg. Squad. Immecourt.
Langallerie * 4 Immecourt 4 Courcelle * 2 Rozel. Valay 4 Melac * 4 Rozel * 4
Total 22 Reserve. Squad. * 1. Musketeers 2 2. Musketeers 4 6 Bombardiers, 1
Battalion.

Note, That of the Reserve of the Grand Musketeers, three Squadrons were
detached with the Dauphin.

I have in this List given the Names to many of the Brigades, not as they are
in the printed List of the Army, but as we find them in the Relation of the
Battle of Landen printed at Paris, to make it more Intelligible; and though the
Dauphin's Detachment did (no doubt) very much alter the Disposition of the
several Brigades in the French King's Army, from what 'twas at first when this
List was published, yet you shall find most of the Brigades by Name that the
Author of that Relation makes mention of, in this List. This was the numerous
Army which the French King came to Head in Person in Flanders, strong enough to
have better answered the Designs of his Voyage, considering how inferior we
were to them in Number, if it had not been for the Care His Majesty and the
Elector took to thwart his ambitious Designs, by their prudent ordering of
Business upon the Maes, and in our little Army a handful of Men, I may say, in
comparison of our Enemies Forces; which the Reader may compare by the List of
our own Army when at Park-Camp, which we shall hereafter insert.

The King made such Diligence to possess himself of Park-Camp, by which he
covered equally Brussels, Louvain, and Malines, that He entirely broke the
French King's Designs upon Brabant, unless the Enemy had ventured to force us
in our strong Camp at Park, which indeed would have been a deciding of the
Business; and worth the undertaking of so great a Monarch as the French King's,
considering the prodigious Army he had, and that success in such an Attempt
promised him no less than all the great and rich Towns in Brabant, as Brussels,
Louvain, Antwerp and Malines; and consequently the remainder of the Spanish
Netherlands; which would have been a more effectual way of bringing the Allies
to a Peace, than sending a Detachment in Germany, under the Dauphin. But the
French King did not think it fit to hazard either his Person or his Army at
that time. 'Twas on the 26th of May that His Majesty decamped from Degham to
possess himself of this strong Post, which bauk'd the designs of our numerous
Enemies; and whereas His Majesty generally made two Marches from Degham to
Parck, the first to Bethlehem; yet upon this pressing occasion the Army marched
it in one day, which proved so hot Weather, that several Soldiers fell down
dead under their Arms. Our Right at this Camp was at Havre, a House belonging
to the Duke of Arschot, where the Elector took his Quarter, covered by the
River Dyle, Louvain, and the little Brook that runs from the Bois de Merdal to
Parck-Abbey, and so to Louvain, remained in our Rear: Our Left was covered by
the strong Defiles of the Bois de Merdal, which from thence covered the Front
of our Army to the River Dyle, making with our Left Wing an acute Angle. There
remained between the Bois de Merdal, and the River Dyle, a little space of open
ground which could give Passage to the Enemy in our Camp; but this being
commanded by the heights of Birbeck, His Majesty caused afterward several
Battalions to Incamp there, as we shall hereafter tell you, which were
sustained by a perpendicular Line of Horse and Dragoons between this place and
the Center of our Left Wing. The Body, under the Duke of Wirtemberg and
Lieutenant General Talmash, joined us in this March, and Encamped in the Line.
We were likewise joined with the Body of Horse under my Lord of Athlone, who
had advanced as far as Tillemont, in order to join us upon this March. He
encamped a part in the Rear of our Left Wing of Horse, to make the Body of
Reserve; so that our Army consisted then of the Forces following.

A List of the Confederates ARMY at Parck-Camp.
[Note, That Count d' Egmont, General of the Spanish Horse, has not served at
all this Campaign, by reason of Sickness, of which he died at Brussels, last
September, for which reason he is omitted in the List of the General Officers.]

Right Wing of HORSE, Elector of BAVARIA.
General Officers under him were:

The Marquis de Bedmar, Mestre de Camp, or Colonel General of the Spanish
Horse. Lieutenant Generals, The Electoral Prince of Hanouer, Du Puy, Count d'
Arco, Lieutenant General of the Bavarian Cuirassiers; Baron d' Offener,
Lieutenant General of the Hanouer Horse. Du Mont, Lieutenant General of the
Hanouer Foot. Major Generals; Prince Charles of Brandenbourg, Counts de Brouay,
de Thian, de Soye, Bouche, Oorh.

First Line.
Regim. Squad. Spanish Valencar 2 Drag. Fourna 2 Guards of Bavaria 2 Guards of
Egmont 1 Guards of Vaudemont 1 Guards du Puy 1 Brancaccio 1 Chimay 1 Hartman 1
Bavar. Arco 2 Cuir. Weickel 2 Hanou. Bulau. 3 Drag. Hanou. Offner 3 Horse.
Hanou. Du Mont 1 Foot. St. Paul 1 Guards 1 Montigny 2 Hanou. Prince Elector
Horse. de Hanouer 1 Gua. d'Hanouer 1 Total Horse 26 Foot 3 Bat. Second Line.
Regim. Squad. Prince of Steenhuy's Dra. 2 Vaudemont 1 Du Puy 1 Moncade 1
Bettencourt 1 Don Augustino 1 Ximene 1 Spinosa 1 Prince Char. of Lorrain 1
Pignatelli 1 Bavar. Arco 2 Cuir. Weickel 2 Hanou. Breitenbachk 2 Horse.
Tarkenheel 2 Hanou. Cordon 1 Foot. Koningsmark 1 Breemer 1 Hanou. Oorh 2 Horse.
Voght 2 Total Horse 23 Foot 3 Bat.

Body of FOOT.
His Majesty of GREAT-BRITTAIN.
General Officers under Him.

Prince Cassimir of Nassau, Velt Marshall, General of Foot; Count Solmes,
General of Foot. Lieutenant Generals, Duke of Wirtemburg, Talmash, Prince of
Birkenfeldt. Major Generals, Count Nassau, Sir Henry Bellasis, Wymbergh,
Noyelles, Ellembergh. Brigadiers of the King's own Forces, Churchil, Ramsey,
Earl, Count d' Alfeldt of the Danes.

Note, That where the Line is stopped by a stroke thus -- so far reaches the
Body of Foot in the King's Pay.

First Line.
Battal. English Guards 1 Reg. 1 English Guards 2 Reg. 1 Dutch Guards 1 Scots
Guards 1 Royal Regiment 1 Pr. George, or Churchil 1 Fuziliers, or Fitzpatrick 1
Collingwood 1 Stanley 1 Earl 1 Scotch Fuzil. or Offerrel 1 Mackay 1 Monroe 1
Second Line.
Battal. English Guards 1 Reg. 1 Dutch Guards 1 Scotch Guards 1 Royal Regiment
1 Selwyn 1 The Queens or Trelawney 1 Bathe 1 Tidcomb 1 Graham 1 Lauder 1 Leven
1 Argyle 1 Queen of Denmark 1
First Line.
Battal. Danish Guards 1 Prince Frederick 1 Prince George 1 Jutland 1 Nassaw 1
Oork lately Greben 1 Suerin 1 Rhingrave 1 Noyelles 1 Wymberg 1 Tersay 1 Nassaw
Friesland 2 Total 26
Second Line.
Battal. Prince Christian 1 Zeeland 1 Finland 1 Packmoer 1 Buwer 1 Swerin 1
Anhalt 1 Aylica 1 L' Ecluse 1 Bernstorf 1 Fagel 1 La Motte 1 Nassau Groningue 1
Total 26
Left Wing of HORSE.
Prince of NASSAU SARBRUCK, Velt-Mareschal, General of Horse.
Lieutenant Generals, Earl of Portland, Auverquerque, Opdam, Scravenmore. Major
Generals, Lord Galloway, Duke of Ormond, Earl of Scarborough, my Lord
Colchester, La Forest, Zuylestein. Brigadiers of the King's Forces, Boncourt,
Letang, Lumley.

First Line.
Squad. Lipzel 2 Warfuse 2 Saxe-Goth^ 2 Darmstadt 2 Ryswick 2 Athlone 2 Queens,
or Lumley 3 Langston 2 Wyndhant 2 Leinster 2 Galloway 3 Berkley 2 Life-Gu.
Auverquerque 1 Life-Gu. Colchester 1 Life-Gu. Scarborough 1 Hesse Marowitz
Dutch 3 3 Dra. 3 3

Fitzharding Eppinger Total 41
Second Line.
Squad. Nassau Friesland 3 Brendick 2 Dompre 2 Welfembuttel 2 Lip, Holl. 2
Opdam 2 Hombourg 2 Monpouillan. 2 Zuylestein 2 Schack 2 Vittinghoff 2 Boncourt
2 Wirtemberg Zeeland La Forest 2 Danes 2 2
Total 31
A List of the Body of Horse under the Command of the Earl of Athlone, which
made the Reserve at Parck-Camp.
Earl of Athlone, General of Horse. Count Nassau Weilbourgh, Major General.
First Line.
Squad. Dorfling 2 Nassau Weilbourgh. 3 Ostfriese 1 Wesel or Chauvet 2 Erpach 2
Prince Philip of Brandenbourg 2 Tilly 2 Total 14
Second Line.
Squad. Hesse 2 Dewits 2 Flodorf 2 Hubert 2 Slain 2 Saxe Heylberg 2 Heyden 2
Nassau Sarbruck 2 Total 16
We had likewise six Brandenburgh Battalions in the King of Spain's Service,
which Encamped apart about a League from Louvain, in the way to Vilvorde, under
the Command of Major General Baron de Heyde. So that the whole Body of our Army
sum'd up together, consisted of 151 Squadrons, which at 150 Maitres per
Squadron, make 22650 Horse; and 64 Battalions, viz. 52 in the main Body, 6
Hanouers in the Right Wing, 6 of Brandenbourg under the Command of Major
General Baron de Heyden, which at 600 Men effective per Battalion, makes 38200.
All which makes the sum Total of our Army at that time to be 60850 effective
Men; whereby it appears, that the French at the beginning of this Campaign*
out-number'd us by 58850 Men; so that the difference between the Enemy and us,
made as good an Army as our own. This I hope will convince the World, that though
the French have had no small Success this Campaign in Flanders, yet it must be
the effect of a great deal of Conduct on our side that they have not had more.

After that his Majesty had posted himself in the Important Camp at Parck,
which frustrated all the French King's designs upon Brabant; and that we had an
Army, rather than a Garrison, in Liege; that Maestricht was likewise very well
provided (which Place we may reckon pretty safe, till the French can make
themselves Masters of the Maes, between it and Namur) the French King chose
rather to make a fruitless though expensive Voyage, than meddle with so
inconsiderable a Siege as that of Huy or Charleroy, which was the only
undertaking that he could now propose to himself: And besides, the Marshall de
L' Orge having made himself Master of Heydelberg, the French King thought he
could make considerable Conquests in Germany, if the Marshall de L'Orge was
supplied with a speedy Detachment; for which reason he detached the Dauphin,
and the Marshall de Boufflers, with 27 Battalions and 46* Squadrons, whereof a
List has been thus published.

The DAUPHIN. June.

The Marshall de Boufflers.
Lieutenant-Generals, Duc du Maine, Tallard; Gasse. Major-Generals, Lanion, La
Motte, Vaudeville, Mailly.

Infantry.
Regim. Batt. Champagne 3 Dauphin 3 The Queens 3 Du Maine 2 Poitou 2 Languedoc
2 La Chatres 2 Fuziliers 1 18 Infantry.
Regim. Batt. Boufflers 2 Perigord 1 La Couronne 2 Charolois 1 Cavois 1 Lignery
1 Fontenay 1 9 18 Battalions 27 HORSE under the Danphin.
Regim. Squad. Anjou 2 Du Maine 2 Courcelle 2 Boufflers 4 Balincourt 4
Courtebonne 4 Langallerie 4 22 Regim. Squad. Melac 4 Rozel 4 Carabiniers 2
Life-Guards 3 Grand Mousquetiers 3 Gensd'arms 8 24 22 Squadrons 46

After the French King had made this detachment for the Rhine, he thought fit
to return to Versailles without attempting any thing in this Country, where his
Majesty arrived the 16th. of June; so inconsiderable a Siege as that of Huy,
was not worth his presence. Every body was very much surprised at this return,
but more particularly the Zealots of his own Nation, who think that Victory and
Conquest are entailed upon every Journey he undertakes: They have been very
much puzl'd to reconcile this with their Invincible Monarch's Glory: Some have
fancied (to make it out) that the French King's Journey in Flanders was but a
Feint for the Allies to bring their best Forces here, to make his designed
Conquests more sure in Germany; and when the Dauphin was detached, they fancied
this Project so sure, that they talked beforehand of nothing but of his
Conquests and Victories upon the Rhine; and a Man would almost believe by their
Writings, that they expected the Dauphin would have had his Winter Quarters at
Vienna, and shared the broken Empire with the Grand Signior. And as Triumph
must attend the French King wherever he goes, so because he could meet with no
other in this Journey, they made this Project pass for a Triumph of Wisdom, and
the Masterpiece of Policy; but it has pleased God that in this design they
have reckoned without their Host, and so have been obliged to reckon twice. The
Allies upon the Rhine, under the Command of the brave Prince of Baden, have
been so Watchful and Unanimous, that the Dauphin has made as fruitless a
Journey upon the Rhine, as the King his Father had done in Flanders, and is
returned to Versailles without attempting any thing upon the Empire.

After the French King had left his Army, and that the Dauphin had marched with
his detachment toward the Rhine, Luxembourg advanced with the Army as far as
Meldert in sight of our own his Right near Tillemont, and his Left at Florival
upon the River Dyle, which Abbey the French (who spare nothing though in their
opinion Sacred) spoiled and plundered. The French King's Quarters were marked
at Meldert, and Luxembourg took his at Cluis. The Bois de Merdal remained
between us, and equally covered our left Wing of Horse and the Body of our
Army. The French possessed themselves of the Cloister of Valdue, a Cloister of
Benedictin Nuns, situated almost in the middle of the Wood, where they kept a
continual Guard. The Ground between the skirts of this Wood and the River Dyle
being something open, his Majesty ordered a detachment of six English and Scots
Regiments, (viz.) two of the Royal Regiment, Bathe, Collinwood, Scots Fuziliers
and Levens, to Incamp upon the Heights, and amongst the Defiles of Birbeck,
which commanded this Passage to our Camp; besides two Danish Battalions which
Encamped in that Line of Horse and Dragoons that ran perpendicular from this
Post to the center of our left Wing of Horse, where they were ready to second
us if attacked.

On the 7th. in the Evening, the French entertained us with a Feu de joy, that
is, a tripple discharge of their Artillery and small Shot, which was drawn out
of their Lines for that purpose, to express their Joy for the taking of Roses
by the Marshall de Noailles in Catalonia. We found that their fire went a
prodigious length, which we could very easily see in the dusk of the Evening;
by which means we perceived the great length of Ground upon which the French
Army was there Encamped. June.


The thick and close Wood of Merdal which remained between us and the Enemy,
gave opportunity to a prodigious multitude of Deserters on both sides to leave
the Army: Of the French there were no less than 1100 Suissers reckoned to go
through Brussels for Holland, where they have been entertained in the Suisse
Regiments which the States have raised; besides their own Native Troops, which
deserted as well as Foreigners: On our side 'twas never known that the King's
Subjects deserted so much as they did in this Camp, but most of them were Irish
Roman Catholics, who were debauched from the Service by the Irish Priests at
Louvain, who when our Army is near this place, are very busy to alienate the
Soldiers affections from his Majesty's Service: There were daily Executions in
both Armies to deterr Soldiers from it, and to hinder them from running away by
Cabals. His Majesty published a Proclamation, to promise a reward of 100
Guilders, or Ten pounds Sterling, to any Soldiers that would discover such as
had a mind to Desert, besides their Dis^^arge, if they asked for it; which
afterward hindered them from deserting in Companies* The Marshall de
Luxembourg put forth an Edict for the same purpose, promising a reward of 30
Crowns, besides their Discharge, to such Soldiers as would discover their
Contrades that had a mind to desert.

On the 14th. of this Month at night, there was a very great Storm of Thunder
and Rain, which caused a great deal of mischief in both Armies: All those
Battalions which encamped in lower Grounds were overflowed with the Torrents of
Water, their Tents and Baggage swimming; but the greatest mischief was at the
King's Quarter, among the Sutlers and Toy-Shops, which being under Banks of
sandy Ground that made the hollow Way, the Banks broke in upon them, and buried
a great many of them* and all the Ground about the Abbey of Park remained under
Water, where, besides those that were killed by the fall of the Banks, many
were drowned in it.

Whilst we were in this Camp, we sent weekly Detachments to Arschot, Die, and
Leuwe, to hinder the French from Foraging on the other side of the River Rupel;
particularly that at Leuwe, which was still commanded by a Field-Officer, being
pretty near the Right of the French Army, very much incommoded their Forragers,
and daily took either Men or Horses.

On the 20th. we made a considerable Detachment from the Garrison of Charleroy,
where we had sent some Horse and Dragoons for such Expeditions: This Detachment
consisted of 500 Horse under the Command of Colonel de Bay, 400 Dragoons under
the Prince of Steenhuys, with 50 Granadiers sustained by 500 Foot of that
Garrison commanded by Colonel Heyden, which forced afterward the Line between
Mons and Maubeuge, took first the Redoubt Vieuxreng defended by several
Suissers, of whom they put 50 to the Sword; and afterward they forced six
other Redoubts, where they made 200 Prisoners; amongst which were three
Captains, three Lieutenants, and three Ensigns: After they had forced this Line
they entered the Enemies Country, and raised Contribution as far as Maubeuge;
and brought back with them a great many head of Cattle, besides Hostages for
such Contributions which had not been paid in ready Money.

We made another Attempt some days following from the same Garrison of
Charleroy, where we had not equal success. The French had prepared at Beaumont
a great Convoy of Money for the payment of their Army for six Weeks, besides
Ammunition and Provisions. Lieutenant General du Puy, who had been commanded
from the Army with a Detachment of Horse and Dragoons to assist the Garrison of
Charleroy in their Attempts upon the Enemies Convoys, made with the same
Colonel de Bay a small Body in order to attack it upon the way to the French
Army. The Enemies Convoy was escorted with a Detachment from the Garrisons of
Namur, Mons, and Maubeuge, under the Commands of the Counts de Guiscard,
Vertillac, and Ximenes, their respective Governors. Du Puy and de Bay, who had
advanced with their Horse and Dragroons, fell upon the Convoy at Bossu, where
the dispute was hot for some time, but the French Convoy being too strong for
them, they were forced to retreat to their Body of Foot, which was not yet come
up; after which the French left off the pursuit, content to have saved their
Convoy; and though reinforced with our Foot, yet du Puy did not think himself
strong enough to Rally for a second Attempt. Many were killed and wounded in
this Skirmish on both sides. The Allies lost three Officers and a good number
of Soldiers. On the French side many were killed, but their most considerable
loss was of the Count de Vertillac Governor of Mons, who was wounded mortally,
and died soon after: The French King has since disposed of his Government to
Monsier de Lubanie, Marshall de Camp and Commandant of Calais.

The French, whilst at Meldert, had still several small Parties which sculk'd
up and down the Bois de Merdal, to be ready to pass out of the Wood upon
occasion to steal our Horses, which we often ventured to graze thereby upon
scarceness of Forage: They have taken a great many of our Horses that way, but
particularly on the 25th. of June several Horses of my Lord of Bathe's Regiment
grazing thereabouts, with a Sergeant and ten Men to look after them, a Party of
the French sallied out of the Wood, and wounded three of the Soldiers: The
French after they had taken four of Sir Bevil Granville's Horses, retired into
the Wood, the wounded Soldiers were brought off, and two of them are since dead
of their Wounds.

The French and we whilst our respective Camps of Meldert and Park, seemed to
try who could keep them longest. On our side we were very much put to it for
want of Forage, and the French on theirs suffered great want of Provisions;
for, besides that Namur was then their nearest Garrison, from whence they could
have subsistence, their Convoys that brought them Provisions were not very safe
for the Neighborhood of Charleroy, unless they had a very strong Escorte,
which they could have but seldom. 'Twas their Interest to endeavor by their
long stay at Meldert to force us to leave the Camp at Park for want of Forage,
that Louvain, remaining open to them, might fall into their Hands; and also to
consume as much Forage as they could hereabouts, and between this and the
Maes, to hinder our Army from marching that way, when they should attempt any
thing thereabouts. His Majesty (lost the French by their obstinacy should cause
an universal want of Forage in our Camp) ordered Hay, and Oats, and other dry
Forage to come from Holland for the subsistence of the Army at Park, rather
than be obliged to decamp first for want of it. The French perceiving that
there was no likelihood of our decamping first, and their Army suffering very
much for want of Provisions, resolved at length to quit first their Camp at
Meldert; which accordingly they did the 28th. The Right Wing marched by one of
the Clock in the morning, and the rest followed with all the secrecy possible,
lest we should make some attempt upon their Rear-Guard: And we were near
Neighbors enough to have undertaken such a thing if we had but had timely
notice. Early in the morning we saw all their Camp in a flame, which gave us
the first news of their marching; upon which his Majesty got on Horseback, and
formed a considerable Body of Horse out of our Left Wing, with which his
Majesty endeavored to overtake the Enemy's Rear-Guard, but it proved too late.
The King rid into the Enemy's Camp, and viewed it. Some of our Refugies
Officers came near enough to speak with some of their acquaintance of the
French Army, which they found straggling behind. A very deep way remained
between them, which hindered any other Action but Compliments on both sides;
they consented mutually to a Truce to have a little discourse together; but a
small Party of our Horse which knew nothing of the agreement, came up another
way, fired amongst them, and broke the Conference. The French marched this day
to Heylissem, making their way toward the Meuse.

'Twas then that we expected to know what designs the French had that way; July*
The King, who endeavored as much as lay in his Power to frustrate them all,
ordered a Detachment to march incessantly toward Flanders, to attack the
French Lines that covered his Conquered Country in it, by this means to oblige
the French to do the same thing to secure their Country from our Invasion.
Lieutenant General Tetteau, who encamped between Liege and Maestricht, with 13
Battalions (as many as could be spared out of those two Garrisons since the
Detachment upon the Rhine) lay ready to fill up the room of this Detachment in
our Army, and as the French could not expect such reinforcement, if they had
detached toward the Line, it would in all probability have saved Huy, and in
case they did not, it did put us in a condition to raise good Contributions in
their Country, to recompense the loss of that place. 'Twas for this reason that
His Majesty ordered on the first a Detachment of 13 Battalions and 40
Squadrons, under the Command of the Duke of Wirtemberg, to march toward the
Lines, with the Marquis de la Forest of Horse, Wymberg and Ellemberg of Foot,
Major Generals under him. Of Horse, Hubert, etc. of Foot, Alfeldt, Bernstorf,
L'Ecluse and Rhingrave, Brigadiers; the 13 Battalions were Bathe, Argyle,
Danish Guards, Queens, Prince Christian, Prince George, Jutland, Torsay,
L'Ecluse, Bernstorf, Rhingrave, Wymberg, and La Motte of Lunenbourgers; Of the
Horse, the Duke of Leinster's Regiment was one. After this Detachment had been
made, Lieutenant General Tetteau came up with his 13 Battalions to reinforce
our Army.

The same day that we were detached from the Army, under the Duke of
Wirtemberg, the Foot marched as far as Vilvorde, under the Command of Major
General Ellemberg; the Horse marched on faster for more Expedition. The second
we came to Mellem, after we had passed the Canal at Vilvorde. The third we met
with very foul Weather, that made our march very troublesome and difficult. It
Thundered and Rained for most part of the day, insomuch that the Ways became
almost unpassable, particularly for our Baggage; however, we made a good march
that day, and passed the Dender at Alost, a pretty clean and neat Town, which
the French took in the Wars of 1667. dismantl'd it, and so it has continued
since without any Fortification, till last Year that the Spanish Forces made a
Winter-Quarter of it; for which end they have made an indifferent Breast-work,
and Pallisado'd the place, which they have renewed again this Year for the same
purpose. After we passed the Dender at this place, we encamped at Meyer, and so
marched the next day to St. George Oudenhore, and passed the Scheld the day
following at Oudenarde. This is one of the most considerable Garrisons the King
of Spain has in this Country, extremely well Fortified. It Is commanded by a
Hill on the Mons side of the Scheld, that quite overlooks the Town, which
exposes it very much to Bombs and Fireworks from an Enemy, but they have such
Sluices within their Works that they can overflow when they please all about the
Town, except at Deynse-Port which is the only place where the Enemy can break
Ground, and open a Trench before the place. Nevertheless, though it be so strong
by nature, and so well Fortified by Art, the French have made themselves
Masters of it in both the Wars since the Pyrenean Treaty, and have restored it
again by those of Aix la Chapelle, and Nimeguen. We encamped in this place,
just on the other side of the Town, after we had passed the Scheld.

The Duke of Wirtemberg, who with the Major Generals La Forest and Wymberg
hasted on before with the Detachment of Horse, arrived at Oudenarde on the
third, where he was joined by several Battalions from our Neighboring Garrisons
to reinforce his Detachment. We had from Bruges, my Lord Castleton's Regiment;
from Brussels, Baron Spaar and Wey; from Charleroy, the Regiments of Carle,
Heyden, and the Duke of Holstein's; from Ath, Potbus, and Slayembourg; from
Audenarde, Scheimelpenning, besides the two Walloon Regiments of the Count de
Falay, and the Vicount d' Audrigny, which came out under the Command of the
Count de Libercey, Governor of Audenarde, who had orders to join us, being a
Gentleman of old Experience, and that understood the Country where we were
going very well. We were likewise accompanied by the Count de Bergeth, the King
of Spain's Intendant for Flanders, to take in the Contributions, and to account
for them. On the fourth, Prince Wirtemberg, with the Horse and Battalions that
had joined him at Audenarde, marched on toward the Line, and encamped in
presence of the Enemy before D' Otignies, where he expected the coming up of
Major General Ellembergh to back his undertaking.

Ellembergh, who with the 13 Battalions under his Command, had on the fifth
passed the Scheld at Audenarde, marched the next day in order to join the Duke
of Wirtemberg before the Lines; The Artillery consisting of 12 Pieces of Canon,
of which two were 12 Pounders, joined us upon this march, besides Tin-Boats,
and all manner of Ammunitions, under the Convoy of Count Horne's Regiment. As
this march was great, we halted when we came to St. Denis, within a League of
the Lines, to refresh our Men; but we were taken with such a violent Storm of
Thunder and Rain, that the Artillery, and Boats, and Ammunitions remained
unmovable, and the great Torrents of Water gathered so fast together in a
little Valley between us and the Lines, thar Count Horne's Regiment which
marched first, could but just wade through, and several of the Rear of the
Regiment were drowned in the passage; upon which, the rest of the Forces that
followed, were forced to the Right about, and to Attempt a Passage another way,
but all in vain; so that 'twas impossible for us to come to Prince Wirtemberg
that Night, which grieved both him and us very much to meet with Weather so
unseasonable for our Undertaking. We were forced to lie that Night in the dirt
by the Waterside, without any shelter for want of our Baggage, and of
convenient ground to incamp upon. The Duke of Wirtemberg who upon our approach,
had marched about half a League to the Right before Maucron, to leave to us the
Attack at D' Otignies, had left only some Squadrons of Horse there, which, with
Count Horne's Regiment that only could come up to the Line that Night, were
very much Inferior to the Enemy before them. To cover this weakness of theirs,
our Quarter Masters and their Men had orders to borrow some Drums from Count
Horne's Regiment, and about the dusk of the Evening to beat sometimes the
English, Scotch, German, and Dutch Marches, as if our Battalions had then been
coming up to encamp there; and afterward to beat their several Retreats. They
made likewise several Fires all the length that was marked for our Camp, and
the Quarter Masters went the Rounds, and Sentries challenged with as much noise
as they could, to make the Enemy believe we were come up. Early in the next
Morning, we that had been hindered from joining by the great Torrent of Waters
which had fallen in the Storm of Thunder the day before, found that these
Torrents dissipated themselves almost in as little time as they had gathered
together, and so found the ways passable by Three of the Clock, at which time
we began to march, and joined our Forces very early that Morning, coming up to
the Ground that had been marked for us by our Quarter Masters, just before the
Enemies Line. Prince Wirtemberg, who took great compassion of the Soldiers
sufferings in this march, that had continued 8 days together, most in very foul
Weather, ordered a quantity of Corn-Brandy of about six Gallons to be
distributed to each Company, in every Battalion, to cheer up our Soldiers, who
immediately cleans'd and fixed their Arms (which had been very much spoiled by
the foul Weather) for the approaching Service. The Rain continued the seventh,
and the ground so deep that we went almost to the Knees in dirt in our Camp;
which likewise hindered our Artillery and Ammunition from coming, by the
badness of the Ways, till late in the Evening. The Weather was so very bad that
it almost dashed the hopes we had in this Undertaking.

Before we proceed to give an Account of the Attack that followed the next day,
'twill not be amiss to describe to the Reader what kind of Works we had to
attack, and the strength of the Enemies Line. This is a Work which the French
have made since the beginning of this War, to cover their Conquered Country
from our Incursions, to make them pay Contribution. It is continued from the
Scheld to the Lys, and so to Ipres, Berg St. VVinnox, and to the very Sea by
Dunkirk. The late Monsieur de Calvo, Lieutenant General, Commanded a Body of
Men to cover the Boors who were ordered from all sides to come and work to make
up this Line; and the French King gave him the Commission of Governor to
command all along this Retrenchment. Since the French have been Masters of Mons
they have made the same, though not so strong a Work (because the course of the
Country is not so capable of it) between Tournay and Mons, and to the very
Sambre by Maubeuge, which, as we have before given an Account, has been forced
this Year by the Garrison of Charleroy. But where this Line or Retrenchment has
the most strength, is where we Attacked it, between the Lys and the Scheld,
where the French have been most industrious to make it strong for the
Neighborhood of the Garrison of Audenarde, and for a greater security to the
rich and fertile Chatelenies of Lisle and Courtray. The little River of Espiers
runs cross the Country, and has its Spring not far from the River Lys, within a
League of Courtray, and so falls into the Scheld, at Pont d'Espiers. The French
have taken the Advantage of this little River to make their Line stronger* and
have drawn it just within; so that this River runs A DRAUGT OF THE ACTION ON
THE FRENCH LINE JULY YE 8TH 1693 The Notes Explained
A The French Line B Our Camp before the Action C The French Foot in ye Line D
Our Foot drawn up E Our Horse F Our Dragowns G Our Batteryes H The French
marching off
1 Betincours 2 Don de Augustins Spanish.
3 Brinicks 4 ^^. Philips 5 ^^^^ Huberts Brandeb:
6 Viscount Dernies 7 Slangenburghs 8 Barron Sparrs 9 Holsteins 10 Caarles 11
My Lord Castletons 12 Blancatz 13 Barron Stains 14 Saxe goths 15 Count Tollies
16 Barron de Heyden's 17 Potbush's 18 Shemilpenning's 19 My Lord Bath's 20
Danish Guards 21 Prince Christiens 22 The Iuitland Reg: 23 Lamothe's 24
Bernstore's 25 Weinbergs 26 Count Hoorns 27 Saxa Heyfields 28 Barron de Heydens
29 Fitinghofs 30 The Duke of Leinsters 31 My Lord Argiles 32 Danish Guards 33
Prin* Georges 34 Rhynberghs 35 L' Ecluses 36 Forsel's 37 La Forests 38
Vallareds Dragowns 39 Morvits Dragowns


sometimes through the Fosse of the Retrenchment, and as its running (as of
other Rivers) is irregular, sometimes it runs within 20 or 30 paces of it. The
Village of Pont d' Espiers, where both the Line and River join the Scheld, was
very well Fortified, and from thence all along as far as the Lys, this Line was
Fortified with good Redans and Redoubts all within Musket Shot of one another,
all Pallisado'd; besides every Redoubt was environed with a good Fosse. The
French, to defend this Work between the Lys and the Scheld, where they found we
resolved to Attack it, had drawn together as many Forces as they could take out
of the Neighboring Garrisons; besides what Forces lay all along for the defense
of the Lines, joined all together here under the Command of the Marquess de la
Valette, Lieutenant General, and made up a Body of 12 Battalions; among which
was the entire Regiment Royal Savoy, one Battalion of Normandy, one of La
March, and one of Anjou, etc. besides 600 Suissers; three Regiments of Horse,
and five of Dragoons. At three Squadrons in each Regiment (which is the least
the French have) makes 24 Squadrons. And now let the Reader judge whether there
was not as great a disproportion between the French Army and ours at Landen, as
there was now between the Duke of VVirtemberg and La Valette; The French
outnumber'd us as much in proportion there as we outnumber'd them here; and
therefore if we had a mind to dress this Account in as Pompous a Style as that
of the French King's Letter to the Archbishop of Paris, after the Battle of
Landen, I leave the World to judge, whether we had not most reason to say, that
we attacked the Marquis de la Valette, very advantageously posted in his
formidable Retrenchments; certainly as much more reason as the Marquis de la
Valette's Retrenchment had been the Work of many Years, and our Retrenchment at
Landen not of as many Hours. I hope the Reader will pardon this Digression, to
let the World know what we could do, if the Allies would once but seriously
apply their utmost efforts in the prosecution of this War, and not play the
good Husbands so much as they do, to the Ruin of their Common Interest.

Prince Wirtemberg, as we have said before, had moved from D'Otignies with the
Right Wing of Horse, and the Battalions that had joined him at Audenarde, about
half a League to the Right, and encamped before the Redoubt of Maucron, to make
room for the 14 Battalions under the Command of Ellemberg, that were to encamp
at D'Otignies; so that in all we made 25 Battalions, 14 with Ellemberg, and 11
with the Prince; and about 40 Squadrons of Horse; with which on the 8th, (as it
proved fair Weather) Prince Wirtemberg resolved to attack the French in their
Lines. For which purpose the Boors had been ordered the day before, and this
morning, to bring a great quantity of Fascines to our Camp. The Prince left the
Right to come in Person to our Attack upon the Left; after which Major General
Wymberg commanded at the Right. Count D'Alfeldt, Brigadier of the Danes, was
ordered with four Battalions to attack the Redoubt at Pont-David, in the Center
between us and the Right; these four Battalions were Argyle, his own or Prince
George, Wymberg, and La Motte. The order of the Attack was on this manner;
First an advanced Party of Granadiers under the Command of a Captain; then a
Detachment of 30 Pikes per Battalion to carry Fascines to fill the Ditch, and
their Pikes carried bound up together four and four to lay under the Fascines;
then followed all the Granadiers under the Command of a Field-Officer. Upon the
Left Attack the Granadiers were commanded by a Dutch Lieutenant Colonel, and
Major Chavonne of Torsay's Regiment. Our Artillery was advanced upon an
adjoining height that overlooked the Enemies Line, consisting of nine Pieces
of Cannon upon the Left Attack, and three we had sent upon the Right. After the
Granadiers followed the Battalions drawn up upon three Lines on the Left Attack
to sustain one another. We marched in this order till we came very near
Musket Shot of the Redoubts, and then we were ordered to halt. Three Pieces of
Cannon were fired upon the Right for a Signal that they were ready to begin the
Attack, which we answered with three like Pieces to show the same disposition
upon the Left; and afterward our Cannon began to fire upon the Enemy; the
small Fieldpieces fired upon the Corpse de Guarde of the Redoubt to make that
Post uneasy for the Soldiers that were lodged in it, and our two twelve
Pounders fired upon the Enemies Horse that were drawn up in a Line, mounted on
Horseback at more distance, and fronting us. The French set two Houses on fire
within half Musket Shot of the Redoubt upon our Left, lest they should shelter
our Foot that were going to attack them. As soon as the Cannon began to play,
both our Detachments upon the Right of us, that is Wymberg and Alfeldt began to
attack the Enemy. The Walloons with my Lord Castleton's Regiment had the Van
upon the Right, and my Lord of Argyle in the Center Attack. The French made a
pretty good defense for about half an hour together, but their Redoubts were
not so strong there as before us upon the Left. A Way went through the Redoubt
of Pont-David, so that Brigadier Alfeldt had only the Barriere and Palissado's
to attack; and upon the Right the little River ran through the Fosse of the
Line about the Redoubt of Maucron: Though the Enemy were weakest at these two
Attacks, yet 'twas where they made the best defense; Alfeldt's Redoubt was
defended by the Suissers, who made a very brisk fire upon us; Argyle's
Granadiers had the Van and suffered very much in this Attack: The first
Lieutenant was killed upon the place, and the second wounded, and about fifteen
of the Company killed upon the spot, besides the wounded. After that Wymberg
and Alfeldt had fired so briskly for some time upon the Right, we upon the
Left, where Prince Wirtemberg was in Person, were ordered to march on and
attack the Redoubt. The attempt was difficult in this place, because the River
did not run here through the Fosse, but made another Ditch about twenty paces
from the Counterscarp of the Redoubt and Line, and both very deep and full of
Water by the great Rains we had before. But that which encouraged our Soldiers
mightily, was, that our Cannon, particularly the two 12 Pounders, played so
briskly upon the Horse, that they were obliged to shelter themselves behind the
Hedges and Trees of a neighboring Village. My Lord of Bathe's Regiment went on
the first next to the Granadiers, sustained by Torsay's Regiment, and Count
Horne's upon the Left. All the Men expressed a great deal of Resolution and
Joy, particularly my Lord of Bathe's (the only English Regiment at this place)
gave several Huzza's according to the Custom of our Country. Our Pike-men, that
were covered by their Fascines, marched to the very brink of the River, within
30 paces of the Redoubt, and when they came to fling their Fascines in the
River, they found that the Stream carried them away; the Granadiers, who were
very eager, immediately flung themselves into the River to get on the other side;
and though they are still the tallest and best of the Foot, yet the River was
then so deep that most of them either swam or went to the Neck in Water: And
when they came to the other side, the Enemy fired two or three Discharges round
from the Redoubt, both upon the Granadiers and the neighboring Plattons of the
advanced Battalions. The Left Plattons of my Lord of Bathe's Regiment being
nearest the Redoubt which they flanked, fired upon the Enemy, which covered
very much our Granadiers, who still went on, and had Orders not to fire till
they came to the very Palissado's of the Redoubt. But in the mean while,
Major General Wymberg, and the Count D'Alfeldt who exposed himself very much in
this Action, having carried their Attacks, our Cavalry upon the Right got
within the Line at the Passage of Pont-David, and formed their Squadrons in
order to attack the Enemies Horse; but as they had now reason to be afraid lest
we should charge them both Front and Flank, they had Orders to quit the Redoubt
we were attacking upon the Left, which otherwise could not have been so easily
carried, and with the loss of so little Blood. Two Battalions that lined the
Retrenchment to our Left of this Redoubt, marched off formed and Colors
flying, but they were so much exposed to our Cannon, that our Shot fell very
thick among their Divisions upon their Retreat; for which reason the rest did
not observe so much order, but retreated as they could by the favor of some
Hedges and Houses just by. The Horse rid off as fast as they could, and about
200 Men which defended the Redoubt made a small fire once, and so abandoned it.
The Granadiers then flung themselves in the Ditch, as deep, if not deeper than
the River, and so came the Palissado's, which they broke down, and so got upon
the Redoubt with their Swords in their Hands. The Officers, and some of my Lord
of Bathe's Granadiers, were the first in it. The Battalions could not follow so
fast, because the Stream of the River carried the Fascines away, so that we
could not presently make a Bridge with them; but as soon as it could be done, a
vast many Boors, who had been commanded for that purpose, passed to pull down
with their Shovels and Spades a convenient space of the Line for our Horse and
Foot of the Left to march thorough: After which we laid a Bridge over the Ditch
of the Line, and so both Horse and Foot got within the Enemies Retrenchments.
Whilst we were getting in, one of the Enemies Squadrons appeared out of the
Village of D'Otignies to obscure us; but they did not think fit to stay there
long, and so went off to the Right-about. They made 26 Prisoners at Count
D'Alfeldt's Attack, and found three small Pieces of dismounted old Cannon, and
Bathe's Granadiers got a large Barrel of good French Brandy in the Corpse de
Guard of their Redoubt. After we had got within the Line, the Battalions drew
up upon the rising Ground, and Detachments both of Foot and Horse were sent in
pursuit of the Enemy; but they had hastened to get to the other side of the Pass
at St. Ledger before we could overtake them, only some of their Wagons fell
into our hands. The Soldiers took the Liberty to plunder, which they did that
night with a witness: They set all the Country about us in a flame, and burned
at least twelve Villages, besides the Churches of Verigny and St. Ledger, where
the Boors had heaped all their moveable Goods, and the Soldiers set fire to
what they could not bring off along with them, which was the occasion of
burning those two Churches to consume what was in them of the Boors Goods. At
Verigny some of them went into the Church to endeavor to save somewhat of what
was their own, as Flax, etc. and two or three remained in the flames.

In the Evening Prince Wirtemberg's Army joined together in one Body, and
marched to the other side of the Village of D'Otignies, where it encamped upon
two Lines; and the Duke of Wirtemberg took his Quarter in that very House,
where the Marquess de la Valette had his. This is a considerable Village, which
belongs to the Prince of Steenhuys, Colonel of a Regiment of Dragoons in the
King of Spain's Service; and to reap some benefit of his Estate in the French
Conquests, his Mother lives at Menin to hinder it from being forfeited into the
French King's hands; which is a way that many of the Persons of Quality have in
this Country to preserve their Estates in the French Conquests. The Marquis de
la Valette, after he had been forced from his Post within the Lines, retired to
Pont a Tresein upon the River Marck, within two Miles of Lisle, to try the other
push at the defense of that Pass. The next day the Regiments we had left to
guard the Line for that night marched into our Camp, and the Boors were ordered
from all the Villages about as far as Audenarde, to come and level the Line,
and the Enemies Works, from the Lys to Pont d' Espiers upon the Scheld, between
three and four Leagues in length; which they have done, though not so thoroughly
as it should have been. The Villages our Soldiers had set on fire the
overnight, caused a very great Consternation throughout the Country, and though
'twas a very miserable sight, yet it produced this good effect, that it made
the Inhabitants of the Chatellenie of Courtray, which extends it self beyond
Tournay, to come in the readier to pay their Contributions. On the 9th. the day
after we had come within the Lines, Prince Wirtemberg, to prevent the Disorders
which Soldiers might commit, put out a Proclamation forbidding all Soldiers to
rob, plunder, or spoil any of the Inhabitants upon pain of death, nor to set
any House or Church on fire upon pain of being burnt alive. But at the same
time he took care that the Country should bring in gratis Refreshments to the
Soldiers, as Cows, Sheep, and Corn-Brandy; and they had this in such plenty,
that every Company in each respective Battalion had generally two Cows a Week,
and the Officers upon each Company a couple of Sheep: And so Prince Wirtemberg
remained some days encamped at D'Otignies, as well to refresh his Soldiers, who
most of them had now marched eight days together, as to settle the
Contributions with the Inhabitants of the Chattellenie of Courtray. And here we
shall leave him for some time, to speak of what the two Armies were doing
toward the Meuse.

We had left the Enemy encamped at Heylissem, the 28th of the last Month, which
Camp they afterward left to come nearer to the Meuse, and encamped at
Borchworm, or Warem, a Town belonging to the Bishop of Liege, situated upon the
River Jaar or Jecker, which has its rising near the Mehaigne, within three
Leagues of Huy, and so runs the same course as the Meuse, by Warem, Lootz,
Tongres, and at last falls into the Meuse at Maestricht. Count Cerclaes of
Tilly, General of the Liege Troops, was at the same time with a Body of five
Regiments of Horse, and three of Dragoons, encamped near Tongres, with a design
to join our Army to reinforce it; of which the Marshall de Luxembourg was
advertised by the Marquis de Nesle, whom he had sent upon Party to get
Intelligence. Luxembourg thought 'twas necessary to hinder this Reinforcement
from joining our Army; and therefore resolved to attack it. To compass this
design, orders were given for eight Squadrons of the King's Guards, two of the
Gens d Arms, and of the Light Horse, the Regiment of Horse Granadiers, and
three of Horse, to march between six and seven at Night, as secretly as
possible, to come and join him some distance from thence, where he expected
them, besides other Troops both Horse and Foot, as many as would make a Body of
10000 Men. The Foot marched on straight before, because they did not know very
well whether Tilly had any Foot with him or no, and about an hour before Night
Luxembourg marched at the Head of the Horse upon two Columns, he at the Head
of the one, and the Marshall de Villeroy at the Head of the other. They
marched as fast as they could without breaking Order all the Night, till about
three in the Morning, at which time they were come within two English Miles of
the place where they expected to find the Count de Tilly, when they mended
their pace to possess themselves of a height from whence they could discover
Count Tilly upon the March, who had been advertised about Midnight of the
Enemies design: Upon which he gave orders for the Baggage to load immediately,
and to march off, but yet they had not so much time, but that a great deal of
it fell into the hands of the French. Luxembourg perceiving that Count Tilly
had been a little too quick for him, ordered some of his best mounted Horse to
file off, and to ride as fast as they could to overtake him, whilst the rest of
the Horse should follow them the great Trot. The Princes of the Blood, who were
at the head of them, came pretty near Tilly's Horse, after they had passed
several hollow ways; but when they expected to fall upon them, they found just
between them and Tilly's Flank a very deep and hollow way, where 'twas
impossible for their Squadrons to pass: Only about 100 of them found a way to
harrass them upon their Flank; but Tilly's Horse, which there made up the Rear,
consisting of six or seven Squadrons, being very much pressed by the narrowness
of the Ground, and besides having express Orders not to engage, only skirmish'd
with them retreating, whilst Telly's main Body rid on to get a Village where to
repass the Jecker. In the mean while the Princes were looking for a convenient
place where they might Charge these Squadrons upon the Flank, but when they
came to it, they found but few of Tilly's Squadrons that made the Rear, the
rest retreating as fast as they could. The French pursued these very briskly
within two hours of Maestricht, where Count Tilly was forced to retire, after
he had understood that the Ways to Liege were possessed by the Enemy. We had on
Count Tilly's side one Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, Major, and two Lieutenants
made Prisoners, and the best part of the Baggage taken. On the French side
Monsieur Sanguinet, Exempt of the Life-Guards, was killed, and the Duke of
Montfort, Son to the Duke of Chevreuse, wounded; the Marquis of Thiange
wounded, and about 50 of the Life Guards and Carabiniers, killed or wounded.

Immediately after this Success, the Marshall de Luxembourg resolved to
Besiege Huy, which place he caused to be Invested the 9th. This Town is
situated upon the Meuse, between Liege and Namur, the best part of it on the
other side of the Meuse, toward the Condros, (for so that part of the
Principality of Liege is called, which lies on the other side of the Meuse,
between Liege, Huy, and Dinant) the other on this side of the River, to which
it is joined by a Bridge, but at the best but a Dirty poor Town. The Castle is
on the Condros-side of the Meuse, seated in the midst of the Town, upon a steep
Hill and a solid Rock. The Castle is small, and commanded by adjoining Hills.
At the foot of the Hill (whereon the Castle is seated) stands the chief Church
of the Town. This Place in the last Wars, after the then Archbishop of Cologne
and Bishop of Liege, had left the French Party to enter into the League, was
Besieged and Taken by the Marshall de Rochefort in the Year 1675. This Town,
before the taking of Namur, was only Environed with a weak Stone Wall, as we
have in our ancient Towns in England, but since they have made several
Half-Moons, and Retrenchments about it, to make the place more Defensible. The
Baron de Renesse, Brigadier of the Bishop of Liege's Forces, Commanded in it
with a Garrison of near 2000 Men. Upon the approach of the Enemy, they abandoned
that part of the Town situated on this side of the River, and broke down the
Bridge upon the Meuse, that joined it to the other. The Commandant had promised
to make as good defense as the situation of the Castle, which is upon the Rock,
could afford; for though it is commanded, yet it is of so difficult Access, that
'twas almost impossible to Assault it after the Breach had been made by the
Enemies Cannon; so that we expected 7 or 8 days resistance from it; but the
Commandant did not think fit to stay so long to deliver up the Place into the
Enemies hands. The same day that the Marquis de Harcourt had Invested Huy, the
Enemy began to batter the Town with their Cannon; and the 10th. it Surrendered
upon Condition that the Governor and Garrison should have liberty to retire
into the Castle. Afterward they Summoned the little Fort Picard to Surrender,
which is a New Work that had been made upon the point of a Rock, but not yet
finished. The Officer that Commanded, agreed to yield it upon Condition he
should have the liberty to retire into the Castle with his Garrison, which the
Enemy refused; upon which he resolved to defend himself till the 13th. that
'twas Surrendered at discretion, and the Garrison made Prisoners of War. The
same day the Enemy fired their Bombs and Cannon into the Castle: In the Evening
the Granadiers of the Regiment of Orleans made themselves Masters of an old
Tower within 100 Paces of the Castle, which commanded the Way to the Breach
which the Enemy's Cannon had begun to make upon the Place, and the next day the
14th. the Governor Capitulated. The Conditions agreed upon were, that he
should be conducted safely to Liege with his Garrison: But the French, contrary
to the Capitulation, retained them upon pretense of Moneys due to the Cardinal
of Furstemberg, who is one of the Canons of Liege.

His Majesty having been informed that the French had Invested Huy, resolved to
march nearer to the Meuse to watch after the security of Liege, and accordingly
on the 10th. the Army marched from Parck (where we had hitherto remained
Encamped) to Tillemont, and the overnight all our heavy Baggage was ordered to
be ready to march the next day to Die. The 11th. the Army continued its march
from Tillemont to Neerhespen, after it had passed both the Geets, and halted
the next day. 13th. the Army marched on to Vellem, having the Town and Abbey of
St. Tron in the Rear, and the day following the King advanced as far as
Hupertingue, our Right near St. Tron, and our Left near Tongres, where his
Majesty heard of the sudden Capitulation of the Castle of Huy, whose weak
Defense the Bishop of Liege has so much resented, that he has since ordered the
Baron de Renesse to be Tried by a Council of War, with a great many other
Officers of the Garrison. The Baron de Renesse has been condemned thereupon to
three Months Imprisonment, and to be suspended from his Employments for the
space of one Year: Of the other Officers some have been Suspended, and some
Absolved; but one who had broke Prison, and fled, has been ordered to be hanged
in Effigy.

After the taking of Huy, the Marshall de Luxembourg drew nearer to Liege, and
Encamped at Hellick, as if he had some Design upon that Place; of which the
King being informed, detached 10 Battalions to reinforce the Garrison under the
Command of Brigadier Swerin, who underwent very great Dangers and Hazards, but
at length got safely into the place. After the King had made this detachment
for Liege, and 3 to Maestricht, he marched back on the 15th. to the Camp at
Neerhespen. The Marshall of Luxembourg being Encamped at Hellick, and his
Right not very far from Liege, sent to the Bishop to offer him a Neutrality;
upon which the Bishop called a Chapter, where 'twas deliberated by them, and
rejected almost unanimously, except by two or three Cannons in the French
Interest, who endeavored to raise a Mutiny among the People to compass their
end; whereupon they were taken into Custody, and sent Prisoners to Maestricht.
The first Bishop of this Diocese, according to their History, was St. Maternus,
one of St. Peter's Disciples, who preached the Gospel here, and had his See at
Tongres, then a very big and populous City, where it continued till St.
Servatus, upon some disgust with the Inhabitants, translated it to Maestricht,
from whence 'twas afterward transferred to Liege upon this Occasion. St.
Lambert, Bishop of Maestricht, was Murdered about that place where the
Cathedral of Liege, dedicated to him, does now stand. St. Hubert, who at first
was a Heathen, that lived by Hunting in the Forest d' Ardenne, being by a
Miracle (as their Legend gives out) converted to the Christian Faith, grew into
such a reputation of Sanctity, that he was chosen for the Successor of St.
Lambert, that had been Murdered at Liege. This Bishop was afterward advertised
in a Dream, to transfer his See from Maestricht to Liege, with the Bones of St.
Lambert, where he afterward began the Cathedral Church, and dedicated it to
his Predecessor. There are three Orders of Secular Cannons in this Church: (1)
The Cannons of St. Lambert, who are always chosen out of the best Families of
Liege, France, or Germany, and in Ceremony at Church are clothed in Purple
Furred Robes, whereas other Cannons are only clothed with Black Robes lined
with Furr. The Cardinals of Bouillon and Furstemberg, are both at this time
Cannons of St. Lambert in this Church. (2) The Cannons of St. Maternus; and (3)
those of St. Servatus, first Bishop of Maestricht, whom we may call Petty
Cannons. His Majesty has the rich Barony of Herstal just without the Gates of
the Town toward Maestricht, which he holds immediately from the Emperor, so
called, quasi stabulum Domini; and they say, that King Pepin of France kept his
Court sometimes at this Place, who was a great Benefactor to the Bishop of this
Diocese, as well as to that of Rome. We shall at present leave Luxembourg at
his Camp at Hellick, and the King at Neerhespen, just entering upon the most
Important Action of this Campaign, to speak something of our Affairs within the
Lines, where we have brought the Duke of Wirtemberg to the Camp of D'Otignies.

On the 12th. of this Month Prince Wirtemberg left the Camp at D'Otignies, and
marched by the Pass of St. Ledger over a Bridge of Boats, and so came to
Esquermes, our Left then within a good English Mile of Tournay. Upon which, two
Regiments of Dragoons, that had been at the defense of the Lines, got into the
Town that very Evening to reinforce the Garrison. This Town has undergone
several Revolutions, and was once in the hands of the French in the Reign of
Francis I, but was retaken by the Emperor Charles V, and so it continued in
the possession of the Kings of Spain, till that great Irruption which the
French made in Flanders in the Year 1667, after the death of Philip IV King of
Spain, upon pretense of a Right which the Queen of France had to these
Countries immediately after the death of her Father. The Spaniards, who thought
themselves secure by the Sacredness of the Pyrenean Treaty, had left all their
Frontiers unprovided, and so in one Year the French King made himself Master of
Lisle, Tournay, Douay, Courtray, Ath, Audenarde, and Charleroy, etc. which were
all again restored to the King of Spain by the Treaty of Aix la Chappelle,
except Lisle, Tournay, and Charleroy. The most considerable Inhabitants of the
Town that had any Lands thereabouts, came out and paid their Contributions, and
among the rest, the rich Abbot of the Abbey of St. Martins.

The day after we had Encamped at Esquermes, the Duke of Wirtemberg ordered a
strong Detachment of 1200 Horse and 600 Foot, commanded by Colonel Potbus, all
under the Command of Brigadier Hubert, with three Pieces of Cannon, to force
the Pass at Pont a Tresein, where the Enemy had above 2000 Men to defend it.
This is a Bridge over the River Marck, about two English Miles from Lisle, upon
the way between it and Tournay, which is along a very good Causway, raised
above five Foot higher than the Grounds about, and Paved with good Stone. There
are very good Barriers of Palisado's upon the Bridge, behind which the Enemy
had made a small Barricade, besides a great many Houses by the River side,
which could have been defended. When Brigadier Hubert came near with his
Detachment, the Enemy drew out some Men upon the Causway, and Posted them among
the Houses to defend the Pass; the Fire continued a little time on both sides,
but when our Cannon was once come up, they forsook the Causway and Houses, and
retired within the Barriers of the Bridge, where they seemed resolute to defend
it: Upon which a Detachment of all the Granadiers there, was made under the
Command of a Dutch Lieutenant Colonel, their Number about 200, to go and force
the Bridge; at the same time our three Pieces of Cannon favored this
Detachment by their Fire upon the Enemy, having been planted in a convenient
place after we had made our selves Masters of the Houses upon this side of the
Bridge. The Enemy fired very briskly for some time upon our Detachment of
Granadiers, who notwithstanding went up to the very Palisado's of the Barriere,
returning (as they marched on) their Fire upon the Enemy. Our Detachment of
English and Scotch Granadiers, who had the Van in this Action, behaved
themselves very well, and got the approbation and applause of their Commanding
Officer, who was an Eyewitness of their Bravery. As soon as our Granadiers
came up to the Palisado's, they fell on to cut them down with their Sabres; Our
Cannon, which played at the same time, and the rest of the Detachment that
followed to sustein them, made at last the Enemy resolve to quit this Post. We
found several of their Men killed upon the place, their Number 14 or 15, the
loss about equal on our side; no Commission Officers, only one English
Sergeant. We could hear the Fire during this Attack very plain from our Camp at
Esquermes. After this Defeat, the Enemy retired to the other side of Lisle,
leaving a small Body for the Guards of the Passes of Pont a Ventin and
Haubourdin, which lead into the Pais d' Artois. The same day that Brigadier
Hubert had been detached to force the Pass of Pont a Tresein, we were joined by
the Regiment of Scheltingua from the Garrison of Ghendt.

Whilst we were Encamped at Esquermes so near Tournay, we made the Inhabitants
of the Country come in with their Contributions all along the Scheld, as far
as Mortagne, where it is joined by the Scarpe, and so on along the Scarpe from
from St. Amand and Marchiennes, as far as Douay. On the 15th. the two Walloon
Regiments of Count Falay and the Vicount d' Audrigny, were detached to
reinforce Brigadier Hubert, who remained Encamped at Pont a Tresein; And the
Chatellenie of Lisle being now open to us after we were Masters of this Pass,
the Duke of Wirtemberg followed the 17th. with his whole Army to raise
Contributions there; and as we were to leave Tournay behind us in this march,
so the Duke ordered that day a good Rear-Guard of the Battalions of Bathe,
Castleton, and Argyle, besides several Squadrons of Horse under the command of
Brigadier Count d' Alfeldt. Some of the Enemy's Squadrons of the Garrison of
Tournay appeared in sight of the Rear-Guard, the other side of a Defile, upon our
Left Flank, about a Mile beyond Templeur; upon which Count d'Alfeldt ordered to
draw up in Battle, and so we marched as long as the Ground would permit it: We
passed the Marck that Evening at Pont a Tresein, where we joined Brigadier
Hubert, and encamped at Anapes, within two small English Miles from Lisle, and
the Duke of VVirtemberg took his Quarter at a Castle belonging to the Count
d'Anapes, and so summoned the Inhabitants of the Chattellenie of Lisle, to come
in and pay their Contributions. The Town of Lisle (in Latin Insulae, because
situated among a great many cross Rivulets between the Marck and the Deule,
which form so many Islands) is a very large, handsome, and populous City, the
largest Town next to Ghendt in the Province of Flanders, and the best of the
French Conquests. It Is the place where resides the Governor General of the
Pais Conquis, at present the Marshall d' Humieres. There is a very fine
Citadel, of which Monsieur de Vauban is Governor, the most famous Ingenier
this day in Europe, and a Man may call this his Jewel, for he has spared
neither Art nor Money to make it the finest Citadel, and the best in France.

Whilst we were encamped at Anapes, 'twas discoursed either that we should push
our point farther, and have forced the Passes of Pont a Ventin and Haubourdin
upon the River Deule, so to have raised Contributions to the very Gates of
Arras and St. Omer, or that we should have Bombarded Tournay in our Retreat, or
else have formed the Siege of Menin. There was a good Train of Artillery and
Mortar Pieces, and a great quantity of Ammunitions ready at Sas van Ghendt, and
it was said Orders were given to have them brought to us by Water to Audenarde:
But what hindered us from undertaking any thing more in the French Conquests,
is what we are now going to relate.

After that the Bishop and Chapter of Liege had refused the Neutrality offered
them by the Marshall de Luxembourg, when he had taken the Frontier Town of
this Principality; the Marshall de Luxembourg made as if he designed to force
it to accept of his Conditions; for which reason (as we have said before) the
King detached 10 Battalions, under the Command of Brigadier Swerin, to
reinforce that Garrison, which now was so numerous, that it made as considerable
a Body as that we had within the Lines, being about 17000 Men. Luxembourg, who
found the place in such a condition of defense, seeing that he could not force
the Bishop to a Neutrality, resolved to Attack the King, who continued in his
Camp at Neerhespen from the 15th. to observe the success of Luxembourg's
Attempt upon Liege, and who was very much weakened by the Detachment he had
been obliged to put in Liege and Maestricht, for the security of those places;
so that His Majesty's Army was now reduced to 51 or 52 Battalions: And to cover
his design with more secrecy, Luxembourg ordered a great quantity of Fascines
to be brought into his Camp, as if he had persisted in the resolution to Attack
Liege, and at the same time to send a Detachment to the Pais Conquis to make a
head against the Duke of Wirtemberg; for which reason the Count de
Montchevreuil was ordered on the 16th. with a considerable Detachment both of
Horse and Foot to encamp a little way off, upon the Left of their Army at
Hellick, of which the King had notice; whereupon the King continued encamped at
Neerhespen, where we had greater plenty of Forage than about Tillemont or
Louvain. On the 17th. Luxembourg designed to march to Attack the King, and
Montchevreuil had orders to join him, but the Rain that happened that day
hindered his march. The 17th. in the Evening he gave Orders for Forage, and
about Midnight the whole Army had Orders to pack up Baggage, and to march
forthwith in the Resolution to come and Attack us in our Camp at Neerhespen,
distant six or seven Leagues from Hellick; and Montchevreuil had Orders to join
Luxembourg. The Army marched as soon as 'twas day upon four Columns, the Foot
upon two in the Center, and the Horse upon two in the Right and Left, for the
greater Expedition upon so long a March; and so the Army passed the Jecker,
part about its Spring, and part above between Warem and Latin upon the
Mehaigne. The Marshall de Luxembourg at first had put himself at the Head of
the Left Wing, commanded by the Marshall de Joyeuse, which made upon this
March the Right Column. When he was come as far as Warem, he learned by his
Spies that the Allies still continued in their Camp at Neerhespen, and so
ordered a halt to give time to this Column to pass the River Jecker. The
Marshall then left the Command of the Left Wing to Joyeuse, and advanced to
the Right Wing, Commanded by the Marshall de Villeroy, which made the Left
Column; and having marched above the Springs of the Jecker, was got before as
far as Avernas, whilst the Foot passed the Jecker upon several Bridges,
Commanded by the Prince of Conti, July 18.
the Duke of Berwick, and Rubantel, Lieutenant Generals. Luxembourg advanced as
fast as he could with the King's Household, and the rest of the Right Wing of
Horse, to come in sight of our Camp, to charge our Rear-Guard, in case we had
resolved to repass the Geet, upon the Enemies approach; but Luxembourg found
that he was not to have so cheap a Bargain. From Avernas he marched along the
Plain, between the Geet and Beck, and about four in the Afternoon he was got as
far as Reithoven in sight of our Camp, and forthwith posted two Regiments of
Dragoons in the Villages of Gertruydenland and Overwinden, which were soon
after relieved by several Battalions of Montchevreuil's Detachment, which
having encamped apart upon the Left the night before, was for that reason more
advanced than the rest of the Infantry of their Army.

The King, who still continued in the Camp of Neerhespen to know the certainty
of the Enemies designs before he went off farther from the Meuse, sent out
daily some Parties of Horse to get intelligence of the Enemy; and the same day
that Luxembourg came up to us, one of our Parties returned, which gave His
Majesty an account that they could not go beyond Warem, because they had met
there with a great Party of French Horse, for which reason they had gone no
farther; which Body of Horse was indeed the Left Wing of their Army upon the
March. As soon as the King had notice of the Enemies approach, he got on
Horseback, with the Elector of Bavaria, and chief Officers of the Army. His
Majesty found by the Enemies Countenance, that 'twas the Vanguard of their
whole Army that was coming up to attack him in his own Camp; whereupon the King
immediately ordered to Arms, and to draw in Battle in order to expect the
Enemy. And this His Majesty chose, rather than expose his Rear in repassing the
Geet to the Enemies Charge, and to certain ruin, and so to make the best
advantage of the Ground he had, and to venture a Battle, notwithstanding the
vast disproportion between the two Armies. Besides, the French were now as near
our great and defenseless Towns of Brabant as we were, unless their proceedings
had been stopped by venturing the Engagement: And as the advantages of a Victory
were great, so upon the worse supposition of the event, we had still Prince
Wirtemberg's Army ready to make up the Breaches of our own, an advantage which
the Enemy had not then so ready on their side. Our Right in this Camp was at
Heylyssem and Wangen upon the River Geet, and reached as far as Neerwinden,
being covered with a small Brook, several Hedges, and hollow ways. The Elector
of Bavaria had his Quarter at VVangen; the Body of Foot, and Left Wing of Horse
reached from thence as far as Dormal, upon the Brook of Beck, where Lewe
remained in our Rear.

There are hereabouts two Rivers, both which have the name of Geet, the Greater
and the Less. The Greater Geet comes from Iudoigne to Tillemont; the Lesser,
which did run upon the Right and part of the Rear of our Camp at Neerhespen,
has its Spring about Lens-les-Beguines, and so runs to Hannuy, and several
other Villages, to both the Heylissems, to Neerhespen, and so to Lewe. The
little River, or rather Brook of Beck, has its rising about Putsay and Avernas,
from thence runs to Landen, and so to Lewe, July 18.
where it joins with the lesser Geet; and all these three small Rivers join in
one, about half a League below Lewe, which continues its course to the River
Rupel, about a League higher than Die, from whence it is conveyed by Arschot
and Mecklin to the Scheld. About six in the Afternoon the Marshall de Joyeuse
came up with the Left Wing of Horse, and the Body of Foot about eight of the
Clock, which for more expedition the Prince of Conti had ordered to march,
after they had passed the Jecker, upon four Columns, with the best part of the
Train of Artillery. As 'twas then too late to begin so great a Work as the
Enemy had now in hand, Luxembourg contented himself to order the disposition of
the Army to the several Posts in order to begin early the next day. For this
end he possessed himself of the Village of Landen upon his Right, where he
ordered the Marquis of Crequi Marshall de Camp, with the Brigades of
Bourbonnois and Lyonnois, to which the Marquis of Feuquieres Lieutenant General
joined afterward the Brigade of Maulevrier; besides, between this Village of
Landen and that of St. Gertrudenland, he ordered the Brigades of Navarre,
Anjou, and Artois, under the Command of the Count de Solre Marshall de Camp,
with the Dragoons of Caylus and Finmarcon, and the Regiments of Asfeldt;
Berwick and Rubantel both Lieutenant Generals, the Baron of Bressey, and
Sarsfield Lord Lucan, Mareschals de Camp, were ordered to march with the
Brigades of Piemont, the King's, Crussol, Orleans, and Reynold, to the Village
of High-VVinden, where they joined the Brigades of Salis and Arbouville, which
had been posted here before by the Lieutenant General Montchevreuil. Note, That
the late King James's Guards were in this Brigade of Arbouville, but not being
detached with Montchevreuil upon the pretended design of the Lines, they were
afterward put in some of the Brigades which were posted upon the Enemies Right
at Landen, and between that and St. Gertruydenland, of which we have now given
an account, and which afterward charged us at Neerlanden, where they were
vigorously repulsed; of which more hereafter. Between these two Villages where
the foresaid Infantry had been posted, viz. Landen and Overwinden, Luxembourg
ordered a Line of Horse of 7 Squadrons of the Kings House, of the Mestre de
Camp or Colonel General of Horse's Regiment, of the Regiments of Dauphin
Stranger, and that of Bourbon, with the Marshall de Villeroy, and the Sieur
Rozen Lieutenant General, and the Duke of Roquelaure Marshall de Camp. He
ordered a second Line, made up of the Brigades of French and Suiss Guards, and
that of Guiche, Commanded by the Prince of Conti: A third of Horse, made up of
the rest of the Household, the Brigades of Bolen, Carabiniers, and the Regiment
of Praslin which remained of the Mestre de Camp Generals Brigade; The Marquis
de Feuquieres, and the Sieur Busca, both Lieutenant Generals, the Duke of
Elboeuf, and the Count of Nassau, Mareschals de Camp, had the Command of this
Line. After, he ordered a fourth Line of Foot, consisting of the Brigades of
Vermandois, Zurbeck, and Zurlaube Suissers, Nice, Royal Roussillon, and la
Sarre. The rest of the Horse, Commanded by Lieutenant General Vateville, made
up several other Lines, as the Ground would permit; and the whole disposition
of the Horse was made according to the Orders received from the Duke of
Chartres, who commanded it. The Chevalier de Bezons Marshall de Camp, with the
Reserve, was posted behind the Village of Overwinden, and Lieutenant General
Ximenes, and Marshall de Camp Pracontal were commanded to the same place with
several Brigades of Horse drawn both from the Right and from the Left. The
Reserve was made up here with three Squadrons of the Grand Mousquetaires, the
Regiments of Dragoons of Bellegarde, St. Fremond, St. Hermine, each consisting
of four Squadrons, besides two Battalions of the Fuziliers. This is the Order
in which the French Army remained this Night.

As soon as the Enemy drew up by our Camp, the King ordered Brigadier Ramsey
with his Brigade then composed of five Battalions, viz. Offerrell, Mackay,
Lauder, Leven, and Monroe, to the Right of all before our Right Wing of Horse,
to guard some Hedges and hollow Ways which there covered our Right just upon
the Right of the Village of Laer. The Brandenbourg Battalions were posted at
this Village, and to the Left of it, and more to the Lest the Infantry of
Hanover. Prince Charles of Brandenbourg, as Major General, commanded the six
Battalions of Brandenbourg, and Lieutenant General Du Mont those of Hanover,
with whom he was to defend the Village of Neerwinden, that covered part of our
Camp between the Right Wing of Horse and our main Body. These were afterward
reinforced by the First Battalion of the First Regiment of Guards, the Second
Battalion of Dutch Guards, and the Second Battalion of Scotch Guards. Upon the
Left at Neerlanden his Majesty ordered the First Battalion of the Royal
Regiment, Churchill's, Selwyn's, and Trelawney's, Prince Frederick's Battalion
of Danes, and Fagel's, to possess this Vilage that covered the Left of our Body
of Foot, which upon the Enemies approach had wheeled from the Left to the
Right, to bring up their Left to the Brook of Beck, where 'twas covered by this
Village of Neerlanden. The Ground was open between Neerwinden and Neerlanden,
whereupon his Majesty ordered a Retrenchment to be made in the night from the
one to the other, to cover our Body of Foot, which indeed was but a slight
Breast-work, as a Man may judge by the time they had to make, and the number of
Men that worked about it, viz. 30 Men per Battalion; and yet the French King is
pleased to call this, in his Letter to the Archbishop of Paris, a formidable
Retrenchment; which Hyperbolical Epithet would certainly have been more
becoming a Poet's licencious way of writing, who to render the least things
admirable is allowed to heigthen their Idea's with pompous and high-flown
Epithets, than the Honor and Credit of a King, who, one would think, should be
obliged in such a Case to the strictest Rules of Truth, particularly when it is
to set forth his own Praise. What remained of the Body of Foot was drawn up in
one Line within this Retrenchment to defend it. Our Dragoons upon the Left were
ordered to the Village of Dormal to guard that Pass upon the Brook of Beck, and
from thence our Left Wing of Horse reached to Neerlanden, where 'twas covered
by this Brook, and from thence turned off to the Right behind our Body of Foot,
where it made as 'twere the Figure of an Elbow.

The King, July 19.
who hitherto had been on Horseback, continually till late in the Evening, to
order the disposition of his Army, to visit and secure the Posts that covered
us, and to see how our Retrenchment went on, at last ordered his Coach to be
brought up to the Rear of Stanley's Regiment, where his Majesty went in to take
a little rest, and at the same time to be ready upon every Occasion. The King
reposed in his Coach two or three hours, and early in the morning his Majesty,
whose Piety is as unparalled as his Valor, sent for Doctor Menard, one of
his Chaplains, into the Coath to pray with him suitably to the Occasion, and to
beg a Blessing upon his Majesty's Arms, but above all that God would be pleased
to preserve his precious Person (as he had hitherto done in the most evident
Dangers) under the Wings of his Almighty and Gracious Providence. And though the
King, who is Pious without Ostentation or Hypocrisy, would not have his
Devotion published out of his Closet, yet I thought my self obliged to publish
this, for an Example to our Officers and Soldiers, that they may be sensible
that the most Heroic Valor is that which is grounded upon a good Conscience,
and a true Christian Piety; that they are mightily mistaken who think that
Piety at such a time does express a dejectedness and fear of Mind, (which
indeed is true in those, who are never Pious but then) and that Men cannot
express how undaunted and unconcerned they are at such an hour, but by
bellowing out their Oaths, and telling Stories of their filthy and infamous
Debaucheries. Would to God his Majesty's Forces would as readily propose to
themselves the King's Example in this Case, as they are willing to follow him
when he leads them to engage their Enemies.

At Sunrising we found the Enemies drawn up within Cannon-shot, which then
began to play upon them with good success: They sustained it with an admirable
Constancy, and though our Cannon made great execution (being very well posted
upon several Batteries on the Right and Left, and all along within the
Retrenchment) yet the Enemies Horse remained as firm and immovable as so many
Rocks, without offering to make any motion for about two hours together, till
about six of the Clock that they made a motion to draw nearer to our
Retrenchment, but they found our Cannon so inconvenient, that they quitted the
middle of the Plain, and made their Infantry march off some to our Right
toward the Villages of Neerwinden and Lare, and to our Left toward the
Village of Neerlanden. Luxembourg, who found that to make his way into our Camp
he must first make himself Master of the Villages of Lare or Noerwinden,
ordered about eight of the Clock the Attack of this Left Village after this
manner. Lieutenant General Rubantel commanded the Right of the Attack with the
King's and Crussol's Brigades: Montchevreuill the Left with the Brigades of
Salis, Suissers, and Arbouville. The Duke of Berwick the Center with the
Brigades of Piemont and Orleans. These three Lieutenant-Generals had under them
Baron Bressey, and Sarsfield Lord Lucan, for Major-Generals. Thus far the
French Account. To sustain the Attack made by these six Brigades, as we have
before told it, we had only the six Battalions of Hanover, and three of the
Guards. The Sieur Reynold had at the same time Orders to join the Reserve with
his Brigade, and the Sieurs Ximenes and Pracontal with their Body of Horse, and
to attack the Village of Lare, where Brigadier Ramsey commanded with his five
Battalions, besides the Battalions of Churchill and Trelawney that had been
sent off from the Left at Neerlanden (where they had been posted the night
before) to reinforce Ramsey upon the Right. The Enemy made their Attack with
all the Vigor possible, and the success was various for some time. The First
Battalion of Guards was at first broken, and then rallied again with the
Second, after the loss of a great many Officers and Soldiers. The French were
forced to give way, but the Duke of Bourbon came to their relief with the
Brigade of Guiche, which renewed their Vigor, and then ours on their side
began to make way. Brigadier Ramsey was attacked very vigorously with the whole
Reserve of Dragoons besides the Regiment Colonel, that had re-inforc'd it with
Reynold's Brigade. The Brandenbourg Battalions who lined the Hedges and Way
between Lare and Neerwinden had their share between these two Attacks. The
Dispute was hot at Lare, and the Fire very violent, but our People at last gave
way, by which the Enemy had the opportunity to come in upon the Right and
charge our Horse, but the Elector of Bavaria received them with such Vigor
that he drove them back again with a great slaughter: Brigadier Ramsey rallied
his Brigade, and they charged the Enemy that had possessed themselves of the
Village of Lare with such Fury that they beat them out again, regained their
Post, and made great slaughter among the Enemies. The Brandenbourg Battalions
with Prince Charles became again Masters of their Post; and the King rallied
the Hanover and his own Battalions at Neerwinden, and made them Charge the
Enemy again, where they had now, as appears by their own Account which I have
inserted, seven Brigades; Crussoll, the King's, Salis, Arbouville, Piemont,
Orleans, and Guiche, under the Command of three Lieutenant-Generals, besides
the Duke of Bourbon who had come to the Relief with the last Brigade;
nevertheless our handful of rallied Men charged them with such Vigor, that
they made them retreat, though they could not so entirely beat them out of this
Village, but that they continued Masters of some of the outermost Hedges. The
French Account to cover this, says, that we were then considerably reinforced
both at Lare and Neerwinden from our Body of Foot; but it is certain there was
no such thing; 'twas only the same Forces rallied that had the Credit of
re-gaining their former Post, and of beating back their numerous Enemies that
had taken it from them. What remained of our Infantry was but enough to line
the Retrenchment that covered us to the Plain, and 'twas not thought fit to
bring one Battalion from thence to reinforce our Troops at Neerwinden, lest we
should have left the most dangerous way into our Camp open to the Enemy. The
Duke of Berwick, who had been very busy and eager at this Attack, pushed so
far as to fall in amongst our Men with his Aid de Camp Acmoughty: They were
undistinguished for some time, till Brigadier Churchill came near, and heard
them cursing the Suissers for not having done their Duty. The Brigadier
remembered Acmoughty's Face, and though he did not see the Duke of Berwick's, yet
by Acmoughty's Employment he guessed at the Person, and so made them both his
Prisoners.

The French tried their Fortune after this at Neerlanden, to see if they could
have better success upon our Left than they had upon our Right. The King (as we
have said before) had in the morning, sent off from this Post the Battalions of
Churchill and Trelawney to reinforce Brigadier Ramsey upon the Right, so that
there remained but four Battalions for the Defense of this Place, viz. The
First Battalion of the Royal Regiment, Selwyn's, Prince Frederick's, and
Fagel's. The four Regiments of Dragoons of Cailus, Finmarcon, and two of Asfeld
had passed the Brook of Beck, between this and Landen, to come and attack us
upon our Flank in this Post. The Marquis de Crequi, who commanded the Brigades
that had been posted the overnight at Landen, ordered them down to Charge us at
the same time in Front on this side of the Brook. The Brigades were,
Bourbonnois, Lyonnois, Anjou, and Artois, King James his Guards being then
amongst them. It Is true, the Post we had to defend was not weak; but 'twas
attacked with a great disproportion of Forces, and the Fire was very smart on
both sides. The King, who was every where where there was any Action, rid from
the Right here to the Left as soon as the Enemy attacked this Post. The First
Battalion of the Royal Regiment was after a sharp dispute forced to retire, but
after sustained by Selwin's, who observing a Passage in this place where Horse
could come in upon his Rear, ordered Trees to be cut down, and stop it up. We
caused likewise that House to be set on fire, where Hamilton's Granadiers had
before been posted: But both these Regiments were at last sustained by Prince
Frederick's, and Fagel's, and after a sharp Dispute of about two hours had the
advantage; the Enemy were entirely beaten off, and pursued quite out of our
Defile into the very Plain, so that they attempted this Place no more. The
King, who was present most part of the time with Selwyn's Regiment, was an
Eyewitness of this Action, and beheld them pursuing the Enemies. The French
Account pretends that we were beaten from this Post quite into our
Retrenchment, and that because Luxembourg found that this was not a place where
Horse could pass into our Camp, he ordered them to leave it; but the truth is
they left it because we beat them from it.

Hitherto the success of the Day was visibly on our side, and both our
Artillery and small Shot had done wonders. And the French who continued still a
faint fire at Neerwinden seemed to have their Belly full. It Is said that most
of the General Officers were of Opinion to retire, but Luxembourg, who had
still the Brigade of the French and Suisse Guards, and the Suisse Brigades of
Zurlaube and Zurbeck, as a Reserve of fresh Men, resolved with these to try
the other Onset, and to see if they could not carry the Village of Neerwinden by
this their very last effort. The Prince of Conti came at the Head of these
Brigades to make the Attack. The Enemies had remained Masters of the outermost
Hedges of this Village, as we have said before, and our rallied Forces, though
they had the advantage in the last Charge to make the Enemy give way
considerably, yet they could not entirely clear the Village of them. The Prince
of Conti, with these three fresh Brigades, and the best Foot the French had in
their Army, charged our People so vigorously (who had been engaged here from
the beginning to this time, which was now between two and three of the Clock,
and wearied with so long service) that they were forced at last to give way,
and the French remained Masters of the Avenues of this Village. Immediately
upon this success the Marshall de Luxembourg came to observe the Passages that
led to our Camp for the Horse to march in. He found a very narrow one; however
the Marshall de Villeroy undertook to bring in Horse this way, and so he
ordered five Squadrons of the King's House to file off upon the Left (which was
the nearest to the Pass) to come into our Camp. The Light Horse first, then the
Gens d'Armes, and after three Squadrons of Life-Guards. As this Body of Horse
came into our Camp they extended themselves upon their Left, and formed their
Squadrons under their Infantry. Count d'Arco, General of the Bavarian
Curassiers, charged them with such Vigor that he repulsed them quite within
their Foot, notwithstanding their brave resistance. The Duke of Chartres, who
charged at the Head of the French Horse, found himself environed with our
Forces, and narrowly escaped being made Prisoner. 'Twas then that we
endeavored to regain once more this Post of Neerwinden. The Elector upon the
Right, ordered two Battalions to Charge the Enemy in Front, whilst three others
should Charge them upon their Left Flank, but the first Brigades of Piemont,
the King's, Crussol, Guiche, Arbouville, and Orleans, upon the Advantage the
Brigade of Guards and Suissers had now gained at this place, Rallied and
reinforced them; so that the Attempt became impossible; They fell upon two
Battalions of Hanouer, and made them quite give way. The two Battalions* one of
Dutch and the other of Scots Guards, which the Elector had commanded to Charge
the Enemy in the Front, had spent all their Ammunitions by their continual Fire
for so many hours: The Elector ordered to have Ammunition brought them, but it
could not come time enough to do business. The King, who had left Neerlanden
upon the Enemy's fresh Attempt upon this Place, led twice the English
Battalions to the Charge, up to the right of the Retrenchment, which was now
Flanked and under the Enemy's Command, where they Fought with very much bravery
as they had done every where else. In the mean while Luxembourg, who had found
a more convenient Passage for the Horse between the Posts of the King's and
Zurbeck's Brigades, came in himself with the Prince of Conti and the Count de
Marsin into the Plain of our Camp, with the Carabiniers and several other
Regiments, whilst the Marshall de Joyeuse and the Duke of Bourbon (who had
left the Brigade of Guiche to Post himself upon his Wing of Horse) passed with
the Count Nassau Marshall de Camp, more to his Left between the Villages of
Neerwinden and Lare, with the Mestre de Camp's Royal Roussillon, and
Cuirassiers Brigades. The first that had come in with Conti joined with the
King's House (that had Rallied behind their Foot where they had been repulsed
by the Count d' Arco) and fell on upon the Hanouer Horse, and broke them. The
Sieur Ximenes, the Count de Guiscard, the Chevalier Bezons, and the Sieur
Pracontal, came in upon their Left, with part of the second Line of Horse, and
the Reserve, along the Hedges of Lare. The Marquis of Harcourt, who had been
sent for from Huy with his Detachment of 22 Squadrons, came time enough to have
his share of the day; He joined these, and made his Dragoons alight to chase
our Foot out of the Village of Laer. The Duke of Villeroy came in upon our
Right of the Retrenchment with the Sieur Rosen, and the Marquis de Feuquieres,
and the Sieur Busca, Lieutenant-Generals, and the Duke of Roquelaure, Marshall
de Camp, with the rest of the King's House; however, this Place was disputed
with a great deal of Bravery by our Right of the English Foot Posted here. They
were Flanked by the Enemy's Foot, now Masters of the Village of Neerwinden, and
in Front by the Brigades of Vermandois, Nice, Roussillon, and la Sare: They
came off and Rallyed several times, and went on again with a great deal of
Courage, notwithstanding the Enemy's continued Fire both Front and Flank; but
at last the Enemy overpowered them so much, that they remained Masters of this
part of the Retrenchment, which they levelled to make room for this Body of
Horse to come in: However, they did not come in upon so easy Terms, but that
the first Troop of Life-Guards, whereof the Marshall de Luxembourg is Colonel,
lost their Standard, which was taken by a Soldier of Talmash's Battalion of
Guards. The Fusiliers suffered very much in this Action.

After the Hanover Horse had been broken by the Enemy, the rest of our Right
Wing of Horse being cut off from our Body of Foot, was soon overthrown by them,
who now had the opportunity to Charge us both Front and Flank. The Elector of
Bavaria did what he could to resist the numerous Multitude of the Enemy's Horse
that Charged him thus; but finding it impossible, he, with the Advice of his
Generals, resolved to Retreat, and made the Cuirassiers by a Countermarch face
the Enemy; but the Enemy had already so far overpowered them, that the Retreat
was difficult. The Enemy Charging on all sides, mingled themselves with the
Horse that had got to the River. The Elector with some difficulty and hazard
passed the Bridge, and Rallied on the other side as many of our scattered Horse
and Foot as could get over, which did some Service to those who were still on
this side of the River ready to pass. The King did what he could to remedy this
Disorder in our Right Wing of Horse; he rid to the Left to bring up the English
Horse for the relief of our Right: But the Enemy, who were now Masters of our
Retrenchment, had got another Body of Horse in our Camp more, to their Right of
Villeroy, under the Command of the Duke d' Elboeuf Marshall de Camp, followed
by Lieutenant General Vatteville, with the Right of the Second Line. The Duke
de Montmorency, who hitherto had been with the Marshall de Luxembourg his
Father, repaired to his Post here as Marshall de Camp, and put himself at the
Head of the Brigades of Rotembourg and Presle; these fell upon the Right Flank
of the Dutch Horse, and put them in disorder before that the English Horse
which were led on by the King, could come up and form their Squadrons; so that
they were forced to Charge the Enemy in the same order they rid up to them, and
most of them had rid as fast as the Horse could Gallop; however, that did not
hinder several of them from doing extraordinary Service that day. The King
Charged at the Head of them himself, and Luxembourg's Account says the same
thing of his Majesty, that he Fought at the Head of my Lord Galloway's
Regiment, which distinguished its self very much this day. Colonel Wyndham
Charged several times through and through the Enemy's Squadrons. Colonel
Langston was made Prisoner. The Duke of Ormond Charged at the Head of one of
Brigadier Lumley's Squadrons, that had the opportunity to form it self in
Order, and Fought amongst the thickest of the Enemies with an incomparable
Bravery, such as became the Son of the Great Ossory, and the Heir of the
Virtues as well as of the Wealth of a Family of Hero's. His Horse (as he was
Engaged in the crowd of Enemies) was shot under him, and a Villain was offering
to Stab him, which he already had endeavored by a push of his Sword down the
upper part of his Breast, after he had first cut him upon the Wrist; when a
Generous Enemy (a Gentleman of the French King's Guards) perceiving such an air
of Virtue and Quality, rid up and stopped the bloody Villain's Hand, and asked
his Name and Quality, of which he gave immediate notice to the Duke d' Elboeuf,
who (as we have now said) Headed the Horse in this place. He received the Duke
of Ormond with very great Civility, gave him the ablest Surgeons to dress him,
and sent him in his Coach to his Quarter.

The King, who saw now that the French Horse was got in every where, that they
had overthrown our Right Wing which already passed the River in great disorder,
and that 'twas impossible to resist, ordered our Infantry to retreat to Dormal
upon the Brook of Beck, which Post had hitherto been kept by the Dragoons of
the Left Wing, who had nothing to do this day: The Left of this Wing of Horse
passed at Osmal a little below, and so they went by the King's Orders to Lewe.
The King, who had stayed so long to give Orders for the Retreat till he found
that the Enemies were surrounding him on all sides, and had already taken
several Prisoners almost by his Majesty's Person, resolved to repass the River
at the Bridge that had been made at Neerhespen. 'Twas with very great
difficulty that the King gained this Pass. There was now nothing but Confusion
and Disorder in our Camp; all those which could not get the Passes for the
Retreat, being pressed by the Enemy, were forced to fling themselves into the
River in our Rear; this was the fate of our Right Wing of Horse, and part of
the Left, and of the Foot that had Engaged at Neerwinden and Lare, where the
Enemy had cut off the Communication with our Left. A great many of both Horse
and Foot were drowned in the River, where the opposite Banks were generally so
very steep and high, that when they were got to the other side, yet even then
they found 'twas very difficult for them to save themselves, especially the
Horse: My Lord of Athlone narrowly escaped being drowned. The Cannon and
Artillery Wagons made up so fast to the Passes upon the River, that they
meeting from all sides, (besides Horse and Foot) were generally so wedged in,
that 'twas almost impossible to get either one way or the other, which is the
reason that so many of our Cannon were taken, and only that escaped which went
off with the Infantry by Dormal to Lewe. If the Enemy's Horse were so brisk to
Charge those who could retreat no where but by the River, where our People were
in the greatest Confusion imaginable, they were as cautious to meddle with
those who could observe the least Order in their Retreat. Lieutenant General
Talmash had the care to bring off the English Foot of the main Body by Dormal,
which he did with as much Prudence as he had before fought with Bravery in the
unequal dispute of the Retrenchment, where he had a Horse shot under him. He
had Sir Henry Bellasis Major General along with him, who signalized himself
very much this day. As the Enemy offered to trouble his Retreat, he made the
Battalions face, and Present to them, and then they halted, unwilling to feel
any more the fire of our Foot, and thus he brought them off safely to Lewe;
this is the cause that so many Battalions of his Majesty's Forces of the Body
of Foot suffered so little that day. When the King had passed the River at
Neerhespen, he joined part of his Foot Guards, and of the Horse of the Left
Wing, and what had passed of Ramsey's Brigade, with which he joined the Elector
of Bavaria, and those Forces that he had brought off along with him, and
retreated to Boutechem near Tillemont; and the rest of the Army that had
retreated by Dormal to Lewe, marched on, and Encamped at Die. There were some
whom the disorder of the day sent as far as Breda. All our Baggage had been
sent to Lewe the overnight, where 'twas safely brought off in respect of the
Enemy, but generally* Plundered by our own People. As soon as the King came to
his Quarters that Night at Boutechem, notwithstanding the perpetual Fatigues of
the day, and that he had been on Horseback from Three in the Morning, yet he
dispatched Thirty Expresses with his own hand to the several Princes and States
our Allies, to give them notice of what had happened, one to the Duke of
Wirtemberg, who was then Encamped almost under the Walls of Lisle, where we
have left him. A Man may safely challenge History to produce all its Hero's,
and see, not only if any King, but if any General has ever exposed his Person
so much as his Majesty did this day, who shared the hazards of it equally with
any Officer or Soldier in the Army. His Majesty was every where, where there
was any Action in the midst of the Enemy's Fire, both with the Horse and with
the Foot, whom he led on himself several times to the Enemy, and all this while
without Armor, which the King would not put on to be better able to resist the
Fatigues and Labors of the day, which his Majesty foresaw would be very great;
and 'twas a Special or rather Miraculous effect of the goodness of God that
then preserved his Majesty, which can never be too much acknowledged by his
People. The King narrowly missed three Musket shots, one through his Periwig,
which made him deaf for a while; another through the Sleeve of his Coat, which
did no harm; the third carried off the Knot of his Scarf, and left a small
confusion on his Side. His Majesty got this day even the Respect and Admiration
of his Enemies, who proclaimed louder his Majesty's Heroic Valor than we can
do our selves. 'Twas the common saying amongst them, That they wanted but such
a King to make them Masters of Christendom. The Prince of Conti, in his
intercepted Letter to the Princess his Wife, mentions, that he saw the King
every where present where there was any Action, exp^sing himself to the
greatest dangers, and that so much Valor deserved very well the quiet
possession of the Crown he wore. I do not say this out of a principle of
Flattery; His Majesty is above it, and I so much below, that the most I can say
cannot amount to it; but I have said this only to disabuse many of the King's
good Subjects, who may be imposed upon by ill minded malicious People. I dare
say, not only that no General, but even no Officer nor private Sentinel, can be
produced out of ancient or modern History, that for his Age has been exposed to
so many dangers as the King, that has seen so many Warlike Actions, and that
has been present at so many Battles and Sieges, and therefore it is certainly a
wonderful blessing of God, and a singular token of the Care he takes of his
Majesty's Person, that his Majesty has hitherto escaped: So that we may
reasonable expect, that as God had so wonderfully raised him to a Throne, so he
will still preserve him for some greater Work; and that notwithstanding the
present prosperity of the Enemy's Arms, yet he is still reserved (when once our
Sins will not be more prevalent than our Arms) for a Curb to check the French
Power and Greatness, and to protect his People. As soon as Luxembourg was
Master of our Camp, he contented himself to pursue his Victory no farther than
the Banks of the River in our Rear, and the best part of our Foot had retreated
in Order (as we have said before) in spite of their Success, to Lewe. When the
Camp remained clear, and that most of our Troops had repassed the River, the
Marshall de Luxembourg ordered the Cannon that had been taken from us to be
drawn upon a Line, which was fired thrice in token of their Victory; their
small Shot, both Horse and Foot drew up, and did the same, and remained
encamped about Landen that night. Luxembourg dispatched post immediately
Monsieur d' Artagnan to the French King, to let him know the advantage he had
got over our Army; for which good News the French King gave him the Government
of Arras, vacant by the death of Lieutenant General Count de Montchevreuil
killed in this Engagement. He likewise ordered the Te Deum to be sung in the
Cathedral Church of Nostre Dame at Paris, and writ the following Letter to the
Archbishop of the Place; which, for the Pomp and Greatness of its Style,
considering the truth of the matter, 'twill not be amiss to Insert here.

The French King's Letter to the Archbishop of Paris.
COUSIN,
THe Army which the Enemies had in Flanders, made up of the choicest of their
Troops, and Commanded by the Prince of Orange in Person, was attacked in its
own Camp the 29th. of the last Month, by my Cousin the Marshall Duc de
Luxembourg, in pursuance of the Orders I had given him. The Enemies, who did
foresee his design, left nothing undone that could secure them; and though their
Camp was already very advantageous by its situation, yet they had fortified it
with Formidable Retrenchments, and with an Incredible Work; nevertheless they
have been forced in it, and put to flight: Part of their Army is remained upon
the Place, part drowned in the River, and the rest dispersed; many of their
General Officers, and a great number of others killed or taken Prisoners; 76
Pieces of Canon, 8 Mortars, 9 Pontons left in the Field of Battle, 12
Kettle-Drums, 60 Standards, and 22 Colors, either taken by force or left by
the dying Men. There is nothing but what my Enemies ought to fear after so
terrible a Defeat; there is nothing but what I have a right to expect, but I
restrain all my Wishes to the good of my Subjects; and I desire no other fruits
of so great a Victory, but that my Enemies may at last open their Eyes, and
prove attentive to their true Interest, and think of a solid and durable Peace,
which I have still offered them in the midst of my greatest Prosperity. It Is to
ask it of God, and to render him thanks for so many Blessings, that I desire
you would cause the Te Deum to be sung in the Cathedral Church of my good Town
of Paris, at the day and hour which the Grand Maitre, or Master of the
Ceremonies shall tell you from me; and so, Cousin, I pray God to have you in
his good and holy keeping,

Given at Marly, the 7th. of August, in the Year 1693. Signed Louis, and
beneath, Phelypeaux.
Indors'd, To my Cousin the Archbishop of Paris, Duke and Peer of France, and
Commander of my Orders.

Though the advantage the French had this day was considerable enough to order
the Archbishop of Paris to sing the Te Deum in his Cathedral Church, yet Truth
is stretched to such a height in it, that the Style of it is altogether
Romantic. It Is observable, that the French King says in this Letter, That our
Army was Commanded by the King in Person, which is as much as to say; That the
King generously exposed his Person in all the dangers of the day, when
Luxembourg attacked his Army; but the French King's Imperious Greatness would
not allow him to do the King Justice in so explicit Terms. Next, the Letter
says, that we had foreseen the design, and had omitted nothing that was
necessary for our security, that though the situation of our Camp was very
advantageous, yet we fortified it with a Formidable Retrenchment, and an
Incredible Work, and that nevertheless we were forced in it, etc. Certainly a
Man that knows nothing else of the Matter, would think by this, that the Allies
had known of the design at least several days before hand, and that they had
been all this time fortifying themselves in their Camp, in order to a vigorous
resistance; nay, that they had almost as good Works as those about a Fortified
Town to cover them, else what is the meaning of Formidable Retrenchments, and
an Incredible Work? and yet it appears by their own Relation sent to Court (of
which the French King was not therefore ignorant) that when first they came in
presence of our Camp, 'twas open, and had no other strength but what the nature
of the ground afforded, and that the Retrenchment was made in very few hours in
the night before the Engagement; and it is certain, the order was but for 30 Men
per Battalion to work at it; Let any Man judge therefore whether in five hours
time at most they could make a Retrenchment so formidable as it is here
represented. But the advantage they have had over us, wanted reality to make it
so great a Victory, and therefore the Author of the Letter has supplied it with
words. As for the particulars of our Losses, as Colors, Standards,
Kettle-Drums, Cannon, Mortars, and Pontons, for the most part it is but an
imaginary advantage, and, so far as there is a real loss in it, it is what can
be easily recovered; but all the Soldiers, the brave Generals, and other good
Officers which the Freach King has lost this day, is what he cannot so soon
recover, and here his loss does very much exceed ours. And now therefore is
there so much reason to say, that there is nothing but what the Allies have
reason to fear from him, after so terrible a defeat? The latter end of the
Campaign is a sufficient testimony to the contrary. But however, to comfort the
Allies in their Losses, his most Christian Majesty is very compassionate, and
notwithstanding so great an advantage, which gives him reason to hope every
thing, yet he expresses the greatest tenderness imaginable for their Interest,
and desires no other Fruits of so great a Victory, but that the Allies would be
made sensible of their true Interest (which so far I pray God they may) and
enter into the sentiments of a solid and durable Peace, which he had so often
offered to them in the midst of his Victories; that is, for all Europe to put
on his Fetters, which indeed is the way to make a lasting Peace when no body
shall be able to resist him. This kindness for the Allies Interest
(notwithstanding so great a Victory) is, I suppose, the reason why after our
Defeat, and that our Army, as his Letter says, was entirely dispersed, yet the
French King would not take Brussels, Louvain, and Malines, etc. which now (if
our Army was dispersed) did lie open and defenseless to his victorious Forces;
that likewise he did not insult the City of Liege, which had so Insolently
refused the Neutrality; and that he has only Besieged Charleroy after so great
an overthrow, which place we were not in a capacity to relieve, whether we had
fought or no. This is sufficient to convince Impartial Men, that the Victory
was far from being so great and so advantageous in reality, as it is in this
Letter to the Archbishop, wherein there is more of the Te Regem than Te Deum
Laudamus, which at last only comes in by the by.

Luxembourg's Letter to the French King, sent by Monsieur d' Artagnan, as it
has been published, is a piece much of the same Style, only he gives the Allies
their due commendation, saying, That they did Wonders: But this comes in only
to Inhance the Glory of the Victory, and to pass a greater Compliment upon his
Forces, who, as he says, did better, (i. e.) did more than those who did
Wonders in their defense: It should rather have been said, that they were
double the number, and by that means overpowered the bravery of their Enemies.
He adds, That the Princes of the Blood out did themselves in this Action; that
as for his part, he had no other share in the Action, but only to take Huy, to
attack the Prince of Orange, and to beat him (which is as much as to say, that
all this is no great matter for the Marshall de Luxembourg) as His Majesty had
expressly Commanded him: But not a word of God, nor the least expression of
Thankfulness to him for the Victory. If we read former Histories, we shall find
as great Hero's that have done as great Exploits, but have been more humble in
their success. The French make their loss very little and inconsiderable, about
2000 killed, and 3000 wounded; but that the Allies had about 20000 Men Killed,
Wounded, and Prisoners; but I believe 'twill appear by and by, that when they
reckoned our Losses, 'twas rather their own, and that if we transpose them,
'twill be near the truth of the matter. It Is certain, that we have taken from
them 19 Colors, and 37 Standards, which, considering the proportion of Forces,
is more than they gained from us, particularly as to the number of Colors; for
besides, that the French had double our number of Foot, that their Battalions
never have but three Colors at the most in each, our Brandenbourg and Hanouer
Foot have as many Colors as there are Companies in every Battalion, insomuch
that some Battalions have a dozen; and therefore it is more for us in proportion
to have taken 19 Colors from them, than if they had taken 50 from us; by which
the Reader may judge which suffered most this day, the French Infantry or ours.
They have had a prodigious number of Officers Killed and Wounded, of all sorts
and Ranks, but the chiefest are these:

Officers Killed.
The Count de Montchevreuil, Lieutenant General; Marquis de Lignery, Lieutenant
of the Life-Guards, and Major General; The Counts of Montfort, St. Simon, and
Montrevel, Brigadiers; Brigadier Quoadt, Brigadier Bohle, Colonel of the Royal
German Regiment; the Duke d' Vzes, Colonel of the Regiment of Crussol; Prince
Paul of Lorrain, Son to the Prince of Lislebonne; Count de Gassion, Officer of
the Life-Guards, and Governor of Rochel; Marquis of Chanvallon of the Guards;
Chevalier Rosen, Count de St. Mark, Son to the Lieutenant General and Colonel;
Messieurs Chassenet, Gaviat, Vaurouy, etc. Captains of the Guards; Du Guay, and
Dongy, Majors; Micheli, Commandant of one of Reynolds Battalions.

Dead of their Wounds.
Sarsfield Lord Lucan, Major General, at Huy; Marquis of Rebe, Brigadier and
Colonel of the Regiment of Piemont; The Marquis d' Allegre, Colonel of the
Regiment of Peronne, both at Namur; The Count de Canisy, Captain of the Guards,
at Huy, and Sir Carles Murray.

Officers Wounded.
Marshall de Joyeuse, Prince of Conti, and Ximenes, Lieutenant Generals; Duke
de Montmorency, Major General; the Dukes of la Rochegayen, and Bournonville;
Count de Lux, second Son to the Marshall of Luxembourg, and Brigadier; Count
d' Immecourt, Brigadier; The Marquises of Rochefort, Sillery, and Tracey,
Officers of the Life-Guards; de Saillant, of the Foot Guards, Count de
Grandpre, the Chevalier de Villeroy, Reynold, Salis, and Zurbeck, Suiss
Brigadiers; Greder and Scheilberg, Suiss Colonels; d'Asfeldt, Colonel of
Dragoons; Lieutenant Colonels Brendlin, Buisson, and Planta, Schenauner,
Commandant of one of the Battalions of Stouppa Suissers.

Prisoners.
The Duke of Berwick, Lieutenant General; Captain Acmoughty, one of his Aides
de Camp, and several others of less Note. They had above 1400 wounded Officers
at Huy and Namur, besides what they had at Dinant, Charlemont, and other
places, of which several dyed daily. The Religious, both at Namur and Huy, were
every day marching backwards and forwards to Burials; and the Drums did not
beat at Namur, either for the retreat, or mounting, or relieving of the Guard
for three Weeks together: Every Window in the Town, if open, had two or three
Night-Caps at it, which were Officers drawn thither in their Chairs to take a
little Air. This is what I have had from a worthy Gentleman, that was both
Wounded and Prisoner amongst them, and I give the very words he was so kind to
send to me in a Letter. So that of these 5000 of the Enemies Killed and
Wounded, it appears that above half the number were Officers; and let any body
judge whether there was no more of the Soldiers; nay rather, how many Soldiers
must be both Killed and Wounded, when they had above 2000 Officers of the
number. But what is an unanswerable argument of the greatness of the Enemies
loss, notwithstanding their Relations, is that Luxembourg retreated the day
following to Warem, where he remained without the least attempt for fifteen
days together; and yet shall the World believe, that we lost 20000 Men, and
they so inconsiderable a number, when they were twice as strong as we before
the Engagement? and that our Army, as they said, should be dispersed, and yet
that they would not pursue their Victory by some considerable Attempt, as on
Brussels, Louvain, or rather Liege, that had disobliged them so much by
rejecting the Neutrality? and yet notwithstanding this great Defeat, and
dispersion of the Allies, we find that Luxembourg Encamped very peaceably at
Warem, within four small Leagues of this City, without offering the least
violence to it; whereby it appears, that the Allies do the French no wrong,
when they compute their loss to be about 17000 Men killed and wounded; and that
the best part of their Infantry was shattered and broken.

As for the loss on our side, 'twas far from being so great as at first
apprehended; for the passage of the River had put our Troops in such confusion,
that for the first four or five days after the Fight, it made our loss appear
far greater than really it was. As for what loss we really sustained the River
killed as many, if not more men, than the Enemy; it is certain that 'twas the
destruction of many more Horses, for the Banks were generally so high on the
opposite side, that the Horses could not get out, and the Riders thought
themselves happy if they could get off, and leave the Horses to the mercy of
the Water. We have found by the review made after the joining of our Troops
from the several places they had retreated to, that we missed but between 5 and
6000 fighting Men killed, wounded and taken Prisoners; that we lost 2700 Horses
either killed, or taken by the Enemy, or drowned in the River. We had several
both Men and Women drowned in the River that were Attendants on the Army, as
Servants, Soldiers Wives, and Sutlers; and if the French will have them put in
the number of our losses, 'twill not yet amount to half their sum of 20000
Men. I will not contest their reckoning of our Cannon, Mortars, Pontons,
Colors and Standards, because I have not seen our own List of it; but if they
have taken so many Cannon, Mortars, and Pontons, they may thank the River Geet
for it. The chief Officers killed were, the Prince of Brabanzon, who fought
with great bravery, to show that he did not lose Namur through any want of it;
Baron d' Offener, Lieutenant General of the Hanouer Troops; Major General
Bouche of Hanouer; Colonel Wiesel; Lieutenant-Colonels Whaley, Macdougal,
Wingfield, Mudie, and Hamilton. Dead of their wounds, Count Solmes, General of
Foot, who had his Leg shot off by a Cannon-Ball the beginning of the Action in
the Rear of Earle's Regiment, of which he died two or three days after at
Malines; Lieutenant Colonel Cludde dead of his wounds at Louvain. Chief
Officers Wounded, the Duke of Holstein Admiral of Flanders; Count d' Arco
General of the Bavarian Cuirassiers; the Duke of Ormond Major General, Baron of
Heyden, Brigadier Earl, Colonel Fitz-patrick, Sir Charles Harah, Colonel
Seymour, Don Nicolo Pignatelli a Spanish Colonel, and a Relation of the present
Pope; Don Louis Borgia, Brother to the Duke of Gandia, Colonel of Spanish
Horse; Colonel de Bay, Colonel Aylua, Colonel Cordon. Prisoners of note,
Lieutenant General Scravenmoor, the Duke of Ormond Major General, Zuylestein
Major General, Count Brouay Major General, Colonel Langston, Colonel Lauder,
Colonel Cordon, Lieutenant Colonel Graham, Major Peyton. But for a more
particular satisfaction, I shall here insert an exact List of all the Officers
Killed, Wounded, and Prisoners, of the English Infantry. I could not get that
of our English Horse.

A List of the Officers Killed, Wounded, and Prisoners in the Battle of Landen,
in the four English Brigades of Foot.
Brigade of GUARDS.
First Regiment of English Guards.
Killed, Lieutenant-Colonels Wyngfield, and Cludde dead of his Wounds, Captains
of the Guards; Captains Fausset, Villers, Forster, Lieutenants; Ensigns
Swannick and Carre. Wounded, Sir Charles Harah, Lieutenant Colonel and
Commandant of the Regiment; Lieutenant Colonel Shrimpton Captain; Captains
Sandys, Barkley, and Evans, Lieutenants; Ensigns, Hussy and Saransey. Prisoner
Lieutenant Colonel Gorsuch, Captain.

Second Regiment.
Killed o. Wounded, Colonel William Seymour, Son to Sir Edward Seymour, and
Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment; Captains, Wakelin, Bisset, Markham, and O
Brian Lieutenants; Ensigns, Hill and La-Ferrelle.

In the two Battalions of Dutch Guards.
Killed, Count Solmes, General of Foot and Colonel; Lieutenant Colonel
Kretsmar, Commandant of the third Battalion; Lieutenant-Colonels Valenbourg,
Forgel, and Harsott, Captains; Captains, Travercy, Jongman, Obrecht,
Lieutenants; Ensigns, Schaep, Beaumont, de la Varenne; Adjutant Dunmeyer.
Wounded, Colonel Weck Lieutenant Colonel; Lieutenant-Colonels, Steincallenfels,
Metral, Botzheim, Wassenaer, Captains; Captains, Ferie, de Wit, Patot, Baker,
Colombiere, Schmidt, Lieutenants; Tilly Quartermaster; Ensigns, Zollincoffer,
Evertzen, Else, Rechteren, and Mortagne; Prisoners, Lieutenant-Colonels Rapin,
and Freyman, Captains.

In the Regiment of Scotch Guards.
Killed, Lieutenant-Colonels Mudie, and Archibald Hamilton, Captains; Captain
Johnston Lieutenant; Ensigns, Verrell and Lundy. Wounded, Lieutenant Colonel
Scot, Captain: Captains, Keir, Douglas, Sinclair, and Cosset, Lieutenants;
Ensign Campbel.

CHURCHILL'S Brigade.
Royal Regiment.
Captain Young dead of his wounds: Sir James Cockbourne Captain, Lieutenants
George Brown, and Blake, and Ensign White wounded.

Selwyn.
Killed, Captain Collier, Lieutenant Campbel; Ensign Burt dead of his wounds:
Wounded, Captain Sandys.

Churchill.
Killed, Captains Norwood, and Parrey, and two Ensigns: Wounded, Captain
Salusbury, one Lieutenant, two Ensigns: Prisoners, Major Peyton, Captain
Salusbury's Lieutenant, three Ensigns.

Trelawney.
Killed, Captain Crofts, Lieutenant Woodcock: Wounded, Captains Carryl and
Wharton, Lieutenant Cole: Prisoners, Captain Carryl, Lieutenant Cole.

Fuziliers.
Killed, Lieutenant Colonel Whaley; Lieutenants Fairbrother, Cooper, and
Blackmore. Wounded, Colonel Fitz-patrick, Major Wilson, Captains Heart, Ruthvin
dead of his wounds, Betsworth, and Withers, Lieutenant Fletcher.

EARLE'S Brigade.
Tidcomb.
Killed, Captains Vanbrugh, Cassin, and Heniosa, Lieutenant Worley. Wounded,
Captains Devaux, and Stannix, Lieutenants Nicholson dead of his wounds,
Campbel, Forbes, Petitpierre, Ensign Revison, and Perrot; Lieutenant Colonel
Graham Prisoner.

Collingwood.
Killed, Captain Louther, Lieutenant East, Ensign Wood.

Stanley.
Killed, Captain Cole, Ensign Johnston: Ensign Campion Prisoner.

Earl.
Wounded, Brigadier Earl, who being sick of a Fever at Louvain, and hearing
the Armies were going to engage, rode sick as he was to the Camp, and came time
enough to Command upon his Post, where he behaved himself very gallantly, and
was dangerously wounded.

Graham.
Killed, Lieutenants, Ramsey, Swenberg, Ensign Maul. Wounded, Captains Boyd,
Mushet, Ensign Forbes.

RAMSEY'S. Brigade.
Offerrell.
Wounded, Captain Campbel, Captain Strayton; Lieutenants Douglas, Dunbarre,
Adjutant Wall: Captain Paterson Prisoner.

Mackay.
Killed, Lieutenant Colonel Mackdougal; Captain Puchter dead of his wounds;
Lieutenants Mackay, and Southerland dead of his wounds. Wounded, Colonel
Mackay, Captains Lamie, and Maccloud, Lieutenant Maclean, Ensigns Stevenstone,
Maccloud, Mackenzie.

Leven.
Killed, Captain Denholme, Ensign Adam St. Clair. Wounded, Ensign John Gordon:
Prisoners, Captains Bruce, Gordon, Cadour, Maxwell, Ensigns Hamilton, Bruce,
Lundy, Gordon.

Monroe.
Wounded, Captain Stuart, Ensign Hutchinson: Prisoners, Captains Alexander
Campbel, Fullerton, and Monroe.

Lauder.
Killed, Lieutenant Colonel Balfour, Sir James Erskin Captain-Lieutenant,
Charles Bruce Senior. Wounded, Captain Murray dead of his wound, Ensign Nisbet.
Prisoners, Colonel Lauder, Captains Levingstone, and Cunningham; Lieutenant
Peter Bruce.

We have said before that the King after the Fight of Landen, or Neerwinden,
(for so it is differently called) had retreated with what Forces, both Horse and
Foot, he had rallied on to'ther side of the River, where he joined the Elector
of Bavaria with the Troops he had rallied. 20th.
The next day the King marched on to Louvain, and the 21th. he Encamped at
Eppeghem, our Right at Burntbridge, upon the Road to Brussels, and our Left
near Malines. The Elector with the Spanish Troops came nearer Brussels, and
Encamped at Scarbeck. The 24th. the Infantry that had retreated by Leuwe to
Die with what Horse had followed them, joined us here, Commanded by
Lieutenant General Talmash, Sir Henry Bellassis Major General, and Brigadier
Churchill under him. Some few who had gone as far as Breda, came up about the
same time, and now we found that we had not suffered so much as 'twas at first
imagined.

We have left Prince Wirtemberg with the Body under his Command, Encamped at
Anapes within two small English Miles of Lisle; but before we bring him off
from thence, we must not forget to mention that he ordered a Ducat per Man to
be distributed to all the Pikemen that carried Fascines at the Attack of the
Lines, to all the Granadiers, and besides to all those who had the Van Guard at
the Attack of Pont a Tresein, whereby several Soldiers had two Ducats in their
Pockets to comfort them in their Fatigues, which encouraged them very much. On
the 20th. the Duke of Wirtemberg gave Orders for the Army to march early in the
Morning, July.
and repass the Marck at Pont a Tresein. 'Twas then supposed we were going upon
some farther Enterprise, and the French were so jealous of Menin, that Monsieur
de Vauban had been ordered there to assist Monsieur Pertuys in the defense of
it, but 'twas rather believed we were going to chase the French out of
Courtray, who still kept that part of the Town situated on the other side of
the Lys, and to have fortified it for a Winter Quarter. As Pont a Tresein is a
very difficult and narrow Pass, and that we left one of the Enemy's best
Garrisons in our Rear, so Prince VVirtemberg was very circumspect in the
ordering of it; our Vanguard went off first, then the Baggage, Cannon, Pontons,
etc. The Infantry marched in Battle; the Front made the Flank toward the Enemy
where all the Officers marched; in the mean while our Rear-guard of Horse drew
up their Squadrons in the Plain, fronting Lisle; three or four pieces of Cannon
were ordered to remain at the Bridge for the defense of it. Our Vanguard and
Quarter Masters, just as they had passed the Bridge met with a Party of 60
Horse of the Enemy's, and they took most of them Prisoners with their Horses:
in this order we repassed the Bridge. The Cannon ordered there came off with
the Rear-guard, and when they were all passed except one or two Squadrons, some
Squadrons of the Enemies rid down full speed upon them, (these had been sent
out of Lisle on purpose) but 'twas too late; they did us no other harm; but
they put the last Squadron in disorder by their so great haste in getting over.
Not long after we had repassed Pont a Tresein, the Duke of VVirtemberg had an
Express from the King, that the French were come before his Camp, and that the
Armies were just going to Engage, and so we marched to our former Camp of
Esquermes near Tournay, where in the Evening the Duke had a Letter from the
King, which gave him an account of our Defeat at Landen, and withal, ordered
him to make all the haste he could to join him; whereupon Prince Wirtemberg
made the next day a very great march from Esquermes, within a mile and a half
of Tournay, to Peleghem, about the same distance from Audenarde, which is in
all about six Leagues march. We repassed the Lines at Pont d' Espiers. We found
that the Boars had pulled down the Line all along, and ruined the Fortification
of this place. The 22th. the Prince marched and repassed the Scheld at
Audenarde, and Encamped that day at Aldereghem, on the little River Swalme,
that falls not far from hence into the Scheld. The 23th. he made another great
march to reach to Alost, where he Encamped that Night. Orders were given to
march the next day to join the King as soon as possible; but that night the
Duke of Wirtemberg had an Express from the King to let him know that there was
no necessity of pressing his march; that he found his Army in a better
condition than he expected, and so ordered him to remain there till he should
repass the Canal of Brussels. We left the two Walloon Regiments in their
Garrison of Audenarde: One or two of ours were sent into Garrison, but afterward
countermanded, so that Prince Wirtemberg had a Body of about 40 Squadrons and
24 Battalions ready to reinforce the King's Army, whereas he had brought from
thence no more than 13 Battalions.

Though the French were not in a condition (after they had so much boasted their
Victory, and that our Troops, as they said, were totally routed and dispersed)
to do us any harm either in Liege or Brabant; yet because they would make some
noise after it, the Marshall de Luxembourg detached Lieutenant General Rosen
with 10000 Horse to go and make Incursions in the Mayerie of Bois le duc, and
raise Contributions upon the States Country on this side of the Meuse, but the
King took care he should not go so far. Upon the first notice he detached my
Lord of Athlone with about 7000 Horse, to march that way. Baron Lubeck, who
commanded the Neubourg Troops between the Rhine and the Meuse, had orders to
advance between Aix la Chappelle and Maestricht, to be ready to pass that River
and join the Earl of Athlone; upon which Lieutenant General Rosen retreated to
the Army, after he had raised Contributions only in the County of Horn, and
some neighboring Villages of the Mayerie of Bois le duc: And then the Earl of
Athlone had orders to come back to our Army.

Prince Wirtemberg remained still in his Camp at Alost, expecting the King's
Orders to march, which he received the 31th. in the Night, and the next day he
marched toward the Canal, and Encamped between Mertom and Mellem. The day
following August the 2d. both Armies marched, the King passed the Canal with
his at Vilvorde, and so we joined at VVemmel, where the King took his Quarter.
Our Right reached beyond Grimberg, and our Left at Lacker. The Elector with the
Spanish Troops, marched from Scarbeck, passed the Canal at Lacker, and Encamped
upon our Left at the Abbey of Dilleghem. And now our Army after this junction
was stronger by many Battalions than it had been all this Campaign. August.


Mine Here Heynsius, Pensionary of Holland, and Deputy from the States General
of the United Provinces, came to this Camp to wait upon the King, and to
congratulate his safe Deliverance from those many and great Dangers to which he
exposed his Sacred Person for our common safety. He brought along with him
Bills for two Millions of Guilders, which the States General sent to his
Majesty as a Token of the entire Satisfaction and Confidence they had in him.
He had orders likewise to assure the King, that they were ready to venture the
very last Stake for the defense of their Liberties under his Majesty's Conduct,
and that they would unanimously concur to increase their Forces both by Land
and Sea, so as to be able to check for the future, the exorbitant Power of our
Enemies. And this was the States resolution, when we thought our selves that
our Affairs were in a far worse posture than we found them afterward; for
which generous Resolution they can never be too much commended, and for the
great Respect and Affection they have expressed in this occasion to his
Majesty. Major General Zuylestein, who had been Prisoner at Namur since the
last Action, came likewise to this Camp; and I cannot omit the great Compliment
and Civility he received from the Marshall de Luxembourg; who, when Zuylestein
took his leave of him to come to our Camp, expressed the greatest Respect for
the Person of our Monarch; and we may say, that the King's Heroic Valor was
so signally conspicuous that day, that he Conquered the very hearts and
affections of his Enemies, who unanimously proclaimed his Praise and
Commendation. 'Twas Luxembourg's expression to Zuylestein, That their two
Masters deserved to share the World between them.

On the 5th. the King reviewed the Army, which drew out of the Camp upon two
Lines; and as it would have been too much work for one day to have viewed the
Regiments by single Companies, as the King rid by the Commissaries took only an
Account of the Number and Depth of the Files in each Regiment, and the whole
Army appeared in a very good condition, and stronger than it had hitherto been
this Campaign. The same day three Battalions were detached to Charleroy for the
reinforcement of that Garrison, under the command of the Marquis de Castillo,
General of the Spanish Ordnance, who was sent to command the Garrison there.
Colonel Potbus's Regiment of Suedes in the King of Spain's Service was one; he
was pleased to grumble and to express his disgust for this command up and down
Brussels, for which the Elector of Bavaria ordered him to be put in Arrest
there.

On the 7th. the Army marched from VVemmel to Nostre dame de Halle. Our Left
reached considerably beyond Tubise, and our Right beyond Halle, so that we
seemed to take up more Ground this Year, than we did the last before the Action
at Steenkirk. The King took his Quarter at the same place where he had it last
Year, viz. at Lembeck, a House belonging to the Prince of Steenhuys. The
Marshall de Luxembourg, who hitherto had Encamped quietly at Warem since the
Fight at Landen, began to move on the 5th, and marched that day to Bonef upon
the Mehaigne, and the next day to Sombref, where he halted the 7th. The 8th. he
marched on to Nivelle, and had his Right at Bois Seigneur Isaac; and though 'twas
now a more favorable Season to have formed the Siege of Charleroy, yet
Luxembourg's Army had been so disordered at Landen, that though they had then
double our Army, yet now Luxembourg was not in a condition to Besiege Charleroy
till he had been reinforced considerably with the Troops that Guarded the
Coasts of Normandy and Brittany, who were ordered forthwith toward this
Country, and with the Body the Marquis de la Valette commanded in Flanders.

The same day that we marched from Wemmel to Halle, Lieutenant General
Scravenmoor came from Namur and joined us upon this march, where he waited upon
the King to give him an account of his Imprisonment, and what he had learned
with the Enemies. On the 10th. Brigadier Churchill's Regiment was ordered to
Garrison at Malines; this Regiment had suffered very much at Lare, where 'twas
sent to reinforce Brigadier Ramsay, but more particularly in the loss of their
Colors which were taken by the Enemy, two of the Ensigns that carried them
were killed, and the third taken Prisoner. On the 16th. the Duke of Ormond came
to Brussels with the English and Scotch Officers and Soldiers that had been
taken Prisoners at Landen. He was Treated very civilly at Namur; the Count de
Guiscard Governor, took him into his own House, where he was attended with all
the care and respect they could express to a Person of so much worth and of so
great Quality, and the ablest Physicians and Surgeons of the Army were sent to
Namur to look after him. His Grace took at this time the greatest care
imaginable for his Majesty's Interest, for though he was so ill for the two first
days after his arrival at Namur, that the ablest Surgeons doubted of his Life,
notwithstanding the illness of his condition, he sent for the Officers that
were Prisoners there, and made them come into his Chamber, and told them that
whatever Money they wanted either for themselves or for the Soldiers, he would
give it them, and begged of them, that for their King and Countries sake, they
would take such care of the poor Soldiers that were Prisoners, that want and
necessity might not force them to take on in the Enemy's Service contrary to
their inclinations. His Grace ordered the Officers Quarters in the Town. Most
of our Prisoners were sent afterward to Dinant, each Foot Soldier received 7
s. and 6 d. to subsist him, and each Horseman a Pistole; they were afterward
removed again to Charlemon^t, and they received the same Sum; so that such
care was taken for our Prisoners, that not six either English or Scots took
Service with the Enemy, and of those few it is to be presumed, that they were
such who would of themselves have deserted to the Enemy on the first
opportunity. The Prisoners that were wounded were put into the King's Hospital
at Namur, and carefully looked after. I must not omit at the same time to say
something of the Condition of our English and Scots Officers that have followed
the late King in France, or that have since deserted from our Service to betake
themselves to his, of which I have had an account by the same Ingenious Person
that was Prisoner at Namur, and who saw and conversed with some of them daily.
Not three of them are yet provided for, and this Gentleman saw many of his
acquaintance that had been Officers in our Troops who still carried Muskets:
and though the French have formed several Bodies both of Horse and Foot of the
Irish in their Service, yet there are not above three English or Scots Officers
that have a Commission amongst them, by which a Man may see that it is still a
Crime in the late King's Court to be an Englishman and a Protestant, and such
a one as renders them incapable of a Commission in his Service: His beloved
Irish Roman Catholics are the only preferred. The day after the Duke of Ormond
arrived at Brussels, he came to the Camp at Halle to wait upon his Majesty,
though he was still very weak, and returned the same Evening.

Most part of the time that we continued in this Camp at Halle, the Weather
proved so excessive hot, that it caused a great Sickness in both Armies: The
Soldiers fell sick daily, and many Officers. My Lord of Athlone went sick into
Brussels, Prince Wirtemberg, the Lord George Hamilton, and many others of note.
Colonel Monroe dyed, and his Majesty has bestowed the Regiment upon Colonel
Ferguson his Lieutenant Colonel. Prince Casimir of Nassau left the Army here,
and returned toward Leewarden in Friezland, after he had ordered his Equipage
to be sold. The Prince of Birkenfeldt Lieutenant General in the States Service
did the same. On the 18th. Prince Wirtemberg, who was now pretty well recovered
of his Indisposition, was presented to the Dutch Guards for their Colonel. Both
Battalions were drawn out, and the King, attended with all the General Officers
and the whole Court, came and presented him himself. All the Officers of the
Regiment were called together near his Majesty, who made a short Speech to
them, to let them know that he could not give them a more deserving Colonel
than the Duke of Wirtemberg; afterward his Majesty spoke to the Duke, and made
him a short Compliment, then the King took a half Pike which was held by one of
his Pages, and put it in the Duke's right hand. The two Battalions had their
Arms presented all this while, and then the King commanded himself the Drums to
beat a March. Afterward the Duke marched on Foot at the head of the Regiment
before the King, and so the Ceremony ended.

The 19th the Marshall de Luxembourg left his Camp at Nivelle, and marched to
Soignies, in order to join the Normandy and Britany Troops that came to
reinforce his Army, for the Siege of Charleroy; Those likewise which the
Marquis la Vallette commanded within the Lines were ordered to join him here,
and other Battalions that were not in so good a condition were sent into their
places. 'Twas necessary that Luxembourg should advance thus far notwithstanding
the designed Siege of Charleroy, because his Army was not yet in a condition to
undertake it, and therefore he reserved the Forage thereabouts for that time;
also because he was here more conveniently Posted for the reinforcement to join
him, which otherwise we could have disturbed if his Army had been farther off,
and likewise to consume the Forage hereabouts to hinder our Army from marching
toward the Sambre for the relief of Charleroy.

The same day that the French marched to Soignies, we sent two Regiments to
reinforce the Garrison of Ath; Spaarvelt's Regiment of Swedes was one. The
Finland and Zeeland Battalions of Danes were sent to Garrison in Ghendt; they
were weak, and had suffered at Landen. We had likewise 900 Prisoners returned
to us this day by the Enemy, which was all that remained of what they had taken
in the last Battle. As soon as the King heard of the Enemies marching, Orders
were given for our Army to be ready to march; and the same day the Baggage and
Artillery were sent before under the Escorte of the first Battalion of the
Royal Regiment. And on the 20th. early in the Morning, the Army marched, and
encamped at St. Quintin Linneck, where the King took his Quarters, and the
Elector at Goicke. Orders were given for the Armies marching again the next
day: accordingly the General-beat, for the King had been informed that the
French continued their march toward Ath, but the King was soon after informed,
that 'twas only a Detachment of about 6000 Men that the Enemy had sent toward
Grammont and Lessines, which they afterward countermanded; upon which our Army
remained in the Camp at St. Quintin Linneck. In the Afternoon the King rid out
upon the Left to A Term used when a General of an Army rides out to view and
observe the several Posts about his Camp.
Reconnoitre; and besides the usual Detachment of his Life-Guards he took a
good Party of Eppinger's Dragoons to ride just before him, because the King
went to observe several narrow Defiles in a Wood upon our Left. These Dragoons
fell in with a Party of about 30 French Horse, under the Command of a Cornet,
the King ordered them himself to charge them, and they took 17 Prisoners.
Another Party of them had the same Fortune this day near Nostre Dame de Halle:
this Party had come from the Garrison of Mons to see what Straglers they could
take after we had decamped from this place: A Party of Spaniards, far Inferior
to them in number, met with them, killed some upon the place, and took most of
them Prisoners. 'Twas said that they had taken one of our Officers Prisoners
(as he was riding from Brussels to Halle) that knew nothing of our being
marched from thence, and that he was killed amongst them.

On the 25th the Duke of Holstein Ploen came to the Camp. The States have
chosen him to be Velt-Mareschal General of their Forces, and Governor of
Maestricht, in the room of the late Prince Waldeck, and have given him the same
advantages which his Predecessor had. He was Velt-Mareschal General of the King
of Denmark's Forces, and is come by his leave, and with his consent to the
Service of the States. His Brother is Admiral of Flanders, and was sent last
Year to Newport, to Command there, when the French drew near this place, after
they had so easily made themselves Masters of Furnes, and he has a very large
and stately House that Fronts the Governors Palace at Brussels. This Duke of
Holstein is most particularly Famous for the Action at Treves, in the Year
1675. He Commanded then a Body of the Allies, with which he fell upon the
Marshall de Crequi, who was posted in a very strong Camp near this place. He
suffered the Duke of Holstein to come quietly by a very difficult Pass to his
Camp, for he computed them as so many men lost, and that he would cut them to
pieces. The Marshall de Crequi had concerted with the Sieur Vignory, Governor
of Treves, to come and join him with his Garrison about 5000 strong; but as the
Governor was riding back over the Bridge, to order the Garrison to draw out,
some body fired a Pistol, which made his Horse fling so violently, that he
threw him over the Bridge into the Fosse, and broke his Neck. The Duke of
Holstein, that had passed the Defile, fell upon the Marshall de Crequi, and
gave him an entire Rout. The Marshall just saved himself in the Town of
Treves. The Duke of Lorrain came with his Army, and after he had joined the
Duke of Holstein, formed the Siege of this place, which Holstein had Invested
upon his late Success. The Marshall de Crequi made a most desperate resistance
to redeem his Credit. He Fortified the great Church, after the Duke of Lorrain
had made himself Master of the Works of the Town, where he defended himself so
well, that though this Town is not very strong, yet he held out in all a Siege of
35 days, and at last refused to sign the Capitulation, because he was a
Marshall of France, and thought he could not in Honor sign a Capitulation for
any of the King his Master's Towns; for which reason he was made Prisoner of
War, and carried to Coblentz. Two Battalions of Dunbarton's Regiment stood by
him in the desperate defense of the Town, when the French mutinied to
surrender; for which good Service the French King afterward expressed his
thankfulness to the Regiment. Since this digression does not come in
Mal-a-propos, I thought my self obliged to mention this, because none of the
French Writers have been so just as to give the Honor and Commendation due to
our Soldiers for this service.

On the 27th. the Prince of Nassau Sarbruck being Indisposed in the Camp, left
the Army to go to the Baths of Aix la Chappelle, and from thence to Bois le
Duc, of which place he is Governor; and the day following my Lord Sidney
arrived here from England, and had all the Honors paid to him that are due to
the Master of the Ordnance, which Office was conferred upon him after his
Lordship had left Ireland. The Dutch Troop of Guards was sent from this Camp to
Loo, and to several Villages upon the Road to it, to Escorte His Majesty
thither by Reliefs, and to do duty there and at the Hague, during His Majesty's
stay in Holland. We have said, in the relation of the Fight at Landen, that
several Soldiers had fled after our Defeat to Breda, where many of them took
the opportunity to desert to Holland, many also had got thither before; for
which reason the King caused Letters to be writ to the Magistrates of
Rotterdam, and other Seaport Towns, to apprehend all English and Scots
Soldiers they found there; to which Order they readily complied, though they
could have pleaded the Privileges of their Towns. After the apprehension of
these Soldiers the Grand Provost had them brought safely to the Camp, and
thirty of the English and Scots Brigades, besides that of the Guards, were
condemned to dye for Desertion, but the King graciously Pardoned Four and
Twenty of them; the other six that had drawn the Lots for Death, were Executed
on the fifth of September, at the head of their respective Brigades; six of the
Brigade of Guards were condemned, and three drew Lots to dye (the other three
Pardoned) and were accordingly Hanged at the head of their Regiments the day
following.

On the 30th. of August the French left their Camp at Soignies to come nearer
to the Sambre, all things being now in a readiness for the Siege of Charleroy.
La Vallette, and the Brittanny and Normandy Troops had joined them; and
besides, the Marshall de Boufflers was detached back from the Rhine with 12
Battalions to make their Work so sure that the Allies might not be in a
condition to Relieve it. All these precautions are very evident Arguments of
what the French fuffer'd, and how much they were weakened at Landen. The French
marched this day to Hayne St. Pierre, and Hayne St. Paul, and the 31st. they
continued their March nearer to Charleroy, and encamped by the River Pieton,
their Right at Gouy and Pont de Celles, and their Left at Fontaine l' Evesque,
and the River before them. The same day Charleroy was Invested by the Count de
Guiscard, Lieutenant General and Governor of Namur, who had marched the day
before from this place with six Battalions of his Garrison, and a Regiment of
Dragoons, which sufficiently shows what shifts the French were put to for Foot
to carry on the Siege, since they drew out these Battalions that had not at
first been thought fit to bring into the Field. The Count de Guiscard, encamped
that day at Covillet, on the other side of the Sambre; and at the same time
Lieutenant General Ximenes took his Post on this side at Marchienne au pont,
with 16 Squadrons of Horse, and a Regiment of Dragoons. The day following the
Count de Guiscard passed the Sambre below Charleroy, and encamped at Montigny.
Rubantel, Lieutenant General, and Vauban Engineer General, took theirs at
Gilly, with 32 Battalions, and 34 Squadrons detached from the Army. In the mean
while the Artillery, Pontons, Mortar-Pieces, and all other necessaries for a
Siege were sent from Namur and Maubeuge by Water, and the Ingeniers who had
been commanded to rendezvous at Mons, came to the Camp before Charleroy.
Monsieur de Vauban promised to put this place into the French King's hands
within 15 days at most from the opening of the Trenches. September.


Charleroy is situated upon the best pass of the Sambre, for this River runs
generally between rocky Hills and steep Banks; for which reason it is not
passable by an Army but at few places, and this where Charleroy is built to
Command it, is the best. The Town, which at the best is but a very indifferent
one, is seated on the other side of the Sambre, and the Fortifications are very
weak. 'Twas Bombarded last Year by the Marshall de Boufflers, for two days
together. But the strength of Charleroy is on this side of the Water, situated
upon a Hill that commands the River, and a great part of it rocky Ground, where
it is very difficult to make any Trenches. Though it is a perfect Hill toward the
River, yet on the other side of the place it is much plainer, and is somewhat
commanded by several Neighboring heights. In the Year 1666 this place was but
an inconsiderable Village, called Charnoy; but because it commanded this Pass
upon the Sambre the Spaniards Fortified it, and called it Charleroy, for their
King's sake, who is named Charles; but the French King called it Charlamoy, to
jest upon the Name, which Jest soon after proved a very true one, for he took
it the Year following, and kept it by the Treaty of Aix la Chappelle. 'Twas
Besieged the latter end of the Year 1672. by our King, then Prince of Orange,
who used a very cunning Stratagem to get the Count de Montal, the Governor,
out of it. He was Governor both of Tongres and this place. The King made a
Feint to Besiege Tongres, which made the Count de Montal leave Charleroy for
the defense of that Place, whereupon the Count de Marsin, who Commanded a small
Body, was ordered by the King to Invest Charleroy, and he at the same time left
Tongres to go and Besiege it. Montal was very much concerned to be so tricked
out of the place, and that made him so desperate that he forced his way into it
in the middle of the Night, and got in through the Besiegers Camp with about
100 Horse along with him; however, if the Weather had been more favorable, the
King would have carried it before any Relief could have come to it; but the
Weather proved so unkind for such an Attempt, that the French had the time to
make up their Army, and upon their advancing the King raised the Siege.

The French, whilst this place was in their possession, Fortified it very well,
and made all the Bastions and Half-Moons with Brick and Freestone, and some of
the last have very good Counter-Guards to cover them. They have a great many
Redoubts round the place, at the foot of the Glacis, under the defense of the
covered way, all very strong, and built with Brick and Freestone. This place
was restored to the King of Spain by the Treaty of Nimeguen, in a far better
condition than it had been before in the hands of the Spaniards; they have
since this War added very little to the Fortification of Charleroy; except some
few Mines under the Glacis and Angles of the covered way, and undermost of the
Works of the Town, to blow them up when taken by the Enemy. There is a large
Pond of Water that covers part of the place, between Brussels Port and the way
to Fontaine l'Evesque, with a good Redoubt in the very middle of it, and
another for the defense of the Sluice, covered by a Horn-work. The French
brought a prodigious Train of Artillery and Mortar-Pieces before the Place* and
soon reduced the Houses and Barracks in it to Ashes: They fired their Cannon
perpetually, whole Batteries at a time, and likewise Mortar-Pieces, which they
fired together by Batteries in the Besieged's Works to dislodge them.

On the 2d. the French began to trace out their Lines, and the 3d. they put
12000 Pioneers on Work about them; the 4th. they prepared two Attacks, and the
5th. at Night the Duke of Roquelaure, Marshall de Camp, opened the Trench
before the place with the Regiment of Navarre. Six Battalions of the French and
Suiss Guards, and the King's Regiment mounted the Trench: and the Rain, and a
Fog which happened then, made the Air so thick, that the Enemies worked three
hours before the Besieged perceived it. The French, at the same time, attacked
an Out-Post called the Warren-House, and carried it after a vigorous
resistance, and several men killed and wounded on both sides; a Captain of the
Guards was wounded in this Action, and the Enemy lost about 40 men in carrying
on the left Attack. The next day the Besieged made a Sortie upon the Enemies,
killed many, among the rest the Count de Broglio the Son, who was killed just
by the Marquess de Crequi, one of their Inginiers was Wounded, and Grandcomb
Brigadier of the Inginiers made Prisoner, and the Marquis of Rochefort, and a
Captain, Wounded.

On the 7th. the Elector of Bavaria was detached from our Army at St. Quintin
Linneck toward Flanders, with a Body of 30 Battalions and 50 Squadrons; 16 of
these Battalions were English and Scots, viz. The Second Battalion of the First
Regiment of Guards, Talmash's Battalion, Two Battalions of Scots Guards, (and
these mounted the Guard upon his Electoral Highness whilst he commanded this
Body) two Battalions of the Royal Regiment, Bathe, Tidcomb, Castleton, Graham,
Offerrel, Mackay, Leven, Lauder, Ferguson, and Argyle; Six Danes, viz. The
Guards, the Queens, Prince Frederic, Prince Christian, Prince George, and the
Jutland Battalions; two Dutch, viz. Count Horn, and Bernstorff; and the six
Brandenbourg Battalions in the King of Spain's Service. These were detached, as
'twas supposed, to attack Furnes, to recompense by this the loss of Charleroy,
which would have given great ease to Newport. For the French had mustered all
their Forces to make this Siege, and expected besides the Marshall de
Boufflers from the Rhine, to reinforce them with twelve Battalions and
fourteen Squadrons, so that, besides this small Body which they expected with
Boufflers, they had above 100 Battalions to besiege and cover the siege of
Charleroy; and if their Battalions were most of them weak, none of ours were
very strong, and Sickness had sent a great Number into the Hospitals,
particularly of the King's Troops which weakn'd them extremely; besides, the
French had eaten up all the Forage between Brussels and the Sambre, except
what they covered for the subsistence of their Troops; so that there was no
possibility for our Army's marching that way to attempt its Relief, even if it
had been in a better Condition. As therefore there was no prospect of relieving
Charleroy, the Elector of Bavaria commanded this Body for some enterprise in
Flanders, and marched this day as far as Ayegem Capelle, after he had passed
the Dender at Ninove, with a good Train of Artillery; and the next pay he
marched to Gavre upon the Scheld: The Ways were so bad and deep that the
Artillery could not come up till the next day, and several Wagons and
Carriages came to damage. Orders were given to be ready to march, but we halted
the next day. The French had left Furnes in a good Posture of Defense, with
about 5000 Men in Garrison, and we found the Ways such that 'twas very difficult
and hazardous to draw our Artillery. And besides, the Marshall de Luxembourg
upon the News of this Detachment, marched from his Camp at Herlaymont-Capelle
to Estines, nearer to Mons, and to the King's Army, which was now but small
after so great a Detachment; upon which the King did not think it safe to
venture this Detachment any further, thereby to give Luxembourg the opportunity
to have fallen upon him; therefore this Body was countermanded. But before the
Elector marched back, he detached Horne's and Bernstorf's Regiments to the
Garrison of Newport, and the same day Offerrel's and Ferguson's Regiments were
sent to Winter Quarters, the first to Bruges, and the latter to Ostend. On the
11th. which was the day following, the Elector marched with the Body under his
Command to St. Levinus-Haltheim in order to rejoyn the King at Ninove, who had
marched hither from St. Quintin-Linneck the day before; and in leaving this
Camp the King ordered to Louvain the Regiments of Ecker, and Fagel, and those
of Aylua, Anhalt, and Oxenstierne to Brussels. The 12th. the Elector rejoined
the King at Ninove.

On the 13th. about 900 English Recruits came up to the Camp, 300 of them were
for the Guards, and the other six that had been drawn out of the Princess
Ann's, Sir David Collier's, Hasting's, Prince of Hesse's, St. George's, and
Tiffeney's Regiments were divided by Lot amongst the English Regiments that had
suffered most at Landen. On the 14th. the King's Domestics left the Camp to go
to Loo, and the day after the King, seeing that nothing could be done for the
relief of Charleroy, and that the Campaign drew near to an end, left the
Command of the Army in the Elector's Hands, and went by Breda to Loo, in order
to repass soon after the Sea to meet his Parliament in England, and prepare
Matters for a more vigorous Prosecution of the War, according to the Resolution
taken by the rest of the Allies; and the King's Guards did after Duty upon the
Elector, and gave him the same Honors that they are obliged to show to the
King. The 18th. the two Battalions of Friesland, Guards to Prince Casimir of
Nassau, were sent to Garrison in Louvain.

In the mean while the French pursued very vigorously the Village of Charleroy,
and the Garrison between 4 and 5000 strong commanded by the Marquess de
Castillo, Master of the Spanish Ordnance, Colonel Pimentel the Governor, and
Bulau Brigadier of the Dutch, made as brave and noble resistance. The French
fired continually their Cannon and Mortars to make the Place as uneasy as
possibly they could to the besieged. They battered to Pieces the Redoubt or
detached Bastion that is without Brussels Port, but it was so Min'd that the
Enemies would not venture to take it. They changed their Attack to the
Horn-work that covered the Sluice of the Pond, and to the Redoubt that was in
the middle of it; and the Enemies had now advanced their Works within ten or
twelve paces of the outer Angles of the covered Way toward the Pond, and on
the other side beyond the Point of the Horn-work upon its Flank. The Enemies
Cannon had fired hitherto so furiously that they had dismounted all the Cannon
the besieged had; but on the 12th. the Besieged made a shift to refit two or
three Pieces, and in the Night they killed and wounded about 100 of the
Enemies, among whom were some Officers. De Pont an Ingenier was wounded
mortally. The 13th. the besieged fired a Bomb which fell in the Magazine of
Powder upon one of the Enemies Batteries, killed six Men, and dismounted two of
their Cannon. The French continued their fire upon the two Redoubts, that
without Brussels Port, and that in the Pond; in this last a Spanish Captain
with 50 Men was posted for its defense; and besides the Batteries of Cannon
they fired against it, they threw twice more Bombs into the Place than there
were Men to defend it. They fired their Mortars here by Batteries, so that the
Soldiers had ten or twelve Bombs sometimes about their Ears. On the 14th. in
the Afternoon Monsieur de Vauban ordered six Pontons to be fastened together,
upon which a Detachment was sent for the Assault of the Redoubt in the Pond.
The Spaniards were now reduced to little above half the Number, notwithstanding
they made a good resistance, but at last were forced to Capitulate. The same
Day the Duke of Luxembourg, who had advanced as far as Mons (upon our
Detachment toward Flanders) returned to the Camp by Charleroy, after he heard
that the Elector had rejoined the King at Ninove. He left the King's House
conton'd near St. Guislain for the convenience of Forage, and generally all the
Horse between Mons, Valenciennes, and Maubeuge. The French and Suisse Guards
remained at Estines, and another Body at Givry. The 15th. the Besieged made a
very brave Sortie; they levelled part of the Enemies Works, and killed many of
the Enemies; a Captain was killed, and the Marquis of Charrost wounded. On the
16th. in the Evening the Enemies attacked the Work that covered the Sluice of
the Pond, 120 Men defended it very bravely, but at last the French made
themselves. Masters of it, after they had lost 50 Men in the Attack, a Captain
and two Ingeniers wounded. When the Enemies had made themselves Masters of the
Redoubt in the Pond, and of the Work that covered the Sluice, they began to
drain it. The 19th. the besieged made a very brave and vigorous Sortie, they
beat the Enemies from a great part of their Works, which they destroyed and
levelled, and killed the Enemies a great many Men. The 22d. the Besieged made
another Sortie upon the Enemies, which proved not so successful as the former.
They wounded a Lieutenant Colonel and five Ingeniers, and in the Afternoon one
of their Bombs fell among some Magazines of the Enemies Granades, but they took
such care that it did them no great damage. The 23d. the Besieged continued
their Sortie, but were repulsed.

The same Day we made a very great Detachment of 28 Men per Battalion from our
Army at Ninove, with a proportionable number of Horse, under the Command of
Lieutenant General Opdam, to Escorte a Convoy of 250 Wagons, and seven Pieces
of Cannon, into Ath. The Wagons were loaded with all manner of Provisions and
Ammunitions, which got safely into the Place that Evening. Wey's Regiment was
sent at the same to reinforce the Garrison of this Place. Lieutenant General
Opdam, upon his return, found that the Country People about Lessines had made a
great quantity of Beer, expecting that the French Army would come and Encamp
there, as usually it did every Year; and because they had not brought it to be
sold in our Camp, the Convoy Wagons that returned empty from Ath had orders to
take all this Beer away, and to bring it into our Camp at Ninove. We made much
about the same time a good Detachment out of all our Dragoons, and 'twas
reported that their Design was to steal a Relief into Charleroy; that Jacob,
Son to the Major that Commands into the Bois de Sognes, was to take care of it,
and conduct them to the Place by the most secret ways, and so to surprise in
the Night the French Camp, and force their way into the Town. But Jacob, as he
was observing the most convenient ways for the Design, was made Prisoner. This
is a report we had in our Camp.

The 24th. the Enemy assaulted the Horn-Work and Half Moon upon their Right
Attack, which they at last carried with some loss on their side. The 25th. the
Enemy made a very furious Assault upon the Counterscarp of the Body of the
Place, but the Besieged made a very gallant resistance, and repulsed the Enemy
several times one after another, which doubtless could not be without some
considerable loss on the Enemies side. It Is said they lost above 600 Men. The
Attack lasted five hours. The 26th. they made another Assault upon the
Counterscarp, but as fruitless as the former. The 28th. the Enemies made
themselves at last Masters of the Counterscarp, and lodged themselves in the
covered Way, the whole length of the Front of their Attacks from Right to Left.
The besieged sprung a Mine under one of the Angles of the Counterscarp: Two of
their Captains were wounded, and an Ingenier killed. On the 29th. the Besiegers
descended the Fosse to fix their Miner to the Body of the Place, and made all
things ready for a general Assault the next day, and 'twas very much feared in
our Camp that the Marquis del Castillo's brave Obstinacy would reduce the
Garrison to this last extremity of being carried by Assault, and put to the
Sword. The 30th. the French played very furiously with their Artillery upon the
Place. The Marshall de Villeroy, who had the Command of the Siege, summoned
the Governor to Surrender, which he refused: Upon which they made a general
Assault upon the Breach, which the Besieged received very vigorously, and
obliged the Enemies to retire: But being now sensible that they could not
resist another, on Sunday the first of October about eight in the morning, the
Governor, with the Advice of the chief Officers of the Garrison, ordered to beat
the Chamade, and Hostages were immediately exchanged on both sides to
Capitulate; which was agreed to on the following Articles.

The Capitulation of Charleroy the 11th. October
of October, new Style, 1693, By Don Francisco-del Castillo y Taxardo, Marquis
de Villa de Arias, Captain General of his Catholic Majesty's Ordnance, and
agreed unto by the Duke of Luxembourg, General of his most Christian Majesty's
Forces.
I. DOn Joan Anthonio de Pimentel de Prado, Marquis de la Florida, Governor of
the Place, Don Joan Francisco Manriques Major General, Monsieur Bulau
Brigadier, the Ingeniers, Bombardiers, Gunners, Miners, the Commissaries of
Victuals and Forage, the Receivers as well of his Catholic Majesty as of the
States General, and all the Garrison, as well Officers as Soldiers, and all
other Officers both Civil and of the Revenues, of what Quality, Character, or
Nation soever, as well Horse as Foot, their Families, Domestics, and Servants,
shall depart the Town freely with their Movables and Effects, whatever they be,
without offering them any hurt, violence, or injury, either directly or
indirectly, in their Persons or Families, nor shall their Baggage be visited,
either at their going out of the Town, or any where else upon the Road to
Brussels.

II. That the Infantry shall go out by the Breach, and the Dragoons and other
Horse by Namur-Port, and all the Garrison, and Persons comprised in this
Capitulation, with their Arms and Baggage, Drums beating, Trumpets sounding,
Colors flying, their Match lighted at both ends, and Ball in their Mouths, and
four Pieces of Cannon, two for the Marquis del Castillo, and two for Monsieur
Bulau Brigadier of the States Forces, besides necessary* Ammunitions at the
rate of 10 Shots per piece: for which end the Besiegers shall furnish the
Wagons, Horses, and Equipages, and all other things necessary for their
Carriage and Transport.

III. That for the Carriage of the Baggage, Goods, and Effects, belonging to
the Officers and others now mentioned, as also for the Sick and Wounded that
shall be in a condition to be so carried, the Besiegers shall furnish 200
Wagons with four Horses a piece, 24 hours before the Garrison leaves the Place:
and as these 200 Wagons will not suffice to carry all the Sick and Wounded,
and all the Officer's Equipages, they shall have to Morrow a sufficient number
of Boats to Transport all the rest to Liege; That the King shall furnish them
all things necessary for their subsistence upon the way, without being stopped or
hindered any where.

IV. That the said Garrison, and all that is here mentioned, shall be safely
conducted under a good Escorte to Brussels, by the streightest, shortest, and
most convenient way, viz. by Gosseliers, Fraine, Genappe, and Waterloo,
marching two hours the first day, and three hours and a half the two days
following, or otherwise if the Marquis del Castillo shall find it more
convenient, and that they shall be followed with all things necessary upon the
Road for the subsistence both of Man and Horse.

V. That no body of what Quality or Condition soever, shall be Arrested for
private Debts; and if there be any Officers or others of the Garrison who shall
owe any thing to the Burgers and Inhabitants of the Town, the Marquis del
Castillo shall give them a Note under his own Name, for such Debts which may be
due to them, and which he will engage himself to pay.

VI. That all Prisoners, whether Officers or Soldiers, made before or during
this Siege by this Garrison, as also those of this Garrison who are now under the
King's Power, wherever or of what condition soever they be, and likewise those
that have been taken endeavoring to get into the place during the Siege, and
such Miners who have been taken in the Mines, shall be immediately Surrendered
on both sides, bona fide, without any Ransom or Compensation, more or less.

VII. That the Sick and Wounded who shall not be able to endure an immediate
Transportation, shall remain in the Hospitals: That the Besieged shall have
liberty to leave some Commissaries behind to look after them; and as for the
rest, they shall be taken care of at the Expenses of his Majesty's Physicians
and Surgeons, and provided with all things necessary for their Cure; after
which they shall be safely sent by the same way, and to the same place as the
Garrison, furnishing them Passports for the safety, carriage, and transport of
their Persons, and they shall not be forced to take on in their Service.

VIII. That for the space of three Months it shall be free for any Persons
either to remain in the Town or to go elsewhere; they shall not be molested nor
ill treated, and shall enjoy the same Privileges with the Inhabitants.

IX. The Burgers who shall be willing to leave the Town within this space of
three Months, shall have liberty during this time to dispose of all their
moveable Goods and Effects that are in the Town, but they shall not have the
same liberty neither for their moveable Goods nor immovable that are without
the said Town.

X. That his Majesty shall continue to the Inhabitants and Burgers of the Town
the same Liberties and Exemptions which they enjoyed formerly when 'twas under
his Dominion.

XI. That the Officers, Receivers of the Victuals and Forage, shall in no wise
nor under any pretext whatsoever, be responsable for the Impositions that have
been laid upon the plain Country in Money, Hay, Oats, or other things.

XII. That the Besieged shall deliver this Evening, after the Capitulation
Signed, Bruxells-Port to his Majesty's Troops, which shall not suffer any body
to come into the Town till the Garrison has left it, four Officers of the
Ordinance and four Commissaries of War excepted, who shall come in with a Pass
from the Marshall de Luxembourg, or Monsieur de Bagnoles, to make an Inventory
of the Provisions both of War and Mouth.

XIII. The Garrison shall go out of the Place the 13th. at Ten in the Morning,
upon these foresaid Conditions.

XIV. If there be any of his Most Christian Majesty's Subjects that are
Hostages in the Town for Contributions, they shall be set at liberty. Upon
these Conditions the Place shall be delivered bona fide in the King's
Possession, with all its Dependencies, if it has any.

XV. Hostages shall be given on both sides for the due Execution of these
Articles.

Given at Charleroy the 11th. of October. 1693.
Thus Charleroy is fallen once more into the French King's hands, after a very
fine defense which* the besieged have made; and after a Siege of 26 days from
the opening of the Trench* and 32 from the time that 'twas Invested. Monsieur
de Vauban had promised to make it the French King's own within 15 days at
farthest, but he has found that he can mistake sometimes in his Calculation,
when he has to deal with brave Men who will resolve upon a stout and vigorous
Defense. This is but a small Place, and much inferior to the Castle of Namur
for Strength, and yet we find that it has made twice the resistance. But the
French King, to save his Honor, in the Letter to the Archbishop of Paris, to
order the Te Deum to be Sung in his Cathedral for the Reduction of this Place,
says, That 'twas not so much the Resistance of the besieged, as his own care
for the preservation of his Men, that has drawn the Siege to such a length:
which is a very unjust assertion to rob the besieged of the Honor due to them
for their brave defense, rather than to let the World think any thing can
resist the vigor of the French Arms. I do not know how much they spared their
Men, but it is plain they did not spare Cannon, Bombs, nor Ingeniers, since a
great many of the latter have left their Bones before this Place; and it is
certain, that as soon as they have been able to make themselves Masters of the
Outworks that covered the Glacis and Counterscarpe of the Place, they were not
very sparing of their Assaults to carry the Counterscarpe, where they have been
several times repulsed by the bravery of the besieged. But whether the French
King has been so sparing of his Subjects in this Siege or no yet this makes the
face of Affairs look quite otherwise than 'twas represented after the Fight of
Landen, for then there was nothing but what the Allies ought to fear from him
after so great a Defeat, there was nothing but what he might expect after this
Success: And yet after all these Rodomontado's, this Letter to the Archbishop
of Paris to Sing the Te Deum for the taking of Charleroy, does ingeniously own,
that the French King could not better end this Campaign than by the Siege of
this Place; and the Author is very careful not to insinuate in the least that
it is a fruit of this so great Victory, which gave the French King reason to
expect so very great Matters; and therefore if it was so, the Allies are very
much obliged to him that he would undertake no more, after so important a
Victory, than the Siege of Charleroy, and that too so late in the Year, when it
must close the Success of this Campaign; Whereas, if the French had so
prodigious an advantage at Landen, what is the reason they did not set down
before this small Place sooner? for then they would have had time to besiege
either Ath or Audenarde afterward, which would have given the World some
proofs of the great advantage they had at Landen. It Is plain therefore that the
reason why they did not was, because they were not then able: and their Army,
which then outdid ours by 45 Battalions and above 100 Squadrons, had been too
well paid off there. After the reduction of Charleroy the French King bestowed
this Government upon Monsieur Boisselot, the late Governor of Limerick. And
now Winter drawing on, the Armies began on both sides to File off toward
Winter Quarters.

On the 3d. of this Month, a Party of French came by our Camp at Ninove, and
took some of the Elector's and other Horses that were grazing on the other side
of the Dender, below the Windmill, but upon immediate notice a Detachment was
made of the Elector's Guards and Dragoons, who took all the Horses back again,
and made several Prisoners. On the 4th. we heard a Triple discharge of the
Enemy's Fire for the advantage the Marshall de Catinat had got the 24th. of
September over the Duke of Savoy and his Allies, in the Plains of Marsaglia. We
had the News of it the Night before, by way of France, which made the Defeat as
great and as terrible as could be, but we judged of the truth of the matter by
what they had published of the Battle of Landen. On the 5th. our Army began to
separate, and to go into Winter Quarters; Part of the Garrison of Bruges and
Ostend was detached, under the Command of Brigadier Ramsey, to march toward
the Canal of Bruges, and got the 7th. into their Quarters. The 6th. the Army
decamped from Ninove, and repassed the Dender, between it and Alost, and so the
Foot continued to march off toward Quarters. The remainder of the Infantry of
the Garrison of Bruges and Ostend left the Camp under the Command of Sir Henry
Bellassis the 7th. and the rest of the Foot marched off to Brussels, Ghendt,
Louvain, Malines, Dendermond, Leer, and Maestricht, etc. the Horse continued
cantoned up and down the Country between Brussels and Ghendt, till the
beginning of November, but the Elector, as soon as the Foot had broke up, left
the Army, and went to Brussels, the place of his residence.

The Marshall de Boufflers remained in the Condros to consume the Forage.
That part of Luxembourg's Army that was to Quarter between the Scheld, the
Sambre, and the Meuse, was sent to Garrison, but the rest that was to Winter
from the Scheld to the Sea, came near Courtray to Fortify that Town, which
they have a mind to put in a Condition to hold a formal Siege. They made
another Detachment toward Dixmuyde, to Fortify that Place for a Winter
Quarter, and are since separated in their several Quarters all along as near
our Frontier as possibly they can, in order not to be idle this Winter if the
Weather proves kind and favorable; and they will be so much the more pressing
and urgent to undertake something, that they know the Allies are all resolved
to make new Levies this Winter, to be in a better Condition the next Campaign
to resist the French Greatness, than they have yet been during this War. Both
the Mareschals of Luxembourg and Villeroy are gone to the French Court, to
concert Matters for some undertaking, and the Marshall de Boufflers remains to
Command in Flanders. And now that Bouffler's Detachment of 12 Battalions from
the Rhine is Quartered in the Pays de Luxembourg, that besides they have now in
Flanders the Troops that Guarded the Coasts of Normandy and Britanny, it is not
doubted but that they will be able to do us some considerable Damage this
Winter, unless the Allies are very quick both in the recruiting and augmenting
the Forces they have here. It Is wholly their Interest, and by what has
hitherto appeared in this War, it is reasonable to think that it would not be
done in vain, since the advantage that the French have hitherto had in this
War, has not proceeded so much from their Bravery as from their Numbers; for in
all the Rencounters which the Allies have had with them this War, it has
plainly appeared, that they do owe their Success merely to the prodigious
greatness of their Armies: Therefore, if it be true that all the Allies put
together have more Men and Money than the French King, I am of opinion they
must attribute the ill Success of this War to nothing else but their
unseasonable Parcimony, which has rather served to augment the French King's
Power, than answered in the least the designed ends of the present League. So
long as we do all ease our Shoulders of the Burden, it is reasonable, nay it is
necessary the French should have Success. Their efforts are vigorous, and ours
are faint and languishing. We make the War as cheap as possibly we can, and
that only serves to make it last the longer; and the Charges must be the same
at long-run, but they are far from being so much to our advantage as when our
efforts are great, though for the present more burdensome. The Allies had as good
fling their Money into the Sea, as think to continue the War with Forces so
unequal to those of our Enemy's; for whilst they continue on this Foot, we
only ruin and weaken our selves, to no other purpose than to increase the
French Power.

Whatever success the Enemies have had hitherto, yet still the Iron is hot for
the Allies to strike, if they will but go to the expense of augmenting their
Forces. The French has made very great efforts this War, and his Treasures are
not inexhaustible. It appears rather by the uncertain value of Coin, which is
hardly the same two Months together in France, that he is reduced to very great
shifts to replenish his Coffers, which were so exhausted the latter part of
this Campaign, that Money was very scarce in his Armies and Garrisons. The
Colonels had only Bills assigned them for the payment of their Troops, upon
which they were to get ready Money as well as they could. In their Garrisons the
Officers were generally so poor that they gave Notes under their hands for want
of Money to pay for their Subsistence. I have heard of one of our Soldiers,
that was two Months in their Service, after they had made him a Prisoner, and
deserted over to us again, that for the time he was amongst them, he received
no more than one French Half-Crown of pay. All this that I say, I have from
Gentlemen that have been among them, and whom I ought to believe, else I should
take care not to publish this. Besides, there reigns a very great Famine and
scarceness of Corn all over France; and in their Conquests their daily Edicts
are authentic proofs of it, though in the Preface of those Edicts they
endeavored to throw dust in the Peoples Eyes, but words do not feed hungry
Bellies: And we hear daily in this place what misery the People suffer at
Lisle, and in other parts of the French Conquests. It Is true, this helps the
French King to make his Recruits, and to increase his Forces, since his
Subjects must either be Soldiers or starve; but still I dare say, that the
French King does not love to see his Kingdom in so universal a Desolation, when
those who are Soldiers rather than Starve, leave the Plough, and thus only
augment the Famine and the public Calamity. In short, I may safely affirm,
that we are all weary of this War, the French King as well as the Allies; and
therefore what the Allies have to do is to raise such an Army for the next
Campaign, as may put them in a condition to treat of a Peace upon advantageous
terms, and not be forced to accept of such an one as will only put the French
King (after a little breathing, and that he has replenished his Stores) into a
better capacity to enslave Christendom, which Peace is worse than the worst of
Wars.

And the Allies have this to encourage their vigorous Prosecution of this War
(I speak particularly as to England and Holland) that they have a King who does
yet venture his precious Life for the advantage of the common Cause, more
freely than they can venture their Purses. Let the King's greatest Enemies
consider but impartially His Majesty's Conduct and Circumstances, and they must
be convinced, that what the King does, is not out of any Interest of his own,
but in an uprightness and sincerity of Conscience, to do good to Europe in
general, and to us his Subjects in particular. God has not blessed His Majesty
and us with an Heir, therefore he does not seek the aggrandizing of a Family.
What then can be the reason that the King does so freely and so often expose
his Sacred Person to the greatest Dangers, but only a public Christian
King-like Spirit of doing good to his Allies and to his People, and to procure
a firm and lasting establishment of Christ's true Religion in its ancient and
primitive Purity in his Kingdoms, and in the Dominions of his other Protestant
Allies?

And since we have followed His Majesty in this History from the Field, which
he left on the 15th. to Loo, where he arrived on the 17th. we ought to see him
safe in England among his good People, before we finish the account of this
Campaign. The King remained at Loo to divert himself (after the Fatigues of the
Field) in Hunting till the 1st. of October. that he arrived at the Hague, where
His Majesty spent some time in Conferences with the States General, and Council
of State, who have consented to a new Levy of 15000 Men, besides the 4000
Suissers raised last Summer, and to augment proportionably their Maritime
Forces. The Plenipotentiaries of the other Allies at the Hague, have consented
to the same Resolution according to their different proportions. The King was
now hastening over to meet his Parliament in England, but he was detained by
Storms and contrary Winds till the 28th. that His Majesty sailed from Oranie
Polder, and arrived safely the day following about three in the Afternoon at
Harwich, and so went on to London, to the great joy and satisfaction of his
good People, to see His Majesty safe amongst them, after all the great Dangers
to which he had exposed his Person this Campaign.

The Repartition of the English and Scots Infantry's Quarters for this Winter.

GHENDT, The three Battalions of English Guards, the Regiments of Selwyn, and
Fuziliers.

BRVGES, Scots Guards, Royal Regiment, Bathe, Tidcomb, Castleton, Graham,
Offerrel, Mackay, and Leven.

MALINES, Dutch Guards, Churchil, Trelawney, and Earl.

DENDER MOND, Collingwood and Stanley.

OSTEND, Lauder, Ferguson, Argyle.

All the English Horse are Quartered at GHENDT, except the Life Guards; that
have their Quarters at BREDA.

FINIS.
Errors of the Press.
Page 29. line 1. for Swiming, r. Swimming. p. 44. l. 14. for and so came the
Palisado's, r. and came to the Palisado's. p. 44. l. 30. for Obscure, r.
Observe. p. 56. l. 21. dele from. p. 115. l. 24. for Village, r. Siege. p. 118.
l. 19. for into, r. in.


