AN EXACT ABRIDGMENT In English of all the REPORTS OF THAT Learned and Reverend
JUDGE Sir James Dyer Knight, And sometimes Lord Chief Justice of the COMMON
PLEAS.

COMPOSED BY Sir Thomas Ireland Knight, late of Grayes-Inne, and heretofore
Reader of that Honorable Society.

Wherein is contained the very substance of all those REPORTS at large.

With a perfect TABLE to the same, Being a perfect abstract of every particular
Case.

London, Printed for Matthew Walbancke, and John Place, and are to be sold at
their Shops at Grays-Inne-gate, and Furnivalls-Inne-gate 1651.

To the Reader.
GENTLE READER,
I Hope I shall not need to use either many words or much eloquence in the
commendation of this small although polite Abridgment, in regard not only of
the fame of the honorable and learned author, out of which this was abstracted,
but likewise in respect of the living worth of the deceased Sir Thomas Ireland,
the judicious Composer of this work: You have been lately pleased to accept of
a former piece of his, which imboldeneth me to present you with this further
fruit of his labors in the like nature, for the general good of the
Commonwealth. If any errors have passed the Press, blame the Printer; I
humbly conceive I have more reason to be sorry for that then your self.

THE ABRIDGMENT OF THE REPORTS OF THE Lord DYER.
The fourth year of Hen. 8.
Pas. 1. Fol. 1.
IN debt upon an Obligation, the Defendant pleaded in Bar, that it was indorsed
upon Condition, to make Account, etc. And that the Plaintiff had accepted of a
Lease at Will, in satisfaction of all Accounts, Judgment, etc. The Plaintiff
demurred. And it was adjudged no Bar; For where a Condition is Collateral, the
acceptance of another thing is no (...) contrary, where the Condition is to pay
money; accord^, 2 H. 4. 9. H. 7. 17. and 20.

2. Attaint and Error were maintained by him in reversion, after the death of
the Tenant for life (upon erroneous Judgment or false verdict given against the
Tenant) at the Common law. And now by the Statute 9 Rich. 2. cap. 3. they are
maintainable in the life of the Tenant, 18. Edw. 3. Error 32. Scire sacias was
brought by the Feoffees of the Conusor, being a stranger to the Record. If
after a Parson has recovered an Annuitie, the Benefice be appropriate, or
union made, the Abbot or the Parson shall have a Scire facias upon the said
recovery, if again there be Arrerages. And it was said, If the King grants his
own Recognizance, it shall be sued in the name of the Grantee; But if he grants
an Obligation forfeit by outlawry, it shall be in the Kings name.

3. In a Quare impedit against Cook and his Clerk, it was holden, That a Clerk
is not enabled by the stat. 25 Ed. 3. c. 7. by the word Possessor, to plead in
Bar, til Induction, for it is that which makes him possessor; upon that he
pleaded he disturbed not.

Mich. 6 H. 8. fol. 2.
4. Repleg. Empson avowed for a Rentcharge granted to him by a stranger, who
as seized of the land where, etc. pro consilio impendendo. It was pleaded in
Bar, that the Defendant was attaint of Treason, and committed to the Tower, and
that the Grantor had business for to have his counsel, and could not have
access to him, etc. and upon Demurrer, Judgment was, that the Avowdant shall
have the Rent, for the Rent cannot be forfeit, neither granted over. As land
given by the King to a Duke to maintain his dignity, may not be granted. Also
the Defendant being in prison may give counsel, as well as when he is at
large, and no default is Assigned in him.

5. In debt against the Executors of Ready, at the issue, upon Fully administered
pleaded, etc. the Plaintiff gave in eviden^ that they had goods in their
hands; the Defendant plead (...) that they redeemed part of them with their
own money, which goods were pledged by the Testator to the full value, and for
the residue that they had paid for the Testator, so much to the full value. And
upon Demurrer, It was adjudged a good evidence to maintain the issue, for a man
shall have recompense for that which he has lawfully paid; as a Disseisor
paying rent it shall be recoaped in damages. And it is not like the case, where
the Testator devises that his Executors shall sell his land, for in that case
they may not retain it; because it is the will of the Testator that they shall
sell.

6. Alien born is no plea in disability in an Action personal, except he be of
the allegiance of the Kings Enemy; Contrary in a real Action, for an Alien may
not have land in the Realm, if he be not made a Denizen.

Pas. 3. 19 H. 8. fo. 3.
7. A fine was levied by Tenant in Tail, after the 4 H. 7. cap. 24. and
proclamations passed, and five years incurred, after Tenant in tail died; the
question was, Whether the Issue shall be barred as privy, because he is to make
his conveyance by his Father, or that he shall not be reputed privy, because
he claims per forman Doni, and then his right be saved, by the second saving,
because he is the first to whom the right descended after the fine engrossed;
vide new stat. 32 H. 8. But it was agreed, that if he to whom the remainder in
tail or other title first accrued, suffered five years to incur without
claim, that this laches of the Ancestor shall bar the issue.

Tri. 4.
8. By Brudnel and Eglesfield; If a man make two Executors, provided, that the
one of them shall not administer, that it is a void hecaiso, because it
restrains all the authorite given in the premises, and the intent which agrees
not with the law is not to the purpose; As a device to A. in fee, and if he die
without heir that it shall remain, etc. is a void remainder. So a device to the
Abbot of (...) Peter, where the foundation is St. Paul's: And so then ^^^action
of debt was well brought in the name of both the Executors, notwithstanding the
proviso: But Fitzh, was of opinion, that it was a good proviso, because he may
bring an Action although he does not Administer, and that a man may make one
man Executor of his Plate, and another of his Goods, and another of his Debts:
And may make an Executor of his Goods in one County, and another Executor of
his Goods in another County.

Tri. 24 H. 8.
9. Rusdens Case: Termor rend^ing Rent granted his term in parcel of the land;
the Grantee made a Feoffment; it was said, that an Action of Debt lies not for
the Rent, till the Reversion be recontinued, quia accessor sequitur, etc. As a
Disseisee of a Manor, with an Advouson appendant may not present after the
descent, till he has recontinued the Manor; Contrary before descent, because
his entry is congeable: and upon Recontinuance supra, he may sue the first
lessee for the entire rent, and the privity remains as well when parcel of the
land is granted, as when parcel of the term is granted: and no apportionment
shall be made; for before the stat. Quia emptor, no apportionment was by the act
of the party, but by the act of the Law, and particular estates yet abide at
the Common law per Henley.

Mich. 25 H. 8.
10. The youngest brother disseised the eldest brother, who is Barred in an
Assize by false oath, the youngest brother Charged the land, and died without
Issue, and the land descended to the eldest; he is without remedy to avoid the
Charge, for he shall not be remitted against the Record; and there was not any
against whom he might bring an Attaint.

11. Stat. 21 H. 8. A Servant receives money upon an obligation, or upon sale
of wares, and goes away with the money; It seems not to be within the statute,
for he had not (...) money by the delivery of the Master: But contrary (...)
it, if he had money by the delivery of another Servant; for it is the Masters
delivery by another: So if he bad gone away with the obligation it self, it
seems not to be within the statute, because it is a thing in action and not
valuable; whereas the words of the statute are of Goods to the value of 40. s.
Yet Fitzh. opinion was, That by the Grant of all Goods and Chattels, an
Obligation shall pass.

12. Idemptitate nominis lies of Surnames, and not of the names of Baptism.

Mich. 13. 26 H. 8.
13. Knowles let land which was devisable, for years rendering rent, and devised
the rent to A. It was holden, that the Executor, and not the Heir of the
Devisee shall have it, because it is but a Chattell in the Devisee: But Baldwin
and Shelly held, that the Devise was void, being a new thing, to which the
Custom reaches not: But Fitzh. made a diversity, where Rent is incident to
the Reversion, there it shall be of the nature of the land; But contrary of a
new Rent Charge.

14. An Indenture of Bargain and Sale, in which were diverse Covenants, and in
the end were these words, ad quas convenc. perimpl. oblig^ me in 20. l. etc. In
debt brought upon that, payment is no plea without an Acquittance; for it is as
a single Obligation, 28 H. 8. 25. idem.

15. In a Formedon against A. B. and C. A. and B. Confessed the action: But C.
pleaded Jointenancy with B. without that that A. any thing had; the Demandant
maintained his Writ, viz. that they three are all Jointenants, and upon that
Issue was taken, and holden by the Court a good Issue; But the Demandant shall
not have Judgment for any part till the Issue be tried.

Pas. 28 H. 8.
16. Lease for years by Indenture: the Lessee covenanted and granted, that if
his Executors or Assigns did alien, that it should be lawful for the Lessor
to enter. After he made his wife Executrix and died, the woman took another
husband, and he aliened, now if this was a breach of the Condition or no, was
the Question: Some held not, because the husband is in by the law, and not
Assignee, as is Tenant by the Courtesy, and the Lord of a villain, etc. But
Brown and Shelley held, that the husband is Assignee in law, and that the lands
are subject to the Condition in whose hands soever they shall come: Quere if
the words supra make a Condition. And if a new Lease before entry be good, to
which all said, It was not.

17. In a Precipe the vouchee was returned dead, per Curiam the Tenant may
vouch at large, for the Vouchee never entered into warranty; Quere if he may
vouch one as Heir within age, because the plea shall abide for the nonage of
the Vouchee.

18. A Termour devised his term to his eldest daughter and her Issues, the
remainder to the youngest daughter, etc. the eldest died without Issue, and her
husband aliened the term. Baldwin and Shelley held, that the youngest daughter
is without remedy; because a void remainder being only of a term, as it is of a
Chattle personal; Englefield contrary, because of the intent.

19. By Shelley the Philizers Office may not be granted although it be a
frank-tenement, of which an Assize lies, because it is an Office of trust, for
it may not be aliened; the same law of an Office of Carver, etc.

Trin. 89. 10, 11, 12.
20. In a Writ of Guard the case was, before 27 H. 8. a man infeoffed I. S. of
land held by knight service, to the use of Bokenham and his heirs. After J. S.
infeoffed J. N. to the use of Bokenham and his wife, and to the heirs of
Bokenham, after Bokenham died, and his wife yet living, having a son within
age: And it was holden, that he shall be in ward in the life of the feme, by
stat. 4. Hen. 7. as the Heir of Cestui que use; for the ancient use is not
gone, but only for so much as it was altered in, so that it is a Reversion in
the son, and not a new Remainder, for a thing may not be given to a man which
he had before, as if Tenant in tail infeoffe him in ^^version it is no
discontinuance.

It was the Lord Rosses case; that Cestui que use of two acres, one holden by
priority, the other by posteriority, made a feoffement of both to his own use,
it made not a owelty, because the use remains.

The Writ here supposed, that B. held of the Plaintiff, etc. and counted that
he was but Cestui que use, so that the Feoffees held. But by Knightly, because
stat. 4 H. 7. gives the Guard, and appoints not a special Writ, the general
Writ, and special Count is good: as warrant Chart. shall be unde Chart' babet,
yet his Count may be upon warranty by Homage ancestrall. By Knightly also, that
the use behooves to be altered by reason of the person, as the King, or a
Corporation may not be seized to an use; so of the estate, as an estate for
life or in tail, because of the tenure, except the use be expressed, or for
money, because of the Consideration: and holden, that a warranty is not
sufficient consideration to alter an use, so a feofment rendering rent is no
consideration, because it is issuing out of the same land: Also it was argued
by him, that a Lease to two, for the life of one, stands well in jointure,
although no survivour on one part: Also a lease for another life, without
impeachment of waste, the remainder for his own life, that drowns the lesser
estate, and makes h^^ presently punishable by wast: Also by Brown, If an infant
make a feofment, and die without Heir, the feoffee is Tenant by title, and
therefore the Lord may not enter for Escheat.

21. Tenant in tail made a Lease for life, the remainder to the Donor in Fee.
Quere if it be not a discontinuance, and vesteth a new Fee in the Donor;
Knightly it seems not, because he may not lose and take Fee by one and the same
livery.

13.
22. Upon a divorce the woman shall have her goods again which were given in
marriage; except they are spent, per Fitzh. and Shelley, because they were
given for advancement of the woman, and Cessante causa, etc. As upon
deraignment, the party shall re-have. 13 Ed. 3. upon divorce vorce he shall
lose the land: for which cause it was moved, Fitzh, that it shall be divided.

23. By Shelley and Baldwin, a Presentment in the Leet of Bloodshed may not
be traversed after the day of the presentment; contrary of things which touch
franck-tenement. Leets were derived out of the Turn of the Sheriff, by
Fitzherbert.

14.
24. A Lease to the husband and wife by Indenture, with proviso, that if they
are disposed to alien, that the Lessor shall have the first offer, if he would
give for it as another would; It was doubted whether it be a Condition or no;
but by Shelley, if it be but a covenant, the wife shall be bound by that if
she survives, and occupy, especially being a covenant which arises upon the
estate, vide 46 E. 3. 38 Ed. 3. A feoffement to two with covenants, and but one
sealed to the same, the other survived and occupied, and he was bound by the
seal of his companion; and by Shelley in the case supra, It suffices to make
proffer, without saying what is offered by others, till the Lessor said that
he would have it, which ought to be showed presently, without respit of
consideration peremptory for hindering the sale.

25. A Termor covenanted in his Lease to build, and no mention of his
Executors, the term expired, and the Lessee died, Fitzh. and Shelley held, that
the Executors shall be charged. But the heir shall not be charged upon an
Obligation, except he be named; But Baldwin said, that the covenant supra,
sounded but to wrong and damage, which dies with the person; but upon an
Obligation the Executors shall be charged without being named.

26. In Debt against a Termor; it was adjudged, that non habuit, nec occupavit,
is no plea; but otherwise it is of a Tenant at will, per Fitzh.

27. By Mountegue it is clear law, if a feoffement be made to four without
deed, and livery be made but to one, that nothing passes to the rest; and non
negit.

15, 16, 17.
28. The Condiiton of an Obligation for marriage money was, That if the woman
die before Michaelmas without issue of her body then living, that the
Obligation shall be void; She had issue and died, and after before Michaelmas
the issue died; and it was adjudged that the Obligation was void for (then
living) shall have relation to the next antecedent, viz. Michaelmas, and not to
the death of the woman; and the Condition being for advantage of the Obligor,
if it be doubtful it shall be construed to his best advantage; and in
doubtful words, that interpretation shall be taken which is most agreeable to
the intent, and the intent is apparent that it was regarded to the continuance
of the issue; Besides where the intent of the parties is to have continuance in
a thing, the thing which they would have continued, shall be referred to the
very last time which possibly it can, per Fitzh. as a Condition to graffe
stocks before Christmas then growing, shall be referred to Christmas; so that
if they die or fail before Christmas, the Condition is broken, and there it is
holden, that where Death and Life are in issue, it shall be tried where the
issue was in life; so that it seems, that he who pleaded that the issue was
dead, needs not to show the place of his death.

18.
29. A recovery to my use, and after I infeoffe the Recoverer, yet it is
holden, that he shall be in by the Recovery, and so still seized to my use.

30. A man seized of two acres of land in one county, let one to A. for years,
and the other to B. for years, and after infeoffed a stranger of all his lands
in the said County, livery in one acre in the name of all is not good for the
other; Contrary, if the other had been but Tenant at will; But if he had been
Tenant at will to my Disseisor per Knightly my feoffement may not determine the
will of another.

31. A man made a Lease of a house, and after infeoffed a stranger of the
house, and of one acre in possession, and made livery in the house (the wife of
the Termor being there) in name of all, And by Shelley, if the livery be void
in regard of the house, it shall not be a good livery within the view for the
acre of land in possession; because the intent to make actual livery, and not
livery in law, which also shall not be done but in case of necessity: But
Knightly hold, that the acre shall pass.

19.
32. Trespass of a close broken in O. the Defendant justified in S. without
that he is culpable in O. And by the Court it shall be entered generally not
culpable, vide 9. H. 6.

33. A Lease reserving wood and underwoods; the Termor cut, holden, that no
waste lies, because the statute is in terris, boscis, etc. sibi dimissis, etc.
By reservation of woods the land is not reserved, by Shelley, for the Tenant
shall have the herbage, etc. But by a Grant of woods the land shall pass,
because the deed of every man shall be taken most strongly against himself; and
in a writ of Entry, where the demand is of twenty acres of wood, the land shall
be also recovered.

34. In Action upon the case by two, for calling them false Knaves and Thieves,
per Curiam they may not join, because the defamation of the one is not the
defamation of the other. So in false imprisonment.

35. Per Curiam, If an Obligation be made, and fail in words, in cujus rei
testimonium sigill', etc. yet it is good if it be sealed.

36. Per Curiam, Obligamus nos and utrumque nostrum is several as well as
quemlibet nostrum.

37. A Lessor covenanted that the lessee shall have sufficient hedgebote by the
assignment of his Bailiffe, and fuel.

1. By Shelley, He may not take without assignment, quia modus and conventio
vincunt legem.

2. That the Copulative (and) makes it, that he behooves to have Assignment of
the fuel; Baldwin and Shelley contrary, not being words in the negative, and
non aliter.

20, 21, 22.
38. In debt by A. against the Administrators of G. Woddy, and counted upon
such a Bill, viz. Be it known to all men, etc. that I G. W. have received 20.
l. of A. J. to bear the adventure to Roan, an there to bestow it in Herrings,
and to see them shipped, and A. to bear the adventure home, and averred that
G.W. had not bestowed it in Herrings, and it was adjudged that an Action of
Debt lies very well upon the said Bill; for an Account lies not against
Executors or Administrators, because they are not privy to the Accounts; And
although there be no Bill, it is in the Election of him who delivered the money
to have an Action of Debt or Account; for a Detinue lies not for money
numbered, because one penny may not be known from another: And the Testator may
not wage his law against the said Bill being sealed and delivered as a Deed,
for all words which prove by specialty one to be debtor to another, is a
sufficient Obligation, and the Executors and Administrators shall be charged
although they are not named; contrary of the heir. But it was agreed, that if
he had employed the money, that debt lies not. And there it is said, that a
man shall not wage his law against a talle written and sealed; but otherwise of
a Scoch; and by Fitziames, that in an Action of Debt for wages, for a Sum due
for tabling, for arrearages of Account, and for rent upon a term a man shall
not wage his law; but for such a rent a man may plead levied by distress, or
payment although reserved by deed, because the Lease is the foundation of the
action, and not the deed. Also by him, if a man be indebted upon a contract,
and make an Obligation for that, the contract is gone, and so upon a Judgment.
And if a man make an Obligation for arrearages of Account; Debt upon arreargaes
is gone, 11 H. 4. contrary.

23.
39. Two as Executors had a Term, and the one granted all that to him
appertained, per Curiam; the entire shall pass, because every Executor has an
entire authority; contrary of Joint-tenants.

40. Trespass for a Close broken, The Defendant said, that the place where,
etc. are six acres in D. which is his franck-tenement; The Plaintiff said,
that it is his franck-tenement, and not the franck-tenement of the Defendant;
If the Defendant give in evidence of other six acres in D, which are his
franck-tenement, it is not to the purpose, for his Plea shall be intended to
be referred to the six acres of the Plaintiff, per Curiam, and the Plaintiff
need not make a new Assignement, because the Defendant varyed not from his
meaning, when he gave no new name.

24.
41. The husband made a feoffement of his wives land, to the use of his wife,
for life, and died, and the statute 27 H. 8. was afterward made, the woman
entered, she shall not be remitted; So if Tenant in tail make a feoffement to
his own use, and die, the Issue enters, he shall not be remitted, for they
shall have the possession in such quality, etc. as they have the use, vide Amy
Townesends case, that to be remitted, it is requisite to waive the possession,
and to bring their action.

42. Abbot with the assent of his covent granted to the feoffor and his heirs,
to sing Mass every Holiday, etc. and quoties defectus, 5. li. It seems upon
default debt lies for the heir, for it is a penalty which insues the land, but
an annuity lies not per Curiam, because it is casual, and peradventure never
shall be a default. Nothwithstanding peradventure annuity lies of Rent payable
every three years. Executors shall not have a Debt for reliese, if the Lord had
estate greater then for life or years, per Fitzh. And by him a Sergeant may not
have an attachment of privilege in an action which he brings as heir; Quaere.

43. A Parson let for three years, and those ended for three others, and those
ended for three others, during the life of the Lessor; by the court it is a
Lease but for nine years; but if the words had been, And so from three years to
three years, during the life of the Lessor, it livery secundum form. etc.
peradventure it shall be otherwise.

44. In a Formedon the Tenant vouched, and upon the Summons returned the
Vouchee is essoined, and day given to the Demandant and Tenant, and at the day
both the Tenant and Vouchee made default, per Curiam, a Petit cape shall issue
against the Tenant, and no remedy against the Vouchee, because the Tenant had
not attended the suit of the Vouchee, for the view may be demanded, etc. so
that he had not yet entered into Garranty.

45. A Quare impedit against the Bishop of Worcester, and the Guardian of
Merton College in Oxford, and counted, how that the Predecessor of the
Guardian was seized in the right of his College of Six acres, to which an
Advowson was appendant in Fee, and presented. And after William Catesby was
seized of the Six acres with the Advowson appendant in Fee, and died seized,
and they descended to G. his son and heir, and after the father was attaint of
Treason by the Parliament, upon which the King seized the land, and the King so
seized, the Church became void, and the predecessor of the defendant presented
by usurpation upon the King, and after the attainter was adnulled, and the son
restored, and entered into the six acres, and infeoffed the Plaintiff, and now
the Church became void, and it appertained to the Plaintiff to present, the
Defendant demurred, and it was adjudged against the Plaintiff, and a writ was
awarded to the Bishop without making title.

46. Brickhed brought an Action of Debt for forty quarters of Malt, and counted
upon two Obligations, in which the Defendant acknowledged himself to owe twenty
quarters to be delivered at J. such a day, and if he failed, to forfeit forty:
the Defendant pleaded tender, and that the Plaintiff refused judgment, etc.
the Plaintiff demurred, and after released twenty quarters and had Judgment;
Defendant ought to plead always ready.

25 Hill.
47. One of the Pannell was sworn upon the principal, and all besides
challenged by the Defendant, and he that was sworn chose to him one to try;
the pols, after the enquest remained for default of Hundredors, and the
Plaintiff suggested that there was not Freeholders sufficient in the Hundred,
and prayed process to the next Hundred; but the Court denied that till they
were certified by the return of the Sheriff^.

48. A man arrested upon a Capias, found surety according to the statute, after
came a Supersedeas, yet per Curiam he ought to appear to save the bond.

49. A man devised his term to his two sons equally; Quaere whether they are
Joint-tenants, or tenants in common.

50. A man shall be tenant by the courtesy, if the issue be born alive,
although it be dumb, so that it be not heard cry, per Fitzh.

51. In an action of Debt upon an Indenture in which a man was bound to pay
twenty pound, payment is no plea without an acquittance no more then upon a
simple bond, contrary, double with penalty.

52. An Attaint, by name of J. S. Knight, where the first writ was of D. it was
holden good notwithstanding the variance, because a new original. 3 H. 6. 16.
the same of an Estrepement.

53. A Dog kills Sheep, the Master being ignorant of his property, is not
punishable.

54. Waste is found, by which the Committee of the King lost the custody of the
land, by the statute of Marlbridge, cap. 4. Yet the opinion was, that he might
maintain a forfeiture of marriage. So if entry be for Mortmain, Guard vested
shall not be divested, But Abbot shall have the marriage, etc.

26.
55. The King seized the body and land of a Lunatic by commission, and granted
that over; and it was adjudged that in a trespass brought, that the Patentee
shall not have aid of the King; and Fitzh. said, that when the Lunatic comes
to be of sound memory he shall have an account, but he lands of a Lunatic the
King or his Patentee shall have to their own use; vide stat. Prerog. cap. 9.
and 10.

56. The next avoidance is granted, cum primo and proximo vacaverit, the church
being void at the time of the Grant, the Grantee shall not have this
presentation, for it is a thing in action; but the next to that, which is the
first which can be granted.

57. Quaere if the Tenant in a Cessavit may be averred pernor of the profits.

58. By the opinion of Mounteg. where a man makes a lease for years rendering
rent, and after makes a Lease of the same land to begin, during the first term,
it is a good grant of the Reversion, and he shall have the rent being but a
chattell which is granted in reversion without atturnment; But Baldwin and
Shelley were contrary, vide Braces. Case.

59. A man recovered an annuity against a Parson, and and had a Scire facias
upon the Recovery against the Successor, who prayed in aid two patrons, in this
case one only may not be essoined per Curiam, but Fitzh. said, that to allow an
essoine where it does not lie, is no error, but to deny an essoin where it
lies, is.

60. Cestuy que use devised that A. should have the government of his Children,
and the letting and ordering of his land; in this case by the Court A. may not
sell the land, for the intent appears to be an ordering for the benefit of the
children.

61. Russell brought an action upon the case against A. for saying that he was
a false thief, and that such a night he would have robbed him, ad damnum, etc.
A. came and defended vim, and quoad pro palationem, etc. querens non suit dam.
in forma qua, etc. the Plaintiff demurred, and adjudged for him; for the words
are confessed, and no damages more grievous then to take away a man's fame, etc.
and a writ was awarded to enquire of damages without further argument.

27, 28.
62. The Abbot of Westnunster brought an action of debt against the Executors
of one Leman Clerk, upon an Obligation dated the 10 Novem. 12 H. 8. The
Defendant pleaded an Indenture of Defeasance, dated the same day and year, by
which the Plaintiff demised to L. the Rectory of A. and the said L. covenanted
in that quod ipse and assignat. sui. exoner. Abb. de omnibus onerib. ordinar.
and extraordinar. and durante termin. repar. aedificia, and in fine term.
reparat. sursum redd. Ita quod non liceret alienar. sine licenc. Abb. etc. sub
pena forisfac. by virtue of which Leman entered, and occupied till the first of
August, 21 H. 8. during which time be paid the rent, and paid five marks
debit. per appropriat. praedict. quae sunt omnia onera tam ordin. quam
extraordinarnecnon aedific. repar. usque dictum diem quo die statumsuum inde
futur. concessit cuidam P. and hoc parati sunt verificare, Judgment if the
Action, The Plaintiff demurred.

Seven Exceptions taken.
1. Because the Defendant showed not the date of the Indenture, but by the same
day and year, referring that to the plea of the adversary, which is not to the
purpose, so for default of showing the time, it shall be intended before the
Obligation, viz. most strong against him who pleads it.

2. The Conclusion ought to be prout in eadem Indent. plen. apparet, or at the
least quae sunt omnes and singul. conventiones.

3. Also he showed not where the five Marks were paid, which ought to be
because of the Vi^ne.

4. The Covenants be in the copulative, That he and his Assigns would pay,
etc. it ought to have been pleaded jointly, for though the Lessor might have a
Covenant against the Assignee, yet that proves not the Lessee to be
discharged.

5. He showed not the License of Alienation, and of the statute 21 H. 8. which
prohibits Ecclesiastical persons to have Fermes, does dispense with the edit.
it ought to have been pleaded, being but in particular to spiritual persons.

6. He showed not that the Assignee was a lay person, where if he were not, the
Assignment is void.

7. Notwithstanding that the statute 21 H. 8. had words that the Lease shall be
void, if it be not aliened before Michael. yet there shall be entry, as Cestui
que use, ought to enter, notwithstanding stat. 27 H. 8. Judgment was given for
the Plaintiff.

29 H. 8.
63. One brought an account for Tin delivered by him to the Defendant, for to
render an account, and it was holden that it was no plea in Bar, that he had
sold it, and taken an Obligation in the name of the Plaintiff for the Money:
But it is good in discharge before Auditors.

64. If composition between Tenants in common to present by turn, be one time
executed, in a Quare impedit, it needs not to show the composition; Also
Parteners may make composition without deed, because privies in blood, and
compellable by the Common law.

65. If my dog kill sheep without my incitation, I shall plead not guilty in a
Trespass brought for the same.

66. The Transcript of a Fine was removed by the Ancestor out of the Treasury
into the Chancery, and it came into the Banck by Mittimus, to have a Scire
facias to execute the same, and the Ancestor died. And holden that without a
new Mittimus, the heir shall not have a Scire sacias, for by the death of the
Ancestor the authority given to the Justice of the Banck by the Mittimus is
determined; But contrary 14 H. 7. for the heir; but agreed for he in remainder.

67. Trespass, the Defendant justified, as Termor, by the demise of a Patentee
of the King for life: And the better opinion was, that he need not to show the
Patent; and the same law of an Under-sheriffe, Under-collector, and Incumb.
because they have no means to come to the possession of it. But otherwise it
is, if the Patentee had granted all his estate to the Defendant.

30.
68. In Detinue for forty Quarters of Wheat, and counted upon an absolute
contract, etc. The Defendant said, that it was upon condition to pay for it
when it was delivered; and that the Defendant delivered twenty Quarters, for
which the Plaintiff did not pay presently: so the contract void. Judgment if
the Action. And holden good without Traverse that the contract was simple; for
the Traverse ought to be on the other part, viz. that it was absolute without
it was upon condition, but agreed that the Defendant might wage his law, or
plead non detinet per patriam. And agreed, that a contract is not good without
present payment, except a day be limited, and then the one shall have a Debt
for the money, and the other a Detinue for the ware.

69. Per Curiam, Lessee for life by the Lease made before 27 H. 8. by the
Feoffees to an use, shall now be distrained by Cestui que use, for the rent
reserved without atturnment; and if before the statute they had granted a Rent
upon condition, it shall be now subject to the condition.

70. A man surrendered copyhold to J. S. and is bound in an Obligation that J.
S. shall enjoy it without interruption of any; and J. S. afterward committed a
forfeiture, and the Lord entered, the Obligation is not forfeit, because his own
act.

71. Debt brought against Executors in Middlesex, the Defendants pleaded fully
administered, etc. the Plaintiff said, that they had assets in Essex, and upon
demurrer adjudged good, because assets are transitory; and the Jury of
Middlesex may take notice of assets in any county.

72. The Lord Audley Diffeisor, let for life rendering rent, and granted the
Reversion to the Disseisee, who accepted the rent; it is an affirmation of the
Lease. Concess^ per quosdam.

73. The King Grants obligation forfeit by attainter, etc. the Grantee may sue
in his own name.

74. A man who had a Warren, and a Law-day in his Manor, by Charter, he
granted the Manor to the King, yet the other shall not pass without cum
pertinent. and per Curiam, one may have either in another man's soil.

31.
75. J. S. made a Lease for life to A. and after he made a lease to B. for
years of the same land rendering rent; A. surrendered, I. S. infeoffed a
stranger, who suffered a recovery, and Tenant for life died. Quaere, if the
Recoverers may avow for the Rent, upon 7 H. 8. cap. 4. for he against whom the
Recovery was might not, because the Lease was not begun.

76. In wast brought by the Grantee of a Reversion, the Lessee may plead, that
he in Reversion, did not grant by his deed, or that nothing passed by his deed,
and give in evidence that he never made atturnment, or he may traverse the
atturnment, per Knightley, and Fitzherbert.

77. In Formedon of a Rent charge in two acres Jointenancy in one, shall abate
all the Writ, for a Rent charge ought to be demanded of all the Tenants of the
land, but Rent service may be demanded of the pernor of the profits.

78. In debt upon an Obligation, with condition to perform covenants in an
Indenture, whereof one was to make such assurance as the counsel of the
Obligee should devise, if he were to that required. The Defendant pleaded by
protestat. that the counsel of the Plaintiff did not devise, and for plea
that he was not required to make assurance; the Plaintiff said, that J. S.
his counsel devised a Release, and he required the Defendant to seal it, who
refused; The Defendant rejoined, that he did not refuse, and by the Court it is
a departure, that he did not refuse, and by the Court it is a departure, and
the issue joined a Jeofaile. And holden, that the Plaintiff needed not to have
pleaded the refusal, but only that he was required; because the Defendant had
pleaded in the negative, that he was not requested, and so at issue.

79. If a Diffeisor sow, and sever, and before it is carried the Disseisee
enters, he shall have them.

Pas. 32. 29 H. 8.
80. Tenant in tail, the Reversion in the King levied a Fine, or suffered a
recovery. Tenus a Bar to the issue, but no discontinuance, because the King is
in Reversion.

18. Upon issue of fully administered, the Executors gave in evidence payments
of Debts upon contracts, where that was a suit upon an Obligation, the
Plaintiff demurred, and had judgment of the goods of the Testator, so much as
was in the issue, and adjudged, that after an Action brought upon one
Obligation, a Debt shall not be paid upon another Obligation.

82. Baron and Feme Cestui que use, before 27 H. 8. and after the statute a
writ of Entry in the Post was brought against the husband only, who pleaded
Jointenancy, with his wife, per Curiam he ought to show the statute, as by the
common law he ought to show of whose feoffement. Pernors are gone by 27 H. 8.
therefore the husband may not be averred sole Pernor of the profits.

83. In an Action upon the case the Plaintiff was Nonsute; and the Defendant
had Judgment of costs, upon stat. 23, H. 8. And upon a writ of Error brought
the Record was removed into the Kings Bench, and after the Defendant sued an
original of Debt for the costs, in the Common place; And adjudged that it
^ieth very well, being an original; and if the Record be denied, it shall come
by Mittimus into the Chancery. But the Common banck may write to a more baser
Court; and by the better opinion, although the Record be reversed, he shall
have the costs assessed by the Court for the wrongful vexation.

84. Debt for Rent, and counted upon the Demise of twenty six acres rendering
rent; the Defendant said, that the Plaintiff let to him the twenty six acres,
and four acres more, without that he demised the twenty six only, and it was
found, that he let but twenty one acres. Quaere, If the Plaintiff shall
recover: It seems by the better opinion that he shall, for the Defendant
confessed the twenty six acres by implication, and then the verdict is not to
other purpose, but to manifest that he did not let four acres more. Curia
advis. But Shelley said, that the Defendant needed not to have traversed,
because he confessed the 26 acres and more, but the traverse shall come of the
part of the Plaintiff, that he let twenty six acres, since he let the four
acres, and then it had been a better issue.

33.
85. Lessee of a Meadow covenanted to repair the banks, and the banks are
broken by sudden flood, he is bound to repair them, because of his covenant.
But by Fitzh. and Shelley he shall now have sufficient time to repair them,
because of the decay, and also the act of God.

86. By the custom of London, a man may devise his land which he purchased in
Mortmaine.

One devised to the Prior and Covent of St. Barth. etc. so that they render to
the Dean and Chapter of Paul's 20. l. by the year, and if they fail, their
estate to cease, and remain to the Dean. Fitzh. and Shelley held it to be a
void remainder, because a Remainder may not be limited after an estate in Fee.
And as to the Condition, the Dean and Chapter shall not have advantage of the
Condition, but the heir.

87. He in Reversion made a feoffement and livery, the Termor being upon the
land: It seems that it is a good livery, because the franck-tenement is seen,
and the Rent passes: But otherwise in case of a Lease for life, and although
the Termor be content with the same, yet that is not a Surrender, per 5 H. 7.
Quaere, if livery within the view, the Termor being upon the land, be good: If
the Lord disseise the Tenant, and make a feoffement, and the Tenant re-enter,
the Feoffee shall have the rent, for his estate is not openly defeated, as in
the other case, but only the possession.

34.
88. In debt against a Chancery man, process continued till the exigent, upon
which he purchased a general Supersedeas, he had lost the advantage of his
privilege, because it recites an appearance: But if he had sued a Writ of
privilege first, it should have been good, although at the Exigent, and then
he shall have a special Supersedeas.

89. Two outlawed in an appeel of murder, purchased a pardon, and had a
Scirefacias against the Plaint: and Seigniors, mediate and immediate (it seems
it needs not to the Seigniors, for the pardon affirms the attainter and not
reverse it) and the pardon agreed not with the indictment in the addition: But
they may aver that they are the same persons; also the pardon was Perdonamus
A. and B. omnes utlag. versu^ praefat. A. and B. seu alterum eorum promulgat.
And although the words of pardon are joint, and they are joined in the words of
pardon, whereat the felony of the one is not the felony of the other, yet by
the ensuing words it is made several, and his non-obstante pardon allowed.

90. A woman brought a Writ of Dower in a hundred acres of land in R. and S.
and as to that in R. the Defendant confessed the Action, and the Plaintiff had
judgment, etc. And to the rest he pleaded to the issue, which the Plaintiff
relinquished, and had a special Scire facias in R. and upon a Scire facias
returned, and default made, she had a special writ of Seisin, because it
appeared not how much of the hundred acres lies in R.

91. Per Fitzh. and Shelley, an Obligation may be delivered to the Obligee
himself, as an Escrow to be a deed upon conditions performed, and that is not
his deed till, etc. Quaere.

35.
92. Concordat, that a feoffement to diverse without deed and livery to one in
the name of all, is not good to the other.

93. Feoffee of a Conusor of a statute upon execution sued, had an Audita
querela, supposing that the Mayor of Chester, before whom it was acknowledged,
had no authority to take the Conusance.

94. A common recovery was had against Tenant in tail, who died before
execution: per melior. opinio. the issue shall not be remitted, nor yet
falsisie the Recovery, because of the Recovery in value of the Vouchee.

95. If a man grants the next presentation to one, and after grants the nex^
presentation to another, the second grant is good by Shelley, and it shall be
intended the next, which he may lawfully grant, and no difference between
proxim. presentat and proxim. advocat. But Fitzh. said, that if it had said,
proxim. advoc. mea. peradventure that passes which is next to dispose.

96. Maleveret brought a writ of Wast, and counted that he let a house, and six
acres of land, and six acres of wood to the Defend, who made waste; cutting and
selling twenty oaks in the aforesaid wood sparsim, growing; The Defendant for
ten, said that the house aforesaid, in tempore quo, etc. was in decay of
Timber, for which cause he had bestowed upon reparations; and as to the other
ten, that they grew upon one acre of land of the tenements aforesaid: which
sometimes had been arable, and pro melioratione, etc. Plaintiff demurred. He
ought to answer to the sale, for if he sold and after redeemed, and bestowed in
reparations, as 5 Ed. 4. is, the wrong by the sale is not gone; so also if a
man sells the distress, and after redeems, and puts it in pound again.

2. He did not conclude that this is the same waste, etc.

3. The words praedicto tempore quo, shall be referred to the time of the
demise, for no time was put of the cutting; so that if they were ruinous at the
time of the demise, the Lessee is not bound to repair no more then if the house
be dejected by tempest or enemies; and although he better the inheritance of
the Lessor, yet it is not lawful to do wrong to another that good may come,
as to drive beasts out of my corn, 21 H. 7. or to carry my tithe in jeopardy
to be destroyed by cattle, into my barn; or to make a trench to convey water to
better land in which I have common.

Yet for the commonwealth a man may justify wrong; as in time of war to make
Bulwarks in another land; so the rasing of a house which is burning for the
safety of the neighbor; so a (...) Sheriff may break a house to apprehend a
villain; but otherwise in cases which concern a private man, as upon a Capias
in a Debt or Trespass. So if a Termor in persuing a villain him exile, if it
be for felony it is no wast; if because he him had slandered; contrary by
Knightly; and a Termor may not at all repair in Timber, without the assent of
the Lessor, but only in small reparations, for the Lessor has interest in the
body of the trees, and the Lessee only in the branches, fruit, brows and
shadow; and if the Lessor upon notice given do not provide timber, so that for
default of that the house fall, the Lessee shall have an action upon the case,
and that is but negligence, and not like to the case where the Defendant
alleges personal wrong, which the Plaintiff did himself; for there the
Defendant shall Rebut the Plaintiff of the action, by matter of another
action, but not so here; as in waste which the Plaintiff himself has made, in
debt for rent against the Termor, or the Plaintiff had him ousted; So in dower
that she detaines the charters.

4. It is holden that if a Termor set wood in arable, vel e converso, it is
wast; so if he convert pasture into arable, and it is a prejudice to the
inheritance; for if the evidence of the Lessor serves to prove that he had
woods, or etc. although he may aver that to be the land, yet that may in time
be unknown.

5. Because the Defendant justified in one acre of land, and so answered not to
the Plaintiff; The Plaintiff recovered.

38.
97. Jurors at a Nisi prius being agreed upon their verdict, they saw Read
chief Justice going to see an affray, they followed him; and did eat and drink;
and after gave their verdict, and it was alleged in arrest of Judgment, and
every one was fined 40. l. yet the Plaintiff had judgment; and after error
was brought.

98. Array challenged, because the Sheriff is cousin to the Defendant; after
in making conveyance the Sheriff was cousin to the wife of the Defendant; and
yet holden very good, for the matter is the partiality; and it is as well a
principal challenge, if he be of the blood of the wife of the Sheriff, as if
of his own blood per Justiciar. but because he did not say, that it was at
the time of the array made, the challenge was disallowed.

99. Gawen brought an appeal in Wiltshire against two, as accessaries to a
robbery made, and counted of incitation at London: Defend' Demurr' and Hales
Justice, said, that it is well brought in Wiltshire, and till the robbery done,
the counsel is no wrong; and the subsequent Action made it wrong in both
counties. And where a man has an Action founded upon two wrongs in several
counties, the Plaintiff is at his election to bring his Action in either, as
in forging in one county, and making Proclamation in another: But an accessory
after the fact, is no wrong done in the county where the robbery is committed.
Also if it may not be brought here, the wrong is dispunishable, for a man shall
have but one appeal against principal and accessory (R. quaere causa) and in
punishing wrong a man shall have favor in trial; as it is in a Mortdant
cestor; And in debt for wages, where the retainer is here, to serve in France
in war; but the Demurrer supposes a confession of the matter, so that the
trial came not in question, as 18 Ed. 4. where a debt was brought upon an
obligation, and counted not where it was made, and the Defendant pleaded an
acquittance; but four Justices were of contrary opinion, who said, that it is a
maxim that trials shall be where may be best notice^, and that is where the
wrong begins; especially in personal wrongs.

If two Closes adjoining, being in several Counties in Curia claudenda,
because of the decit it shall be brought in the county where the Close of the
Plaintiff is. But if he had but a term, an action upon the case only lies,
and it ought to be brought in the county where the land of the Defendant lies,
because it is in the personalty (but an appeal is no action either real or
personal). Recovery in a Quare impedit in Devonshire, and the writ to the
Bishop is delivered in Middlesex, who refused; a Quare non admislt shall be
brought in Middlesex. Also Life, Liberty, and Dower, are favored in Law, and
the attainter of the principal because it is a matter of Record, those of
London as every one is, ought to take notice of that. But peradventure of a
thing which arises upon the land the action shall be brought where the land
lies. And where the Defendant may plead the general issue in the several
counties, an action may be brought in the one county or other. As where an
annuity is granted out of a parsonage in one county and seisin is had in
another. So if a Physician take upon him to cure in one county, and administers
unhealthfull salve in another county. But if the general issue may not be
pleaded, as in our case he may not plead not culpable to the procurement, which
is counted to be in London, then otherwise it is because it shall be wrong to
the Defendant. And by Brown clearly the demurrer is no confession, but is to
the insufficiency of the Count, for after that adjudged the Defendant may plead
not culpable. And by them there is a diversity, if a man steals in one county
and carries it into another, for there because the property is not divested,
the appeal lies in every county. But otherwise in a Trespass, as also in an
appeal of Robbery, for it is no robbery in the county where the goods are
carried into. If a Lease be made in Middlesex of Land lying in Essex, rendering
rent for years. So if Retainer be in one county and Departire in another, for
the privity the Plantiffe may choose or bring his action where he pleases. But
otherwise after the privity destroyed, as after waste committed, or where a
stranger takes the servant. London may not join in trial with another County,
and although it be a mischief to abate the appeal, yet it shall rather be
suffered then an inconvenience of trial, where there can be no notice for that
part.

100. The Dean of Salisbury let to one Chaffin by these words, quod Decanus ex
assensu Capitul' dimisit, and the seal of the Chapter put to the deed, and good
per Curiam, If the Dean be sole seized in the right of his Deanary. But if the
Dean and Chapter be seized together, then words of assent are not sufficient,
because persons able to make a Lease, and is not like the case of an Abbot and
Covent.

Pas. 41. 30 H. 8.
101. In a Warrant of Dower upon issue, never seized so that she may have
Dower; A remitter to defeat the estate of the husband is no good evidence by
the Court, but it ought to have been pleaded, and so if the estate be defeated
by condition: and the Court would not admit a verdict at large (1 Ed. 1.
contrar') and for that reason it was found against the defendant for folly in
pleading, and the Plaintiff had judgment.

102. In a Replegiare the Plaintiff is non-sute, and after he issued a second
deliverance, a superdeas is had for a Retur' babend', for it is but a reviver
of the first plaint, yet after the Sheriff returned averia elong' upon that,
and it was alleged in arrest of judgment that insomuch as it appeared that he
himself elong' etc. that the Plaintiff shall have judgment, for the return
was without warrant.

42.
103. A writ of Proclamation upon the Exigent was returned by the Sheriff out
of office at the time, upon which the out-lawry was adjudged void per stat. 6
H. 8.

104. The Executors of Greenliffe brought an action of debt upon an obligation,
and the condition was, that whereas W. has sold to G. a certain Meddow in etc.
the said W. shall warrant the said G. against Lord and King, and all other; if
the said G. shall peaceably enjoy the said Meddow, to him and his heirs of the
Lord of the Manor of M. by the services due after the custom, that then, etc.
The Defendant said that the Meddow is copyhold, and is holden of, etc. and that
is customary and rent behind, or for waste, the Lord may enter for forfeiture,
and that G. took that by copy, and all his life habuit and pacifice gavisus
suit, and obiit inde scisitus, and it descended to the Plaintiff as son and
heir, who of his own wrong entered without admission contrary to the custom,
etc. And because 3. s. rent was behind such a day, the Lord entered as
forfeit, Judgment, etc. Plaintiff demurred. Jenney said that the condition is
void, for if G. peaceably enjoy, it needs not that the Defendant should warrant
it. And it was agreed that although it was not showed what was warranted; yet
it shall be intended of the Land about which was a communication. But the
warrant to G. shall not extend over the life of G. Yet if the feoffee upon such
warranty recover in value he shall recover in fec-simple; and it is not spoken
to whom the warranty is made, but only that it shall be for him and his heirs,
per. 6. Ed. 2. the garranty shall be according to the state. And as to the last
part of the condition Jenney put adversity, where words are that a man shall
enjoy to him and his heirs, and where it is he and his heirs shall enjoy, for
if he injoyes but during his life, he enjoyes to him and to his heirs, because
he had see per touts, that a man is not holden to warrant against new titles
after the garranty. (43) Also the Plaintiff is particeps Criminis for that
etc. per touts the Bar is not double for the entry without emitta^ is but
surplusage, and at the first he did not allege it as a forfeiture. Shelley
that pacifice gavisus fuit is but an argument, that he had warranty; And it is
a failable argument also, for he may be impleaded for the issues which the
obligor had forfeit, and yet it is not contra pacem, but pacifice made. But it
ought to have been showed directly how he had warranted, or that he was non
damnifi'.

105. Concord' that if a Parson purchase a Manor and after he lets his
parsonage, notwithstanding the unity he shall pay tithes, and so of his
feoffee. But they were in diverse opinions whether if a person let his Glebe
rendering rent, if the lessee shall pay tithe.

106. After custom and subsidy paid for clothes in a tempest upon the Sea, the
clothes were cast out, and the Merchant came again and Deputy customer. It
seems that he may, and also gives to him license to carry over so much more
without custom, all which was pleaded in Bar upon Informat' for subsidy and
custom not paid, etc. Counsel the King demur' and it seemed reasonable that he
shall not pay. And in many cases where a man has loss and makes the other
privy he shall have recompense. As if a man be implead' and vouch' he shall
recover in value. So where a man grants a seigniory by fine, and the Tenant
dies without heir before atturnment, and a stranger abate in the land, the
Conusee shall have a scire facias servitia. The King after waived the Demurrer,
and joined issue, that custom and subsidy Domino Reg. deb' concelat' and
substrac' etc. contra formam flat'. and it was found that he did not conceal
and withd raw etc. in manner and form as is supposed by the Information. And
it is doubted whether this verdict shall be taken for or against the King, for
if it be for the Defendant, it should be concluded prout defend allegavit. Reed
said, that it seemed to be their intent to acquit the defend' of conceal' but
not of the substract'. It Is there holden that custom is inheritable in the King
and due by the common Law. For the first stat. viz. 14. Ed. 3. which speaks of
custom gives not custom, but abridgeth it for wool and cord.

Subsidy is a tax assessed by Parliament, and granted by the subjects during
the life of every king, for defense of the Merchants upon the Sea. (44) And for
that information of a subsidy for cloth is evil, for cloths were excepted in
stat. 1. H. 8. also there is is no statute which gives to the Informer the
moity, for all the custom and forfeiture for that is due to the King. And there
it is holden that custom is well paid for the time, if it be before the
departure of the ship out of the view of the Port. As it is of a distress
chased within the view, and a prisoner within the view of the Jailer.

107. It was found by office that Gilbert held land of the King as of his
Honor of Philipton, and other land as of his Manor of Dartington which came
to the King by attainter of treason of the Marquess of Excester. It seems it is
not holden in capite, for tenures in capite began in ancient time by the Grants
of the King, to defend him against Rebels and Enemies, and stat' Prerog. cap.
1. Quod Dominus Rex habebit custod' etc. Dum tamen ipsi tenuerint de Rege ab
antiquo de Coron'. and at this day the King may create a tenure in capite if he
gives to hold of his person, but otherwise if he give to hold of a Manor,
Honor, etc. (45) and tenure in capite shall be immediately of the King, and
shall be created by the King himself, for a tenure created by a subject can
never be a tenure in capite neither shall have any prerogative annexed to it,
and if the tenants of an Honor hold in gross, viz. in capite of the King, the
Honor when it comes to the King shall be destroyed, que nes issint. Also it is
no reason that a tenant in whom is no fault, that he should be prejudiced in
his tenure by the offense of the Lord. Otherwise if forejudge or evict of his
mesne. Also tenant in capite is inseparably of the person of the King, and
cannot be released, although he after grants the Reversion, for it is not
incident to the Reversion, but to the person of the King: as it is of
Frankalm', every grand Sergeanty is tenure in capite, for it cannot be of any
but of the person of the King. Vide a good case vouch' 6. Ed. 3. the diversity
of the degree in which the King shall have an escheat, either as Lord or as
King.

Mich. 31 H. 8.
108. A Lease upon condition that he shall not alien to A. the lessee aliened
to B. and he aliened to A. the condition is not broken, for a condition which
goes to the breaking of an estate shall be taken strictly.

109. A Lease upon condition that he shall not assign his term during his life
without the assent of his lessor, he devised that without etc. and died: by two
it is a forfeiture, for he that is in that, is in by the Devisor; contrary of
assignment in Law if one had that as Executor.

110. John Minors Tenant in tail made a feoffment upon condition to remake an
estate to him and his wife in tail, remaind' to T. M. filio meo etc. the
remainder to Sibill' filiae meae, the Feoffees reciting the deed, made a
feoffment by words Dedimus and concess' to J. Minors and his wife, and to the
heirs of their two bodies, remaind' T. M. filio meo, remaind' Sibill. filiae
meae, and J. M. died, T. M. within age entered for breach of the condition, and
holden that Sibill filiae meae may not be intended the daughter of J. M. But
peradvent' otherwise of T. M. filio meo, because none of the names of the
Feoffees were M.' (46) Mountegue and Bromley the party who shall take advantage
of the condition, is party to the breach, for that etc. also his acceptance
extinguisheth the condition, but otherwise if an estate be made to a stranger,
it shall be taken strictly. But quaere if the condition be but suspended during
the life of the father, for the parties agreed.

111. Milbourne let land to two habend' iis ad termin' vitae little (conjunctim)
and alter' diutius vivent' and assignat' suis q. primus eorum decedere
contingat, durante vita ejus q. superstes and non aliter. Plusors that the word
conjunctim is no restraint to make partition. Quaere if he that first dies
shall assign all, if good by the words supra, or but a for a moity, but if
there was no assignment, the survivor shall have the entire.

112. A man wounded in one County died in another, the heir sued an appeal in
the county where the death was, the defendant plead non culp'. Tenus that the
Jury shall come out of both counties, and that the visne of each county shall
be of the body of the county: and the trial be in the Kings Bench, and not at
the Nisi prius: but per Clericos if a man be wounded in Middlesex and he die in
London, the trial shall be only in Middlesex, because London may not join.

113. A Bishop made a lease to two for years rendering Rent, and after he made a
new lease with the confirmation of the Dead and Chapter to one of them, the
Bishop died. Quaere if by his death the first Lease be void in all, for because
of the second Lease the liberty of the successor is gone of affirming the first
Leass by acceptance of the rent in prejudice of the second Lease, but otherwise
if the second Lease had not been. So of Tenant in tail, Abbot etc. who have
inheritance. but of Lease of a person or tenant for life it is otherwise, for
it is void by their deaths. But some held that the Lease was surrendered for the
moity only, and remained for the residue. Quaere, for the parties agreed.

Pas. 32 H. 8.
114. A man let for life to A. after by Indenture renting the said lease, he
demised the remainder to B. habend' the said remaind' after the determinat' of
the first lease for 20. years: quaere if the reversion passes by name of
remainder, and if there need atturnment.

115. Indictment of the husband for the murder of his wife, it was found
before the Coroner, qued Elizab. fuit in pace etc quousque predict. A. vir
praefat' E. of H. in com. predict. Yeoman etc. Tenus that although it be not
said nuper vir etc. so that it was objected if he be now her husband then is
she living. For husband and wife are relative, yet good, because the death
found super visum corpor' and the best shall be taken for the King. (47.)

2. The addition although Elizabeth be the next antecedent, shall be referred
to the husband, because a woman may not be a Yeoman: contrary of Spinster.

Trin.
116. Banister brought a Trespass of entering into a house and issue joined upon
the disseisin supposed to be committed before to the Plaintiff, and the
Defendant in evidence to prove that he disseissed not, showed a recovery of
land, with averrment of building the house after; the Jury was charged to find
the disseisin if they found not the building, but if etc. They prayed discret'
and per 3. Justices a Formed' in reverter shall be of a house if it be built
upon the land after the gift: but by others, by a recovery of the land the
buildings upon the same are also recovered.

117. A Lease without impeachment of waste, and if it happen he make waste, it
shall be lawful for the lessor to enter, and the lessee made waste; per
Shelley it is a void condition, because repugnant to the grant to be discharged
of waste. Others held that it was good, because it shall be intended, that the
les^ee shall not be impleaded for waste, for to leese trebble damages, per
that the lessor may enter.

118. Quaere if debt lies against the Executors of an Administrator upon an
obligation of the intestate, or a new administrat' committed.

119. Per Shell^y two Towns may not inter common because of Vicinage, where
there is a third Town between the Commons, because they are not neighbors,
Baldwin contrary, but such Common may not be used where the Commons are at
several seasons. And per Curiam, if two Towns are adjoining, and a great field
lies between them, and one who lives in one of the Towns has Common there
with the tenants of the other Town, It behooves to make title for Common
because of ^^cinage and not appendant.

120. A man was obliged to a Dean in 20 l. solvend' eidem Decan' and Success',
the Dean died, per Shelley the successors shall have it, for an obligation may
be made to him and his successors, as well as to his Executors. So of a Prior,
Abbot, or Bishop. Contrary of a Mayor, or the Guardians of a Church. Baldwin
held the payment to the Dean and Successors was void, because the obligation
was to the Dean only. A man had two sons, the eldest is attaint and dies
without issue in the life of the father, the youngest son shall inherit, but if
he had issue the land shall escheate.

Mich.
121. One man had the nomination, an Abbot the presentation to a Church, the
King after had the possession of the, Abbot, and presented without nominat' per
Curiam, a Quare impedit lies against the Incumbent notwithstanding, for the
King may not be a disturber. Townsend moved that the King cannot be an
instrument to any. Shelley, he is an instrument to every one in administration
of Justice to him.

122. A Juror was labored with by the Plaintiff to appear and to give verdict
according to his conscience, and no cause of challenge, per Curiam.

Pas. 33. H. 8.
123. Upon issue joined of Villain regardant, in evidence it is no good title
that he is a villain in gross. But by Justice Bromley contrary, insomuch that
their charge is upon the right of the villainage, viz. if a villain or not.

124. Tenant in tail of a Manor with a villain regardant infeoffed J.S. of
one acre, parcel of the Manor per words, Dedi unam acram etc. and over, Dedi
and concessi R. villan' meum, Dubitatur if the villain pass in gross or
appendant, because by several grants, although in one deed; Shelley, the
Advouson appendant so granted is in gross; But otherwise it had been if the
feoffment had been of the entire Manor.

125. Tenant in tail of a Manor with a villain regardant, infeoffed the
villain of one acre parcel of the Manor and died, per Justitiar. the issue
ought to recontinue the acre before he seize the villain.

126. The Earl of Bridgwater tenant in tail, before the stat. 32. was bound in
a Recognizance to him in remainder, that he should not make an estate longer
then for his own life, if after the 32. he make a lease for 21. years or 3.
lives according to the said stat. Per 3. Sergeants, he forfeits the
Recognizance notwithstanding every of them is party to the statute. But he in
reversion or remainder shall not avoid the lease made according to the 32. if
tenant in tail die without issue, for so is the intent of the makers of the
statute although no words in the statute of the Donor or he in remaind'. (49)
Vide Austins case adjudged contrary, where the King was within in point of
reverter.

127. A man delivered money to the use of a woman, to be delivered to her at
the day of her marriage; quaere if the Baylor may revoke before the condition
performed: and diversity was taken where there is a considerat' precedent, and
where it is mere good will; as for a New Years gift before the delivery. So a
man may alter his Will annexed to a feoffment at the time of the livery, and he
may revoke a letter of attorney before livery made; so of a bailment or
delivery, before delivery be made over; and by Baldwin the case above, except
the words of use alter that. And use alters not the property of chattels. For
stat. 50 Ed. 3. cap. 6. to prevent fraudulent gifts of goods to an use to the
deceit of Creditors had been in vain, if the property had continued in the
Donor. But 2 contra 2.

Mich.
128. Stat. 27 H. 8. which establishes the Court of Augmentation, wills that
all grants for life or years of offices concerning the land of the said Court,
shall be sealed with the seal of that Court. It Is doubted if a patent of such an
office under the seal of the Chancery, viz. if the word (shall) be compulsary.
Bromley, if it be enacted, that the youngest son shall have an appeal of death
of his father, that shall not exclude the eldest because there is no word of
restraint.

51.
129. Stat. 31 H. 8. made it treason for a woman to poison her husband. It
seems that now an appeal lies not for the heir, because now the murder is
changed into Treason, and the greater extinguisheth the lesser.

Yet it was moved that although chasing in Park be by the statute made felony,
yet the offense may be made a Trespass at the pleasure of the party. Saccombs
case.

130. A man condemned in debt paid part, and the Plaintiff made acquitance,
viz. received 10. l. in part of a more sum, wherein the Defendant was
condemned by judgment, before the Justices of Nisi prius, where judgment is
always in the Banck. Tenus, that it is no good Release to have an Audita
querela, if Execution be after sued of the entire, for there was no such
judgment.

And this diversity put by Whorewood, If I release all my right in white acre,
which I purchase of such a man, where I had it by descent, yet it is good,
because white acre is named certain, an the rest surplusage: but if it be of
all his lands which he had purchased; it is otherwise, because general an
uncertain.

131. An appeal of Murder against Wainford, the writ was to answer A. B. alias
dict. A. C. frat' and haered' of the dead: the defendant was disch. because the
name of the brother which enabled to the appeal was in the alias dictus, for
the alias dict' is not any part of his name. The count was, The Defendant
percuss' 1 day of May, etc. whereof he languished at D. three weeks, and there
died, and sic defend' die and anno praedict' murdr', etc. Quaere because die
praedict. was the day of the wound, and not of death.

132. Cockerell was sued upon a simple Obligation per Survivor, he pleaded
payment, and re-delivery of the Obligation in place of acquitance, and
re-taking by the Plaintiff and so not his deed. Tenus no plea. For first, he
which pleads payment in the same county, ought to rely upon the Debet. Also a
simple Obligation may not be discharged without deed; for arbitriment is no
plea, and in annuity payment is no plea, for a mischief shall be suffered
rather then an inconvenience that a nude averment shall discharge a deed.
Contrary, if it be with penalty, or the annuity clause of Distress, and the
deed re-delivered is no acquitance, because there wants words of acquitance.
Also a second delivery of a deed, which takes effect at the first i^ void.

133. Tenant in tail discontinued, and retook an estate in Fee, and after made
a Lease for years, rendering rent and died; The issue before he entered upon the
termor, or receipt of the rent, levied a fine of the land; and holden that the
Grantee shall not avoid the Lease, for because the rent reserved may be a
recompense to the issue, the Lease is not void, but is at his election to
affirm it. And there by Bromely, that if Tenant in tail infeoffe his issue,
who at full age makes a Lease for years, and the father dies, the son shall
avoid the Lease, as Littlet. put, que il serra Rent Charge.

134. Condition that for default of payment of Rent the Term shall cease, it
beho^es to demand the rent upon the land; Contrary, if it be reserved to be
paid dehors, per Shelley.

Hill. 52.
135. A Parcener let that which appertained to her, after upon a partic'
faciend' brought against the Lessor, too little is allotted to his part. Per
some there is no remedy for the Termor; Quaere if the partition had been
without writ.

Pas. 34 H. 8.
136. The King granted a License to transport Bell metal non obstante any
statute made, or to be made. Baldwin and Shelley held, that the dispensation
for statutes made after is void, because before the law is made, also the
Grantee is a party to the statute. But the King may dispense in things to come
wherein he has inheritance, as subsidies or taxes, Quaere.

137. Per Broml. and Shel. if tenant by Knights service make a gift in tail
rendr' 10 shill' without any more, yet the Donee? shall hold as the Donor held,
for the law creates that, Quaere.

Trin.
138. A Parson made a Lease for forty years, to which the confirmation of the
Patron and Ordinary was annexed for twenty years: some held it good for all,
others contra, Fitzwills case.

(53.)
139. Quaere if he in remainder be in possession according 32 H. 8. cap. 9.
that he may acquit a pretensed title, viz. si particul' estate a remain' soient
come un a ce' purpose.

140. In Attaint it was agreed for law, that a will of land deviseable by the
Common law is good without deed, and that the Plaintiff in Attaint may not
produce two witnesses, nor the ancient may not depose farther matter, and to
that purpose the witnesses were examined if they deposed at the first as now;
otherwise of the Defendant: And it was said to the Jury that they ought to find
accordingly if the evidence were pregnant, which induced the first verdict,
although it be false, for bomines sunt mendaces, and non Angeli, Inter Rolfe
and Hampden.

Information against Richards upon 4 H. 7. cap. 9. for importing Gascoigne wine
in a strange ship; the Defendant pleaded as assignee of part of a License, and
showed not the Letters Patents, nor the life of the Patentee, neither showed
the deed of Assignment; but averred a custom amongst the Merchants to assign
by paroll only. Also after the said License the stat. 3. H. 8. enacted, that
the stat. 4 H. 7. should stand in force; So that from thenceforth no man shall
presume or attempt to do any thing contrary to the effect thereof. Quaere, if
that takes away the License before. But for insufficiency of pleading judgment
was given against the Defendant.

142. Tenant in tail before 27 made a feoffement to the use of his wife for
life; and after her decease to the use of his son in fee; the statute is made,
the husband and wife die, his issue enters, he is not remitted, but his issue
shall be remitted.

143. Tenant in tail before 23 H. 8. made a feoffement to the use of himself
and his heirs, the Feoffees granted a Rent charge, the statute is afterward
made, Tenant in tail dies, the issue enters, he is not remitted to the tail
to avoid the Charge, Adjudged between Simmons and Chapman.

Pas. 35 H. 8. (55.)
144. The Lord Borough Tenant in Capite, suffered a recovery to the use of his
sons and his wife, and the heirs of the bodies of his sons, without limiting
any remainder over, the son died having issue within age, and notwithstanding
the sta. 32 H. 8. it was adjudged that the issue shall not be in ward during the
life of the mother, for the ancient Reversion remains, and the father donor
held of the King; and not the sons, as they should if there had been a
remainder. Tenus also that whereas the Lord Borough was seized of land in
possession and in use, covenanted upon the said marriage, that his son
immediately after his death shall have all his lands, according to the same
course of inheritance that then stood, and that all now or to be seized, shall
stand seized to the uses aforesaid; and it was holden to be but a covenant, and
that it altered not the use of the father of the Fee presently; so that for no
cause shall the issue of the Son be in guard; Quaere si les parolls fuissont
urera and remain' al fits.

145. Two Parceners of an Advowson, the youngest within age, and in Guard, The
Lord intermaried with the eldest; the Church being void he presented in both
their names, after the youngest came to age, and the Church again void: It
seems the eldest shall present if the youngest will not join, for the last
presentment was indifferent, Quaere.

146. A Quare impedit was abated because the Plaintiff was made a Knight, and
yet compellable; Quare if he shall have a new writ by Journies Accounts.

147. Judgment upon a writ of Annuity was, that the Plaintiff shall recover
the arrerages before, and hanging the writ of q' attingunt, etc. and in summing
there is a quarter more then is incurred. Also it was showed to the Court
before the verdict that the Jury had eat and drank at their own costs, and upon
those matters Error was brought; But because the day of writ brought, and also
of the Judgment is put in certain; it is apparent to how much the arrerage will
amount; And the Summing which was the office of the Clerk is not of necessity.
Also the eating of the Jury at their own costs, although it be finable, yet it
shall not induce affection, and so the first Judgment was affirmed.

148. Trespass, Demur', if the Son may avoid the feoffement of his Father
being deaf and dumb.

Trin. 56.
149. A Lease of land and sheep, the sheep died, or part of the land is
surrounded with the sea, the entire rent shall issue out of the residue, by
diverse, but some held the contrary, because it is the act of God: And if a part
be evicted upon elder title it shall be apportioned.

150. A Writ of right was brought against husband and wife, the wife being
within age is admitted by her next friend, the Tenants vouched, and joined
issue upon the mere right; and after made default; Judgment final was given
against the Vouchee and his heirs, and against the Tenant and his heirs, Nota.

151. A. is obliged that B. shall pay 20. l. to the Obligee, the Obligee
accepts a horse of B. the Obligation is discharged, but otherwise had it been
if the payment had been to a stranger to the Obligation.

(57.)
152. Reed brought a debt upon an Obligation, where the condition was to
perform Covenants, Grants, and agreements, in an Indenture of Lease, The
Defendant pleaded the Indenture, and that after, viz. such a day five years
after, the Plaintiff by deed here showed in Court released, etc. ad primum
diem Maii^, qu' esset in anno Domini, etc. all Covenants in the Indenture.
Judgment if the Action. The Plaintiff demur' and adjudged that the plea is not
good, because he had not alleged that till the release he had not broken any
Covenants; for if the Obligation be one time forfeit, a release of Covenants
after shall not dispense with that.

Mes si per release les Covenants sont dischar' durant ascun infrient, the
Obligation is then discharged Quia accessorium. As in cases of Redisseisin,
etc. nomine penae, etc. Per melior. opinio. that the words ad primum diem Maii
qu' esset, etc. are void words, and the premises shall stand as a present
release, for the subsequent words may qualify and abridge but not destroy the
premises. And a release is not available but for a right, or an Action which
one had at the time of the release; for it is contrary to the nature of a
release to take effect in time to come.

Notwithstanding by Laldwin peradventure, if the heir of the Disseisee deliver
a writing as an Escrow, to be his deed after the death of his father, it shall
be good ( R. Quaere because of the relation) and holden by Bromley, and
Shelley, that by a release of covenants, the Demise and all agreements, as
Reservation of Rent, which is an agreement of both, is released. But Baldwin
denied it.

Mich.
153. Stat. 1 Rich. 3. gives authority to Cestui que use to make a Grant,
Lease, Feoffement, Per Justic. if Cestui que use for life, where the remainder
is over in tail, makes a Lease for another life and dies, the Lessee is but
Tenant at sufferance; for the statute intends, not that it shall be a
Discontinuance, but such an estate as he may lawfully grant; Case Lord Zouch.

(58.)
Cestui que use made a Lease for 20 years the first day of May, to begin at
Midsum. The Feoffees they made a Lease the second day for 30 years to begin at
Midsum. also: And holden that it is not a surrender of the first Lease, because
it was not yet begun, although it be so in the Lessee that he may either give
or forfeit it. But it shall inure as a confirmation for 20 years, and as a new
Lease for 10 years after: If Cestui que use make a Lease for years, and after
make a Feoffement of that, and other land, and livery in the other. Quaere,
because he neither had in possession nor in use according to the statute, if
good for that in Lease. Cestui que use in tail made a Feoffement and died, as
it seems the franck-tenement shall not be adjudged in Feoffees with regresse.
Saunders Case.

Trin. 36 H. 8.
154. The King had the honor of Gloucest' partly by descent, and partly by
attainter of the Duke of Buckingham; The tenants of the Honor held not in
Capite, nor the King shall not have the prerogative of other lands, as was
decreed in the case of the heir of A^^^ur of Clopton, in Guard for tenure in
Chivalry as of the said Honor.

155. The Bishop of Bath and Wells made a Lease for life, and after granted the
Reversion, habend' terr. praedict. cum post mortem etc. vacare contigerit usque
finem 20 annorum extunc' proxim' sequent' with a Letter of Atturny to make
livery; which was executed and a Confirmat. had; The tenant for life made
regresse; the Bishop died; if the said grant be good as a new Lease without
Atturnment, or if the regresse be a sufficient attornment, Quaere.

156. The King let to Taverner a Rectory rendering rent, and granted to him to
be discharged of all pensionibus, portionibus and omnibus denar' summis; and
decreed in court of Augmentation, that the King shall find the Curate; and if a
common person let without such words of discharge, yet he shall find, for it is
a spiritual administration, which may not be let; and the service is annexed
to the person, and not issuing out of the Parsonage.

157. The Prior and Covent of C. let the Manor of D. Cum pertinent' una cum
columb' ac reddit' tenent' decim' garb' finib' heriot' perquis' cur. and aliis
omnib' proficuis, advocac' eccl' and wrecc' excep' and reserv'. Per some the
word (ac) conjoines the last words of that which is let, but that may not be
first, for then aliis omnibus proficuis which came after is excepted which is
repugnant, also the nature of a forspris is to restrain part of a thing before
spoken of, whereas decim' garb' is a new thing. Case Wiltshire.

(59.)
158. In a debt upon an Obligation brought against Hawood, he pleaded non est
factum, and so at issue, and before the day of the appearance of the inquest,
the rats had eaten the labell of the Obligation per the negligence of the
Clerk, in whose custody it was, etc. upon which the Jury were charged by the
Justices that they should find that it was the deed of the Defendant at the
time of the plea, and give a special verdict, and so they did. 2 Ed. 3.22
simile.

In a Repleg. the Plaintiff was Nonsute and ^Return' habendo awarded which was
returned Averia clongat', for which in Withernam other beasts were delivered:
yet by the Court the second deliverance shall be of the first.

Pas.
159. The Lord Latimer devised to his wife the third part of all his Goods and
Chattels; Quaere if they shall be intended as they are after all Debts and
Legacies paid, or if the entire; And if three parts of the Debts of the
Testator shall also pass. The word utensils shall not pass plate and jewels,
per Justic. A Devise to the daughter 500. l. toward her marriage, If she die
before marriage, per greater opinion her Execut' shall have it. Contra if the
words were to pay at the day of her marriage or at the age of 21 years, and she
die before both, as tenus 3 Eliz.

Pas. 28 H. 8. (60.)
160. Trewynnard Burgess of the Parliament was taken upon an Exigent after a
Capias, and now upon a Writ of privilege from the Parliament the Sheriff let
him go at large.

(61.)
1. Tenus that the privilege is grantable non obstante the execution, for the
King and the Realm had interest in the body of every Burgess, and the
Commonwealth shall be preferred.

Trin.
2. That the party after the Parliament may be taken in execution again, for
the Plaintiff shall not be prejudic' of his execution by Act of the law, which
makes not wrong to any.

3. Admitting that the privilege should not lie in that case, yet the Sheriff
shall not be charged, because he is sworn to execute process, but he is not
bound to take notice of the law.

161. A Prebend in a Cathedral church let parcel of his prebendary for years,
and the Dean and Chapter confirm' and diverse held, that it shall not bind the
Bishop, who is Patron and Ordinary of every Prebend, Quaere. vide 8 Ed. 3.

162. Whorewood and his wife were Joint-purchasers of 60. l. land, and the
husband seized of 300. l. land more, devised that his wife shall have the 3
part of the entire, with her Jointure by the Assignment of the Executors, and
the wife waived her Jointure, and demanded the third part of the entire as a
Legacy, viz. 120. l. and the third part of the residue for her dower, viz. 80.
l. And it was decreed that she shall have the third part of the entire, and
over that 40. l. of the residue for all her dower.

163. Upon information upon the statute of plurality of Farms, and that the
Defendant had seven lying in seven towns in 4 Hundreds in Essex. Concord' if
there be 4 hundredors returned which have land, or abide in any of them, it
suffices for the challenge for the Hundred.

164. Tenus, that a plaint in Assise of four acres of land and a house, it may
be abridged for the house, because the Jurors had not the view of that, and it
suffices if the Jury have notice of themselves, although the Sheriff^ cause
them not to view it: (62.) For the matter is, if they can put the Plaintiff in
possession if he recovers. The examination of the view was, by the true
speaking of the Jury upon their oath, and holden that if a Termor after
surrender continue possession and pay rent to the Lessor, holden that it is no
Disseisin except at the pleasure of the Lessor. Three were named conjunctim and
divisim as Atturnies to make livery, and two did it the third being present,
but said nothing; Quaere. But it was agreed if the third had been absent it had
not been a good livery.

Expliciunt Anni Regis Henrici Octavi.
Incipiunt Anni Regis Edwardi sexi: Anno Tertio.
Mich. 65.
A Parson granted an Annuity de Rectoria sua to A. and his Assigns for the
life of the Grantor pro consitiosuo impens. tantum, and A. assigned that J. S.
who brought an Annuity, and counted that A. was seized in Demcan as in
francktenement, etc. Defend' demur' if it may be assigned: Also it was moved
by Pollard that an Annuity lies not because of the Count that the Grantee was
seized in his demean as of francktenement, which shows an election to take as a
rent seck, Quaere.

166. Wast is assigned in amputando and decapitando 40 fraxinos, etc. and upon
Demurrer adjudged wast.

Error Assigned in Assise of 40. s. rent. 1. Because B. in the association was
also Attorney to the Plaintiff.

2. Because at the day of Assise one Defendant appeared and nihil dixit, and
the Assise was adjourned into the Exchequer chamber, at which day the said
Defendant made default, and upon that default the Assise awarded, whereas it
should have been awarded upon the nihil dicit.

3. The Plaintiff and Defendant varied in the land put in view whereof, etc.
and the verity is not inquired by the Jury.

4. Because the Plaintiff was admitted to abridge 20. s. where the rent is
entire; and is not as in case of land.

5. Also notwithstanding the said abridgement, the verdict and Judgment was ne
redditu in querela, viz. of the entire.

6. After 5 sworn upon the principal, then the Assise remaind' pro eo quod
nihil habuerunt infra hundred. de A. without saying infra quod, etc. quodque
non fecerunt visum, etc. where if 4 hundredors are sworn upon the principal it
is sufficient.

7. The rejoinder was in nullo est erratum, where the first error assigned is
matter of fact, and issuable of one and the same person. But holden very good,
for he agreed that it is one and the same person, but yet denied it to be an
Error. Seignior Windsors case.

(66.)
167. The words of a Lease were and non licebit to the Lessee to alien without
assent of the Lessor sub pena sorisfac'; It was agreed that this is condition.
But that the restraint continues but during the life of the Lessor and Lessee.

168. Debt was brought in the Exchequer by Sergeant Minors against the
Sheriffs of London upon an escape A. And counted that he was in execution in
Ludgate in the time of 4 Sheriffs, till the Defendants 15 December. 3 Ed. 6. etc.
Defend' said, that long before the said 15 December. 3 Ed. 6. viz. 23 September,
1 Ed. 6. the said A. being in custody of J. and C. the^ Sheriffs, upon the
said Execution, they at Lambeth in Surrey let him to go at large, etc. and hoc
etc. Plaintiff demur.

1. Because it may be before the 3 of Ed. 6. and yet the year after J. and C.
were out of office.

2. It is repugnant that the said Sheriffs suffered him to escape in Surrey
he being then in their custody in London.

(67.)
3. Also it ought to be alleged certainly that he was in their custody in
Surrey, or otherwise if there be not special matter, as the commandment of the
King, or his counsel, or chamberlain by writ, it is an escape.

4. Also they excuse not their own wrong by traverse, nor by confession and
avoiding: But this put upon another, whereas every one shall answer for his own
misdeed, Escape 45. that such matter is confessing and avoiding, 33 H. 6. it is
a good excuse, that escape was by sudden fire, or enemies. Contra of Rebels.
So also a Jailer may not him aid of the escape by error in the Record, upon
which the prisoner was in execution, because a stranger to that, 21 Ed. 4. fol.
28 acc' and M. 14 Ed. 3.

169. A man made a Lease for years to two, provided, that if they die with the
term, that the term shall cease, the t^rmors made partition, and after one of
them died, Tenus that his Executor shall have it, because there is no occupant
in this case, and it shall not cease during the life of his companion. But if
it were a Lease for life it should be determined. Farringtons case.

170. In debt the Defendant pleaded a release of the Plaintiff in Bar; and at
the issue upon Non est factum the Defendant confessed that it was not the deed
of the Plaintiff, and then the Plaintiff had judgment presently, and Defend'
Capiat. 33 H. 6. and he was but amerced. But for denying his deed, the judgment
is quod capiatur, although he be not convict by verdict.

171. Upon Extend' faci' upon a statute Staple the Sherriffe extended the land
of the Defendant, and sold the goods, and returned the extent in Chancery; And
a writ of Prerogative issued, that the Sheriff should first levy 100. l. for
the King, and driven to execute the writ of Prerogative; for it is holden that
till the Liberat' no property is in the Conusee. R. Quaere, for by many of the
Temple, the extent seiseth them into the hands of the King to the use of the
party, and upon that they are in custody of the law, in privilege of all other
executions.

Hill. 5 Ed. 6. (68.)
172. Tenant in tail in feoffed his issue within age and his wife, the issue
died having issue, he is remitted. Quaere because of the Feme.

Pas.
173. An Indictment was quod A. apud D. insult. etc. and ipsum murdravit
without ad tunc and ibidem; also the Indict' was Barksh. Inquisit' capta ibid'
without showing where the Inquisition was made, Defendant outlawed; and the
outlawry reversed for the same errors: (69.) And holden that the word murdravit
implies ex malitiapraecogita, as furatus est implies felonice cepit. Also
holden that a Justice of peace may inquire of murder, because it is felony non
obstante opinio' Fitzh. Bucklers case.

174. A Parson makes a Lease for years or grants a Rent charge to begin after
his death, the Patron and Ordinary confirmed it. It seems good to bind the
Successor, because the charge is present, although it take not effect in the
life of the Grantor, Quaere.

175. Three brothers the middle of them was slain, and the eldest died within
the year, and no appeal began, and Demur' if the youngest may have an appeal.

176. Four women being coheirs of one Harwell, three of them and their
husbands-prayed a Covenant to levy a Fine against the fourth and her husband:
which Conus' of the tenem' to be the right of one of the three sisters as that
which her husband and she, and the other two husbands and their wives had of
their gift; The Conusees rendered to the wife of the Conusor in tail, the
remainder to three women Conusees in tail, remaind' rectis bered' Harwell; The
wife Conusor died without issue, and the three husbands and their wives now
brought a Scire facias to execute the remaind. quare the remaind' non deb^ant,
etc. Vide 1 H. 5.8. that a Scire facias lies not to execu^e a remaind' in that
case, for the Conusees as that, etc. ^^ey had see executed, and then it is a
void limination of a remainder in tail to themselves.

177. Tenant in ancient Demean vouched one at the Common law, within the same
county, because the Vouchee had nothing to be summoned within, etc. And upon
Demurrer the Voucher adjudged, and day was given in the Bank to determine the
warranty: And a Summons ad warrant' was warded to the Vouchee in the forain
county, who entered into warranty, and vouched over into another forain county,
etc.

178. A man infeoffed two upon condition to remake a Lease for life to the
Feoffor, the remainder in see to a stranger, the one sole made an estate
accordingly, and per many it is good for the moity by dispensation of the party
who made the condition, per his acceptance of the estate.

Trin. 6 Ed. 6 (70.)
179. In a Trespass against Isham Keeper, for entering into a Park and
depasturing swine, and for entering into one meadow and taking of grass, etc.
the Defend' pleaded in Bar to which were diverse exceptions.

1. Because he had pleaded a grant of the office of a Keeper for life, by
virtue of which he was possessed, whereas it was a frank-tenement.

2. Because in his Bar he made three several Justifications, and pleaded
semper, quod J. S. suit seisit, etc. and granted to him the office, and said
not praedictus J. S. so contra, because it shall be intended diverse men. (71.)

3. He justified the depasturing of swine as appendant to his office, whereas
swine nor goats are not commonable.

4. He had pleaded a grant of the office, and made prescription to have things
incident, etc. and said not that he was seized by force of the grant before
he made his prescription, for otherwise he may not prescribe.

5. Before his prescription Non dicit that it was an ancient Park, which
exception was the principal cause that Judgment was given against him. For
matter in law it was doubted, if the Defendant being Keeper but for life
whether he may prescribe in him and his predecessors, for he cannot say, and
those whose estate he had, etc. or if he ought to prescribe in a place, as to
say quod habetur talis usus in the said county that every Keeper, etc. As
Tenants at will may prescribe quod talis habetur usus in such a town, etc. but
not in their persons. Yet it is said that the prescription of the chief
Justice in giving offices is general, that every chief Justice for the time,
etc. yet he is an Officer at will of the King. vide 11 Ed. 4. the like
prescription of a Sergeant to be sued by original and not by Bill. The like 21
H. 7. for Bar fee by the Sheriff. And holden that a Lord of a Manor may
prescribe to have a hariot upon the death of the tenant for life, for although
an estate for life be interrupted, others have continuance by which the
prescription is made. But the Tenant himself may not prescribe. Tenus that the
Lord may dispark, notwithstanding the grant of the office; But not ear it if he
had granted the herbage. And holden that by grant of the office of a Keeper
incidents pass especially if the words be in tam amplis modo and forma quod A.
habuit, which are as available as express words. (72.) Also it was objected,
that a Keeper of a Park might not prescribe to have seyn, viz. primam tonsuram
prati, for it is a frank-tenement, and an Assise lies of it, and then for the
mischief of obeyance, etc. which shall not be suffered but only in case of a
parson. Contrary of an office of inheritance. And it was argued, that an
Advowson may not be appendant to the services but to the Demean.

Mich.
180. Vide the form of the Sergeants writ, the inscriptions of Annualls were,
Plebs sine lege vuit.

181. One learned in the law took notes of the Will of one sick, and after writ
the Will, but before he showed it to the sick he died; And yet by the opinion
of the Court it is a good will in writing within 32 to convey soccage sand.
Idem 5 Elizab. although written after his death. Sackvils case.

182. The husband alone levied a Fine with Proclamation of his wives land and
died, and five years incurred without entry or action of the wife; she is bound
per Curiam by stat. 4 H. 7. And the stat. 32 H. 8. aids him not although it
limits not any time peremptory, for that speaks not of a Fine with Proclamation.

183. A man levied a Fine at the Common law of land in ancient demean of the
nature of Gavelkind. The course is not altered, Quaere.

184. A Parson made a Lease for years after the Patron granted proxim'
advocat', and after the Patron an Ordinary confirmed the Lease, and the Parson
died: he that had the next avoidance presented A. and he was discharged of the
Lease; after the Patron granted the Advowson in Fee, and A. died, and the
Grantee presented B. If he shall avoid the residue of the term, Quaere; and
note the alienation was after the death of the Lessor.

185. Adjudged that an Action upon the case lies, for saying, W. Kempe will be
a bankrupt within this two days.

73.
186. Upon a writ of Partition upon 32 H. 8. the Sheriff returned the
partition made by 12 lawful men; one of the parties surmised an inequality,
and prayed a new writ, Quaere if he shall have it.

187. Eps. surrendered an ancient Lease of the possession of 2 Priory, and took
a new lease for 41 years, within the year 31 H. 8. of Dissolutions rendering the
ancient rent; and after the Patentee of the King avowed upon the Lessee for
Damage fesant, Demurr' if it be a good Lease.

(74.)
188. Exceptions to an information upon the Will of the Lord Boucher.

1. That the will was not found by office, and the Attorney of the King may not
entitle the King to the frank-tenement by suggestion without matter of Record
inducing thereto.

2. The information is quod dedit manerium O. etc. by his Will, which is false
if he had but an use; for a Devise is not within the stat. 1 Rich. 3. de don.
de posses' as it is of a scoffement of Cestui que use. And being before the
stat' of Wills, it shall not be intended that he might devise the land it
self, without pleading the custom specially.

3. Also in his Will he requested the King to accept his Manor of O. etc. for
the 500 pound which he owed him, but those he gave not to him, and therefore
the acceptance ought ^o be showed.

4. The words are over, paying to hi Executors ultra, so much as the King
pleases, toward etc. and this word paying in the Will is a condition, and
ought to have been showed performed by the payment of some sum.

5. Also a use or possession of a frank-tenement may not be vested in the King
without matter of record.

6. Also after his will made his Feoffees by his commandment made a feoffement
to the use of himself for life, remaind' to estr. uses, which was a
countermanding of the Will, for a Will cannot take effect till the death of the
Testator.

189. Lessee for years devised his entire term to A. provided if he die while
J. S. is living, then the residue shall remain to J. S. A. aliened and died,
per Hales and M^ountagu^, J. S. is without remedy. Vide Welkdens case.

Debt by Patridg against Grocker upon stat' 32 of buying itles. Plowd. Com.

(75.)
190. An Action upon the case was brought by Bridges, for saying B. is a
maintainer of thieves, and a strong thief himself; Issue joined if propalavit
mode and sorma, and all the words found besides strong, and the Plaintiff had
Judgment. Quaere if he shall be amerced for the said addition, for peradventure
it shall be an error in Judgment.

191. Andrews brought an Action upon the case, and counted that the Defendant
for 20 pound whereof the moity was paid; and the rest agreed to be paid at a
time; for which he promised to deliver 400 pound of wax to the Plaintiff such
a day, and at the day he delivered to the Plaintiff 373 pound of ill wax, and
warranted it to be good and merchantable, by which the Plaintiff was
damnified, etc. The Defendant pleaded an agreement or concord made between them
after for the 26 pound of wax, iswell for the insufficiency, as for the rest
not delivered, which agreement or concord he had paid or performed, and the
Plaintiff accepted that, etc. Judgm' etc. Plaintiff demur' because the deceit
was not answered; (76.) And the Bar was holden good, because a Concord executed
is a good Bar in all actions where only damages is to be recovered. And
arbitriment is a good plea before it be executed, because an action of Debt
lies upon Arbitriment. And holden that the deceit supra, is not material to be
answered, because the warranty of the sufficiency was after the Contract, and
so no confidence. Also the Count is not good because he had not showed that the
second day of payment was not come, for it shall be intended that it is come,
and that the consideration is not paid, where the agreement was for 20 pound;
which is condit'.

192. Fieri facias issued against Vincet, who died, and the Sheriff levied the
execution against the administrat'; And the administrators brought a writ of
Error, and reversed the Judgment, Quaere of a writ of error by Administrat.

193. In Dower by the wife of Kettlesby, the tenant pleaded the entry of the
Demand' in parcel after the last continuance, and holden that the tortious
entry shall abate the writ; The Plaintiff said that she entered for a
Quarentine. And holden that she ought to show the death of her husband in
certain, and the time of the forty days.

194. In a Quare impedit against the Bishop of Salisbury and the Incumbent,
verdict passed before the Justices of Assise for the Plaintiff, accord. stat.
w. 2. cap. 5. Judgment was given before them and a writ to the Metropolitan
awarded; and for damage a Fieri facias to the Sheriff the Defendant upon a
writ of Error brought removed the record into the Kings bench, and had a
Supersedeas to the Metropolitan made in the Common pleas, after the Plaintiff
sued a Scire facias to have execution, because the Defendant did not assign
Errors, which by the course in this writ is as ad assignand' Error', upon
which the Defendant assigned Errors.

1. Because found by the enquest of Office that the Incumbent was in by the
presentation of A. who was not named in the writ.

(77.)
2. Because damages were adjudged for half a year where it appeared that the
presentation was not deraign'd within 6 months, and the words stat. w. 2. cap.
5. are recited quod si disratio' presentat' infra tempus semestriae tunc
adjucent' dampn' ad valor' medietat' ecclesiae per unum annum, notwithstanding
these the Judgment was affirmed; And upon suggestion, that the writ of Error
was brought before the payment were ass^ssed by the Court, and costs according
3 H. 7. c. 10. and 19 H. 7.20. And a writ of Execution awarded to the Guardian
of the spiritualty sede vacan^^ of the Metropolitan. Exception was, because the
writ of Error was, in recordo, processu, and redditione judicii loquel. que
fuit co^am nebis etc. which was false.

195. The King let the fee of Richmond with all Deodands which should happen
within it to C. for years; And after he granted all Deodands generally to
Amne': the term of C. expired, and the King made a new Lease to C. as supra; By
Mountague the Almner shall not have the Deodands against the Patentees, for his
Grant was void because the Lease of C. was not mentioned in the Patent. Omnia
quae movent ad mortem sunt Deodands.

196. The King let the Site of an Abbey and omnia terras, prata, pasturas and
subscript' cum pertin' dicto Monaster' pertin' etc. viz. such a thing, and
such, etc. Tenus that (viz.) shall have relation to the subscrip' only; so that
the Patentee shall have allother lands which appertain to the Monastery, and
not to omnia.

197. Adjudge in Assise that where Tenant in tail discontin' to the use of
himself for life, the remainder to the use of the heir in tail, the remainder
to a stranger in fee, and died, and the heir entered, stat. 27 H. 8. is made,
and after the heir died without issue. It was resolved that the entry of him in
remainder was congeable, because the heir of the Tenant in tail was not
remitted, by the possession executed by the statute.

198. Abbot 29 H 8. made a Lease for 80 years rendering etc. of a wood three
miles distant from the house, notwithstanding never in Lease before, but the
wood was never spent in the house but always sold; the house within the year
was dissolved. And the opinion of the Justices was that it is a Lease within
stat. 31 H. 8. ergo, void.

199. In Attaint the Grand Jury were returned Summoned, by the Sheriff Cousin
to one of the Petty-Jury; But the Resummons and Distress, and 20. and 16.
Tales, all were returned by a new Sheriff, and now full Jury appeared, and the
grand Jury was quashed, causa qua supra, and the Tales at the peril of the
Plaintiff; But diverse presidents are that such a Tales shall stand.

200. In Assise the Writ was de libero tenemento in C. the plaint was of one
house, etc. the Defendant said that the land was in H. and not in C. Judgment
of the writ, and si, etc. Quaere if he need to say and not in C. for this writ
is but a supposall, viz. de libero tenemento.

201. In a Quare impedit the Plaintiff made title by survivor upon a grant
made to him and others by A. who had advoc' quart' partis in gross, and had
presented B. etc. and after another as in gross, and after a third as in
gross, and then the Defendant presented as appendant, and every of them had
advoc' alius quartae partis, etc. and that the Church is now void by the death
of the presentee of the Defendant: and so now appertains, etc. The Defendant
said, that the entire Advowson is appendant to the Manor of D. the moity of
which he had by descent, and now it belonged to him to present, sans that the
said B. was admitted and instituted ad presentat' A. Some held that he ought to
have traversed it absque hoc, that in gross; Quaere, for the parties conveyed
not from one and the same person; Ideo 20 Ed. 4. 21 and Lib. Entr. 130. and the
presentation was traversed, this issue shall be tried by the Ordinary.

Hill. 7 Ed. 6. (79.)
202. An Indenture of Lease had such a clause, viz. And the Less shall
continually dwell upon the premises upon pain of for feiture; Per Curiam, it is
a Condition, for the clause is the words of both; so quod non licebit alien'
etc. sub poena sorisfact'. Vide de proviso and covenant ensemble.

203. In a Formedon the tenant vouched one as Cousin and heir of Townsend, and
prayed that the plea abide, per Curiam he ought to show how he is Cousin. 16
Ed. 3. idem 15 Ed. 4. contra.

204. A man made a Lease of a Manor in which was 30 acres of wood, and also in
another place of the Manor were timber trees; excepting timber trees and great
woods: by 3 Justices that the herbage and underwoods in the woods shall pass,
and so seems to be the intent of the Lessor per paroll grand, Mountague the
contra.

205. A man was sued in his spiritual Court for his very tithe, and upon
suggestion de modo decimand' over 60 years, viz. of paying 12. d. only for,
etc. and that he had pleaded it in spiritual Court and was not allowed, and
had a Prohibition, and per Curiam if the 12. d. had been a rent issuing out of
the land, yet a Prohibition shall be granted, Quaere and vide 8 Ed. 4. fol. 14.
per Choke 2 man may not prescribe de non decimando.

206. In a writ of Right, the writ to summon the four Knights was returned
served, and they appear not, Hab. corpora shall issue, and not alias summon';
per Justices.

207. A writ of Partition was brought by Ra. Haward Esquire, and the Lady Anne
Powes his wife, and was abated, and so he was driven to purchase a new writ;
and to leave out the word (Lady) and the form was per Annam uxor' ejus. And the
Plaintiff counted how the feme was coheir with one in tail with the
Defendant. (80.) And holden that he needs not show the beginning of that,
because he affirms the possession of the Defendants, and demanded not the land.
The Defendant pleaded special Bastardy in the wife of the Plaintiff. Judgment
of the partition; And holden a good plea without traversing the Coparcenary,
and the trial shall be where the birth was alleged.

208. A man condemned in Debt died, before Execution, and holden that the
Administrators are holden to pay this debt upon Record before specialties, and
if they are sued upon an Obligation, they may plead recovery against them,
which is not executed, and if they do not plead so, but in default of that
Judgment was given against them, and execution had, before the first execution
sued; they shall answer of their own proper goods, for by the first Judgment
the goods were charged.

209. Questions for the Lord Willoughby.

1. If a man let all his medows in D. containing 10 acres, where it does indeed
contain 20, if all pass; And it seems it does.

2. If a man let 40 acres juxta F. whereof 10 lie in A. and 20 in B. and 10 in
F. if all pass.

3. If a Stewardship may be granted by a common person to be had after the
death of the first Grantee.

4. Of herbage of a Park be granted, and the Grantee surcharge so that the Deer
are not pastured, if he has any remedy.

5. Grant of a Keepership, with 3. l. fee of rents, profits, and issues of the
Manor of S. by the hands of the Receiver it shall charge the Manor, Per
Mountague and Hales.

210. There is a proviso in stat. 31 H. 8. that Leases which have been
examined, enrolled, decreed, or affirmed in the Court of Augmentation, and the
decree put in writing and sealed with the seal of the said Court, it shall be
good and effectual according to the said decree, etc. Lease made within the
year, and the ancient rent not reserved, (so that it shall be void except for
the proviso) was exhibited in the Court of Augmentation 25 April 31 H. 8. to
be allowed, and so was, and exemplified: But that bare date 28 day of April,
which was the first day of the Parliament, Quaere if it be aided. It Is clear
it had, if it had been dated 27 April. Sir John Sentlees case.

(81.)
211. The heir was condemned in an Action of Debt by nihil dicit upon the
Obligation of his father. And the opinion of the Court was, that the Plaintiff
shall have no other execution but by special Elegit of all the lands descended
in fee to the heir of the said Ancestor, which he had the day of the Writ
purchased. Peppes case.

212. The College of Graystock having a Master presentable, and 6 Priests with
stipend; The opinion of the Justices that the college was not given to the King
by the st. 1 Ed. 6. of dissolutions, because the master is presentable, and had
not a common seal, Hales contra.

213. Sir John Ailiffe sued an attaint in London, upon the stat. 23 H. 8. and
process continued upon the said stat' and upon the statute 37 H. 8. cap. 5.
and this Judgment was given in the Exchequer, and before execution the record
wac removed into the Banck by C^ritiorare, Nota hoc, and now the Plaintiff
prayed Judgment upon that and had it. For by the Justices an Attaint is not a
Supersedeas as a writ of Error is, nor a Supersedeas lies not in attaint; and
upon the Resum. returned in the Banck served, 20 Tales awarded. Nota. And
because by the said statute the inquest shall not be compellable to appear out
of London, the Justices caused the distress to be returned at Guildhal, and
there they sat in the Majors court and charged the inquest, verdict passed for
the Plaintiff, but Judgment was respited per Curi^m to be advised.

(82.)
214. Debt against the Executors of Potter in the debet and detiuet for rent
incurred upon a term after the death of the Testator; They pleaded that part of
the land was evicted in the life of the Testator, and for the residue that they
profer', etc. and uncore prist. etc. Plaintiff demurr't but at length accepted
according to the apportionment, without costs or damages of either side.

215. A man is obliged to pay 20. l. viz. 10 pound at Michaelm. and 10 pound at
Christm. he tendered the 10 pound at Michaelmasse, and was in pollards which
after were abased, which was refused, and he failed of payment of the other 10
pound, upon which a debt is brought, and upon the tender pleaded, etc. Judgment
that because in default of the Plaintiff himself, that he received not the
first payment he shall have it in pollards, but the second in sterling, and
damages, etc.

216. A man sued A. before the Mayor of London, and a third person being so
much indebted to the Defendant, by the custom of attachment he is condemned,
notwithstanding this Judgment, yet till execution, the Plaintiff may resort,
and have judgment and execution against the Defendant himself, also he may sue
the third person for his debt, notwithstanding the judgment unexecuted, which
was certified by the Recorder.

217. Receiver who paid not that over at the day which he ought, if he shall
bear the imbasement of the money after. Quaere if the cofferer refuse to accept
after the day, and after it is embased. Quaere if the Receiver pay not upon
Request having money of the Kings in his hands.

(83.)
218. A man is bound in 20. l. to pay 10 pound at Michaelmasse, the Obligee
upon tender refused, and after brought a debt upon the Obligation. It seems
because it behooves to plead, unc' prist that the Obligor shall bear the
imbasement.

Pas.
219. Sergeants case: assise de porciene decimarum per the Dean and chapter of
B.

1. Exception was taken because the writ was de libero tenemento. But it seemed
to the other side to be very good, and the count shall be special de porcione
decimarum, for no special writ is given by the statute 32 H. 8. and then the
ancient writ stands, and there shall be a special count. Vide Bckenhams case.

2. Because the Land-tenants were not named; but it was said to be very good,
for tithes are not so precisely issuing out of land as rent is, neither is
there other want of those then he that takes it.

(84, 85, 86, 87.)
3. Because the plaint is quadam portione garbar', etc. in 200 acres, without
showing the certainty of the loads. But is was answered the taking of part was
a disseisin of the entire tithe; the which being casual and uncertain the
plaint cannot be more certain, and quadam is a word of certainty, except it be
joined with a word uncertain, as quidam ignotus.

4. Because the statute was not particularly alleged, answer was it need not
because general.

5. Because the writ was in Dominico, etc. It was said they are tangeable, ergo
Demean.

6. Because the prescription of the payment made the plea double, to which it
was denied, because the prescription is but an inducement to the right, and the
seisin the effect, and seisin only shall not be a sufficient title of a profit
apprender to charge another soil.

7. Praet^xtu quorum shall have relation but to the last part. But it was
answered to all; but not to better or worser the estate.

8. Because it was not said in jure coronae. To which it was said, that the
statute gives tithes to the King to dispose, and sil allegeroi^, etc. It may
be doubted if they may be severed from the crown.

9. Because the name of Baptism of the Deane is not showed, fuit dit, that it
is no policy if it be of a thing which he has with the chapter, for by
interlessant his name of Baptism he may have an assise of Disseisin in time of
his predecessor.

10. Because it is not showed that the tithes are not parcel of the Demean of
the Archbishop York nuper in tenura B. according to the Grant. It was said it
need not, for it is very certain to name the land out of which they come 2 Ed.
4.

There were also three matters in law moved.

1. If where the statute speaks but of a person or persons a body Politic
shall have advantage of that.

2. If Tithes in their spiritual hands may be demanded in Temporal court.

3. If Tithes are made Temporal by any words in the statute 27 or 32 of
Dissolutions.

220. Presentment is come to the Bishop by lapse, and after the Bishop is
deprived. Quaere if the Metropolitan or King shall have the presentment.

221. The King by Indenture made a Lease for years of tithes rendering rent to
be paid at Midsummer and Michaelmasse, or within a month after the said feasts
in the court of Augmentation; provided if it be behind by the space of one
month after any day of payment limited, if it be duly demanded, that the Lease
shall be void. The King after granted the Reversion in fee, the rent is hehind
two months after the feast day; Quaere if any demand need to be made by the
Kings Patentee; and if he ought, whether of the person, or in the court of
Augmentation; (88.) and whether tender in any mean day of the month suffices.
Note, rent reserved upon tithes, and that they pass by the grant of the
reversion of them; and so it is not like a sum in gross.

222. Eden who had practiced Multiplication, which is felony by the statute, 4
H. 4. cap. 41. he was pardoned by the general pardon; But W. accessory was
accepted, as one of those who were in the Tower; It was moved if he be yet
discharged: Quaere if he may be accessory to a new felony.

223. Assise against 3 the plaint is of 6 acres, and it was found that one is
tenant of 2 acres and disseised the Plaintiff of one only, and not of the
other; so of the other; so of the third, he is tenant of two acres the residue,
and disseised the Plaintiff and is dead hanging the writ; The Plaintiff after
verdict abridge the plaint of two acres in which there was no disseisin, and of
the other two, of which he that died was found tenant: Quaere if he shall have
judgment according of the residue.

Trin.
224. Appeal of murder by a woman of the death of her husband, against
Margaret Oldcastle Spinster, where she was indeed a Gentlewoman; It seems it
is not a sufficient addition: But she was estopped to plead that to the writ
because she purchased a Supersedeas upon this, and so she pleaded not guilty;
after the Plaintiff took a new husband; for that, etc.

(89.)
225. Davies the 19 H. 8. made a feoffement to B. to the use of C. in tail; the
remainder to the right heirs of the same Davies: and O. and C. levied a fine to
a stranger, who granted the land to the King; C. died without issue, after D.
died, and B. sued a Petition to revive the use to the heir of D. and the matter
supra, found, and suit said, that the fee was lawfully granted by D. Also the
stat. 27. had taken away all interest of the feoffees, for that, etc.

226. Cliffords Error, Ejectione firmae, and bona and catalla ibidem invent'
vi and armis, etc. And counted of a Lease for 40 years to begin at Michaelmasse
next after the death of J. S. and averred that J. S. died and he entered, etc.
It was pleaded non ejocit, it was found quod ejecit, and Judgment was given
that he shall recover the term aforesaid; where indeed the time is not showed
certainly when he entered; so that it may be the term is ended. Also he did not
show the time of his entry, for if he entered before the Michaelmasse, after
the death of J.S. he is a Disseisor, and not a Termor; also bona and catalla,
nor vi and armis, are answered, per non ejecit pleaded, and found, but it
should have been non culpable to that, yet judgment quod capiatur pro fine.
Also the Plaintiff was not amerced for a false clamor of the goods, etc.
because nothing was found.

Expliciunt Anni Regis Edwardi sexti.
Incipiunt Anni Reginae Mariae,
Anno Primo.
Mich.
John Varney made a feoffment to the use of himself and D. his wife, and to the
heirs of their two bodies, the remainder to the right heirs of the husband, and
they had issue Mary, and the husband died; D. the wife sold the land in fee;
Mary and R. her husband joined in a Fine in Confirmation of the estate and Mary
died without issue. Now R. and D. and one Edward Varney, as cousin and heir of
Mary, brought a writ of Error to reverse the fine, and then to avoid the sale
of D. upon stat. 11 H. 7. And R. and D. did not appear; upon which a Summons ad
sequend' simul issued, which was returned nihil, and after they appeared freely
with the third: note, that they assigned for Error, that after the conusance,
but before that certified and engrossed, viz. 25 day of March, which was before
the Test of the Dedimus potestatem that Mary died. But it was holden that they
shall not be suffered to allege that, contrary to the record and certificate
of the Justice before whom, etc. Also it was holden that because the writ of
Error was to remove the record it self it was evil, because only the
Transcript shall be removed till it be reversed; because they have not the
Chirog. in the Kings Bench if the fine be affirmed. Also the writ of Error is
brought by Edward Varney as cousin and heir collateral to Mary, and the tail
is determined as appears by her death without issue, and he had not made
himself right heir to John Varney, (90.) then it shall be intended that he had
issue a son or another daughter, and a writ of Error shall be brought by him
who shall have the land, viz. the right heir to him in remainder; by the equity
of 9 Rich. 2. cap. 3. Quaere, and not by heir general to Mary. And admitting
that fee in Mary, yet because expectant upon tail he which shall demand it
when the tail is spent, ought to make himself heir to John Varney, for he
shall have it although he be but of the half blood to Mary.

(91.)
228. In wast by Marvyn de suceidendo and vendendo, etc. the Defendant said
that the Plaintiff sold to him omnes arbores suas crescentes super, etc. quae
possent ration abi^^ter parcari. for that he cut, etc. Plaintiff demur'.

1. Because he had not answered the selling.

2. He had not showed for what the Plaintiff sold the trees to him; so that he
had not quid pro quo.

3. Also they shall not pass per the Grant of the Plaintiff de arbor suis; for
not being excepted in the Lease, the Lessor during the term had but a right in
them and not a property; and a right may not be granted but by deed, no more of
a chattell then of land.

4. Also the Grant is void for the incertainty, when it may be spared; contrary
if it had been referred to an arbitriment, because it might be reduced into
certainty.

229. Scire facias to execute a Recovery in Dower by Tourney, the Tenant
pleaded that the Plaintiff had accepted a rent after the judgment in
satisfaction, etc. and a good plea if it be issuing out of the same land; which
rent is distrainable of common right; the assignment was pleaded without deed,
Quaere, there it is held acceptance of land which is not in demand in no Bar in
Dower per Justices. If before the 32 husband and wife make a Lease per paroll
rendering rent, and the husband die, and the wife accept the rent, that does not
affirm the lease, because her assent is needful to the Lease at the making
thereof, which cannot be without deed.

230. In attaint the array was challenged because Mary the wife of Sir Richard
Mannering Sheriff, who had issue in life, is cousin to one of the Petty Jury,
and it was demur^ upon the challenge.

1. Because it was not showed that he was Sheriff at the time of the making of
the pannell.

2. Because it was not showed that Mary was his wife at the time of the making
of the pannell, etc.

(92.)
231. In an Indenture of Lease made to one Dives, there were these words, viz.
it is agreed that if any fortune to have the interest, that he or they shall
find surety within the year for the rent, otherwise the estate to cease, the
Lessee devised his term to his wife, the wife found surety and after took
husband, he aliened to M. Quaere if he be bound to find surety.

232. Wast was assigned in cutting and selling, where the Defendant had but the
lops, he may plead no waste made, and give the especial matter in evidence.

233. The King without words For him and his heirs, granted to an Alien that
he should pay but English custom, and holden by all the Justices that it
should bind the Kings successors because of the Kings inheritance in the
custom. But otherwise of a License; contrary also of an Annuity except it be
for executing an office, and then it ought to be limited by whose hands it
shall be paid, because the person of the King shall not be changed, Com. sol.
449. Wroths case.

234. In a writ of Partition it is a good plea that the Defend' had such a writ
against the Plaintiff, and judgment to have partition; but doubted whether he
shall plead it in Bar or in abatement; because hanging another writ; or as
estoppell that he had contradicted the partition; although that appears by the
first record that he was all times ready, when they confess the Action, 22 Ed.
3. A. brought a Quare impedit against B. and B. brought another against A. of
the same Church, and returnable at one and the same day, and the Court caused
one of them to be discontinued.

(93.)
235. King Hen. 8. made a Commission to four Lords under the great seal, and
signed with the sign manual to give royal assent to the act of Attainter of
the Duke of Norfolk, which Act was indorsed soit fait come est desire.
Dubitatur if it be a good act; Quaere for this assent, 33 H. 8. cap. 21. a
Cerciorare was directed to two Clerks of the Parliament to certify the act.
Tenus a void Certificate by one only; Also the circumstances were not
certified: But this Commission was suspected because H. Rex was written after
the Test, where it ought to be supra caput, and the King was so sick that he
could not write well; and after it was declared by Parliament to be void.

236. Judgment in wast was reversed. 1. Because it was recorded quod querens
obtulit se 4. die per attornatum, and not named him. 2. The writ alleged
seisin to the use of the father of the Plaintiff and his heirs, without
showing the state of the feoffees, but they showed it in the assignment of the
wast. 3. It is not showed how the use of the particular estate began. 4. The
Plaintiff showed that A. held for life, the reversion to him, and said not
spectant.

237. A man made a Lease to Woodhouse, after he let the same land to B. habend'
from the falling of the first interest. The Assignee of W. took a new Lease,
which is a surrender of his first estate (note where is a mean interest.)
Quaere if the term of B. begins.

(94.)
238. King Edward 6. granted to his Aunt the Lady Cromwell, the Manor of D.
etc. habend' sibi pro termino vitae suae si tamdiu nobis placuerit: after the
King reciting the Lease, granted the reversion of that to Sir William Cecill.
It seems he may not defeat that estate at will. But it seems the King may of
other Manors which are in his hand.

239. A Replevin by Chafyn against the Lord Sturton, it was enacted 13 Ed. 3.
that the County of Cornwall should bea Duchy, and that E. the eldest son Ed. 3.
should be Duke of Cornwall, and so every eldest son and heir apparent of the
King; King Ed. 3. by his Patent granted the Manor of Mere, which he had in the
right of his crown; to be holden inseparably, and to go as the Duchy. After
all escheated to Ed. 3. and by descent came to Hen. 8. who before, and also
after the birth of Edw. 6. made a Lease of Mere and died; holden that Ed. 6.
being made King cannot avoid the Leases. 1. Because it was but an estate at
will in the son of Ed. 3. 2. Also the annexing to the Duchy, and limiting how
it should go, was not to the purpose without an act of Parliament. 3. Upon the
escheat to Ed. 3. he was seized in his first estate, and a son born after shall
not divest it. 4. No livery or ousterlemaine was sued by Ed. 6. when he was
Prince, and now he may not avoid it when he had taken the royal dignity, which
drowned the Dukedom. Chafyn pleaded that Ed. 6. by his birth was seized of the
reversion in see which might not be so long as the term continued, as Littleton
is, upon disseisin of a Manor; the reversion is not in the disseisor so long
as a particular estate continues: so also if the Prince had title to the
reversion, he had also to the possession; and shall avoid encumbrances, as a
son born after descent or escheat.

(95.)
240. A man took one to wife who was in Guard to the King, and had issue, and
after 16 years accomplished per the feme, tendered a general livery, but before
it passed the wife died, her issue within age, Quaere if the husband shall be
Tenant by the Courtesy.

241. In debt by Oliver Whitton upon the statute 1 Ed. 6. for usury, and in his
writ he mis-recited the statute, to be made at the Parliament holden 5 Ed. 6.
but holden that was but surplusage in the writ; for the declaration ought to
show the cause of the debt, also it was holden at that time by prorogation,
etc. Defend' pleaded quod non recepit, etc. that is a confession of the
contract which is within the statute, and the Court ex officio ought to take
notice of that and give Judgment: And if a Juror takes moneys to speak his
verdict, although he speak it not, or a man takes upon him to maintain although
he does it not; and if a man carries wools to any other place then to Calice,
although by wind forced thither, yet is it forfeit.

242. Termor avowed for damage fesant, the Plaintiff said, that he of whom the
Lease, etc. was but Tenant in tail who died, and we his issue, etc. The
Defendant said that the rent was received, which you accepted after the death
of your ancestor, etc. Tenus a departure, Quaere.

(96.)
243. Seymor late Admiral covenanted with B. that in consideration that the
said B. had conveyed to him certain lands after his death to levy a Fine to the
use of himself for life, the remainder in tail to B. Tenus. that the use is not
changed till the fine levied, for then the covenant may not be performed.
Contrary upon a covenant that the party shall have, etc. If a man devise that
his Feoffees shall make estate to A. and die; the use changes before the state
is expected.

244. Duke of Sommerset purchased to himself and to the Duchess and to the
heir males of their two bodies, which is not an estate mentioned within the
statute 27 H. 8. to be a jointure which shall be a Bar in Dower, yet resolved
that it is within the intent of the statute.

245. Plus de Cliffords Error. 7 Ed. 6. sol. 89. upon an indictment in an
ejectione firmae, also it was assigned. 1. Because the writ was in manerium de
A. etc. and unum M. suagium, unum etc. and the Count of a Demise of the Manor
(advoca' eccles' reddit' assisae, etc. dicto manerio pertin' except' and
reservat') so that the entire Manor was not let as the writ supposes:
Bromeley said that it was a void exception of services which are the substance
of the Manor, and not only the Maneri' pertin' as the conclusion of the
exception is. 2. Also the premises of the deed comprehend all the names in the
writ, but the habendum is, habendum maneri' without speaking of the house, etc.
so that he is but Tenant at will of that: Bromley said that the rest might
peradventure be known by the name of the Manor. 3. Also the writ supposes a
demise by the Abbot of C. and the Count is that the Abbot and Covent Monasi.
beati Petri de C. etc. and so a variance. (97.) Bromly said it was a very good
name, because he departed but with a term. Contrary of a frank-tenement; and
the Covent do not demise but only give consent; and by all the Justices that
the substance of the Action is out of the statute 32 H. 8.30. of Jeofailes. So
it seems of a declaration, for that is no pleading, quaere. But after upon
great deliberation the Judgment was reversed.

246. Error was assigned because the Venire fac. being returnable Mense Mich.
the Hab. corpora was returnable octab. Martim proxim. non alloca^d' unicum
esson. vel defalt' to the Defend' upon the Ven. fac. Also because the Hab.
corp. was returnable octabis Martini, Nisi Ed. Mountague capitalis Justic' de
banco, etc. die Sabbati, viz. 19 No. apud Guilel all' prius venisset, whereas
the 18 day was the first day of the Utas; so to take verdict after the day
returnable is an Error by the Court, 31 H. 6. fol. 45. accord. 22 Ed. 4.49. a
fine levied had relation to the first day of the Return.

Pas.
247. The case of the Duchess of Sommerset abridged before fol. 96.

(98.)
248. A writ was to summon the Parliament, without the style of Supremum caput,
and it was resolved by the Justices upon great deliberation that the writ was
very good, for it is but an addition and not parcel of the name.

249. In a writ of right brought by the Lord Windsor, the Plaint' and four
Knights, and eleven of the grand Assise appeared, and the Tenant made default;
per Pronotaries the default of the Tenant shall only be recorded, and the
Jurors shall not be demanded, for the Inquest shall not be taken by default in
this case as in personal actions. Vide Glanvill contra. But the default of the
demand' or (after the mise joined) of the Defendant it is peremptory ( vide 44
Ed. 3.22. husband and wife Tenants, they made default after the mise joined,
and the wife was received to join the mise again) but if the party shall have
seisin of the land without a pety Cape, in that the books differ. And holden
that 16 shall be of the Inquest in a writ of right (R.) Quaere, for the form
of the writ to the four Knights is, Ad ^ligend' ex s^ipsis and aliis duodecem.

250. Two Coparceners are of land in tail, one of them made a feoffement of
her part; the feoffee and the other in 18 H. 8. made equal partition, it
seems, the issue shall not be defeated; because the feoffee was compellable at
this day to make partition; although not contrary. Contrary if inequal: Also
there i^ Tenant in tail be disseised and die, and the issue release with
warranty, and die; if it be a discontinuance or no Quaere, Saunders held that
it is. Mores case.

251. Sir N. Throgmortons case; two conspired to commit treason and one only
executed it, both are Traitors, and so at the Common law before the declaration
of the stat. 25 Ed. 3.

(99.)
252. Upon a Fieri facias the Sheriff returned, that he had taken goods to
the value of part of the debt, and found not buyers; and although it was
objected that the execution is not served, nor the property altered; yet upon
this return vendic' exponas, was awarded by Saund. and Brown.

253. Indictment was that the Defendant burglariter fregit Ecclesiam in nocte
ad depredand' bona parochianorum; and it was holden Burglary, but the
Indictment not good, because it should have been fregit and intravit.

254. Clergy was allowed to an accessory in horse-stealing, because the stat. 1
Ed. 6. cap. 12. speaks but only of the principal, which shall be taken
strictly.

255. To let one to go at large, which was put in fetters for felony, although
he was not indicted, it is felony by the Common law, de frangentibus prisonam.

256. Indictment quod felonice cepit bona cujusdam ignot', is good, as it is de
morte ignoti, for it may be brought in a forain couty, where the owner is
known, per plusors Justices. Portman held a diversity.

257. Justices of Assise hold plea of an appeal of murder, per stat. West. 2.
or 3 H. 7. and of robbery per Commission of Jail delivery.

258. Indictment of Murder of Manslaughter, Quaere if good by words
interfecit, or murdravit, with percussit.

259. A man made a feoffment to the use of his wife, for life, and after her
death to the use of the right heirs of the body of the Baron and Feme; the
woman had issue and died, the husband survived, the issue may not enter, for
the husband may not have an heir in his life.

260. A man gave a mortal stroke 15 Septem. and a general pardon was granted
the 1 of October; the party died the 3 of October; Quaere, if by that pardon
the felony be discharged.

261. A man bought stolen beasts out of any Market, and gave 5 shillings to have
election to refuse in the Market to be holden the next day; and then in the
Market he agreed to have the beasts, and paid toll. It was holden that the
property was not altered because that agreement relates to the contract out of
the Market.

262. Upon the arraignment of W. Thomas for Treason because he had compassed
the death of Queen Mary; It was said that the statute of trial by peers, had
always been in ure; And that an Esquire may be tried by those who have 40. s.
freehold, or 100 pound goods.

Trin. (100.)
263. If one be an accusor upon is own hearing or knowledge, and says
moreover, he to whom, etc. may be the other Accusor, and so over; and such two
were accusors of W. Thomas.

264. He which challenges Juror for the hundred, and says that the place
where, supposed to be within the hundred, is within time of memory exempt; he
shall be sworn and show how it is exempt.

265. It was holden that if the Queen gives land to the honest men of
Islington, rend ring rent, although no mention of Successors; yet is is a
perpetual corporation as to the rendering of the rent, but not to another
intent, and if the rent be released the corporation is dissolved, for Cessante
causa, etc. Quaere.

266. Upon an Elegit the extent shall be by the oath of. 12 men, and not by the
Sheriff himself, although the writ speak not of Inquisition, and so are many
presidents. King H. 8. gave land in tail to T. Culpep' the remaind' in tail
to Jo. Culpep' and T. Culpep' is attaint of Treason, which is confirmed by
Parliament; and the actual seisin of the land of T. given to the King without
office; saving rights, titles, entries, reversions, remainders, etc. to
strangers: The King seized the land, and granted the same to one Bush. in fee.
Tho. Culpep' died without issue; John Culpep' entered, and was ousted by Bush.
and he brought a writ of entry sur disseisin, and counted that he was seized in
his demean as of fee, which was evil, (100.) upon which he amended that, and
said, ut de libero tenemento; and that by Fitzh. Not. bre. shall maintain an
estate for life or in tail. Bush. he showed all the matter, and descent of the
Seignory to Ed. 6. and prayed aid of him and had it, and 4 searches in
Chancery, during the hanging of which a Mandamus was awarded at the suit of
Bush. upon that the grant in tail to Tho. Culpep' is only found, and a false
date of the Letters Patents, as also the attain and execution, and that the
King was seized in see, and granted, etc. and after upon a Melius inquirend',
the very date found, but the attainter and execution was found to be before the
Grant, upon mistaking the change of the year of the reign, upon which return in
Chancery, for the apparent untruths in them a Procedendo in loquela was
awarded, the Demandant not put to a Petition or Monstrance of Droit, the
Plaintiff traverse that the Queen ne suit seisit' in Dominico suo ut de feodo,
and issue upon that: and it seemed that the matter in law would maintain that,
for the base fee of the King is determined by the death of T. Culpeper without
issue, for the King was not in point of reverter, because of the mean interest,
and the remainder, and entry of the demandant is saved by the act; after the
Defendant acknowledged the action; but the Justices would not proceed to
judgment; without a Procedend^ to judgment; according to Fitzherber^; Not. bre.
153. upon that all the matter was again removed into the Chancery. (K.) because
there are not words of restraint, viz. and non ad Judicium, It seems it needs
not.

267. Marmaduke Constables case; the grand father tenant for life, the
remainder in fee to the father, they covenanted in consideration of the
marriage of the son, that after their death, the land should descend, remain
and come to the son, and to the issues of his body; with proviso, that they
shall have liberty and make Jointures to their wives, and to pay ransomes, etc.
and that whosoever are sersed, shall be seized to the said uses, the
Grandfather died, the father entered, and after was attaint of treason and
executed, the Covenantees sued a Petition of right to the use of the son,
supposing them to be disseised, by the father who was attaint; if the use was
in the tail by the said Indenture, or not, was the question.

(102.)
268. Marquess Barkley Tenant in capite levied a fine, with render to himself
in tail, the remainder to King H. 7. and his heirs males, the remainder to his
own right heirs: The L. Barkley died without issue, the heir males of the body
of H. 7. failed, if the right heir of the Lord Barkly being within age, shall
be in guard to Queen Mary; because the Seignory was suspended at the instant of
the death of King Edward, and it was resolved per Justic' that it was so: for
the tenure is now revived, and if the right heir had sailed it ought to have
escheated. Ergo the sea simple was in consideration of the Law.

269. The Dean and Chapter of Winchester made a Lease for 30 years, after they
made a lease to another for 50 years, to begin after the expiration of the 30;
and that upon condition of re-entry if he should alien without license; the
second Lessee aliened, the Lessors made a new Lease for 21 years, before the
expiration of the 30 years, and that without entry or claim, Quaere if the
Lease for 50 years was void, becauss they may not enter during the first term:
Quaere also if they may enter without Attorney warranted under their common
seal.

2 Mary.
Mich. (103.)
270. Trespass by Fulminston against Stuard, com. 102. The Lord windsor
brought a writ of Droit against Baron and Feme, and at the Pety Cape the Feme,
and it was prayed that because the Demandant proffered not himself at the
first day, that he might be nonsuit; but it seems he needs not where the tenant
had made default. But upon issue joined by battle or Grand Assise; for there
he ought to appear, etc. and his proffer ought to be entered in the Roll^: Also
the Tenant was not there the first day to make demand' of the Demandant; and
then he may not be nonsute: And the Feme answered and vouched, and after waived
that, and joined the mise upon the Grand Assise; and upon the summons the 4
Knights appear' (104.) and one was challenged because he had married the
daughter of the Demandant, and so he was drawn out; and a Summons awarded to
summon another; and a Habeas corpora of the residue.

271. Ward recovered in a Dum fuit inf. aetatem per default after default, and
that against an infant, who brought a writ of Error, and assigned for Error,
that he was within the age of 21 years at the time of the judgment; and averred
not that he had the land by descent; so that it might appear that there was
cause that the plea should abide. After the defendant demur' in law upon the
said assignment, and best per Curiam, and not to rejoin in nullo est erratum.
But the said except' supra not allowed, and the president 6 H. 8. accord'. Also
the supposall was in the first writ that he was son and heir of A. for that,
etc. And upon the said president the judgment afterward was; quod per error'
praedict' Judic' per edict' revocetur; sans and in reeordo, for that is an
error in deed and not in the record. There holden that an infant shall be
punished for contempt; for frustra legis auxilium invocat qui in legem
committit. As 2 H. 8. outlawry is good against in infant if he exceed the age
of 14 years, 30 H. 8. if he make default after the mile joined judgment final
shall be given, 3 H. 6. he shall answer a breach of a prohibition of estrepement,
3 H. 7. he shall answer a felony, quia malitia supplet aetatem, 5 Ed. 2. his
nonsute in a Quare impedit shall be peremptory, 14 E. 3. An essoin of the service
of the King failed of his warrant at the day, and seisin of the land awarded.
And an infant is bound by every statute law unless he be excepted: And infant
which prays to be received, which is traversed, he shall find surety for the
mean profits, 5 Ed. 3. The plant' in an Ass^^ shall be aided by the Court to
plead and make his title; Contra, if defend. 3 H. 6. if he appear upon a Grand
Cape, he shall not save his default, 5 Ed. 3. and 34 Ed. 3 appearance by
Guardian in a Formedon and pray his age, the Demandant averred that he was of
full age, (105.) and praid that he might be reviewed, if at the day he make
default, a grand or pety Cape shall issue. There holden that it is not a good
return of the Sheriff, that the Tenant is a feme covert or an infant. But 1 H.
6. a good return, that one sued by name of J. Ab. is deposed because it amounts
to a death.

272. It was adjudged in an action upon the case brought by Sir John Bonham
against the Lord Sturton, for words, etc. that the Justices may not diminish
damages which were assessed to 500 marks, because the damages of the
principal. But in a Tres. pr Tripcony of assault and battery, and amputac'
manus dext', where damages were assessed but to 40. l. they increased them to
100 pound, because upon the view of the Court, they may judge of it.

273. A common recovery was suffered to bar the issue in tail, where the
warrant of Atturny was entered, qd' Alicia po. lo. suo, where her name was
Elizabeth, Quaere if it be amendable per stat. H. 6. ca. 13. the writ of error
brought upon that was de loquela quae fuit in curia nost' coram Iustic'
nostris, p^r brev^ nostrum, whereas the judgment was given in time of H. 8.
Quaere if the record be well removed.

274. A woman Executor took a husband, which are after divorced upon a
precontract, and the woman appealed to the Delegates, pendant which the husband
administered, after the wife died, Quaere if the husband be chargeable as
Executor of wrong; and if seiser without receiving or disposing of the goods be
an administration or no.

(106.)
275. The King granted the next avoidance to two conjunctim and divisim, Ita
quod liceat 2 present' A. which had the next avoidance, they did according,
after granted the Advowson in fee, the Patentee after the death of A. is
disturbed of the presentat' and brought a Quare impedit, who made title by the
presentation of two only, and not by the King, Quaere if a suffcient title.
Vide 9 H. 7. 16.

Amy Townsends case, Comment. fol. 111.
276. Champion, Prebend of the Cathedral Church of Chichester, made a Lease by
Indenture, the words are, that he with the assent of R. Bishop of Chicester,
and of the Dean and Chapter of the same Church, without naming the Dean, etc. n
cujus rei testimon' parts praedict', etc. and the seal of the Bishop and the
Chapter was put to it, Quaere if a good Confirmation without other words.

(107.)
277. The Lady Powes elop' but after she and her husband lay together, and that
was holden a reconcilement, notwithstanding they never dwell together again, so
that if she does not clope again she shall be endowed.

278. A Man brought an action of debt for damages recovered in Assise, the
Defendant pleaded in B^r the entry of the Plaintiff in the land between the
verdict and the judgment, Quaere.

279. Saintalbyn brought a Trespass, the Defendant conveyed by 6 descents in
tail, per opinion, the Plaintiff may not traverse one of the mean descen^s; up
on that he confessed the tail, took the last dying seized by pretestation,
and for plea that he which is supposed to be last, etc. infeoffed A. our
ancestor, from whom it descended to him, without that he died seized, and
although the feoffement be false, the Defend' shall be true, if be said not
true, for he ought to maintain his first saying, 20 Ed. 4. the plea supra,
when the tail is confessed is holden double; for one answer viz. gave not by
his deed shall end all.

280. Tenant in tail the reversion in the King, made a Lease for years, and
after is Attaint of Treason, having issue, Quaere if the King shall avoid the
Lease during the life of the issue.

Challenge in Assise between Nudigate and the Lord Darby, Comment. sol. 117.

(108.)
281. The Archbish. Cant' had the catalla felonum dese infra manerium de D. he
committed treason, and after the King made a general grant to the Almner of
all goods de fel' de se etc. and after the Archbish. is Attaint; and Hales who
had a Lease for years there is selo de se, the Queen granted the term, and
doubted whether the Patentee or the Almner shall have it. And by diverse
Justices the King may grant that which is not in him at the time, as a ward, or
the temporalities which shall fall for that, etc. But others held contrary of
Escheats. (R.) Quaere because the Attainter of the Archbish. had ^^ation to the
offense committed, etc.

282. Wast was assigned in suffering a Mud wall, and a Brick wall to fall, and
in a Manger and plancks in a stable loosened and distracted; But because he
showed not that the walls were covered, etc. nor the plancks, etc. were sixed
to the frank-tenement; bolden no wast.

283. A man covenanted to discharge A. of his wardship of the body at the age
of 21 years, or before at the request of A. Quaere if A. or the Covenanter
shall have election, if it shall be before or after 21, request being made
before.

(109.)
284. Trespass by Rugway, the Defendant pleaded in Bar that the Plaintiff
within age per Indenture, etc. and Letter of Atturny, made a feoffement to the
father of the Defendant rendering rent, and that after, etc. per Indenture, etc.
he confirmed tenement' praedict'. etc. habend' tenement' praedict' sibi and
hered', and that his father died seized and that the land descended to him,
Plaint' demur'; And it was holden without argument, that the feoffment which he
pleaded was void by his own showing, for being by Lett^^ of Atturny of an
infant it is a disscisin: Also he did not show the first Indenture where the
warrant of Atturny is contained: Also it is not averred that the Defendant had
any thing in the land at the time of the confirmation upon which it might
inure. Also he pleaded that the Plaintiff confirm' tenement' praedictum etc.
habend' tenement' praed', and that is not true that the land should pass here,
but where a confirmation inures by way of enlargement; Also it is not averred
that the Plaintiff was of full age at the time of the confirmation. Also he
showed not before the Indenture of confirmation. After the Plaintiff had
judgment without argument. And a writ to enquire of Damages.

285. A Bishop with the confirmation of the Dean and Chapter aliened in see, or
in tail. It seems that the King being Founder shall have a contra formam
collatio, and that although stat. West. 2 cap. 41. gives cont. form' collat'
but to a common person, Founder of an Abbey, Priory, Hospital, or other house
of Religion without speaking of a Bishopric, Et vide stat. 33. and 34. and 35.
Hen. 8. of the Chapters of Lichfield and Wells. 46 Ed. 3. Forfeit 18 for that.

Hill. (110.)
286. Replog. Clerk possessed of a term of Abbey land, assigned it to R.
rendering 50 pound per Ann' si R. execut' and Assign' sui tam diu occupav'
virtute dimiss' and R. Grant' etc. quod liceat distring' si, etc. (note that it
is not a rent service) after the King granted the reversion to Dormar, to whom
R. surrend', after D. devised the land to his wife for life, upon which the
Administrator of Clerk distrained and avowed as upon the Assignee of R. for
rent, The Plaintiff pleaded that her husband was seized in fee, and devised to
her for life, and the descent of the reversion to her son, and prayed aid of
him; who came in by the same Atturny. Note, they pleaded all the matter above
in Bar; upon which the Avowant demur'. 1. Because it was pleaded that the
reversion was first given to the King, per s^at. 31 H. 8. of Monaster': where
the statute gives not an but those which shall be sutrendred, relinquisht, etc.
and therefore the surtender, etc. ought to be showed; And upon that the opinion
of the Court was that the Bar was incurable. 2. Also after speaking of
Atturnment 30 October. 33 H. 8. vaont ou^^, viz. Et post, viz. 30 Sept. 33 H. 8.
which is impossible in time. 3. He pleaded that the reversion descended, which
is not true, for till the Feme entered there is not any reversion. 4. Also it
was showed agreement to the surrend' R. 5. Also he took not traverse that the
Plaintiff nor the assignee R. as is alleged in the Avowry.

287. The husband and the tenant in tail had issue two sons, the husband with
the wife made a feoffment to the use of her self for life, and after her
decease to the use of the heirs of the body of her husband engendered, the
remainder in see to J. S. stat. 27 is made: After she and the youngest son levy
a fine of that, with warranty of the feme and her heirs, the Conusees render to
the youngest son for 60 years rendering rent, and they granted the reversion to
the wife and to the heirs of her body, and of the body of her husband
engendered; the remainder in fee to J. S. The eldest son entered, the feme died,
the youngest claimed the lease; seems he had no title. Cowards case.

288. It was found by special verdict upon nothing by descent in fee pleaded
per the heir of Musgrave; the father who obliged him and his heirs in an
Obligation, that the Grandfather made a feoffement to the use of the heirs of
his body and died, stat, 27. is made, the father entered and died, and the land
descended to the son Def' and prayed the discretion of the Court, whether the
land descended in fee simple or not.

(112.)
289. A man brought a Droit close in ancient Demean, and made protestation to
sue in nature of a writ of right at the common law; the Tenant joined the mise
upon the mere right, and upon that removed the record by Accedas ad Curiam; but
because that is no cause, a procedendo was awarded to the Bailiffs. In the
Register is a writ of Jurat' loco Magn' Assis' in Gavelk' eligend', 1 H. 7.17.
E. 3.7 Ed. 3.

290. Trespass, the Defendant pleaded in Bar, that before the trespass D. was
seized in fee, and let to him and justified and gave color; The Plaintiff
said that a long time before the trespass B. was seized in fee, and infeoffed
him, and that he was so seized till by the Defendant the trespass was madea,
bsque hoc quod dict' D. by the Court it is a Jeofaile, and the Jury discharged.

291. A man made a Lease for ten years, after by Indenture demised the same
land for 10 yees, to begin at Michaelmasse, the first Lessee purchased the
reversion; per Curiam the second Lessee may enter at Michaelmasse.

292. Peers brought an Action of Debt upon an Obligation, the Defendant pleaded
non est factum, and gave evidence that upon payment of the money, the
Plaintiff annulled the seal of the Defendant, Plaintiff demur'.

293. Debt was brought against an Administrat' of Administrat' and showed not
in his Count that the Administration of the first intestates goods were
committed to him; and the Defendant also pleaded fully administered of the goods
of the second intestate, without speaking of the first, Quaere.

294. A writ of Covenant by Administrat', and counted that Windsor the
intestate bargained and sold land by Indenture to the Defendant, and covenanted
to make farther assurance, and to deliver evidences, etc. In consideration of
which to be observed, etc. the Bargainee covenanted to pay to him a hundred
pound; (...) indsor died intestate, his Administrator brought a writ of
covenant, and counted how Windsor perimpl^vit, etc. tamen d. f. licet sepius
requisite. etc. The Defendant pladed a release of Windsor of all actions made
after, etc. the Plaintiff said that he was a natural Idiot tempore, etc. and
so had been from his birth usque tempus obitus, the Defendant traversed the
Ideocy, Quaere if a Jeofaile. The Venire facias was awarded where the action
was taken, and not where the release was pleaded. Quaere.

Tertio Mariae.
Pas. (113.)
295. Justice Marvyn having two sons by diverse venters levied a fine of land
holden in capite, to the use of himself and his second wife for life, the
remainder to the youngest son in tail, the remainder to himself and his wife
in fee, and after died, the wife survived and after died, if the youngest son
being heir to his mother shall have the entire according to the fine, or the
eldest the third part by stat. 32 H. 8. Quaere.

296. Redman promised to deliver to Deck 20 Quarters of Barley at the feast of
St. Michael, every year during their lives, and that the Plaintiff shall pay
for every Quarter four shillings; Peck brought an action upon the case for
failing three years, and upon issue of non assumpsit, it was found for the
Plaintiff: But the Justices were three against three if the damages shall be
assessed for the entire time to come, which is uncertain, or for that which is
past only.

Debt by Buckley against Thomas, Com. fol. 118.

(114.)
297. Hide covenanted with his Lessee without word of Heirs or Executors, to
pay Quit-rents, and died. Quaere if the Executors are bound to the payment.
Diverse Justices herd that they are not, but bound only the person of the
Testator which died with him.

298. In Trespass against Parkins, they were at issue if the land, etc. had
been demised or demiseable from time, etc. by Copy as the Defendant would: The
Jury found that it had been demised for 60 years by Copy, and once by Indenture
for years, and after by Copy to the Defenfant, and prayed the discretion of the
Court, and by the court the special verdict was void and a new Venire facias
awarded.

299. Milburne sole seized in fee joined in a feoffement with his eldest son,
to the use of himself, and to the use of his youngest son for life, provided
that he shall permit his eldest son to make Leases for life or years, during
his life rendering the ancient rent to the youngest during his life, and after
his death to the use and uses patris and heredum, after the father sole made a
Lease for 21 years, Quaere if good.

(115.)
300. Assise of frank-tenement in Westminst' and the plaint was of the
Philizers office, and made his title in the plaint, and alleged seisin by
taking for one Capias, the post where they were set at first when they are made
officers put in view. And holden that the Court may discharge him if the cause
be without record, but if there be no cause the Court is not a disseisor. But
he that took the office ought to survey that at his peril.

301. Sir Thomas Wyat Tenant in tail to him and his heir males of his body of
the gift of the King, made a Lease for thirty years to Austin rendering 20
shillings rent, to him his heirs or assigns, and died having issue S. T. who
accepted of the rent, and after is attaint of treason, and is executed, having
also a son in life, and the King accepted the rent; yet adjudged upon
information of intrusion, and surmised the land to be in the hands of the King
by reason of the attainter of S. T. Note that for the inconvenience of two fee
simples, in one and the same person at one time, the King is in point of
reverter, and so the Lease void, and so his acceptance cannot affirm it Nota
supra, the reservation to the general heirs; but as it seems it shall be
intended to go according to the reversion, otherwise the Lease had been openly
void upon the death of Sir Tho. the eldest; the Lessee showed not the Letters
Patents of the intail in pleading, Nota.

302. Durine Lessee for years among other covenants that he shall not cut any
trees, and was obliged to perform, etc. In debt brought upon the Obligation,
and breach assigned in cutting 20 trees; the Defendant pleaded that he did not
cut the 20 or any of them; Plaintiff said quod suecidit 20 prout, etc. The
Jury found that he had cut ten, yet the Plaintiff had Judgment, for the
Covenant is broken if he cut but ten, and the rest surplusage.

(116.)
303. Ryder Tenant in tail devised land, etc. it is not discontin' because the
devise takes not effect till after the death.

304. Quaere if the Bishop certify in the Court of First fruits and tenths,
that a Vicar contumaciter refused to pay subsidy for his Vicarage, if the
Vicarage be void, vide stat. 2 and 3 Ed. 6. and 26 H. 8. of Subsidies granted
by the Clergy.

305. A man by Indenture renting a former Lease made by him 6 Aug. 30 H. 8.
habend' from the feast of Sr. Michael then next ensuing for 21 years, he
demised the same land to one Hodgekin, habend' for 21 years, from the
expiration of the said first Lease, and the verity was that the first Lease was
the 30 of August; now in pleading the second Lease being in question, the first
Lease was showed to be made the 30 of August, and issue joined if he demised
modo and forma, and the Jury found the special matter and adjudg that modo and
forma is not material, but the matter is if he demise.

(117.)
306. Ibgrave b^^^ght an Ejectione firmae of a portion of tithes, the Def'
says that after the ejectment supposed, the Plaintiff granted to him,
bargained and sold all his estate, etc. the Plaintiff maintained his count
sans quod concessit, etc. per the deed, it is a Jeofaile, and Repleador
awarded, for it should be pleaded as a Release or a Confirmation, for a grant
is not good to a Trespasser, for it was said that the damages are the
principal in that action, and if any part of the term be to come, it is but
accessory. Also it is no plea for the party himself that he granted not by the
deed, but not his deed, or that he had nothing at the time, etc.

307. In a second deliverance of a Barge taken at Gravesend in loco ibidem
vocat' the Kings stream of Thames, the Defendant showed that he is seized of
the Inn called the George in Milton, and that he and his ancestors, and those
whose estate he had, etc. they had used to repair a panel of the bridge of G;
In consideration of which the Plaintiff being Ferry-man there, and his
ancestors, and those whose estate, etc. had from time beyond the memory of man,
paid to him and his ancestors, etc. 4 shillings yearly at Michaelmasse, and for
one year being he avowed by prescription to distrain the Ferry-mans Barge in
the same place, and averred the Bridge well repaired, and that Barge to be a
Ferry Barge, the Plaintiff demurred.

308. Cestui que us devised to his wise for life, Ita qued non faceret vastum,
the remainder to the youngest son in tail and died, and the stat. 27 H 8. as
made, the wife made waste. Quaere who ought to enter for the Condition broken,
the heir, the feoffees, or he in remainder, or if the remainder shall be
defeated by such entry.

309. Tenant in tail made a feoffement upon condition, and died having two
sisters inheritable to the tail, the one levied a fine upon Release, with
Proclamation to the feoffee of the entire, and 5 years passed, Quaere if the
other be barred of her moity.

(118.)
310. In Repleg' the Defendant made conusance as the Bailiffe of Sentloo damage
fesant, supposing that Ed. 6. demised the land, etc. to A. for years, who
granted parcel of the years to his Master, etc. the Plaintiff said, that long
before Ed. 6. and thing had, one J. Abbot of, etc. was seized in the right of
his Church, and with the assent of his Covent by Indenture, date 14 H. 7.
witnesses the said Abbot, etc. demised to him for life habend' post mortens A.
and B. and they died, and he put in, etc. and they were at issue upon traverse
of the Lease of the Abbot, and the Jury gave their verdict at large, which
because they might not do upon a special issue, a Repleader was awarded, and
que commencer al avowry; who pleaded as before, and the Defendant demur' upon
the Bar to the Avowry. 1. Because there is neither livery nor atturnment
pleaded by the Plaintiff. 2. He had not pleaded precisely that the Abbot
demised, but that the Indenture, testatur, etc. upon which without argument,
judgment was that the Defendant shall have return irreplegable, and a Retorn'
habend' award' with commandment to the Sheriff in the same to make inquiry of
damages.

311. If by Bill of Trespass brought in the Kings bench, the trespass be laid
in Middlesex; the Defendant need not to be supposed in the custody of the
Marshall, after issue of not culpable Hen. 8. died, and a precept was made to
the Sheriff, without writ or Test of the Chief Justice, to reattach the
Defendant, and Hab' corp' against the Jury, and very well, and cursus curtae.

312. Barbor brought on Action upon the case against Hawley for saying, That
men cannot have their cattle go upon the Common but Barbor and his children
will kill them with B. Dogs. Adjudged that the words will not bear an action.

Mich.
313. Whilington being prisoner in Ludgate upon a Capi. utlag. in detinue,
Thrower the Jailor took an Obligation of him and two sureties, with condition
to save him harmless, and to discharge his fees, and to render his body at any
time upon a summons, etc. And in a debt brought upon the Obligation against one
of the sureties, he pleaded the conditions performed, upon which the Plaintiff
demur': and holden an insufficient plea, but questioned if the Court ex officio
be bound to take notice of stat. 23 H. 6. cap. 10. not pleaded by the party,
and to stay judgment. Dyer held that not. 1. Because particular in general,
but of a general statute as of a general pardon, the Judges are bound to take
notice of that, because it makes a common law, but otherwise of a particular
statute if it be not pleaded. 2. But quaere if the Barons of the Exchequer
where the action is brought are Judges of the Common law in that case, of an
action of debt brought by a subject of privilege in that Co^rt. 3. Also it is
not expressly averred that the Plaintiff is Jailer, otherwise then that the
Plaintiff named himself R. Tho. servant to Richard Chomley Mil' capital'
Baron. al' dict' R. The. Jailer of Ludgate, which alias dict' are intended
false, and only put to agree with the specialty; then if he be a stranger and
not the Jailer, as the Court may not take notice whether he be or not, the
Obligation is good at the Common law, and not void by the stat. 23 H. 6. cap.
10. although the Judges should be bound to take notice of the statute, for the
statute speaks only of Obligations made to officers and color' officii. 4. It
is out of the case of the statute, because it was not showed that he was
arrested according to the course of the law, according to the words of the
statute, but only that he was outlawed at Northampton, tale die, etc. and
postea arrestat' apud Lond' and commiss. etc. and showed not by whose
authority, without writ of Capias utlag. it shall be unlawful to arrest him,
which shall not be intended because it is not shown; but in case of felony
every one may arrest. (120.) If he had pleaded the statute to avoid the
Obligation; Quaere if the conclus' of his plea should be, and so void, or
Judgment if the action. Quaere also if the statute where it made the Obligation
taken in another form then is limited, of any person or by any person which
shall be in their wards, shall be intended per the words of any person
general, and void also against the sureties which are at large; Outlawry is
one of the seven exceptions in the statute of which the Sheriff had
commandment not to let to Mainprize, yet the Obligation upon that is not out
of the statute. Vide Dive and Maningh. case. Com. fol. 60.

Appeal by Read de morte fratris, Post fol. 131.

(121.)
314. The Lord Mountague brought an action upon the case against the Countess
of Worcester, supposing by the writ and Count, that whereas he was possessed of
a chain of gold, of the price of a 100 marks, and sic poss. illam tali die apud
L. in parochia, etc. casualit' amisit, which came to the hands of the Defendant
she knowing that chain to be the Plaintiffs chain, and yet machinans him
defrauded, and sold it to diverse persons unknown, and the money converted to
her own use. The defendant traverse quod non vendidit modo and forma, etc. and
hoc. etc. Judgment if the action etc. upon which plea the Plaintiff demur.

1. Because the plea is but an argument, but non culpable had answered to all.

2. He ought to have concluded and de hoc pon. se super patriam, because a
direct negative, and traverse to the affirm' of the Plaintiff.

3. The Plaintiff is at his election to have this action because of the
misdemeanour supposed. Dyer held contrary, and first he held that it should
have been ad valentiam and non precii of a dead chattel ( Fitzh. N. B. one or
other good) as by the Register of a live chattel the form is cepit and abduxit,
but of a dead chattel cepit and asportavit. 2. Also it is impossible quod
possession' amisit, Quaere. 3. Also he supposes fraud, where was neither
privity, nor confidence, but appears she came to the chain by finding. 4. Also
an action upon the case lies not because he had his remedy by action of
detinue, for he had not showed the sale to be in market overt to change the
property; And although London be by prescription a mark open every day, this
special custom ought to have been pleaded, otherwise the Court is not bound to
take notice of the same. 5. That the traverse of the sale is good, for although
it be but a conveyance, because by that the defendant is put out of his law, he
may traverse the conveyance without answering the point of the action. As in a
debt upon a lease for years non dimisit is a good plea if it be of land,
otherwise of a Lease of sheep, 1 H. 6. so in Debt for arrearages of Account
before Auditors non computavit is a good plea, so in debt against the Sheriff
upon an escape, quod non permisit ire ad largum. Also the Defend' in some case
of misdemeanor, may plead generally non culpable, or traverse the point of the
writ as not forged, non esecit, or non culpab', (122.) 6. And at the conclusion
although the better form had been to plead to the country, yet a good issue
might have joined upon that if the Plaintiff would have replied quod vendidit.

315. A man had issue two sons and a daughter, and devised land to his wife for
10 years, the remainder to his youngest son and his heirs, and if any of his
two sons die without issue, etc. the remainder to the daughter and her heir,
the youngest died in the life of the father, after the father died per Curiam
it is a good remainder to the daughter being upon a devise although the
particular estate fails, and it seems the eldest son shall have the entail by
the intent. Quaere of this case.

316. Sir Thomas ^y^t in consideration of the marriage of his son made a
feoffement, and retook an estate to himself for life, the remainder to Sir Tho.
his son, and his wife which shall be in tail, and marriage was accompl', the
father levied a fine to the King of the said land, and obliged him and his
heirs to warranty and died, the son is attaint of treason and executed, his
issue living, after the Queen granted the said land to a stranger in tail, and
after the feme is restored, Quaere if the issue shall inherit, after the death
of the feme against the Collateral warranty, fine with proclamation, and
attainter of his father, per whom he conveys: There was contention in the
Patentee, if the feme had right to the entire remainder, or but a moity, and if
she may enter upon the Patentee of the Queen, without suit to the Queen, etc.

317. Issue was joined upon an absque hoc quod talis dimisit, and holden by the
Court a good evidence that he had nothing in the land at the time: In a Formed'
it is no good traverse that the donor had nothing in the land at the time of
the gift, but non dedit, etc.

(123.)
318. The opinion of the Court was that notwithstanding a traverse be tendered
to an Indictment upon the statute of forcible entry, 8 H. 6. That it is at the
discretion of the Justices to stay, or grant a restitution, according to that
which the title appears to them. vide also a Supersedeas of restitution granted
by other Justices.

319. The Prior of Plympton the 1 of October. 30 H. 8. made a Lease for years to
Dyer rendering 10 pound (which is the ancient rent, at two Feasts of the year,
viz. Purificat. and Invenc' Crucis, per aequales porciones primum terminum
soluc' incipend' at Purificat' Anno 1539. which was the Purificat' a year and
more after the Lease began. The question was if the Lease be void by stat' 31.
H. 8. because no rent is reserved to be paid the first year. Per Iustic' the
word Yearly is not in the Act, for that etc. And by Whidd' and Port' If an
ancient rent was well reserved, and after was released by the Abbot, yet the
Lease is not defeasable by the statute. Pertm' held in the principal case that
the duty is not discharged, but is only deferred, for the reservation was
yearly. Dalys. and Whyddon, contra.

320. Poole Dean of E^eceter being attain of treason 31 H. 8. but not deprived
by sentence, but his possessions forfeit by 26 H. 8. another was put in his
place, he and the Chapter confirmed the Fe^ffment of the Bishop, and now the
attainter of Poole is repealed by Parliament, and the Bishop died, Quaere, if
the successor shall be bound by that confirmation.

321. Davie held land in Soccage, and other in Chivalry of F. as of his Manor
of S. and F. held over in capite, F. dyed his heir within age, and in Ward to
the King, D. also died and his heir within age, the heir of F. sued his livery,
and by office it is found that the heir of D. is of full age, Quaere if he
shall sue Livery or Ousterlemain, and if as well for the land in soccage as in
chivalry. But it seems the soccage land shall not be in ward by the
Prerogative, because the tenant held not immediately of the King as the statute
speaks Fitzh. N. B. when the wife of D. has her dower assigned in the
Chancery, she shall not be sworn the Kings widow.

(124.)
322. In debt against the heir, upon issue of nothing by descent in Fee simple,
the Jury gave a special verdict, that the father devised all his chivalry land
to his wife, till the Defendant his heir was of the age of 24 years, and then
that the entire shall be to him and his heirs, and his wife to have the third
part during her life, and if he dye before he has accomplished the age of 24
years, it shall remain to the Feme for life, and after her decease to the
heirs of the Devisor, the heir being 24 years of age the wife died. It was
holden that there was no in tail, but the entire was in the heir in Fee by
descent, and not only the third part, and that he is liable to the obligation
of his father.

323. A man who was indebted to the Queen in 200 marks upon Recognizance, was
attaint of Treason, the Queen pardoned the treason, and gave, granted, and
restored all his goods, chattels, etc. which he had forfeit by this attainter,
(125) the debt is not gone by this pardon, nor by the suspension, per Justices.

(126.)
A second deliverance by Throgmorton against Tracy, com. 145.

Hill. (127)
324. A man devised land to his wife upon condition to bring up his eldest son,
and after the decease of his wife to his second son in tail, the wife entered
but educated not, the eldest son entered upon her, It seems here his entry is
congeable. And first that a Condition may be annexed to a Will, by the Statute
of Wills, which gives free liberty to a man for to devise for advancement of his
wife, etc. Littlet' that a devise that the Executors shall sell land, and they
retain it, the heir may enter for breach of the condition, 18 Elizab. 345. A
devise of land upon condition to pay rent to his wife, and added to it a clause
of Distress, yet both penalties shall stand, and a particular estate may well
be upon condition, although the remaind' be without condition, and he in
remainder shall not take advantage of the condition, but the heir because he
is prejudiced in his inheritance by the devise. And the heir by his entry shall
defeat only the estate of the feme, and remainder may well stand by the devise
without the particular estate: but if the estate had passed by livery,
otherwise it had been, because the livery is defeated by the particular estate
being defeated. Also a condition may defeat part, as a Feoffment of two acres
upon condition, that if he does not such an Act, that the Feoffer may enter in
one; and if tenant for use and he in remainder join in a Feoffment upon
condition, that if such an act be not made, that tenant for life shall
re-enter, that shall not defeat the entire, 11 H. 7.6. A gift in tail the
remainder to the right heir of the Donor, upon condition that if he alien in
Fee, it shall be lawful to enter, upon condition broken the estate tail is
only defeated, Quaere. vide News and Scholast' case, like adjudged limitat'
and that he in remainder may enter.

(128.)
325. A woman servant conspired to rob her Mistress, and in the night she let
in the Felon at the Door, and him had to the bed of her Mistress, where he
killed her Mistress, the Servant holding the candle, but said nothing: Quaere,
3 to 3, if she be principal, and if it be petty Treason.

326. Three Parceners of a Reversion, one aliened her part, the particular
Tenant died, the eldest entered into the entire per curiam, the Grantee and the
other Co-parcener, may not join in a rent of partition against the third,
because one of them is entitled by the common law, and the other by Statute 31
H. 8. Quaere if the entry of the eldest parcener gives seisin to the Grantee,
as he does to the other, because of the privity. Ballards case.

327. Wilford was bound in an Obligation without day of payment limited; and
devised land to his Executors upon condition, that if they paid not the said
sum according to the obligation, that the devise should be void; and that
then A. shall have to him and his heirs upon condition to pay it, and A. dyed,
the Executors are requested to pay it, Quaere, if the Heir of A. may enter,
and pay, etc.

328. John Constable pointed to one, and said to his friends, Ecce Reg' Edw.
he had sent to the Queen to render the Realm to him, and the Queen answered
the got it by the sword, and yet she acknowledged she had right to it. It was
holden that it was not a direct affirmation, that another besides the Queen had
right to the Crown, within 1. Mary: per griender opinion, yet he had judgment
and executed as a Traitor, Quaere if it be not within the Declarat. 25 Ed. 3.

329. A Subject by license departed the Realm, and upon a privy Seal sent to
him ^e did not return, his Chattels and lands were seized to the use of the
Queen. Tempore Ed. 2.

(129.)
330. Test of a writ of Entry in le quibus was 13. Feb. and it was returnable
crastino Purifica^' and to the return before the Test, and upon that error
the Judgment reversed.

331. A Grandfather tenant in tail made a Feoffm' to the use of himself for
life, the remainder to a stranger in tail, the remainder to the right heirs of
the Grandfather, the Grandfather died, the Father died, stat. 27. is made, the
stranger enters, dies without issue, his wise with child. The son entered as
right heir of the Grandfather, Quaere if he be remitted for the first in whom
the remainder in Fee is vested by the statute; in which estate it behooves of
necessity to be judged in, if then the entry of the son be not congeable upon
him, Quaere, Bonvils case.

332. Quaere, if wast brought by the Bishop shall be ad exheredat^ Epis. or ad
exheredat^ Ecclesiae, for the Register varies.

Pas.
333. Haydon brought an Attaint upon the statute 23 H. 8. against I upon a
verdict in Assise. I. died hanging the writ, notwithstanding proper stat' the
writ shall not abate. The false oath was assigned, because it was found that
certain land in S. was not contained in the letters pattents made to A. etc.
and the plaintiff averred that it was contained, and the verity was that the
letters patents misrecited the town, and name of the last tenant of that, but
the misrecitall was aided by stat. 35 H. 8. in that case as it seems. But
because the Justices of Assise would not have the statute given in evidence to
the Jury in the country for troubling them, because it was not pleaded, it
shall not now be given in evidence, pur que pl. nosme.

334. A Church being void upon 2 stat' 11 H. 8. for taking another of 8 pound
value without qualification: now the Patron granted the first and next
presentation, which first and next should happen to fall: holden that the
present avoidance shall not pass. Agards case.

(130).
335 Tenant for life, remainder in tail, remainder in Fee, of land holden in
Chivalry of the King, he in remainder in tail died his heir within age, the
King granted over the Seigniory, and tenant for life died. Quaere, if the
Grantee shall have the Guard, for the interest began by the death of the
father, which was before the Grant of the Seigniory. Sir Thomas Shares case.
24. Ed. 3.33 Simile, where the Grantee had the Ward. Nota hic, tha^ although
the issue be the first in whom the remainder vesteth, yet he had it by descent.

Trespass by Hill against Grange, com. fol. 164.

(131.)
336. The possessions of the Abbey of Comb came to H. 8. diverse parcels being
in lease for years, the King made a lease for life of all to the Duchess of
Richmond and died, Ed. 6. granted the reversion, the Grantee made a Feoffment
of all and a letter of Attorney to make livery, the Attorney made livery in one
parcel which was in lease in name of all without Atturnment, or agreement of
the Termers, Quaere, what passes: per six Justices if there be not words and
omnes inde expellend' it is a desseisin for the Attorney to make livery where
other had state for ^^se, for the authority shall be intended to make a lawful
act, ^^x others held contrary.

337. R. Read brought Appeal of the death of his brother against 5 principals
and one accessory, 3 principals and the accessory appeared, the Plaintiff
counted against, the Principal who appeared, and two others absent, (but upon
no Indictment): and against the other of procurement and abetment, two
principal and the other pleaded non-culpable, and so at issue, the 3
principal plead non-guilty ready to defend' by his b^dy; upon which Plea the
Plaintiff Demur' Ven fac. everal warded to try the plea of the others, sed
cess' versus p^ecess' qu^usque princip' legit' modo cenvine. In the mean time
they were put to Bail, after the Demurrer was adjudged against the Plaintiff;
and the Defendant had Judgment to go without day: And one of the Principals
which appeared not is returned dead, the other outlawed; Also the Plaintiff at
the Nisi prius was non-sute against the two. And according to the statute the
Jury at their request were command' and found damages tam occasion appelli
quam infam' and impris. severally; for the Plaintiff had not sufficient, for
which they found the Abettors per name, viz. quod procuraverw^t, instigave' and
abbet' etc. sed non dicit' per malitiam, Nota. Another was charged at the same
time against the accessory, but it was not recorded, that they wereclected,
ried, sworn, but per curtam discharged, and the Plaintiff was non-sute and
inquiry of the Abettors ut supra, and at the day in the bank Judgment given
according as to the 3. and qued ireut sine die; sed quoad sectam Re^is, they
were severally brought to their trials, but one made a default, upon which a
Capias issued against him and his Mainpernors, the accessory and the other
principal pleaded non-culpable, and were acquitted, and the Abettors inquired
of as supra, severally, vide West. 2. cap 12. for the authority of the Justices
of Nisi prius, to inquire of damage and abettors; ^ide also 10 Ed. 4.14. that
they may not give Judgment of the damages by the stat. 8. H. 6. cap. 1. vide
the opinion Fairfax 22 Ed. 4.18. And now he that was discharged upon demur
supra was arraigned at the suit of the King, for it was no acquitall, (Nota)
and was found not culpable, and had Judgment of acquitail: now he which made
default, and appeared at the suit of the King ut supra, came in by the Exigent,
and because the Inquest first returned was discontinued upon the Roll, a new
Venire facias issued, he was also by that non-acquited, and damages found newly
to ten pound, and that the Plaintiff was sufficient, and at the request of the
accessory, because upon the acquitall of all the principals he is discharged.
The Jury again found damages for him to two hundred and twenty pound, and that
the Plaintiff was insufficient, and found 6 abettors ex malitia, so three
several times damages had been inquired for the Accessory, but Seir^ facias,
agard' against the abettors upon the last, because before the acry was not
lawfully acquitted before. And exception taken because in the Scire facias he
had not made mention of the acquitall, of the principals, and lome pleaded quod
non abettaver', others justified by common same, and the Plaintiff averred of
his wrong without such cause, and both found for him, and damages assessed, and
had Judgment.

Trin. (132.)
338. The stat. 1 and 2. Ph^ and Mary cap. 10. that trials in treason shall be
according to the course of the common Law, takes not away the force, 35 H. 8.
cap. 2. for trial of treason committed over the Sea, because it was not
triable at all at the common Law; But it takes away the force of 33 H. 8. of
trial in a forain county, per Justices, but the intent of the said statute was
only as it seems to take away the force of the statute 5 Ed. 6. cap. 11. for
the two accusors.

339. A. and B. Surveyors to the Marquess Dorses made leases by Indent'
witnessing that they as supervisors demis't etc. rendering rent to the
Marquess, with condition of re-entry to the Marquess, and clause of warranty
of the Marquess in cujus res testim' etc. the Surveyors, sigil. appos. Quaere,
if a good Lease in the name of the Surveyors, and if the words ut supervisores,
do not imply, that they were not surveyors in deed.

(133.)
340. The Plaintiff in the Court of Pypowders counted of a contract made the
last Fair; whereas there was no plaint begun and no judgment of amercement of
the Defendant was given: and holden an error in both per touts le Justices.

Quarto Mariae.
Mich.
341. After grant of the next presentation, the parson made a Lease rendering
rent which is confirmed by the Patron and Ordinary, after the parson was
deprived for marriage, so that the Grantee of the said turn presented, it seems
the entry of this Incumbent is congeable upon the lessee.

342. Tenant in tail, the remainder in Fee, Tenant in tail levied a fine with
proclamation, he in remainder died his heir within age, and tenant in tail died
without issue, so that title incurred to the enfant, and 5 years passed and yet
he is within age; notwithstanding statute 4 H. 7. saving the action to the
infant till full age, and then he shall have 5 years, yet he may use his action
within age if he will, per all the Justices. Petic' Basset. vide plus. 136.

343. The year of the delivery of the warrant to the Chancellor of the grant
of an Office was omitted; viz. the entry was; Mem^rand. 1. De. an. H. 8. ista
billa deliber' fuit Demi. Can^. Angliae; But it was filled among the warrants
of 37 H. 8. and the Letters Patents bare date, 1 De. 37 H. 8. vide statute
thereupon 18 H. 6. cap. 1. and Ludfords and Grets case, Com. adjudged a good
Patent where the day of the delivery was not entered.

344. 5. and 6. as principals and Benjamin Smith and his wife as accessaries
were found culpable in the procurement of the death of Rutford, at the suit of
the Queen, and the principal was executed, and Benjamin the accessory, for his
Clergy was toll per Parliament. and the Queen pardon the woman; Quaere if an
appeal lies against him, for the principal is not named, neither in the
appeal, nor in life.

345. Gavelkind land was devised to the husband and wife for life; remaind.
prexim. hered. mascul. corporibus suss legitim. procreat. imperpet. the husband
and wife had three sons and died, if the eldest shall have the entire Demur'.
Vide remaind' seniori puero, and in another deed in English eyne child. Post.
Eliz. 337.

(134.)
346. It was resolved by the Justices, that notwithstanding 1 and 2 P. and Mary
(trials) of treasons shall be according to the common Law, there shall be
accusors upon the Indictment upon 5 Ed. 6. cap. 11. Also in misprison for
concealment of Treason, there shall be two as well upon the arraignment as
upon the Indictment; And the words of the stat' 5 Ed. 6. except he voluntarily
and without torture confess it, that shall be intended before the arraignment.
And the accusation under the hands of the accusors, or testified by others is
sufficient, and if the accusation be upon Record, it suffices although the
accusors be dead.

347. In trespass the Defend, said the place, etc. is and was the Frankten. of
A. at the time; and as servant, etc. The Plaintiff said that a long time
before the trespass B. was seized in Fee, and infeoffed him; and we were
thereby seized till by A. disseised, upon whom we re-entred, and were seized
till defend, die and Ann. p^edict. made the trespass, the Defendant maintained
the Bar, and traversed the Disseisin, Holden by the Court a Ieofail, because
in the replication he had not denied the Franktenement at the time of trespass.

348. Traps disseisor made a Lease for years, rendering rent, the disseisee
re-entred, the Lessee, continued possession, and paid his rent to the
Disseisor; notwithstanding he is by continuance of possession a Disseisor, for
he may not limit his wrong, per curiam.

(135.)
349. In a Quare impedit by Poyner, issue found for the Plaintiff, but by his
negligence the Jury were not charged to inquire of the 3 points, viz. de
plenitud. ex cui. present. and si temp. semest. trans^^t. Also the Justices of
Nisi prius gave not Judgment as they might by stat. West. 2. cap. 30. Now in
the Bank the Plaintiff prayed a writ to the Bishop, to inquire of the 3
points. Lib. Intrac. fol. 110. the writ is such, Et quod interim cesset execuc'
de breve Epis. habendo. And at the last the Plaintiff relinqui^hed his damages
and had Judgment; Et breve Episc. suo periculo, Nota.

350. The Grantee of the next auoydance died, his Executors granted that to a
stranger, the Grantee brought a Quare impedit, he need not to show the
testament, for the Grant is good notwithstanding they never prove the
testament, and it is administration.

351. Stat. 5. and 6. E. 6. will that the Q^arter Sessions in the County of
Anglesey in Wales shall be kept at Beaumares only, and non alibi, they held
them at another place; holden that the Indictments were void per Justices,
because a negative prohibit': And the Justices were fined in the Star Chamber
every one at 5 pound for the contempt, because that the statute exemplified
(for it was not printed) was shown to them before they sat, yet they would not
surcease.

(136.)
352. Quid juris clamat against Elizabeth Turton, she sued a Dedimus potestatem
with supposall that she ought not to atturn because Tenant in tail and with
sugesti' quod adco impotens and senio, etc. that she could not travel to the
Bank to plead that, for that the writ (which was directed to Saunders Justice)
was to resort to the Defendant, and to receive attorney for to appear for her,
which was allowed by the opinion of the Court, yet rare in that case: although
there are presidents that it lies to receive atturnment; so of a recluse, and
for a woman with child.

Hill.
353. Arthur Basset son and heir of Sir John Basset within age, per petition of
right for land, whereof a recovery was suffered before 27. the which is averred
to be to the use of the Lord Dawbeny in tail, the remainder to Sir John Basset
in fee; also it was averred, that the tail to the Lord Dawbeny, was determined
by the death of the Earl of Bridgewater, son of the Lord Dawbeny he dying
without issue, and conveyed to himself the same remainder as heir to Sir John
Basset. Note that the Indentures which declared the use, were made four years
after the recovery, and holden good; also it appeared by the Indentures that
the Lord D. had authority in default of issue, in his life, or by his Will to
nominate the use in tail to two of his next blood, the remainder in fee to Sir
John Basset. But no mention was made in the Petit' of any such Indent', nor
averment, that there were any such nomination. And it was holden by all the
Just' that it needs not, because nothing was given by the authority if no
execution was; but if the Indent' had been disclosed then they ought to aver,
because the Petition, which is in nature of a formedon in remainder, was for
default of issue of the L. D. only. (137.) and it was demur' if the plea ought
to abide during the time of the nonage of the Plaintiff upon plea pleaded in
Bar of the Petition, which is not any matter of any of the ancestors of the
Plaintiff (which was prayed for the Queen). First it was agreed that if he
recover the remainder he shall have it by descent, for by stat 27. it was a
remainder executed in his ancestor, and shall make him to become in ward when
he comes to the possession, although it never was in the possession of his
ancestor. Tamen per 2 Just^^' q. est tanq' p^^q^e' al heir nesteant unqs. en
launc. and lacc. ne descend. Also especially the Petition of right shall not
targe, as 21 Ed. 3. and 43 Assise is; for it may not be revived, or a summon
lies not in the original, therefore a resummons lies not to revive it, and it
is a mischief to the heir, for a Collateral warranty may descend to the heir
in the mean time, where there is a principle, that in all things the age of an
infant shall be favored and have aid, but in no case take disadvantage by his
age But 5 Justices held contra, and that the Petition targera. At the Common
law in all actions founded upon a right descended to an heir within age, and
one whose seism and espees ought to be showed in the ancestor, the Tenant by
exception to the person of the Demandant, shall targera the plea till, etc.
without plea pleaded (contra, if the King being within age brings a Droit 6 Ed.
3.) but as it appears by the stat' Glocest' cap. 2. it was otherwise of an
action ancestrall possessory, founded upon one dying seized where he need not
to show the esplees; as besaiel. aiel, and cosinage; except he had pleaded a
feoffement, to which the heir for tenderness may not answer; and because the
circumstances shall not be inquired as in Mordancest. and Assise, but that case
is also remedied by the statute, and notwithstanding such feoffement pleaded,
the inquest shall be taken as of another man of full age. And West. 2. cap. 46.
is to be intended where the heir of the Disseisee makes fresh suit, per 24 Ed.
3. Also notwithstanding that the heir of the feoffee of the Disseisor, the
Vouchee, the prayee in aid, and tenant by receipt within age shall have their
age. The like case brought by a husband infant, and his wife in reversion, upon
alienation of tenant for life, because it is in the right of the wife the plea
shall not abide. But in a Formedon in reverter the plea shall abide. So in an
appeal of Murder, because he may not deraign battle, and although he may have
a champion in a Writ of right, yet the plea shall abide; because he may not
discern his right ancestrall. Contra, if he brings a Droit of his own purchase,
because it is intended he may as well defend as purchase, p^r 40 Ed. 3. as it
is also in Assise, and Entry in nature of Assise. And if an infant be Seignior,
and the Tenant cease, or disclaim in Avowry made of his own seisin. Also in
Escheat the plea shall not abide because no right descends in the land, and
reason will that he shall have the land in recompense, where the survisees; and
in some case though the ancestor might have had the action, yet the plea shall
abide, as if one had cause to have a Dum fuit infra aetatem, upon an estate
made by his ancestor who died within age, for at the time of his death the
ancestor might not have the said writ, because within age. And now by the
nonage of one of the Demandants the plea shall ahide: The same law in a Dum non
suit compos mentis. So in a Formedon in Discender, the ancestor might not have
the action; where he himself was the man from whom the descent was; (138.) And
the heir in soccage shall not have an action of Account against his Guardian
till full age: also a Formedon in Descender is a writ of right, and the Count
quod remansit jus, and so out of the stat. of Glocest. and West. 1. for after
theseisin once had, Formedon in remainder is gone, for that, etc.

354. The Countess of Surrey Tenant for life surrendered to the King with an
intention that the King should give to her other lands in recompense; The King
aliened those, and gave others in recompense, which being upon defeisable title
they are after evicted, the entered upon the Patentee, and it was decreed that
het entry was not congeable; for it is no condition but only a confidence.
(139.) Also there was not any request made before the gift made by the King,
which ought to be when the condition is to be performed to the party himself,
contra if to a stranger. Also the King in this case is entitled by double
matter of record, in which she may not enter upon the Patentee without
petition, no more then upon the possession of the King. Also here was a
recompense and fine executed, and if a man be barred in a Formedon upon
warranty and Assets pleaded it is perpetually a Bar, although the Assets are
after evicted. Quaere. Also it was her folly to accept of it, Bracton, Scito
qu^d (ut) modus est (si) conditio (quia) causa.

355. The Earl of Huntington covenanted with the Lord Clinton to infeoffe him
of the Manor of D. before Easter, discharged of all former encumbrances but
Leases whereof the ancient rent is reserved, after, and before the feoffement
he made a new Lease rendering the ancient rent, 4 contra 2 that it is no breach.

356 Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury made a Lease for years of parcel of the
Manor of P. after he granted a Rentcharge out of the same Manor to Dr. Buts,
who also after devised the rent to the same Archbish. till 100 pound be levied
per retaining, the remainder to D. and died, the 100 pound is levied and the
rent is behind, and D distrained upon M. Lessee of H. for one year, who pleaded
in Bar to the Avowry the Lease made to H. before the charge, who let to him,
and showed not the original Lease, nor showed not the place where the
confirmation of the said Lease was made, upon which the Avowant demur^, and
exceptions were also taken to the Avowry. (140.) Because he pleaded the
confirmation to the grant of the rent quod Prior ecclesiae Cant' and ejusd'
loci Capitul' confi^m', and said not Cathed' nor named the Saint, whereas there
were diverse Priors and Churches in Canterbury; and said also, as in the same
writing bearing date at Cant. in the Chief house, or in domo capitul' fully
appears, where it may be delivered in another place. And for the imperfection
in the pleading both parties Repled' agard. But as to the matter in law it was
moved; If a Rentcharge for years shall pass by a devise paroll, because
local, but agreed it shall go to the Executors, as it is of a Relief due to a
Lord, because they represent the Testator. And a devise of a Wa^d and a Villain
is good per paroll because transitory, and if a new Rentcharge being against
common right be deviseable as land is, because it shall charge the Tenant
without atturnment, and not per prescription. Also if the remainder be good,
depending upon a particular estate in suspense, for if a Seigniory be granted
to the Tenant for his life, the remainder over, it is a void remaind', and if
it be granted to the Tenant and a stranger it shall not stand for benefit of
survivor, but is extinct as to a moity; also it was said that by the regrant to
the Arcbishop the annuity was suspended, and a personal thing or action once
suspended by the act of the party it is gone for ever. But otherwise if by the
act of the law; Then also he may not after have resort as to a Rentcharge, for
although it be at his election to charge in whose hands soever, yet if he
discharge any of the hands both is gone. Also after the archbishop aliened the
Manor whereof, etc. to the King, and by that the rent granted is included; and
as to the Devisee of a term for life, and if he die before expiration that
shall remain, etc. if the first alien the entire, he that should have the
remainder is without remedy. Quaere if a Quem redditum reddat lies where
termor of a Rentcharge grants that by fine.

357. Sir John Gates having see, made a feoffement of certain land, and after
committed treason and is attaint and executed, although the land is not forfeit
nor escheated, yet adjudged his wife shall not have dower. A. Brown contra
vehement' according to the opinion of Vavis. in Littl. stat. 5. and 6 Ed. 6.
which bars the wi^e of Dower in case the husband commits any manner of treason,
extends to pety treason per Stanf. fol. 193. per generalty.

(141)
358. A man made a Lease by a Indenture for 90 years to Goug^, and after made a
feoff^ment, and after took an estate in tail to him and his wife, etc. after
Gough took a new Lease of the husband per paroll for 18 years, the husband
died. The opinion of the Justices was that the wise may enter, for the
acceptance of a new Lease is a surrender of the old.

359. Ed. 6. granted to Lady Mary ^e Manor of D. so long as she should
continue sole, she granted a Rentcharge, Ed. 6. died, and she is made Queen,
and the reversion descend' to her, and now she married, Quaere if she shall
avoid the rent.

Pas.
360. In a verdict upon a writ of Forcible entry brought against 7. upon the
stat. 8 H. 6. that sour disseised, and put out by force, but only one detained,
the 4 joined in an attaint upon the expulsion and disseisin, and adjudged well,
and that for the Detainer the other is to have an attaint if he will sole.

361. A man avowed for damage fesant, they are at issue, and after the
Plaintiff is nonsute, doubted if the avowant shall have costs and damages,
because the stat. 7 H. 6. cap. 4. speaks only where the Plain^iff is barred;
and also where the a vowry is for rent, customs, or services, but by 21 H. 8.
it is clear that he shall, for this extends to a nonsute, as well as where the
Plaintiff is barred, and as well where the avowry is for damage fesant as
where it is for rent, customs or services.

362. Sir Will. Cuts disseisor commanded his termor to keep possession against
the Disseisee as his termor, and after went over the sea, the Disseisee entered,
and is ousted by the Termor, who after paid the rent to the use of C. after
Cuts died, if that be a descent, viz. if the Lessor be a Disseisor til
agreement after the disseisin, in diverse opinions, The Inquest to try the
traverse coming to give verdict, the Traverser is nonsute, Quaere if
receivable, and Quaere if peremptory.

363. Tenus in the Star Chamber, that he which had quiet possession 3 years
upon good title, if after he be put out by force, and restored again, yet he
may not justify to detain with force, by the proviso of the said statute,
because his possession was interrupted, neither may he recome with multitude
with him to put himself in posses. Per Sanders chief Justice, if a Termor be
expulsed by force, (142.) he in reversion may not have an action upon 8. H. 6.
for although he be disseised, yet he is not expulsed. Vide the stat. for the
disjunctive.

364. The husband conveyed two parts of his lands held in Knights service to
his wife for advancement, which he intended to marry, and after married the
wife, and after infeoffed a stranger of the moiety of the third part and died
his heir within age, if the supply to satisfy a full third part may be taken
out of the said two parts per the Seignior, Quaere, pro domino Paget.

365. A man made a Lease rendering rent at the feasts of St. Mich. and of our
Lady, or within a month after, and if it be behind after the said feast, and a
day limited by the space of eight weeks, it shall be lawful to enter, Quaere
of the 8 weeks are accomptable from the feast day, or from the month; per
diverse from the month, which is the 28 day after the feast, because the most
reasonable intendment for the Lessee, and the 28 day is as well a day of
payment as the feast day at his pleasure. And Quaere, because the month is a
time entire, whereas the words are Feasts, and Days, Nota also the copulative.

366. Trevilian and A. his wife joint-tenants in see suffered a recovery 23 H.
8. averred to be to the use of the husband only, (Quaere) after in 24 H. 8. he
devised the said land to A. his wife for life the remaind', etc. and died not
till 37 H. 8. Holden a void devise, for the devise was not within the sta. 1
Rich. 3. to convey the possession, till the statute 27 H. 8. which transfer the
use in possession, (143.) was a countermand of the devise per drowning the use
in the possession, and the possession may not be devised till 32 H. 8. which
inables to devise the possession, and that shall be intended to enable in time to
come. So for the weakness of the foundation, etc. and that from the beginning,
etc. and it was adjudged void. yet it had been good by a new publication after
32. The ville before and after juxta, is always intended a Town of it self,
and not a Hamblet. Quaere after an estate in see pleaded, to enable to devise
per stat. 34. and 35. of explanation, it behooves to conclude and de tali statu
suo obiit seisit', and not and sic seisit' obiit, for that shall not relate to
the estate mentioned, for it may then be intended he died seized of an estate
in tail, whereas he which is sole seized of an estate in fee may devise by the
statute of explanation.

(144.)
367. A man being over sea is disseised, and after recomes and departs again,
and a descent is had, Quaere if he shall be bound, except it be proved he had
notice of the Disseisin, but if an infant be disseised, and after he be of full
age goes over the sea, he shall be bound, but otherwise if he goes over sea
within age, per opini. 2 H. 7.

Patent of an office of a Justice of the Bank, the habend' is quamdiu nobis
placuer.

368. John Sherleys a Frenchman one of the rebels with Stafford, who
rebelliously took the Castle of Scarborough in Yorkshire, was now arraigned in
the Kings bench upon an. Indictment of treason, which was contra legeanc' su^e
debit, Nota, it was well, although he was no subject, because in a time of
peace. But if it had been in a time of war between our two countries, he shall
be ^ansomed, and not arraigned, and the Venire fa^^as awarded in York was
general, and not de medietate linguae, for there are no presidents of trial
in treason per Med ling'. Also the stat. 1 and 2 Ph and Mary is, that all
trialls in treason shall be according to the Common law. But for felony and
murder it is otherwise, as in the case of Gavarre of the death of Gambo, 3
Edw. 6. The criall per Med. ling. first by the stat. 27 Ed. 3. cap. 8. was made
for aliens which were Merchants of the Staple, who moved plea before the M^ior
of the S^uple. But by stat. 28 E. 3. c. 13. it is made general for all aliens,
and in all pleas before whomsoever, yea although the King be a party. But after
there was a statute 2 H 5. cap 3. which is, that in a plea real or personal
where debt or damages amount to 40 marks, that it should be a good challenge
that the Jury had not freehold 40. s. per year, and because an alien may not
have freehold here this statute was declared per H. 6. cap. 29. not to extend
to such trials; Quaere of the said statute, for the King and the Lords only
made the said declaration, and the Commons are omitted in the words of the act.
The Plaintiff 21 H. 7. after Venire facias, and al. destringas showed that the
Defendant is an alien, and to avoid delays for that, and prayed a Venire facias
of new de med' ling' according to the statute, and he had it. (145.) Quaere if
an alien Plaintiff suffer a Venire facias to be returned before he requires
med' ling' if he has not passed his time, for the statutes were made for
their benefits if they would require them.

369. Information upon arrerages of account adjudged before Auditors assigned
by Commission, was put by the Atturny of the King against the Receiver of
Irel', the Defendant may not wage his law, but ought to plead ad patriam, nihil
debet. Vide Stat. 5 H. 4. cap. 8.

370. Land was given to the father and son in tail, the remainder over, the
father died, and his son heir to the in tail, after the son discontinued and
died, 3 Justices that there needs not several Formedons for he in remainder,
Quaere.

371. A Dean made a Deputy per paroll who in his absence with the Chapter
confirmed a grant made by the Bishop, Quaere, if it shall bind the successor.

372. The stat. 8 H. 6. cap. 16. that a demise or a grant to ferm by the Lord
Chancell' etc. before office fully returned (or within a month after, if any
tender traverse, and offer to take it to ferm) shall be void; after till 18 H.
6. cap. 6. there was a evasion used, viz. to take to ferm before any title
found for the K. 146) which is remedied by the said stat. 18. Those statutes
are not to be intended but that such grants are good, where the King is well
entitled without office. Also an estate in fee or tail is not within the
statute.

373. Villers Assise, It was found upon special verdict, that the husband and
wife seized in the right of his wife per Indenture, in consideration of 60
pound demised, bargained, and sold land to B. for 30 years, the remainder to
themselves for life, the remainder to their son, and to the daughter of B. in
tail, and suffered a recovery to the said uses, and it was found besides out of
the Indenture, that the said assurance was as well in consideration of the
marriage to be between their son and the daughter of B. as for the said money:
and over it was found that the father and mother died, the term expired, the
son having issue died, his wife levied a sine as that, etc. to a stranger with
warranty of the said land, the issue within 5 years entered for the forfeit,
(147) upon 11 H. 7. against whom an Assise is brought, Dyer. The money is the
sole consideration expressed, then the other shall not be averred, as an use
shall not be averred against an use expressed. Neque causa matrimon' prelocuti
or other consideration is expressed, but if no consideration had been
expressed, then a consideration might have been averred without deed; also the
land went from a feme covert who may not limit an use but by writing, then the
consideration with her assent shall be only in writing. Therefore before 32 a
Lease paroll made by husband and wife, and the husband died, and she accepts
the rent; yet the Lease is not affirmed because it could not be assented to at
the first, and then the finding of that by the Jury, which may not be averred,
nor given in evidence, in void; Then it is not within the 11 H. 7. for it is
not a Jointure although made by the ancestor of the husband, for a Jointure
shall have no other consideration then love and advancement, where nothing was
the cause here, but the money of the King, or the Kings coin. Also a Jointure
shall be a present sustentation, and not a remainder as here. But three held
contra, and that another consideration which is not repugnant to that mentioned
in the Indenture may be averred, and it shall be within 11 H. 7. although money
be part of the consid', for wel-nigh all marriages are made for money. Dyer,
that a gift in frank-marriage may be before, or at the time, or after marriage,
and upon divorce the feme shall have the entire; and it is said frank, because
the dispositi' free from services: (148.) notwithstanding the stat. of Gloce^',
yet warranty by tenant of the courtesy, continues collateral, notwithstanding
it be no Bar without assets, and it seems if he enters not in the life of the
father he shall be bar' without assets, so by a release with warranty, for that
is not an alienation, as the words of the statute are; and the statute is where
the husband aliens the inherit' or marriage of his wife, so that it seems that
land purchased by the wife is not within. But the stat. 11 H. 7. is more hard
against women, because they have no voice in Parliament, and eradicate and made
void all; and where a woman had jointure in tail, there warranty lineal, and no
bar without assets, which is reasonable, and yet by the said statute that is
destroyed, which is hard, and therefore the statute shall be taken strictly;
there it is said a man may not revoke a gift Causa matrimonii praelocuti as a
woman may.

Trin.
324. If a woman covert be tenant for life, and a fine levied of that to her
and her husband, who renders for years, Quaere if a forfeiture; It Is clear if a
feme be before in tail within 11 H. 7. and accepts such a fine, it is not a
forfeit. Penycocks case.

(149.)
375. Debt against the heir upon the obligation of his father, who aliened the
assets hanging the writ, and pleaded nothing by descent the day of the writ
purchased, etc. it was found against him, and a general judgment, and an
Elegit de mediet' omnium terrarum the heir as his proper debt. But this Elegit
according to the ancient Formedons without limitation of time, and upon return
nihil habuit, etc. another Elegit issued to extend that, quod habuit die of the
Nisi prius, for this day, and the day in the Bank are all one in law. Brook if
he had aliened of covin hanging the writ, if that be returned by the Sheriff,
a new writ shall issue reciting that. Note the execution was ruled by the court
ut supra, yet elsewhere special judgment, etc. and execution of the entire
assets, quod durum.

Assise Hunt of the office of Register of the Admiral Court post fol. 153.

376. Before 27 H. 8. an use was limited to Alice at S. and J. N. in special
tail, they enter-mary, the stat. 27 H. 8. made, makes them not joint-tenants by
individed moities, for that executes the possession in such form, quality, and
condition, etc. Therefore where the husband after aliens the entire to one of
the feoffees and die, the wife shall have a Cui in vita of the moity, per
Curiam: but if she dies the son may maintain a Formedon of the entire. Note the
use changed supra upon the posses' of the feoffee without claim, etc. Bedles
case.

(150.)
377. A man made a Lease by Inden' in which are words provisum est quod si
Lessee die within 60 years, that the Executors shall have it in his right, till
60 years from the date, per Curiam it is but a covenant and not a Lease,
Graveners case.

378. A man bound in 20 pound for the payment of 10 pound he pleaded tender at
the day and place in a debt brought upon the said Obligation, and upon demur'
adjudged, that he behooves to plead always ready, although there be a place
certain where the payment shall be, otherwise it is of a thing collateral,
Panells case, Catling, and Griffith contra, because the place is parcel of the
obligation, 7 H. 4. tamen 11 H. 6. contra. vide good diversity, 19 H. 8.12.

379. Eaton College incorporate by name of Praepositi and Collegit Regalis
Coll' beatae Mariae de Eaton juxta Windsor, they made a Lease by name
Praepositi and sociorum Colleg' Regalis de Eaton, etc. leaving out Beatae
Mariae, and adjudged void.

380. Umpton after 31 devised the entire land held by Knights service, and in
the 34 of explanation of such a devise to be good for two parts, Umpton is
specially except, yet adjudged good for two parts.

Quinto Mariae.
Mich.
380. Brook Chief Justice of the common place revoked a grant made by himself
before of the office of the chief Protonotary, beca. the Grantee inidoneus, and
gave it to another, and there is a president put 5 E. 4. (151.) where the
office of the clerk of the Crown in the Kings Bench was granted to a Vintner,
and another, and after died, and the Vint' exhibited his Patent, and it seemed
to the Justices because he was never exercised in the office that his Patent is
void, and refused to admit him, for the benefit of the King and his people, and
after signified his disability to the King, and commended another to him as
sufficient, which the King Ore tenus them commanded to admit and swear.

381. Sir John Savage Sheriff in fee, was indicted in the Kings bench for
escape of two felons felonice and voluntary, and of hold' his Turn in loco
consueto against the statute of magna Charta, The Atturny of the Queen put in
an Information upon the Indictments, and by the Court his office was seized
without a Scire facias quousque, etc.

(132.)
382. Per touts les Justices where a man devises that his Executors shall sell
land, and of the sum coming, shall give such a portion to his daughters, it is
not a Legacy, because out of land, and an action of Account lies, and not suit
in the Court Christian, upon which a prohibition was granted, contra 9 Eliz.

383. A man being in execution in the Fleet for a debt recovered in the Common
pleas, being before condemned in the Kings Bench for another debt, he was now
removed by a Corpus cum causa condemn; It was holden that the Plaintiff may
acknowledge satisfaction for both debts in the Kings bench, for he is in the
Ward of the Marshal for both, and if he escape the Marshall shall be chargeable
for both.

384. A Proviso semper, and it is covenanted and agreed, and the Lessee
covenants and grants, that neither he nor his Executors or Assigns shall not
alien or grant the term to any without the assent of the Lessor, otherwise then
to his wife, or to one of the children of the Lessee, the Lessee died, and his
Executors granted the Term to one of the sons of the Lessee: And 3 held that he
may not that grant over to a stranger without license, but two held contrary,
and that the restraint is determined by the grant to the son, Quaere also if it
be a Condition or but a covenant.

385. Thymolby and another arraigned upon an indictment of robbery, pleaded non
culpable and a Venire fac' awarded, and 3 of the Jury were sworn against both;
T. challenged 4 others without showing cause or saying peremptory, and the
other would not challenge them, upon which T. was taken from the Bar, and more
till 12 sworn against the other, and found him culpable; and by all the
Justices it is a good trial, for he was not discharged but stood asid for a
time; ruled 1 H. 5. for although it be one panell indeed, yet it is several
inquests in law, and may proceed against one sole, contra in an appeal, and
this Venire facias had not words, and qui nulla affinit' atting', etc. as in an
appeal.

(153.)
386. In assise Hunt' of the office of the Regist' of the Admiralty it was
prescribed, quod quilibet hujusmodi persona, which shall be named by the
Admiral, shall be Register of the Admiralty for life, and it was found that
the Admiral named two by deed habend' for life, and that one is dead; quaere
if the prescription be performed, viz. si quilibet shall be taken singularly,
that but one shall be officer; where is a name collective, and understood of
many. Or if where one dies so that the other ought to claim in by the first
Grantor, as by a Grant made to him sole, if that maintain the prescription. It
seemed to diverse that it shall. Quaere also if two may be Joint-officers, the
Grantor by deed of an office shall not alter the prescription to nominate per
paroll, for a man may speak or nominate by his deed. A Corody uncertain may not
be granted but to one, but certain may be granted to many. Fitzh. N. B. (154.)
There it is holden if a man assign dower to his wife by deed, habend' for term
of his life rendering rent, it is void habend' and reddend' for she is in by her
husband.

387. In a writ of entry in the Per, an essoin of the service of the K, in
partibus transm. was put by Knivet for the tenant in octab. Tr. and he had day
til crastin' Martin', Quaere if the day to bring in the essoin shall be given
to the essoiner, or to the termor; also if the grant of the abscence shall be die
Lu. in cra' oct. Trin. and octab. because die Dominico; The warrant to the
Justices is by writ close and recites the essoin, but not that the essoiner is
sworn, yet it behooves to swear him of the verity of that.

388. Tenant in Chivalry of a common person made a gift in tail, the remainder
to the Queen in fee, Tenant in tail died, his issue within age, per opin. he
shall not be in ward to any, for the Tenure of the ancient Seigniory is
extinct, and the services gone by the fee simple in the King, who may not hold
of any.

(155.)
389. Oldnold indicted for slanderous works of the Queen three months passed,
contra the form of diverse statutes generally, and without mention unde
scandalum in Regno inter Dominam Regin' and Magnat' vel populum suum oriri
poterit, he was after arraigned and convicted of that; the question was, what
Judgment he shall have, and by what law, for he is not punishable, per 1 and 2
P. and M. because the three months passed, and the 2 and 12 Rich. 2. are only
of punishing slanders of the Nobles. So it is only punishable by West. 1. cap.
4. and according to that he had judgment of fine and imprisonment at the Queens
pleasure till he had found out the author.

390. Tyrrell for 400. l. paid by G. by deed indented and enrolled, bargained
and sold, gave, granted and covenanted land to the said G. and his heir habend'
to the use of the Bargainer for life, the remainder in tail to G. the remainder
to the right heirs of the Bargainor, this limitation by the haben' is void and
impertinent, for by the Justices it is of an use rising out of an use.

391. Land deviseable came to H. 8. by dissolution, who granted it to hold in
Chivalry in Capite, the Patentee devised the entire, it is a good devise
against the heir for all, for no words in the 32 H. 8. restrains the authority
to devise land deviseable before the statute, but peradventure not against the
King for ward and primer seisin.

392. At the Common law a Melius inquirend. is grantable per Register, where
found was by office quod tenementa tenentur of the heir of J.S. and named him
not; (156.) where A. is heir of the part of the mother of he which is dead, but
of the part of the father ignora'. And also where the value was too little. But
doubted upon the clause in the 2 Ed. 6. c. 8. that where de quo vel de quibus
ignorant, where tenure of the King is found, but by qu. servic' ignorant, that
a Melius inquirend' shall be awarded as is used, any late custom to the
contrary notwithstanding. If non obstant, the proviso in the Act which extends
not to prejudice or take away the title of the King, or of any another accrued
by any other inquisition before the said day, but they shall enjoy as if that
Act had not been made, if upon such ancient offices menti' Melius inquiren'
lies; the better opinion that it does not, notwithstan' Saunders vouched a
president to the contrary. If a man be found by office of the age of 15 years,
and when he comes to 20 he is found by Aetate probanda of full age, if the
Queen had no remedy but ought to make livery. vide the words of the statute,
that at his very full age indeed, he shall have an Aetate proban' and if it be
granted before it seems a traverse shall be admitted, and so ruled.

393. Greiswold seized in fee by Inden' made a Lease for life, remainder to the
heir males of his own body, the remaind' to his heirs, he died having two sons,
tenant for life died, the eldest son entered and died having a daughter:
Adjudged that she shall have the land as heir general, for it is clear the tail
is not good, for he may not make his own right heir a Purchaser, without
departing with the fee (4 H. 6. Chapmans case) but admitting it good, in
various opinions if it ends upon the death of the eldest son without heir male,
viz. if he was purchaser, or had it as heir male of the body of his father by
descent. Vide Robridges case, 1. 2. and 4. Ed. 3. and Littleton in tail and
conditions, where land is given to the son and to the heir males of the body of
his father which is dead.

(157.)
394. Annuity was brought against the successor of the Bishop of Ely, who
granted for life to the Plaintiff the Stewardship and fee of 40. s. pro, etc.
percipiend' de manerio de D. and the Plaintiff showed that he kept the Court,
but averred not the engrossing of the rolls, and that after the Bishop
discharged him, etc. It seems he ought to tender his service to every
successor, an it is issuable that such successor non exoneravit. The Bishop
came by Atturny and made no defense, but his Bailiffe demanded conusance, and
was allowed; and yet the words de licet ipsimet sit pars, are not in the
Patent, because so it had been allowed before.

Hill.
395. Puttenham by Indenture granted land in fee ferme with condition of
reentry for non payment, and covenanted to make further assurances, and by
another Indenture bearing like date, he covenanted to levy a fine to the use,
intents, effects and conditions in the first Indenture, and to no other, now he
levied a fine as that to the Grantee; It was decreed against the opinion.
Baker, Catlyn, and Kelway, that neither the fine nor condition is gone, for the
Indenture rules that, as if it had been an express proviso to save the rent.
(158.) 6 R. 2. Simile in Assise, and 23 Eliz. Bradborne levied a fine of land
rendering rent, and now for further assurance a writ of Entry in the post was
brought against J. S. who vouched Bradborne, who entered into the warrant
generally, the opinion of all the Justices that the rent is not gone.

306. In a writ of Entry en le quibus against Marrow of 70 acres of land in H.
the tenant pleaded that one C. was seized in fee, and demised the land to him
for life, the Demandant entitled himself by absque hoc quod dimisit modo and
forma. It was found that C. and 6 others were seized to the use of G. of the
said 70 acres, and of a house in H. which house and lands had been from time
called W. and that the said C. and the others 16 H. 8. joined in a Lease of the
said house called W. with the pertinenc' to the Tenant, etc. It was moved in
arrest of Judgment, 1. That this demise found, will not maintain the issue for
the Tenant. 2. It is not expressly found that the 70 acres are appertaining to
the house called W. which is found to be demised. 3. A Juror which had his
appearance of record, and was not discharged by challenge, he being sworn upon
another inquest; 3. de circumstant. were put in to make 12. whereof one was in
his place. 4. Quaere if issue for the 7 part of the land be sufficient found
for the Tenant.

397. In action upon the case against an Hostler, issue was joined if the goods
of the Plaintiff were robbed in default of the Defendant. Per Curiam it is a
good evidence that the house was full, upon which he refused the Plaintiff, who
said he would make shift, etc. and if the cause be false, an action upon the
case lies against the Hostler upon refusal.

398. A man made a Jointure of soccage land to his wife, after he purchased
Capite land, and devised two parts of it, none of the soccage shall supply the
3. part to satisfy the statute of Wills, except covin may be averred.

Pas.
399. Dyer lustice of the common Bank had a Patent and was sworn Justice of the
Kings Bench, because Morg. which ought to keep the essoynes were absent, per
melior. (159) opinion per this superior auth' the inferior is resumed, as a
parson created Bish. Also the entry shall be impertinent, because Judgment
then before him in the common Bank shall be reversed before himself in the Bank
of the King. But one has been Justice of the common Pleas and Baron of the
Exchequer together.

(160.)
400. The husband and wife by Indenture, let the land of the wife for years
rendering rent, her husband died, and she before any day of payment took
another, who accepted the rent and died, the lease is affirmed, 3. contra.

401. Action upon the case against one, where two sued in the Admiral Court of
a thing done in the body of the County and well, for there vexation is
several, and there are presidents of suit one or both as it pleases them
where two were sued there; And the writ was tam. pro Domina Reg. quam party.
And the effect of the surmise in the libell shall be put in the writ, so the
Judgment was of costs and damage double for the Plaintiff, and but ten pound
to the Queen, and Capiatur. And holden that the action may either be brought
where the Contract was, or where the citation was served, The writ and the
Count were Coram C. Lieutenant of the Court of Admiralty, whereas the Court
had no Deputy. It is not the form to put the Damages in the writ. In presidents
three statutes, viz. 13 Rich. 2.15 Rich. 2. and 2 H. 4. are put, where here the
15 Rich. 2. was omitted.

402. It was found by Inquisition that a Customer purchased land with the
Queens money, and by covin had caused the Estate to be made to a friend, that
seized into the hands of the Queen til etc. so of a Collector of tithes or
fifteens although he dies without heir or Executor, process made against the
Feoffees to answer and satisfy the Queen.

403. A man made two Executors, one refused, the other proved the will, and
made Executors and dyed, his Executors brought an action of debt, for a debt
due to the first testator; and well by Brook, for the election of him who
refused and determined, and now the first testator is dead intestate, 21 Ed.
4.28. Curia, that the action is not maintainable by the Executor of an
Executor, ideo quaere.

404. A Lease to 3 by the premises habend. to the first for life, remainder to
the second, the remainder to the third, the opinion of the Court that they
shall take successively and not jointly.

405. A man bound with two sureties for 40 pound to be paid at two days, for
their assurance he sold to them beasts for 40 l. paid, provided if he them
discharge and save harmless etc. the sale shall be void, and it is agreed that
he shall occupy (161.) He failed the first payment, after he is felo de se, And
awarded in the Star Chamber that the Almner shall have the beasts and discharge
the sureties, Dyer contra. to all, because the property is in the vendees upon
breach of the said condition, Quaere, if a woman which continues her Quarentine
may defend the possession with force.

Trin.
406. The Lord North Chancellor of the Augmentation Court delivered an
Obligation of the Queens to his servant to deliver to the Clerk to whom the
custody appertained, the obligor and the servant conspired to cancel the
Obligation, the Master is chargeable by the Justices.

407. Trespass, the Plaintiff made a new assignment, and gave a special name
and put buttels, by plusors he ought as well to prove the Buttels as the name,
quaere.

(162.)
408. Offic' virture brevis was, that A. died seized of landholden of the King
per Knight service, the heir within age, it shall be intended in Capite; It was
found by the Escheator in another county, that the same A. held of B. other
land by Knights service, B. is put to traverse of the tenure in Capite by the
common Law.

409. The Lady Vere covenanted with A. by Indenture in consideration of etc. to
assure by Recovery to A. and his heirs, land to the uses subscript, And A. also
covenanted that within 8 Months, he would remake an Estate to the Lady for
life, remainder, etc. Recovery is had, the use is not changed after the 6.
months, but a Covenant lies: Baron alien joint-purchasor during the coverture,
and died, the wife may enter in all, by 32. for it is the franktenement and
inheritance of the wife.

410. One in execution shall not be dismissed by the protection of the service
of the King, because sub salva custod. per Justices, And if by 1 Rich. 2. cap.
12. he be put at large by writ or commandment of the King by Bail. Quaere, if
the Jailer be chargeable against the party.

411. He which is condemned in debt or damages had land in several Counties,
the Plaintiff may have an Elegit in every of them for all, or he may divide
his debt.

(163.)
412. A Feoffment of land holden by Knight service, to the use of himself and
his wife in tail, the remainder to the use of himself and his heirs, stat' 27
H. 8 is made, the husband dies, If the heir shall be in Guard during the life of
the wife; Sanders held he should, for the ancient reversion remains. Dyer, if
the land had been on the part of the mother, yet the use shall go to the part
of the Father, for that a new use. But otherwise if the King had made the use,
as is a diversity upon a tenure especially reserved upon a Feoffment before
statute quia emptores, etc. and where it is created by the Law.

413. The Justices of Nisi prius die, the Clerk of Assise may bring in the
verdicts without Certiorare. vide West. 2 cap. 30. 14 Ed. 3, 6 stat. Eborum.

(164.)
414. A man devised the moity of his goods to his wife and died, she shall
have the moity as they are at the time of the death, if the Executors have
Assets ultra.

415. Record came out of ancient Demean into the Bank by writ of false
Judgment, the form of which Writ was sub sigi llo tuo and sigill. 4. legal.
homin. ejusdem curiae, etc. where it should be and per 4. legal. hom. etc. Also
it wanted the words (and aliud breve) ante le Test. And because the Defendant
would not assent to the amendment, the Court doubted what he should do, 4 H.
6. the Plaintiff may have a Procedendo to the Justices.

416. He which had two several Commons in one place, and appurtenant to one
house, another to another, he may not make a joint prescription: An Indictment
that where A. such a day made a Felony at H. by that W. him apud H. predict'
arrest' and in salva Custod' adtunc and ibidem habuit quousque defend' in
predict' A. adtunc and ibid' insult' fecit and eundem adtunc and ibidem
felonice rescussit, etc. It Is doubted if the first adtunc etc. make the time of
the arrest certain, also if the last adtunc etc. may not be referred to some
part of the said day, as well before and at the instant of the said said
Felony, as after.

Expliciunt Anni Reg. Mariae.
Anno primo Elizabethae.
Mich. 165.
417. REsolution of all the Justices upon the statute, 1 Ed. 6. c. 7.1. That
the King may begin his reign the day of the death of his Predecessor. 2. That
the Patents of the Judges, Sheriffs, Escheat', Commissioners of Oyer and Gaol
delivery, and Justices of the Peace, are determined by the death of the King.
Contra of the Coroners office who is chosen by writ. 3. Original writs not
returned at the death of the King are not helped. 4. Quare, if repris after
judgment may be put to execution by new Justices.

Hill.
418. Queen Mary inhancred the impost upon cloth without Parliament, Quaere,
and if before stat' 5. Rich. 2. (166) it was lawful to go over the Sea
without License; Magna Customa was for Wool, Woolfels, and Leather, for which
only custom was paid at the common Law, and Parva customa was that which
Aliens paid over the rate of the Denizens.

419. Anno 8. H. 7. the Lord Audly made a feoffment, after by Indenture he
recited the Feoffment to be to the intent that his Feoffees should perform his
last will, and over, Know ye that my will is, that they shall stand seized for
the payment of my debts, and after shall make an estate to me and to my wife in
tail, etc. that is no Will because it limits an Estate to be executed in his
life: also the wife was a stranger to the land and ancient use, and for that
cause without a state remade by the Feoffees, the use shall not be changed by
the declaratur supra. But it shall remain to the husband and his heirs general
as it did before, because the Feoffment was without consideration, per curiam,
vide 11 H. 4. and 31 H. 6.

420. Debt against Porter as Executor of wrong, and because he received per
debt, and made an acquitance, it lies well per Justices: so if he takes goods
into his possession, for Devener' draws the charge, be it Executor or
Administrator, (167) And a debt lies against an Executor which has possession
of the goods, It lies also against a woman which takes more then necessary
apparel. And if one has color by overseership, Letters ad Colligend. or by
will countermand? so that he expends about the Funeral, and a Feme Covert
which refuses after the death of her husband, all those ought to plead the
special matter, without they administered in other manner; But he which claims
inteerest ought to conclude absque hoc quod ut executor.

421. The Patentee himself shall have a Constat per sta^' 3 and 4 Ed. 6. cap.
4. by the first sentence of the purview, S. T. Wroths case, where there are
joint Patentees, surrender the entire Patent of an office in the Forest.

Trin.
422. Yaw brought an action of debt as Executor upon an Obligation made and
dated 12. Jan. The Defendant said, that the first day of May he caused the Deed
to be written, and delivered that as his Deed to A. to be delivered to the
testator, and A, proffer it, and the Testator refused it, so not his Deed,
Plaintiff demur', 1. It may not be intended the same Obligation whereof the
action is brought, otherwise if the Plaintiff had spoke of it as his deed
bearing date etc. 2. The refusal made it not no Deed, but that afterward he
may accept it, and for that he ought to have pleaded the special matter,
Judgem' if the action. Centra if it had been delivered as an escrow, to be
delivered over as a Deed, and he refuse.

(168.)
423. Error by Barret, the Judgment in a Scire facias upon a Recognisance was
reversed, 1. because the Execution awarded upon one nihil returned. 2. Also the
writ bare date die solis; And holden that there shall be two nihills returned
to have pardon of outlawry allowed. But one countervails Sci. feci against he
who had lost debt or damages, yet there shall be two against his Executors,
because they are no parts to the Judgment. It is a custom in the Kings Bench
if any thing is assigned for an error, which is not, to mark that with a cross.

424. Guard by tenure of an Honor or Manor and not in Capite, he shall not sue
livery till a year after his full age, he shall have cum exitibus de tempor'
plenae aetatis, and tha^ by the name of Oustr. le main per usum curiae ward run.

425. An Information of perjury for the Queen against Bronkard Sherif in the
Star Chamber for returning one who was not chosen a Knight of the Parliament,
and he was fined and imprisoned according to the statute for the false return;
But it appeared that he took not his Oath at the entry of his office per
perswason of Hide to whom the Dedim' potestat' etc. and they were both fined
and imprisoned for the contempt of the ancient law.

426. Distress in the county of Wiltshire in a place which is within the honor
of Wallingford, is driven to the castle of Wallingford, which is in the county
of Oxford, Accedas ad curiam to remove the plaint into the Bank, was directed
to the Sheriff of Oxford and the Court of the taking in Wiltshire, which well
per Court, Note.

(169.)
427. Wilts by Deed reciting falsely that in consideration of 7000 pound paid,
he infcoffed A. and B. habend. iis and hered. to their proper use and uses of A
and B. ^mperpetuum: After it was found by Office that Wilkes died seized and
held in Capite, and I. of full age found his heir. It was holden that the heir
shall not be received to aver the false consideration against the Conusance
of his ancestor, and that the Master of the Court of Wards may not remove the
Feoffees upon examination of the consideration, and retain the land quousque
etc. But in justice the Queen ought to render livery to him who is found heir,
if he proceeds as he had tendered suit of livery, otherwise she ought to grant
the ferme to the tenderers of the traverse, etc. by star. 34 and 36 Ed. 3. and
8 H. 6. and 3 H. 8. holden that the Feoffees have the use for life supra^on^^a
if the words ad opus, etc. had been omitred.

Secundo Elizabethae.
Mich.
428. Hen. 8. let to Sir Richard Cromwell the Forests of Waybridge and Sapley,
the game passes, the Lessee covenanted to keep 100 Deers continually during
the term, (170) and such a number at the end of the term to leave, the King
granted the reversion, the Grantee may not kill the Game there, for then it is
impossible for the lessee to perform the covenant.

429. A Mandam^^ issued after the death of the Lord Powes, the Jury gave their
verdict to the Escheator in paper, and after came a Supersed' per paroll, the
Supersed' is good for the time, because by stat' 34 and 36 Ed. 3. cap. 13. and
3 H. 8. cap. 2. it shall be delivered by Indenture under their seals, and so
holden in the Chancery, where the Escheator returned all the matter supra, But
if executed although not returned, the Supersedeas had been too late. But
holden that the writ shall not be amended, Postea it was resolved it lies not
in this case, nor in a diem clausum extremum, but the party was put to his
traverse.

(171.)
430. A Prohibition was sued upon the stat. 2 and 3 Ed. 6. upon suit within the
7. years in Court Christian for tithes of wheat in 60 acres of barren ground
improved, It was found that all was barren, but that of 30 acres, tithe of Wool
and Lambs had been paid, and because he had brought his suit of wheat, where
he ought to have such tithes as had been paid Per 7. years for those 30. acres,
Consultation lies not.

431. Frencham devised land to his wife for life, the remaind to C. F. and to
the heirs of his body, and if it happen he to dye without heirs of his body
then to H. and to his heir males in Fee simple, the remainder to the next heir
males of the kin, Adjudged that the si contingit alters not the tail because
the intent is apparent.

432. Replegtare, the Plaintiff supposed the taking to be at N. in a place
called the Common Field; the Defendant as termor of the demise of P. of the
place in which, etc. containing 300 acrees, avowed damage sesant, the
Plaintiff said that long before P. any thing had, the Bishop of E. was seized
of the site of the Manor of D. whereof the 300 acres are parcel per
Indenture, etc. which was confirmed, both which deeds remain on Record in the
Chancery, and demised to A. for 50. years, whose estate we have etc. and put in
our beasts, and the Defendant them took; Defendant demur' and Judgment given
against the Plaintiff without argument, 1. Because the avowry is at large,
except that long before be a confession and avoiding of the lease, Quaere. 2.
Also 300 acres may not be intended but parcel of the site of a Mannorand over
he had supposed the taking to be in the common field. 3. Because he ought to
have showed either the Deeds themselves of the demise and confirmation, or else
the exemplification, for nothing may pass from a corp' without deed. 4. He may
not plead que estate of a term and he is actor and by way of title, 5 etc. He
said not by force of which he entered and was possessed.

(172.)
433. Outlawry upon judgment in debt, the Chancellor not being certified that
the Plaintiff was satisfied, had pardoned the outlawry, ita quod stet recto
where it should be satisfac. querent. and upon two Nihils returned, it was
allowed, Quaere, of the remedy for the party: vide the exposition of the stat.
5 Ed. 3. cap. 12. that where one is outlawed for fine to the King in trespass,
he shall not have a Charter till the Chancellor be assured that the party is
satisfied. After the year the Plaintiff sued a Scire factas, and had execution
by default, and a capias and an Exigent, and if upon the Captas utlag' the
Defendant shall avoid the outlawry by plea without writ of crror, Quaere.

434. Lane tenant in chivalry of C. as of his Manor of D. in the county of N.
holden in capite levied a fine and retooke by the same for life, the remainder
to his wife for life, the remainder to the right heirs of the husband, and C.
being within age, was upon office found in the county of M. that he held the
Manor of O, etc. in Guard, and the King granted the wardship during the
Minority to P. excepting Wards and Marriages, Lane died having two sons, his
wife entered, the eldest died, the youngest within age, if the King shall have
the ward, and the 3. part of the land out of the hands of the wife; The 32
speak not but in case where the husband and wife have joint estate and to the
heirs of one of them, and speaks only of land holden of the King. Also the
youngest was not heir at the time of the death of his father. The grant to P.
void because no Office in the county where the Manor is. And quaere, if the
exception be good of incidents, etc. or if but a covenant. And if a Fine with
render be a disposition of the husband for advancement of his wife. Ruled for
the Queen.

(173.)
435. Al' plur reple' the Sheriff returned that the Defend' claimed property,
upon that a proprier' pro band' issued, Quaere if yet there shall be proceeding
in the bank, for it may be the Plaintiff had cause to have possession of the
beasts, although the Defendant had the property as a gage, or let to compass
his ground.

436. Re-entry is made upon tenant at will, by a servant and the lessor, who
notwithstanding continued possession, and his rent is accepted, he sowed and
severed, the servant of the lessor by his commandment entered and took the corn.
It is a good commandment where the Dissessor sows, etc. But in the case supra,
doubted if the acceptance of the rent shall waive the advantage of the
Disseisin, and made them tenant at sufferance.

437. Sir John Parret outlawed upon a Judgment in debt whereas in the
original the Plaintiff had addition, Sadler, and the Scire facias to have
execution was Salter, he brought a writ of Error in which he named the
Plaintiff Salter, directed to Sir Anthony Brown by name, de error' in record'
process. and in redditione judicii quam promulg' utlag'. Sir Anthony was
removed and a new chief Justice of the Common pleas made who certified all: And
holden without Warrant, also there is no such original with addition of
Salter, (174) upon which a new writ was awarded to the new Justice, and he
certified the process of execution only, and no such Record of the rest.

438. A termour brought a Quo minus, and in his count entitled the King, that
his lessor granted the reversion to N. who by his deed in rolled granted the
same to the King, and alleged not that the grant made to M. was by deed, (R.)
it seems well because he is a stranger. Also he does not convey title to
himself by this, and when he speaks of a Grant it shall be understood a lawful
Grant, and if he had not pleaded well, the Court ought to aid him for the
benefit of the King; And in Assise the tenant conveyed to him by the Grant of
A. in tail, the remainder to the King in Fee, and praid aid without speaking of
the deed, and had it. Also in wast that the Plaintiff had granted his
reversion to whom we atturned, its good without saying by deed.

439. Cestui que use of land holden in capite before the 27. died seized of
other lands holden of other Lords in soccage, the King shall have the Ward of
them by his prerogative.

440. J^osail in debt against Executor of Executor, first because the bar is
not concluded with nothing in the hands of the first Executors, whereas he had
pleaded that he in his life had fully administered. (175.) 2. The Plaintiff in
his replication had not alleged that the Executor had Assets at the time of
his death, but in his life, and issue upon two affirmatives, replied.

441. Between the Test and return of an original writ, may be two or three
terms, because no damage to the Defendant, contra of a Capias for the long
imprisonment.

442. Repleg' nor a trespass shall not abate by the death of one of the
defendants.

443. Serogs case in time of vacation of the chief Justice of the Bank; Queen
Mary granted the office of the Exigenter of London, and holden void, for it is
incident to the office of the chief Justice, which office the Queen her self
may not use, after the Queen granted a commission to order the interest, and a
bill was exhibited before them, upon which, and the Jurisdiction S^r^gs demur'
and would not answer, and they committed him to the Fleet, but the Justices of
the Bank after granted a cerpus ^um causa, because he was a necessary minister
of the Court.

Hill. (176.)
444 A Juror was challenged because he was within the distress of the
Plaintiff, viz. within the Precinct of his Leete, and holden a principal
challenge although no tenure.

445. The office of the Chiregrapher and Custos brevium, is in the gift of the
King Vide form of the parent.

446. Sir Mauri^e Barkley 1. Ma. surrendered the office of Banner bearer to a
Master of the Chancery, who recorded a Memoran^^on of that, But S^ M^urtee
delivered not up his Patent of that, It seems the Record is not sufficient to
make a surrender.

447. Queen Mary licensed Bartue to go over Sea to recover deb^^, provided
that if he resort to the fugitives, the license to cease. One was sent with a
privy Seal to command him to return who being misused recame and certified a
resort, etc. into the Chancery, which by Mirtt^us was certified into the
Exchequer, they there made Commission to seize all the lands, goods, and
tenements, etc. and after B. re^ame, he may not traverse the certificate,
because it may not be tried, but Quaere, if the Messenger shall not be sworn,
as it is in an Aff^id. for serving a Sub. pena. It was holden that the Queen
might not revoke the License, because for a certain time, and that the resort
to the Fugitives made not the license void from the beginning, but (denque)
shall be intended (de illonque) 10 H 4.5. simile.

448. Cestui que use before 27 devised that A. B. and C. his Feoffees should
fell, etc. A. died, now B. and C. may not sell: contra, if he spoke generally
of his Feoffees without naming them.

449. An action upon the stat' 1 and 2 P. and M. for leading distress into a
Forain country, because the stature gives five pound, and treble damages, the
Plaintiff shall not have judgment of costs, although they are assessed by the
Jury, Quaere, if the Judgment shall be that the Defendant shall be taken, or
in mercy.

450. The Sheriff returned a pannell, and falsely; that it was executed by his
Predecessor; the party may challenge the array for cosinage notwithstanding the
fall return.

(178.)
Ej^cti^ne Firma by Wrotesley against Adams, Com. fo.

451. A Termor is ejected and make regresse, yet the disseisin remains to the
lessor if he will.

452. The Queen under the Seal of the Co^^t of Wards granted the land of T. her
Ward, to Willoughby habend' during the Minority of T. or any other his heir
male. Decreed that the stat. 32 H. 8.4. of the erection of the Court of Wards,
gave not authority to grant Wards which may happen after, but only of words in
possession during their minority, and after till livery, or if that Ward die
till office found of the next Ward. (ou) supra had construction of (and) Quaere.

453. A Divorce causa frigid' natu^' and perpet' dissolved the marriage from
the beginning, they both married again, and had issue, and quia accepta
ecclesia, they shall be compelled to cohabite again; and great suit was to stay
the engrossing of a Fine, tamen fuit irgrosser de cent eyanc dl 2 Baren. Burys
case.

(179.)
454. Dower against diverse, some confessed the action, others demand' the view
and granted, Quaere, for although they agree in dilatories, yet in Dower which
is favored, it is elsewhere, denied.

Pas.
455. A man convict was reprieved before Judgment for the difficulty, if he
shall have Clergy, he is not Baylable, for it is intended in Bayles, that it is
indifferent whether culpable or not, as it stood here.

456. Two Ioim-tenants in Fee made partition after star. 3 H. 8. by parol out
of the county: It was doubted if good, for the statute is only to compel them
by writ to make partition, as of Co-parceners, and for the rest it is as all
the common Law.

457. The Clerkship of the Hamper was granted to Sir Ralph Saler and to one
Hales, and H. having a duplicare, Sir Ralph surrend' the Patent it self, and
retook, etc. the duplicate shall not aid H. for it is made by the Chancellor
without warrant.

458. A Feoffment of land in Borough English after 27. to the use of the
Feoffer and his heir males, secundum cursum comm' legis, yet the youngest shall
inherit one, 26 H. 8.

(180.)
459. The form of a Fine levied upon a writ of customs and services where it
is repeated, that whereas there was a contention for Murage and Castle Ward,
now the seignior concessit quod fit quietus de predict' servie' salvis omnibus
al' servic', Knights service still remains, for the discharge of the murage and
castle Ward, which it may be are usurped, is no discharged of the renure in
Chivalry.

460. Debt against two by several Precipe, and several issues joined upon no
such Record, and several Judgments given for failing at the day, now one joint
writ of error was brought, and therefore the certificate refused. And holden
that now it is sufficient time, to enter the Warrant of Attorney for the first
suit, and the Attorney shall forfeit every of them 10 pound by the statute of
Jeofails, for there was an issue joined supra, although triable by the Record.

461. The Conusee of a statute Merchant had certified into the Chancery upon
Certior. directed to the Mayor; and there sued a Capias returnable in the Bank,
and an Alias, and after died; and his Executors because it was doubted if they
may have a Seire facias or an Eoctent upon the first proceeding, upon oath that
the testator was not satisfied, they had a Cert^^r' to begin again.

462. A man bargained and sold land, Proviso, that if the Bargainer pay to him,
his heirs or Assigns, 10 pound before Nowell, that the bargain shall be void,
the Bargainee died, and the Bargainor paid to the Executors. It was doubted if
good, contrary to the express words. And it seems the word Assigns shall not
help him, for although Executor be Assignee in law, yet he is not Assignee in
the land.

(181.)
463. Moodies case, the father by act executed conveyed estate in Capite land
to himself for life, the remainder to his second son in tail, the remainder to
a stranger in Fee, and died, There shall be a wardship of the 3 part and of the
body of the heir per 32. Quaere, if but a state for life had been limited among
the children, the remaind' to a stranger.

(182.)
Error by Fish against Brocket, Com. fol.

464. The Sheriff made an array in Attaint duly, and delivered the writ and
the pannell to the Plaintiff, to take counsel of the formal return, who
delivered that to the Messenger of other writs, who at the nomination of the
Plaintiff returned diverse others, (183) the Sheriff being removed, 3 terms
after disavowed the return, but too late after the same term, and the array
shall not be quashed because duly made at the time; But the Defendant may
challenge the pols because put in at the denomination of the Plaintiff.

465. A woman having a term as Executor, the husband submitted to an Arbitrim.
upon that a moity is award to the Pretendor of title, it seems that the wife is
bound, But because the Defendant in an action of Detinue brought by the feme
for the Indenture of the Lease, pleaded non de^^et, and not the special
matter, Judgment was given against him.

466. Repleg' the taking supposed in K. the Defendant said that the place is
40. acres parcel of the Manor of K. which is his Franktenement, and avowed
for damage fesant. The Plaintiff: said the place is parcel of the Manor of K.
in K. and conveyed to himself title to that; a bsque he quod dictum maner' de
K. unde' etc. fuit liber' tene' of the Defendant, he is estopped to give
evidence that the Defendant had not any Manor of K. for the absque hoc, and
the word unde implies that he had such a Manor, but he ought to have taken by
protestation that the Defendant had no such Manor of K. for plea that it is
parcel of the Manor of K. in K. to which he himself conveyed title absque
hoc quod dict. 40 acres was the frank-tenement of the Defendant.

467 A man indicted as accessory upon giving to one counsel to commit
Burglary, and there was not the word (malitiose) in the indictment, which is in
the sta. of 4 and 5 of P. and M. which takes away Clergy, and it seems for that
reason he shall have his clergy; but by some, counsel to rob burglar^ter is
not of malice but covetousness.

468. Account was brought by an Executor of receipt by the hands of the
Testator, and the Defendant was ousted of his law because it was a receipt by
the hands of another.

(184.)
469. H. 8. made a Lease for years to Col^h^^st excepting great trees, and
after granted the reversion and trees to the Duke of Northumberland, who
demised the land and trees to B. without impeachment of wast, the Duke is
Attaint, etc. the Queen granted the sea to S. who infeosted D. in fee, and was
obliged to save harmless the parson of D. and the premises touching any
interest of B. per the Lease supra B. felled trees; D. brought a debt upon the
Obligation, but because he showed not in his replication that B. claimed the
trees by virtue of the Lease, nor made conclusion with so damnified, adjudged
against him for form. And as for the matter it was doubted if that be a breach
of the Condition; for if it had been by virtue of a Lease of trees, ^he ought
to have cut but branches, or take the fruit; and if by exception in the Lease
of Colth' the trees are but a chattel in the Ki. and what profit or property
the Duke had by words of the dem' of the trees without grant. And the words
without impeachment of wast, made not a property in him, for if they be cut, in
a Trespass brought, he shall but only recover damages for the Trespass upon
the land, and for the branches.

(185.)
470. In dower, issue was taken upon the death and life of the (...). of the
Deman' and day given, ad docend' curi' by proofs, and there were no proofs of
his life, but some presumptions given by the Plaintiff of his death in
evidence, upon which the Plaint. had judgment to recover seisin; Bracton, this
trial is not peremptory, but the Tenant shall plead over to the right of the
dower.

Trin.
471. Debt against Sir John Chichester Executor of B. Executor of A. upon an
obligation of A. the Defend' A. did owe upon a statute to B. 100 pound after
whose death goods to the value of a 100 pound came to the hands of B. as
Execut. of A. with which he paid himself, and ultra dict. bona the said B. in
vita. sua fully administered, and so nothing in the hands of B. etc. (186.) the
Plain. said that assets in Bond. ultra, etc. tempore mortis B. it was found for
the Pl. A. and he had judgm. of the goods of A. in the hands of the Def. and
damages of the proper goods of the Defendant. The Sheriff returned Devasi' upon
the Defendant, because he found assets in the hands of B. tempore mortis, and
not upon B. Upon which judgment was given, that execution shall be of the
proper goods and chartells of the Defendant, and if nulla bona be returned, it
seems the Plaintiff may have a Capias or an Elegit.

472. Stat. 1. Ma. c. 7. is that although a term be adjourned, so that a fine
may not be proclaimed accord. to the 4 H. 7. yet it shall be also available,
and holden if part be adjourned it is also aided, for it is a statute for a
general benefit, and shall be taken by equity.

Tertio Elizabethae.
Mich.
473. A Lease to A. for life to the use of B. for life. Per Curiam, if A. die,
the estate of A. is determined, Quaere before the sta. 27.

474. The Adulterer counseled the woman to kill the infant when it should be
born, the infant was born and murdered by the Midwife, in the presence and by
the commandment of the woman, the woman and the Midwife are principalls, and
the Adulterer accessory, because the counsel before the birth continued till
after, it not being countermanded, and may not have Clergy, vide the president
of the Indictment there.

475. Debt upon a counter-bond to save harmless of an obligation against A.
the Defend' pleaded non dammf. the Plaint' showed that A. recovered upon a
plaint in Land. etc. issue upon no such record, and day was given to the
Plaint. to have the record at his peril, Note they shall not write to a base
Court, Quaere if the Plaintiff had required it. At the day per Mittimus out of
the Chancery he brought the tener of the record and it sufficed.

476. Two Jointenants for life, one let his part for years rendering rent and
died, the term shall continue against the survivor, but the rent is gone.

477. Indictment of forcible entry upon stat. 8. H. 6. was found at the Quarter
Sessions and a writ of restitution granted, Quae. if the Justices which were
absent may grant a Supersed. But if it were at specall Sessions none may but
they who were present, except the Justices of the Kings bench who have supreme
authority, the King himself sitting there as is intended.

478. Two Executors one disposed his own money for the testator in pious uses
and died, possessed of goods of the testator to the value, the other Execut.
shall not have them, and for that cause issue was joined in detinue, that the
value of them was greater then the expenses.

479. Dower against 8. two confessed the action, the rest pleaded in Bar, the
Plaintiff had judgment presently for the third part of two parts in 8 divided,
and after upon the Bar found for her had judgm. of the 3 part of the 6 parts in
8 divid.

(188.)
480. Assise, the Defendant pleaded outlawry in the Plaintiff, issue upon no
such record, at the day to have the record the tenor was brought, in which
appeared variance in the day of the return of the exigent, and in the place
where the outlawry was pronounced; The Plaintiff also brought the tenor by a
Mittimus, to adnull the action, Quaere if to the purpose, because it was after
the issue, notwithstanding for both causes together it was adjudged a Failer,
and defend' disseis' absque Recogn' assisae according to the statute.

481. Sir Ralph Rowlet tenant in tail, the remainder over in tail suffered a
recovery, he himself benig sheriff, to the use of Sir Nath. Baron, and for to
avoid Error released all errors, and also after brought a writ of Error, and
was barred by the release, yet this no bar to the issue of a writ of Error, for
the right of the tail is not gone, and it seems if the issue fails he in
remainder per stat. 9 Ri. 2.3. may maintain a writ of Error, although no party
to the record, 4 H. 8.2.

482. A fine of land to be amortised to St. John's College in Oxford was refused
for defect of a writ directed to the Justices to pass such a fine.

483. In the time of Ed. 4. one Davies cut one with a dagger in Westminster. Hall
sitting the Court and threatened to hang him if he gave evidence against such a
felon, the which upon indictment he confessed, and he adjudged to perpetual
imprisonment, forfeited his lands, tenements, goods and chattels, and his right
hand cut off at the Standard in Cheapside.

484. Array made by the Predecessor of the Sheriff was challenged, and quashed
for cosinage, now the Plaintiff is at his election to have a new Venire
facias, to the Coroners, or to the new Sher. the trial between the Voucher and
the Deman. is out of the statute of Jeofails, being not between the parties to
writ.

485. At the Pluries Repleg. the Sheriff returned in the Bank catalla elong'
and quod nullum aliud breve, etc. (189.) upon that a Withernam was awarded, and
according to the said writ the Sheriff returned that the Plaintiff found
pledges to prosecute, and return; and that he took 6 beasts in Withernam, which
he had delivered to the Plaintiff, quousque, etc. and that he had attatched
the Defend. Both did now appear, and the Plaintiff declared of the taking, and
yet detaining of the Cattle, and the value of them, and they are at issue upon
the property, and the Defendant shall not gage deliverance, etc. But the
Plaintiff ferr' d' aver' pris en Withernam. Note, because it appeared by the
return (quod nullum aliud breve) that no plaint is before the Sheriff, for the
first Repleg' gave authority to him only, and not the Alias or Pluries, for the
parties have day in the Bank upon the Replevin without Pone, etc. It was
doubted if the Plaintiff had not appeared if he shall be nonsure, and if it
was upon the Replegiare. And if upon such default the Defendant suggesting
property, he shall have a special writ for to rehave the beasts taken in
Withernam, or that a return shall be awarded of the first: Donard said, of the
first, to the intent the Plaintiff may have a second deliverance, and it may
be that after the return, he Sheriff had made a Repleg.

486. The Lord Bray for 800 pound bargained and sold the custody and marriage
of his eldest son to 4 of the Privy Council per name, in behalf of the King,
to the intent to be married by them or their assigns, appointment and
nomination without disparagement; (190.) and he seized of diverse lands in
Barkshire and Buckinghamsh^re, those in Barkshire he held in Chivalry in
Capite, he covenanted to assure the land in Buckinghamshire to them four, to
the intent to find him and such wife as he should marry by their appointment
till 21 years of age, and then the land to remain to his son and such his wife,
and to the heir males of the body of his son, and a fine was levied to them in
fee to the same intents, one of the 4 died, and the Lord Bray died, after which
the King upon office in Barkshire seized the Ward, and granted the marriage to
the Earl of Salisbury, who married his daughter to the said son by the Kings
assent, and by the appointment of the survivors, after the age of 21. the son
sold the land in Barkshire to Butler by fine and recovery, and died, the wise
entered; and Butler brought an entry en l^ qu^bus, and all the ma^^^^ supra
given in evidence, upon which demur'. 1. If the father may grant the marriage
of his son. Weston, Carlyn, and Saunders held he might not, it being a
prerogative inseparable in his person, and therefore the grant is but an
authority which is ended by the death of the Lord Bray; as also by the death of
one of the Grantees, for authority may not survive as an interest may: But
Brown and Dy^r held it is an interest and the words without disparagement is
parcel of the contract and not confidence only, but Dyer agreed that the death
of the Lord Bray had determined the Grant, in respect of the interest of the
King by office since found; also by the Grant of the King under the seal of the
court of Wards, the King showed that he waived the other interest, and then the
joining in marriage of the son is not to the purpose, but it shall be the
marriage of the Earl of Salisbury only; ^s where one had the nomination, and
another the presentation to an Advowson, (191.) grant an annuity to H. till
advanced to a Benefice by him; although he present A. at the nominat. of the
other, the annuity is not gone, for it is no promotion but of the nominator. So
of a Clerk that had been in above six months upon presentment, usurper
resigns, and the patron made a grant ut supra, and after the Grantee is
presented by the usurper and patron, for it is the presentment of the usurper.
So in the principal case the wife is not married by the appointm. of the 4.
for where diverse join in an act, the law only adjudgeth them actors which have
authority to do the same, for that reason the land is only in the son, and his
Grantee shall enjoy it against the wife, and so adjudged; It was moved the wife
was not known at the time of the estate conveyed, which she shall never have.
But clear being by way of use, as by Brown the word intention countervails an
use, she shall take very well after she is known.

487. The King gave land to the husband and wife, and to the heirs of the
husband, the husband made a feoffement to the use of himself and his wife for
life, and after their decease to the use of their youngest son for life, and
after his decease to the use of himself and his heirs and died, now because the
woman claimed her ancient estate, and her entry was congeable upon 32 H. 8. she
is remitted, and the 3 part shall not be in ward.

(192.)
488. Ejectione firmae against a woman, who justified because the wife of a
copyholder, which ought to have for life, the custom was traversed, the
defendant gave evidence of a Widows estate only, it shall not maintain the
issue, but if (tantum) had not been, Quaere.

489. An attachment of privilege in a Trespass by an Atturny against Kemp,
returnable at a certain day, and not at a common day, and the Defend. was after
condemned in another Trespass of privilege, and a capias ad satisfac' issued
returnable after the said day, the Sheriff at the first day brought the party,
and returned both the writs, but said that his intent was not to return the
execution before the day, and that for policy of escape, yet at the Prayer of
the Plaintiff the Sheriff was discharged, and the Defendant committed in
execution to the Fleer. Quaere of a Capias ad satisfac' in an attatchment of
privilege, because a Capias nor process of outlawry lies in the original;
Quaere also upon a recognizance.

490. Brown upon a Capias utlag. in debt returned against him Non est inventus,
he came gratis, and would have pleaded that he was not abiding at the place
alleged the day of the purchase of the original, nor never after, etc. he
shall not have the plea, for the Plaintiff is out of the Court, and it is not
known whether he be the Defend if he came not in by ward by return of the Cepi
corpus.

491. Tenant was obliged to A. to the use of a feme sole, which be intended to
marry, and delivered the deed to the woman, saying, This will serve, she
delivered that to A. and married T. who died, in debt against, etc. adjudged a
sufficient delivery.

(193.)
492. Tenant in Capite in Chivalry to defraud execution of 300. l, recovered
against him, made a feoffement with condition to redeem per himself or his
heirs for 20. l. he died, his heir within age, he shall not be in guard, for it
is not within the clause of the 32 for advancem. of his children, etc. and it
only to defraud the execution and not the King (which is inquirable) shall not
be inward.

493. Avowant before the Venire facias with Proviso served, now he prayed december
tales, and by the Court he shall have it as well as the Plaintiff because the
first pannell at his suit.

494. Kemp in execution for damages in trespass brought an attaint, and had a
write de manucap' to ^he Justices of the Bank to let him to Mainprize to pursue
with effect, and to render his body if etc. which was doubted because it had
not been used in the Common pleas, although presidents of that in the Kings
bench, at length upon Manucap' taken as well for the King as the party, he was
dismissed. Another time the Guardian of the Fleet was commanded to have the
party in the Court quolibet die pendente placito. After upon agreement
satisfaction acknowledged, and recognizance discharged as to the party, yet
they would be advised as to the King.

495. Sir William Gascoigne acknowledged a statute, and after infeoffed the
Conusee of part of his land, and conveyed the other part to his son, and to the
wife of his son for jointure, the Conusee sued execution and was barred upon an
Audita querela brought by the son alone without his wife. Nota the Venire
facias to the Conusee gave not day to the Plaintiff, and the Defendant
answered upon the writ of Audita querela, without hearing of the writ, and
without declaration: In an Audita querela the Plaintiff shall not recover
costs or damages; and tor that interlesse in the Judgment although found by the
Jury. The Venire facias had a Supersedeas in it.

(194.)
496. The Bishop of Coventry, etc. patron of two Prebends, granted the next
avoidance alterius carum primo vacant', the Dean and Chapter confirmed, the
Bishop died, a Prebend void, the Successor presented, the Grantee brought a
Quare impedit within six months; and two years after the issue was found for
the Plaintiff, and the avoidance plenary, and the writ brought within six
months, and the value of the Church per the year, the Bishop died, yet the
Plaintiff had judgment, and is at election to have a writ to remove the Clerk
to the new Bishop, or to the Metropolitan, and holden that the Quare impedi^
shall be brought where the Cathedral church is, and not where the body of the
Prebend is.

497. Trespass in two closes, the Defendant justified in one and pleaded non
culpable in the other, the one found for the Plaintiff, the other for the
Defendant, the Defendant may have judgment for his part of the verdict though
the Plaintiff will not, and the Plaintiff may also pray judgment for the
Defendant to the end to bring Account.

Hill. (195)
498. Queen Mary reciting the grant of the custody of the Castle of Colchester
by H. 8. to the Lord Darey (misreciting the date) which premises in manib.
nostris sunt per serisfact siv sursum redd. the Lord Darcy granted the custody
to Kemp, and said not the office of the L. Darcy, and Queen Mary died, the
Queen now granted the office to Mackwill, who entered upon Kemp, and he brought
an assise, and the Jurors challenged to be within the distress of Mack. at the
time of disseisin, viz. suitors to the hundred there holden by the Defendant.
Quaere, but upon the verity they never made suit, etc. and so they were sworn,
Kemp gave in evidence a surrender of the Lord Darcy before Hare Master of the
Rolls, which was not recorded, nor the patent cancelled, nor the vacat entered
in the life of Hare, and doubted if it may be recorded after his death. Also
no time is showed of the surrender, and if it were not before the Patent of
Kemp, viz. his patent is void: And for the Defend' the misrecitall and
non-certainty by which means the Queen came to the office were given in
evidence, for the stat. 4 and 5 P. and M. excepted misrecitall in Ooffic. and
it was found for the Defendant no disseisor. It seems that the Grant of the
custody of the Castle is as good as the grant of the office of the
Constableship.

499. Recovery against Batman per Non sum inform' in an action upon the case
brought in the Kings Bench for turning a Water course from the Mill, the
Plaintiff for damages found upon a writ of inquiry, etc. had a Capias ad
Jatisfac', and an Exigent, and Thrice exact' returned, and no more counties
holden between the Exigent and the Return, upon which Exig. alloc' com' issued,
and the party outlawed, and the outlawry returned into the Kings bench, upon
which the Defendant gratis rendered himself to the Marshalsee, and made
suggestion of errors in the judgment, and had a Scire facias returnable two
terms after, and the court took 4 Mainpern' every in the entire sum, and he put
at large to pursue, and in the mean time he showed a writ of Error tam in
judic' quam in promulg. utlag. quae coram nobis, etc. and at the day of return
he assigned Errors, because no day given to the Complainant, when the writ of
inquiry of damage was awarded, Quaere if it be needful, sed quoad hoc, because
the Court may not correct their own judgment, the writ abated, but for the
awarding of process and promulg' the outlawry before the Coroners, the writ
maintained, and the outlawry reversed, for process of outlawry lies not in the
original, and then a Capias ad satissac', and a Capias upon that is an Error,
for in this action he shall have an Elegil, or a Fieri facias.

500. Sir Robert Catlin purchased land in Capite, to him and his wife, and the
heirs of the husband without license, (196.) the Queen pardoned all offenses
pro quacunque alienac' sibi facta, and although without speaking of the wife,
the pardon allowed, and he discharged in the Exchequer.

501. The Condition of an Obligat' was if the obliger pay all sums which J.S.
stands obliged in to J.D. per deed obligatory to pay, that then the Obligation
shall be void, the Obliger in a debt may not plead that J.S. stands not obliged
in any obligation, but he is estopped to deny the special recital of the
Condit', adjudged upon Demur'.

502. Lee Citizen of Land. was indebted to a Forainer upon an obligation, and
the Forainer to him upon a simple contract, the Forainer died, the citizen (as
he may by the custom) upon oath that it is a due debt, had an action against
the Executor of the Forainer, and upon 4 defaults recorded he attatched the
debt in his own hands, according to the custom of forain attatchments, and the
Execut. found Mainprise, that if he could not disprove the debt within a year
and a day, that so much should be recovered upon the obligation, and in a debt
brought by the Executor of the obligation, and this attachment pleaded, it was
demur' whether it be a good custom, and as well between Forainers as Citizens;
also because judgment was, that the Plaintiff shall have execution upon the
debt attatched, and no judgment that he should recover.

503. Hungerfords case, A man delivered money to deliver over, and after
brought an account against the Baylee, by his own hands, the Baylee pleaded
never his receiver, the matmatter supra is not a good evidence, (197.) for it
proves he was a receiver conditionally, viz. if he had not delivered over; and
before Auditors he shall not have allowance but ought to plead the special
matter.

Pas.
504. Lassels was taken in execution upon a Capias ad satisfac' out of the
Kings bench, and there issued a writ of Prerogative out of the Exchequer to
have his body, test day before the arrest, and the return before the Capias,
upon which the Sheriffs of London where he was taken brought his body into the
Exchequer, and there showed the cause of the detainer, to have the body at the
day of the return, etc. and thence the prisoner was committed to the Fleet in
execution for the said debt, and also for the debt to the Queen which he also
confess^d in court: after Hab^as c^p' came from the K. Bench, it a day, etc.
the Warden brought the body, and showed all the matter in his return, Ideo
remaunde.

505. Scire facias ejusmodi, For the first Patentee of a Parkship upon
disturbance, to revoke a latter patent. For the King to adnull the Auditorship
upon breach of the condition. For the K. to adnul the remembrancer of the
Excheq. offi. granted upon false suggest. viz. to the son of Baron Blage,
haben' after fors. surren' etc. his father, where in verity the taking of the
Baronship quamdiu placue' determined the offi' of the Remem' which the father
had for life. (198.) For the King to adnull the office of the Sergeant at arms
to be exercised cum Cancellario for not attending: For he which had a Bailwick
of inheritance, where the Patent is made of the said office, and the Patent was
revoked salvo jure cujustibet. For the first Patentee of the clerk of the Crown
upon disturbance by the second: It seems that by the said Scire facias, that
the officer of record shall not be removed without a Scire facias of record.
In a Scir. facias to adnull a Patent the cause is put: contra for a subject.

506. Upon a Scire feci returned and default, or two Nihils which countervail a
Scire feci, judgment shall be that the Patent shall cease.

507. The Plaintiff and Defendant both challenged one person, and before the
court would have him drawn out, the Plaint' would have released his challenge
and might not as it seems.

508. Upon a distress in attaint the Sheriff made a pannell but returned not
that till the essoin day of one return after this writ returnable, and for that
he was amerced 20. l. and the Jury discharged although the parties requested
the contrary.

509. Lessee covenanted to repair at his proper costs, the house decayed in the
Grunsells, the Lessee cut trees upon the same land and repaired, he Lessor
brought a writ of Wast, the Lessee justified for reparations, the Lessor may
not reply by the covenant, for as to that he is put to his action of covenant,
so if the Lessor covenant to repair and did not, the Lessee may cut trees, and
justify in wast.

(199)
510. The Sheriff attatched one by his goods, he ought to return the certainty
of the goods, and the value, and it is not sufficient to return attatched by
his goods to the value of 10. l. for the goods shall be forfeit if he make
default at the day of he return.

511. Gales case in a fine as that, the Conusee rendered to the Conusor in tail,
the remainder to himself in fee, the Conusor died without issue, the Conusee
brought a Scire facias to execure the remainder, and holden that it is no
remainder but a reversion, and also it is a fine execut' being as that; But if
it had been a fine executory, he shall have a Scire facias in reverter, but now
he is put to a Formedon.

512. A man justified in a trespass, by seizing of beasts by the custom that
the Lord shall have the best beast, etc. and said not pro heriotto, and if the
best beast be essoined, he may seize the beast of a stranger levant and
couchant upon the land, and show that the best essoined; and that tenant, etc.
and it was adjudged an unreasonable custom, also the form was evil.

(200.) 513. Before statute 27. a man infeoffed diverse, one being his own wife,
to the use of himself and his wife for life, etc. the statute of 27 is made,
the husband died, if the feme shall have the possession by the feoffement, or
the use and possession by the statute, Quaere.

514. At the Nisi prius a full Jury appeared, but yet but two Hundredors, the
two were sworn, and the Plaint' had a Tales de 2 circumstant. Hundred. they
were sworn and annexed to the 8 of the principal pannell, and had not a December
tales de circumstant. for that the principalls were approved indifferent,
saving that he failed of Hundredors.

515. The King let a measuage rendering rent for years, the Lessee after took a
Patent of the office of the custody of the said house, it seems it is a
surrender of the Lease. Trin.

516. Cheney levied a fine, and after brought a writ of Error to reverse it,
and assigned nonage and had a Scire facias against the Conusee, and upon two
Nihils returned the court proceeded, and by witnesses and inspection they
reversed the fine: Cheney sold the land to others, upon which the first conusee
entered, and the vendees brought an entry upon disseisee, and against the
judgment before, the tenant gave an exemplific. of examination. of witnesses in
the chancery, proving him to be of full age in evidence, and although to the
court it seemed not available against the judgment, yet the verdict passed with
those witnesses, which was after affirmed in Attaint. Vide postea. 202.

517. Austin brought an attaint against Executers upon verdict given in a Quo
minus brought by the Testator at termor of the K. supposing they held the land,
and per Cur. it lies well against the Exe' by the equity sta. 23 H. 8. for the
stat. was made in mitigation of the rigor of the common law, and shall be taken
by equity; and the words against the party, which has judgme' the superfluous,
for it lies against whosoever has the thing which was lost; the Executors
pleaded a concord by their Testator for the interest of the Pl. upon which the
Pl. them. the Pety Jury pleaded the general issue, and by the stat. 23. the
Grand Jury shall be charged upon this issue hanging the other matter
indiscussed. Note two of the Pety Jury challenged the array, which was tried
against them; if the other challenge the poll^ they ought to show cause
presently, for as if they had been quash' all should have had advantage, so
shall they have disadvant' now.

518. Ellen Lambert brought an appeal of Rape, and doubts were upon the count,
because it was not averted that she did not assent; for then the suit is given
to the K. by way of Indict' nor the conclusion is not contra sorm. statuti;
also it was not said felonice rapuit; and holden that the Def. may have his
Clergy now although Bigam'; but it was Quaere being in appeal, if he shall
without purgation, vide Stans. 139. also if the Queen may pardon the
imprisonment and burning in the hand.

(202.)
519. Clear brought an account as Administ the Def. plead that the dead made
Exec. who proved the testam' and administ' at D. who is in full life, judgment
if the action, and because he did not traverse the dying intestate, the
Plaintiff demur.

520. Attaint upon verdict in Norwich upon stat. 29. H. 8. the Corporation
demanded conusance of attaints by special name in their Charter, but the
statute is that all attaints hereafter to be taken, shall be taken in one of
the Banks, and in no other court, therefore it was denied.

521. Thomazin Gray brought a dower, the tenant vouched the heir in the same
county, who entered as he who had nothing by descent in see to render dower, the
tenant averred that he had assets by descent, Quaere if he ought not to say in
see, for by Weston and Brown, if he had in tail that shall not save the land
of the tenant, Quaere, the opin. of the court was that the wife should have
judgm' presently against the heir if he had it, and if not against the tenant,
and that before issue tried of the assets.

(203) 522. An indictment for celebrating private Mass against the stat. of 1.
of Eliz. and note that wherein the printed book the Parliam. began the 23 day
of Apr. in verity it did not begin till the 25 day, for the Q. propter
aegritudin. discharged the appearance for two days. Also clerk is a sufficient
addition for a Priest or Minister, and he is within the stat. had he cure or no.

523. Execut' recovered in an account, and the Def. in Execution for the
arrearages, and after the testam' was adnulled because the Testat. an Idiot,
and he in execution sued an Audit. Querela comprehending this matter, upon
which the Exec. them.

(204.) 524. Courts holden at Hartford castle, yet the Warden of the Fleet
shall have the prisoners of the Common pleas, Starchamber, Exchequer and
chancery. But it was doubted of the Duchy court, because the castle is parcel
of the Duchy, that the constable of the castle shall have them.

Quarto Elizabethae.
Mich.
525. Upon Nihil dicit in wast, a writ issued that the Sheriff in proper
person should go to the place wasted, and inquire of damages, and holden good,
and not to inquire of wast, for that is confessed, and requires not that he
should go in his own person according West. 2. c. 25. for that is only to
inquire of wast, where the Defendant makes default at the distress.

526. Debt upon an obligation against the heir, it is no plea that the
Executors have assets, per Curiam. Capell.

527. Tresp. upon 5 R. 2. in 3 acres, issue upon gift in tail for 2 acres, and
upon alotment upon partition for the third. The Jury gave open verdict of 2
acres, one for, and the other against the Pl. and they were sent back to agree
of the residue, and after they gave private verdict of all for the Plaintiff,
and in open court on the morrow only gave verdict of the the third acre,
without speaking of the alteration, yet upon great deliberation the Plaintiff
had judgment of all.

(205)
528. One arraigned of Treason stood mute, he shall have judgm' as upon
conviction.

329. Justices of Gaol delivery who had commanded respite of execution of a
prisoner, they may in vacation after adjournment of the commission, command the
Sheriff to respit over the first day, by the custom of the realm.

530. If it be entered of record at one Sessions quod non legit, and the
prisoner is for some cause reprieved, and at the next sessions he can read, he
shall then have his clergy in favor of life. And by the 34 H. 6. he shall have
his clergy allowed under the gallows, and the Gaolor shall be punished for his
contempt in suffering him to be instructed.

531. The Conusor of sta. had a Rentcharge, and before extent, he purchased
parcel of the land, the rent is gone, and shall not be in execution, but
otherwise it had been if he had purchased after extent of the rent as it
seems: and see that tenant by sta. or Elegit may make Avowry for Rentcharge;
a writ of Extent was awarded in the time of Qu. Mary returnable Quind. Mar. the
writ executed by inquisit. in time of the Q. but before the return she died,
and yet it was returned, and a Liberate granted in the Queens time which now
is. Quaere if the return of the extent were without waarant.

(206.)
532. Outlawry was reversed upon sta 6. H. 8. without a writ of Err. because
the usual words put in the writs of Proclamat' viz. fac' tribus separalib.
dieb. unde una proclam' etc. were omitted by negligence of the Exig. by which
the writ was not sense.

533. A man made a lease for years to begin at a day to come, and before the
day the reversion is granted over diverse times; after the termor entered and
made wast, and the fourth Assignee brought a writ of wast, and counted upon
assignm' and tenure of every one of them, to whom the land came after the
Lease, although no tenure before the Lease begun, yet well, and so the Register.

534. A Certiorare to remove a record capta in Curia nostra, etc. where it was
taken in time of the predecessor, the record shall not be removed by that.

(207.)
535. A Lease within the year of 31. of woods saleable by the common woodward
of the Abbey per parcel every year, and (...) miles distant from the house,
and there was not any estovers of that employed at the house; because it never
was in Lease before it was void by the star. for although it be not immediately
spent in hospitality, yet it may be it was reserved in store for that purpose.
In an Assise the Termor may not plead in bar, but justify by the Lease, so in
without wrong, and if the Tenant of the freehold be not named, he shall say no
Tenant of the frank-tenement named in the Assise.

536. One brought a Wast, and counted that an Abbot was seized, etc. of one
house, and 30 acres of land, etc. and demised to the defend' and that after by
surrend' and the act of the 31. the K. was seized, and granted to the Pl. and
his heirs the aforesaid tenement by name of the Manor of C. with appurt'; the
Exception that there are not words sufficient in the count to carry to him the
lands let, so as that he may maintain a writ of wast, for the per nomen may not
maintain the Grant of the land in Lease without averment that those in the
Less are parcel of the Manor, yet judgment given to the contrary, and Error
brought upon the same.

(208.)
537. Owins case, debt and damages recovered, the Defendant died before
execution, a Scire facias issued against the heir and all the lands which were
to the Defendant the day of the judgment, and upon that an Elegit as upon a
recogniz. And it seems not to be needful to have a Scire facias brought against
the Execut' no more then upon a recogniz' per st. W. 2. c. 18. as well goods as
lands are subject to the Elegit, Ideo Quaere if he wave to have execution
against the Executors, and have it sole against the heirs, etc.

538. In debt against Executors, issue assets in their hands the day of the
writ purchased, etc. evidence for the Plaintiff that the same day 100. l. was
paid to the Executors in the Prerogative court, and a good proof for the day
is entire; and although the Def. showed that by order of the same court he
presently paid i^ over; that is not to the purpose, but peradventure upon
special pleading it shall not be assets.

339. The form of awrit of wast against the Assignee of a term per 3 Ass. of
the reversion.

540. Array challenged by the Lo. Hastings, because he is a Lo. of the Parliam.
and no Knight returned, and a writ issued to the coroners to make a new pannell.

(209.)
541. Inquisition taken of D. of land in S. without showing in what county D.
or S. is; adjudged insufficient, for it may not be tried if it should be
traversed, for fault of conus' whence the visne should come, Office found that
he died seized, but argumentive, not, good.

542. The President of Magdelin College in Oxford deprived by the Bishop de
Wine, their Visitor shall not have an appeal to the Delegates, for that
deprivation is temporal, not spiritual, therefore out of the stat. 25 H. 8.
and he is put to Assise.

543. Quid juris clamat by Saunders against Freeman, Plow. com. A Lease for
years upon condition that if the Lessor grant the reversion, the Lessee shall
have fee, the Lessor levied a fine, the Conusee brought a Quid juris clamat;
the Termor claimed fee, it is no forfeiture, for the condition was repugnant.
Nota the judgm' there that the term shall be forfeit, the Conusee may enter,
and the fine shall be engrossed. Phelingtons case 6 R. 2.

544. Tresp. against 2. the Defend' severally claim to have common in the
place where, etc, appendant to the Manor of D. whereof they are several
tenants, which Manor was holden of the K. as of the Duchy of Lancaster in
chivalry, and which was in ward to the K. by nonage of the heir, the ward of
which the K. had granted to one of the Defen. under the seal of the Duchy,
rendering 20 l. per an. and prayed aid of the K. and had it, per words scquatur
penes Dom. R. and proceden' after awarded in the name of the K. and not Duke,
so by the name of the K. the name of Duke is drowned, for he may not be a
Sovereign and a Subject, 3 H. 6.

(210.)
545. Debt against 2 Execut', one appeared and confessed the Action, the other
made default, and judgm' given to recover of the goods of the Testator in both
their hands; and to the same effect issued a Fieri facias, the Sher. returned
Nihil, but he which made default had and devastavit ante receptionem brevis,
upon which a Scire facias issued only against him who had wasted, and upon
default, upon Scire feci returned, execution was awarded of his, own proper
goods only, without his companion, 3 H. 8. fol. (...).

Hill. 546. A devise that the Execut' shall rake the profits of his land until
the heir shall be of full age to pay, etc. one died, after the other made his
Executor and died, the Executors of the Executor last dying, shall take, for it
is an interest which survives; contra if it had been but authority.

547. Dubitatur upon stat. 13 H. 4. c. 7. If Justices of Peace are bound to
inquire of a Riot within a month at their peril of 100. l. without notice
given, for the stat. speaks not of notice, a Township shall be amerced for
escape of a Murderer in the day time, although the murder be committed in the
field.

548. Scire fac. to execute a fine, an estrepement was granted, one which had
ancient woods before the Scire fa. was prohibited by the Sheriff to cut,
Quaere what remedy, both writs issue out of the Bank.

549. In a plea of land view is not grantable, nor jointenancy, nor nontenure
pleadable after imparlance.

(211.)
550. Sir R. Chapter Patentee of a Receivorship upon condition, he broke the
conditi. there needs not to be an office found of that to repeal the Patent;
notwithstand' the Patent is not void, for being an officer of record, it
behooves to have Scire fac' of rec. to repeal it. Vide st. 11 H. 8. which made
the off of those who shall be absent when the K. is in distress with the rebels
to be void, etc. and than notwithstand' the opin. of Rast. War. 8. that star.
is not determ' by the death of H. 7. and attendance shall be only (upon that
penalty) to that K. which advances, vid. 19 H. 8. c. 1.

551. If the Jury in a Leet refuse to make presentment the Steward may assess a
fine upon every of them for contempt and concealment, and if the homage in
court Baron refuses, if they are copyholders it is a forfeiture.

552. Exigent is returnable by the roll oct. Mich. but the writ of Exigent was
returnable Mense, the Defendant was outlawed at the county day between octab.
and Mense, Adjudg an Error, for the roll is of more credit.

Pas. (212.)
553. By the better opin. though the stat. 28 H. 8.15. ordained that
commissions of Oyer and Terminor of Pyracy, shall be awarded to the Admiral
and others to be named by the Chancellor, yet the Lo. Keeper being no
Chancellor may grant; for it is not a Judicial act, but only as an Officer,
and for necessity of Justice also. But others held Contra, because penal
statute.

554. If the Defendant in attaint give new matter in evidence to enforce the
first verdict, as they may, the plaintiff shall have a respite to disprove
that, but the Plaintiff may not give new evidence, nor enforce the first by
new matter disclosed.

555. Quid juris clamat the tenant claimed Fee, in part, and ^^turned for the
other part, and yet the entire Fine engrossed sans forspris: yet 18 Ed. 3. in
Per quae servitia, where it was found that one of the tenants name non tenuit,
etc. was engrossed tantum quoad resid'.

556. If the Sheriff return Rescous, the party shall have traverse per parol
Convincatur in West. 2 cap. 40.

557. A lease for years of the Greyhound in Fleetstreet, with diverse
implements, rendering rent, the lessor entered and made a Feoffment, the Lessee
re-entred, and for rent behind the Feoffee brought a debt, and adjudged
maintainable although no privity. And this by 5 H. 7. where the Devisee brought
a debt. And it was not extinct but only suspended, til the termor by his
regress revived the Reversion, and shall not be apportionment for the
implements, for magis dignum wahit, and not the reversion of the Chattels, and
it is not like where they are evict, for here the lessee continued his term in
them.

(213.)
558. Office found that the tenant died seized of land holden in soccage in
Capite, and also of other lands holden in Soccage of a common person, his heir
of full age: It was ruled he shall not pay primer seisin of those holden of
others, nor of other lands holden in soccage of the King, if not in Capite.

559. A woman tenant for life, the remainder in tail, tenant for life with her
husband levied a Fine as that etc. and by that released and quite claimed to
him in remainder, who by the same Fine rendered to the Conusors a rent,
proclamation passed, the woman died, tenant in tail died, the issue shall avoid
the rent as it seems; so Thornton, Com. 435. for the rent is not a thing
intailed.

560. Officium Hostiarii de Scaccario cum diversis officiis ad idem speci' is
holden of the King by Grand Sergeanty as appears in records de tempore Ed. 4.
Vi^^ 8. Assi.

561. Tales of 60 was awarded in appeal of robbery, 15 H. 8.

562. In an action brought in another county then London or Middl. the writ of
proclamations as it seems needs not, and if ^e had false addition of the county
he may avoid the outlawry, by the stat. of Additions, 1 H. 5. But if an action
be brought in London or Middlesex (214) and the Exigent awarded there, it
behooves that the writ of Proclamation go to the place where the Defendant is
abiding at the time of the Exigent awarded by statute 6 H. 8. But if he be
named nuper de London, alias dict' de N. in comit' K. gent', there if the
Proclamations go into K. where in verity the Defendant is dwelling in
Middlesex he shall without writ of Error avoid the Outlawry per 6 H. 8. for the
alias dict' is not any part of his name.

Trin.
563. A man condemned per non sum informat' in action upon the statute 8 H. 6.
forf. treble damages, for this condem' is a conviction, So in wast upon nihil
dicit, non obstant, stat. Glo. cap. 5. speaks of attainter in wast. And there
if diem ad jurat', although the pannell be not returned, the Plaintiff appears
not, he shall be non-sute, for the parties are demandable before the Jury.

564. Four years after Judgment in debt, the Defendant being in the Fleet for
another cause, he was brought into the Bank by Hab^as Corp' and upon
examination it appeared he was the party against whom the Judgment was given in
the action of debt, for that he was resent into Execution for the debt; Note
without a Scire facias after the year and day.

(215.)
565. Stones case, a man committed two Felonies whereof for one Clergy lies,
but not for the other, viz. Murder and robbery, he was first arraigned of the
Robbery and found culpable and prayed his Clergy, and had it, and non legit,
Afterward at another day being repry without Judgment, he was arraigned for
the Murder and found culpable, and now prayed Clergy again for the Robbery,
and had it, and legit, etc. But not burned in the hand, nor delivered to the
Ordinary entered, which is the Judgment, and therefore after had Judgment to be
hanged for the Murder; but if the said Judgment had been entered, he had been
discharged of all other Felonies before this conviction. Vide now slat. etc.
Eliz. cap. 7.

566. Venire facia^ with proviso not grantable to the defendant, but where he
is actor, or otherwise where there is laches in the Plaintifle, but one time
laches suffices for all the suit. But if after the Venire facias with Proviso
pursued by Defendant, the Plaintiff sued another which is returned, and not
that of the Defendant, because, here the laches of the Plaintiff appear not
upon Record, the Defendant shall not have a Habeas Corp^ cum Nisi prius cum
proviso, except there be a new laches in the Plai'.

567. After the 4 H. 7. of a man plead upon a Scriesaci^s to execute a Fine,
quod pantes finis nihil habues'. he ought to say in possession or in use,
according to the same statute.

568. Tenant in tail levied a Fine, error in the Proclamat' is no cause to
reverse the entire Fine, but it shall be a Fine at the Law notwithstanding,

(216.)
569. Sir Robert Chesters case, that where the stat' 1 Mar. dissolves the
augment' Court, the office of the receiver for the lands of the said Court is
dissolved, for it is incorporate to the said Court, But by Proviso in the Act
the Fee remains.

570. Formedon in reverter, the Donor need not to show the Pedigree of the
issues of Donee, nor who was last seized, but quod post mort' of the Donee
without issue, etc, for he is a stranger to the Pedigree, Contra in Formed in
descender, Quaere, of a Formed. en remainder.

571. An Obligation with Condition to perform the award of A. arbitrator
indifferently chosen by the parties to the arbitration, for Dilapidations, etc.
and of all other suits, Quaere, etc. between the parties, so that the said
award be made and delivered in writing, etc. A. made Arbitrim' in this form,
viz. The award of A. indiffer' chosen by 1. for the behalf of the Obligor on
the one part, and by the Obligee on the other part, and that was only of
Dilapidations, with protestat' that he would not moddle with the rest; and
upon nullwn feen arbit' in issue, that supra was the special verdict; And it
was doubted if the award may be intended between the parties to the Oblig' or
that the words in the behalf etc. shall be void; But it seems good between the
parties But it seems the Arbitrator had disabled himself, because he had not
arbitrated all, for the submission was conditional, so that the same award; But
if it be a subm. absolute of 2. things, the award of one only shall be good.

(217)
572. Five things incident to an award, matter of controversy, subm', parties
to the submis. Arbitr', and rendering up the ward.

573. A Venire facias with Proviso was returned served, and put upon the file,
and two hours after a Venire facias which was after pursued by the Plaint' was
returned, and filed also, every part pursued a Hab. Corp' which are returned,
now the Plaintiff failed of his Iurat' continuand' is not a discontinuance,
for the continuance by the Defendant suffices, and no diversity is between the
entry of the one or other.

Quinto Elizabetha.
Mich.
574. A Transc. of Recognizance in the Chancery came into the Bank, and non
allocat' to have a Scire facias upon that.

575. A Covenantee released actions, suits, quarrels, debts, executions and
trespasses before covenant broken, he is not be that barred in an action of
Covenant. Querela is a case of action, Actio est jus prosequend' in judicio,
etc.

(218.)
765. A Cond' of an Oblig', that the Obligor upon request shall do all such Acts
which seem reasonable to the counsel of the Obligee, to release the Obligat',
in which the Obligee stands bonnd to the Obligor, request was made to seal a
release of all demands to the Obligee, and to one M. and averred that no other
matter between them, but spoke no of M. the request adjudged unreasonable,
although there be no matter beween the Defendant and M. Fortescue against
Strede.

577. At Nisi prius. the Jury after departure recame, and said that they all
but one who had eat Pyer and drunk Ale were agreed, who would not agree; they
were sent again at the request of the Plaint', and gave verdict for the Plaint.
and good, and day given in the Bank to assess the fine upon the said Juror, and
there it was assessed to 20 l. and the Plaintiff had Judgment.

578. Submis. by Oblig. So that the award be made and given to the parties, or
one of them before etc. in debt upon the Obligation, is was holden it might be
delivered by word, and to one only of one part.

579. Pophams case, a man bargained and sold to one, and after to another, the
first deed was enrolled, after the second and also the last day of the 6 month,
accounting the day of the date for none, and yet by the Court the first
Barganee shall have. So see, from the date which are the words of the statute
and the same sense, as from the day of the date, 28 days are a month.

(219.)
580. The opinion of all the Justices, that the stat. of 32 H. 8. cap. 33.
shall be understood of the descent upon every Disseisin, although the words are
of entries with strength.

581. A man devised that after the death of his wife, his land should be sold
by his Executors, una cum assensu A. and made his wife and a stranger
Executors, and died, the wife died, A. died, the authority is determined.

582. A man bound to deliver the Key of a house and quiet possession to the
Mayor of London to the use of the Obligee; every one being out of the house, he
insealed the door, and delivered the Key to the Mayor out of the view, a
stranger pretending title entered, It seems that it is in delivery of
possession, yet the verdict, contra, and after ass^rmed in attaint.

583. A man declared of a debt of 20 l. upon a sale of Woods, and gave evidence
but of 20 Marks, it shall be sound for the Defendant, as if there had been
variance in the things sold, Quaere, if no diversity, for the issue is, quod
nullam denar. inde debet; In Detinue of a chain of 3 ounces where it is but
two, wager of Law lies. 22 Ed. 4.

(220.) Hill.
584. A man seized of land in Fee holden in Soccage, and of land in tail holden
in Chivalry in Capite, he devised the 3 part of all his Lands and Tenements to
his wife in recompense of Dower and died, Quaere, if the wife shall have her 3
part of all out of the Fee simple land. But because she had entered into the 3
part of the Fee simp. land, before she brought a writ of Dower, she was barred
by 27. of Dower in the Court of Wards.

585. Recovery was had to the estate of Sir Nich. Bacon, and because Dedimus
potesta. to make Attorney for the tenant bare test after the return of the
original, an error; for per Curiam, the judgment had relation to the return of
the writ, which is before the warrant of Attorney made.

Pos.
586. Recogniz. to Sir Nich. Bacon, and two others, acknowledges before Sir
Nich. Bacon, being L. Keeper, adjudged that void to himself but good to the
other.

(221)
587. Knowledge of a Fine by Carell and his wife, of the land of his wife who
was but of the age of 19 years, was taken in the vacation after Hillary term by
Dedimus potestatem, the writ of Covenant bare Test in January, returnable
Crastin. purificat. and the Dedimus potesta. bare Test, 3 days after the
original, And the Queens silver was entered in Hillary term 4 days before the
death of the wife, viz. Die veneris in septimana Paseh. But yet the fine was
not engrossed till diem Mercur. Prokim. upon which the heir of the woman in the
term of Pasch. prayed that the Fine be not delivered to the party, nor
recorded, and yet was notwithstanding the undue practices of the husband,
because the Queens silver entered, and the Fine engrossed another term.

588. Tenant in tail made a Feoffment to the use of himself in Fee, and after
devised the same land to his wife in Fee, and died, the son is not remitted
although the Father die seized, for the Devise takes away the descent, Bishops
case.

589. War. Chart. where the land lies in two Counties, it is not well brought
in one. Also the Plaintiff counted that he is impleaded in Assize before
Judges in the other County, therefore evil also, and this writ lies not upon
special warranty. viz. against the warrantor, and his heirs only, except there
be Dedi and concessi, in the deed.

590. After admission and before induction a Prebend charged and adjudged void,
for he had yet but a jus ad rem, and not in re, so of a Parson. Dyer. If a man
plead per faclum suum datum. 1 Ian. and deli. 4. he ought to say del. 1. for
otherwise sum imports it was an effectual deed, 1 Ian. (222.) If a man brings
a writ of Annuity, and counts of seisin in his demean as of Fee, it shall be
taken et his election to have a rent Charge.

591. The Bishop of York made a lease for years of diverse lands in Battersey,
rendering rent at Battersey, Proviso in time of vaction the rent shall be paid
to the Chapter ut in iure suo, the rent was behind sede vacant. The Bayliffe
of the Successor reentred and distrained, and avowed damage sesant. First,
holden that the Proviso was not a Condition, but a Forspris not being annexed
to the thing given; Also if it should, yet it is an impossible Condition, for
rent may not be paid to the Chapter, because they have not the reversion. Also
in jure suo may not be, because the Queen had the right during the vacation.
Quaere also if a Chapter may receive rent because a body politic, and
imperfect. And it seems the rent shall not be paid at York, nor at the Mansion
of the Bishop at Batters^y, but upon the land, and upon demand, Quaere, if the
state shall cease, because in the time of vacation that the Condition was
broken, (if it be a Condition) so that neither predecessor nor successor may
avoid it by re-entry, because the Condition is not broken in the time of the
one or other, and upon payment of the rent which is not due to any of them. But
clear that it ought not if Frantenement. And holden that the Bayliffe may not
re-enter for his Master without express command' though it be not expressed
who should pay the rent, yet it shall be intended the tenant, And the
Desendant^ showed not the distress to be taken damage fesant after the
regresse, which is male.

592. If a man be Obliged to pay money at a day and place certain and that pay
before, and at another place, by the acceptance he is discharged,
notwithstanding if he plead payment according to the Obligation the same day
and place, the Jury is not bound to find for him, for the verity is contrary.

(223.)
593. Proctor was returned outlawed by the Coroners, upon a Certierare per
Curiam process of Outlawry lies not in detinue of Charters although Judgment
of the Outlawry is given by the Coroners, because the Sheriff returned that he
appeared the 5 county, and proiulit Supersed. and he had the custody of the
Record and of the Exigent, which is the Warrant to the Sheriff to proclaim,
whereas the Coroners make but a brief remembrance of that in his Book, Adjudged
that the return of the Ceroners is not a sufficient Record to make the party
outlawed, and it was reversed without writ of error, and in another termer, and
a writ of restitution granted of the goods of the Desendant which were of the
value of a hundred pound, and the Sheriff returned that he had sold them for
40 li and protulit. pretrum inde, and the return adjudged insufficient, for in
the writ it is not warranted V^ndic. expenere. Yet 3 Justices doubted, for the
writ is in^manus. nostras cap. ut de verovalore, etc.

A Thief took 40 shillings from the person of another in the High way, and it
is no robbery without fear of death, and so had his Clergy.

A Venirefacias reourn' quinque Pas. the parties appeared, but the Sheriff
returned not the writ, (224) therefore a Venire facias awarded returnable as at
first this continuance made upon the Roll of the Plea, and yet a the said
quinque Psa. the Defendant was essoyned unde ventre facias, and the Plaintiff
demand' appeared not, There is entered a nonsute upon the Lessors Roll,
notwithstanding the Plaintiff p^oceeded with the issue and had Judgment, for
the recording of the appearance confounded the essoyne.

594. A man levied a Fine with Proclamations and died, and 5 years incurred
before his wife brought a writ of Dower, Quaere, if she be barred, Quaere also
if it need to averr that the woman was of full age, and sound memory, etc.

595. A Bastard born at Turney, when it was under the obedi^nce of H. 8. was a
Denizen as the issue born within the Realm between aliens, per Curiam.

596. The Attorney of the Queen took Conusance of a Fine without special
Dedimus potestatem; being Justice of Assi^e, by force of a general Patent with
non obstante, and been. Note it was in derogation of the chief Justice of the
Bank, who only is preferred in that.

Trin. (225.)
597. Sir Will. Candish Treasurer of the Chamber seized of land, covenanted to
be seized of that the use of himself and his wise, and the heirs of the
husband, and died, the wife took another husband, process computa. issued
against the second husband and the wife (because returned the landtenants in
jure ^^oris) account for the arrearages due to the Queen for the said Office, a
die dat' litter' patt' usque mortem, etc. co quod est return' in de Chancery,
quod nulli sunt execut. nec administ. And agreed that they shall account,
because the landtenants of this land of the said Sir Will. was sole seized
after an Office granted. But if the wise had been Joint-purchasor during the
covertue and before Office, the land shall not be liable, and that account is
by the Prerogative against those who are not privy to the writing vide now the
statute 13. Elizabeth.

Mich. (226.)
598. Recovery against the heir by nihil dicit in debt, he brought a writ of
Error for fault of Warrant of Attorney per himself, the writ was not delivered
to the Clerk of the Treasuty till six days after the return, for that the
Plaintiff was now suffered to put in a Warrant of Attorney for the default,
which was commanded to be entered. Note after a writ of Error brought.

Sexto Elizabethae.
Mich.
599. Diverse ad journments of the term, viz. of the entire term, of two
returns, etc. (226.) and holden that the Queen may by her Prerogative make a
Sheriff, without the usual assembly and election in the Exchequer, quod
accidit hoc Anno.

600. Assizes adjourned in the Bank, were without day by the not coming of the
Justices, notwithstanding the adjournment of the term, though they are not
discontinued per reas. of the stat. 1 Ed 6. And after upon an Reatrachment
against the Defendant and Resummons or Habeas Corp' against the Recoguizors
returnable the next Assise.

601. Ejectione Firmae against two, the one appeared and pleaded the general
issue, process continued against the other, who now appeared, and pleaded
entry after the last continuance, in abatement of the writ, upon which the
Plaintiff demur'. After the issue supra was found for the Plaintiff, he shall
not have Judgment; for the Demur' confesses the entry, which abate his own
writ, for in this action the term is to be recovered. Contra, if he had been
imparled.

(227.)
602. Where adjournment of the term was to Hertford 20. Ian. because between
this day and some of the 3 Returns there are not 18 days, the original for
Fines and Recoveries were made returnable Octab. Hill. at Westmin. and
notwithstanding the final accord was made at Hertford.

603. A Scire facias to have execution of Damage, recovered in an Assise, the
Defendant said that the Plaintiff entered after verdict, and before Judgment,
and no plea, but if he had said and seized it amounts to a non-tenure.

604. Sir Gi. Capell granted an Annu' to B. for; life out of land, and si
contingat aretro fore; liceat distring. for the Annuity 6. s. 8. d. in nomine
poenae, B. died, his Executors brought a debt of the arrerages and penalty
against the Executor of Sir George: who pleaded, no such land out of which,
etc. The Plaintiff demur' the count was, vir^ute cujus Grantee was seized in
his demean of a Freetenement, whereas it was but an Annuity. Also the person is
not charged with the words supra sub uomine poenae: Besides there are no words
of Grant of that, but only si conting' etc. Quaere although the person be not
charged: For if a Rentcharge be granted for life, Proviso, non onera bit
personam, if the Grantee die, debt lies against the Executors for arrerages:
also it appears that the son of Sir George was named in the Deed as Grantor,
but because he sealed not it needs not that the Executor should make mention of
him, Quaere.

605. General pardon discharged all post Fines under 6. li. Two Originalls of
Covenant, but only one Concord was of lands in two Counties, and the Post Fine
exacted entirely, exceeded 6 pound, whereas if it be divided it is under, which
although Sackford requested, yet the Concord being entire, the Post Fine shall
be but one.

(228.)
606. Debt upon the statute 24. H. 8. of apparel, tam pro Domin a Reg' quam pro
se ipso, the Defend' pleaded outlawry in the Plaintiff, who replied no such
Record, and day given to, bring in the Record, (But because in the same Court
it is so that the Justice may in the mean time see the Record in the usual
form) before the day, the recovery was removed by wri^ of Error; and now at
the day he brought an exemplification without writ and without other Seal then
of the Kings Bench; And it seemed to some a Failer; So it should have been by
relation if the Record had been reversed, although there was such Record at the
time of the Plea; But then it seems it is not peremptory but that he may plead
over, Quaere.

607. Ashten in accomplishments of covenants of Marriage of his son with A. made
a Feoffm. to the use of A. for life, the marriage succeeded, the Father died,
Office found that the son was seized in Fee of the land supra: and of other
lands holden of the King in Chivalry as of the Duchy of Lancast', his heir
within age, the wife sued a Petition of Dower to have other lands, per ouriam,
the conveyance supra, is a so within 27. although not father of the Baron at
the time, But if the said Feoffment had not been found by Office, also not
being expressed in the Indentures to be for. Jointure, it may be averred for
the Queen, and also to be for Jointure, Quaere, and if the wife shall be
received by Commission in the Court of Wards, to aver it is not for Jointure.

608. Q^ are impedit per Sir H. Sidney, the Church void by making the incumbent
Bishop, per tours les Justices del common Bank, the Queen shall have the
presentment by her Prerogative. And there that the issue for avoidance shall be
tried by the Country; for the avoidance is open to the country, and the
resignation which is spiritual is but an evidence.

Pas. (229.)
609. The wife died before livery sued, the husband shall be tenant by the
courtesy, and he shall sue livery.

(229.)
610 Chibbornes case, Lands in London may be bargained and sold by paroll
without Indenture, or inrollment, as before the 27. by proviso in the statute.

611. An Obligation to ratisie, confirm and allow all times the estate of the
Obligee, it is no Plea he had not ratified, confirmed, etc. for the
confirmation ought to be pleaded by deed.

Trin. (230.)
612. A man having a Charter which concern' 4 acres of Soccage land, he devised
3 to his youngest son, and the 4. to his wife for life, the remaind' to a
stranger and died, the wife entered in the acre and happened upon the Charter, and
brought a Dower of 3 acres, against the youngest son, who pleaded detinue of
Charters in Bar, and that if she would doliver, he was ready to render Dower,
but in conclusion he said yet ready to render, in^^rlessant the condit' if etc.
which is a confession, and adjudged for the complainant, and none shall have
the plea but the heir of the husband, and in by descent and not by purchase,
and he ought to be landtenant and not Vouchee: Tenant by Receipt, nor yet pry
in aid, for then he may not plead all times ready si etc. Also Guardian in
Chivalry shall not have the plea, because he may not maintain detinue of
Charters, and the plea is not good for more lands then the Charters concern:
The certainty of the Charters ought to be showed if they be not in a Box. Also
he which shall have the plea ought to show that he is heir, otherwise it shall
be intended he is not.

613. Judgment of Treason for clipping money, is to be drawn and hanged only.

614. Alfords case a Servant made a Bill testifying buying wax to the use of
his Master, and that was without seal; in which he obliged himself to pay the
debt; Debt lies not against the Servant but an action upon the case, for it is
the debt of the Master and the Assumpsit of the servant.

615. Seignior in Chivalry, released and confirmed to the Tenant to hold per
esperu': the new reservation void upon estate before created, and here the
tenure of Fealty abides

616. In debt because no warrant of Attorney entered the Judgment reversed, and
this although the writ of Error brought the same Term, the record remaining in
the breasts of the Justices, and the Plaintiff had praid entry of that, Note
the first action and the writ of error brought in the Kings bench.

Septimo Elizabethae.
Mich.
617. A grant of the next avoidance between the statute of Monasteries of 31 H.
8. and the surrender of the Abbey seems void; for the saving in the act, shall
not be understood of future titles, tamen dubitatur, if a lease be made ut
supra rendering the ancient rent.

(232.)
618. The Defendant challeng. for^ the hundred he ought to show in what place
the hundred is, and shall not drive the Plaintiff to show it.

619. Sir Edw. Walgrave upon forfeiture of a 100 marks for hearing private
Mass it was estreared into the Exchequer, be died before the 6 month past,
Quaere, if the Executors shall be charged with the 100 marks, because he
himself was at election to pay or to be imprisoned per 6 months, which is now
discharged by the act of God.

620. If debt be brought against the Ordinary for the debt of the intestate,
after notice he may not administer to others if he had not sufficient to
satisfy that debt.

621. When fine and ransom is imposed, ransom is treble, the fine is the
less.

622. Leases by the Chancellor of the Duchy without the usual Proviso viz.
si^ quis plus dare vol' are void by the ordin. of the said Court, 20 H. 6. yet
where there is in such Lease those words qued Dominus Rex, with the assent of
the Counsel without words supra, (although falsely) the Lease is good, because
Leases made by the Counsel of the Duchy are excepted out of the Ordinances.
Leases under the seal of the Duchy Chamber of lands within the county Palatine
of Lancaster, newly annexed by the intendment of the statute 37 H. 8. cap. 7.
which will, that such as pass under the County Seal are void: And in the time
H. 8. it was holden, where an Office of the same Court was granted by the King
under the great Seal, it was void; Yet the words of 27 H. 8. of erection of the
said Court are in the affirmative. And Leases of Possessions within the survey
of the said Court shall be by seal of the said Court. Quaere, of the Chancery
land within the Duchy, (because of the Proviso of 1 Ed. 6. which shall be in
the survey of the Duchy Court, as other land shall be in the order of the
Augmentation) If the Counsel of the Duchy may grant the Reversion or make a
Lease above 21. years, for the Augmentation by the Letters Patents of the
erection were restrained.

623. Harrison at full age brought an Audita querela in the Chancery to avoid a
Recognizance, in nature of a stature Staple made by him within age; But because
his age shall be tried by the inspection of the Court, which now may not be, it
lies not, so also if he dye within age.

(233.)
624. A Prior made a Lease for life of the demean of a Manor, rendering rent,
the King after dissolution made a Lease for years of the Manor; And adjudged
that by name of the Manor, the rent and reversion of the demeans shall pass.

625. A Prior and covent may not make livery, per the view.

626. A dispensation per Archb. Cant. is sufficient for one who is created a
Bishop, ^^o hold a Benefice in Commendam, although the dispensation is not
enrolled according to 25 H. 8. in any Court but only in the Register
Archbishop.

627. An Ordinance of the College of Windsor was, that if the Dean be to be
absent, that he shall choose on of the Commons to be his Leivtenant, q. suum in
omnib' exerc' and gerat' offic' in person' and Colleg' memorat', such Deputy
with the Chapter made a Lease, and it seems without authority. For College is
to be intended but the site of the College, and sometimes but the circuit of
the house. 29. Ass. Rent granted percipiend. de Abbath. the site shall be
only put in the view.

628. The Steward of a Leete which was holden per prescription once in the year
when it pleased the Lord, ( Quaere, if a good prescription out of the Mense
Pasche and Mich.) assesse a Fine by one for assault only in his presence,
Quaere, clearly the indictment found there. So in the Turn of the Sheriff on
Assault and Battery is not good there without blood spilt.

(234.)
629. Bonner by Addition of Doctor and in sacris ordinibus constitut' was
certified per Bishop Wint' Recusant of the Oath of the supremacy upon the 1.
Eliza. And the certificate challenged because there is not addition of Clark
nor Bishop, But non allocat. The entry of the certificate was that it was
brought by A. Cancell' of the Bishop without speaking of his commandments, yet
challenged for that non all^cat' because the recording of that is not of
necessity: The Indictment was in Middlesex according 5 Eliz. in that county
where the Kings Bench; the Defendant pleaded not culpable. And because the 5.
of Eliza. warrants not the trial there, the Inquest was of Surrty where the
proffer of the Oath was; And per Curiam upon that issue it is a good evidence
that he which certified was not Bishop of the time of the offering of the Oath,
and the Jury may take notice of that.

630. In a Formed' in descend', a Fine with Proclamation 30 H. 8. was pleaded
in Bar, and issue upon no such Record: at the day the tenant had the Record,
but in the Proclamation 5, 6, 7, 8. made in Trinity term, the year of the King
is not put; But because in Pasch. before, and Michael. after, was put the 30 H.
8. of necessity it insued that the said 4 procl' were in the said year; for
that holden, that he had not failed of the Record.

631. The wife of Nichol. Po. without the Assent of the husband she bought
Velvets and Silks of one W. for her apparel, But the husband paid the Tailor
for making; And in debt, brought by the Executors W. against Sir Nicholas upon
issue of non det^^et, all the matter supra in evidence, the defend' demur'. But
the Jury charged, for that the Plaintiff nonsuit; D. doubted if the issue
shall be found for the Plaintiff.

633. Nudigaies case, Lessee for lift, and he in reversion made a Lease for
years by indenture, this is the confirmation of the reversion now. But if the
tenant for life die, he shall have a wast ex demis. prop. 2 contra 2.

(235.)
634. Petty treason is discharged per general pardon as to the Queen, but
murder excepted; one who had killed his Master was indicted of Murder only
without proditor' and found culpable and reprie for the difficulty.

635. The Lady Manners case, before 27. a man covenanted in the consideration
of the marriage of his daughter, that he would retein land for life, and after
his death, that his daughter and her husband, shall have it in tall, and that
he and all others, then, or after selsed shall be seized to the said use, and
over that he would make assurance to the said use, the marri. is had, after he
bargained and sold the land for 300 l. (But nothing paled) to one who had
notice of the use, and upon that levied a Fine and suffered a recovery, but
retained the land during his life, and died; The Bargain to one who had notice
changes not the use, which was well raised by the Covenant; for that the son
and his wife entered and made a Feoffment, and adjudged good.

636. Land in Capite given to the Grandfather for life, the remainder to the
father in tail, the remainder to the right heirs of the Grandfather, the father
he died, the Grandfather and son levied a Fine as that, etc. in which it was
rendered to the Grandfa' for life, the remaind' to the son, and M. his wife in
tail, the remainder to the right heirs of the Grandfather, the Grandfather
surrend' and released to the son and his wife, and to the right heirs of the
son and died the son at full age, the opinion of the Court he shall sue livery.

637. Attain upon the stat. 23 H. 8. for false verdict in Assise given against
the Plaintiff, where issue was no wrong, etc. by the Grand inquest the
Disseisin found and damages and costs assest after the Assise brought, and the
Judgment was to recover the seisin, etc. but not per visum Iurat' and the
penalty of the statute.

(236.)
638. If a stat. makes a thing an offense which was not at the common Law, and
inflict pain for that to be recovered in any of the Courts of Record, that
offense is not to have penalty, nor determines before Commission of Oyer, etc.
nor out of the 4 usual Courts at Westminister, but if to Court limited the
King shall have the Prerogative in any Court.

Hill.
639. In an action upon the case for calling the Plaintiff Murderer and
Thief, the Defendant justified Murder, because he was indicted of Murder at
Chester, holden that it is not a good justification, but the Plaintiff passed
that, and said that he was acquitted of that by the Jury, and showed the
exemplificate under the great Seal of the County Palatiue, to which the
Defendant said no such Record, Quaere, it he may against such exemplification:
And for thief the Defendant justified, because there was a Robbery done, and
the common fame was that the Plaintiff etc. and holden no Justification here
but good in false imprisonment.

640. Executors refused, the Ordinary committed the Administration, the
Administrators brought an action of debt, and the writ supposed dying
intestate; Quaere if the Defendant may traverse that and say he made a
testament, etc.

641. The Qu. shall recover damages in Quare impedit per st. west. 2. c. 5.34
H. 6 Wangf. contra, and that in a worser case then a common person, Fitzh.
Quare imped. 181. Dam. 17. accord.

Pas. 642. Benefice for the first fruits valued at 6. l. by the year, where it
was worth 8. yet it shall be void upon stat. 21 H. 8. for taking another,
Quaere if there need notice to the Patron, but void upon stat. 26 H. 8. for
refusal to pay tithes because the words are, that it shall be void to all
intents, as by death, the Ordin. need not to give notice.

643. Mackwill had land holden of the King in Chivalry, to him and his wife,
and to the heirs of the husband of the body of his wife; the remainder to the
right heirs of the husband; and he had other lands holden in soccage in capite,
and infeoffed diverse persons to the use of himself for life, the remainder to
the youngest son in tail, the remainder to his own right heirs and died, and
his eldest son for the body was in ward, per stat. 32. where two have an estate
and to the heirs of one of them, after the son came to full age, and then the
wife died, he shall not sue ousterlemain of the Chivalry land, because it was
never in the hands of the Qu. but was a bare remain. during the life of the
feme; and for the soccage he is not bound to use livery because the youngest
son is in life and had issue.

644. The husband seized of land in fee, a fine is levied of that to him and
his wife, and to the heirs of the husband, and they rendered for the life of the
husband, the remainder to a stronger for life; the remainder to the right heirs
of the husband; the husband died, and the tenant for life died; it seems the
wife shall have the land for life, for the render to his own right heirs by the
husband is no remainder, but the ancient reversion, for it is a void limitation
per him and to his own right heirs; notwithstand' judgm' was given with the
heir as a Purchaser, but it was compounded, but such a fine refused 13 E. 3.
Bromlys case.

645. In an action upon the second branch of 1 and 2 of P. and Ma^y of
impounding entire distress in several pounds, the place where the distress
was taken is not material, no more then in a Trespass of goods taken, 2 Just.
contr. but upon the first branch the place is material, because distance of
the place causes the offense.

(238.)
646. The Lo. Shandoes brought a Trespass upon the stat. West. 1. c. 26. de
Malef. in parcis, etc. but upon issue found for him the Court advised for the
entry of the judgm. because the action was not also brought in the Queens name
according to the presidents; also there is no double recital according to the
words of the stat. of finding surety: The bond that by the stat. shall be taken
of the Defend' quod non ampl' malefa. extends also to all other parks; and it
seems the Bond shall be by Recognizance to the King and not to the party.

647. The Coroners inquest indicted a man of murder, and quod fugam fecit, and
upon his arraignment he is acquitted, and another found guilty ut oportet, and
also found that he did not fly, yet he shall forfeit his goods, for upon his
arraignment in this place the flying shall not be given in charge, for they
were forfeit by the Indictment.

648. The Defendant in intrusion in the Exchequer ought to make title, for that
he pleaded que estate of a term; The Queens Atturny traversed the original
Lease, which was found against the Queen, he may not now take advantage of the
insufficiency of the plea.

(239.)
649. A Customer in the Creek according 1 Eliz. made a Deputy, the deputy
concealed the custom, the customer himself upon his oath certified the custom
according to the misinformation of the Deputy; adjudged that the customer
himself shall be charged with the treble value upon stat. 3 H. 6. c. 3. for
false concealment.

Trin.
650. In a debt against three heirs in Gavelkind, upon the obligation of their
ancestor, the one being within age, they were outlawed, the two of full age
purchased a charter; and upon a Scire facias the Plaintiff counted against
them all together, etc. the plea shall not abide for the nonage of the third,
because by the outlawry the original is determined against him, and it is not
void because an infant, but voidable by Error.

651. The Provost of Wells Parson imparsonee of the Parsonage of Winsam, he
let the tithe for 50 years rendering rent, which was confirmed by the Dean and
Chapter, but not by the Patron and Ordinary; the Provostship was by Parliament
united to the Deanery, cum primo vacare conting. the Provost died, the Dean
accepted the rent, and adjudged that the Lease is not affirmed, for the Lease
of the Provost is void by his death; as it is of a Parson and Prebend; contra
of a Bishop, Dean, Abb', etc. who are elective and may make a discontinuance.
But if the Lease supra had been for life, it should not have been void without
entry. Also the acceptance supra is not to the purpose, for the reversion is
determined, and the name of the Successor altered, as if Tenant in dower, or
other particular tenant made a Lease and died, and he in reversion or remainder
accepts, (240.) that shall not affirm it, for the reversion is altered; and
holden that the Jurors may take notice of the special act without an except'
under the great seal given in evidence of that.

652. The wife had 3 part of the land of a Termor delivered to her by the
Sheriff in Dower, the Termor gave, granted and assigned all the land comprised
in his Lease to A. and covenant that he had not done any act, but that the
assignee may enjoy it against every act, and was obliged to perform the
convenant, the obligation is not forfeit; for the words (mes que) they have
relation to the words that the Lessee had not done any act; and are not
absolute words.

653. To build a new house in his wast or several within a forest is
purpresture and nuisance to the game; and finable at the discretion of the
Justices of the Forest, for suffering to stand where it is to be rased at
their pleasure.

(241.)
654. The Lessee of a Parson brought an ejectione firmae, the Defendant pleaded
that the Parson was deprived; the Plaintiff said that the Parson had appealed
to the Bishop of Cant. in Curia prerog. suade arcub. and because the words of
the st. 24 H. 8. cap. 12. are, that an appeal shall be to the Archbishop of
the Province, where etc. without limiting any court in certain, the Plaintiff
demur' and holden per Just. that to the Archbishop Canterbury are words
sufficient and the rest but surplusage, and shall not prejudice. Also it
appears that the Arches is not the Prerogative court: but because the Def.
showed not but demur' generally, the temporal Judges may not take notice of
their jurisdiction.

655. It is not a good return for the Sheriff, quod mandant balivo itinerant'
who answered that the arrest and Rescous is made, for it is the arrest of the
Sheriff himself: And if it be upon a Capias ad satisfac' or a Capias utlag'
after Judgment, he Sheriff himself shall be charged with the escape, except it
be by the Kings enemies; and he shall have his remedy over against he which
made rescous, by his action upon the case; but if it had been a Bailie of a
Franchise the return had been good, and Non omittas shall issue.

656. A Quare impedit against the Archbishop of Cant. the Bishop of Linc. and
the Incumbent, they made default at the Grand distress; upon that the
Plaintiff made title, and had a writ to the Bishop, and the writ was awarded
to enquire of the damages, of the plenarty, and at whose presentation, and how
long time since the vacation, and of what value the Church is per annum, all
which points are returned by inquisition, and accordingly judgment given that
the Plaintiff shall recover the presentation, and had a writ to the Bishop of
Lircoln, and damages to the value of the church for half a year, and the
Defend' in misericord.

657. Cobham indicted of Pyracy stood mute, for he answered not directly, and
had judgment of pain, fort, and dure, by stat. 28 H. 8. c. 12. and after had
his Clergy after he demanded it per stat. 1. E. 6. c. 12.

Octavo Elizabethae.
Mich. (242.)
658. A Capias ad satisfac' retourn' tres Trin. is not served, the Factor of
the Plaintiff took it from the Sheriff, and one of the pronot. clerks made
tres Trin. tres Mich. and now the Factor delivered it to the Sheriff unsealed,
viz. to the Sheriff of London, who made a warrant to the Sergeant, who
arrested the Defend', and after the writ was sealed; the offenders for the
practice were committed to the Fleet, but the writ was received, after it
appeared upon examination that the Plaintiff was ignorant of the practice, and
the Defendant was committed to the Fleet in execution. The practice supra
appeared, because the writ was sur testatum, and then it is entered upon the
award of that, which was not amend'.

659. Two submitted to arbitriment by Recogn. for the right and interest in 200
acres of land called Kelstorling; and for all other actions and suits
concerning the same, Ita quod arbitrium etc. before a certain day: The
Arbitrators awarded that the Defendant shall have brakes during his life in the
wast of the Town of Kelstorn, rendering to the other 2. s. per annum, and upon
demurrer adjudged a void award for 3 causes. 1. Because the Arbitrators had
disabled themselves, their authority being upon condition, viz. Ita quod;
insomuch they had made award but of one thing; where the submission was of two;
but if the submission had been per parol the award had been good for part. 3.
Also they had not awarded the property of the land of which the submission was,
but one profit out of the land. 3. They had not named Kelstorling, and although
they that intended, yet the averrement of the parties may not declare the
intent of the Arbitrators.

(243.)
660. Perjury in suggestion to obtain a prohibition is not punishable in the
Star Chamber, vide stat. 3 H. 7. c. 1.21 H. 7. c. 25. and 5 Eliz. c. 9. for the
authority to punish perjury in the Star Chamber.

661. Three Coparceners, one aliened her part, the other brought a writ of
partition against the Alienee, and the three coparc. upon the stat. and per
Curiam it shall abate, because in this case a writ of partition lies at the
common law. But yet if they join against and Alienee, and one of them had been
nonsute, she shall be summoned and severed, and yet her part shall be allotted;
If the husband of one of the coparceners, or one of the coparceners themselves
had purchased part of the other coparceners, they shall have a special writ at
the common law against the third.

662. Submission unto award by obligation, so that it be made and yielded in
writing at or before Michael. etc. the Plaintiff said that the Arbitrators by
arbitriment in Script. fact. and made the delivery of it to the parties before
the day, etc. and assigned breach; Defendant demur'; Curia against the
Plaintiff.

1. It is not direct, but only an argument that the Arbitrators delivered the
award.

2. Also he ought to have pleaded the delivery according to the condit' viz.
that it was delivered at or before Michael. etc. and not before only.

3. Also reddit. had been more apt a word to answer to yield then deliberat'.

(244.)
663. A Bill of debt against an Atturny of the Common Bank by name of
husbandman, upon which he was condemned and brought a writ of Error, and after
per Capias ad satisfac. seized with the seal of the Bank of the K. (where it
issued out of the common Bank) he was taken, but upon suggestion of those
matters he was brought into the Bank upon Hab. c^rp. awarded in London, and
upon examine. apparent ut supra, was discharged, and the Atturny of the
Plaintiff committed.

664. Four Defendants in Assise, where the plaint was of 3 houses; and 3
Defend' took the tenancy severally of a house, and pleaded several Bars, and
to the residue no wrongs, the fourth took the entire tenancy of all without
that, etc. and pleaded also Bar at large, the Plaintiff is at his peril to
choose his tenant.

665. Ed. 6. granted to a Bishop and his Successors an Advowson, and that he
shall hold to his proper use, after the death of the Incumbent, the Bishop by
Indenture made a Lease, to begin after the death of the Incumbent, which is
confirmed and died, the Incumbent died, per touts Just. it is a void Lease
against he successor, for he had nothing to let during the life of the
Incumbent, who survived him.

666. The Factor of the Plaintiff and the Sheriff conspired to arrest one
condemned in debt, and after procured a Capias ad satisfac' and the prisoner
brought into the court upon the return of the writ he had the matter examined,
and found ut supra: notwithstand, because the Pl. was not party to the crime,
he remained in execution, and the Sheriff and Factor amerced, the Sheriff to
10. l. the Factor to 5. l.

(245.)
667. If a writ of Error be delivered to the chief Justice or to the clerk of
the Treasury, that is a perclose, to the awarding execution, but if the
Plaintiff pursue not to have the record removed before the writ of Error
returnable, the Justices after may award execution; but otherwise it is of a
Cerciorare to the Justices of Peace, to remove an indictment, which had words
de non vult fell illam terminari alibi qu. coram se.

668. Upon st. 35 H. 8. c. 6. one of the principal pannell may be joined to
the 11 of the Tales de circumst. or one upon Tales joied with 11 principal,
and yet the words of the st^are plural, viz. proceed with those added, and if
two of the principal appear, and Tales de 12 circumstantibus be granted, if
the two be drawn out, the trial may be all per Tales, per Brown. But Quaere
if upon the said stat.

669. Varney 34 H. 6. in execution in the Fleet for diverse debts, as also for
fines for the King returned in the Exchequer, caused himself to be indicted of
felony, to the intent to confess that, and to have his clergy, and so to be
out of the temporal law, and after to make purgation, and this to defraud his
creditors, and upon a Corpus cum causa all was removed into the K. Bench; the
King understanding that, per privy seal commanded the Justices to stay the
arraignment. After one of the creditors acknowledged satisfaction in Kings
hench, of a debt recovered in the Exchequer, and note the judgment was quod
esset inde sine die for esset inde quietus.

670. A Plur. Repleg. out of the Chancery returnable in the Bank, the Sheriff
of London returned that they ought to make Repl. by custom upon plaint, in the
Sher^court, and not by writ out of the Chancer. and by all the Just' the return
is insufficient, and another Plur. Repleg. award' to the Sher. now, and
process of contempt to attach the late Sheriff, vide stat. Marlb. ^. 21. and
it seems at the common law the Sheriff may not make a Repleg. without writ;
Quaere if upon Plur' Repleg' the Defend^ had day in the court to plead.

(246.)
671. After the Test of a writ of Covenant, and Dedim' potestat. and Conusance
of a fine taken of a feme sole, and before day in the Bank, to record and
ingrosse the record, the wife took husband, yet it shall be now recorded as the
fine of the feme fool, for she had done all which was in her to do, and it
shall bind the wife and her heirs, and also the husband as it seems, for the
marriage of the feme is her own action, but if she had died the writ of
Covenant had abated being the act of God, then otherwise had it been.

672. Tenant in tail made a Lease for 20 years to begin at Mich. Quaere if good
within 32.

Hill.
673. Repl g. against a Bishop and others, they were at several issues, but one
Venire facias awarded, the Bishop challeng' the array because no Knight, and it
is a good challenge for all, because the Venire facias was entire, although the
issues several.

674. Assise of land in Middlesex, the Defendant pleaded a Lease for years to
him made by one F. per name of a message in Surrey, and of all lands lately
with that demised, and averred that to be the land in plaint, and in without
wrong; the Plaintiff demur'.

1. Because no color is given to the Plaintiff by F. Quaere if it needs
because the plea is no Bar to the assise, for not being tenant of the
franktenement, he shall say assisa non.

2. Also the house and land are in several counties, therefore the per nomen
is not well pleaded; (247.) But by the Justices upon the Lease for years supra,
the land in both counties shall pass, but otherwise of an estate for life, for
there shall be several liveries. It had been a better form to have pleaded,
that F. was seized as well of the lands in view, as of the house, and demised,
etc. per nomen, etc.

675. The Ordinary after administration committed was sued in debt by plaint in
London, and being returned Nihil habet, upon suggestion the debt was attached
in the hands of one W. who was indebted to the Testator, and after 4 defaults
of the Ordinary, being returned non est inventus, and oath that the debt is
due, the Plaintiff had judgment and execution against the said W. against whom
now the Administrator brought an action of debt, who pleaded the matter supra,
the Plaintiff demur. and adjudged he shall recover, for after the Administrat.
committed, an action of debt lies not against the Ordinary, nor yet for him,
and it lies not at all till West. 2. cap. 19. which is within memory, and may
not make a custom. Tosts case.

676. If by the private statute of a College, special persons of a corporat.
may dispense with the absense of a Fellow, the greater part of the said
special persons dispensed, etc. it is not good upon the stat. 33 H. 8. c. 17.
which is that Grants, Leases, and Elections of the greater part of the body,
which is of the entire body; and not the greater part of the part of the
Corporation, etc. ut supra.

677. In a Writ of Right, the mise joined upon the Grand Assise, the Jury and
four choosers appeared ipso die Essoin. and oath given to them being sixteen
in number precise dicer' verit' etc. and because the mise is joined and prayed
by the Tenant first, he shall first give his evidence.

678. Land was given to the Grandfather, and the heirs of the body of the
Grandfather, who was dead, the son brought a Formedon in discender, he ought to
make him cousin and heir to the Grandfather: for otherwise it was intended
that the gift was made to the youngest son and besayell. Alii, it shall not be
intended without showing of the Tenant.

248.
679. A Termer granted over his estate, rent incurred, debt lies not against
the first Lessee, for the privity is dissolved and gone with the Land, Quaere
being but a personal Contract 44 Assise Chall. 49. very Tenant remained Tenant
to the Avower till the Alienee atturn Tenant to the Lord.

680. Per Catlyn, Sanders and Dyer, a state limited in Fee simple, by the
husband to the wife, may be averred to be for lointure for Bar of Dower within
27. H. 8. Brown and Whiddon Contra B. Dower 69. that the opinion of the
Justices 6. Ed. 6. was, that it may not, so of a devise which is but a
benevolence: But holdon that an estate in Fee is not within the Statute of 11.
H. 7. the case of the wife of Sir Maur. Dennis.

681. A Steward or Bailiffe may be retained without deed, and shall have a debt
for wages if he exercise the office; but he shall not have a writ of annuity
without deed.

682. Quaere if but an action of the case lies for he which had Freehold in a
Mill for diverting multam aquam, or he shall have an Assise.

249. Pas.
683. Upon a Commission in nature of a Diem clausit extremum tenure of the
Queen, as of the Barony of S. in soccage was returned. After a second
Commission found Chivalry tenure, as of the said Barony. After that a third
Commission issued; reciting quod compertum est per inquisit' capt' post mort'
A. tempore H. 5. that said Land was holden of the King in Chivalry, in Capite,
upon which Chivalry in Capite is now returned prout per dictam inquisit de
tempore H 5. liquet.

684. It was holden that the heir needs not to traverse the two last
inquisitions, for they were without warrant, but that the first office although
against the Queen, shall be allowed, till disproved by Scire sacias, which
shall issue out of the said Record of H. 5. according to the Statute of
Escheators, 29. Ed. 1. Bassets case.

685. Breretons case, A Manor holden in Capite, being in lease for years and
rents reserved, descended to the heir, he entered and took the ^ents. The
general pardon of the 5. of Eliz. came and discharged all intrusions and
entries: and holden that by consequence the mean issues and liveries to be
sued, are discharged; and the exception of those who had rend' and ought to sue
liveries out of the hands of the Queen, shall be intended in the Copulative and
not in the Disjunctive, and holden that actions of account, and of debt
excepted, neither excepting homages, reliefs, rents, and services, are to the
purpose for those mean Rents here, for at the time of the Act she was not
entitled to any action or rent by the Law for those.

686. Harrison in execution for Debt in the Counter, because the Fleet is an
easier Prison, caused himself to be sued in the Common Bank upon an obligation
of 20 l. and confessed the action, and caused one in the name of the supposed
Obligee (being brought into the Bank by Corpus cum causa) to pray that he might
be committed to the Fleet an execution which was done for both executions. Now
the matter was revealed, but the Obligee knowing nothing of the matter was
discharged, and the Prisoner was resent to the Sheriffs of London, and a fine
of 10 pound assessed upon him for the fraud, vide Stat. 1 Rich. 2. cap. 12. and
how Prisoners shall be kept strictly: and 24 H. 8. in Star Chamber, the Keepers
of London were enjoined upon pain of a 100 pound that no person should go at
liberty within nor out of Prison with a Keeper.

250.
687. Error was brought in the Common Bank upon judgment given before the
Justices of Assise for the County of Monmouth, the Defend' demm' upon the
Iurisdict' to hold plea of Error, upon judgment in Assise before the Justices
per Letters Patents of the King, by all the Justices of the said Bank it lies
not; vide Britton cap. 1. And there are diverse cases vouched of the
Jurisdiction of the Common Bank to hold plea of Error or attaints upon false
oath, in other Courts, and to write to other Courts to have the record
certified to try a thing depending before them.

688. Tenant for life of a house brought an action upon the case against one
who stopped a way in his Land, which from beyond time, memory, etc. had been a
passage between the house and a Park, and although the Park was to the Lessor,
and not to the Tenant for life, It was holden by the Court that that action
lies not, but an assise of Nuisance.

251.
689. The Custom of a Manor was, that the Lord and Surveyor, or his deputy,
might demise by Copy. The Lord granted authority to two to make customary
estates for payment of their debts, and died. They held Court in their own
names, and granted Copies in reversion according to the custom. The wise of
the Lord had one of the Copyholds assigned by the Sherriffe upon recovery of
the third part of the Manor in Dower; and holden that she shall avoid the
Grant by the two Assigns.

690 Lessee for years rendering rent, the reversion is granted, for life
remainder over in Fee, the Grantee released all his right to him in remainder,
he in remainder granted the reversion in Fee, the Tenant for life also released
to this Grantee ut supra, and holden that the releases are void because there
are not words of Surrender, yet Quaere if the second release shall not inure as
an Atturnment to make the remainder pass.

691. ^ar^well covenanted to assure all his Copyhold Lands to A. after he
Surrendered to the Steward out of the Court, according to the custom, of
diverse parcells per particular name, but concluded generally by name of all his
Copyhold Lands there: D. that no more passes, but that which was named in the
Surrender.

252.
692. Tenant for life is content and agreed by words, that he in reversion
shall have his interest, rendering 20 shillings by the year, and that without
deed or livery, it is no surrender per Curiam.

693. If a Formedon be returned tarde, and the Demandant sue an alias Summons,
there shall be 9 returns between the test and return of that, and upon the
tarcle supra return' the Tenant may not be essoigned, for he had no day in
Court. Note in the alias Summons shall be words si demand' fec^r' te secur.
except there are sureties found in the Bank.

Trin.
694. The incumbent of a Frank Chapel or Chantry donative made a Lease for 99
years, A. being Patron of the Donation appendant to a Manor of Awas seized in
^ail, confirmed it; the Stat. 1 Ed. 6. of dissolutions is made, the Patron and
Incumbent died, It seems the King may avoid the Lease as the successor might.
But because the Patron had discontinued the ancient tail, which he had at the
time of the Confirmation, and took a new one 33 H. 8. the Lessee for the King.
shall not have judgment.

253.
695. The Queen granted to Sir William Cordall the custody of the heir of one
Kniveton and omnium terrarum, to him descending or appertaining, as son and
heir of the said K. If the said K. happen to die, his son and heir being
within age. After Kniveton conveyed his land to the use of himself for life,
and after his deceased to the use of his wife in tail, the remainder to the
right heirs of him and his wife. After Kniveton and his wife made a Lease for
40 years, and sufferred a common recovery for the assurance of the Lease. The
husband having issue a son within age died, after the wife died: if the Grant
in the life of the father be good, yet the Grantee shall have any land in Guard,
for he had nothing in descent as heir of his father, but the body and the
marriage he shall have which is vested immediately after the death of the
father, and this by Stat. 32. H 8. because the disposition for preferment of
the wife, But he may not have the the third part of the Lands by the words of
the Grant, for he had the tail, and the Fee simple expectant also now by
descent from the wife, and by the Court the heir may avoid the Lease, for the
w^fe had nothing in the Frank tenet at time of the recovery. There by Kellaway,
that childrens children, per opinio' Curi' have been intended of strange blood
to the dispos' and are not within Stat. 32 of Wills.

696. Swinton granted Rent to F. by Fine habend' si^i and assignat' durante
vita Cassandrae wife of the Grantor, and that if it be behind quod been ^^ccret
F. and haered' durante vita Cassandrae distring' F. demised the rent and died,
if the Grantor shall return it as occupant, or the Devisee shall have it, Dier.
that the Devisee shall have it for the clause of Distress made, and that the
Grantee had Fee determinable, upon the death of Cassand' vide Quintons case 26
Assise, and Collingbrooks case 8. H. 4. accord.

697. A Termer without impeachment of wast, covenanted after selling, to
enclose, land in debt upon the obligation for performing of covenants, pleaded
that he had not felled, the Plaintiff said he had felled two acres, and that
he had not made defense, the Defendant that he had made defense, and de hoc,
etc. tenus a departure and feofail, and the Jury discharged.

698. A Lease is made for 41 years to W. Cicell if he live so long, and if he
die within the aforesaid term, that the wise to the said C. shall have it for
the residue of the said year, etc. per Dier and Catlyn, the term is ended upon
the death of Cicell, and then there is no residue to remain to the wife, and
therefore that limitation is void.

254
699. Where other time convicted is objected against Clergy, and the Justices
per the Stat. 34, and 35. H. 8.14. shall write to the Clerk of the Crown to
certify the first conviction, this writing shall be in their own names: But
where the Justices of one County or Circuit write to the Justices of the other,
to certify the attainder of the principal for araignment of the accessory,
there the better form is per Writ in name of the King, vide Stat. 2. and 3. Ed
6. Cap. 24. which had words as supra. M^stris Sanders was accessory to the
murder of her husband, because the principal was but a murderer, it shall
not be pery treason in the wise, 40 Assi 25. accord.

700. Conusance of a Fine was taken Hill. 20. H. 8 where the ded' in potestat'
made not mention of the County, and all is certified the same Term, and the
Kings silver entered, but the Fine was not engrossed, but remained in the office
of the Chirograph' And it was resolved that it may be now engrossed: but
because it is at the election of the party to have it either with, or without
proclamation as before 4 H. 7. and he is dead, so that now no election may be
made, it shall be a fine without proclamation, as at the Common law. Cromptons
Case.

nono Elisabethae.
Mich.
701. Debt by Bowls for rent behind, and counted that his Termer devised to the
Defendant the term and died, and that the Defendant entered and was possessed,
and for arrearages, etc. the Defend' demur' 1. because he had not alleged that
the Devisor had made executors, and that the Defendant entered with their
agreement. 2. Now he saw not virtute Cui' leg. the Defend' was possessed, and
if by other title (as the most strange shall be taken against the pleader) he
shall not be chargeable of any such rent.

255.
702. Bell recovered in a Quare impedit against the Bishop of Norwich, and upon
the alias breve Ep. he returned that before the receipt of the Writ, the
Plaintiff presented, but he refused, because criminous, viz. a haunter of
Taverns and unlawful games, But it was holden by the Justices that no evil
prohibited, but only malum per se is criminosity, also he had not excused the
not return of the first Writ per this, etc.

703. A Forreiner as well as a Freeman may demise his Lands in London per the
Custom, but not in Mortmain without license of the King, and where Licenses
shall be only to Corporations, spiritual or temporal within the City, vide
38. Assi. 18. que serra de Citizen.

704. The Condition of an Obligation was, that if the Obliger suffer the
Obligee his Termer to enjoy, etc. and that without trouble, vexation, or
interruption of himself or any other, etc. A Copy holder who had Elder right
entered, the condition is not broken by the Court, for (suffer) is a Passive
word, and imports not that he ought to do any act; Notwithstanding if he proves
disturbance the Obligation is forfeit, and all the subsequent words depend upon
the word suffer.

705. He which had a benefice over 8. pound, took another without dispensation,
the first is void per Stat. 21. H. 8. as by death or resignation. And per
Curiam needs not notice, for the Patron may here as well take notice as the
Ordinary.

706. Value of Marriage lies without tender per Welsh and Brown and 31 Assis.
Weston and Dier doubted because of 21. Ed. 4. 51. 40. Ed. 3. 1. H. 7. and the
words of the Statute of Merton, Cap. 6. but because the Plaint, Here in his
Writ and Count supposed tender, he gave advantage to the Defendant to traverse
it.

707. Per touts Justices, a demise made 4 and 5. P. and M. to the Master and
fellows of Trinity College in Cambridge for to find Grammar Schools and poor
Scholars, was good by Stat. 1. and 2. P. and M. which enabled to devise to
spiritual Corporations, for the said Statute ought to be favorably expounded.

256.
708. The Commissary of the Bishop of the Diocese granted Letters ad
colligend' without his proper name and ad vendend' ea quae peritura essent and
compotum inde, etc. he to whom the Letters were granted sold things that would
perish, he is executor of his own wrong adjudged, For the Ordinary himself had
not such authority, and also the proper name of the Commissary, to the Ordinary
ought to be express.

709. Dower by Elizabeth Michell, Tenant vouched (as Lessee for life of a Lease
of the husband with warrant) the heir of the husband in ward to the King, for
cause of Guard, and prayed aid of the King, and had it, and after a procedend'
and he had judgment, and the Demandant recovered against the Tenant, and
Tenant against the heir, sed expectet executio. If the infant ought to warrant
till he come to full age, and till the hands of the King be amoved. It may be
discontinuance per entry of the aid, prayer and procedend' for the parties were
sine die.

710. Entry of proclamat' upon Fines notwithstanding 4. H. 7. begin not till 6.

711. Trespass de muliere rapta, and abducta cum bonis viri, as it seems shall
be brought where the abduction and detention was, and not in another County,
Judgment was stayed because the Original was returnable coram nobis, being
brought in the common Bank.

257.
712. Tenant for life surrendered one moity, the Lessor granted the entire land
to a stranger, habend' the one moity for life, the other for 40 years after the
death of the Tenant for life reddena' annually 40 pound, he may distrein and
avow for the entire rent presently although that one moity be but land
reverting, for the reservation is entire, but because he avowed as in land
charged to his distress which is the Form in a rent charge, and so he shall
avow upon him as his Tenant per the Manor, and because he did not sever the
Moitie, but said generally that the seis' in Dominico suo ut de feodo les. etc.
where the moity was not in demeasne, the Avowry holden insufficient.

713. A writ of Pleg. acquiteand. for that the Plaintiff was obliged with the
Defendant, as surety by Bill obligatory, and was arrested etc. defend' cognovit
astionem judgment given that he shall acquit the Plaintiff of the same and
damages. Quaere which damages, because it appeared not that he had paid the
money to the Creditor.

714. Tenant for life, the remainder in Fee, tenant for life demised for 15
years and died, he in remainder entered, and the Termer brought a covenant
against the Executor of the Lessor upon the demise, and adjudged that it lies
not, although the Lease was by Indenture, except it had been broken in the life
of the Testator, otherwise it is of a covenant expressed, But then if the heir
ought the Termer of his Father, a covenant lies against him upon the demise for
the privity. By Brown the Assignee of a Termer, shall have an action of
covenant against the Lessor upon the Demise, and without words Assignee in the
case. Quaere and vide Stat. 32. H 8. cap. 34.

258.
715. In trespass the Defend' said the place where is within the Forest, of
which the Queen is seized in Fee, and himself is Forester and had walk there by
patent, and he prayed aid and had it, and ex asseasu of the Plaintiff. Quaere
11. H. 7. tenant at will of the Queen who was Patentee of the King shall not
have aid in trespass because a stranger, also no loss to the King in this
action.

Hill.
716. In ejection^ firma de decimis garbarum, qmodam horreo and gardino
Rectoriae, judgment entered that the Plaintiff shall recover the term to come
in Rectoria horreo and gardin' and a writ of seisen, or to inquire of damages
awarded, which was returned more then the Plaintiff counted, and judgment
upon that given, and diverse exceptions to the Judgment. 1. Because it is of a
Rectorie of which he had not complained, but that holden but surplusage. 2.
because no express Judgment for the tithes. 3. Damages are assessed for the
in the Rectorie whereof there is no complaint. 4. The writ of Seisiin was
awarded without prayer of the parties. 5. Also the writ was, quod querens
recuper asset possession'termin.' which is false. 6. Also because more damages
were found then the Plaintiff did count for. And if this judgment be
erroneous and emendable the same Term, or good as it is, Quaere

717. He in reversion received in default Tenant for life pleaded to the issue
which was found for him at the Assizes, and before day in the Bank, Tenant for
life died, if the writ shall abate, Quaere County Sussex case.

Pas.
718. Sir John Savage granted a Stewardship for life, after he granted to
another the reversion post mortem primi cum feod' pro excere. with clause of
distress: Adjudged that the second grant is void, because there is no
reversion of that; so in case of the King, yet the King may grant an office
exercend. after the death of the first, which a subject may not: also the Fee
above is void, for it was an executory recompense for the execution of an
office.

719. Two advowsons are in Illesfields, viz. Saint Martins appendent to the
Manor of E. and to All Saints, which was in gross, both being void, All
Saints by assent of the Patrons and Ordinaries were united to Saint Martins,
and it was ordained that the Patron in gross should have the first
presentment, and sic alternis vicibus, which had been done according many
times. Now the Patron in gross granted his patronage to the use of himself for
life, the remainder to his wife for life, the remainder to his right heirs,
and died, the other Patron presented twice together and died, which was an
usurpation (for it is not as amongst Coparceners, who are privies of that
blood) the wife died, the church void, and the right heir presented, who was
disturbed, and brought a Quare impedit of the Church in Illes. without naming
of Saint Martins, and well, for after the union there was but one Church there.
Quaere if the right heir be to have as purchase;er o^ by descent, for if as
purchaser it seems he is without remedy, and it seems notwithstanding the
union, that the advowson of Sain Martins appendent for every second turn,
according to 43. Ed. 3. and there are not moities as between Joint tenants or
tenants in common, who make composition to present per turn, for there one time
is a moitie.

260.
720. In a Quare impedit brought by Basset against the Ordinary, Patron, and
Incumbent, the Ordinary claimed but as Ordinary, and issue between the others,
tried for the Plaintiff, and the common points ex officio, and Judgment given
by the Justices of Nisi Prius, according to the Stat. West. 2. and a writ to
the Bishop was awarded, and the record being remaind' to the Bank another writ
was awarded to the Bishop retournable in the Bank, upon which the Bishop
returned, that hanging the Quare impedit per an office title was found for the
King by minority of the Plaintiff being his ward, and the King presented, of
which the Church is full, which excused the not performing both writs, and he
shall not be estopped of this Return, for his plea supra is not any plea of
plenarty, as it is of the Patron and Incumbent, and if this Return be false the
party may have a Quare non admisit, and also he may have a Scire facias against
the first and new incumbent according to 21 H. 7. and there came the title of
the King in debate.

721. Debt upon a Lease for years of several parcels, the parties to the issue
upon non demisit, it was found de demis. but one such a parcel, and of that
non demisit, and assessed damages, the Plaintiff must not have judgment.

722. The Queen granted the ward and marriage of the body. saving the land, the
Grantee tondred marriage which is refused, for which the Grantee prayed
detainor of the land at the full age of the heir. But holden that the Statute
32. H. 8. for the erection of the Court of Wards gives not authority to retain,
but only for livery to be sued. Also that the Statute of Marbridge gave not
authority to retain for the value, where the body and land are severed.

261.
723. Partition against two, the one confessed partition, the other pleaded to
the issue, and in the record of Nisi Prius, the name of the Defendant is
omitted, per negligence of the Clerk, and written and praedict. Similiter, and
no more: also the Jury were between the Plaintiff and both the Defend. whereas
one of them is no party to the issue, but because apparent it is amendable, and
for that the Jury taken three Justices agreed but Brown held it is not
amendable, because the Justices of Nisi Prius are only authorized to a certain
purpose, and are not Justices before whom the Record resides.

724. Cuthbert Musgrave in an appeal of murder upon nothing culpable pleaded,
is acquitted of murder, but found culpable of Manslaughter; it was doubted; if
he shall be discharged of the appeal, but after he prayed Clergy, the Queen
may not pardon the imprisonment, for it is the execution of the party, and the
Defendant shall not make purgation: But Quaere of the burning in the hand.
Voluntary and ex malit. praecogit. intersecit, is not sufficient in an
Indictment of murder, without murdravit. per Catlyn.

725. A man seized of land in a town, and in two Hamblets of the town, demised
all his lands in the town and in one of the Hamlets, nothing of the Land in the
other Hamblet passes because of the intent.

262.
726. A man made a Lease for 30 years. and four years after made another Lease
by those words, Noverint, etc. no. dict. 30 annis finitis dedisse and
concecisse B. habend. a die confection. praesent. termin. praedict. finito, us.
que finem termini 31 annorum, and the words a die confection. were drawn
through with a Line per the Lessee, but remained legible, and the Justices of
the common Bank subscribed their opinion in Hibern. that the lease begins at
the end of the thirty years, and it shall not be intended de consum. in the
first term; because most strong against the Lessor, but clear the defacing
being the Act of the Lessee himself, although it be not in a place material,
makes the lease void.

727. The Condition of an Obligation was, that if I. S. prove not a suggest on
of a Bill depending in the Court of Requests before utas Hillarii, then if he
pay 20 pounds, etc. it is a good plea in Bar, that I.S. died before the utas.

728. Debt due to a Felo de se per contract. is not forfeit to the King; for
then the party shall be rebut of his law.

Trin. 263.
729. False Judgment in a Judgment given in ancient Demean upon a droit
close, there prosecute in nature of an Aycll. one Plaintiff was nonsute and
severed: the Suitors would not make Record to the Sheriff, but would be
advised, Distress issued against 7 named in the Return who refused, upon that
they only brought the Record, and Errors assigned. 1. Because in the style of
the Court no mention is made before what judges. 2. There is no officer named
in the award or return of the Summons. 3. No day prefixed to the tenant in the
Summons, but ad proxim. Curiam. 4. The tenant made Attorney within age, 5. no
warrant of Attorney entered for the plaintiff. 6. No names of the Summoners
returned. 7. Tenant within age, and in by descent ousted of age. 8. Refusal to
receive Demurrer: and upon non sum inform' the Court proceeded to the
examination of Errors, and reversed the Judgment, and award that he should be
restored, but no costs or damages, and the Suitors were amerced to 7 pound: and
there where the Custom is that an infant may make a Feoffment at 16. years of
age, yet he may not answer to actions, but the plea shall abide.

730. The husband and wife, and A. purchased to them, and to the heirs of the
Husband and A. A. he released to the husband without words of enlargement, the
husband and wife made a Lease of all rendering Rent, the husband died, the
heir of the husband award to have one moity of the Rent, for the release
inures to the husband only, and not to the wife, and there needs no words of
enlargement, because he had Fee, contra if the Release had been to the wife who
had but for life.

731. Dower by the Lady Arundell against F. who made default after appearance,
and a Termer per Stat. of Glocest. cap. 11. came to save his Term, and was
received to plead, who said that the husband of the wife was attaint of felony
by the Parliament, and a Commission issued out of the Court of augmentation,
which assigned the third part of the lands of the husband in Dower, upon which
the Rent reserved upon the term by her husband was assigned to her, the which
the woman accepted; Also after the King granted the Dower under the Great Seal,
and averred Collusion between the Demandant and Tenant, to make him lose his
Term. And holden that if it had been good matter, it should be allowed to the
Termer to save his Term, quamvis pu. al title del dower. But the assignment of
Dower is void in the Augmentation Court, for it should be in the Chancery. Also
the Authority is not pursued in Assignment of Rent, and then the Confirmation
of a good Assignment is void, and the plaintiff had Judgment.

264.
732. A woman Coppyholder for life took a husband, the Reversion of the said
Coppyhold was granted to three, viz. to A.B. and C. cum acciderit post mortem
Surrend. or forisfact. for their lives successively according to the Custom,
The husband surrendered to the use of A. for life, to whom the Lord granted a
Copy for the life of A. And B. died, and the opinion was, that C. shall not be
admitted, for after the death of the husband the wife may enter, or have her
plaint in nature of a Cui in vita, and during the life of her husband the lord
shall not have it in nature of an occupant, after the husband and the wife
would have released to C. and the Lord would not hold Court, till he was
enjoined in Chancery to hold Court or in avowed possession.

733. A new Assignment of Trespass was in one acra terr. sive prat. in camp.
vocat. N. the Defendant pleaded non culp. but for the incertainty of Land or
pasture, and also because no abbuttells the ^ury was discharged.

734. The husband, and wife, Termers of the three Conies in Fleetstreet, the
husband let part of the Term per those words, the house called the three
Conies, with all the chambers, cellars and shops, except to the husband the
shops ad proprium opus and usum, the husband died, the wife entered into the
shops, and being brought an ejectione firma and by the Court, the exception is
but temporary to the husband himself, where there are no words of Executors or
Assigns, and the exception void touching the shop, because it is repugnant to
the Lease of the shops 3 H. 6.53. for the first part.

735. A man demised Land to be sold by his Executors, and that the money shall
be disposed in Legacies specially expressed, and died, they sold, the Legatory
sues in Court Christian, prohibition lies not, for the money is assets, and no
remedy but in spiritual Court for a Legacy. 5. P. and M.

Decimo Elisabethae.
265. Mich.
736. The Jury demanded did not appear full, and the Defendant came not,
opinion' the inquest shall be awarded by default, for the parties are
demandable before the Jury, and if the Plaintiff had made default, he should
have been nonsute.

737. In account as receiver by the hands of the Plaintiff the Defendant waged
his law, and at the day, etc. he would have confessed the action for part, and
made his law for the residue. Curia praeter Harper, that the confession shall
not be received.

738. The Justices of Peace ought to certify into the Chancery, their
agreement made upon servants wages, six months after Pasche, according to the
fifth of Elisabeth, upon penalty of 10 pound, and that by the words and the
intention of the Statute.

739. In Debt against the Lord Cobham they were at issue, and a venire facias
returned, served, and process continued against the Jury till the Distress, and
the Plaintiff perceiving the array quashable, because no Knight returned, he
prayed a venire facias de novo, and might not have it, for no better writ could
issue than at the first.

266.
740. A. B. Tenants in Common of a Manor, A. ^urchased a Franktenem' so mixed
with the Demeans that it was unknown. B. brought writ of Partition of the
Manor notwithstanding, and Judgment given that they shall make Partition, and
a writ to the Sheriff according, tenus per Justic' that A. ought to show the
bounds of the Franktenement and B. needs not to show the bounds of the Manor
to the Jury: but if evidence be given of no part, if the Jury make Partition of
so much quant. praesumitur and dignnoscitur, it suffices, for they are
compellable to serve the Law and the Court; at the day appointed to give
verdict, one Iuror made default, the Sheriff returned a Fine of 40 shill. upon
him, and the difficulty of the maatter, and quod nihil ulter. fact. propter
brevitatem temporis Quaere of the Retorn and of the Fine. Temple against Cook
and Wotton.

741. The husband being Cesty que use before 27 caused the Feoffees to execute
estate to him and his wife, and to the heirs of the husband, and declared not
in the deed to be for jointure, Quaere if it shall be intended for Ioynture
except it be now averred.

742. Entry in the quibus against 3, one being Sheriff returned that he might
not summon himself. Quaere for he appeared and after pleaded that in arrest of
Judgment 18. H. 8. Fitzh. the Sheriff may summon himself.

743. An Inholder commanded one of his guests to put his goods in such a place
under lock, otherwise he would not warrant them; the guest suffered them in the
outward Court, where they were taken away, per opin' Curiae, the Inholder shall
not be charged. And it behooves to show in writ and Count that the Defendant is
a common Hostler.

744. I.S. built upon the waste of a Manor whereof the Queen was seized, the
Queen granted the Manor to the Earl of Leicester, after I.S. died seized,
Mel'opin' that it no descent against the Patentee, because at the first it was
a disseisin against the Queen.

267.
745. A Lord seized not, nor claimed his villain nor his issues within a
hundred years, so that a Nativo habendo lies not against the issue of the
villain, because of the Statute 22. of Limitation. It seems in favor of
liberty he may not seize; notwithstanding by Sanders and Dyer, Quaere well
between Butler and Crouch, vide 11. Eliz. 28.3. where in Assise the Justices
admitted foreign trial ex assensu partium in favor. libertat. And holden,
Error. Also they received a special verdict upon issue joined upon traverse:
also because the issue is not upon Frank, and etc. but upon seisen of the
villain. Also Butler prescribed in seisen, where he and his Ancestors failed
after 1. H. 7. til now, although seized of the Manor to which, etc. for that,
etc. Error.

746. The Bishop of Saint David's by license of appropriation made a Church
Collegiate, and Prebends in that, and appropriated to every Prebend a Church,
and that was after confirmed by the King, that was taken a College within the
Statute 1 Ed. 6. Collegium est quando plures simul colliguntur. etc.

747. In trespass the Defendant said that he had piscary in one County from
time beyond, etc. and prescribed to draw into the Soil of the Plaintiff in
another County, and both were travers. The issue is triable by both Counties.

268.
748. Tenant in Capite made a Feoffement per collusion to defraud the
Executions of his Creditors, with condition that when the sums shall be
discharged, that hi Feoffees should convay to such uses, as he or his heirs
should appoint, which is found upon Mandamus, and quod nulla alia causa aut
intentio suit. The Queen shall not have the ward of the heir, for it was not
to defraud her of the ward, decree vid, Marleb. cap. 6. and 34. H. 8. cap. 5

749. A writ of false Judgment shall be re. fa. lo. quae suit in eadem cur.
and not which is, for the plea is determined upon the Judgment.

269.
750. A man held a Messualty of the King in Chivalry in Capite, and the Tenant
held certain Lands of the mesne in Chivalry, and also held other Lands of the
Durchy of Cornewal in Chivalry. The King granted the Duchy to his eldest son
simul cum wardis and marriag. non obst. Praerog' Regis; the Mesne died and his
heir in ward to the King, the Tenant also died, and his heir within age, the
King shall have the prerog. of the ward of the body and marriage, because of
the Guard, for general words in the Kings Patents shall not have a special
intendment as that supra in special case. And diverse notable cases put, where
a general Patent shall not extend to special cases. And by Saunders chief
Baron, Issues, and amercements are not allowed any in the Exchequer, upon their
Charters of general grant, except they be specified in what Court. And upon
grant of Fines, Issues, and amercements sont Tenants, A Fine upon a Constable,
Sheriff etc. shall not pass, except there be clause, licet ministri sive
officiari^ nostri fuerint.

751. Cases vouched where words ex gratia speciali, certa scientia, and mero
motu suis, make general Patents of the King, to have special intendments,
vide the difference between false suggestion, false informat' false
consideration, and false cause.

Hill.
752. The Prior of Saint John's of Jerusalem, and his confrers made a Lease by
Indenture to three at will, one died, the Lessors 4. H. 8. per indenture
reciting the death of one, and that the first Indenture is surrendered and
cancelled, they made an estate to the survivers, habendum iis and haeredibus,
but no Letter of Attorney to make livery, and adjudged void, for by the
surrender of the Indenture the estate at will is determined, so that now the
second grant cannot inure by way of confirmation. D. Quaere if the death of the
one determine not the will, for an estate at will may not survive.

270.
753. A writ of Covenant to levy a Fine is retornable in crastino Purificat'
one of the middle returns of the Term, and the concord is made and recorded,
the same Crastino ut oportet, and the third day after, viz. before the fourth
day after, the first Proclamat' was made, and well, for die Crastino is the
retorn day, and the fourth day after, is but a day of grace, but if it had been
retorn Octab. Hill. Quaere, because the Justices sit nor, being the first
Return of the Term, till the fourth day, whereas the Statute 4. H. 7. is, that
it shall be in full Court.

754. Queen Mary granted one a License to sell wines by retail with non
obstant' the Statute 7. Ed. 6. and limited not how long, but there is a
commandment in the Patent to the Officers to permit him for life, and holden
by Dyer and Sanders, it shall be durante been placito only, an that the
pleasure is determined by the death of the Queen: also the command by her death
cease.

755. The husband and wife, seized of a Manor, and to the heir of the
husband, the husband granted the Stewardship to Walton for life, the remainder
by the same deed to the son of the said Walton for life, and a Rent Charge
jointly to them for exercising the same out of the same Manor; a Coppy-hold
being by escheat in the hands of the husband and wife at the same time, the
rent is behind, the Grantor died, Walton died, the wife granted the Copyhold
upon which the son distrained for arrearages in the life of his father, and the
Plaintiff in Bar to his avowry averred not the life of the wife, per Curiam it
is maintainable, for the Copy holder came under the Charge. But contrary if a
Copyhold had been surrend' to I.S. who after had been admitted, and if he avow,
it seems he ought to show that he continues to exercise the office, for if it
cease, debt only lies for the arrearages, etc.

756. In a writ of Right, the four Knights retor' pannell, venire facias in
nature of a habeas Corpus shall issue to the Sherriffe which names their names,
and if they appear upon that they shall be taken.

757. In debt upon an Obligation with condition to perform Coven' brought in
Land, the issue was if the Defendant was true possessour of certain Lands in
Bedford at the time of the Indent. the trial shall be in Bedford.

271.
758. Debt upon escape lies not against the heir of the Jailer, for the heir
shall not be charged with a debt, due either by the Common Law, or Statute Law,
except he be named, neither although it be recovered in the life of the father,
but by Elegit, where he shall be charged as Land Tenant per Scire faciae, vide
21. Assise, Debt upon escape against the Execut. of a Guardian lies nor.

759. Arrearages of a rent Charge be due to a feme sole, she took a husband who
made an acquittance of one feast after the coverture, and by that, all the
arreages is gone, per Dyer and Harper for per. 11 H. 4. 24. it is a positive
Law, that an acquittance for the last day discharges the arrearages, but
Weston and Welsh contrary, especially the arrearages being when the woman was
sole, 1. H. 5. 7. per Norton.

760. The husband and wise outlawed, the wife came in ward by Process, and had
a Charter of pardon, she shall be discharged of the Imprisonment, but the
Charter was not allowed, because she may not have a Scire facias against the
Plaintiff without her husband.

761. A Guardian during the minority of the issue in tail (which is but of the
age of one year) let for 10 years, the Land never being in Lease before, that
is not such a Lease for 20 years, which inables Tenant in tail to make a Lease
with 32. to bind the issue; so of a Tenant in Dower, or per courtesy, or the
husband in Right of his wife, for they have no inheritance, but Quaere the
Donor.

272.
762. Debt against the heir who pleaded nothing by descent, the Plaintiff
replied that he had assets in Lond' and now at the Nisi Prius gave in evidence
assets at Cornal. Quaere if it shall maintain the issue, and if Lond' Jury may
take notice, but of goods the evidence shall be good, because they are
transitory.

763. A Termer granted his Term habend' after the death of the Granter it is a
void habend' and the Term passes presently by the premises adjudged.

Pas.
764. The servant of A. was arrested in London, upon a Trespass, and two which
knew his Master bailed him, after A. promised them for their friendship to save
them harmless of costs and damages, etc. If afterward they are charged, yet
an action upon the case lies not, for it is no consider' for the bailing of
the servant was of their own heads, as was executed before the assumpsit, but
if the Master had requested it before, and promised after ut supra,
peradventure otherwise it should be, as in consid, that one has married my
daughter at my request, I will give, etc. it is a good consid' because the
marriage insues and follows my request, and Land may be given in Frank marriage
after espousalls.

765. The Executors of a Termer rated the Copp^^ or furnace fixed by the Termer
himself, it was holden waste, and if waste be assigned in domibus and hoscis,
the Plaintiff may not so abridge the waste to relinquish all in the houses or
contra. And if many issues are joined, and one be a Jeofall, yet the other
issues shall be tried by the same Jury, but the new issue shall be tried upon a
venire facias, Dominus Burgavenny.

766. A Lessor Covenanted and granted to a Termer that he should hold the Land
to him, and his present wife, and the wife which after he shall marry, for term
of life of the Lessor, and no livery made, three lustices, that it is not a
Surrender of the Term, nor a confirmation, but a mere Covenant only; but
Weston held contrary, because of the word grant. Sackford.

273.
767. The Deanery of Wells was dissolved by Parliament, and a new Deanery
erected, to which the possessions of the Prebend of Cory were annexed, (note
the Prebend it self was not annexed) therefore Quaere if the Dean after was
justly deprived, for the Prebend of C. was not extinct: And by the said Act it
was ordained, that the King may make a new Dean, and that the new Dean may make
Demises, as the ancient Dean did. The King made Goodman Dean who took the
Prebend, of one of the Prebends of the same Church, upon which the Bishop per
Commission of Visitation did deprive him, for taking of two dignities in the
same Church, against the Canon of the Civil Law, which was also affirmed upon
appeal to the Arch-Bish. Cant. and a new Dean made, upon which he appealed to
Queen Mary, and by Commissioners Delegates the said deprivation was disallowed,
upon which he made Demises which were confirmed by the Bishop and Chapter, and
after upon another appeal to the Commissioners Delegates he was removed, and
the other Dean restored, who would have avoid the leases, upon which issue was
joined if Goodman was Dean at the time of the making, and found that he was,
and so the Ieases good, also it was agreed, that a Deanery is a spiritual
promotion, and not temporal. It was doubted if the taking of a dignity in the
same Church, made the Deanery void, or but voidable by sentence. Also it was
said by the interest of the Bishop taken away by the Act, the Bishop is not
bound for the spiritual ^urisdiction to Visit, but temporal personage. Also
that the Demise of the Dean need not the Confirmation of the King, nor of the
Bishop, but only of the Chapter, for Deanery is not donative, as is of a person
and Prebend.

274.
768. Cestuy que use in tail before 27. suffered a Common Recovery with single
voucher, and died without issue, the Feoffees may now enter or have an action
to revive the use to him in remainder.

769. Two brothers and the eldest had cause of Petition to the King for Lands,
and the youngest had issue a son, and is attaint, and executed for treason, the
cldest died without issue, the son of the youngest is restored in blood only,
as to his father, but so as that he shall demand the Land of any Collateral
ancestor, as if no such attainter had been provided that it shall not extend to
land in the hands of the King by attainter, and saving to every person their
interest, it was holden that is enabled to Petition supra.

770. John Mutton levied a Fine of Lands, to the use of himself, and of such
wife or wives, as he shall marry, and after he married one A. she shall take in
Iomture per Wray, Mead, Plowden and Onslow being upon use, contrary upon an
estate executed, and so it seems that feme is a good name of purchase; but
Quaere if this be a Iointure before or after Coverture, and in whom the use was
before the marriage, and of what estate. 15. Ed. 44. possession of the brother
of an use made the sister heir.

275.
771. A Certiorare was awarded out of the Kings Bench to the Custos brevium, to
remove the very Record of a Fine, after Error adjudged upon the transcript,
and that to the intent to take away the Fine to the Filaciis, and Cancel it in
the Kings bench, and allowed, But another of removing a Record of Nisi prius,
whereof Attaint is brought in the Kings Bench, but that was not allowed, but it
shall be by Certiorare out of the Chancery, of the tenor of the Record, and so
shall come into the Bank by M^ttim'.

772. The Marshall suffered one in Execution to go at large by commandment of
the chief Justice, the Plaintiff agreeing to that, after he recame, he is in
execution again, so if he put at large by Writ of Priviviledge from the
Parliament, for the going at large ut supra, is not an escape, and therefore if
after he recomes again, he be suffered to escape, debt lies against the Jailer.

Hill.
773. Falfe imprisonment was brought by Foreman, the Defend' pleaded that the
Plaintiff is excommunicate, for malicious drawing of his dagger in the
Churchyard, to the intent to strike A. and is indicted of that. Quaere, if the
words of the statute 5. Ed. 6. cap. 4. that he shall be excommunicated ipso
facto, shall be intended without sentence or proof. But it was agreed that
without Conviction or outlawwry the Indictment is not sufficient for to make
him to sustain the corporal punishment in the statute to lose his ear.

276. Trin.
774. The Lo. Dacres let land and a stock to Friends, who Covenanted to pay 100
pounds per an' to him, and his Wife, his Heirs and Assigns during the term,
and 2000. l. at a certain day for marriage money of his Daughter: The I.o.
Dacres died his son within age, and he suffered more then the third part of all
his land to descend; Adjudged that the Queen shall not have the 100. pounds per
ann', but the Executors of the wife, for it is no rent which should go to the
heir, but remains in gross, and adjudged no Collusion to defeat Wardship,
because the third part left, which satisfies. 34. and 35. H. 8.

277.
775. A Scire facias by Bosset against the Corporation of Torryton for
repealing their Patent of Faires and Markets: But holden the younger Patentee
shall not have a Seire facias to repeal the ancient, but contra. And if the
last Patent be of Faires and Markets to be holden at other times than the
first, it is no cause of repealer, for it is a distinct thing from that first
granted.

776. After title of laps came to the Queen, one is presented by the Patron,
and admitted, instituted, and inducted, per the Metrapol' Quaere if prejudice
to the Queen, or if the Queen her self be holden to admit such a present. of
the Patron.

777. The Bishop collated by laps, the Patron presented before induction, yet
the Bishop may refuse to admit him.

778. A Ward fell to the Bishop of Durham by a tenure of him in Chevalry, who
died before seizure, his Executors shall have it, and neither the King nor his
Successors.

779. A Formedon in remaind' per Estoft, upon a remainder in use, limited after
27. per Just. he needs not to she the Deed of the remainder for two causes;
First, because in this case a remainder may be created without Deed. Secondly,
because the deed appertains to the Feoffees, and not to C^stuy que use.

780. Lessee for years demised his term to his Executors for life, the
remaind' over to A, and died. The Executors entered, and made Executors and
died, the Execut' of the Execut' entered, but in remainder brought an Attempt of
the profits, and it lies not, for fault of privity 2. because the Executor had
not Declared to the term as Devisee or as Executor, and it shall be intended
as Executor till the contrary be showed. 3. Because the remainder of a term
is void; Weston, Welsh, and Harper that good, of a Devise void of a state
executed.

278.
781. The Prior of St. John's, had privilege from Rome that he should not pay
Tithes of any lands, quae prop' m^nibus aut sumptibus excolunt, but the Termors
they paid tithes; The Prior made a Lease for years before the dissolution; The
King after the dissolution granted the reversion. Tenus that after the term
expired, the Patentee shall hold discharge, if the Prop' manib' excol'. But if
he make a Lease, the Termor shall pay by statute 31. H. 8. cap. 13.

Undecimo Elizabethae.
Mic.
782. A Corporation per the name of the Deane and Chapter Ecclesiae Cathed'
sanctae and individ' Trinit' Caerlil', made a Lease by the name of Decanus
Ecclesiae Cathed' sanctae Trinit. in Caerlil' and totum Capitul' de Ecclesia
praedict. six were against three, that it is good notwithstanding the variance,
which is not in substance of the name, vide 35. H. 6. 5. and 6. a Prior sued by
name Ecclesiae sanct' Pet. where the foundation was Peter. and Paul, and holden
evil.

783. A Formedon in discender, is out of the statute of Limitations, 32. H. 8.
and was not in any other of the ancient statutes of Limitation.

784. Habere facias seisinam, upon Recovery in Dower, the Sheriff returned
that he proffered seisin to the Demandant of the third part by meals and
bounds, who refused; Notwithstanding by Harper and Dyer the entry of the
Demand' is now congeable, for the certainty is known, and alias Habere facias
seisinam, never granted by any president.

785. The Duke of Norff. being Marshall of England, and having authority to
make a Deputy, he made one Gaudy his Deputy, who was sworn in Court, etc. after
Gaudy licensed a Prisoner in upon Execution, to go into Norfolk with a Keeper,
for which the Plaintiff brought a Debt against Gaudy for the escape, and
recovered notwithstanding he was but the under Marshal, and notwithstanding the
action brought in Middlesex, supposing the escape at Shoreditch, and not in the
County of Surrey where the Marshalley is.

279.
786. A Scire facias upon a Recognizance, to perform Covenants where one was
to permit his tenants to have common in D. an other that he would not do any
act to alter the courses of the fields in D. the Defendant said that he had
permitted, etc. and that he had not altered the course, etc. and it was Ruled
that this general pleading was very good.

787. Tenant for life, the remainder in tail, a stranger levied of that, as
that, etc. to he in remainder in tail, who rendered to the Conusor rendering
Rent, and died, and after the Proclamations passed, the tenant for life died,
and the issue in tail accepted the rent, the Fine and also the acceptance of
the Rent affirms the Lease, for the Causes in Stapletons case, Comment
Manwood. If tenant in tail made a Lease for years to begin after his decease,
rendering rent, the acceptance here is no Bar to the issue in tail, because the
Lease took not being in the life of the father, Catlyn denied it.

788. The next avoydance is granted to two, who join in a Quare impedit, the
one dies, the next shall abate, Fitzh. Brief, 665.

789. William Shotholt was obliged by name of John, and an action brought upon
that against William alias dict. John, the Defendant pleaded non est factum,
and the matter found upon special verdict, and adjudged that the Plaintiff
shall not recover upon this Verdict, but that his action ought to be against
John, and the Defendant shall be estopped by the Obligation to say that
William, etc.

280.
790. The Citizens of York incorporate by Richard 2. by name of the Mayor,
Sheriffs, and Citizens, they now prescribed, that Wares foreign bought, and
foreign sold, have been of time beyond memory, etc. seisable by the Mayor,
Sheriffs and Citizens. Whereas before the time of Rich. 2. they were Mayor,
Bailiffs, and Citizens. Quaere, yet it is admitted a good prescription ut supra
and travers. and the veni^e facias issued to the Sheriff of the County, for
the officers of the City were Citizens.

791. The Prior and Covent of Norwich made a Lease for 24. years 24 H. 8. to A.
after 26. they made a new Lease to Corbet for 99. years, And in the 30. the
Priory was translated into a Deanery, and now they made a new Lease to Corbet
for 99. years, and that within the year of the statute of dissolution, 31. H.
8. and 1. Ed. 6. the Dean and Chapter surrendered to the King. 1. The Dean and
Chapter is holden to be a body within the statute, for it is spiritual which
had succession, although they are not specially mentioned, nor yet the
Cathedral Church. Also the words that it shall be surrend. to the King, is
intendable as well of Ed. 6. as of H. 8. Also the taking of a second Lease by
Corbet is a Surrender of the first, although it be not in esse at the time as
37. H. 6.4. is, And also to the other purposes the second was void, because it
was within the year of 31. H. 8

792. In a Repleg' the Plaintiff is nonsute, and the Defendant had Retorn, and
the Plaintiff sued a second deliverance, and is also nonsute upon that, and a
Retorn irrepreg. is to be awarded, some held without avowry, others without
avowry showing the certainty, etc. to have a writ to inquire of damages,
others held he should detain the Cattle till mends proffered for the damages:
and in diverse opinions, if he might now work the Distress, but he put them in
pound overt, and if they die, he may take another Distress for the first cause.

793. In Repleg' the Defend' acknowl' the taking as Bailiffe of Sir Anthony
Cook, as in his Frankten' damage feasant, the Plaintiff said that he and his
Master are Coparceners, and showed how, and traversed not sans ceo that he sole
Tenant of the Franktenement: And at length Issue was joined upon the
Coparcenership, and not upon the entire place to the Franktenement; for but a
supposall as a Declaration, etc. and that plea of Coparcen, is but in abatement
of the avowry, alibi the opinion in Avowry of a Rent Charge, suppos' the
Granter seized in Fee of the place, etc. If the Plaintiff said, that the
Grantor was seized in rayl, and he Issue, etc. he ought to traverse absque hoc
he seized in Fee.

281.
794. The Bishop of Salisbury made a Feoffement to Bullock of a house and 17
acres of wood in Bearwood (the great wood containing a thousand acres) at the
election of the Feoffee and his heirs, before election Bullock died, and 5
discents after the heir would have made election, but it was adjudged against
him for 3 causes. 1. Because the Feoffement is pleaded without deed, and
election may not be annexed to an estate without deed, no more than a
condition, covenant, licenses, assent or liberty. 2. Because it is an estate
which passes by livery, and that made the thing certain which passed, and if
it be uncertain it is void, for after livery there abides no election to make
the Frankren' in abeyance. 3. Because election ought to be made in the life of
the parties, for before election there is no property, and therefore before
election it may not descend. But exception was taken for the pleading, because
the Defendant pleaded virtue cujus Feoffement' his ancestor was seized in his
Demean as of Fee, whereas ^e had not made election, etc.

795. A Lease upon condition that the Lessee shall not make any wast, he suffer
wast in the decay of the houses, Dyer and Welsh held that the condition is
broken, for the Statute of Glocest. is vastum facere, and yet permissive waft
is punishable by the Statute, and (any waft) general. Quaere.

382. Hill.
796. Resolved per touts lustic. upon Stat. 5. Eliz. that if a man imports
books over sea written against the supremacy, knowing the effect of them, and
utters them to any Subject, that he is within the danger of of the Statute 5.
Eliz. 2. That the Receivers if they in conference of them, do not allow them,
they are not within. 3. If in conference they do allow of them, they are within
particulars. 4. The same of them who hearing the contents affirm them to be
good. 5. So also of him which conveys the books secretly to his friends, to
persuade them to be of the same opinion. 6. The same of them who print and
utter such books within the Realm. 7. Also if such books written within the
Realm are conveyed out, and those are bought, read, and conference had upon
them.

283. Pas.
797. The Arch-Bish. of Dublyn, had two Deans and Chapters, to the Sea, the one
surrendered without assent of the Bishop all his possessions to the King, after
the other alone confirmed a Lease made by the Bishop, and well, contra if both
had been in esse.

798. A Patron granted the next and first avoidance, and the right of
presentation to the same, jam vacant. ita quod liceat to the Grantee, hac unica
vice tantum praesentare, the Church being void at the time, the Grantee shall
have the next avoidance, and not that, for it is a thing in action, and
therefore not of an Avowson not the Avowson it self, yet the execut' shall have
it, and the King might grant it in such case.

799. Cestay que use of 3 acres in several places in one County, he made a
Feoffement, and a Letter of Attorney to make livery; the Attorney made livery
in one in the name of all, and adjudged good. 25. H. 8. Rot. 71. But it seems
if the Feoffer had been seized in Demeasne of one acre in which the livery was,
it should be of no value, for the rest Brook. Feoffem. 77.

800. King infeoffed two, viz. an Alien and a Dezen, to his own use, it seems
if office be found of that, the use to King of the moity is gone, and the Queen
shall be seized to her own use by the Prerogative.

Bu^ler against Crouch abridge before. 267.

284.
801. Damages shall not be recovered in Dower, but in case where the husband
dies seized, so Statute Marleb. cap. 1.

802. A Venire facias awarded return' Mense Mich. it was not returned at the
day, upon which the Defend, sued a venire facias with proviso return' Octab.
Hill. but in the mean time the first venire facias upon the file of Mich Term
with post diem; after, the second veni^e sacias was returned, and upon that a
second pannell, the Plaintiff pursued a Habeas Corpus, and the Jury appeared
and found for him: and although that be erroneous at the Common Law, yet
because of the Statute of seofail. 31. H. 8. Judgment was given for Gray the
Plaintiff, upon consideration of the point of misconveyance of the Process.

803. In Attain the Defendants had hearing of the Record being in the same
Court, upon which the Plaintiff assigned the false oath, upon which they were
at Issue, and now the record was removed into the Kings Bench, by Writ of
Error, yet it seems they may proceed.

285. Trin.
804. A general pardon which discharged suing of liveries and intrusions, it
is available although office was not found at the time of the pardon.

805. A Writ of Scandal is Magnatum lies not, for bringing an action which
imports slander, as a forger of false deeds, especially the Writ hanging
indiscussed.

806. An Indictment of an assault and Battery, in one John parish Priest
without his surname is good as in quendam ignot' in an Indictment of murder,
and if after he be vexed upon an Indictment in which his very name is put, he
may aver it is but one and the same Assault.

807. Humphrey de Bohem Earl of Essex who held Manors of the King by service
to be the Constable of England, who had issue two daughters and died, the
daughters took husbands, and the husband of the youngest is made King, they
made partition. Here were three questions. 1. If it was a good tenure reserved,
and it was holden that it was grand Serjeanty. 2. It was holden that the
daughter before marriage might exercise the office by deputy, and after
marriage it shall be exercised by the husband of the eldest only. 3. By the
unity of the Seigniory, and parcel of the tenancy in the King, the services
are not suspended, but the entire shall issue out of the residue because it is
the Act of the law to be King. As where a man who had two daughters held of the
eldest by Homage, and died, and after Partition the youngest shall hold in
Homage of her sister of her part: so of every other service not apportionable.
And after King H. 8. refused the service supra, because of the great fee, and
because very high and dangerous, that was the Claim of the Duke of Buckingham.

808. The Patentee of the Herbage of a Forest, may maintain a trespass, or
distraine Damage Fesant, and per 2. Justices he may enclose. But he shall not
have an action for the trees, nor of the proffits or fruit of them.

809. Upon an exigent after Judgment, the Defendant may not appear gratis, and
plead release of Executions, and have a Scire facias, etc. But upon a Cepi or
Redd ditie. But he shall have an Audita Querela being at large. But at the
Exigent to answer, he may appear gratis.

286.
810. A Pardon by the King of intrusion is not good to the he^re without exitus
and proficua.

811. In an Enjectione firmae, the Plaintiff declared of a Lease made to him
the 8. day of May, to have and to hold for 21. years, then next coming, by
virtue of which after, viz. the same 8. day he entered; And it seems very well,
and that he had not entered as Disseisor before the Lease began, for then is
immediately after the delivery, and it shall not be intended, before the date;
and the Postea declares, he entered not before the Lease made.

Duodecimo Elizabethae.
Hili.
812. At the day of Return of the Habeas Corp' or distring' the Jury and
Defendant appeared, and although the Writ be not returned, if the Plaintiff
make default, he shall be nonsuite, for the parties had day by the Roll. But
doubted in the Kings Bench.

813. The stat. 33. H. 8. for indictment and trial of Treasons, confessed
before 3. of the Privy Counsel to be in a Foreign Country, is repealed per 1.
and 2. Ph. and Ma. And now that the Rebels then in the North shall be indicted
in the County where the offense is, and the indictment removed before the King
in the Bench, or the Justices of Oyer in Midlesex, and there shall come of the
Country where the Indictment was, or of the Freeholders of the County where the
Indictment was.

287.
814. Tenant in Capite conveyed by act executed for natural affection the
entire land to his uncle for preferment, or to his son, his brother, or other
collateral cousin; And upon a great assembly it was holden by 6. that it is
not within 33. which gives to the King Wardship and primer seisin of the 3.
part. But otherwise if it had been to Childrens children in a right line: But
6. others held contrary in both.

815. But Dyer held that both were within the statute, and that it is not to be
construed or thought that a man should be more beneficial to one remote, than
to a more nigh Kindred in blood; And a gift in Franck-mariage may be as well to
the Cousin as to the Daughter. 2. sid. 6. Brok. Testa. and holden by the
Justices, that although the state executed be to a stranger, that by the
generality of the 3. article of the 34. of explanation, the Wardship and primer
seisin of the 3. part is saved to the King.

816. A Writ of Privilege for Office is with a flat Supersedeas, and a
Procedend' lies not, if he may pursue where he is attendant; Contrary of he
which is privileged, because he had a suit depending in a higher Court, as
Plaintiff, or Defendant.

817. Indictments and Outlawries of Treason against Rebels, which fled into
Scotland, is very good per stat. 26. H. 8. cap. 13. and 6. Ed. 6. cap. 11. And
as well for Treasons mentioned within the 25. Ed. 3. as treasons made by the
said statutes.

818. The Bishop of St. David's by License founded a College of 13. Canons
secular, and one Chantry, and reserved the office and vicem Decani to himself.
And assigned the Benefice of Lannarth, of which he was Patron and Ordinary, for
the living of one of the Cannons, and made a Prehend of that: And after by
License of the King, without license of the College, he translated the
Benefice to the Deanery and died, and the King presented and restored to the
Successors, who had always enjoyed it as an Impropriation, parcel of the
possession of the Bishops. And now upon stat. 1. Ed. 6. the Benefice shall be
to the King or Bishop, and found that the Bishop is seized in the right of
Bishopric, and not of the Deanery, upon issue joined upon that. Notwithstanding
by the Civilians his translation, especially to his own use, is void by the
Civil Law. As also that there wants sufficient words to make the Bishop Deane.

Pas. 288.
819. A Bill of Perjury may be sued in the Chancery, for perjury committed
there; but it shall be in Latin, and the issue shall be tried in the Kings
Bench, but the Defendant shall not be sworn to his plea of non Culpable, nor
examined upon interogatories. But if before the statute 5. Eliz. 9. this Court
had authority to examine perjury, it shall be now, as it was accustomed by the
last proviso of the statute, which reserves the Jurisdict' also of the
Star Chamber.

820. If one who writ the Will of a sick man, and he insert a clause without
Warant, after the Testator is speechless, it is not forgery of a Will within
5. Eliz.

821. Bygot an Attorney of the Common Bank sued one per Attachment of
privilege, he shall find pledges ad prosequend', as a stranger shall do, who
sues an Attorney or Clerk thete by Bill. And otherwise it is an Error as was
adjudged.

822. The King let a Manor to Orme excepting the Courts and perquisites,
after he Granted the Reversion to a stranger with the perquisites and Courts,
the Grantee made another Lease to begin after the first excepting Courts and
perquisites, and holden that the exception is good in the Lease of the King,
but not of the Grantee, and therefore the Grantee of the Reversion during the
first term may Grant Copies, but when the second Lease begins he may not, but
the Lessee himself.

289.
823. Jura Regalia were granted to the Bishop of Durham, in the Time of Ed. 2.
with escheats for Treason within a certain Precinct. After the stat. 25. Ed. 3.
gave all Escheats for Treason to the King. Also the statute 26. H. 8. that he
which commits treason, shall forfeit to the King his Heirs and Successors, all
their lands and tenements, in which they have any estate of inheritance. But as
to the stat. 25. pe^^touts Just. that is but an explanation of what was forfeit
by the Common Law, thesefore notwithstanding that, the Grant to the Bishop
remains good, but as to the stat' 26. H. 8. 4. Justices held it destroyed the
state of the Bishop, yet five held contrary, because there is a saving in the
said act of rights to strangers. But agreed that lands entayled, and lands in
the right of the Church: which were not to be forfeit at the time of the Grant,
supra, but now by the stat. 26 H. 8. they shall be forfeit to the King. And so
is the for^eiture for new treasons made by statutes after the Grant, and it is
there holden that the stat. 26. H. 8. when as to treasons at the Common Law, is
not repealed by 1. Ed. 6. and 1. M.

824. Her Curiam, Ravishment of Ward shall be brought where the wrong was
committed, and not in the other County whither the Defendant had carried the
Ward. But by the statute West. 1. cap. 35. a Writ shall issue to the Sheriff
where the body is, to have the body in Court at a day.

825. Seign^or Paramont avowed for services of his tenant, the Plaintiff who
is a termor said, that he held of the tenant for ten years, whereas he had 40.
and prayed aid, etc. that shall not conclude him of the rest of the term after
10. years expired; for in the aid prayer the number of the years is not
material nor traversable; Also the services, and not the land, were in demand,
therefore the estoppel is not for the land per Curiam. Therefore the Lessor
shall have advantage of that.

826. The Bishop of Lond' being high Commissioner, was translated to York, yet
the authority remains by 1. Ed. 6. cap. 2. implicitly.

290.
827. Husband and wife suffer a Recovery in a Writ of right in London of a
tenement there (which by the Custom binds as a fine at the Common Law) This
was to the use of the Recoverers, until they had made a Lease for 40. years,
and after to the use of the husband and wife, and the heirs of the wife, the
Lease is made, the husband died, the wife shall not avoid the Lease by the
limitation to the Recoverers until, etc. But shall hold under the Recovery, so
that the term precedes her estate. But Quaere what remedy she has for the
rent reserved, for the wife came in, en le post, and the rent was reserved
before her use created.

291.
828. A Formedon in Remainder by Fitzwilliams. 1. The tenant for the moycie
vouched B. as son and heir of A. son and heir of C. It is no good Counterplea
to the Vouchee, that C. the Grandfather of the Vouchee, nor any of the
Ancestors of the Vouchee whose heir etc. never had nothing except jointly
with M. who survived, with averrement that the Grandfather aliened not, etc.
without also Counterpleading the seize of the Vouchee himself, except he be
Vouched as within age, for that the Plea ought to abide, adjudged. 2. And as to
the other moity, except the moity of 7 houses (some held that evil forspris
out of a moity for a forspris goes to the entire) he pleaded a Fine with
Proclamation, and five years incurred in Bar, the Plaintiff counterplead that
the parties to the Fine nothing had, etc. that may not be verified by an use in
a party to the Fine, for that is a departure, and it ought to have been
pleaded first, for it is well levied by Cestuy que use after the Statute Rich.
3.3. As to that in the forspris, he pleaded jointtenancy by Fine, which shall
abate the Writ presently except the Demandant can that confess and avoid: but
by all the Iust^ces, Iomtenancy, of parcel shall not abate all the Writ,
although the Demandant be of an entire thing, as of a Manor, but otherwise of
nontenure, because the Writ ought to have a forspris there: Contra of
Iointenancy, and holden that because Iointenancy was pleaded after voucher and
Bar, it is preposterous and shall not be regarded: And the last seisen in a
Formedon or in a Writ of Right shall not abate the Writ, as in a Mord. Ayell,
etc. which are Ancestrall, possessary, for in a Formedon the gift, and not the
seisen of the ancestor is the title, and it is not within the statute of
limitation 32. H. 8. to be brought of seisen within 50 years, idco, etc. And
after Judgment that the Voucher shall stand, and to recover seisen of that
whereof the Fine is pleaded, and before the Iointenancy discussed, the Tenant
prayed that he might remove the Record upon a Writ of Error, but the Court
would not depart with the Record till the entire matter was discussed, for then
they should proceed without warrant: also the Writ of Error is, quod si
Iudicium inde redditum sit, and inde imports the entire demand.

292.
829. A Coppyholder in fee had Issue two daughters by several venters, and
died, the daughters entered, and the eldest died without admittance, yet holden
posses. fratris, which shall make heir collateral here inherit, so the custody
committed to a Guardian during the minority, although the eldest son died
before admittance, it is possess. fratris.

830. The King presented (ratione temporal. dun Eveschery) a Prebend, and after
repealed his Presentment, notwithstanding the Clerk is instituted and installed
by the Dean and Chapter, guardians of the Spiritualties, during the vacation:
after the King reciting quod fuit canonice institut. ratified the Presentment;
after the Bishop is created, and the Incumbent dies, and holden that the King
shall have the presentation now, for by reason of his repeal the Church was not
full before, then if the presentment is void, the Confirmation is also void;
but a common person may not revoke his presentment. Quaere in the case of the
King supra, if it needs to be averred that the Guardians of the spiritualties
had notice of the Repeal.

831. Upon a Diem Clausit extremum, tenure of the King is found, but by what
services they are ignorant, upon that a melius inquir. issued: upon that it was
found that the tenure was of a subject, the opinion of the Court was, that the
first office needs not to be traversed, but it is void by the fence of the
Statute 2. and 3. Ed. 6. cap. 8. and the melius inquirend. is in the nature of
the first Diem Clausit Extremum.

832. The parish of Hurst extended into two Counties, viz. into Barkshire and
Wiltshire, one let his close called Callis in the parish of Hurst, in the
County of Barkshire, where the close was in the County of Wiltshire, yet
adjudged a good Lease: and it is not like where a men let his house in the
Parish of Saint Buttolphs without Algate, late in the tenure of R. where he had
no such house there, but in Saint Buttolphs without Aldersgate, the Lease is
there void, for they are two distinct Parishes, and the house had no other name
but by the Parish which is mistaken.

Tertio decimo Elisabethae.
293. Mich.
833. A Patron presented a mere Lay person, the Ordinary refused him, he needs
not to give notice to the Patron, for it is notorious, he is not capable, but
if he refuse because of criminosity or inability, he behooves to give notice:
But if the Lay man be admitted, instituted and inducted, that is a plenarty,
and the Church is full, for he is Incumbent in facto, and behooves to be an
adnullation per sentence, before a new Presentment, and of that the Ordinary
shall give notice as of a resignation, and other avoidances, where the Bishop
is privy or party. Adjudged also that Bastardy and perjury are causes of
refusal, but exception was taken to the pleading, because the Incumbent said
actio non before he showed who was possessor, for otherwise per Stat. 35. Ed.
3. he is not able to plead in Bar.

294.
834. Goodman gave, granted, and rendered to Ed. 6. totum Praebend. suam de
Cory, and terras, and possessiones, and omnem authoritat' and potestat' etc.
dict. Praebend' spectant. etc. and over for the interest and right of the
Prebend, ut decet subjicio and submitto, etc. Harper and Weston held it was a
resignat. and so other Justices: but the Civilians held that the resignation
ought to be by words renunciare, cedere, or dimittere, and that resignare is
not an apt word, Dyer contra, but Harper and Weston held at the first, that the
King although supreme he may not take a resignation, without notice given to
the Patron, for so it were a wrong to the Patron, si, etc. yet after Judgment
was given with their assent according.

835. The Commissary of the Bishop of London committed the administrat' per
poll, and gave oath to the Administrat. and made entry of the same in his
Register, the Administrat. sold the goods and died, and a new Administrat. to
whom was committed by letters of Administrat' and he sued for the goods, and
issue joined, si Epifc. Land. commisit Administrat. etc. found non commisit, so
that for default or pleading the matter came not in question, it was doubted if
the committing per word is a sufficient warrant.

295.
836. In debt upon an Obligation the Defendant pleaded the conditions
performed, and upon a certain point they are at Issue, and before trial
knowing the verdict would go against him, he conveyed his lands to others upon
condition of payment of 20 pounds, etc. and took the profits continually, and
the Plaintiff sued an Elegit to have the moity of that land, and the Sheriff
returned that he and the Jury upon finding this are in doubt, if the land shall
be extended, and prayed the discretion of the Justices, vide there more cases
and Statutes to prove it liable.

837. A Capias ad satisfac. upon testatum, is returned non est inventus, upon
that an Exigent issued into a foreign County: per opin. it is an error, for
it ought to have resorted to the first County, and ought to have another Capias
returnable there, and upon that an Exigent.

838. Two Closes adjoined, the one being by prescription bound to fence, the
owner of one, purchased the other, and suffered the hedges to decay, and dyed,
having two daughters his heirs, who made Partition. Quaere if the prescription
for the enclosure be revived 11. H. 7.25. the like of a Gutter.

296.
839. A Merchant went over the Sea to be free from the Laws and government of
the Realm, and not for Merchandise, and that without license, and by the
greater opinion he shall not be punished without a prohibition, or ne exeas
regnum, vide now Stat. 13. Eliz.

840. Upon an indictment of murder, Stanley was found Culpable, and after the
wife of him who was killed, entered an appeal. the Defendant pleaded that she
had taken another husband at Exeter, so depend' per an. After it was removed by
Certiorare, and the prisoner demand. quamobrem he shall not have Judgment of
death, he pleaded that there was an appeal hanging, but upon no such Record
pleaded by the Kings Attorney, it appeared the suit was discontinued, and after
the woman was nonsute, upon Judgment was given that he shall be hanged.

841. A Father in consideration of the Marriage of his youngest son, promised
to the friends of the woman, by word, that after his death, and the death of
his wife, the son should have the land in Fee, and no use was altered by this
bare promise, and so adjudged.

842. A man conveyed Capite land to his Bastard son, by act executed, and died,
office found, but not that he is a Bastard, nor son to the donor. 1. It was
holden that the third part shall not be in ward, for a Bastard is not within
32. H. 8. for it shall be the lawful generation. 2. But the Kings Attorney
may supply the defect of the office by averment, that he is son of the Donor;
for it is but a supplyment, and not repugnant.

297.
842. A man Condemned in the Exchequer for a debt to the Queen was committed to
the Fleet, and after was condemned in the Kings Bench upon a Bill in Debt, at
the suit of a subject, and he was brought into the same Bank per Corpus cum
causa, and by them is committed again to the Fleet, as also for the Debt of the
subject. The Jailer per the commandment of the Treasurer and Chancellor of the
Exchequer, suffered the prisoner to go into his Country, with a Keeper, for
to collect and get his Debts to pay the Queen; The subject brought a Debt upon
the escape, but holden that it lies not, for the Kings Bench had no authority
to commit him to the Fleet, for the Marshalsey is their proper prison, and so
the Prisoner was never in Execution for the party, for, etc. But if he had, yet
the Execution for the subject begins not till the Queen be satisfied; For she
may not have a subject a compan' in the interest of the body of any; But if he
had been in Execution, no Commandment although of the Queen her self, without
Writ, is sufficient warrant to discharge the Keeper per touts Justices.

298.
843. Putnam made a Lease to his youngest brother, who acknowledged a statute,
with Defeasance of performing the Covenants, the Conusee sued Execution, and
the Lessee sued an Audita Querela, shewin the Defeasance, and that he had
performed all the Covenants, as he could show, upon that Process issued, and
the Conusee showed the Indenture, and the breach of one, and prayed that he
might proceed to the Execution, and upon that they are at Issue, which is found
for the Conusee. And it was alleged in arrest of Judgment, that here is no
sufficient Declaration by the Plaintiff in the Audita querela, and an
insufficient Declaration is not aided by the statute 32. of Jeofailes. But
after Judgment was given that the Conusee may proceed to Execution.

Hill.
854. The particular tenant writ to the Grantee of the Reversion by Fine,
before the ingrossng of the Fine, and after the Queens silver was paid; que le
Conusor mesne nayent that he is joyous to have so good an heir, and holden a
good Attournment.

845. If the Subjects of the King levy War, they are not enemies, but traitors
and Rebels: He which is over sea at the time of the Rebellion, and after there
succors a rebel who did fly thither, and knowing it, is a Traitor with 25. Ed.
3. per 4. Justices against 4.

846. The Conspiracy of Story, he being beyond sea, he practiced with a
Foreign Prince to invade the Realm. Also he practiced the destruction of the
Queen. And it was holden that both are Treason, and tryable by 35. H. 8. which
is yet in force obstant' the repeal, M. and the Clause. 1. and 2. P. and M.
that trials of Treason shall be according to the Common Law, and not otherwise.

299.
847. Tenant in Capite made a Feoffment to the use of his Feoffees and their
heirs, till the Feoffor pay a 100. pounds, to him or his heirs, and then to the
use of the Feoffor and his heirs, the Feoffee died, his heir within age, the
100 pounds is paid to the heir, and office found, and per Monst. de droit,
the hands of the King amoved, and of the mean issues after the payment, And
holden although this heir was in ward, it shall now be divested, and the King
shall not have the value of his Marriage upon tender of marriage to him, for all
mean Contingents are removed, which happen in the mean time, so upon a
Condition performed.

Pas.
848. The Executors of the Conusee of a statute sued Execution, upon which
Writ, the death of the Conusor is returned, and also an inquisition of the
Extent of the Manor of B. of which he was seized the day of the Recognizance,
and holden that the Executors, or the Executor of this Executor, if he received
no profit of B. he may have a re-Extent, although liberate executed, for it
behooves that the estate be found, for he not being dead, as is returned, no
estate is liable to the Execution but Fee, and not Tail, nor for life.

849. Evileigh made title in a Quare impedit by the Grant of the next
presentation by one who had two parts of the Advowson appendant to the Manor
of D. and a stranger which had the 3. append' to the Manor of S. he needs not
to show, how the Torns of the Grantor begun, because being appendant it is
apparent it is by prescription, and so adjudged. The Court was that the avouson
pertained to the Manor of the Grantor ad praesentand' 2. vicibus, and quod
advocat' pertin' to the Manner of a stranger to present the third time. Dyer,
it should have been that he was seized of the parts of an Advowson; and the
other of the other part of the advowson, for it is but one advowson and one
Church. Notwithstanding by him per stat. 36. Ed. 3. cap. 15. the Court having
substance, it shall not abate for form.

850. Tenant in Capite of a Manor in Chivalry before the stat. of quiaem
ptores, made a feoffment of parcel of the Demesns, without saying any more,
the Feoffee made a Feoffment over, to hold of his Feoffor per 10. sh. for all
services, this land is not holden in Capite clearly, and the first Mesnalty is
holden of the Feoffor as of his Manor by Knights service.

851. Debt for Damages recovered, the Defendant said, that the Plaintiff had
an Elegit served, but spoke not of the return. And it seems good, for his
election of the Execution is of record.

300.
852. Issue was joined quod T. West Miles dominus Delaware non dimisit, in
verity he is now Dominus, but at the time of the demise was but a Knight, yet
it seems by 3. Justices that the dignity is parcel of the Issue, so that it
may not be found with him who pleaded his Lease.

853. Suggestion to have a Writ to the Coroners ought to be a principal
Challenge, and not for favor, and in Ejectione firmae, it is no principal
Challenge, that the Sheriff is Cousin to the Lessor, or that he is Master of
the Bayliffe who made Conusance in Replegare, 9. H. 7.22.

854. The Advowson of an Hospital of St. Katherine is append' to the Manor of
B. the Hospital being void, the Queen Granted Manerium ac omnes advocat' cum
pertinent' the present presentation shall not pass.

855. In Debt upon an Obligation, the Defendant after hearing of the same,
imparted, and now pleaded tender at the day and place, and none there to
receive, and now ready, and said not at all times, and a good Plea, for he had
excused the Forfeiture by the Plea, and he shall not be estopped by the
imparlance to plead now ready.

856. Story Indicted of Treason Committed at Antwerp, said upon his araignment,
that he is a subject of the King of Spain, and would not answer to the
Indictment; But because he was openly known to be born in England, because he
would not plead otherwise, Judgment of Truason was given against him. Quaere
by Callyne, if a Spaniard commit Treason over the sea against out King, if he
came into our Realm, if he shall be indicted and arraigned of that.

857. A Feoffment to the use of himself, and after his decease to the use of
Alice, who he intended to marry, till the Issue which he shall beget of her be
of the age of 21. years, and after the son comes to that age, then to the use
of his said wife during her widowhood, the husband died without issue, adjudged
that the woman shall return, for there the estate is good, although he never
have a son. And if a Feoffinent be made to one and his heirs until I. S. pay
a 100. pounds, if I. S. dies, the Feofee shall hold in perpetuum.

Trin. 302.
858. Plus de cas Cheney devant fol. 201. Now the vendees of Chency being duly
Barred in a Writ of Entry sur disseisin, and in Attaint, they brought a Writ of
Right, where Parramour the tenant chose trial by Battle, and the Lifts of the
Champions being all prepared, the Plaintiff being remanded was nonsure, and so
final judgment given against him.

859. Elisabeth wife of Vyvion had two sons born in espousalls, both named
John, the eldest being reputed by the father to be begotten by one Mayo, and by
him and others called John Mayo, the wife of Vyvion died, after the Earl of
Devon died without issue. Office found that John Vyvion son of Elisabeth was
coheire to the Earl, upon that John the youngest sued livery with the other
coheirs, and held Courts, and recovered Rents, and after John the eldest,
released, gave and granted all his right, interest and d^mand, in all the
Manors, etc. to John the youngest, and after that the Tenants paid their
rents to John the youngest as before; It was holden that this John who is heir
indeed, shall be intended so by office, and that neither the common reputation,
nor the meaning of the Inquest shall be otherwise averred. 2. Also that the
suing of Livery, holding of Courts, nor yet receipt of the Rents, had gained him
any possession, either per wrong or by right, upon the release may inure. If
words of gift and grant shall pass the reversion, yet that payment as before
by the Tenants not knowing of the Grant, is no Attournment. Plowd. would have
the gift and Grant mure pro fraterno amore to raise an use to the youngest.
Also he moved, that John the youngest by name of John Vyvion had levied a Fine,
per which the eldest shall be intended Conusor and estopped. Quaere of those to
the purpose.

860. Forgery of a Testament by which any Lease for years is devised, is within
5. Eliz. by the word writing, for there is not express mention of a Testament,
but of a will concerning Franktenement in the statute. Quaere if perjury in
Court Christian about probare be punishable in the Star Chamber per the proviso
of the Act of 5. Eliz.

303.
861. The Coppyhold of an Idiot is not within the survay of the Court of Wards,
but it shall be ordered in the Court of the Lord of the Manor as to that.

862. Office found by Commission of Mandamus out of the Church at Westminster
of Lands in Chester is not good, but the Commission shall be out of the
Chancery there, and of Lands in England and Ireland, there ought to be several
liveries, and several Seals.

Quarto decimo Elisabethae
Mich.
863. The Office of the Aulneger, viz. ulnator pannorum, may not be granted by
the King without warrant of the Treasurer. Quaere if the King put in a clause
of non obstant. Stat. vide the Statutes of that matter 17. Rich. 2.5. 1. H.
4.13. 4. H. 4.18. 31. H. 6.5. 17. Ed. 4.5. 9. H. 4.2. 2. Ed. 3.15. 27. Ed. 3.4.
31. H. 8.15.

304.
864. A man devised two parts of his Land to his four youngest sons in tail,
and if the infant in the belly of his mother be a son, that he shall have the
fifth part, as coheire with the fourth, and if the fifth die without issue,
that the two parts shall revert, the father died, the son is born, and after he
and three other of the said sons died, by Sander, Dyer, Bendlo and Mead, the
infant in the belly of the mother shall take nothing, because he was not
capable when the Devise took effect, Whiddon contra, and holden that none of
the two parts shall revert till the five sons are dead without issue.

865. Grevill pleaded a forged acquittance in Bar of a stature of 600 pound,
for payment of 300 pound, after in the Star Chamber he is convict of the
Forgerie, damages double the penalty, and not of the 300 pound shall be
assessed by Stat. 5. Eliz. for the Plaintiff ought to have recovered the
penalty, and by the release he is so much damnified.

866. In an Ejectione firmae of the Lease of a Rectorie verdict passed for the
Plaintiff. And in arrest of judgment it was alleged it was not shown that
the person was in life; but because that was averred by implieation viz. and
scisit' yet it is in Dominico in the Court, the Plaintiff had Judgment.

867. Tenant in Tail made a Lease for years rendering 20 shillings rent, and
after released 19 shillings and died, and the issue accepted, 12 d. if he may
distrain for the 19 shillings more, was the question, Sanders and Catlyn held
he might not, Dyer and Whiddon contra, but clear if the Lessor had granted
after the lease, that the Lessee shall hold without impeachment of wast, that
it had not been good.

868. The next avoidance is granted to 3 habend' iis and uni little conjunci^m
and divisim, the first presents the third, who is admitted, instituted, and
inducted, and adjudged well, but if the Bishop had refused his sole
presentment, peradventure he might have failed in his Quare impedit, for the
severance of the habend. supra is void in law as it seems. Simile 21. Ed. 4.18.

869. Tenart of the King in soccage in Capite made a feoffement and retook to
him and his wife for life, the remainder to his son and heir, and the husband
and wife died, the son of full age, Quaere if he shall sue livery by the first
branch of 32.

870. An indictment was that the defend' ex malitia praecogitat' felonice
percussit A. whereof the eighth day after he died, and there were no words
Murdravit, holden per Curiam that but homicide which was pardoned per the
general pardon.

305.
871 Ejectione firmae and counted of the Demise of 300 acres of land per nomen
Manerii, habend. Manner. and catera praemis. virtute cuius in Manerium and
caetera praemis. intravit, etc. It had been better to say in the said three
hundred Acres, he entered, yet very good, and the word Manerium is surplusage.

872. A man gives to me all his trees, and after he himself cuts and I them
carry, and he brings a Trespass, I may plead as to the cutting non culpable,
and justify the residue. Quaere if the first plea goes not to all.

873. Luker Merchant of Ireland was obliged in eighty pounds to one D. of
London, the Obligation was made in Ireland, but all times remained in London.
D. died intestate in the County of Bedford in England, the Bishop in Ireland
committed the Administration to the son of D. and he released. The Archbishop
of Canterbury committed the Administration in England to the wife of D. who had
the Obligation, supra, and recovered upon that, for the Administration shall
be committed in the place per the Ordinary, where the Obligation is at the
death of the intestate, and not where the Debt began, for it is not local.

874. Trespass by the husband and wife of the Lands of the wife whilst she
was sole, and the writ was ad grave damnum ipsorum, and the Count was with
continuando usque diem brevis of depasture. Quaere.

875. A Writ issued to the Bishop upon Issue in Dower, to certify if ever
accoupled in lawful matrimony, he certified the espousalls to be of the age of
twelve years of the husband, and 16 of the wife, and the Bishop was amerced
for the return, for he ought to return the lawfullnesse of the marriage which
is triable by the Spiritual Judge.

306.
876. A man pleaded never Executor, and gave evidence of Administraton by
Letters of Administration, and well, yet he might have pleaded that in
abatement of the Writ, which named him Executor. Quaere.

877. Puttenham condemned per default in a Scire facias in the Chancery upon a
Recognizance there, the Court commanded the Guardian of the Fleet where
Puttenham was in ward, for other causes, for him to detain in Execution for the
Condemn. supra. the Guardian took Recognizance of Puttenham to save him
harmless against every one, and suffered him to escape, the Conusee sued the
Guardian for the escape, who imparled and sued Puttenham upon his Recognizance:
Issue non dampnif. The Justices held he was not damnified for three Causes,

1. Because the Capias hes not for Execution upon Recogniz. because not in the
Original, but he shall have a Fieri facias or an Elegit.

2. Because Puttenham came not in upon Habeas Corpus, nor was recorded by the
Court, nor apposed if he be of the same person before he was awarded into
Execution.

3. Also it was not ad petic. petent. whereas peradventure he would choose
another manner of Execution. It was agreed if the Plaintiff had brought the
Original of Debt that he might have an Execution by Capias, but he shall not
have an Elegit-there, but of Lands which the Conusor had the day of the
Judgment given, whereas in a Scire facias, he shall have those things which he
had die Recognit. etc. it was admitted supra, and by the Original brought
against the Guardian, and imparlance that he was dampnified.

878. It was sound upon a Melius inquirendo tenure of the Queen as of the
Manor, etc. but by what service, they were ignorant, it shall be intended
service in Chivalry as of a Manor, for stat. 2. Ed. 6. cap. 8. excludes only
tenure in Capite per such intertain office.

879. The Queen granted the Ward of the body of A. who died at full age, and no
tender of Marriage made, the land shall not be returned in the Court of Wards
upon the prayer of the party, for it was his folly.

307.
880. Fines lost a Hawk, and I. S. sound it, and sold it to A. and he gave it
to Sir John Spencer, who fold that over, and though he knew the Hawke, he is
not chargeable with an action upon the case for Trover; And the Plaintiff
ought to count expressly that he is tame and reclamed, But by Southcote, ^he
words that he was possessed, ut de Bonis propriis, import so much.

Hill.
881. A Statute was acknowleded 26. day of May, the Conusee made release
bearing date the 25. day of all demands usque confectionem praesent', and
delivered the same first upon the 27. day, the statute is discharged, for the
day of the delivery is the day of the making. But if the Words had been usque
datum praesent' the statute had not been discharged.

308.
882. In action upon the case against one in the Kings Bench in the Custody of
the Marshalsey, who pleaded to the ^ssue, which is found against him to the
damage of 45 ^pound, after he confessed himself debtor to the Queen in the
Exchequer; upon which he was committed in Execution to the Fleer, and now
Judgment i^ given in the Kings Bench, and by Habeas Corp', the (...) was
brought into the Kings Bench, and the Worden of the Fleeted scharged, and the
Prisoner committed for both Executions to the Marshalsey. The Excheq' Writ to
the Marshall, ad Habend' Corp' by Prerogat'. Quaere, if he be bound to obey.

883. A Termor of a house for 40. years devised the house to I. S. without
limiting any estate, the Devisee shall have the entire term, for he may not
have for life, nor at will, nor for lesser term of years, per opin' Cur'.

884. Lessee for 99. years, made a Lease for 40. years, rendering rent, the
Lessee for 40. years made a Lease for 15. years, rendering rent, the Lessee also
for 40. years, granted, all which is in him to the Less for 99. years, the
Lessee for 15. years would not atturne, nor pay rent. Quaere Broughtons Case.

Pas.
885. A woman seized of Land by descent from her father, suffered a recovery 6.
H. 8. to her own use in Fee, and after by Indenture between her and A, willed
and granted that after marriage (which she intended with the said A.) that the
recoverers shall be seized to the use of her, and of A, and their heirs, the
marriage took effect, and the Feoffees executed estate according; After the
husband and wife by Indenture made between them and the next heir of the part
of the mother of the feme reentring, that the land was inheritable by her, on
the part of her father, and that she had no issue of her body; and that she
was deceived in the first Judgment, for she intended always that for default
of issue of her body, that the heirs of the part of the father should have the
land, upon the husband and wife concluded and agreed, to be seized to the use
of themselves in special tail, the remander to the right heirs of the wife,
and the husband covenant if the wife died without issue, that he would execute
estate to himself for life, the remainder to the use of the heirs of the wife,
and the wife died without issue the 27. is made, the husband died without
executing an estate, and yet holden that the heir of the wife shall have the
land, and not the heir of the husband, and that per omnes Just. For the
Correction of the limitation of the use, in which the wife was deceived, was
lawful; And the consideration in the last Indenture of the husband and wife,
was sufficient to raise an use of the entire land to the heirs of the wife,
because the land moved from the feme, and it was for advancement of the ^l^ne
from whence the land descended.

886. Cobham Indicted of Pyracy stood mute, and had judgment of pain, fort,
and dures, the Parliament pardoned all contempts, pains and Executions, etc.
and excepted Pyracies. If he may be newly indicted of the same Pyracie; there
were diverse opinions of that, for it is no Judgment for the Piracy, but for
the Contempt, But holden that he may be indicted of another Pyracy committed at
the same time, or before, so that it is no Conviction.

887. The Lo. Paget levied a Fine as that. etc. of land holden in Capite in
Chivalrie, in which rend^e^ to himself for life, the remainder to his eldest
son, and his heir Males, remainder to the youngest and his heir males, the
remainder to the right liers of the Lo. Paget, and died; The eldest son entered,
and at full age sued livery of the third part upon 32. because a disposition
for advancement or his children, and after that, he paid the value of the 3.
part in possession, and for the remainders to the right heirs sued livery, as
he who had a remainder by descent from his father, and paid the value of the
Moytie of the Remaind in Fee, according to the usual rate, after he had issue
a daughter, and died without issue male, the daughter in Guard for the remainder
to the right heirs; the second brother entered for his remainder ^n tail, the
daughter died without issue, the youngest brother being he their. Plowden it
seems he ought not to sue livery of the 3. part, as the eldest son did, because
the statute is satisfied for livery for the injury for fault of Wardship, and
the statute extends not when there is many issues advanced on after another,
that every one ought to sue livery, one after another, but once for all: Quaere
for they Compounded as to that point, and as to the remainder to the right
heirs, the youngest brother sued livery, for though he took as heir to his
father, for which his eldest brother had sued Livery, and not as heir to his
Niece, for such a remainder may not be possess. fratris, for default of
possession, yet because the Kings tenant is dead, and another in by descent,
the Queen shall have her Duty, adjudge vide 40. Ed. 3 9. Provost de Beverleys
Case, and 15. Ed. 4.10. Skreens Case.

309.
888. Winters Case, a Lease of three Manors, rendering for one 6. pounds, for
another 5. pounds, for the third 10. pounds, with Condition of reentry for
non-payment, the Lessor granted the reversion of one Message, and the Lessee
atturned, after the Lessor bargained and sold the Reversion of all, and the
Lessee atturned, and Ren^^n one Manor is behind, the Grantee may not enter. A
three questions were here, 1. If they are several rents, and three held they
were, but Dyer contra; because the reversion is entire, and the rent accessory.
2. If the Bargainee of the reversion be Grantee within star. 32. H. 8. to take
advantage of a Condition, And they held all but Mounson that he is. 3. If the
Bargainee of parcel of the reversion shall have benefit of the Condition, and
upon that, adjudged not; And holden that the reversion within 32. ought to be
expectant, upon a terme^^ Franktenement, and not upon tail; And also a Grantee
of the entire estate in Reversion as was in the Lessor himself. vide Kidwells
Case in the pleading of it.

310.
889. A Reversion upon a term is granted to the use of the Grantor for life;
after his discease to the use of his Executors and Assigns, for term of 21.
years, the remainder over in tail, the Grantor is attaint of Treason, and died
intestate, and without assignment, and holden that the Queen shall have the
term as forfeit, for it was an Interest in the Grantor, and may well stand in
himself in expectancy, notwithstanding his estate for life, and if the
Executors shall take by it, they have it not as Purchasors to their own use,
but shall have it as Assets.

890. Three were obliged per words Obligamus nos and utrumque nostrum per se
and pro toto, and in solido, two of them went, sued and pleaded non est factum,
it was found against them, and in arrest of Judgment, it was said, that one or
all shall be sued, and not two, but it appeared not to the Court, by the Roll,
which was quod querens protulit script' praedict' quod debit. etc. witness
that three were obliged, upon that Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

891. Keite devised Gavelkind land to Harrison in writing, and after revoked
his Will by word in that point, and adjudged a good revocation. And where
Harrison was hanged for the Murder of Keite and his son had entered by the
Custom of Gavelkind, viz. the father to the bough, the son to the plough, this
entry was not lawful.

311.
892. In a Mortdancest' if tenant of the land, or tenant by the Warranty plead
Bar, viz. matter of Record, Release, Collateral warranty, etc. and it pass
against the tenant, it is peremptory, But if he pleads in abatement of the Writ
or Voucher, which is Counterplead, and found against him, there the 3. points
shall be over inquired, viz. if the ancestor died seized, if the Demandant is
next heir, and if the ancestor died within 50 years, and those ought also to
be found for the Demandant, otherwise he shall not recover, and it seems if
issue be joined on one of the three points, and found against the Tenant, that
yet the two others shall be inquired 9. Assi, 3 accord, though 33. Ed. 3. and
27. H. 8. the opin. of Fitzh. be contrary, and that the others shall be holden
not denied, and that he is Barred. But that is not so, because he said not quod
assisa non.

212.
893 A man bargained and sold a Manor with an Advowson append' in Fee, to
have to the use of the Bargainee and his heirs in such manner as after in
these indentures is covenant' and covenanted to suffer a recovery, to the use
of the Indenture rendering Rent, to the Bargainer and his heirs, with
distress, and nomine poenae, and moreover for further security, it was
concluded that the Bargainer and Bargainee shall levy a Fine upon grant of the
land to the Bargainee with render of Rent to the Bargainer, provided that the
Bargainee shall regrant the Advowson to the Bargainer for life, and also
covenanted that all estates after to be made should be to those uses. The
recovery was suffered, and a Fine levied, but variant from the Covenant, the
Bargain died before regrant of the Advowson, 1. It was nolden that the
proviso, though it be placed among the Covenants, yet it was a condition to
defeat all the Bargain and sale. 2. That the regrant shall be upon request,
but yet in the life of the Bargainee, for that his death is a breach of the
condition. But Dyer held (...) for want of conveyance within six months, the
condition was broken, and it is not like to a Feoffement where livery (...) to
be made; and if so, then the Fine, (for it was levied after the 6 months)
conveyes this again to the vendee absolutely. 3. Although the Fine vary from
the Covenants, yet by the general covenants that all estates after to be made
shall be to the said uses, the condition shall be well preserved, so the Rent.
And it is there holden that render of a Fine, which implies consideration, may
be averred by writing to be to the use and so also may a gift in tail: and a
gift in tail made by a woman to a man, rendering rent by writing, my be averred
causa Matrimonii praelocuti.

Trin.
894. A writ of Entry in l^ quibus against A. and B. found was that A.
disseised and not B. yet judgment shall be given of the entire, and not of the
moity only against A. and the Plaintiff in misericordia against B.

895. Trespass upon the Statute that none shall distrain the beasts of the
plough, so log as other reasonable distress may be had, and declared of taking
contra formam Statuti, and showed not specially how he had other Distress, yet
it is adjudged good, and employed in the words, contra formam Statuti, and it
shall come of the part of the Defend' after he has showed the cause of the
distress: He shall also show that there was no other distress, adjudged 4. E.
3.1. and per Ed. 2. that a Tenant shall have that action against the Lord,
although he had made agreement for the thing for which the distress was taken,
and the issue was joined here quod defend. non cepit nec imparcavit contra
formam Statuti.

896. Cestui que use in tail, the remainder in tail after 27 tenant in tail in
possession levied a Fine and died without issue, a stranger in the name of the
Feoffees or surviver of them, without naming any of them, entered within the 5
years, for to revive the use to him in remainder. Quaere if well.

897. Upon Statut. 21. H. 8. a Clerk one time qualified as a Chaplain to a
Baron, although his Master die, or that he departs his service, he shall not
lose his plurality. If a Chaplain allowed by the Statute take two Benefices,
and sue not a dispensation of the Metropolitan, yet he shall not forfeit the
Plurality; for the statute is, that he may sue a Dispensation, and not that he
ought. Also, if a Lo. allow by his letters Testimonial 6, to be his Chaplains,
where he ought to have but 3. the first three shall be his Chaplains.

898. A Lease for 20. years to 3, after two of them took a new Lease for ^30.
years, to begin after the 20 years, or immediately after the death of their
Companion, if he die within the 20. years, and he died within 3. years; Quaere
if it be in the election of the two, to begin their second Lease, or not, till
the 20. years expired.

899. In Avowry for Rent Charge, the Defendant said that the Grantor was seized
in Fee, etc. The Plaintiff said that the Grantor was his father, and seized in
tail, etc. it seems he shall traverse the Fee.

213.
900. A Seigniory and tenure de obite and Chantrie land, is extinet per
possession of the King per stat. 1. Ed. 6. notwithstanding the saving of the
Statute, but the Rent remains distra^nable, and the Lo. shall avow upon the
matter, but not upon the person, as within his Fee and Seignory.

901. In Dower issue was never coupled in lawful Matrimony, the Bishop
certified, that the woman at 16. years, and the man at 10. years, the Marriage
was solemnized at such a place, and sic legitim' matrimon' Copulat', and holden
no answer to the Writ, in point of the Writ, and a new Writ issued to the
Bishop.

902. The Lo. Powes conveyed land in capite, to one Gray his Basterd in
remainder after his own death: The Lo. Powes died, holden by Dyer and Sanders,
that the Bastard shall not sue Livery, for the 3. part, for he is not the
lawful generation, as 32 mentions.

314.
903. Lessee covenanted at his proper charges, and after cut trees upon the
Land, and in wast pleaded that the house by tempest, etc. and that he cut to
repair, etc. the Lessor replied by Covenant. Quaere, vide 40. Ed. 3.6. 21. H.
6.50. 12. H. 8.1.

Wast by Clear against Haddon Comment.
904. A Fine was levied by A. to the use of B. for life, the remainder to E in
tail, the remainder in fee to B. provided if B. pay 100 pound, that he shall
have tail and fee expectant, upon payment the use is transferred.

905. A recovery was suffered to the intent that the recoverers should perform
his will, and said not his last will, after he made Declaration of the uses by
Indenture, yet he may alter them, for his will, and last will are all one.

315.
906. The Lord Cromwells Case, a Lord of the Parliament shall not be impanelled
without special commandment of the King, or that their presence be of
necessity.

907. Error, Trespass supposed in D. iuxta S. where in English it is called
beside S. yet good, and the Defend' taken pro fine, omitted in the judgment,
and well, because the Defendant a Bishop, and a Capias lies not against him.
Quaere if the omission de misericordia or e contra, which is only for the
King, shall make all the judgment void to the party 29. Assise.

908. A Scire facias in the Chancery to have execution upon Recog. the
Defendant pleaded a defesance which was dated before the Recognizance, but it
was first delivered afterward, and was not received, but the execution awarded,
upon which he brought an Error in the Kings Bench, and reversed the Judgment.
Note, yet both Courts are coram Rege.

909. In a Formedon in reverter or remainder, the Demand. need not allege
seisen within 50 years upon Stat. 32. nor in a Scire facias to execute a fine
of such nature, for they shall come in upon traverse of the part of the tenant
as in avowry, viz. not selfed of the services after the limitation

Quinto decimo Elizabethae.
316. Mich.
910. A Formedon against the husband and wife, who after summons and essoin,
levied a fine to a stranger, and after the husband made default, upon the wife
prayed to be received, the Demandant Counterpleaded the receipt by the fine, and
proved that the land is not the right of the wife, yet by judgment she was
received, for the right shall be intended that which was at the purchasing of
the Writ.

911. The husband made a feoffement to the use of himself and his wife for
life, the remainder, etc. the husband sowed the land and died, the wife shall
have Crop, and not the Executors of the husband, because the wife was joint
purchaser with her husband, contrary it had been if a remainder had been
limited to the wife. And if the husband sow the land of the wife, and the wife
die, the husband shall have the Crop, so shall Tenant for another life, if
Cestuy que vie die. And if the husband sow land and die, and the third part is
assigned to the wife for dower she shall have the emblements, because de optima
posses. of the husband per 5. contra. 4.

912. A Juror was challenged, because he had nothing within the hundred, at
the day of the Venire facias returned, and it appeared that he had at the day
of the Distress, but Harper and the Clerks held that he shall be sworn, because
the Challenge is in the present cense, quod nihil habet, etc. Dyer held that
the entry of that shall be referred to the day of the Pannell, the third part
of which shall be Hundreders. But if he had at the time of the Pannell, and yet
had not at the time of the distress, yet he shall be sworn, for his notice is
not altered, and by Common intendment upon the sumons upon the Venire facias,
he ought to take notice. Quaere.

913. A Commoner because of Vicinage, may not put in his beast immediately in
the drift into the other soil, but it behooves they stray thither, being put in
his own soil. 13 H 7.10. lib. Ent. 567. Contra.

317.
914. Land in Gavelkind is demised to the eldest son upon Condition that he
shall pay 100. pounds to the wife of the Devisor, he failed of payment, Quaere
by Manwood, ^f the youngest may enter in the Moytie, as by employed limitation.

915. If a man be Outlawed in London, Judgment is not given by the Coroner,
which is the Mayor, but by the Recorder by the Custom; And if the Exigent be
not returned, the Outlawry is not pleadable in disability of the person,
notwitstanding upon witness Process issues to the Sheriff, (and not to the
Coroners according to the Custom) who certify that, and it is sufficient for
the Queen, but not for the party.

916. By Dyer, Mounson and Manwood Justices, a Jointure may be upon Condition,
viz. to perform the last Will of the husband, or so long as she shall live
sole or unmarried, and that shall be a Bar in Dower, and although it be a
remainder after the death of her husband it is a good Jointure. And by Dyer an
estate in Fee is a good Jointure within the words stat. 27. H. 8. viz. for the
life of the wife or otherwise, and may be so averred, if there be not express
words in the Conveyance to the contrary.

917. Hawley brought an Action upon the Case against Sydnam for words, viz. he
is infected with the Robbery and Murder lately committed, and smells of the
Murder, and it lies for the words infected, and Hawley had Judgment and 300.
pounds damages.

318.
918. Two had Closes adjoining, the one from time, etc. had always been bound
to enclose, and now for insufficiency of the Enclosure, the beasts of the other
escaped in, and immediately before they were driven out, they were distrained
for Rent. But because it was but by a Termor, who had granted part of his
term, rendering rent; and besides no default in the owner, It was adjudged that
the distress was unlawful, But it seems liable to the distress of the Lo. if
he did not make fresh suit.

919. The Earl of Kent being reputed but an Esquire, brought a Writ of Entry by
the name of Esquire, and the Pannell was returned, and now by the Herolds he is
declared to be an Earl, and he challenged the array, because no Knight
returned, etc. and not allowed, because no default in the Sheriff. The Jury
was upon Habeas Corp' with proviso, in default of the Demandant, and yet the
Tales shall not be granted at the suit of the tenant, before some default be
again showed in the Demandant, for the proviso ought to be quando duo brevia
sunt in codum gradu and qualitate.

920. A man was obliged to perform Covenants contained in an Indenture of a
Lease of tithes; and there was a Proviso in the Lease, that if the Lessee
attempt and prosecute an action against A. who pretended a former Lease, if
Verdict pass against the Lessee, that the rent shall cease. In debt upon the
Obligation for not payment of the rent, it is no plea, that A. enjoyed the
tithe by virtue of his former Lease; so that the Defendant could not have
according to his Lease, and so no article ex part sua per implead per Curiam,
for the Rent is payable till the Verdict pass against the Defendant.

319.
921. A man bargained and sold land, provided that the Bargainor shall have and
retain for 20. years, without interruption. The Bargainee disturbed the
possession of the Bargainor within the 20. years. Quaere if the entire estate
of the Bargainee be defeated, or that the proviso be but a reservation, grant
or agreement.

Challenge in a Formedon per Vernon against Manners Comment'.

922. Capite land is extended upon a Statute, the tenant died, the heir within
age, the dying seized is found by office, but not the title of the Conusee.
Quaere if he shall answer of the profits to the King, or hold them per stat' 2.
Ed. 6.

923. Two Executors brought an action of Debt, the one is Summoned and severed,
yet he may release before Judgment. But after Judgment he may not acknowledge
satisfaction, because he is not privy to the Judgment.

924. Queen Mary had Rent of 20. pounds out of land, whereof the husband and
wife are Joyntenants, and gave, granted, Remised, released and renounced the
rent, to the husband and his heirs, the husband Devised the rent, and well by
Dyer, and that shall be a Declaration of the election of the husband, to have
the Deed inure as a grant, and not by way of extinguishment. Quaere if he had
not made election, if his heir might, and that the Patentee shall have
election to use his Patent, as to him seems best. 9. H. 6.

320.
925. In a trespass upon the case against the Lady Brown, for the divided
part of the course of water, which ran from, etc. to the house of the
Plaintiff, and it appeared that the Diversion was of a main pipe, but of which
the Husband of the Lady, made a quill with a Cock to serve his house in his
life, and because it is with a Cock, so that upon every opening of the Cock is
a new diversion, the action lies against the Lady; but Judgment was longer
stayed, because the Plaintiff did not show, that he was seized of the house to
which, etc. at the time of the Diversion; sed cum existat, etc. and after
Error brought.

926. In an Ejectione Firmae, the Defendant prayed aid of the Queen, because
the reversion after the term which he claimed was to the Queen, per the
Attainter of the Earl of Northumberland, and was granted. And in the Chancery
the Defendant prayed Search for the Queen. And after long argument agreed, that
he shall not have search, for no damages shall be to the Queen; And it had not
be seen that search should be in aid prayer, but only in Petition of right,
upon that a procedendo granted, sed non ad Judic' Regina, inconsult.

Hill. 321.
927. The Grandfather, Father, and two Daughters were, the Grandfath. levied a
Fine as that, etc. in Chester, and that with render to himself for life, the
remainder to the Father, and the heirs Males, the remainder to the eldest
Daughter in tail, remainder, etc. the Grandfather died, and the Father died
without issue Male, the eldest Daughter entered, the youngest in her own name,
and in the name of her eldest Sister as Cousins and heirs to the Grandfather,
pursued a Writ of Error, out of the Chancery, re^urnable in the Kings Bench, to
revers the Fine (the Writ was directed to the Justices, and not Camerario
Cestriae nota) which was returned with the Record, and the eldest Daughter came
not, upon that she was summoned and severed, and a Scire facias issued against
the heir of the Conusee to hear the Errors (note where he had nothing in the
land) and none against the tenant, And the Errors were assigned. 1 for default
of entry and nonpayment of the Qeens silver in the Roll, but it appeared upon
the back of the Writ of Covenant, what was assessed. 2. Because the Concord is
not signed by the Justices who took the Conusance, according to the course in
the Banck, where the Conusance is taken out of Court. 3. For default of Entry
of a note of the Fine, which is usual in the Common Bank, and remains with the
Chirographer before the engrossing. But as to that, one of the parts of the
Chirographe remained amongst the Records, as the use is there, and no other
Foot of the Fine there, as remains here with the Custos brevium upon the back
of which the Proclamations are entted. And it was moved that a writ of error
should first be brought in Chester, But it was not to be so for there are
errors in their Charters excepted. But the Plantiffe ought to bring his writ
there at the next County, where they may see the writ, and proceed and reverse
if there be error apparent, or affirm it, it upon a scire facias returned the
Defendant do not appear, without receiving Plea of Release. And if the
Defendent be grieved he may have a special writ to remove both Records unto
the Kings Bench; It was holden that the Plaintiff ought to have a scire faeias
against the land tenant, for otherwise if he had judgment quod restituat, he
may not have execution, for if the tenant be outed without being Garnished, he
shall have an Assise. Also it may be the Defendant had a release to plead,
which would be an ease to the Court of the examination of errors, upon that a
scire facias was awarded against the elder Sister as land tenant, who appeared,
but said nothing to the errors assigned. The heir of the Conusee of the Fine
before rejoyner to the erros alleged dimunition, upon that process was awarded
to the Justices of Chester, who returned that all was certified, and after the
heir of the Conusee rejoyned to the Errors assigned, In nullo est erratum,
and upon surmise of the Plaintiff a Mand. was awarded Camerario de Chestria to
make a writ to the Sheriff, there to garnish the land Tenant ad audiend.
errores si, etc. Another time it was directed to the Justices of Chester. After
the Fine was affirmed good.

928. Tenant for life by Fine granted all his estate to A. and his heirs, the
Grantee died, the heir impleaded in a Praecipe, prayed aid and might not have
it, because but an occupant.

322.
929. The Lord Cromwell avowed Distress for breaking of a Bylaw made by the
Homage of his Manor of A. as they may by the custom pro meliori ordinat.
averiorum cum opus erit. which was that he which put in his beasts into the
certain Common before pulsation of a Field, etc. should forfeit 10 shillings,
and showed that the Defendant Tenant there, and one of the Homage had broken,
and that the Lord had used to distrain the beasts of the offender in any place
of the Manor, etc. Adjudged a good Justification. It is not showed that the
breach was presented, nor that it was needful, nor that it was pro meliori
ordinatione, etc.

930. Whitacres brought a Debt against the Guardian of the Fleet of an escape
in the life of the Testator, and adjudged that it lies not, for the offense is
but a Trespass, which dies with the person, and by the Common law Debt lies
not against a Guardian, but an action upon the case, till 1 Rich. 2.12. which
gave a Debt against the Guardian, and it speks not of the heir nor Executor,
but if there be a Recovery in the life of the Guardian, so that it be reduced
to certainty, etc. contra.

223. Pas.
931. Taverner was sued in the Star Chamber, for forging a customary, so usage
of Coppyholds, which tended to the disinheritance of the Lord, and put diverse
Seals to it, and adjudged Forgery within 5. Eliz. by the word writing, the
Damages were levied by English Bill to the Sheriff, and by four Justices the
Queen may pardon the co^porall punishment which is but in example, but 3 held
contrary without a release of the party.

932. Linguen made a Feoffement to his own use, and after devised that the
Feoffees should be seized to the use of his daughter A. who in verity was a
Bastard, that is not a good devise of the Land by the intention, for by no
possibility may they be seized to her use; and a man will that his Feoffees
shall give in tail, that is a good devise of the Land.

933. Per nomen omnium haereditament. scituat. iacent. and existent. in D. the
Advowson of the vicarage passed, for although the Advowson be not visible nor
palpable, nor lies not in Livery, yet in Droit the Avowson the Church shall be
put in view, so that it had a being in the town and Church.

934 He which was convicted for three Masses, forfe^^s but 100 pound upon the
Statute 1 Eliz. vide verba Statuti.

324.
935. The under Marshall took an Obligation of one in Execution, and a
stranger, to save him harmless of escapes, and let the Prisoner at large, and
although the Statute 23. H. 6. touches only the Sheriff, Guardians of the
Fleet, and Palace, and ministers of the Sheriffs, the opinion was, that the
Obligation was void, and the written Statute is, that the Sheriff nor none of
the officers, and not of his officers as it is printed, also it seems the
Condition is against land, and then the Obligation is void by the Common Law.

936. A Termer covenanted for him and his Executors to repair and sustain a
house at his own charges, principali macremeo ( in laeso vel in decasu pro
defectu reparac' or otherwise in default of the Lessee or his Executors) only
excepted, and died, the house is burnt in default of the Executors, and
adjudged that a covenant lies against them, and damages recovered of the goods
of the Testator, and not conditional, if they had not of their proper goods,
and this was upon great advisement.

937. Tenant for life, the remainder in tail, the tenant for life levied a
Fine, as that, etc. to the use of himself in Fee, which is a forfeitrue, after
tenant for life, and he in remainder joined in a Feoffement by Letter of
Attorney, it is a discontinuance of the tail, for first it was entry for the
forfeiture, and then the Feoffement of he in remainder, and not a confirmation
of Lessee for life.

938. Tenant essoined after issue joined in a real plea.

325. Trin.
The Lord Audleys Case abridged before. 1 Eliz. fol. 166.

939. Sir William Say seized of land, and having issue two daughters, made a
gift in tail to the eldest, the remainder to his own right heirs, and died,
that daughter entered and is attaint of treason 31. H 8. by Parliament, and it
was enacted that she should forfeit, etc. which act saves to strangerrs their
rights, titles, reversions and reminders, and no word of Entry: It was resolved
that the Entry of the other daughter for her moity was congeable upon the
Patentee of the King. 1. Because the Act of Parliament had not put the Queen in
possession without office. 2. because Statute 33. and 34. and 35. H. 8. for
Confirmation of Patents without inquisit, wills that the Patent shall be good
against the King and his heirs, but it speaks not of subjects, upon which she
entered without Petition or monstrance of Right.

940. A writ of estrepment was granted in a quid Juris clamat between
Judgment and Execution.

941. Assise of two acres, the tenant pleaded two several Bars, and the
Plaintiff made several titles, and the tenant said the Assise to come upon
the title in the singular number, and they found for the one with the
Plaintiff, for the other with the tenant, and Judgment shall be given for one
for the Plaintiff, and shall be Barred for the other only, notwithstanding
his plea in the singular number.

Sexto decimo Elisabethae.
326.
942. Huntley devised a house to a woman, and to the brother of the woman, and
to the heirs of every of their bodies, and for default of such Issue of the
brother and of the sister, the remainder to the right heirs of the Devisor, and
died: The brother died without issue, the sister had issue and died, the issue
shall have a moity and no more, for it seems the word (every) made several
estates. Quaere if the right heir shall have in reversion or remainder.

327.
943. The sea left a great quantity of Land upon shore. Quaere whether the
owner next adjoining or the Queen shall have it.

944. The Queen was seized of Waddon Chase, and the Lord Gray was Lieutenant
there in fee, and he and his A^cestors, and their Keepers, had by Prescription
used to hunt vagrant Dear in the Demesns of the Manor of S. adjoining, as in
purlews, the Mauno^ of S. came into the hands of the Queen, who granted that to
Fortescue in Fee with a free Warren within his Demesns, Ita quod null' intret
in Warrennam illam ad sugand sine licentia F. It was holden that he unity does
not extinguish the purlew, and that the clause of Ita quod, etc. is not to be
extended against the Keeper of the Queen, but other subjects. So that where
Fortescues servant, killed a servant of the Keepers for chasing there, it is
not Justifiable by the Statute of Malef. in parcis.

945. If a Chaplain qualified for two benefices, take a third by triality,
Quaere if the first be void upon the Statute 21. H. 8. also Quaere if the
penalty of twenty pound, and profits, incur but upon the last Benefice, so
that the second only remains. Also if the presentation of the King with a false
supposall, that the King had title by lapse, where he had not, is void, And if
the King present one, and after p^esent another before induction, if without
express repeal, and rec^tall of the first accord, Statute 6. H. 8. cap. 9. if
the second shall repeal the first, and if the ordinary not having notice of the
repeal, proceed to induction, if the repeal be now of force. The King had the
presentation, the Bishop of Norwich the Nomination, the Bishop Collated without
presentation, and in a quare impeait he pleaded not disturbed. Quaere of the
Plea.

328.
946. A Church void by death, the Patron presented to the Archbishop of York,
who refused because illiterate, and that was given notice of by intimation
fixed at the Church door, and after the six months presented by lapse, the
Patron brought a Quare impedit. First it was resolved that the six months shall
be accounted from the death of the incumbent and not from the notice, But if
the Church be void by resignnat. or deprivation, it shall be accounted from the
notice, Also holden that the notice after this manner is not sufficient, except
the Pat^on inhabited ^n a foreign County, so that he cannot easily be ^ound,
also that the issue may be joined upon he ability, and that shall be tried by
the Archbishop of Canterbury Primate of all E^gland, and not by the Deane and
Chapter of York as side vicante. Q^ae^e if not so e converso if the Bishop if
Canterbury disturbes, and if the Cle^k be dead before issue tried, then it
shall be tried by the Country. After it was found for the Patron that the
Clerk was sufficient, and a writ to admit him awarded to the Archbishop of
Canterbury.

947. Mountford let, promising that the lessee shall quietly and peaceably have
and enjoy without interruption of any one as a doer of wrong entered, an action
upon the case lies upon the promise, and is not like to a warranty for that is
against titles and not against wrong. 26. H. 8.3.

948. A Receiver of the Queens impleaded in the Common bank for debt, had a
Writ of privilege out of the Exchequer to the Justices of the Bank to cease,
because he first ought to satisfy the Queen, but it was disalowed.

949. A lease is made to one, his Executors and Assigns, for the life of
another, the lessee made a lease for years rendering rent, to him his Executors
and Assigns, and died. Quaere if the less^e for years shall be occupan^, and
the rent extinct, or that the frank te^. shall revert to the first lessee, and
the term shall be in esse, but it seems the rent is gone. Vide 38. H. 6.4.

950. A Termor devised his term to his son when he shall come of full age, and
in the mean time that his wife shall have the occupation and proffits, the
wife executor sold the term. Quaere, what remedy for the son.

329.
951. The Deane and Chapter at Gloucester made a lease of a great wood rendering
rent, with recentry, and by letter of Attou^ney under their Common Seal, they
demand at an open place of the Wood, the Lessee made tender at another place;
Issue shall be taken upon the demand in the most open place. But for rent
payable out of land issue shall be of the tender in the most open place.

952. Upon submission by obligation, it was Arbitrated that the one shall pay
to the other twenty shillings for six years toward the finding of A. An action
of debt is brought upon the obligation, and default assigned in the nonpayment
of the twenty shillings in the fourth year, and showed not that A. is in life,
and yet adjudged good for it shall come in on the other part. Also the Annuity
is not determined by the death of A. being a Grant for six years, and is a duty
to the obligee himself toward the, etc.

953. A writ of false Judgment upon a Recovery upon an action upon the case,
and after the Record was removed the Plaintiff was nonsute, a scire jacias
issued to have execution of the damages, for the Record shall not be remand.

954. Talis tenet dimid' fcodi Mil' vocat. Bacoy in London de haered. que tenet
ultra de Rege this shall be intended in Chancery per moitie of a Knights Fee.

955. A man entitle himself as devisee of the entire land by the Statute 33. H.
8. although he showed not the tenure, yet it is very good, for that shall come
of the other party, and prima facie it shall be intended Socage, because the
greatest part of the land in the Kingdom is so: Tamen Sanders cor^ra.

330.
956. Before 27. H. 8. Cesti que use in tail, the remainder in tail, the
remainder to the first in Fee, he made a Feoff^ent to the use of himself for
life, the remainder to his eldest Son and Wife for life, and after their
decease, the remand' to the uses of their bodies in remand', etc. 27. is made
the Father died, so that the eldest Son and his Wife are seized of estates
tail executed. If the Feoffees may enter and revive the ancient use in tail
in the Son: But it was agreed they must not for two causes. First because
Statute of 1 R. 3. the Feoffees are bound by the Feoffment of cest^y que use.
Secondly because the Son came in by his own acceptance, and by the Statute, and
he is not remitted to the ancient use.

957. An Essovne was entered in the Roll in Common Bank, but not in the Essoyne
Roll, and upon that it was adjudged Error, And the Plantiffe in Error of policy
alleg^^ dimunition of the Record in that point, and had a Certiorare directed
to the Chief Justice of the Common place, to certify if he had any such
Essoyne, for if he certified that he had not, then his adversary shall not
allege dimunition in that point, although he had caused the Essoyne to be
entered in this term^. Admission of a Guardian or next friend, is without any
talis po^lo. s^o, for it is the act of the Court.

958. Avowry for Fealty and ten shillings rent, and suit, and alleged sesin
within fifty years, the Plantiffe said that he held by fealty twelve pence and
suit absque h^e, etc. found that the seisen of the rent, but not of the sidue,
he shall not have ^udgment, for all is in the affirmative, Traverse is not
found D. Quaere if it shall not be after fifty years. Quaere if the seisen of
the rent be not seisen of the other services also.

331.
959. C^ache devised a house to Alice his eldest daughter and her he^es, and if
she die having no issue, then to Thomasin his youngest daughter and her heirs,
and other lands he devised to Thomasin his daughter and her heirs of greater
value, and if she die within sixteen years, that A. shall have her part to her
and her heirs, and if A. marry such an one, that Thomasin shall have her part
to her and her heirs, and if Thomasin die having no issue, that all her part
shall go to two others which were Neeces, and if Alice die without issue, that
Thamasin shall have her part, to her and her heirs, Thomasin after sixteen
years died without ^ssue, and it was adjudged that Alice shall not have her
part but the Neeces, for notwithstanding the cross limitations, it appears
that the intent was not, that Alice shall have by Thomasin, if she survives
sixteen, for as it appears he bore more affection to Thomasin, and besides the
words so import, and when his intent is expressed it shall not be taken by
implication.

Dyer said that so there is no estate tail in the case but fee upon
limitation, but two held contra.

Hill.
960. A man devised that after debts and legacies paid, that his wife shall
have the residue to distribute for the soul of the testator, and made his wife
executor and died, she took another husband who made executor and died, against
which she brought a Detinue for the goods of the first husband, and adjudged
that it lies, for she shall not have the goods as legatory but a executor to
distribute, etc.

961. This Statute. 34. H. 8. cap. 21. of misnomer shall not aid non no^mer.

332.
962. The Conuser of a Statute infeoffed A. B. and of several lands, the land
of A. is extended and he brought an audita querela against B. to have
contribution, he pleaded in abatement the omission of the lands in possession
C. sed non allocatur, for the Plaintiff is not bound to take notice of that,
but every one grieved may have an audita querela, but upon a Statute Staple the
course is to have a^ Audita que^ela to the Chancellor, but upon a Statute
Merchant it shall be directed to the Justices of the Bank.

Pas.
963. A woman conspired with her servant to kill her husband, which he did in
her absence, it is petty treason in the woman being accessory, because petty
treason in the servant, contrary if the conspiracy had been with a stranger,
vide Mist. Sand. Cases.

964. Wast was assigned in the cutting 10 trees, the Defendant as to three
justified, for that he employed them in six posts, ad separand. separalia
clausa ibidem, and said not quot clausa, and alleged not that by prescription
there was such a kind of enclosure there, nor that all the three Oaks were
there so employed, nor that the enclosure is made indeed, upon which it is
adjudged against the Defendant, and to the seven he justified, because they
were dry, hollow, and putrified in the top, non being sufficient maeremiam pro
aedifici^s; Mounson and Harper, it seems the ^lea is insufficient; but Dyer
held contra, because it amounts to that which is usual in Presidents, viz.
that they were dead, not bearing fruit, ^^que folia in aestate. Sed quod non
fuit suffic. maeremium, it is not to the purpose, for it may be otherwise
employed.

965. Husband and wife, Donees in special tail, the husband is attaint of
treason and executed, having issue, the wife dies, the issue shall not have the
Land, for he ought to make his conveyance by both, per opin. Iu^^ices.

333.
966. One Citizen sued another in the commonplace for debt upon an Obligation,
for which and because he would not stand to the order of two Aldermen, he is
disfranchised, and because here is no cause to disfranchise him, a Writ was
awarded to the Mayor to restore him.

967. Chapman devised his house in which I. inhabited to his three brothers,
and the house which T. his brother inhabits to the said brother, and he to pay
10 pound to Chr. C. or otherwise to remain to the house, provided the houses
shall not be sold but go to the next of blood being male, that is an estate
tail, and shall go to the house, and shall be construed to the most worthy
person of the Family, and being males it shall be construed in the future time.

334.
968. Tenant in Tail levied a Fine, as that, etc. and retook in special tail
to a second wife, the issue of the first may not aver continuance of
possession against the Fine, which is a Feoffement upon Record and
discontinuance. Quaere of a Fine with Conusance of Right only. vide the
Statute of fines 17. Ed. 1. cap. 1.

Trin.
969. A lease for years upon condition that the Lessee shall not alien to any
person without license of the Lessor, the land, nor any part of that, the
Lessor gave license to alien part, the Lessee aliened the other part without
license, and adjudged that the Lessor may enter, notwithstanding the
dispensation with the Condition in part.

335.
970. Sir Francis Calthrope 26. H. 8. not having any issue by Indenture
tripartite between himself and one Windam, and one Edward Calthorp his nephew,
covenanted with Windam sole, that Arthur the son of Edward, shall marry the
daughter of Windam before Michaelmas, and Windam also covenanted for the
daughter, in consideration of which marriage to be had, and other agreements
for the said marriage, Sir Francis covenanted with Windam sole, that he would
make an estate to a stranger of so much of his Manor of Northmorton as amounted
to 40 Marks by the year, to the use of himself for life, the remainder to the
use of Edward for life, remainder after his decease, and carnal copulation
between the said Arthur and the daughter of A. Windam to their use, and to the
use of the heirs of Arthur, of the body of the daughter, the remainder to
Arthur in general tail, the remainder to Edward in tail, the remainder to the
right heirs of Sir Francis, and the residue of the said Manor of N. to the use
of himself for life, and after to the use of Edward in tail, the remainder to
the use of his own right heirs, and covenanted with Edward only to make
further assurance within the year, and agreement that the said uses shall not
be altered without the assent of Windam, for which Covenants and agreements
Edward covenanted in the same Indenture to pay to Sir Francis a 100 Marks,
which after he satisfied, and a Fine and recovery was had to the said uses; the
marriage took no effect, Sir Francis had after issue one son and died, If the
son being the heir general shall have the land by descent, or Edward shall
have by remainder ut supra, came in question upon the demurrer, upon that above
given in evidence in an Ejectione sirmae brought by the Lessee Edward. Note
there is no Election showed by the Feoffees of the part of the Manor of N.
which amounts to 40 Marks, as it seems there must be, before it can be in
Cestuy que use. And note although here is money paid in Consanguinity, yet
because the principal cause of the entering into this conveyance was the
marriage which took not effect, Quaere if all be destroyed. Windam never agreed
to alter the uses. Compound.

971. Humphrysons case, the use upon a recovery was limited in Latin, made to
the use of H. he against whom the recovery was had for life, remainder seniori
puero de corp. H. in tail, etc. After H. covenanted by English Indenture to
levy a Fine to the use supra, where the remainder was to the use of the eldest
child of the body of H. etc. H. had a daughter eldest, and a son youngest, the
opinion was, that the daughter shall have the land, for though the word puero
be indifferent to every sex, and then the male for dignity shall be preferred,
yet the English had declared the construction to be to the eldest child.

972. A disseifor of land in three several towns A. B. and C. he levied a Fine
of that in A. the disseisee within five years made a Letter of Attorney, to
enter in all the three, the Attorney entered in B. and C. in name of all, per
Curiam it is not an Entry of that in A. for the Conusee had there distinct
Franktenement by title, and for every franktenement, a several Entry is
needful. 9. H. 7.25.

973 A Parson 28. H. 8. made a Lease for life rendering Rent, and that is of
Land given to him and his successors to find lights, etc. the Rent was employed
till Statut. Ed. 6. after the Statute the successor accepted the Rent; the
opinion of the Court was, that the patentee of the King may enter upon the
Lessee as the successor might have done before the statute, if he had not
accepted the Rent, the acceptance supra was void, as to the affirming of the
Lease, for he had no reversion at the time, it seems that the acceptance before
the statute by any successor shall bind the Patentee by the saving in the Act.

338.
974. Cook, Wotton, and Dannet purchased jointly in ^ee, and every of them
covenanted with the other, and his heirs and Assigns, and ut^ique little, to
make such conveyance, to the other heirs, who should first die, as they shall
devise, D. and W. died, the heir of W. devised an Indenture of bargain and
sale, and tendered to C. to seal and deliver; And C. he required time to confer
with his counsel, upon which W. brought an Action of Covenant, as heir, and
recovered 200 pounds damages. Note a Covenant lies for the heir where it is
not annexed to the Land, and also that the Covenanter is bound peremptorily
upon request to seal, and utrique is as several as alteri.

975. In a franchise where a Lord had Waifs, a thief waived sheep which before
the Lord s^ised, they strayed into another liberty, where the Lord had
Estrayes: Gerrard held that they appertain to the first Lord, and that the
property was in him as it should be in the King, upon the Waivier without
seiser; Catlin, it is in the King by Prerogative without seiser, but the
Prerogative is not grantable over for that.

Decimo septimo Elisabethae.
Mich.
976. An Infant which was Plaintiff by his next friend' and now at full age
made an Attorney and is nonsute, he shall be ^amerced, contra if he had
continued within age.

339.
977. At the Nisi Prius 12 Jurors appeared, but no hundredor, and 4 were
challenged, and upon a tales de circumst. 4 hundredors returned, and joined
with the residue, and it passed for the Plaintiff. Quaere if it be a lawful
trial according to 35. H. 8. Cap. 6.

978. The Prebend of Salisbury made a Lease, for 70 years, the Bishop, Dean,
and Chapter confirmed, (the Bishop being Patron and Ordinary) quoad 51 years
and non ultra, the Demise and all that is in the Indenture, adjudged good for
51 years, and Quaere except for all.

979. Tenant for life, the remainder for life, the remainder in tail, the
remainder in Fee to the remainder for life, Tenant for life, and he in
remainder for life joined in a Feoffement by deed, per Curiam he in remainder
in tail may enter for forfeiture of both their estates, for he in remainder
joining, is particeps criminis. If the Tenant for life himself had made a
Feoff^ment he in remainder for life, might not enter, because he had not estate
of inheritance.

980. One had a common appendant in a great west, the Lord improved parcel of
the wast, and after infeoffed the Commoner of that which he improved, it is no
extinguishment of the Common.

Hill.
981. A woman and her husband, as Administrators of the first husband,
recovered a Debt, while that suit was depending, the son of the intestate by
Coven between him and the Defendant, procured new Letters of Administration to
him and his mother jointly, and after judgment released to the Debtor: The
husband and wife sued Execution, the Debtor brought an Audita querela, hanging
which the second Administrator was repealed per sentence, and the Coven and the
repeal pleaded in Bar, upon which the Defendant demur, and against the
Defendant.

982. The Ordinary collated A. to the Vicarage of Ya^ton, after two years
where, the title of the lapse was come to the King, after the King presented B.
who brought a Quare impedit against the Bishop and Incumbent, upon refusal to
admit him, hanging which, A. procured another Presentment in the name of the
Queen without mention of the first, and adjudged no revocation of the first,
vide Statute 6. H. 8. cap. 15. that where a Patent is ad been placitum Regis,
the second Patent ought to rent the first, and that the will is determined.

340.
983. After Statute 27. H. 8. a man made a feoffment to the use of Alice his
wife for life, and if she dies leaving the husband, then to the use of the
husband and such wife as he shall after marry, for life for her jovnture, The
remainder over to a stranger, and after with privity and assent of the Feoffee,
he in remainder joined with the Feoffees in a feoffment, by letter of Attorney,
to new uses, and after the Feoffee leavied a fine according; the first wife
died, the husband took another wife and died, and five years after the fi^e,
the second wife by commandment of the first Feoffees entered to revive the first
use. Mounson and Harper said, that the entry is lawful without possession, or
commandment of the Feoffees, which had nothing therein, but the future use is
in the custody of the Law, and 27 H. 8. has given the possession to the use,
and so the feoffment of the Feoffees void; But if they had right or title in
the land, their feoffment had given it, per Mounson, It was the Lady Vmptons
case, That a Feoffment of he in reverson, and livery in absence of the Tenant
for life will pass the Fee; Manwood and Dyer held that the use is drowned, for
the second Feoffees had not their possession for any such confidence, for they
have not notice, and the feoffment had taken away the entry of the first
Feoffees, where their entry ought to execute the dormant use; And although the
Statute concern the Franktenement and Fee, yet they have a mean interest in
regard of the dormant use, the which is conveyed by the Feoffment, and it is no
injury to the woman which was then unknown. Dyer said, the second wife shall
not take in jointure, nor otherwise, for she was not in esse when the
particular estate ended, by the death of the first wife.

341.
But all the Justices held the contrary, for there is a difference between an
use and possession; Also Dyer thought that the remaind' after the death of the
husband, is no j^ynture, but it shall be an estate in the life of the husband.
Quaere accord.

Pas.
984. A Formedon against husband and wife, the husband made default, the wife
rescued and vouched, the demand' counterplead' the voucher in parcel for
joyntute with her husband, non allocat', for the default of the husband shall
not prejudice her, and it shall be intended by the undivided moyties; And to
another parcel because the Vouchee not his Ancestors had nothing after the
title of the Demandant, except jointly with A. and B. who are in full life and
non allocat' because he ought to allege by name that the Vouchee or his
Ancestors were joynt-tenants, and aver the continuance of the Jointure and
survivor, for otherwise he acknowledges the possession whereof he may make a
Feoffmen^: And the Demandant did counterplead in another parcel, because the
husband and wife have leavied a fine, as that he hanging the Writ non allocat'
for he is stopped by his using his Writ against them, to say they are not
Tenants; But if he will counte^ple^, it should be in the place and Garranty,
because she shall not have in value if she had nothing in the land demanded.

985. The Statute 27. H. 8. of Suppressing, is, that Leases made by Governors
within a year of the Statute, by which the houses are decayed, shall be void,
and there are affirmative words, that Leases with the ancient Rent shall be
good. A Lease was made within forty seven days of the statute, for threescore
years, without reserving the ancient Rent, and holden that is shall not, be
intended Covenous without express averment of the Covin, for it may be bona
fide. And the affirmative words shall not be intended, and no other. Also
peradventure the value was decayed.

342.
986. Four Letters for the inception of the four first words in a Patent of the
King, were interlessed and space left for them, viz. H. R. F. and H. yet it was
adjudged a good Patent, for its for the honor of the King, and it is usual in
many Patents, that after they may be depict or limmed with gold.

Trin.
987. A man having two daughters by diverse venters, he demised the moity of his
land to his wife for seven years, and that the eldest daughter ought to enter
in the other moity, ad the day of her marriage, and if his wife be with child
with a daughter, that she shall have an equal portion with the other sisters,
and he died, the wife entered and had no daughter, the eldest daughter took a
husband and entered in the moity, the youngest daughter died without issue, the
seven years expired, adjudged that the collateral heir of the youngest shall
have the moity of all, and not of the moity only by liberty of Entry Devised
to the eldest, the property is not devised, but occupation for a time, for the
minority of the youngest, and it appeared that his intent was that every
daughter shall have equal advancement.

343.
988. The Earl of Arundell granted a Manor to the Earl of Northumberland in
tail, the remainder in tail, upon Condition that they, nor neither of them, the
Manor or any part thereof, shall alien, discontinue, or do any thing in any
manner, or permit directly or indirectly, but that without impediment it may
and shall revert, if they die without issues: The Earl of Northumberland took
w^e, also he granted the reversion of a Copdyhold according to the Custom, and
after he committed treason, and after he is attaint of that by outlawry, and
died without issue, the Coppyholder in possession died, the Earl of Arundell
entered into the Manor, upon which the Grantee in reversion entered into the
Coppyhold land, and the Lord of Arundell brought a Trespass, and the opinion
of the Justices that it lies not.

1. By all besides Geffreys the taking of the wife although her Dower may
hinder the immediate reverting, yet it is no breach of the condition, for if
there had been an express condition that the donee shall not tak wife, or that
his wife shall not be endowed, it shall be repugnant to the estate and void,
and besides, be cause the wife may not enter in her Dower without assignment,
that shall revert absolutely without impediment.

2. Also by the better opinion the reverting is not hindered by the reversion
granted of the Coppyhold, for the Coppyholder is but Tenant at will according,
etc. so that the Frank tenement may revert, but peradventure an express
condition that he shall grant a Coppyhold, in reversion he would be restrained;
etc. But the general condition here as it seems, because the condition shall
be taken strictly, it shall not comprehend, a private Custom upon the land
has not an eye, warrants of Land in Borough English shall bind the heir at
the Common Law only; so the heir at the Common law, shall take advantage of
the Condition.

344.
3. Also the Treason committed without Attainter is no cause of entry, for the
Condition, and when the attainter came as it seems per melior. opin. it is no
breach of the Condition, for the quo minus reverti debeat and possit, had
mitigated the precedent words of the Condition, for otherwise if it had been an
impediment to the descent, to the issues, it shall be a breach of the
Condition, but the quo minus, etc. it shall mitigate that if it may revert as
it should, for the King had estate but during the issues, and then it may
revert immediately with Petition or sure, as the Lord Barkleys Case is that his
Entry was adjudged congeable upon the failing of the Issue male of the body of
H. 7. But all agreed, that although there be a Cause of Entry for some of the
matters, and yet the Grantee of the Reversion of the Coppyhold shall retain,
for it is a thing incident to the Custom of the Manors, which the Lord for the
time may grant, etc.

Decimo octavo Elisabethae.
Mich.
989. In debt upon an Obligation against the daughters and heir of Henningham
upon the Obligation of their father, the Plaintiff recovered upon nhil dicit
and Judgment general, and upon a Scire facias to have Execution the Defend.
pleaded nothing by descent in Fee, at the day of the first Writ purchased, nor
after; But the Opinion was, that after recovery per nihil dicit, non sum
informat. or confession, the heir shall come too late to plead nothing by
descent, etc. But he ought at the first to plead that, or she the certainty
quant. etc. An by Dyer, that if the profits received after the death of the
Ancestor till the Writ purchased, are sufficient to satisfy the Debt, that the
Plaintiff shall have a general Judgment against the heir: Manwood contra,
and the Judgment supra shall be special lib. Intrac. 151. Debt against the
Executors of the heir without averment the assets descended to the heir, for
it shall not be intended, if the contrary be not showed.

345.
990. A man grannted a Rent Charge without words prose and haered. and died,
the Grantee brought an annuity against the heir, and after discontinued his
suit, and distrained, and well adjudged, because the election to make that an
annuity is determined by, the death of the father.

991. It was found by office that tenure which was holden of the Queen, as of
her principality of Wales, by service to go into the Wars of the Prince, at
the Charge of the Prince, and per Curiam, it is not tenure in Capite.

992. Thorntons Case, it was decreed that a Bastard to whom the mother conveyed
the entire Chivalry land by act executed, It is not a Child advanced within 32.
yet certain side.

993. A quarter of a year is 91 days, half a year 182. a year 365. and to the
6 hours the Law had not regard.

Ter centum, ter viginti cem quinque diebus,
Sex horas neque plus, integer annus habet.
346.
994. Upon Error in Chester the Writ shall be directed to the Judge there out
of the Chancery at Westminster, returnable in the Kingsbench; and they
themselves may reform that without defend. present. and make restitution, or
award a Scire facias against him if he will, but if he affirm the first
Judgment, all shall be removed, and if it be found erroneous they shall
forfeit 2 hundred pound.

995. Quare impedit by Bacon Tenus that if an Incumbent be deprived for not
reading articles (according to 73. Eliz.) that the Ordinary shall give notice
to the Patron, Intimation that comprehends that the Incumbent had not read the
articles and subscribed, it is not sufficient; But he ought to say late
Incumbent, and he is bound to show that he ought to subscribe, and that he is
deprived for default of that, also the Limitation is omnibus, etc. where
special notice ought to be given to the Patron, and it is not sufficient to
have the intimation read at the Church door, and in pulpit, but it shall be
special notice given to the person of the Patron for that.

347.
996. A Subpoena 1. Out of the Common Bank against Waller, upon information
exhibited against him there for usury, contra formam Statuti. 2. There is no
mention what Statute 3. that by the Attorney pleaded nonculpable, and was found
against him, and Judgment gave according, for the Statute of Jeofailes, which
speaks of misconveyance of process, and misjoyning issue.

997. A Condition of an Obligation was, that if the Obliger before Mich. make a
Lease for 31 years, if A. will assent, and if he will not assent then for 21
years that the Obligation shall be void, A. would not assent, the Lease for 21
years ought to be made before Michaelmas.

348.
998. Westons Case, If the first benifice became void by ^anceptance of another
per 21. H. 8. for although Weston had a dispensation from the Pope, that was
made void by the statute, and though after dispensation be purchased of the
Queen within the Act of the statute, 28. H. 8. yet the party shall not be
restored without a new presentment, notwithstanding the said stat. 28. made the
Bulls of the Pope good for one year, and that if within the year surrender
them, that the Chancellor of the augmentation may make a dispensation to them
per Mounson and Manwood But Dye^contra, for by him as 21. made the benifice
void, so the 28. restores it again, and both stand if it may be, Tenus if the
Queen had two titles, to preserve one as Patron, and another by lapse, and
granted the Fee of the Avowson of the Church, being void, and spoke not of the
Presentment hac vice, he himself shall present. And if the King had title to
present by lapse, or, etc. and he presented, end the Clerk is instituted and
admitted, and dies before induction, the King shall present again. Quaere,
Otherwise it is in the Case, of a subject: and the Queen after institution and
before induction may revoke her presentation. And it was adjudged in the
Exchequer chamber, that if the Church be void per resignation or upon 21. H. 8.
for that no notice is given to the Patron although the lapse incurres to the
Queen, she shall not present, for then the Prerogative shall do wrong.

999. A man devised Lands in London, to two upon condition to pay Rent to his
wife at four Feasts of the year, and if the heir be behind, by 40 days being
demand' that it shall be lawful for the woman to distrain and holden that if
the Rent be behind, the wife may not distrain till it be demanded, and yet the
heir of the husband may enter for condition broken, although the wife never
made demand, and as to that they are bound at their peril to pay. And holden
that the subsequent words of distress does not qualify the Condition, but
jointly both penalties for the non payment.

349.
1000. An appeal of the death of a brother against I. S. of M. etc. as
principal, and one F. as principal, whereas the name of the principal was T.
S. the accessory appeared, and pleaded no such in rerum natura as I. S. the day
of the writ purchased nor never after. The two chief Justices held that
although there be another I. S. in another County, if there be not in the same
where the Town of M. is. Or if they be dead before the writ put chased, the
plea is good: and holden there that in favor of life a man may traverse the
return of the Sheriff.

1001. The Conusee of a Statute took a Fine of the Land of the Conusor to
another use, it is not discharged of the Execution, for the Statute 27. had a
saving of elder rights, etc. which the Feoffees have, or may have.

Pas.
1002. Lands in the hands of an Abbot, and of the Farmers of an Abbot, were
time beyond memory. etc. charged but of tithe of Lamb and Wool, and now the
Parson sued to have tithe hay, and grain, prohibition lies by the Statute 31.
H. 8. per the parolls discharged in the Statute Parson Pekirks Case.

1003. A. Tenant in Tail, the remainder to B. and C. in tail, A. discontinued
and died without issue, B. brought a Formedon in remainder of the Moity, the
Writ was, that after the death of A. B. and C. to the Demand. Filio and Haered.
B. remaind. etc. eo quod A. obiit sine Haered. de corp. and well without
mention in the eo quod in the death of C. for the clause of eo quod is used
always to determine the former Tail, and for the estate for life that is
emplyed sufficiently determined per the words quae post mortem, etc.

350.
1004. A man let 10 acres parcel of a Manor for 10 years rendering Rent, and
after let his M^nour for 20 years to begin at Michael. and the Lessee for 10
years never atturned, the 10 years expired, the Lessee of the Manor had 10
acres during his term, because the Franktenement and the Fee abides parcel
always.

1005. Upon recovery in a Quare impedit a Writ to admit the Clark was directed
to the Guardian of the Spiritualties, which is not returnable before it is
executed, the Bishop is created, it was doubted if their authority cease, But
it seems upon the suggestion of the matter supra, the Plaintiff may have
another Writ to the Bishop returnable if he will.

1006. A man obliged to two in 200. pound, to be paid 100 pound to one, and
100. pound to the other; the one died, Quaere, if the survivor, or the executor
of the other shall have his 100. pound.

1007. A man devised land to his two daughters in tail, they by word made
partition, the one died, per Curiam, the other shall have the entire:
Peradventure of a term, partition may be made by words.

351.
1008. The Rectory of West Bodin ought to come to Edw. 6. per attaindor of
Felony, to which the advowson of the Vicarage was appendant, and was concealed,
the Queen granted the Rectory and omnia haereditamenta. parcel. spectant. vel
pertin. dictae Rectoriae; and because the Patent was in tam amplis modo and
forma quam the Felon had it. Also there are words ex certa scientia, etc. so
that the Queen is not deceived; Adjudged that the advowson passes without
special naming: and so it was moved that some books are, that by an usurpation
the King shall be out of possession, and put to his droit of advowson; But 35.
H. 8. is clear that the Queen may gain possession, per presentment and plenarty
six months, against an infant which is a purchaser.

Trin.
1009. A man which held by Herriot Custom of diverse Lords, he made a
fraudulent gift of 20. horses, one of the Lords brought a debt for him and the
Queen, for the value of 20. horses, upon the Statute 13. Eliz. Dyer and Harper
held it was maintainable, but Manwood contrary; For the other Lords are
grieved, and the statute shall not be construed to aid one only concerning his
grief. Quaere if the Lords may join in an action.

1010. Husband and wife tenants in special tail, the husband only levied a
Fine to his own use, and devised the land to his wife for life, the remainder
over rendering Rent, the husband died, the wife entered and paid the Rent and
died. The Issue is Barred for a causes, first by the Fine which had Barred his
conveyance and the entail. 2. By the remitter waived by the mother.

352.
1011. The Chaplain of the Arch-Bish, of Canterbury having a Ben fice of the
g^ft of the Queen, he procured a dispensation of the Archbishop of Canterbury
to have a triality, the Queen confirmed the dispensation with a non abstante in
aliquo statut. the Chaplain took two others, the first adjudged void by the
Statute 21. H. 8. vide 1. and 2. P. and M. 25. H. 8. and 1. Eliz.

1012. An Abbot made a Lease to another Abbor for 60 years, the Lessee and his
Coven. made a Lease for 60 years, the reversion came to the Queen, the 60 years
expired, the second Lessee surrendered to the Queen ex intention that the Queen
would grant to him for 20 years remaining, the Queen citing the Indenture and
surrender ex certa scientia, etc. granted for 20 years, Wray, Southcote and
Manwood, held, that the Queen may avoid the Grant because she was deceived,
Dyer contra, for it is not upon suggestion but consideration, the which ^s not
to the put pose be it true or false.

1013. The custom of granage in London is, that the Mayor shall have the 20 part
of falt, brought into the Port of London by an alien, the alien brought salt,
and promised to satisfy Granage, In an Action upon the Case the Plaintiff
declared that for so much being the 20 part not satisfied, etc. and yet as
well, as if he had said he had not satisfied the 20 part, for it is employed in
the words supra.

353.
1014. Information was exhibited for intrusion into 15. houses, the Defendant
conveyed to himself title by the Letters Patents of H. 8. by name of the great
Garden, etc. containing in length from the East, etc. 100 feet, and in latitude
from, etc. 200 feet. The Attorney of the Queen replied and maintained the
information absque hoc, that H. 8. granted the 15 houses by name of the great
Garden containing in length 200 feet (where the Defendant had pleaded the 200
feet in latitude, and he made no mention of the latitude, and hoc petit quod
inquirat, etc, and upon that they were at issue, and verdict found that H. 8.
did not grant by name of the great Garden containing in length 200 feet prout
Defend. in Barra allegeth; where it should have been as the Attorney of the
Queen had alleged, insomuch that verdict was found for the Queen and judgment
given: and after by error was reversed, for error in the Issue and verdict of
more feet then in the plea; And there it is said that it is not formal, that
be which traverses absque hoc, which is in the negative, should join issue
first, but ought to be a rejoinder: so that the party affirmative, ought first
to join issue, viz. praedictus Def. us prius dicit, etc. and de hoc ponit se
super patriam. And there it is a Quaere if by the Statute of Jeofailes 32. H 8.
discontinuance in the Case of the Queen, after verdict be aided.

Decimo nono Elisabethae.
354. Mich.
1015. Blower being a Lay man with^^^ 24 years of age, was instituted and
inducted into a Benifice, a stranger sued a citation out of the delegate to
deprive him, hanging which one W. brought a Quare impedit, and against Blower
and the Ordinary, and had judgment by default at the grand distress, B. and
the Bishop brought a writ of descent upon non summons. W. pleaded in Bar to
both (which was evil) the deprivation of Blow. supra; also holden no plea, for
the incumbency was not in question, but the disturbance, for which upon
demurrer it was adjudged that the first Judgment shall be void, and the
Plaintiffes restored to that which they lost.

1016. A Fine was levied by Edward Barrows to one Anne Barrows to the uses in
an Indenture, where there was a proviso, if Edward pay or tender 20 pound
during his life at the Fontstone in the Church of Salisbury to Anne, that it
shall be to the use of Edward in Fee.

1017. And holden that because the day is not limited that tender shall not be
to the purpose, except he give notice to Anne, that she or her deputy may be
there to receive.

1018. Cestuy que use 12. Ed. 4. devised his land in E. to his son and his
heirs, provided that if he die without issue, or the issues fail living his
Executors, they shall sell the land, per Curiam, that is not an estate tail,
nor any gift of the land it self, in a Formedon.

1019. A woman covert with her huband, levied a Fine of the land of the wife
holden in Capite, and that to the us of her Children, An holden by the greater
er number, that the Wardship is saved by the Stature upon the parties
compounded. Notwithstand. Plowden and Dyer contra. 1. Because a woman covert is
not solely seized. 2. Also a woman covert has neither power nor will. 3. Also
the Statute was made only for advancement by husbands of their wives, or
children, but not contra, and such cases rarely happen, for that they are not
provided for. As the 11. H. 7. provides not discontinuance by the husband of
the land given to him by his wife, and the chief intent of the 32 was, to give
a liberty to make a will of land.

Hill.
1020. A Termer is ejected, the Lessor may enter every year for to save a
descent, or to have an Assise. but shall not recover damages: by Bell and
Dyer, if the Lessor be upon the Land, and the Lessee will make a Feoffement, it
is no disseisen. Manwood and Wray contrary, Dyer said if the Lessor after his
regresse be ousted, he shall have an Assise and recover Damages. Quaere 15. H.
7.5. Lord Cromwell against Andrews.

1021. If a Writ of Discharge of the ancient Sheriff be delivered to the
County Clerk sitting in the County Court, the authority of the said Sheriff
although absent shall presently cease, for if a man be pronounced outlawed of
felony in the County Court, and any of the County do afterward receive him,
they are accessory, for it is a public act of which every one ought to take
notice.

1022. The Duke of Sommerset bargained and sold land to King Edward the 6. and
acknowledged the deed before the Master of the Chancery, but it was never
enrolled but put in a Chest; now in time of Queen Elisabeth, it was holden that
the inrollment will not make it to pass to the Queen, neither as purchaser,
nor as heir, because never in her Ancestor.

Pas.
1023. Only brought an Action upon the Case against the Earl of Kent and his
wife, and declared upon an assumpsit of his wife whilst she was sole, in
Consideration that he had employed great travel and expended 1500 pound about
businesses and suits of the wife, that she would repay the 1500 pound, and
besides 200 l. more: The Defendants per Protestation that the Plaintiff did
not expend 1500 l. and by Protestation that the Feme did not promise the
aforesaid 200 l. over expenses, an for plea said that the Plaintiff expended
10 pounds about, etc. and not above, and that the heir in recompense of part of
the Dower of the Feme concluded to make a Lease for years to the Feme to begin
after her death, which the Feme caused to be made to the Plaintiff to the use
of the Feme; and after marriage the Earl agreed that in satisfaction of the
Plaintiff of the said assumpsit for expenses and travel, the Plaintiff
should retain the Leases, and that at the request of the Plaintiff, upon which
the Plaintiff demur. Mounson and Manwood held the Consideration was against
Law, because it imports maintenance, also the Plaintiff ought to have showed
what business, etc. Dyer, it seems not to be Maintenance to aid a Widow in
her business, but Charity, and that is no satisfaction to retain the Lease
which was his own before, and of which no use may be limited. Also it no
advantage till the death of the wife, where the amends upon accord ought to be
executed in the life of the Trespassour and ought to be executed before the
action brought, and not at a day to come, for although such agreement had day
to come, the party may refuse, but otherwise in arbit: ement, and yet
arbitritrement ought to be in appearance commodious to both parties, Manwood
agrees that it is no satisfaction

1023. A writ of Error is brought against B. upon Error in a Writ of Covenant,
where in the Writ of Covenant B. was named Assignee of C. Barh. and Manwood,
the word. Assignee enables the Plaintiff, etc. and come j^y nest. gar. per le
record, for that, etc. Mounson Dyer, Wray and Bell, and here is the entire name
of the Plaintiff, which suffices.

357.
1024. A Parson made a Lease for 40 years, the Bishop of London being Patron
and Ordinary confirmed it without the Dean and Chapter, the Incumbent died, the
Bishop collated another, who made a new Lease, which is well confirmed, the
Bishop is translated, the resolution of the Justices was certified to the
Counsel, that the first Lease stood good, and not the second before both lives
of the Bishop and Incumbent which found the Church charged.

1025. There was a private Statute made 35. H. 8. that all Leases made by A. of
the Land of his life for 3 lives or 21 years rendering the ancient Rent, shall
be good. The husband made a Lease for 21 years, to begin after a Lease in Esse,
and it seems good, for in the Act is no restraint of Leases in reversion, as is
in the 32. Mounson contra.

1026. Chick devised a house in Soper lane to Alice his Cousin in Fee simple,
and after her decease to W. her son, which W. was heir apparent to A. It was
adjudged that the woman is but Tenant for life, the remainder to the son for
life, the remainder in Fee to the woman, so the husband of the wife was not
tenant by the courtesy.

1027. Spinosas Case, if an Alien born d^e not pray Medi^t. Imguae before the
venire sacias awarded, he comes too late after, for it appears not to the
Court, that he is an alien.

358.
1028. Salfords Case, a Custom was alleged that tenant in Fee might make a
Lease but for 6 years, and adjudged a void Custom, because repugnant to the
Fee, and unreasonable.

1029. A Lease to a spiritual person against the Statute of 21. H. 8. c. 12.
it was adjudged, that it is not void, for although the Statute said that none
shall take, said not it shall be void, but ordained penalty, vide for that the
first part of the Stat. and the proviso for hospital^ty.

1030. He in reversion infeoffed Tenant for life without deed that shall inure
first, as a surrender of the Lease for life, and then as a Feoffement, as
Tenant for life surrendered to the Grantee of the reversion, that is first an
Atturnment, and then a Surrender.

1031. Jointure after the coverture, the husband and wife levied a Fine of the
jointure, it seems clear, if it be as that which the Conusee had of the gift of
the husband, that it is no Bar in Dower. And the election is not given to the
wife till after the death of the husband, according stat. 27. H. 8.

359. Welcden against Elhington. Com. fol. 516. Vicesimo Elizabethae. Mich.
1032. He which held of a Manor in soccage, which Manor is holden over of the
King in Capite, purchased a release of the measualty, he shall now hold in
Capite, Quia volenti, etc.

1033. Upon a pluries distress 3. only appeared, the Plaintiff prayed
another Distringas, without praying a Tales, If the Defendant pray a Tales, the
Court ought to grant it at his request.

360.
1034. A tenant of Prince Arthur as Earl of Chester in Chivalty in Capite died,
B. his eldest son is in Ward, B. died without issue, after upon Devenerunt, C.
was found brother and heir to B. and within age; C. at full age pursued livery
per a Writ to the Escheator, per name of C. son and heir of A. and now it came
in question, if the possession continued in the Queen now, etc. And adjudged
not. But it is a good livery, for if he had not been named heir to any it is
good, for it is a petition; And it is in verity, he is heir to his father, his
brother being dead without issue: Also by livery the King shall not part with
any thing which is his own, but to do a thing only to which he is holden in
Justice, and for that the Advowson appendent shall not pass without naming:
Contra in a Grant. But if it be a void livery the entry of the heir is
intrusion, which is pardoned by diverse Parliaments, as also by the death of
Prince Arthur.

1035. A Peer of Ireland committed treason in Ireland. it may not be tried in
England, per stat. 26. H. 8. 32. H. 8. 35. H. 8. 5. Edw. 6. for he is no
subject of England but of Ireland; And trial in Ireland is by Parliament, not
by Peers.

1036. A Church void by taking a second Benefice upon 21. H. and lapse came to
the Queen, who presented A. who was admitted, instituted, and inducted, after
which the Queen presented B. A. died, the Pat^on brought a Quare impedit
against B. and counted of the avoidance and lapse supra, and that the Queen
presented A. who was admitted and instituted; and that the Church is void by
the death or A. if that be sufficient without saying inducted; and it seems
because they said that the Church was void by the death of A. that it implies
an induction, and then it is not revokable, for that etc.

361.
1037. A lease to the mother and son habendum ijs pro ^ermino vi^ae successive
uni eorum post alterum sicut nominantur in Indent. and non conjunctim, It was
ruled that they are not Joynt-tenants, but it is a remainder to the son.

Hill
1038. Windsor Bargainee of land for 600. pound, by another Indenture
covenanted to remake to the bargainer and his heirs, such assurance as the
Counsel of the Bargainer shall devise within a year; Provided that if the
Vendee make default in assurance, then if he do not pay 500. pound to the
Vendor, that he shall stand seized to the use of the Vendor, the Vendor did not
tender assurance, and the 500. pound is unpaid, the Vendee had the right of the
land, because it was the folly of the Vendor not to require assurance.

1039. In Trespass, upon issue of not Culpable the Jury appeared the first day
of Hill' Term, the Defendant said, that the Inquest ought not to be taken, for
the Plaintiff had released after the last continuance, but because the release
was after the essoyne day of the utas, it came not between the last continuance
and the utas, therefore the inquest taken, contra if in the mean; But then also
he shall say, actio non, and not that the inquest shall not be taken.

1039. Dower by Beamond, the Tenant pleaded assignment of rent out of the land,
etc. But because he said not, that it was the land of the Tenant at the ^^me,
adjudged against him upon demurrer.

1040. Altons case, digging of a trench in meadow, by which the pasture is
^ettered, is no waste. Quaere if he plead no waste made, if that be a good
evidence, or that he shall plead in Bar.

1041. A Bill of deceit against an Attorney for appearing without warrant, per
covin and fraud, in an action of debt, brought against the now Plaintiff, and
pleaded non sum informatus, the Defendant said, that he was retained for the
Plaintiff and another, and the other him retained for both, and for want of
information, he pleaded ut supra, per Curiam, he ought to traverse the fraud.

1042. Tenant of King in Chivalty, infeoffed his brother, to the intent to
infeoff his heir male at full age, whereas at that time he had no male, but his
wife was with child, the father died, a male is born, If this Collusion be
found by office, Quaere it all, or but a third part shall be in Ward upon 32.
33. and 34. H. 8.

1043. The Jury found that the Executors had taken the rent which was reserved
upon a Lease per tenant in Fee, made of a house and implements, and so assets
the (so) holden void, for the rent goes with the reversion of the land as
magis dignum, and it does belong to the heir.

362.
1044. The second husband and his wife, by Fine did alien the jointure of the
wife, the heir within age entered, adjudged that he shall not be in Ward, for he
is in as a purchaser, during the life of the wife. If the husband die, Quaere
if the wife may enter against the Fine.

Pas.
1045. The Queen granted Manor and all woods before this time used or repured,
as parcel, etc. and the wood which was parcel of the Manor in the time of
Edward 6. and by him granted in Fee, and now recome to the hands of the Queen,
shall pass per the word ^ntehac, etc.

1046. Tenant in socage in Capite died, his heir within the age of 14. years,
he shall not sue livery, but shall have Ouster le main, together with the
issues; Also if the heir be of the age of 14. years or above, there he shall
sue livery and pay relief, for that is his full age for socage.

1047. Tenant in Capite levied a Fine, declared by Indenture to be to his use
in tail, the remainder to the Conusee in Fee, the issue shall be in Ward to the
Queen and not to the Conusee, for by the use the Fee is as a remainder, not as
a reversion in the Conusee, although by the Fine the Fee passed to the Conusee,
and the Conusee is Donor here.

1048. Termer for a 100. years made a feoffement per words, Dedi, concessi and
confirmavi, and by letter of Attorney made Livery, the Lessor being upon the
land, yet by Dyer and Wray the land passes by the feoffement and livery by
Attorney, and the dedi and concessi will not make it pass as a Grant of the
term.

1049. After 27. a Fine was levied of land, declared by Indenture to be to the
intent that the Conuser shall have 10. pound there out of that during his life,
and the opinion of the Court was, that he may distrain for Rent by the clause
in the Statute of uses, without clause of distress.

Trin.
1050 Tenant in Tail made a Feoffement by Letter of Attorney, the Atturner
ousted the Termers servant, and made livery, after the Termer agreed, saving
his Term, that is a discontinuance.

1051. A man recovered by verdict in Assise, and because no warrant of Attorney
was found for the Plaintiff, adjudged Error.

1052. The Sheriff by Fieri facias and vendie. exponas, sold a Term, the first
Judgment is reversed, yet the money and not the Term shall be restored, for
the sale was lawful.

Mich.
1053. Indictment upon the 1. and 13. of Elisabeth upon a praemunire for aiding
B. knowing him to be a principal maintainer of the Sea of Rome, and the
Indictment was contra formam Statuti praedicti, and yet it is not sufficient,
because it was alleged to be to the intent to ext^ll the authority, etc.
according to the words of the Statute.

Vicesimo primo Elisabethae.
Hill.
1054. A Custom in Denbigh that a feme covert with her husband, by surrender
in the Court there, may alien her land, it is not abrogated by the Statute of
Wales 27. H. 8. for it is an usal^ Custom in our Kingdom. And if husband
alien the land of the wife, after issue, and the wife die, the heir may not
enter till the death of her husband per 32. H. 8. per Curiam.

1055. A Coppyholder prescribed for Estovers in annothers soil, and said that
all Coppyholders eiusdem tenementi usi sunt, where he should lay eiusdem
Manerii, and for that adjudged a void prescription.

264. Pas.
1056. One brought a Quare impedit against the Queen, the Ordinary and
Incumbent pendente lite the Queen upon resignat. presented another, who is
instituted and inducted, and in by 6 months, yet he is removable by a writ to
he Bish. although he be not party nor privy to the Judgment in the Quare
impedit. Plusors contra.

Vicesimo secundo Elisabethae.
Mich.
1057. The Sheriff took an Obligation with condition that if the Obligee shall
appear, etc. and then and there (shall) answer, that the Obligation shall be
void, adjudged upon demurrer that it is a good obligation according to the
Statute 23. H. 6. for it amounts to as much as then and there to answer.

1058. Attaint was brought in the common Bank upon a verdict in the Kings Bench
in an information of usury, and the Defendant who brought that being in
Execution of the Marshalsey tam pro Rege quam ex part for the penalty was
removed by corpus cum causa. And now a writ of manucapt' sufficient securitate
came from the Chancery to the common Bank for enlarging the prisoner ad
prosequend. etc. And agreed that the recognisance shall be to the Queen and the
party, and as well to discourage suitors who are in Execution by trial, to
bring attaints, as also because the warrant was in the copulative, that he
shall find Mainprise to render his body, and satisfy the sum, they would have
the recognisance of the Mainpern. copulative.

365. And because the party could not find mainprise according he was licensed
by the court to go with a Keeper to instruct his counsel after the first
verdict was affirmed.

1059. A vowry for damage Felant in, etc. the Plaintiff said that he is seized
in Fee of the close adjoining, and the Defendant and those whose estate he had,
etc. time beyond, etc. were holden to enclose, the Defendant said that the
Close where, etc. was the Franktenement of A. without that the Plaintiff was
seized of that in Fee, the Plaintiff demur. And holden that this special
traverse of the estate in Fee is good, because the Plaintiff had given
advantage of that; Yet if he had but an estate for years, or at sufferance, or
common, or license, hac vice, it suffices, contra it but a trespaster. S. F.
Leke.

366.
1060. Ejectione firmae, supposing a demise per the Lo. Cromwell, the Defendant
said, that before the Plaintiff or the Lo. Cromwell any thing had, one B. was
seized in Fee, and feoffed one Andrews, who died seized, and his son left to
us, by which we were possessed till ousted, and le fills deseisi per dit B.
which B. after infeoffed the Lo. Cromwell, who demised to the Plaintiff, upon
which the Defendant reentred, etc. the Plaintiff took the feoffment and
descent by protestation, and for plea before the ejectment B. infeoffed the Lo.
Cromwell, absque hoe quod B. diss. the son and the Defendant demurs; But it was
holden a good traverse by the superfluous folly of the Defendant, for in this
action it behooves either to confess and avoid, or else to traverse the title in
the Court; for a bare color as in Assise and Trespass, which do not contain
title in the Writ, nor Court, (as that action does in both) it is not
sufficient, so that the desseise here shall be intended a confession and
avoiding of the title, and of necessity it behooves to be traversed. Et 9. H. 6.
it is a maxim, that a disseise alleged in Bar, or replication, is always
traversable; yet it may be the feoffment of B. to Andrews, and the dying
seif^ed, are also traversable at the election of the Plaintiff.

1061. In Avowry Vernon conveyed to himself the land, as collateral heir of
the Lo. Powes, co quod dom. Powes obiit seisitus in feodo sine exitu, etc. The
Plaintiff confessing the dying seized, conveyed to him by the devise of the
Lo. Powes, absque hoc quod terra descendit to the Defendant; But it was
adjudged against the Plaintiff, because he had not traversed the dying seized,
but the descent.

1062. A man seized of 10. pound land in capite, and five pound in soccage of a
subject, he devised all the capite land, and died seized of the soccage. The
Queen shall have the 3. part of the capite, and all the soccage in ward; for
otherwise the statute 32. and 34. H. 8. shall be defrauded.

367.
1063. A term is devised to the Executor, who entered and died before probate,
yet his entry was Ruled to be a good Executorship, and his Administrator shall
have it.

1064. Upon issue joined in Ejectione sirmae, the Plaintiff suggested, that he
and the Sheriff, and one of the Coroners were all of the livery of the Count'
Wigorn, and prayed a venire sacias to the other Coroner, and the Defendant
confessed the suggestion, for that process was made according to the prayer,
and the Jury found for the Plaintiff. Now in arrest of Judgment, because it
is not a principal challenge, yet because ex assensu partium, and also the
statute 32. H. 8. of Jeofails helps the misconveyance of process, Judgment
was given.

1065. In a Formedon the Tenant vouched one as cousin and heir, the vouchee
without demand of the view entered freely, as he who had nothing by descent:
Dyer said, that if the Plea had been prayed to abide, that had been a good
entering, but now it may be he is vouched upon his own warranty: But the Tenant
said, that he assets, and so at issue. Dyer held that the Plaintiff shall now
count presently against the vouchee, before that issue be tried; yet some held
this issue triable presently.

Hill.
1066. Vincent made a feoffment to the use of himself and his wife in the tail,
the remainder to the wife and her heirs for ever, of land holden in Knights
service and died, having issue a son within age, the Lord shall have the Ward
of the body and the 3. part of the land.

1067. Error brought in the Exchequer chamber, upon Judgment given in the
Exchequer upon information of usury against Ken proacc pta^ 80. pound pro
accommodatione and damtione diei soluc. 500. pound, etc. 1. Error was showed,
because it was not expressly showed if Ken or other accomoda^'. 2. Also the
Verdict was, that Ken accepted for accomod' and day given. 3. Also and so the
information also where the Statute is in the disjunctive Curia advisare. The
said information was at the commandment of our L. the King only, where it
should be an information qui tam pro dom. Reg. etc. and the venire facias was
awarded to the Sheriff of the County of Somerset, where the offense is supposed
in the information to be in Middlesex in part, where the Defendant joined issue
quod non habuit nec accepit, the Verdict was non Culpable, and the said
information was exhibited before a Baron only in the vacation.

368.
1068. Upon a trespass upon the Case in Ipswich, where according to the cust^me
the Defendant was committed for default of Mainpernors, and after upon Verdict
was condemned, and after upon request of the Plaintiff, committed for the
Execution, but that was not entered of Record, and he escaped. Now in debt
brought by the Plaintiff in the Bank upon the Record, the Defendant confessed
the Judgment supra, and averred the second committing at the request of the
Plaintiff for execution, the Plaintiff said, Quod non habetur tale record' of
his request, the D^f^ndant demurred, and good cause, for he had not alleged
that it was of Record, and the Plaintiff had good cause to demur, if the
committing in Execution by the Bailiffs out of the Court had been insufficient.
Quaere hoc.

Pas.
1069. A man seized of land in Fee had issue two sons, and obliged him and his
heirs in an Obligation and died scised, the eldest entered and died, the
youngest shall be charged as heir of his father notwithstanding the mean
descent, so of Grandfather, father and son: And so of a Grandfather, and two
daughters, which have two sons and do not make partition, for they shall join
in Assise notwithstanding several discents, and they are one heir to the
Grandfather, if the daughter becomes heir to the father by the possession of
the brother, or the father heir to the son by a mean descent to the uncle,
which by no means may be heir to the the Obliger. Quaere.

1070. Lands to the value of fourteen pound per annum were conveyed to the Dean
and Chapter of Pa. to find ten Marks annually to a Priest to sing, etc. and the
other profi^s for an obite, they maintained the Priest with ten Marks, but they
observed not the obite within five years of the Statute, the Rent of ten Marks
is only given to the King, by the first of Edward sixth, and not the land, for
that belongs to Dean and Chapter of Paul's.

1071. The form of a Certificate the Bishop of accoupled in Matrimony, and
solutio Doctorum, that the wife of full age married to the husband at the age
of twelve years who died after he was put into the bed to her, and within age
of consent, he ought to certify lawful espoused in case of Dower, quamvis
alias sint spensalia de futuro.

1072. By all the Justices, if a Termer grant all his estate to A. to the use
of himself and his wife for their lives, if now he grant all his interest it is
void, for he had nothing, for the 27 executes not the possession to that use.

1073. Morgagee of Capite land died, his heir within age, and the King seized,
and also certain socage land, the Morgager performed the Condition, he may
enter, and divest the Wardship of the King, of the body, and of the land.
Knightley's Case.

1074. The Tenor of a Recognizance by mittimus came out of the Chancery into
the Common Bank, and it was holden that upon the tenure a Scire facias shall
not issue: but an original Writ of Debt, and declare upon the Tenure.

1075. Plomer Grantee of annuity pro consilio impend. was of counsel with the
adversary of the Granter, not being requested to give counsel to the Granter,
the annuity is not gone.

1076. The Statute 13. Eliz. cap. 12. which ordains that he which reads not the
articles of Religion shall be deprived ipso facto, ordains also that no lapse
per deprivation ipso facto shall incur, but after notice given by 6 months,
the Patron is knowing of the not reading, and suffered two years to incur,
yet because he had notice by the Ordinary the King may not present.

1077. In an Ejectionae firm because no evidence was given touching damages
the Jury found the damages according to the Count, which was excessive, yet
attaint lies not.

370.
1078. Clifford brought an Eiectione Cusiod. ter. and haered. they are at issue
upon traverse of the Tenure which was tried for the Plaintiff, and damages
assessed, in arrest of Judgment it was said that the Writ lies not, for the
ejectment of the body, but of the land only, upon which the Plaintiff
relinquished the damages and costs for that which was assessed for both, and
had Judgment for Ejectment of the Land.

1078. The Ward and marriage of the heir only may not be granted without deed.

1079. Two are obliged coniunctim and divisim as principal Debtors, without
words that the one is pledge for the other, a Writ of plegi^s acquietand. lies
not.

1080. Two being robbed of one joint sum of money, they may join in an action
upon the Statute of Wint. but otherwise, if it be of several sums. The
Hundred pleaded that they freshly pursued the Felons per three Towns to the
Town of A. which is in the Hundred next adjacent, and there they gave hue and
cry to the inhabitants: Adjudged no plea, for the Statute is not satisfied
without apprehending or answer of the malefactor, or of knowing their names,
that so they may be indicted and outlawed, vide new Stat. 27. Eliz.

1081. Tenant in Capite made a Feoffement to use of a woman which God should
give in marriage to his son for life, the remainder to the son in tail, the
marriage took effect, the father died, the son sued Livery for the third part
in the life of his wife, for the conveyance intended for his advancement, he
taking the profits and being also the principal cause of the estate.

Trin.
1082. The Statute of Glocest. cap. 1. warrants costs and damages to be given
in a Writ of Entry in le post upon disseiser made to the Demandant in mean,
otherwise if to the Ancestor of the Demandant.

1083. The Bishop of Winchester granted annu^ty out of a Manor to Doctor Dale
for life pro consilio impenso and impendendo, The Dean and Chapter confirmed,
the Bishop died. Quaere if the Grant be void against the Successor per Statute
1 Eliz. made against Grants, Feoffements, and Conveyances, etc. Also if a Debt
lies against the Executors of the Bishop for the arrearages incurred in his
life, during the life of the Grantee.

Vicesimo tertio Elisabethae.
Mich.
1083. An Indenture of covenant between A. and B. in which A. covenanted in
consideration of a marriage to be between his son and the sister of B. that he
at the costs of his son by his sufficient deed, would before Michaelmas assure
land to his son, and B. did covenant if A. performed it, that then he would
make a general release to him. Although A. was ready, and his son tendered not
the assurance, yet if the conveyance be not made, B. is not bound to make a
release, the Defendant pleaded in Bar perform. of all covenants ex part sua,
etc. and in the rejoinder he only showed that he was ready, it is a departure.

1084. A man devised all his Lands to his sister, except one Manor, which I
appoint to pay my Debts, and made two Executors by name and died, the one
Executor died, the other may sell and pay the Debts for the intention.

1085. Certificate of Excommunication under the Seal of the Commissioners
Delegates, to which is appeal from the Prerogative Court of Canterbury was
allowed.

1086. They father Tenant for life, the remainder to the son, the son devised
the land which he had or may have in reversion, after the death of his father,
to his wife, rendering for her natural life 40 shillings Rent to the right
heirs of the father and died, living the father, by the Court no other estate
shall pass but for life when the remainder falls, viz. after the death of the
father, and then also begins the payment of the 40 shillings by the year, for
the father had no right heir during his life.

1087. The Condition of an Obligation being upon diverse points, in Debt if
Issue be joined upon one point which is found against the Plaintiff and he
barred, although after all the other are broken, yet he shall never sue his
Obligation again per Cnri^^m.

1088. An action upon the Case supposing promise to reassure Land, was brought
by the Lord S^^ff. against Alderman Haward. The Jury found that the D^s^ndant
did not promise in manner and form, notwithstanding if H. and W. witnesses have
sworn true, as it seems to us they have, we say that he had prom^sed, and if
the court think so they assessed damages: Dyer and Ayl^se assembled in the
Chancery, held it clear that the verdict shall be for the Defendant.

1089. An Executor made Executor and dyed before probate, his Executor is not
Executor to the first testator. Notwithstanding if the goods after Debts and
Legacies paid were bequeathed to his testator, the Administration shall be
committed to him with the testament annexed, and if they were not bequeathed to
him, the Administration shall be committed to him to whom they were bequeathed,
and for default of ^he such to the next of blood of the first te^^^tor, which
demands that, Is^^des case.

1090. Two provisoes were in two several Indentures of conveyance of several
Manors to A. and B. that if the Feoffer pay or render 20 shillings to A. and B.
or to the heirs of A. that the conveyance shall be void. A. died, tender to B.
is not sufficient, but to the heir of A. and it shall be 20 shillings for
every proviso. Otherwise of another collateral Act; one only suffices for
both as a carue of land descended is Assets for three several Formedons.

1091. The Lord of a Waste of 200 acres, he inseof^ed one of 50 acres toward
the North, the Feoffee put in his beasts and they estrayed into the residue,
and they are distrained damage fesant, and well: for the purchasers ought to
enclose, or to keep the beasts within the 50 acres, and so ought the Lord of
the residue. Adjudged.

1092. A Parson made a Lease by Indenture for 12. years, and covenanted to
suffer the Lessee and his assigns to enjoy for those years, and that he would
not do any act by which the Benefice should be void: and that one A. Farmer of
part of the tithes should pay 8 pounds annually for 7 years, and was obliged to
perform the Covenants, and now in a Debt brought upon the Obligation, he
pleaded performance of the Covenants, ex part sua perimplend. till 20 of Eliz.
at which time he himself was absent by the space of 80 days generally, and
spoke not of the Statutes 13 Eliz. c. 17. and 14 Eliz. cap. 11. And as to the
Covenant in the negative, he said nothing ut oportet, but it seems there needs
not express mention that the Farmer paid the 8 pounds, for it seems employed in
ex part sua perimplend. Quaere if the Covenants and Obligation are void from
the beginning, or but after the absence.

373.
1093. In ancient demesh Tenant in Tail levied a Fine with Proclamation, and in
a ^ormedon there brought the Tenant pleaded the Fine to be a Bar to the Tail,
by the Custom, and Judgment there given according, upon which a writ of
falsee Judgment was brought, and if the Custom of Barring Tails be averrable
against the Statute de donis condi^. which is within memory was assigned for
Error. It was said if the Judgment be reversed; Judgment shall only be that
he shall be restored to his action, and then they will adjudge again according
to their Custom.

1094. Debt against a Niece, as Cousin and heir upon an Obligation, she said
that only a reversion descended, etc. And Judgment was given that he shall
recover the Debt and damages of the aforesaid reversion to be levied when it
falls, and shall have a special Writ to extend the entire land, it seems it
was by the Common Law before the Sta^^te West. 2. cap. 18.

374.
1095. Tenant in general Tail having Issue two sons, the eldest had issue a
daughter and died, h^s wise with child of a son. the father suffered a common
recovery to the use of himself for life, the remainder to the recoverers for 24
years, the remainder to the heir maies of his body; the recovery was had
returnable, Octab. Mich. viz. 9. day of October. upon day at the hou^e of 9 of
the clock in the morning, he himself died, yet it seems very good, and the Writ
of Habere facias s^isinam was awarded and returned served, and after the so^^
the belly of the mother is born, if the uncle or the son now born, or the
daughter of the eldest son shall have the land was now the Question. And it was
resolved by the Justices that the son posthum. shall have it as Issue male of
the body, for if it be by purchase because of the mean estate for years, the
uncle may not have it, for it behooves to be heir as well as male, who shall
take: And the daughter of the eldest son is heir: But it seems that it shall
be taken by descent till the son born, also by all the Justices but only Dyer
and Peryam, that the recovery is executory against the Issue in Tail, because
of the recovery in value.

1096. Worsley covenanted with his eldest son and two others, to stand seized
to the use of himself for life, the remainder to his eldest son in tail, the
remainder to himself in tail, the remainder to Bichard Worsley his bastard son
in tail, and if any in the remainders shall make discontinuance or other
prejudice, to any of the remainders, his estate shall cease, and they shall
stand seized to to the use of the next in remainder, according to the
limitation. The father surrendered and granted all his estate to the eldest son,
who levied a Fine with Proclamations, and 5. years possed, the bastard
supposing that he had title without entry made a Lease to try the title, and
within the year ^nformation upon the staute 32. H. 8. for buying of titles was
exhibited. And by all the Justices being but a term, it is within the statute,
as in Partridge Case; And it was holden that for the use to the bastard there
ought to be a valuable consideration, for natural affection is not sufficient,
for he is a stranger in the law, although a son by nature. Besides if the
bastard had title, yet that the non claim within 5. years of the Fine, had
barred that. And as it seems, if the consideration had been sufficient, that he
had title in the life of the father, for as it seems the estate tail of the
father in remainder was in abyance by grant of all his state; so that the
bastard who had failed in remainder is immediate to the advantage.

Hill. 375.
1097. A man demised diverse closes per words demi^eth, grants, and to farm
lets, together with all manner of timber, wood, underwood, and hedge rows,
except the great Oaks in such a close, the Termer cut where they are not
excepted, it is waste Adjudged, for he which had timber demised may not cut,
and the word Grant in the Lease alters not the same from being a Demise.

1098. Error brought in the Kings bench upon recovery in Assise, and the
Judgment affirmed, now they brought a Writ of Error in the Parliament of the
Judgment in the Kings bench, and the chief Justice brought the Record in the
Parliament, and also the transcript, and after that there examined, the record
was remand, and the transcript remained, upon that a Scire facias awarded. The
Errors assigned in the Kings Bench were because the parties were adjourned in a
foreign County to plead, and upon that issue joined, the Assise passed without
Writ of resummons awarded: also no place was in the test of the Hab. Corp.

Pas.
1099. A man made a Lease for life rendering Rent, and died, if the Executor
shall distrain or have an action of Debt, for the arrearages in the life of the
testator, per 32. H. 8. cap. 37. Some held that the Statute is to be
understood, of rents in gross, and not incident to the reversion: Others held
contrary by 37. H. 6.39. and 10. H. 6. that Debt lies by the common Law for the
Executor or administrator of the Lessor.

376.
1100. The Act of 13. Eliz. against Fugitives, and the statute of Explanation
14. g^ves no greater interest to the Queen in the lands of a Fugitive, than he
had before, by seizure, for not returning after License determined, upon receipt
of the Privy seal: And therefore where the Queen seized before 13. and granted
the land by Patent, quam diu in manibus nostris, etc. and after the 13. seized
again, and one as his steward grants a Copy it is void, for it shall be steward
to the Patentee.

1101. The Statute of V^ury 13. Eliz. Cap. 8. is made to continue 5. years next
after the end of the said Parliament, and then to the end of the first Session
of the Parliament then next ensuing, if (next ensuing) shall be referred to the
Session, or to the Parliament. And adjudged that to the Parliament, which is
the principal substantive, and it is for the Commonwealth; So that 3. Session
of the Parliament began 14. being the 13. did not end it; But it shall be a new
Parliament after the 5. years ended; And that it was so holden was published by
Proclamation.

1102. Judgment given in the 5. Ports. False judgment lies not in the Kings
Bench, nor in the Common Pleas; But it is reversable in the Court of the
Guardian of the Cinque Ports upon examination, apud Curiam Sh^pware.

1103. The Justices of Assize have authority by statute 25. H. 8. Cap. 6. to
award Tales de circumst. Coronat. for favor in the Sheriff.

1104. A man seized of a message in D. by purchase of T. Cotton, he made a
feoffement by letter of Attorney, of the house in D. nuper Ric. Cotton, and the
opinion of the Court was, that it is a good feoffement, for Cotton without
other name is very certain, and so is the message in D. without other name; so
that T. Cotton is but surplusage.

1105. Tenant in tail suffered a Common Recovery, and died before Execution, a
Scire facias lies against the issue for Execution, because of the value. Vide
Manxels Case.

Trin. 377.
1106. A man grants a reverlion for life or years, rendering when the reversion
shall happen 10. pound rent; that is to be understood, when the possessi^n of
the reversion shall fall, or happen, because most strong against the Reservor.

1107. Annuity was granted for exercise of stewardship, and after Recovery in
Annuity the rent was again behind, and the Grantee brought a Scire facias, the
Defendant said, that the Plaintiff hanging the W^^t, had refused being
requested to bold Court; and adjudged a good Plea; for upon the Scire facias he
had judgment of the arrerages before, and hanging the Writ, where if he
refuses the Annuity cease, and then he shall recover the arrerages by Writ
of debt only.

1108. Office was found after the death of the Lord Powes, that he died seized,
and Vernon is his cousin and heir, and within age. C. tendered traverse of the
dying seized, and that V. is not heir, and had the land in Fee ferme, Vernon
came of full age, the Queen is at election to drive him to sue general livery
non obstant' statut. 33. H. 8. and that the land is of the value of a 100.
pound per annum, and if the traverse be not found for G. at the next Assise,
Vernon may proceed after with his livery.

1109. Powles Case: Husband and wife are sued in the Bank, the husband being a
Clerk of the Chancery, they shall not have the privilege, for the woman is not
impleadable there. Otherwise it is where the husband is impleaded in the Bank,
and veniendo, etc. he and his wife be arrested into a base Court.

1110. A Clerk which had a Benefice over the value of 8. pound per annum,
without dispensation took another, and he was to that instituted and inducted,
but did not subscribe to the Articles of Religion, according to 13. Eliz. and
after died. tenus per Curiam that the first Benefice void by death. and not by
the statute 21. H. 8. because never lawful Incumbent of the second.

The end of the Reports of the Lo. Dyer.
FINIS.
A perfect Table of the principal matters contained in every Case in this Book.
Casus prim. IN debt where acceptance of another thing is a bar. 1. Attaint or
Error, where maintainable by him in reversim. 2. In whose name the Kings
Grantee of a Recognizance may sue. 3. A Clerk cannot plead in Bar before
Induction 4. An Annuity pro Consilio, etc. by what Act forfeited. 5. If an
Executor redeemeth goods pledged, it shall be allowed. 6. Where an A^iennce is
a plea in disability. 7. Where issue in tail is barred as privy by 4. H. 7. 8.
What proviso good, and what no^. 9. Dye^h luth not till the reversion be
recontinued. 9. Where the rent sh^^^ apportioned. 10. No remitter against a
Record. 11. What act by the servant is felony within 21. H. 8. 12. Idemp itate
nominis where it lies, 13. A rent de novo where it is deviseable. 14. Where
payment is a plea without an acquittance. 15. No judgment till the iss^e be
tried. 16. Where the ^u band shal^e said to be an Assignee. 17. Where the
tenant may vouch at large. 18. A devise of a ^erm where good, and where not.
19. Where an essice of trust is grantable. 20. Where the Heir of Cestuy que use
shall be in ward. Where the Writ may be general, and Count special. A
^^^tenancy may be, and yet no surviver. 21. A Lease for life the remainder to
the donor in Fee, Quaere whether a discontinuance 22. Upon a divorce goods
restored to the woman. 23. When a Presentment in a Leet must be traversed. 24.
Where a proviso makes a Condition, and where a Covenant. 25. Where Executors
liable to a Covenant without naming, but not the heir. 26. In Debt where Non
habuit, etc. is no plea. 27. A Feoffement without deed to 4. and livery to one,
nothing passetth to three. 28. Much good matter touching Relations. 29. A
Feoffement to the recoverer to an use, how in 30.31. Livery in one acre in the
name of all where good 32. Where a Plea amounts to the general issue. 33.
Where waste lies for cutting of wood. 34. Two cannot join in an action of
slander. 35. An Obligation good without in cujus rei, etc. 36. Obligamus nos
and utrumque nostrum, is several. 37. a Covenant to take hedge boot and fuel
by the assignment of the Bailiffe how to be expounded. 38. Debt against
Executos for money delivered to the testator, where wager of Law lies, and
where not. 39. One executor grants all his part, the whole passes. 40. In
Trespass where the Plaintiff must make a new assignment. 41. Where there
shall be a Remitter, and where not. 42. Where Debt lies for a penalty. 43. A
Lease for three years, and so from 3 years to 3 years. 44. Where a Petit. Cape
does lie. 45. To whom the present action belongs. 46. Where the Defendant
must plead always ready. 47. Where the Process shall issue to the next
Hundred. 48. A man arrested must appear notwithstanding a Supersedeas. 49. A
Demise to two sons equally, Quaere if Jointenants. 50. Where a man shall be
tenant by courteste. 51. Where payment is a plea without acquittance. 52. An
attaint good, notwithstanding a Variance. 53. A dog kills Sheep, where the
Mast. is punishable. 54. Where a thing vested shall not be revested. 55. A
Lunaticks lands shall not be to the Kings use. 56. A thing in action is not
grantable. 57. If the Tenant may be averred pernor of the profits. 58. Where
Grantee of a reversion shall have the Rent without atturnment. 59. Where an
Essoin does lie, and where not. 60. A Devise that A. shall have the Government
of his children. 60. An action for saying he was a false thief. 62. In action
of Debt upon a Bond seven exceptions taken. 63. What is a good plea in an
account. 64. A Composition to present where good without deed. 65. A dog
kills sheep without incitation. 66. No Scire facias without a new mittimus
upon a Transcript. 67. 'Where in pleading the Patent must be showed. 68. In
detinue where a traverse is necessary. 69. Where Cestui que use may distraiu
without Attournment. 70 A Condition for quiet enjoying, when broken. 71. A Jury
in M. take notice of Assets in any County. 72. Acceptance of Rent affirms a
voidable Lease. 73. Grantee of an Obligation may sue in his own name. 74. A
Warren passes not without cum pertinentiis. 75. Where recove^^rs may avow for
Rent by 7. H. 8. cap. 4. 76. In wast what pleas the lessee may plead. 77. Where
Jointenancy shall abate a Formedon. 78. What plea makes a departure. 79.
Disseisee reenters, he shall have c^^ne severed. 80. The issue barred by a
Fine, and yet no discontinuance. 81. Fully administered pleaded, yet the
plaintiff had judgment.

After debt brought upon one bond, executors cannot pay another.

82. Where 27. H. 8. of uses ought to be pleaded. 83. Debt for costs after the
Record removed, good, although the judgment be reversed. 84. Debt for rent of
26. acres, verdict found but 21. demised. 85. Covenant to repair banks, after
broken by suddeu floods. 86. Land deviseable by the custom of L. in Mort main.

A remainder may not be limited after an estate in fee.

87. Livery made the Termor being upon the land.

But of a livery within view, quaere.

88. Where privilege allowed to a Chancery man. 89. Variance between the
pardon and Indictment. 90. In Dower a special Scire facias and Writ of seisin.
91. An obligation delivered to the Oblig^e himself. 92. A seoffment to diverse
without deed and livery to one. 93. Feoffee of a Conisor of a statute, brings
Audita querela. 94. After recovery tenant in tail dies before execution, the
issue not remitted, nor can f^lsif^e. 95. The next presentation granted to one,
after to another. 96. Much good matter touching wast, and pleading therein. 97.
Jurors agree, and after eat and drink, if good. 98. Array challenged, because
the Sh^riffe Cousin, etc. 99. Appeal of robbery where it must be brought. 100.
Lease by a Deane where good without the Chapter. 101. In Donor, issue never
seized, etc. what is good Evidence. 102. A second deliverance is but a revivor
of the first plaint. 103. A proclamation upon the exigent returned by the
Sheriff out of office at the time is void by 6. H. 8. 104. A condition to
enjoy lands peaceably, good matter. 105. A Parson shall pay tithes
notwithstanding an unity. 106. Great variety of learning, of Customs and
Subsidies. 107. A Tenure in Capite, and by whom it must be created. 108. A
destructive condition taken strictly. 109. A Condition not to assign, and he
devises. 110. He who should take advantage i^ party to the breach. 111.
Construction of the word Conjunctim 112. A man wounded in one County dies in
another there the Appeal brought. 113. Where a lease is void by the death of
the Bishop. 114. If a Reversion pass by the name of a Remainder. 115.
Indictment for murdering his wife, very good matter. 116. By recovery of land^
the buildings thereupon are recovered. 117. Where a condition void because it
is repugnant. 118. Debt against the Executors of an Administrator. 119. How and
when two Towns may intercommon. 120. An Obligation to a Dean and his successors
is good to them. 121. The King cannot be a disturber. 122. A Juror labored to
give a verdict according to his Conscience. 123. Issue if a villain regardant,
what is good evidence to prove it. 124. Several Grants in one Deed. 125. Where
after discontinuance the Issue may seize a villain. 126. Every man is party to
an Act of Parliament. 127. What Acts are countermandable. 128. Exposition of
the word (shall) 129. Poisoning made Treason by 31. H. 8. 130. Where a release
good, and where not, a good difference. 131. Alias dictus is no part of the
name. 132. What is a good Accquittance, and where a deed may be twice
delivered. 133. A lease by Tenant in Tail where voidable only by his Issue.
134. Where Rent must be demanded upon the land. 135. In Partition too little is
allotted, Quaere what remedy. 136. Where a non obstante is good by the King.
137. Tenant in Chivalry gives land, rendering 10 shillings only, what tenure.
138. A Confirmation of the Patron and Ordinary where it is good. 139. Where the
particular estate and remainder are void. 140. A will of land devisable by the
Common Law good without deed. 141. If a man claims under a Patent, it must be
showed. 142. 143. A Remitter where it shall be, and where not. 144. Where the
Issue of Tenant in Capite shall not be in ward. 145. Two parceners of an
Advowson, which of them shall Present. 146. The Plaintiff in a Quare impedit
made a Knight. 147. Summing which is the office of the Clerk is not necessary.
148. A Feoffement by a man deaf and dumb, if good. 149. Where Rent shall be
apportioned. 150. Where final Judgment shall be given in a writ of Right.
151. Where acceptance of a thing collateral barreth a Bond. 152. If a Bond be
once for feited a release after will not help.

Very great plenty of matter touching Releases.

153. What Estate Cestui que use may make by 1. R. 3. c. 154. Tenure of an
Honor, is not Tenure in Capite. 155. A Grant by a Bishop good as a new Lease
without Attournment. 156. A Grant of a Rectory discharged of all Pensions,
portions, etc. 157. The nature of a Forspris, what it is. 158. The plea of non
est factum where it is good.

Of what Cattle the second deliverance must be.

159. The Lord Latimers will, and diverse quaint points in it. 160. A Burgess
of the Parliament what Privilege he has. 161. A lease by a Prebena if it
binds the Bishop. 162. Where the wife may waive her Jointure. 163.
Information for Pluralities, what Hundredors must be returned. 164. Where a
plaint in an assize may be abridged, and of livery by letter of Attorney. 165.
An annuity pro Consilio if assignable. 166. Waste in cutting ashes. 167. Assize
for rent diverse errors assigned, very good matter, Non licebit makes a
condition. 168. Debt upon an escape, and upon a demurrer, diverse resolutions.
169. No occupancy a difference between a lease for life and years. 170. If a
man deny his deed, judgment is quod capiatur. 171. Upon an exteat no property
is in the Cognizee till the Liberate awarded. 172. Tenant in tail infeosseth
his issue within age, quaere if a Remitter. 173. An Indictment of an Assault,
and diverse exceptions taken. 174. A Parson grants a rent charge to begin after
his death, which is confirmed, quaere if good. 175. Three brothers, and the
middle of them slain, the eldest ^ieth within the year, who shall bring the
appeal. 176. Where a Scire facias lies to execute a remainder by Fine. 177.
Where a man may vouch in a sorraine County. 178. Acceptance preventeth a breach
of a Condition. 179. Trespass for depasturing of swine, diverse exceptions
taken, and much excellent matter thereupon. 180. The form of a Sergeants Wrtt.
181. Where a Will shall be good within 32. H. 8. 182. Where a wife is hound by
a fine levied by her husband. 183. Where the nature of Gavelkind is altered by
a fine. 184. Where a new Incumbent shall avoid a Lease made by the Parson. 185.
An action of the Case for words. 186. Where a new writ of partition shall be
awarded. 187. Where an Avowry for damage feasant lies. 188. Exceptions to an
information upon a Will. 189. Deviser of a Term without remedy. 190. An action
of the Case for words 191. Where a concord executed is a good bar.

Where an Arbitrament is a good plea.

192. A writ of Error by Administrators, quaere. 193. Entry in parcel after the
last continuance a bar in dower, and she must show the death of her huusband
certame. 194. Upon Judgment in a Quare impedit, Errors assigned. 195. A Patent
must mention a former Lease. 196. The exposition of videlicet. 197. No Remitter
if possession be executed by the statute of 27. H. 8. 198. A lease by an Abbot
where void by the statute of 31. H. 8. 199. Where a Tales is well awarded and
served. 200. An assize is but a supposall. 201. Where a Traverse is well taken.
202. What words make a Condition. 203. If one be vouched as Cousin, he must
show how Cousin. 204. By exception of timber and great woods, what is excepted.
205. A Prohibition for tithes where it lies. 206. In a Writ of Right, where a
Habeas corpora shall issue. 207. A Writ of Partition, and much good matter upon
it. 208. In what order Administrators must pay debts. 209. Five notable
questions for the Lord Willoughby. 210. What Lease is good by 31. H. 8. in the
Court of Augmentations. 211. What lands are liable in the hands of the heir by
descent. 212 What College is given to the King by 1. Edw. 6. 213. An Attaint
is no Supersedeas as a writ of Error is. 214. Debt against Executors in the
Debet and Detinet. 215. Where a Tender in base money is good. 216. The custom
of London in Attachments. 217. 218. Who shall bear the imbasement of moneys.
219. The Sergeants case full of excellent Learning. 220. A Bishop has title by
lapse and is deprived, who shall present. 221. Where a Patentee must make a
demand of rent.

Rent reserved upon inhes good.

222. Multiplication Felony by 4. H. 4. c. 41. 223. The Plaintiff after
verdict abridged the plaint of two acres. 224. Spinster no good addition for a
Gentlewoman. 225. A Petition sued to revive an use. 226. Several material
errors assigned in an Ejectment. 227. Diverse Errors alleged to reverse a fine.
228. In wast four notable exceptions taken. 229. What is a good Bar in Dower.
230. Challenge in an Attaint, and Demurrer for two causes. 231. An agreement
and the construction thereof. Quaere. 232. General issue in wast and special
matter in Evidence. 233. In a Grant the Kings Successors bound without the word
Heirs. 234. Two Writs depending for the same thing. 235. What manner of Royal
assent will make an Act. 236. Judgment in wast reversed for four Causes. 237. A
Lease in futuro when it shall commence. 238. Where the King may defeat an
estate at will. 239. Where E. 6. shall avoid Leases made by his father. 240.
Before Livery passed the wife died, if the Baron Tenant by the courtesy. 241.
Where the Court ex officio must take notice and give judgment. 242. What
manner of plea is a departure in law. 243. Where an use may arise upon a
Covenant. 244. What estate is a Jointure within 27 H. 8. 245. What Exception is
good, much good matter there. 246. Verdict taken after the day of return is an
Error. 248. The Q. writ of summons without supremum Caput, good. 249. In a writ
of right the Inquest shall not be taken by default. 250. What partition is
good, and where compellable. 251. Two conspire in Treason, both are Traitors.
252. Where a Venditioni exponas shall be awarded. 253. Indictment of Burglary
void without Intravit. 254. Clergy allowed to an accessory in horsestea within
1 E. 6. 12. 255. What escape is Felony by the Common Law. 256. Indictment quod
cepit bona Cujusdam Ignoti, is good. 257. Justices of Assise hold plea of an
appeal of Murder. 258. Indictment of murder, etc. if good without Percussit.
259. The husband may not have an heir in his life: 260. What pardon
discharges a felony. 261. Stolen goods bought out of the market, the property
remains. 262. Trial by Peers has always been in ure. 263. Who may be an
accusor in Treason. 264. Challenge of a Juror for the hundred. 265. Lands given
to the honest men of I. rendering rent makes a Corporation. 266. Upon Elegit the
extent must be by oath of 12. men, where a procedendo in loquela may be
awarded. 267. A Petition of Right sued, and when it ought to be. 268. Where a
Seigniorie in suspense of a Wardship may be. 269. Where a Lease in reversion by
Dean and Chapters good. 270. In a writ of right where and how the demandant may
be nons. 271. Where a Judgment by default against an Infant is error. 272.
Where the Court may diminish or increase damages. 273. A warrant of Attorney
errontous if amendable, Quaere. 274. Where the Husband is Executor of his own
wrong, and what Act by, him amounts to an administration. 275 What is a good
title to bring a Quare impedit. 276. A Lease by a Prebend, with the assent of
the Bishop, if good. 277. When Act is a recencilement after an elopement. 278.
The Plaintiff enters between verdict and Judgment if the damages, he list,
Quaere. 279. What should be said at double plea and a good traverse. 280.
Tenant in tail, leases for years and is attainted having issue, if the King
shall avoid the Lease. 281. Where the King may grant a thing that is not in
him. 282. What is wast in a Stable, and what is not. 283. Who shall have
election. 284. Of Feoffment by letter of Attorney by an Infant, and much good
matter there. 285. Where Contra forman collationis lies. 286. In a replevying
for rent a demurer and diverse exceptions taken 287. Questors of land intailed.
288. In an action of debt nothing by descent pleaded, Quaere. 289. In a writ of
right Close where a Procedendo lies. 290. What pleading as a Jeofail. 291.
When a second Lease for ten years shall commence. 292. In an action of debt
non est factum pleaded. 193. Debt against an administrator of an administrator.
294. What Traverse makes a Jeofail. 295. A fine levied of land Capite by just
Mervin. 296. In an action upon Assumpsit for what time damages must be
assessed. 297. A Covenant without the words Heirs or Executors. 298. Where a
special verdict may be found. 299. A power to make Leases for life to years.
300. An assise of the Filizers office. 301. Where an acceptance of rent
barreth. 302. The Plaintiff declares of twenty trees cut, the Jury found ten.
303. Tenant in tail devises land it is no discontinuance. 304. A Vicar
refuses to pay a subsidy, if the vicaridge be void. 305. Where modo and forma
is not material. 306. Where a Repleader shall be awarded, and where a grant is
good to a trespasser. 307. A prescription to distrain a Ferrymans Barge for
repairing of a Bridge at Graves-end. 308. Who shall enter for a Condition
broken. 309. Where a fine by one Sister barreth the other. 310. Demurrer upon
^ar to the Avowry. 311. Where the Defendant need not to be supposed in the
custody of the Marshall.

A Precept to the Sheriff without writ or Test of the Chief Justice.

312. An Action of the case for words. 313. If the Court ex officio are bound
to take notice of 23 H. 6. c. 10.

Outlawry is excepted in that statute.

314. An Action of the case for a chain of gold: very good matter. 315. A good
estate in remainder although the particular estate fail. 316. If the issue
shall inherit against a Collateral warranty, fine with proclamations, and
attainder of his father. 317. Absque hoo quod talis dimisit, evidence that he
had nothing in the land at the time. 318. Where it is in the discretion of the
Judges to grant restitution. 319. What is a good Lease by a Prior within 31 H.
8. 320. P. a^t^^ined but not deprived, a new Dean confirms a Lease. 321. Where
an Heir shall sue Livery, or Ousterlemain. 322. Upon nothing by descent in fee,
a special verdict given. 323. A debt due to the Q. is not gone by suspension.
324. A Condition annexed to a Will, and where it may defeat part only. 325. A
woman conspired to rob her Mistress, if principll, and it petit Treason. 326.
One entitled by the common law, and another by sta. cannot join in partition.
327. Executors refuse to pay debts, if the heir may enter and pay. 328. J. C.
^ointed to one and said, Behold King Edward. Treason. 329 Upon a Privy Seal a
subject refused to return into England. 320. (...) ^^ste of a writ of Entry
before the return, It is Error. 321. I^ the ^e^^ being in by 27 H. 8. be
remitted. 332. W^^^ by the Baf it shall be ad exhaeredationem Episcopi, or
^^^lesiae. 333. The Act of 23 H. 8. not suffered to be given in evidence. 334.
If a Church void by the grant of the next avoidance it passes (...). 335. If
Grantee of a Seigniory shall have a Wardship fallen before. 336. Atturny makes
livery upon Tenant for life in possession. 337. An appeal of death, and much
good matter therein. 338. The statute of 1 and 2 Ph. and M. takes not away 35
H. 8. c. 2. 339. A Lease made by the Surveighors of the Marquess of Dorset.
340. A plaint must begin the same Fair the contract is made. 341. A Parson
makes a Lease, and is deprived, the Incumbent may enter. 342. Issue in
remainder may have an action within age if he will. 343. The year of delivery
of the warrant to the Chancellor omitted. 344. If an appeal lies against the
accessory. 345. Devise of Gavelkind, remainder proxim. haered. masculis. 346.
Notwithstanding 1 and 2 P. and M. Trialls according to the Common law.

What accusation is sufficient within 5 Ed. 6.

347. A Jeofaile for defect in the Replication. 348. Lessee of a Disseisor
continues possession after entry of the Disseisee. 349. In a Quare impedit
three points inquiralde. 350. Executors grant a next avoidance, it is an
administration. 351. Justices fined in the Star Chamber for sitting contrary to
the stat. of 5 and 6 E. 6. 352. A Dedimus potestatem to receive an Atturnment.
353. A Petition of Right in nature of a Formedon in remainder, good matter.
354. A difference between a Condition and a Confidence; also where a request
must be made to the King.

A Bar by warranty and assets which are after evicted. Quaere.

355. What is a breach of a Covenant. 356. If a Rentcharge for years pass by
a devise paroll, and what it deviseable by parell.

If a Remainder be good depending upon a particular restate in suspense.

357. A. makes a feoffement, and is attainted, his wife shall not have Dower.
358. Acceptance of a new Lease is a surrender of the old. 359. E. 6. grants to
his sister the manner of D. dum sola, etc. she grants a rent, etc. 360. A writ
of forcible entry upon the statute of H. 6. 361. A diversity where the Avowant
shall have costs and damages upon 7 H. 8. and where 21 H. 8. 362. If the lessor
be a disseisor till agreement to the disseisin where a man may justify a
detaining with force. 363. Where a man may be detained with force. 364. Where a
supply to satisfy A. third part may be taken out of the wifes two parts. 365.
A lease rendering rent at the Feast of St. M. or in a month after, good matter.
366. A device not within the statute of 1 Rich. 3. 367. A man over sea is
disseised and after recomes and departs

A Patent of the Judges Office.

368. An alien arraigned for Treason contra ligien' su' debi' good.

No trial in Treason per emdiatatem linguae.

369. Information upon arrears of account the defendant may not wage his Law.
370. Where several Formedons must be for him in remainder. 371. Deputy Dean by
paroll confirms a grant by the Bish' Quaere. 372. The remedies provided by 8
and 18 of H. 6. 373. An use shall not be averred against an use expressed, what
is a Jointer within 21 H. 7. 374. What fine levied to a Feme Covers makes a
forfeiture. 375. A judgment in debt against the heir what manner of Elegit
shall issue. An assise of an Office of Register of the Admiralty. 376. 27 H. 8.
executes the possession, form, quality, etc. 377. What words makes a Covenant
and not a Lease. 378. Where a man must plead in debt always ready. 379.
Variance in a grant in the name of a Corporation. 380. Where a device shall be
judged good for two parts.

A grant made by the Chief Justice of the Office of Prothenetarre revoked,
because the Grantet was unfit.

381. A Sheriffs Office seized, for an escape without a Scire facias. 382.
Where an action of account lies and not a sure in the Court Christian for a
legacy. 383. A man in execution in the Fleet being before condemned in the
Kings Bench, is removed into the Kings Bench, he is in the custody of the
Marshall for both. 384. What words make a Condition, and what a Covenant. 385.
One pannell and its several Inquests in Law. 386. The construction of the word
quilibet to maintain a prescrip^. 387. Where Essigneor must be sworn. 388.
Whereby a remainder in the Q. an ancient seignory is extinct. 389. A man pleads
slanderous words of the K. how he shall be punished 390. An use cannot rise out
of an use. 391. No words in 31 H. 8. restrain a power to devise land deviseable
before that statutes. 392. Where a Melius inquirendum lies at the Common law.
393. A man cannot make his right heir a purchaser without departing with the
Fee. 394. An Office of Stewardship granted by a Bishop to A. he ought to attend
his service to every successor. 395. Where by a Fine, a Condition is not taken
away in a former Indenture. 396. In writ of entry in the quibus, diverse
material things moved in arrest of judgment. 397. An action upon the case
against an Ostler, what is good evidence for the Defendant. 398. Where no part
of the Soccage shall supply the third part except covin may be averred. 399. A
chief Justice of the Common pleas made a Judge of the Kings Bench the former
place is void. 400. Where an acceptance of rent affirms a lease. 401. Two
sue in the Admiral Court, for a thing within a County, an action upon the case
lies against one. 402. A customer purchases land with the Queens money, the
land shall be ceased in the Queens hands till, etc. 403. Where an action is
not maintain' by an executor of an execu' 404. A lease to three, to the first
for life, the remainder, etc. they are not joint Tenants. 405. A man bound with
two sureties for their security sells them beasts, he faile^^ of payment, and
is Felo de se. 406. The Master is chargeable for the Servants offense. 407.
Where the Plaintiff makes a new assignment he ought as well to prove the
Buttells as the names; Quaere. 408. What shall be imended a tenure in capite,
and where it must be traversed. 409. Husband alten joint purchaser with his
wife dies, the wife may enter into all. 410. One in execution shall not be
dismissed by the protection of the Kings service. 411. A man condemned in debt
has land in several Counties, the Plaintiff may have an Elegit in every of
them for all, or may divide his debt. 412. Where the heir shall be in ward
during the life of the wife. 413. Where the Clerk of Assise may bring in the
verdict without Certiorari. 414. A devise of the moity of his goods to his
wife, what she shall have. 415. Where the Plaintiff may have a Procedendo to
the Justices. 416. Where a man cannot make a Joint prescription. 418. Custom
upon cloth inhanced without Par. Magna customa and parva customa. 419. What
words amount to a Will. 420. What Act makes a man Executor of wrong. 421. The
Patentee shall have a Constat by 3 and 4 E. 6. 422. Non est factum, pleaded,
and upon demurrer much good matter. 423. Judgment in a Scire facias upon a
Recognizance reversed. 424. How and when livery shall be sued of land holden
of an Honor. 425. An information of perjury. 426. An Accedas ad Curiam how it
shall be directed. 427. Where the Queen ought to render livery to him who it
found heir. 428. By the grant of a Forest the game passes. 429. Where a
Supersedeas by paroll is good. 430. A prohibition for tithes of barren land
improved. 431. The construction of Si contingar. 432. A Replegiari, and much
good matter. 433. A pardon of an Outlawry. Ita quod stet rectus, where it
should be Satisfaciat querentes. 443. Whether incidents in a Grant may be
aceepted. 435. In an Alias Replevin the Sheriff returned that the Defendant
claimed property. 436. Where acceptance of Rent shall wave the advantages of a
disseisin. 437. In the Original the Plaintiff was named Sadler, and in the
Scire facias Psalter. 438. In quo Minus if the party plead not well, the Court
ought to aid him for the benefit of the King. 439. Cestui que use of land in
capite before 27. died seized of Soccage, the King shall have the ward of them.
440. A Jeofail in debt against the Executor of an Executor. 441. Where there
may be two or three terms between the Test and return of an Original. 442. A
Replevin nor a Trespass shall not abate by the death of one of the Defendants.
443. The office of Exegenter of London is incident to the office of Chief
Justice.

The Exegenter of London was committed to the Fleet, but the Judges Bank
granted a corpus cum causa because he was a necessary Officer.

444. What cause makes a principal challenge. 445. The Offices of the
Chirographer and custos Brevium are in the Kings gift. 446. A memorandum is not
sufficient to make a surrender of an Office. 447. A License to go beyond sea,
upon refusal to return, his lands and goods are to be seized.

Where a Ce^^ificate may not be travers^d.

448. A device that A. B. C. may sell, etc. if A. die B. and C. sell, otherwise
of his feoffees in general. 449. If a statute gives a penalty and treble
damages the Plaintiff shall not have costs. 450. The party may challenge the
array for cousenage, notwithstanding a false return. 451. A Termo^ is rejected
and reenters it, the disseisin remains if the Lessor pleases. 452. The
statute of 32 H. 8. of the Court of Wards gives no authority to grant wards
which may happen after. 453. A divorce Causa frigiditatis, dissolveth the
marriage Ab initio. 454. In dower some confessed the action, others demand the
view and granted. 455. A man reprieved before judgment, if he shall have
Clergy. 456. Jointenants make partition after the stat. 32 H. 8. by paroll,
Quaere. 457. A duplicate of a Patent, and the effect of it. 458. A feoffment
Borough English to the use of the feoffor and his heirs, yet the youngest shall
inherit. 459. A fine levied upon a writ of Customs and Services. 460. A debt
against two by several precipe's and several judgments given, a joint writ
of Error lies not. 461. Upon oath the Testator was not satisfied, Executors
had a Certiorari and begun de novo. 462. Where payment to an Executor as an
assign is good. 463. Where there shall be a Wardship of the third part and of
the body of the heir, by 32. 464. A Sheriff being removed disavoweth a Return.
465. A woman bound by the act of the husband. 466. Distress for damage
seasant, and a traverse taken: Indictment of one as accessory without
Malitiose. 467. Aneceipt by the hands of another, no wager of Law. 468.
Isrdgment against a Plaintiff in debt for want of form. 469. Jua Lease of
Trees are excepted, Quaere. 470. In dower issue upon life and death, trial by
proofs in that case. 471. The Sheriff returns a Devastavit, what judgment and
execution. 472. 1 Mar. c. 7. touching adjournment of the Term expounded. 473. A
Lease to A. for life to the use of B. for life. 474. Adulterer contriveth the
murder of the Infant. 475. Debt upon a counterbond to save barmlesse. 476. The
term continues but the rent is gone. 477. If Justices absent may grant a
Supersedeas. 478. Executor may pay himself by retainer. 479. In Dower 2
confess the action, the rest plead in Bar. 480. Outlawry pleaded, the tenor
was brought in. 481. A Sheriff suffers a recovery, and releaseth Errors. 482.
A fine of land to be amortised refused, and wherefore. 483. One cutteth another
in Westminster Hall sitting the Court. 484. What trial out of the statute of
Jeofails. 485. Although the Plaintiff appear not, yet no non-sute. 486. If the
Father may grant the marriage of his Son. 487. Where a woman shall be remitted.
488. Justifies for life by custom a widows estate no good eviden. 486. If a
Capias ad satisfaciendum in attachment of privilege. 490. After an outlawry
the Plaintiff ^s out of Court. 491. What act is a sufficient delivery of a
deed. 492. What is an advancement of a child within 32 H. 8. 493. Where an
Avowant shall have december Tales as well as the Plaintiff. 494. Where a man in
executi. may have a writ of de manu capt. 495. A Conusor of a stat. infeoffees
to Conusee part of the land. 496. A Quare impedit shall be brought where the
Cathedral Church and not the Prebend is. 497. In trespass in two Closes, the
Defendant justified in one, and pleaded not guilty in the other. 498. Whether a
surrender of an office by the Master of the Rolls may be recorded after his
death. 499. An action upon the case for turning a watercourse from a Mil, good
matter. 500. A purchased Capite land to him and his wise without license, the
Qu. pardoned all offenses for any alienation made to him. 501. Where a man
estopped to deny a recital of a condition. 502. Whether the custom for an
attachment be good between a Forainer and a Citizen. 503. In an account what is
a good plea for the Bailee. 504. A man in execution in the Kings Bench
committed to the Fleet upon a writ of Prerogative. 505. An Officer of Record
shall not be removed without a Scire facias of Record. 506. Upon two Nihils of
returns judgment that the Patent shall cease. 507. The Plaintiff and Defendant
both challenge one person. 508. The Sheriff amerced for not returning the
Pannell till after the Essoin day. 509. The Lessee covenants to repair at his
proper costs, cuts trees upon the same land and repairs. 510. In attachment of
goods the Sheriff must return the certainty and the value. 511. Where the
Conusee may have a Scire facias to execute a fine. 512. Where the Lord may
seize the Beasts of a stranger for Heriot. 513. Before 27 H. 8. a man infeoffed
himself and others. 514. A Tales de circumstantibus Hundredi. 515. The Patentee
of a house, accepts a grant of the custody thereof. 516. An exemplification of
Examination of witnesses in the Chancery given in evidence to prove a man of
full age. 517. An attaint brought against the Exec. by the equity of 23 H. 8.
518. A woman brings an app. of Rape, and diverse good Excep. tak. 519. The
Administrator brings an account, the Defendant pleads that the dead made an
Executor. 520. Cognizance in attaints denied to a Corporation. 521. In a writ
of Dower the Tenant avoucheth the heir who pleads nothing by descent in fee,
the Tenant averreth Assets. 522. Clerk is a good addition for a Priest or
Minister.

Executor recovered in account.

523. The will made void because the Testator was an Idiot. 524. Duchy Court,
what prison belongs thercunt^. 525. Upon nihil dicit in waste, a writ to the
Sheriff to enquire of the damages only. 526. Debt upon a bond against the
heir, is no plea that the Executors have Assets. 527. A private verdict where
good. 528. If a man stands mute in Treason he shall have Judgment as
convicted. 529. The power of Justices of Gaol delivery on respitting a
prisosoner. 530. Notwithstanding an entry quod non legit, the Prisoner after
may have his Clergy. 531. Conusor of a statute has a rent charge, and before
extent purchases part of the Land. 531. A writ of extent executed by
inquisition in the time of Q.M. and returned in the time of Q.E. 532. Outlawry
reversed upon 6 H. 8. without a writ of error. 533. Before the entry of the
Lessee the reversion is granted ov^^ to several, the Termor enters and makes
waste. 534. A Certiorari to remain a record capta in Curia nostra taken in time
of the predecessor. 535. What Lease made by an Abbot is void by 31 H. 8. 536. A
Per nomen cannot maintain a grant of Land in Lease without an averment. 537. If
a man may wave execution against the Executor, and have it against the Heir
only. 538. Debt against the Executors, Issue taken upon Assets, a good case.
539. The form of a writ of wast against an assign of a Term. 540. An Array
challenged by a Lord because no Knight returned. 541. An Inquisition must be
certain. 542. A President of a College is deprived, he shall not have an
appeal to the Delegates but an Assize. 543. A condition where it is repugnant.
544. By the name of King the name of Duke is drowned. 545. Upon a Devastavit
returned against one Executor xeecution awarded against his own goods only.
546. An interest may survive but not an authority. 547. If Justices of Peace
are bound to inquire of Riot without notice. 548. A Scire facias to execute a
fine, estrepment granted. 549. A Plea of Land is not grantable after
imparlance. 550. Where there must be an office to repeal Patent, but there must
be a Scire facias. 551. If the Jewrie in a Leet refuse to present, the Steward
may fine of every of them. 552. The Roll of Exigent is of more credit then the
writ. 553. The Lord Keeper may grant a Commission to determine of piracy as
well as the Chancellor. 554. In an attaint the defendant may give new matter
in evidence, but the Plaintiff cannot. 555. In a Quid juris clamat, the Tenant
claimed fee in part, and atturned for the rest, if the whole fine was
ingressed. 556. A party may travers upon return of a Rescous. 557. Debt
mentionable without privity. 558. Of what lands the heir must pay primer
seisin. 559. Where issue in tail shall avoid a rent reserved by fine. 560.
Office of Doorkeeper of the Chequer holden by grand Serjeanty. 561. A Tales of
60 awarded in an appeal. 562. Where a man shall avoid an outlawry for Error in
the Proclamations. 563. A condemnation by Non sum informatus, in an Action upon
8 H. 8. is a conviction. 564. A man committed in execution four years after
judgment without a Scire facias. 565. A man commits 2 selonies whereof for
one Clergy lies. 566. Where a Venire fac. was, a proviso is grantable to the
Def. 567. He that pleads Quod parts fines nihil habuerunt, must say in
possession nor in use. 568. Notwithstanding error in the Proclamations it
remains a fine in the common law. 569. By the dissolution Augmentation Court
the Receivers Office is dissolved. 570. In a formedon in the reverter, the
donor needs not show the pedigree of the issue of the donee. 571. An
Obligation with Condition to perform an award, much good matter. 572. Five
things incident to an Award. 573. A Venire facias with a proviso was served,
and 2 hours after a Venire facias by the Plaintiff was filed also. 574. No
Scire facias upon a transcript of Recognizance. 575. By what words a Covenant
is not released. 576. A Condition that the obligor upon request shall do all
a^ts reasonable. 577. A verdict good although one disagree, who was fined for
eating, etc. 578. A Condition that the ward being given by parties, may be
done by word. 579. From the date, and from the day of the date are all one.
580. By the opinion of all the Judges the stat. of 32 H. 8. is understood of a
descent on every disseisin. 581. A devise that his land shall be sold after his
wifes death. 582. A man bound to deliver the key of a house, and quiet
possessi. 583. A man declared of 20. l. and gave evidence but of 20 marks.
584. A man seized of Soceage in see, and of Capite in tail devised a third part
of all to his wife for her dower. 585. A Dedimus potestatem dated after the
return of the Original. 586. The L. Keep. cannot take a Recognizance to his
own use. 587. The fine settled after the Queens silver paid. 588. Where a Devise
takes away a Descent. 589. Warrantia Chartae must be brought where the land
lies.

It lies not against the Warrantor and his heirs except Dedi be^ in the deed.

590. A charge by a Prebend void before Induction. 591. Where a proviso makes
not a condition but a forspri^.

Plenty and variety of good matter in that case.

592. Condition to pay money at a place, where acceptance barreth. 593. A
return by the Coroners of an outlawry is no sufficient record. No robbery
without fear of death, and Clergy lies. 594. Proclamations upon a fine and 5
years passed before Dower brought. 595. A Bastard born at Tourney in H. 8.
time, is a Denizen. 596. The Q. Attorney Justice of Assize, took a fine without
a Dedimus. 597. If the wife be joint Purchasor before her husband be an
Officer. 598. The land is not liable to an account, stat. 13 Eliz. A warrant of
Attorney admitted after error brought. 599. The Q. may by her Prerogative make
a Sheriff. 600. Assizes adjourned without day notwithstanding the adjournment
of the Term, and yet not discontinued. 601. Diversity between a Demurrer and an
Imparlance. 602. Concerning adjournment of the Term. 603. A Scire facias to
have execution of Damages, Non tenure a good plea. 604. A grant of an Annuity
and 6s. 8d. nomine poenae, debt for the arrears and penalty. 605. If the
concord be entire, the post-fine shall be but one. 606. Debt upon 24 H. 8. of
apparel, outlawry pleaded in the Plaintiff. 607. What estate may be averred
for a Jointure within 27 H. 8. 608. If a Church become void by cession, the Q.
shall present. 609. The wife dyed before livery sued, Baron shall be Tenant by
the courtesy. 610. Land in L. may be sold by Paroll without enrollment. 611.
Obligation to confirm the estate of the obligee, confirmation must be pleaded
by Deed. 612. In Dower where the Tenant may plead detinue of Charters. 613.
Judgment for clipping money is to be drawn and hanged only. 614. A servant
buyeth was for his M. it isa debt of the M. and assumpsit of the servant. 615.
A new reservation void upon estate before created. 616. No warrant of attorney,
and Judgment reversed although Error brought. 617. A grant of a next avoidance
between 31. H. 8. and surrender of the Abbey. 618. In a challenge for the
hundred, he must show where it is. 616. A. forfeited 100 marks for hearing
Mass and died within 6 months, if the Executors be liable. Quaere. 620. Debt
brought against the Ordinary for a debt of the intestate. 621. a Ransom is
treble to a Fine. 622. Duchy Leases without the usual proviso si quis plus
dare voluerit are void. 623. H. at full age brought Audita quaerela to avoid a
Recognizance made within age. 624. Where by the name of a Manor the Rent and
the reversion of the Demeans shall pass. 625. A Prior in Covent cannot make
Divery by the view. 626. Where a Dispensation by the Archbishop is sufficient
to hold a Benefice in comendam. 627. A Deputy Dean and the Chapter made a lease
it is not good. 628 If a prescription to hold a Leet when it pleases the Lord,
be goood. 629. B. Certified to be Recusant of the Oath of supremacy by the name
of Doctor, and good, and rther notable matter therein. 630. Where a man shall
be said to fail of a Record. 631. The wife of N. without her husbands ascent
bought velvets and silks if the husband be liable to pay. Quaere. 633. A Lessee
for life, and he in Reversion may make a Lease forgeries by Indenture. 634.
Petty treson is pardoned, but a murder excepted, one who had killed his Master
is endicted of Murder only. Quaere 635. A bargain to one who had notice
changes not the use well raised. 636. Where livery shall be sued by the Form.
637. Attaint upon the Statute 23. H. 8. for false verdict in an assise. 638.
Where the King may sue in any Court upon a penal Law. 639. An Action on the
case for Wards. 640 Executors refuse, the Administrators bring Debt, the
Defend, says he made a testament. 641. If the Queen shall recover damage in a
Quare impedit. 642. Where a Benefice shall be void by taking of another. 643.
Where the son shall be in ward for the body. 644. Where the heir is in by
purchase, and where by ancient reversion. 645. Where the place of impounding a
Distress is material and where not within 1. and 2. Ph. and Mary. 646. A
Trespass brought upon the Statute de malefactoribus in parcis good matter.
647. Where a man shall forfeit his goods upon a fugam facit. 648. The Defendant
in intrusion in the Exchequer must make a Title. 649. A Customer liable to the
abuse of his Deputy 650. By the Outlawry the original is determined against an
Infant. 651. Where a Lease by a pro. Parson imparsone, is good. 652. Where a
Covenant for enjoying is broker. 653. What Act, within a Forest is a
purpresture. 654. Where words of Surplusage shall not prejudice. 655. What is a
good return for the Sheriff in case of Rescues. 656. A Quare Impedit against
A. he makes default at the grand Distress. 657. A man indicted of Pyracy
stood mute, and had Judgment of pain, fact, and dure, and after had his
Clergy. 658. Where notwithstanding a practice between the Clerks and Attorney,
an Execution stands in force. 659. An Award adjudged void for three causes,
good matter. 660. Where perjury is punishable in the Starchamber. 661. Where a
writ of Partition lies at the Common Law. 662. Submission to an award by
Obligation upon Demurrer. three resolutions. 663. A Bill of Debt against an
Attorney by the name of husbandman void. 664. I. an Assise where the Plaintiff
is at his peril to choose his Tenant. 665. Grantee of an Advowson makes a
Lease to begin after the Incumbent void: 666. A Sheriff amerced ten pounds and
a Factor five pounds for a practice. 667. After a Writ of Error delivered, no
Execution can be awarded. 668. Where one of the Tales may be joined with the
eleven principal. 669. One in Execution in the Fleet, caused himself to be
indicted of Felony. 670. If at the Common Law the Sheriff may not make a
Replevin without a writ. 671. Where the marriage of a woman shall hinder the
recording of a Fine. 672. Tenant in Tail makes a Lease to begin in futuro.
Quaere. 673. A Replevin against the Bishop and others and several Issues, the
challenged, the Array because no Knight, a good challenge for all. 674. Assise
of land in M. when he pleads a Lease Of a house in S. and averres that to be
the same Land a Demurrer. 675. After Administration committed, no Action lies
against the Ordinary.

An Avowson cannot commence since West. 2. Cap. 19.

676. What persons by a private Statute of a College may dispense of the
absence of a fellow. 677. In a writ of Right where the Tenant shall first give
his Evidence. 678. In a Formedon when a man shall make himself Cousin and heir
to a Grandfather. 679. Where Debt lies against the first Lessee for Rent
after assignment. 680. Where an Estate in Fee may be averred to be a Jointure.
681. A Steward or Bailiffe may be made without deed. 682. If he which has a
Freehold in a Mill may have an Action of the Case or Asssise for turning the
water. 683. A commission in the nature of an Extremum Clausit. 684. What is
pardoned by 5. E. of all intrusions and Entries. 686. Prisoners must be kept
strictly by first Rich. 2. and 24. H. 8. 687. No error in the Common Pleas for
a judgment before the Justices of Assize at Monmouth. 688. Whern an action of
the Case lies not, but an assize of Nuisance be stopping the way. 689. Where a
grant Coppy-hold is by authority of the Lord. 690. Where a release is void for
want of words of surrender. 691. A surrender of diverse parcels by particular
names, and concludes generally, what passes. 692. Tenant for life is content
that the reversioner shall have his interest. It is no surrender. 693. If a
formedon be returned ^tarde and an Alias summons sued, the tenant cannot be
Essoyned. 694. The Incumbent of a Chantry made a Lease for 99. years, whether
the King may avoid it. 695. If a grant of a War ship in the life of the father
be good. 696. A rent granted to one and his assigns during the life of C. the
grantee devised i^, who shall have it. quaere. 697. What shall departure and
Jeofall. 698. A Lease is made for 41. years to A. if he live so long, and if he
die, that his wife sh^^^ have the residue, avoid limitation. 699. Where the
Clerk of the Crown must certify a conviction in the name of the Justices,
where the principal was but a murderer, it shall not be pety treason in the
wife. 700. If the Kings Sil. be entered the fine may be engrossed. 701. A Termer
devises his term and dies, the devisee enters, the lessor brings debt for
rent, and barred for 2 causes. 702. What is a good cause for the Bishop to
refuse a Clerk. 703. Who may devise lands in I. by the custom, but not in
Mortmain. 704. A condition was, that if the obliger suffer, the obligee to
i^joy, etc. 705. He which has a benefice above 8. pounds, takes another, it is
void without notice. 706. Vallue of marriage lies without tender. 707. A
demise made 4. and 5. Philip and Mary to a College to a charitable use is
good. 708. If the Commissary of the Bishop grant letters ad Colegendum and
etendendum ea quae peratura essent, it is void. 709. If the infant in ward
ought to warrant till the hand of the King be amoved. 710. When entry of
proclamations upon fines begin. 711. Where a trespass de mali erl raptu and
deducta, shall be brought. 712. An Avoury for rent holden insufficient, for
diverse causes. 713. A Writ of pleges accquetandes brought, and judgment given
for the plaintiff. 714. A difference between a Covenant expressed, and a
Covenant employed. 715. Where aid of the King shall be granted. 716. In an
ejectment of tithes judgment for the plaintiff, but 6 good exceptions taken.
717. A reversion received pleads and found for him, and tenant for life dies
before judgment, quaere. 718. Where a man may grant an office in reversion.
719. By an union 2 Churches become one, good matter. 720 What is a good excuse
for the Ordinary for not returning a writ. 721. Debt upon a Lease for years of
several parcels and non demised pleaded. 722. The Queen grants the Ward and
marriage of the body saving the land, the grantee tenders marriage, which is
refused, he cannot retain. 723. Where an error in the record of Nisiprius is
amendable. 724. Upon an appeal of murder a man is sound guilty of
manslaughter. 725. A man demised all his lands in the Town and in one Hamlet.
76. A Rasure in a lease by the Lessee himself, where it makes a lease void.
727. A condition of an obligation become impossible by death. 728. A debt due
to a faelo dese by contract is not forfeited. 729. A false judgment in a
judgment given in an ancient demean. Several errors assigned. 730. Where a
release is good without words of enlargement. 731. In a Writ of dowre the
tenant makes default, and a termer was received to fine his term, by the
statute of Gloucester, Chap. 11. 732. A woman copyholder for life, takes a
husband, who surrenders the copyhold, and dies, the wife may enter. 733. A
new assignement of trespass must be certain. 734. Where an exception is but
temporary, and where repugnant. 735. A man devises land to be sold, and the
money to be disposed in legacies. 736. Where inquest shall be awarded by
default. 737. I account, the defendant wageth law, and afterward have confessed
part and made law, for the residues, it cannot be. 738. The Justices of peace
must certify their agreement upon servants wages. 739. In debt against a Lord,
a venire was returned, if the Array be quashable, a venire facias de novo shall
not issue. 740. At the day appointed to give Verdict, one Juror makes default,
the Sheriff returned a fine of 40. shilings on him. 741. What shall be
intended a jointure without Averment. 742. Whether a Sheriff can summon
himself. 743. Where the Inholder shall be charged with the loss of his guests
goods. 744. No disseasin against a Patentee, because at the first no diseasin
against the Queen. 745. Where a Lord may lose his villain for want of claim.
746. What is a College in the statute of 1. E. 6. 747. Where an Issue is
liable by 2 several Counties. 748. Where notwithstanding a feoffement with
collusion, the Queen shall not have the ward of the heir. 749. The form of
false judgment. 750. Where the King shall have a ward, because a ward, and
diverse notable cases where a general patent shall not extend to special
cases. 751. Construction of the words, ex gratia special certa scientia and
mera motu suis, a difference between false suggestion, false information, and
false cause. 752. Whether the death of ono tenant at will do not determine the
estate. 753. Where the first proclamation upon a fine is well made by 4. H. 7.
754. A command by the Queen cease by her death. 755. Where a Coppy-holder is
subject to distress for rent Artar, a diversity. 756. In a writ of right,
where a venire facias in the nature of a habeas corpus shall issue to the
Sheriff. 757. In debt to perform Covenants, trial shall be where the land
lies. 758. Debt upon escape lies not on the heir of the Jailer. 759. Right
due to a feme soul, she marries A. who makes an acquittance on feast after
the marriage. 760. Husband and wife outlawed, and she is pardoned but not
allowed, because she cannot have a Scire facias without ^er husband. 761. What
is a lease for 20. years by a tenant in tail within 32. to bind the issue. 762.
In debt the heir pleads nothing by descent, the plaintiff pleads Assets in
Land, gives in evidence at C. quaere a diversity. 763. A termer grants his
term a begin after his death, it is void. 764. What promise is a good
assumpsit in Law. 765. What shall be a wast raising Coppers. 766. What words do
not amount to a surrender but to a covenant. 767. A deanary is a spiritual
promotion and not temporal if the taking dignity in the same Church by a dean
makes a deanary vo^d. 768. Where feoffees to use may enter and have an action
to revive the old use. 769. Two brothers and the eldest had cause of petition
to the King for lands, the youngest had issue and is attainted. 770. A fine
levied to the use of the cognizer and to the wife that he shall marry, it is a
good jointure, otherwise of an estate executed. 771. Where a certio^ari shall
issue out of the Kings bench to remove a fine. 772. By what comandment or
authority the marshall may suffer one at execution to go at large. 773. False
imprisonment is brought the defendant pleads that the defendant is
excommunicated. 774. No collusion to defeat the queen of wardship if a third
prart be left. 775. Where a Scire facias lies against a Corporation to the
repeal of a patent of fairs. 776. After laps to the queen one (...) instituted
and inducted cu^^re. 777. The Bishop collateth by laps, the Patron presents
before induction the Bishop may refuse. 778. A. ward fell to the Bishop of D.
who died before ceazure, his executor shall have it. 779. A formedon upon a
remainder in use, he needs not show the deed for 2 causes. 780. A term
devised to an executor, who enters generally he is in as executor, where the
remainder of a term is void. 781. Where a Patentee of the King shall hold
lands discharged of tithes. 782. Where a grant by a Corporation is good
notwithstanding a variance in the name. 783. A formedon in defender is out of
the statutes of Limitations. 784. Upon an habere facias seizinam feizen
preserved of a third part by the Sheriff, by metes and bounds and refused it,
the demandant may enter. 785. The deputy of the Marshall of England liable to
an escape in debt. 786. A Scire facias upon a recognizance to perform
covenants, what pleading for the defendant is good. 787. Where acceptance of a
rent affirms a lease. 788, A next avoydance is granted to 2 who join in a
quare impedit. and one dies. 789. W. bound by the name of I. the Action must
be brought against him by the name of I. 790. What is good Prescription
foreign bought and foreign sold. 791. The Dean and Chapter is holden to be a
body within the Statute of 31. H. 8. 792. How a Distress upon a return
irrepledgable shall be ordered. 793. In a Replevin the Defendant acknowledges
taking as Batliffe of I.S. good matter. 794. A Feoffement of a house and 17
acres of wood (in a great wood) at the election of the Feoffee and his heirs
before election, the Feoffee died the heir cannot make election for 3 causes.
795. A lease upon condition not to make wast, and he suffers wast. Quaere.
796. Diverse resolutions upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. c. 2. touching of
importation of books written against the Queens Supremacy. 797. The Archbishop
of D. has 2 Deans and Chapters, the one surrenders to the King, the other
confirms a Lease made by the Bishop. 798. The Church being void, the Patron
grants the next avoidance, it passes not, but otherwise in the case of the
King. 799. A Feoffement of 3 acres in one County, and livery made by one in the
name of all. 800. A. Infeoffs an alien and denizen to his own use, if the
office be found, the use to A. of the Moity is gone. 801. Damages shall not be
recovered in dower but where the husband died ceazed. 802. What misconveyance
of process is aided of a Jeof all within 31. H 8. 803. Where the plaintiff may
proceed in an attaint, although the record be removed by error. 804. Where a
general livery is good, 805. Where a writ Scand^^is Magnatum lies. 806. An
indictment of assault against one without a surname. 807. A tenure of land to
be Constable of England, as Grand Sergant if such an office descend to
daughters how it shall be executed. 808. Whether the pate^tee of herbage may
maintain a tresp^sse. 809 Upon an exigent of a judgment the defendant cannot
appear gratis. 810. Where a pardon of intrusion is good, and by what words.
811. Where a lessee may enter the same day the lease is dated. 812. Where the
default in the plaintiff shall make a nonsuit. 813. Trial of treason where it
shall be 814. What shall be conveyance within 33. to give wardship to the King.
816. What writ of privilege is with a Supersedeas. 817. Outlawries against
Traitors which fled into Scotland good. 818. What Benefice is given to the
King by the first of Edward the sixth. 819. Where a bil of perjury may be sued
in chancery 820. What act may amount to Forgery of a Will within 5 Eliz. 821.
Where an attorney in attachment of privileges shall find pledges. 882. An
exception shall be good in the Kings grant but not in the grant of a Subject.
823. Jura Regalia granted to the Bishop of D. and the ^^tent of the grant. 824.
A ravishment of Ward lies where the ward was done. 825. Where an estoppell
shall not bind him that pleads it. 826. Bishop of L. being high Commissioner
is translated to Y. 827. What remedy one has for rent, who comes in, in the
Post. 828. What is a good counterplea in voucher, much good matter. 829. Where
Possessio fratris may be of a Coppy-hold before admittance. 830. Where one may
revoke his Presentation. 831. Where the first Office must be traversed, and
where it is void. 832. The Parish of H. extends unto the County of B. and W.
one made a Lease of H. in the County of B. whereas it lay in W. good. 833. If
the Patron present a mere Lay man, notice is not necessary to be given by the
Ordinary. 834. What words amount to the resignation of a Prebend. 835. Whether
a Commission of an administration be good or not. (Quaere.) 836. The Defendant
before trial of Issue makes a fraudulent conveyance of his land, (Quaere) if
the land be liable. 837. Where an Exigent shall issue into a foreign County.
838. (Quaere) if Prescription to enclose be destroyed by unity. 839. If a man
go beyond Sea without license, whether he be punishable or not. 840. Where a
man shall be executed upon indictment an appeal depending. 841. Where an use
may be raised upon marriage to a younger son upon a bare promise. 841. A
bastard is no lawful child 32. H 8. 842. The Kings bench has no authority to
commit a man in execution to the Fleet. 843. An insufficient declaration is not
aided by 32. of Jeofals. 844. What Act amounts to Attournment. 845. What act
makes a man a traitor within 25. of E. 3. 846. A conspiracy beyond the Sea, of
a subject to invade the Realm is high treason. 847. A wardship and marriage
divested out of the King. 848. Where an Executor may have an Extent. 849. The
Grantee of the next avoidance needs not shwe the title of the Granter. 850.
What Conveyance will create a Tenure in Capite. 851. An Elegit served and not
Returned, is a good Election. 852. The name of Dignity is parcel of the Issue.
853. A Suggestion of a writ to the Coroners ought to be a a principal
Challenge. 854. The Queen grants a manor and all Advowsons belonging the
Presentation passes not. 855. The Defendant in Debt upon a Bond shall not be
estopped by an Importance to plead now ready. 856. If a Spaniard commit Treason
beyond Sea against our King, and after come into E. if he may be arraigned.
857. If a Feoffement be made to one and his heirs until J. S. pay 100 pounds,
if J. S. die, the Feoffee shall hold it for ever. 858. In a writ of Right the
Tenant chose Trial by battle, but the Plaintiff was non-sute. 859. Two John's
sons, one reputed a bastard, and John found heir by office, it shall be
intended the right heir. 860. Forgery of a will by which a term is devised, is
within 5. Eliz. 861. The Copy held of an Idiot shall be ordered in the court of
the Lord of the Manor. 862. For lands in Chester the commissian of Mandamus
must issue out of Chancery there. 863. Who may grant the office of an Almager.
864. A Devise to an infant in his mother belly, if good. 865. Upon a conviction
of Forgery what damages shall be given by 5. Eliz. 866. Verdict passed for the
plant. in an erectment moved in arrest of judgm that the Lessor was not in
life. 867. Tenant in tail makes a Lease rendering 20. s. rent, and releases
19. and dies. 868. A next avoidance is granted to 3. habendum iis and uni
eorum conjunctim and divisim. 869. Where the heir at full age shall sue Livery,
32 H. 8. 870. An Indictment of wilful murder void without Murdravit. 871. An
Edictione firmae declared of a Lease of 300 Acres by the name of a Manor. 872.
Where a man may plead not guilty to part, and justify for the residue. 873. By
whom and where administration shall be committed. 874. A trespass by husband and
wife of the lands of the wife, while she sole, Ad grav. damna ipsorum. 875. A
Certificate by the Bishop of Espousalls void. 876. What Ac^ makes a man
Executor. 877. A Recognizance to save a Jailer harmless, the Jailer not
damnified for three causes. 878. What office shall make a Tenure in Chivalry.
879. A ward died ar^full age before tender of marriage. 880. An Action of
Trover brought for a Hawk, the Plaintiff must declare that he was reclaimed.
881. The day of the Delivery of a Deed is the day of the making thereof. 882. A
Debtor to the Queen is in execution in the Marshalcie, the Exchequer Writ to
the Marshall ad habendum corpus by prerogative. 883. Lessee for yoers devises
without limiting any estate. 884. What remedy to compel Lessee for years to
atturn. 885. Where the heirs of the wife and not the beirs of the husband shall
have the land. 886. A man indicted of piracy stands mute, if he may be indicted
again. 887. If many issues be advanced, yet one livery shall suffice for all by
the statute. 888. A Lease for three Manors rendering for one 6 l. one 5 l.
another 10 l. a case full of much good learning. 889. A Tenant for life, the
remaind. to his Exec. and Assi. for 21 years is attainted the Q. shall have the
remai. 890. Three were bound by Obligamus nos and utrumque nostrum per se, how
it shall be sued. 891. A devise in Gavelkind land in writing may be guided by
words. 892. In a Mordancester a diversity where the Tenant pleads at Bar, and
where abatement, the writ. 893. Where a proviso makes a Condition.

A gift in tail made by a woman to a man rendering rent may be averred causa
Matrimonii prolocuti.

894. A writ of Entry in the quibus against A. and B. and found that A. only
deceased, judgment shall be given for all. 895. A Tresp. upon the stat. that
none shall restrain the beasts of the Plow, if other distress may be found.
896. A Tenant in tail, the remainder in tail levied a fine and died without
issue, a stranger enters to revive the remainder (Quaere). 897. Several good
resolutions upon 21 H. 8. of pluralities. 898. A Lease for twenty years to
three, and two of them take a new Lease for 30 years to begin after the 20
years. 899. The Defendant in avowry for rent said, that the Grant was seized in
Fee, the Plaintiff said, he was seized in tail. 900. A Seigniory Chancery
lands is extinct by possession of the King but the rent remains. 901. What is
a good Certificate of lawful matrimony by a Bishop. 902. A Bastard is no
lawful generation to sue livery within 32 H. 8. 903. A Covenant by the Lessee
to repair at his proper costs and charges cuts trees, and pleads the house fell
down by a tempest. 904. Upon payment of money an use is transferred. 905. A
recovery to the intent the recoverer should perform his will intended his last
will. 906. A Peer shall not be impanelled without special command of the King,
or necessity. 907. If the omission in Misericordia shall make all the judgment
void to the party. 908. A judgment in a Recognizance in Chancery reversed in
the Kings Bench. 909. In a Formedon in reverter or remainder, he need not
allege seisin within 50 years. 910. Where a Counterplea of a receipt of a wife
in Formedon is good. 911. The Husband sows the land and dies, whether the
wife shall have the land and not the Executors. 912. A Juror challenged because
be had nothing within the Hundred at the return of the term, good matter. 913.
A Commoner because of visenage may not put his beasts into the other soil. 914.
Gavelkind is devised to the eldest son upon condition, which is broken, if the
youngest may enter into the moity. 915. An outlawry in London, judgment is
given by the Recorder. 916. An estate upon condition is a good jointure. 917.
An action of the case for words. 918. Where the beasts of a stranger are liable
to distress for rent. 919. The Earl of K. brought an action by the name of Esquire
the trial good although no Knight be returned. 920. A Covenant that if a
verdict pass against the Lessee the rent shall cease. 921. A bargain and sale
proviso that the bargainer shall retain for 20 years. 922. Capite land is
extended, the Tenant dies, is heir within age. 923. Two Executors Plaintiffs,
one is summoned and severed, he may release before judgment, but not after.
924. A man has a rent charge and grants, and releaseth it to the Tenant of the
Land. 925. A tre^passe upon the case for diverting a water course. 926. The
Defendant in ejectment shall have aid of the Queen in reversion, search lies
not in aid prayer but only in a petition of right. 927. Several Errors
assigned upon a fine levied at Chester, very goodmatter. 928. A special
occupant shall not have aid. 929. A distress by the Lord by the custom for
breach of a By-law. 930. A debt lies not against Executors for an escape by
the Testator. 931. Forgery of a customary of Copyhold is within 5 Eliz. 932.
What is a good devise of land by intention. 933. By name of all Hereditaments
an advowson of a Vicarage passes. 934. A man convicted for three Masses
forfeiteth but 100. l. upon 1 Eliz. 935. The under-Marshall within 23 H. 6. for
taking security. 936. A Termor covenanted to repair, and the house is burned
down. 937. Where a feoffment by him in remainder in tail makes a
discontinuance. 938. Tenant effoined after issue joined. 939. A. seized of land
gives in tail to one of his daughters who is attainted by act wherein there is
a Saving, the other daughter may enter. 940. A writ of Estrepment between
judgment and execution. 941. Assise of two acres two several Bars pleaded.
942. A devise of a house to a woman, and her brother, and to the heir of every
of their bodies, they are several estates. 943. The Sea left a great quantity
of land upon the shore, Quaere. 944. Whether Unity does not extinguish a
Purleiwe. 945. A Chapleyn qualified for two benefices takes a third, Quaere.
946. In laps how the six months shall be accounted, and what is a good notice.
947. A promise that the lessee shall hold against a wrong doer. 948. A writ of
privilege disallowed to a Receiver. 949. A Lease made to one his Executors,
and assignment for the life of another, who made a Lease for years rendering
rent, Quaere. 950. A Term devised to his son at his full age, in the mean time
is sold by the Wife, what remedy, Quaere. 951. In what place a rent must be
tendered. 952. Debt upon a Bond to perform an award. 953. In a false Judgment
the Record was removed, and the Plaintiff non suit, a Scire facias shall go
for damages. 954. What shall be intended a Knights fee. 955. In a will the land
shall be intended Soccage. 956. Where Feoffees may enter to revive the ancient
use. 957. Essoyn entered in the Roll of the Court, but not in the Essoine Roll.

Diminution alleged in policy in a writ of Error.

958. In Avowry Seisin alleged within Fifty years. 959. In a Will if the
intent be expressed no implication shall be taken. 960. Detinue by the wife
against Executors of the second husband for the goods of the first husband.
961. 34 H. 8. of Misnosmer shall not aid non nofmer. 962. Upon an Extent where
Audita Querela lays for Contribution. 963. Conspiracy with a servant to kill
her husband is petite Treason in both, otherwise with a stranger. 964. Wast in
cutting 10 trees, the Defendant justified as to three. 965. Issue in special
tuile must convey by Father and Mother. 966. What is a good cause of
disfranchisement of a Citizen. 967. What words make an Estate tail in the
Will. 968. Where issue in tail may aver continuance of possession against a
fine. 969. A Condition the Lessee shall not alien without license, he aliens
part with license. 970. Feoffees to use must make election before it self in
Cestui que use. 971. A Remainder seniori puero indifferent to both sexes. 972.
A Letter of Atturny to enter into 3 acres, who enters intotwo in the name of
all, where not good. 973. Where an acceptance of a rent is void. 974. Where a
Covenant lies for the heir although not annexed to the land, and the
Covenanter is bound to seal upon request. 975, Whether property in an estray be
in the Lord before seizure. 976. An infant after full age nonsuit shall be
amerced. 977. What is a lawful try all by a Tales by 35 H. 8. ca. 6. 978. A
Prebend makes a Lease for 70 years, which is confirmed as to 51 years, and non
ultra. 979. Tenant for life makes a feoffment, he in remainder for life cannot
enter. 980. The Lord improveth parcel of a wast, and infeoffeth the Commoner
of the improvement, no extinguishment of the Common. 981. Execution sued, and
an Audita Querela brought. 982. What act is a revocation of a former
presentation. 983. A feoffement of him in reversion, and livery in the absence
of tenant for life will pass the fee.

Where a wife shall take a jointure before she was in esse.

984. Where a counterplea of Voucher lies. 985. What lease is Covinous within
27 H. 8. 986. The four first letters in a Patent interlessed, and yet good.
987. Where the Collateral heir of the youngest shall inherit. 988. Diverse
excellent matters resolved in a case between the Earl of A. and N. 989. After
recovery by Nihil dicit the heir cannot plead nothing by descent, What judgment
shall be given against the heir. 990. Election to make an annuity is ended by
the death of the Grantor. 991. Tenure to serve the Prince in his wars is not
capite. 992. A Bastard is not a child within 32 H. 8. 993. A quarter of a year
91 days. 994. Error to Chester returnable in the Kings Bench. 995. Deprivation
for not reading the Articles, notice must be given. 996. Information for usury,
diverse exception taken. 997. A Condition of a Bond to make a Lease. 998. A
dispensation from the Pope made void by 28 H. 8.

The Q. shall not present by laps if no notice be given to the Patron.

999. Two penalties for rent, a distress, and a condition to enter. 1000.
Appeal against I. S. and his name was T. S.

In favor of life a man may traverse a return by the Sheriff.

1001. Conusee of a statute takes a fine of the Conusor to another use. 1002.
Where a Prohibition lies upon a prescription for tithe. 1003. A formedon in
remainder of a moity, and the form thereof. 1004. A Lease in futuro, the first
lessee never atturned. 1005. When the authority of the Guardian of the
Spiritualties cease. 1006. A bond to two in 200 l. Solvendum 100 l. to one,
and a 100 l. to another, Quaere. 1007. Two make partition of land in tail by
word only. 1008. Where an advowson passes by patent without speciciall name.
1009. One held by Heriot custom of diverse Lords and made a fraudulent gift of
20 horses, one Lord brought debt. 1010. Husband and wife, tenants inspeciall
tail, the Husband levies a fine to his own use issue is barred. 1011. A
Benefice void by 21 H. 8. notwithstanding a dispensation. 1012. The Queen may
avoid her grant, if she were deceived. 1013. An action of the case for Granage
by custom of L. 1014. He which traverseth absque hoe, must not join issue first.

If discontinuance in the case of the Queen after verdit be aided by 32 H. 8.
Quaere.

1015. The Incumbency not in question, but the disturbance. 1016. 1017. A fine
to certain uses in an Indenture with proviso, and because no day is limited,
notice must be given to the Conusee. 1018. What words make an estate tail in a
last will. 1019. A fine by husband and wife of her land to the use of her
Children, if the Wardship be saved by the statute. 1020. Termor erected the
lessor may enter to save a descent. 1021. If a man be pronounced outlawed of
Felony in the County Court every one must take notice of it. 1022. A bargain
and sale to E. 6. acknowledged but not enrolled. 1023. What is a good
consideration to maintain an assumpsit. 1023. Error upon a writ of Covenant.
1024. A Lease by a parson for 40 years confirmed by the Bishop, Patron and
ordinary, but not by the Deane and Chapter. 1025. The husband makes a lease to
begin, after a lease in Esse of his wifes land by virtue of a private Act in
35 H. 8. 1026. Where the husband shall not be tenant by the Courtesy. 1027. An
alien must pray a medietatem linguae before the venire facias. 1028. A custom
that tenant in Fee can make a Lease but for six years. 1029. A Lease to a
spiritual parson against 21. H. 8. c. 12. not void. 1030. Reversioner
infeoffeth tenant for life without deed. 1031. A Iointure after the Coverture
where barred by a fine by a husband and wife. 1032. He which holds in Soccage,
and purchases the mesualty in Capite, shall hold in Capite. 1033. Where the
Court ought to grant a Tales at the Defendants request. 1034. The elder brother
dead without issue, the younger is heir to the father. 1035. A Pere in I. must
be tried in I. for Treason. 1036. After Induction the Q. cannot revoke a
Presentation. 1037. A Lease to A. and B. habendum protermino vitae successive,
they are not Iointenants but it is a remainder to B. 1038. The folly of the
vendor not to require an assurance. 1039. In trespass, the plaintiff
releaseth after the Essoine day of the utas, therefore the inquest taken. 1039.
In Dower assignment of rent out of the land pleaded. 1040. Digging of a trench
in a meadow no wast, Quae. how it must be pleaded. 1041. A bill of deceit
against an Attorney. 1042. If Collusion be found by office how much shall be in
Ward by 32. 1043. Rent goes with the reversion, and so no assets in the
Executors. 1044. Where the heir is in as a purchasor during his mothers life,
he shall not be in ward. 1045. The Queen grants a manor and all woods
heretofore reputed as parcel, etc. 1046. An heir of Soccage in Capite within
the age of 14 shall not sue livery but an Ousterlemain. 1047. Tenant in Capite
levied a Fine to his use in tail the remainder to the conuse in Fee the Queen
shall have the Wardship. 1048. Termer makes a Feoffment by Dedi and concessi,
and makes livery, the lessor being upon the land. 1049. When a conusor of a
fine may distrain for rent by the statute of uses without clause of distress.
1050. Tenant in tail made a feoffment and in making livery outed the termer.
1051. Error in assise because no warrant of attorney. 1052. The Sheriff by a
Fieri facias sels the Term, them Judgment is reversed. 1053. Indictment for a
Prenumire upon 1. and 13. of Eliz. 1054. Where a custom in Wales is not
abrogated by 27 H. 8. 1055. A copyholder prescribed for estovers in another
soil. 1056. Where an incumbent is removeable by a writ to the Bishop although
no party to the judgment. 1057. What is a good Obligation and condition for
the Sheriff within 23 H. 6. 1058. In an attaint the Plaintiffes recognizance
shall be to the Queen and her party. 1059. In what case a special traverse of
an estate in Fee simple is good. 1060. An ejectment what is a good traverse,
and what in an assise of Trespass. 1061. Where a man must traverse the
descent, and not the dying seized. 1062. A man seized 10. l. land in Capite,
and 8. l. in Soccage devised all the Capite, the Queen shall have the 3 part of
the Capite, and all the Soccage. 1063. An Exec. being Devisee of a term enter
before probate, it is good. 1064. Where a mis-convey. of process is helped, 32
H. 8. 1065. In a Formedon the Ten. avouched one as Cosen and heir, who entered
without demanding of the lieu, etc. 1066. Where the Lord shall have the
Lordship of the body, and the third part of the land. 1067. Upon judgment given
in the Exchequer upon inforform. for Usury diverse errors assigned, and good
mat. 1068. The custom of Ipswich is that the Def. in trespass must be
committed for default, Mainpernors. 1069. If the elder brother die the younger
shall be charged as heir in an Obligation of his father. 1070. How much of a
superstitious use is given to the K. by 1 E. 6. 1071. Where a Bishop must
certify, lawfully espoused in case of Dower. 1072. In 27 H. 8. does not
execute the Lease of a term. 1073. If the Morgager redeemeth Capite land he
shall divest the Wardship from the King. 1074. A Scire facias shall not issue
upon the tenure of Recognizance but a Writ may. 1075. Grantee of an annuity pro
consilio may counsel the adversary if the Grantor do not request him. 1076.
If a man be deprived for not reading the Articles if notice must be given to
the patron. 1077. Where an a^^ai. lies not for finding excessive dam. 1078. No
ejectione custodia lies for ejectm. of the body. 1078. The ward and mar. of
the heir not gran. without deed. 1079. Where a writ of pleg aq uietandis does
not lie. 1080. If 2 be robbed of a joint sum they may join in an act. What is a
good hue and cry within the st. of Win. 1081. Where the son shall sue livery
for a third part upon a conveyance for his advancement. 1082. Where the stat.
of Gloucester chap. 1. gives costs and damages in a writ of Error in the Post.
1083. The Bish. of W. grant an annuity pro consilio, etc. which is confirmed
(Quaere) if void against the Successor by 1 Eliz. 1083. What is a Departure.
1084. Where the surviving Exec. may sell and pay debts. 1085. A certificate of
excommunication by the Deligates. 1086. The Son devises the land he has or
may have after the death of his father. 1087. If issue be joined upon one
point, and the Plaintiff barred they shall never sue his bond again. 1088. A
double verdit. 1089. An Executor made an Executor, and died before probate, his
Executor is not Executor to the first Testator. 1090. What is a god tender to
make a conveyance void, a diversity. 1091. The Lord of a Wast of 200 Acres
infeofeth one of 50 Acres, the Feoffee must enclose. 1092. Where Covenants and
Obligations are void from the beginning or only after non residence by 13 E. 14
of Eliz. 1093. If the custom of Barring Tails be averrable against the statute
de donis conditionalibus which is within memory. 1094. In debt against an heir
Judgment given, that the Plaintiff should recover the debt of a reversion to
be levied when it falls. 1095. The recovery was had returnable the 9. of
October. which day the recoveree dyed it seems good. 1096. A Termer within the
statute, of 32 H. of maintenance. 1097. The Termer cut trees not excepted it is
wast. 1098. Error in Parliament for a judgment in the Kings Bench, good
matter. 1099. Lessor for life rendering rent dyed, if the Executor shall
distrain or have an action of debt. 1100. The statute of 13 Eliz. against
fugitives gives over a seisurt the lands. 1101. Next ensuing bow expounded.
1102. Judgment given in the ^inque ports is reversable as the Warders Court at
Ship way. 1103. Justices of Assise may by 35 H. 8. award a Tales to the
cortners. 1104. Sufficient certainty to make a Feoffment good. 1105. Tenant in
tail suffers a recovery and dies before executon^ Scire facias lies against
the issue. 1106. A reversion granted rendering rent, when it shall happen, that
is, when it falls in possession. 1107. If a Grantee for S^ewardship have
judgment in an annuity and refuse how the Arrearages shall be recover^d. 1108.
A. an infant is f^und heir by office, B. tenders a traverse of the dying
ceased, A. came of full age, the Que ^nnay cou^pell A. to sue general livery.
1109. Husband and wife are sued in the Bank he being a Clark in Chancery, they
shall not have privilege. 1110. A Clark of a benifice above the value of 8 l.
per annum, took another and was insti^tuted, but did not subscribe according to
13 Eliz. and died, the first bonefice is not void by 21 H. 8.
FINIS.
The perfect Table of the Cases.
A.
ABbot of Westminster. 62 Audley Lord. 72 Andrews. 191 Ailiffe Sir Jo. 213 Arcbish.
of Cant. 281 Agarde. 334 Audeley Lord. 419. 938 Austyn. 517 Ashton. 607
Alforde. 614 Archbish. of Cant. 656 Arundell Lady. 731 Arundell Earl. 988
Altons case. 1040 Andrews. 1060
B.
Bokenham. 20 Bishop of Worcester. 45 Brickhead. 46 Banister. 116 Bridgwater
Earl. 126 Borough Lord. 144 Buckingham Duke. 154 Bishop of Bath and W. 155
Buckler. 173 Boucher Lord. 188 Bishop of Sarum. 194 Barkley Marquess. 268
Bonham Sir Io. 272 Barbor. 312 Ballard. 326 Bonville. 331 Bassett. 342 Bedles.
376 Barrett. 423 Bronkard. 425 Barkley Sir Maur. 446 Bury. 453 Bray Lord. 486
Bateman. 499 Bacon Sir Nic. 585. 586 Bishop. 588 Bishop of York. 591 Bonner.
629 Brereton. 685 Bell. 702 Bowls. 701 Bassett. 720 Bassett. 775 Butler. 745.
800 Bohun Humphrey. 807 Bygott. 821 Brown Lady. 925 Bodin Rectory. 1008
Blower. 1015 Barrows Ed. 1016 Beamont. 1039
C.
Cooks case. 3 Catesby. 45 Chaffin. 100 Cockerell. 132 Chapman. 143 Clifford.
226. 245 Cromwell Lady. 238 Chafyn. 239 Culpepper. 266 Constable. 267 Champion
Prebend. 276 Clerk. 286 Constable Jo. 328 Cranmer. 356 Cutts Sir Will. 362
Cromwell Sir Rich. 428 Colthurst. 469 Cichester Sir Jo. 471 Coventry Bishop.
496 Cathyn Sir Robert. 500 Cheyney. 516 Clear. 519. 858 Chester Sir Robert. 569
Carell. 587 Candish Sir Will. 597 Capell Sir Giles. 604 Chiborne. 610 Cobham.
657 Cordall Sir Will. 695 Compton. 700 Cobham. 739 Citizens of York. 790 Cook
Sir A. 793 Cobham. 886 Cromwell Lo. 906 Cromwell Lo. 929 Clacke. 959 Chapman.
967 Calthrop Sir Fra. 970 Cook. 974 Chester Error. 994 Chicke. 1026 Cromwell
Lo. 1060 Clifford. 1078 Cotton. 1104
D.
Dean of Sarum. 100 Davies. 225 Durine. 302 Davie. 321 Duches of Richmond. 336
Dorset Marquess. 339 Dawbeny Lord. 353 Davies. 483 Darcey Lord. 498 Dennis Sir
Maur. 680 Davies Bishop. 746 Dacres Lord. 774 Durham Bishop. 778 Dean and ^. of
Carlis^e. 782 Dublyn Archb. 797 David's Bishop. 818 Danett. 974 Denbigh Custom.
1054 Dean and Chapter of Paul's. 1070
E.
Empson. 4 Eps. 187 Eden. 222 Ed. 6 to Lady Mary. 359 Eaton College. 379
Estost. 779 Eweleigh. 849
F.
Farrington. 169 Fulmerston. 270 Frencham. 431 Foreman. 773 Fitzwilliams. 828
Fines. 880
G.
Gawen. 99 Greenliffe. 104 Gilbert. 107 Graistock College. 212 Gravesend. 307
Gates Sir Jo. 357 Gravenor. 377 Greiswold. 393 Gasco^gne Sir William. 495
Gales. 511 Gray Thomazin. 521 Greyhound fl. 557 Goodman. 834 Grevill. 865
Gloucester Dean. 951
H.
Hampden. 140 Haywood. 158 Harwell. 176 Harward. 207 Hide. 297 Hodgekin. 305
Haydon. 333 Huntington Earl. 355 Hunt. 375. 3^6 Hungerford. 503 Hartford
Castle. 524 Hastings Lord. 540 Harrison. 623 Harrison. 686 Hurst Parish. 832
Hawley. 917 Huntley. 942 Humphrison. 971 Hendingham. 989 Hawarde. 1088
I.
Isham. 179 Islington. 265 Ibgrave. 306 Illesfielde. 719 John's Priov. 752
Ireland Peer. 1035 Ipswich Custom. 1068 I^leds case. 1089
K.
Knowles. 13 Kempe. 185 Kempe. 489 Kempe. 498 King. 800 Keite. 891 Kent Earl.
919 Kenne. 1067 Knightley. 1073
L.
Latimer Lord. 155 Lane. 434 Lee. 502 Lassells. 504 Lambert Ellen. 518 Lecester
Earl. 744 London Bishop. 826 Luker. 873 Lingen. 932 London custom. 1013
M.
Maleveret. 96 Minors. 110 Milbourne. 111 Minors. 168 Marvyn. 228 Mannering.
230 More. 250 Musgrave. 288 Marvyn Just. 295 Milburne. 299 Mountague Lord. 314
Marrowe. 396 Moodie. 463 Magdalen College. 542 Manners Lady. 635 Mackwilliams.
643 Michell Elizabeth 709 Mulgrave Cutbert. 724 Mutton John. 770 Mountforde.
947
N.
North Lord. 406 Nudigate. 633 Norfolk Duke. 785 Northumberland E. 988
O.
Oldnolde. 389 Owins. 537 Orme. 822 Ontley. 1023
P.
Prior of St. Bartholom. 86 Powes Lady. 207 Peppes. 211 Potter. 214 Powes Lady.
277 Peers. 292 Pecke. 296 Parkins. 298 Plympton Prior. 319 Poole Dean. 320
Poyner. 349 Pannell. 378 Puttenham. 395 Porter. 420 Powes Lor. 429 Parrett Sir
Io. 437 Popham. 579 Proctor. 593 Prior of St. John's 781 Prior of Norwich. 791
Putnam. 843 Puttenham. 877 Pagett Lord. 887 Powes Lord. 902 Plomer. 1075 P^wles
case. 1109
R.
Ready. 5 Read. 313. 337 R^sden. 9 Rosse Lord. 20 Russell. 61 Rolfe. 140
Richards. 141 Read. 152 Richmond fee. 195 Rugway. 284 Redman. 296 Ryder. 363
Rutford. 344 Bowlett Sir Ralph. 481
S.
Saccombe. 129 Symons. 143 Saunders. 153 Sackvill. 181 Seintloe Sir Io. 210
Sturton Lord. 239 Seymor. 243 Somerset Duke. 244 Saintalbyn. 279 Seintloo. 310
Share Sir Tho. 335 Smith Benjamin. 344 Sherleys John. 368 Savage Sir John. 381
Scr^ggs. 443 Sadler Sir Ralph. 457 Saunders. 543 Stone. 565 Sydney Sir Henry.
608 Shandoes Lord. 646 Swynerton. 696 Saunders. 699 Savage Sir John. 718
Shatbolt William. 789 Sarum Bishop. 794 Stanley. 840 Story. 856 Spencer Sir Io.
880 Sydnam. 917 Say Sir William. 939 Sarum Bishop. 978 Somerset Duke. 1022
Spinosa. 1027 Salforde. 1028 Stafford Lord. 1088
T.
Taverner. 156 Trewynnard. 160 Townesend. 203 Thomas Will. 262 Traps. 348
Turton Eliz. 353 Trevilian. 366 Thymolby. 385 Tyrrell. 390 Tawe. 422 Tourney.
592 Trinity College. 707 Taverner. 931 Thornton. 922
V. U.
Vincent. 192 Varney. 227 Villiers. 373 Vmpton. 380 Vere Lady. 409 Varney. 669
Vivion. 859 Vmpton Lady. 983 Vernon. 1061 Vincent. 1066 Vernon. 1108
W.
Woody. 38 Waineforde. 131 Whorewood. 162 Windsor Lord. 166 Willoughby. 209
Woodhouse. 237 Whitton. 241 Windsor Lord. 249 Winton Dean. 269 Windsor. 294
Wyat Sir Tho. 301 Whittington. 313 Wyat Sir Tho. 316 Wilford. 327 Wilts. 427
Walgrave. 619 Windsor College. 627 Wells Provost. 651 Walton. 755 Wells Danry.
767 West Kni. and Lord. 852 Winter. 888 Whitacres. 930 Waddon Chase. 944
Westons case. 998 Wyndsor. 1038 Winton Bish. 1083 Worsely. 1096
Y.
Yatton Vicarage. 982
Z.
Zouch Lord. 193

