LITCHFIELD TO BE SURRENDERED: TOGETHER, With all the Ordnance, Arms, and
Ammunition.

AS ALSO, The Names of the Commissioners appointed by Sir Thomas Tidsley,
Governor, on the one Party; and the right Honorable Sir William Brereton on
the other Party, for the resigning up of the said Garrison to the obedience of
King and Parliament.

LIKEWISE, The gallant proceedings of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfaxes
Forces at Worcester, since the coming up of the additionall Regiments both of
Horse and Foot.

These are Printed by the Original Papers, and Published according to Order of
Parliament.

LONDON, Printed by Berneard Alsop July 6. ^646.

A PERFECT COPPIE OF Sir Richard Diots Letter to Captain Stone out of
Litchfield Close, for the surrendering of the said Garrison, together with all
the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition.
SIR,
AFter I had acquainted the Covernour with what you were pleased to tell me,
concerning my Son, I made a Report to Him, and to diverse Noble Gentlemen of
this Garrison, of other more important Matters propounded by your self, and
Lieutenant-Colonell Gerrard the other day at our meeting: And now I shall
acquaint you with the result of their conference upon the Report.

I find, that though we be in a gallant condition, yet we are so tenderly
affected to our dear Country, and so very sensible of their sufferings, in
respect of their great and long charge, and or their danger in respect of the
spreading Infection, much occasioned (as we conceive) by the continuance of the
siege. As also, so unwilling that there should be any impediment in England, to
retard in the least degree any expedition against the Rebels in Ireland; to the
suppression of whom, we are resolved to contribute to the utmost of our powers,
that you shall find in us no obstinacy (as some are pleased to call our
constant Loyalty) but hearts studious of public peace and tranquillity; and for
that end inclinable to comply with you in any fair propositions, which are
consistent with Loyalty, Honor and Conscience; Wherein to acquit our selves
as good Subjects, and good Patriots; it is propounded as an expedient, that
there should be a meeting of twelve Staffordshire Gentlemen, six of this side,
and six of yours (or what other number you please) to confer together and to
prepare the business.

The Gentlemen nominated for this Garrison, are the Lord Aston, Sir Tho. Leigh,
Colonel Snead, Col. Skrimshire, Captain Glasier, and my self: if you like this
motion, we desire you to send the names of the like number of Gentlemen for
you: Of which number we earnestly desire, that it would please your General
Sir William Brereton to be one, who has no small interest in this County: Sir,
I have no more at this time to say, but what you shall ever find that I am

Your respective Friend, Richard Dyot.
July 1. 1646.For my worthy and much esteemed Friend, Captain Henry Stone.
The Answer of Captain Stones to Sir Richard Dyots Letter, for the surrender of
Litchfield Close.
SIR,
I Have received yours, which J have imparted to Adjutant-Generall Louthian,
who is content to admit of a meeting with the gentlemen you propose, although I
must tell you there is not one man (to my knowledge) in all our quarters sick of
the plague, neither is our lying so burdensome to the Country, but they can in
a more gallant manner without much charge to any particular persons, provide
for us here, then your gallant condition can provide for you. And yet we so
far tender our Counteries good, as not to oppose a fair accommodation, which
may stand with the honor of those, by whom we are entrusted and will be tender
of sheding one drop of blood if not provoked.

The names of those who are to meet are Mr. Manwayring our high Sheriff, Col.
Stepkins Lieutenant Col. Gerhard, Mayor Cambridge, Capt. Slade, and my self,
and the place of meeting (if you please) to be at Elmehurst at Mr. Bidhel phs
it being the nearest convenient house, for the sickness in the Town is
dangerous. If you approve of the persons and place, appoint your time and you
shall have a safe conduct for your selves, and servants, J have no more at
present but subscribe my self

July the 1. 1646. Your Servant Henry Stone.
If your Commissioners come forth, its expected they should come with power
from the Governors to treat and conclude.


For the right worshipful, Sir Richard Dyot Knight.
SIR,
SInce my last, I thought fit to acquaint you with these ensuing particulars,
The Enemy sallyed out of Worcester on Thursday night last, but we having timely
notice of their intention, placed our Ambuscadoes, and at their approach
charged them, who after a hot encounter, forced them to retreat with the loss
of about twenty men. Thus for the present I cease, remaining

Your affectionate Friend E. H.

FINIS.

