AN EXHORTATION TO BROTHERLY COMMUNION betwixt the PROTESTANT CHURCHES:

Written, by the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN DAVENANT, Bishop of Sarum.

IN DOMINO CONFIDO printer's device of Richard Badger

LONDON, Printed by R. B. for Richard Badger, and John Williams; and are to be
sold at the shop near S. Dunstane's Churchyard, and in S. Paul's Churchyard.

TO THE COURTEous Reader, and desirous of Peace, Grace and Peace in CHRIST
JESUS.
SOme years since we privately imparted to JOHN DURAEUS, a man learned, godly,
and most desirous of the Churches Peace, our advice of procuring Peace, betwixt
the Protestants. He thought fit to print our Opinion delivered in a Letter, and
to present it to the view of the World. After the publishing whereof, the same
DURAEUS, and also other most worthy men, were instant, and did press me with
much earnestness, that I would somewhat more largely, make an inquiry
concerning the Fundamentals of the Catholic Faith, that it might the better
appear, whether or no, the Protestants in all these agree amongst themselves:
For truly and wisely they did conceive, that Peace and Union could not be made
up betwixt them, who indite each other, as guilty of violating and overturning
the Foundation. But this they did not so advisedly, that they accounted me, a
man almost spent with old age, able to undergo the weight of so hard and heavy
an imploiment. Therefore I long and often gave the Denial to some of my
friends, who desired it, and were importunate with me, to enter into
consideration of this matter, and conceived this employment was to be
committed to none, but some Divine flourishing in his health and strength. Yet
I know not how, not long since, of its own accord it came into my mind, that it
would not be amiss, if, (to give my self some satisfaction,) I should a
little meditate with my self, of the question propounded. Hence came forth
this our Discourse, however it be done: Which after that out of our Study, it
had come into the hands of some friends, whilst they requested it, and I was
not unwilling, it came abroad into the World. But we will not have this
Tractate appear in public, unless also accompanied with that other, which we
formerly sent to DuRAEUS. Which we do, both for the asfinity of the subject
matter, which is well nigh the same in both, as also because the one reflects
mutual clearness on the other. Mean time I am not ignorant on how dangerous
a rock he touches, who offers to define Fundamental Doctrines, or to bound
them within certain limits. But it was enough for my purpose, with this our
sleighter work, to have whetted the industry of others, to a more full and
acurate explaining of this Matter. In the mean time, if those our pains may
be any ways useful to Peaceable Divines, toward the establishing of Peace
betwixt Protestant Churches; for my part let them enjoy them, who the whilst
shall enjoy this comfort, that my weak help herein has not been wanting to
the Church in distress. Farewell, Brethren in Christ, and Prince of Peace,
diligently endeavor to procure the Peace of your own Churches.

AN EXHORTATION, To Brotherly Communion betwixt the Protestant Churches.
MOST worthy indeed of the consideration of all godly Divines, is that Speech
of God himself in the Prophet Zachary, Love the Truth, and Peace. Zach. 8.19
To which also agrees that of the Apostle, Speak ye the Truth in Love. Ephe.
4.15
We ought not therefore so far to tender the Truth, that the care of Peace
should be wholly neglected, nor to be ambitious of such an Unity, wherewith the
true Faith is forsaken. Let the Divines therefore which encounter each other,
pretend what they please of Religion and Faith, they heartily love neither,
which love not both; They desire neither with a godly mind, which desire not
both. For if every Natural body (as Philosophers maintain) no less desires
its own Unity than its Being; I see no reason, why that Spiritual and
Mystical body, which we call the Catholic Church, should not with equal
affection desire its own Unity; as being that which if it be dissolved, it
cannot really subsist, nor so much as in the mind be conceived. Therefore let
us burn with a longing desire after Truth, as great as possibly may be in
godly Catholics: So be it in the mean time we forget not that of Paul, Romans
12.18.
If it be possible as much as in you lies live peaceably with all men; I say
with all men embrace an outward, and civil Peace, with all Christians an
Inward, Ecclesiastical, and Spiritual. This is the Will of Christ himself;
This the general desire of the Christian Church, that all that believe in
Christ may meet and be joined together in one Body, yea in one Heart and Mind.
These things therefore being thus, deservedly are those Peacemaking Divines to
be praised of all, who lately employed their pains in making a brotherly
fellowship betwixt the Protestant Churches. For my part, would to God, for the
Common good, I might give some advice which may serve to advance so holy a
work. What I can, I will do at your request, beloved DURAEUS, and I will
publicly produce those things, which very lately came into my mind, whilst I
thought on this matter.

Therefore in the first place I conceive it must be considered, whether such
an Union of the Reformed Churches betwixt themselves be possible, by virtue
whereof each should count other not only in the place of Friends, but Brethren;
and because of such an Union, should mutually receive, and return betwixt
themselves all signs, effects, and offices, not only of outward Friendship,
but of Brotherly and Spiritual Communion. For if this most near Union, which
we so much desire, be impossible, Impossibilium nulla est obligatio, There is
no tie which obliges men to endeavor after Impossibilities: but if it be
possible, no excuse can be made, why so holy a thing, so acceptable to God,
should either be opposed, or delayed any longer. Now what I have said, that it
must be enquired of in the first place, whether such a Communion be possible:
That ought so to be understood, although the beaten Controversies still remain
betwixt the private Doctors of particular Churches, which all see, and the
godly sigh for, have so long disquieted the German Churches.

Although a full and perfect agreement betwixt Divines, is to be wished for in
all these Controversies, yet truly it can scarce be hoped for, much less
effected in one age. That so many heads should agree in one opinion. But that
the Churches may in the mean time, notwithstanding these Controversies depend
undecided, make up betwixt themselves a brotherly and holy Communion, may
appear from thence, that as often as the Divines of both sides have begun from
their souls to desire, and seriously to attempt it, so often, and so much have
they effected herein as themselves were desirous to effect, and without doubt
had brought more to pass, if their own want of will had not been their
hinderance.

Witness Luther himself, and the Helvetians, betwixt whom whilst there
remained some difference of opinion about the Presence of the Body of Christ, a
friendly Union was drawn up at Marpurg. Hespin. Hist. Sacra. Anno 1529.
Luther professing that he would not grant this praise to the adverse party,
that they should be more desirous to embrace peace and concord than himself.
Which agreement, I know not by what Engines somewhat battered and shaken, they
again renewed; even whilst Luther rejoiced thereat, and counted it necessary,
Idem An. 1537.
after he had diligently considered the Confession of the Helvetians, that they
should join their hearts and right hands together. But if any conceive that
this agreement was not so full and perfect an Union, as that which now we
affirm is possible to be made; we deny it not, but add this moreover; That
not the impossibility of the thing it self, but the will of some private men,
not yet well purged from the froth, and dross of suspicion, have hindered this
worthy, and godly work, from being brought to the final upshot and happy
perfection. Ibidem.
For as touching Bucer, and other principal Divines consenting with him, they
not only requested a brotherly and absolute Communion, but also endeavored to
demonstrate, that it must be done, and omitted no Offices which conduced any
thing thereunto.

Moreover, how possible this brotherly Union and Communion is betwixt
Protestant Churches, is witnessed by that consent of the Polonian Churches, not
long since made at Sendomiria, and hitherto religiously observed. They could
not finally take away all Controversies, but they could bid farewell to all
dissentions, and establish so near a Communion betwixt themselves, that they
refused not to admit each other into their Congregations, either to the hearing
of the Word Preached, or receiving of the Sacraments. Which holy and brotherly
conjunction of the Polonian Churches, the most wise Prince Elector Lewys, and
Count Palatine, not only by his Letters congratulated unto them, but also
heartily prayed that the God of heaven would grant the same to the German
Churches. What therefore was once said to peaceable Solomon, about the building
of the Temple of Jerusalem; That say I to all peaceable Divines, about the
making of brotherly fellowship betwixt Reformed Churches, Chron. 22 16.
Arise therefore, ye godly men, and be doing and the Lord be with you: Let us
not doubt, but that now may be done, which elsewhere all confess has been
done. But least this vain scarecrow of an impossibility should hinder and
delay the endeavors of Princes, Divines, and all pious men in this matter, I
will reckon up those obstacles and impediments, which in very deed do make the
Communion betwixt Protestant Churches altogether impossible, whence it will
appear that no such thing blocks up the way, but that the German Churches,
even whilst these controversies do depend, may enter brotherly Communion
betwixt themselves, and may wholly observe it when it is entered.

Therefore the first and greatest obstacle wherewith Churches, as yet not
agreeing in all Questions of Divinity, are hindered from meeting together in
one, is the usurped Dominion, which one challenges over another, or the
exercising of any Tyrannical Jurisdiction.

For if some one Church will so lord it over the Faith of others, that it will
acknowledge none for Brethren, or receive none into Communion with it self,
save such as first receive from her Laws what they should believe and speak,
there is no hope left of making or keeping brotherly Union betwixt such, in the
differences about opinions whatsoever. Seeing that the Holy Scripture forbids
us in this sort to make our selves vassals to any mortal men: Our only Master
forbids us that we should not in this manner acknowledge earthly masters Lords
of our Faith. That Church, which on those terms is received into Communion
with another Church, gains not Peace thereby, but enters it self into a
Covenant of most unjust slavery. The Romish Church alone, has arrived at such
a height of pride and madness, as to thrust out all those Churches from the
Communion of Saints, and curse them to the pit of Hell, which refuse to undergo
this Antichristian yoke, of absolute and blind obedience. God of his goodness
keep this madness of the Papists far from Protestant Churches; which if it
should prevail in them, it were not lawful, not indeed to hope, yea not to
wish this Conjunction of Churches, which all ought to desire. But (thanks be
to God) it is well known, it is most sure, that all and every one of the
Reformed Churches from their whole hearts abhor their Antichristian ambition
of dominiering. Therefore this principal hinderance is removed out of their
way, which uses to make an everlasting Schism betwixt those Churches, which
as yet agree not in all things, and with the same Act renders the Union betwixt
them in very deed impossible.

The second obstacle, coming between, makes the Union and Communion of diverse
Churches (suppose the Saxon and Helvetian) impossible, as the approving of
Idolatrous worship on the one side, and detesting it on the other. Seeing that
in Hosea is well known to all the godly, Chap. 4.15.
Though Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend; Come ye not into,
etc. And that of the Apostles, And what agreement has the Temple of God with
Idols? 2 Cor. 6.16.
and almost infinite passages to the same purpose. Well spoke Tertullian of
this matter, Idolatry is the principal crime of Mankind, and the highest guilt
of any age. God therefore so severely commanding, that we should fly from Idols
and all Idolatry, though shadowed over with what fair pretenses soever, that
is to be counted morally impossible which cannot be done without some stain of
Idolatry, and grievous offending of Gods Majesty. See here the grand and
horrible hinderance, whereby the Reformed Churches are compelled, not without
great grief, and horror of mind to remain out of the Communion of the Romish
Church. For they so dote on their Idols, and enforce them on others to be
adored, that none can come, at least abide in Communion with them, except with
the same deed he will become a most manifest Idolater. If the German Churches
could not enter and retain this holy Communion betwixt themselves, but that
either they must be tied to the exercise of an Idolatrous worship, or at
leastwise be bound to believe and confess that such a worship is not
unlawful, I should not doubt to affirm that such a Communion is impossible,
which cannot be obtained but on such hard and heinous Conditions, for we can
only do that, which we may do lawfully, as the Lawyers use to speak. But
here we have that for which we ought again and again to give thanks unto God,
who has made the Reformed Churches, albeit little agreeing in all conclusions
of divine knowledge, yet unanimously to consent, and wonderfully to agree in
the condemning and abolishing of all Idolatry. If therefore at this very hour
the Protestant Churches desire all to meet in one brotherly Communion, not so
much as the least spot or stain of Idolatry were to be feared on either side.
Away therefore with all pretense of Impossibility drawn from this Reason,
neither let it make men's minds or endeavors step aside from this so holy a
purpose, and design.

The third and last obstacle, whence the Communion of diverse Churches betwixt
themselves is held impossible, is the asserting and defending of some
Fundamental Article, necessary to be known and believed to the salvation of
Christians, on the one side, which is sound and Catholic; and the denying and
opposing the same, on the other side, which is Heretical. For to grow together
into one with Heretics subverting the foundations of the Christian Faith, is
to start off from Christ, the Foundation of the Christian Church. Concerning
this hinderance, because it is a matter of greatest moment, we must dispute
somewhat more largely.

Therefore in the first place, I conceive that is to be counted a Fundamental
Article, which through the will of God revealing it to the attaining of
Salvation and eternal happiness, is so necessary to be known and believed,
that from the Ignorance, and much more from the opposing thereof, men run the
manifest hazard of losing eternal Life. This care and charge lies not upon the
Divines of our age, that they should forge new, and fundamental Articles of
the Catholic Faith for Christian people. That which was not Fundamental in
the times of the Apostles and Primitive Church, cannot with all our Affirmings,
wranglings, and Cursings, become Fundamental. These first Beleevables which we
have gathered, and brought together out of the whole body of the Scriptures
into the Apostles Creed, Epist. 57. ad Dardan.
makes up that Rule of Fundamental Faith, which Au^ustine calls common to small
and great, and determines that it must be maintained of all with Perseverance,
whereof Hilary almost to the same purpose. It is most safe for us to retain
that first and sole Evangelicall Faith confessed and understood in Baptism. Ad
Constan. August.
And I think the Apostle had an eye to these Fundamental Articles when he
calls Titus, Titus 14.
mine own son after the common Faith. This common faith, comprised in the
Apostles Creed, proposes to all Christians to believe the admirable
workmanship of all Creatures made of nothing, the unsearchable Mystery of the
Trinity, which is to be adored, the benefit of Christ Incarnated, Suffering,
Rising again, Glorified, bestowed on miserable sinners; and those things which
flow from thence, the Redemption of mankind, the Sanctification of Gods
peculiar people, the Communion of the Saints betwixt themselves, the forgivenes
of sins, the Resurrection of the bodies, and the Glorification of the
faithful. Who so believes all things which we have contained in this short
Creed, and endeavors to lead his life conformable to the precepts of Christ,
is not to be dashed out of the lift of Christans, nor to be driven from the
Communion of other Christians, members of what Church soever. On the other
side, He that filcheth away, or carpeth at any of these Articles, though he
challenges to himself the name of Christian, is to be driven and kept off from
the Communion of those which rightly believe; yet I acknowledge, that besides
these Articles, many Doctrines are contained in the holy Scriptures, and out of
the holy Scriptures may be deduced by firm consequence, which are very
profitable to be known, and conduce much to proficiency in Divine knowledge: but
then at last are to be ^eld under the peril of losing Salvation or Communion,
when they are manifestly declared and understood to be contained in the
Scriptures, or necessarily to follow out of them. In these things if any
Church, cannot so clear the truth of her opinion to other Churches as to draw
them to the same opinion, she ought to cast off their errors, but ought not to
cast off brotherly Communion with them because of these errors. To these I
add, that although some place of Scripture may seem to these Churches to
establish a Fundamental Article, seems not unto others; yet in this diversity
of opinions there is not cause just enough to break off the Communion, so be it
both sides piously believe the same Article and acknowledge it to be clearly
and solidly sounded on other places of holy Scripture. Lastly, and this also
must be added, It is neither impossible, nor swarving from the duty of good
Christians, to retain communion with those Churches, who seem to us to follow
some opinion which truly cannot hold together with a fundamental Article, so
be it, as in the mean time, they profess the same Article, and with both
arms, (as we say) embrace it. For it abhors from the rule of Charity, yea from
sound reason, that any, for those Consequences by himself neither understood,
nor granted, should be conceived to have denied or rejected a fundamental
Article, which he firmly believes, explicitly affirms, and if need were, would
Seal and Sign the truth thereof with his own blood. More true and favorable
is the judgment of a great and peaceable Divine; Bucere.
It is not our part, to have respect to that, which of it self follows of
any opinion; but to that, which follows in their consciences, who hold that
Point, which we conceive opposite to a fundamental Article. For even as he
that believes any true Principle, does not presently believe and understand
all those things which learned Men by consequences may deduce from the same; so
he that holds any false opinion does not instantly hold all those things, which
those of better sight do perceive to be conjoined with, or ^o^lowing after that
false opinion. It is lawful therefore to urge such consequences to snatch our
brethren from their Errors, but odiously to charge them therewith as if they
were their own proper Doctrines, it is unlawful. How far this spreads it
self, and how forcible it is to establish brotherly union betwixt Reformed
Churches, Wise men and lovers of the Peace of the Church, may easily observe.
For if it be granted that Communion only is impossible (that is, unlawful)
with those Congregations, which explicity reject any fundamental Article, or
defend an Heresy which stabs the Heart and cuts asunder Communion with Christ
himself, that also will follow, that this brotherly Communion which we so much
desire betwixt the German Churches, may be establishes between, Churches which
are found, and those which are not so well in health; between Churches of a
more, and of a less refined Standard. Therefore let those Churches which stick
to the foundation, depart from those which by Apostasy slide back from it, but
in the mean time, from those which err in matters of lighter moment, neither
disjoyn from Christ the fountain of life, let them not depart. Romans 14.1. Romans
15.1.
The Apostle commands us, to receive the weak in faith, not to cast them off;
We that are stronger ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to
please our selves, says the same Apostle. That Church pleases it self too
much which scorns and disdaines other Churches, as unworthy of her Communion,
for some weakness in their understanding, which are found guilty neither of
Tyranny, Idolatry, nor any deadly Heresy; Not so, the Fathers of the ancient
Church, whose desire and care, in making agreement betwixt particular Churches,
scattered over the whole world, may be observed in the Centurists through every
hundred of years. But that very fitly serves our purpose, which Optatus
Milevitanus has written: Lib. 2. c. 7.
That the Churches, through the whole world, by the intercourse of Formal
letters, might agree in the fellowship of one Communion. Now in those formal,
peaceable, or Synodall letters, nothing else was contained, besides the
confession of the Catholic Faith established in the Creeds, and briefly
explained against Heritiques, by the general consent of the universal Church,
in the Nicene, Calcedonian, and other Councels. Of infinite other questions,
which may arise, and be canvassed betwixt the private Doctors of dispersed
Churches, no Church either required or expected a form of absolute consent
from other Churches. For if without this, the brotherly Communion betwixt
particular Churches, were adjudged impossible, to the cementing and sodering
thereof, we should not stand in need of Synodall Epistles, or brief forms of
confessions, but of huge volumes of controversies. But if we refuse to learn of
the ancient Fathers; yet now at last let us learn of our Enemies, that the
brotherly communion of Minds, Duties of Courtesy, and Sacraments, is not
impossible betwixt those Churches which defend contrary opinions, about
controversies never to be decided. I will say nothing of the wranglings of
Thomists and Scotists, nothing of the Dominicans and Jesuits: There is at this
day a controversy beaten and bandied betwixt the Churches of the Romish
Religion, of more moment, than all those things, whereabout Protestants do
strive, if they were rouled up in one bundle: I mean that of the infallible
Judge, in all questions of the Christian Faith. The Spanish and Italian
Churches defend the Pope to be this Supreme Judge, warranted with the
irresistible authority of Christ himself, and so inspired and enlightened with
the spirit of truth, that in all his decrees and determinations, wherewith he
intends to bind the whole Church, he can in no wise err and be deceived. But
on the other side, the French Churches, cry him down, justle him out of his
infallible chair, and conclude him to be so subject to error, that if in
matters of faith or manners, he refuses to obey and to be ordered by the
judgment and Authority of a general Council, they voice him, to be counted
for a Schismatique, and a Heretic, and one to be deposed: See agreat
difference about the very Pillar of the Catholic faith. Yet in this brawling
about opinions, there is no breaking off of brotherly communion betwixt the
Churches themselves. Tell it not in Gath, nor publish it in the streets of
Ascalon, that the Philistines were more forward than the Israelites to preserve
Peace and unity betwixt them. Lastly, if such controversies should make an
union betwixt particular Churches impossible, I feign would have one show to
me, even but two Churches (whereof one is not subject to the other) which must
not of necessity, be alienated, plucked asunder, and as it were with a partition
wall divided each from other. For except we return to this point, that we only
admit and allow of this Separation from other Churches, for dissenting in
Fundamentals, the communion of the Catholic Church anciently so highly extold,
August. de unit. Feles. cap. 12.
will be but a bare name and fained title, to which the heart of the thing it
self will never answer. The Donatists of old were wont to say, that the Church
had perished out of the whole world besides, and only remained in the party of
Donatus. The Romanists, in this point, are pure downright Donatists, who shout
it out, that the Catholikc Church is found only in the part of the Pope of
Rome. It is our duty to detest such Schismatic wickedness, and to keep and
profess brotherly Communion with all Christian Churches, which we adjudge not
as yet to be disjoined from Christ the Head by Heresy, or Idolatry, or not at
all to be shunned by other Churches, for usurpation of Tyranny.

What hitherto has been disputed about those Obstacles, which make the
communion of diverse Churches betwixt themselves impossible, and also of those
different opinions, which no ways cause the same; all aim at this end, That
if it could be agreed betwixt Divines, that those controversies which so long
have troubled and tired the Protestant Churches, are not of such importance,
that, whether one come off to this or that side in their opinions, he is not to
be judged to depart from Christ and the Fundamental Faith, and to fall into a
Heresy contrary to the foundation; we would confess that brotherly union may
be made up, and kept betwixt all Protestant Churches, even whilst these
dissentions rather of the Schools than the Churches, do still remain. It is
not my purpose to engage my self in the controversies themselves: only I would
desire that the most learned and famous Divines of the Dutch Churches would be
entreated, with peaceable minds, and calm affections, to run over all those
controversies, which are in agitation betwixt them, seeing the Judgment
perishes when the matter is passed into the affections. The chief and almost
the mother of all the rest is that controversy which as yet remains
undetermined, of the manner of the presence of the body and blood of Christ in
the Lords Supper. And as touching this point, the every way most learned Bucer,
after serious weighing and considering of the matter, expressed himself thus,
that In the thing it self, and meaning there was an agreement, only some
variety in the words, In Epist. ad Lutherum. Contra. Robert Atringen and alibi.
Hosp. Hist. Sacrpa. 144.
and manner of speaking. Luther said formerly, If you beleeve^, and teach, that
the true body, and true blood of our Lord is exhibited, given, and taken, in
the Lords Supper, and not the bread and wine only, and that this receiving, and
exhibiting is done truly, and not imaginarily, we are agreed. At the same time
Bucer with his associates did grant, That the true body, and true blood of the
Lord, were exhibited, given, and taken, with the visible signs, Bread and
Wine. James Andrews wrote formerly, We neither are of opinion of the
Capernaites, nor do we receive the Transubstantiation of the Papists, nor do
we establish a Physical or Local presence, or inclusion of the body, and
blood of Christ in the holy Supper. Neither do those words, Substantially,
Corporally, Orally, signify to us any thing else, besides the true presence
and eating of the Body and blood in the holy Supper. Now let us hear what was
the Judgment of the Helvetian Churches: Hosp. Anno 1536. ^ag. 145.
Although they deny transubstantiation to be made, neither conceive there is
made any Local inclusion in the Bread, or any durable conjunction out of the
use of the Sacrament, yet they grant the Bread to be the Body of Christ in a
Sacramental Union, and that when the Bread is reached forth, the Body of
Christ, is together present and exhibited. No one thing can be more like to
another than is the judgment of the Helvetians to the judgment of the
Lutherans. Yet if any suspect, that under this concord of words, some
Repugnancy of meaning and opinion may lie hid, nevertheless this is to be
urged, and enquired into, whether this Repugnancy be such and of so great
moment that it renders the Peace and Unity between Churches impossible, and
makes the Schism and disjoynting betwixt them necessary and everlasting. I
know it seems far otherwise to most learned and solid Divines, when they
side not to take part, and are without the Lists of this discord. Now as
concerning those controversies of the Omnipresence of the Body of Christ, the
communication of his properties, and others that first may seem to have bred,
whosoever shall weigh with Judgment what is granted, what denied on both
sides, shall presently perceive, that neither of these, nor of those any
Fundamental Article is called into question, much less opposed, or
overthrown. For, whatsoever was determined of these matters, by the Catholic
Church in the Creeds, and General Counsels, that, both sides receive, and
profess; whatsoever was rejected, and condemned, that, both alike reject, and
abhor: but that sometimes one Party should endeavor to draw the other by the
small cords of consequences into the dirt of filthy Heresies, is not a thing so
much to be admired, as to be bemoaned. We all know the custom of angry
disputants, especially after they have begun to be thoroughly hot with long
contending. Also we have briefly touched before, what is to be conceived of
Heresies, which are charged on others, by consequences not at all granted or
understood. For the present, this one thing may suffice to demonstrate the
possibility of brotherly communion; That, on neither side any doctrine, which
is point blanck contrary to a Foundation of Faith, Devorato^rium Salutis.
or (to use Tertullians word) such as swallows up, and devours Salvation, is
explicitly defended; yea those which are such, are all clearly and explicitly
condemned on both sides.

If there be any other new controversies bred betwixt the Churches, aabout
Predestination, Freewill, and the like; They can with no color be pretended
for the hindering of the Churches communion. For in all these, this one thing
alone belongs to the Catholic, and Fundamental Faith; That the free Grace of
God, in predestinating miserable men, in conversion of sinners, in setting free
of men's wills; Lastly, in perseverance, and Salvation of the Elect, be so fully
acknowledged; that whatsoever he does to the attaining of the state of Grace or
Glory, or whatsoever is done by men in reference hitherto, that wholly be given
to God, and granted to Gods special grace and mercy: On the other side,
whatsoever pertaines to the corruption of man's nature, whatsoever to his
obstinacy in sin, whatsoever to the viciousness and servitude of Fr^ewill;
Lastly, whatsoever draws miserable mortals to damnation, and tumbles them
headlong into Hell, that we impute all this to our selves, and our own
demerits, and command it distance, to be far off from God himself. Whilst
these things remain fixed, and immovable (as indeed they do remain)
although in the doctrines built upon the Foundation, they have diverse manners
of conceiving, and forms of speaking, yea, although they follow different
opinions, such errors are not so deadly, that for their sakes a deadly hatred
should be hatched, or that a perpetual Schism ought to be norished betwixt the
churches. If therefore this once be agreed on betwixt Divines; that their
strifes neither were, nor are about any fundamental Articles, and things
altogether necessary to be known to Salvation; with all it will appear, That
it is not impossible that Union and Communion betwixt the Churches be renewed,
that this pernicious Schism be forthwith taken away, and a blessed Peace for
the time to come be holily preserved betwixt the German Churches. Now it
follows in the next place, since we perceive this union is possible, that we
consider, Whether Princes, Doctors, and even all Christian people, be not tied
by virtue of Gods command, and their own bounden duty, every one for his own
part to endeavor that this Brotherly Communion, as soon as conveniently it
may be, be established between the Churches.

In the first place, Paul mentioned by us in the beginning, seems to intimate
that we are all bound to this; If it be possible, and as much as in you lies,
have Peace with all men. If a Civil and outward Peace is to be kept with so
great desire betwixt all men, without doubt, the Spiritual and Ecclesiastical
Communion betwixt Christians, is to be procured and cherished with far
greater En^eavours. Where therefore no unconquerable impossibility hinders on
the part of the thing to be done, man's Will cannot be excused, which herein
neglects, or refuses, is either lazy, or perverse to obey the commandment of
God; nor is there cause, why any should pretend, that the differences of
repugnant opinions cannot as yet be reconciled. If in the mean time the
Schisms of the Churches may be taken away (as out of doubt they may) I had
rather a Millstone were tied about my neck, and I cast into the depth of the
Sea, than that I would hinder a work so acceptable to God, so necessary to the
avoiding of scandals, or not with all my mind and might further and advance the
same.

Hither it may be added, Jesus Christ, would have his true Disciples
distinguished, and discerned, Joh. 13.35.
from those that are false, and counterfeit; By this all shall know that you
are my Disciples, if ye love one another: Now I leave it to be decided of
every man's conscience; what charity at last that is, which permits Christian
Churches on no just cause of refusal, mutually to deny the right hands of
fellowship, and eternally to detest the making of an Union betwixt them. Is it
not enough for us to depart from the Hay and Stubble, that is, the errors of
other Churches, except also by making a voluntary rent, we depart from the
Churches themselves, which never as yet departed from Christ?

Besides I seem to my self to have observed, both those that embrace the
Zwinglian, and Lutheran doctrine (as they use to call it) on both sides to
acknowledge, that the Churches, whether they maintain that, or this doctrine,
remain the true Churches of Christ, or the true members of the Catholic
Church under Christ the head. The Illustrious Princes themselves, Osiander
Antist. p. 75
in their Preface to the form of concord clearly profess: That it is in no
wise their purpose or intent, to damnt those men who err out of a kind of
simplicity of heart, nor are they blasphemous against the truth of heavenly
doctrine, much less to condemn whole Churches which are under the Roman
Empire, nor that they did doubt, that even in those Churches many godly were
found, which hitherto consented not with them in all things. And also Lucas
Osiander, when it was objected against him, that he called the Calvinists the
Devils Martyrs, diligently purged himself in this manner. They that have heard
my Sermons will say that they never heard any raylings against the Martyrs of
Christ, In Antist. page 91.
and my public writings do witness, that I called them holy Martyrs, that on
Bartholomew day were murdered in France. It is therefore seriously to be
weighed, whether it be safe, whether it be pious, whether it agree with the
duty of Christian Churches, for every error of lighter moment, not to reach
forth the ri^ht hand of fellowship to those Churches, which notwithstanding
this error may remain Christ's Martyrs, yea his holy brethren. Will they,
^ill they; whosoever acknowledge Christ their elder Brother, they must of
necessity have all the Brethren of the same Christ joined unto them, in a most
near, and Brotherly Communion.

Moreover, I doubt not at all, Saxon and Helvetian Churches, and others which
either consent with these, or those; acknowledge themselves to have, and to
desire to retain Brotherly Communion with the English, Scottish, Irish, and
other foreign Reformed Churches. Surely as concerning us, although we consent
not with them, in all points and titles of controversall Divinity, yet we
acknowledge them Brethren in Christ and protest our selves to have a Brotherly
and holy Communion with them. But if they themselves be like minded toward us,
with what equi^^ d^e the German Churches amongst themselves deprive each other
of that Brotherly Communion, which with foreign Churches they fear not to
retain? What therefore M^ses said of old ^o the Israelites that fought
together; that may truly be said to the Dutch Churches striving amongst
themselves, Acts 7.26.
but cannot truly be confuted by them, Ye are brethren, why do ye wrong one
to another?

Lastly, Psalmist, and the same ought also to be of Princes, Psalm. 122. v. 9.
Doctors, and all Christians; Neither did he only wish all good things to the
church of God, but sought for them, and procured them as much as lay in his
power. This was his duty, it is surely ours also. And here I should not be so
well employed, if in a long set Oration, I should lay open to the German
Churches, either the commodities of Peace, and Union, or the discommodities of
long lasting dissension. That of Prudentius is instead of an Oracle.

-- Scissura domestica turbat
Rem populi: titubatque foris quod dissidet intus.
Homebred rents trouble the State, and that shakes abroad which is divided at
home. Let them therefore look to that which is for the ben^fit of their own
Churches, and let them resolve with themselves, that all that is not only to be
requested of God in daily Prayers, but also, it must be labored after, with
the greatest, and unwearied endeavors of all men, that it may be effected and
obtained. Neither let men unexperienced in matters, hope that they shall
ingratiate themselves the more with the Papists, and suffer less damage from
them, if they refuse to join with those, whom they call Calvinists. What is to
be hoped of them, Osiander long since has told, The Papists (says he) burn
the Lutherans no less than the Zwinglians in those places, In Antist. page 74.
where the Pope of Rome that fierce and cruel beast has, and does exercise
full dominion. They therefore who are highest in their favor, can hope for no
more kindness from them, than Polyphemas in Homer bestowed on Ulysses.

(...). I will eat Ulysses last after his Companions. They will devour the
C^lvinists sooner, the Lutherans later, and at last if they can they will
devour all.

Hitherto we have employed our pains to this purpose, that this communion
betwixt the Dutch Churches may be understood, not only to be possible, but by
virtue of Gods commandment altog^ther due, and necessary. It remains now that
we show in what manner, and by what means these Churches miserably rent, and
torn a sunder; may with best convenience and speed be reduced, and made up
together into one Body: which I will endeavor to do, rather that I may
manifest the willingness of my mind, to so worthy a work, than that I
conceive those noble Churches, and evermore stored with plenty of learned,
pious, and peaceable Divines, to stand in need of the counsel of forreginers
in this matter.

Forasmuch therefore as the fore^^^d controversies, may be agitated either
betwixt Churches belonging to diverse dominions, whereof one is not subject to
another, or betwixt Christians of the same Church, who acknowledge one, or the
self same Prince, or supreme Magistrate; we will speak first of diverse
Churches standing on terms of equal right, ^hen of the members of ^ne and the
self same Church, how they re all to be joined together amongst themselves.

For the reducing of diverse Church into one communion, I conceive no more fit
and convenient way can be thought upon, than that familiar one of appointing a
fair and peaceable Conference betwixt Divines chosen by the authority of their
Princes. For if any man think, that by calling a Council out of all the
Reformed Churches, these questions, which have employed the wits of most
learned men these many years, may within a few months or years, or within one
century of years be so defined, that the consent of all men may be obtained in
all these heads of controversall Divinity (be it spoken with the good leave of
all good men) to me it seems scarce likely; Seeing the weak eye of Men's minds
hardly pierces into the nicity of subtle controversies, even when it surveys
them being in quietness; But if it be, as if it were full of black dust,
raised with the motion of Disputants, for most part it cannot so much as see
them, or with a fixed and steady look behold them. And, to speak the truth,
Councels, especially those that are General, ought rather to be used, for the
defending and establishing of clear Articles of the Christian Faith against
Heretics, than for the discussing and defining of hard; and controversies
which are not necessary at all. Let us return therefore, to that peaceable, and
Brotherly conference, which we lately commended: which if it be appointed with
that mind, and managed in that manner it ought, we are in great hope very
shortly to see an happy agreement of the German Churches.

This therefore ought first to be settled in the mind of all, who are
entertained in the Conference, that they are not called together, that as
adversaries they should contend; but that as Brethren, they should seek and
follow all lawful ways to establish Peace. For if they themselves betwixt
themselves saw one another, and think they must revy contentions, they will
never persuade Union and Peace betwixt the Churches at variance: Therefore let
them not so much as offer to enter into the Labyrinths of the wonted
disputations, but let them aim, and direct their meeting to this one mark,
that they may show their Churches, that there is no cause just enough, why they
should refuse mutual Union, and so long abhor from joining their right hand
of Brotherhood. That this may be done, let it be stated and determined in the
first place, concerning every controversy, what of old was defined by the
Suffrages of the Catholic Church, and under the pain of a curse was to be
believed of all. For about things most Fundamental, there may arise some
questions, and Problems no^ at all Fundamental and which the ancient Fathers,
if they had been moved in their age, would never have offered to have defined,
within the p^rill either of raising, or continuing a Schism betwixt the
Churches. For instance; That God is one in Essence, three in Persons
distinguished betwixt them^e^ves; that the Son is begotten of the Father;
that the holy Spirit, is the Spirit of the Father and the Son; that these
three Persons are Coeternall, and Coequall: All these are deservedly determined
and ranked amongst the Fundamental Articles. Now if any should contend that
all those things which are disputed of the Schoolmen, of the Manner of
Proceeding and Begetting, are also Fundamental, and necessary to be determined
on one side, verily he by this his rash Judgment, would gain no favor with
Christ, or Christ's Churches. So also, That our Lord Jesus Christ is God and
Man, and has in one Person the Humane and D vine nature inseparably united
together, and that we owe our Salvation to God incarnated, is a most solid
Foundation of our Catholic, and saving Faith. Notwithstanding whatsoever may
be asked, and disputed of the unutterable manner of this Union, whatsoever, of
the manner of the Corporal presence in the Holy Supper, whatsoever, of the
properties communicated to the humane nature, by the virtue of the Union, or of
the Operations of the humane nature depending on this Union, it does not
presently belong to Fundamental Faith, but to skill in Divinity, and perchance
not to that neither, but sometimes to the curiosity of Divines. Let this
therefore be the first and chief care of the Divines at the conference,
accurately to distinguish and sever Fundamentalls from those which are not
Fundamental; neither to take it for granted, that whatsoever seems to touch
and border on a Fundamental Article is presently Fundamental.

After they have agreed on these things, care must be taken that these
fundamentals be expressed in few and clear words, and be propounded to be
established with the common consent of the Churches, De anima.
Certa semper sunt in paucis, Those things that are certain are ever comprised
in few words, says Tertullian: And whatsoever necessary is to be known to the
Salvation of Christians, whatsoever makes men better or more blessed, is set in
open veiw. Here is no place for subtle distinctions, which only a quick
sighted Eagle, or some Epidaurian Serpent can perceive, and discern, no place
for the fringes of long explication, or penthouses, which we often see jetting
out, not so much to build up Christians in Fundamental Faith, as for the
enlarging of the Doctors opinions; Lastly, no place for Metaphysicall
formalities, and abstracted notions, which may trouble the heads of the
learned, and deter the minds of the unlearned from the Catholic Faith it
self; but neither bow the hearts of these or those to the embracing of the
Faith of Fundamental Articles.

But now when those things which belong to the Fundamental and common Faith of
the Churches, are comprised in few words, and plain, but sound forms of
speeches, and those set aside and left alone, which are not as yet agreed on;
It follows in the next place that all peaceable Divines endeavor to make all
thoroughly to be persuaded of this, That we must no longer sight in hostile
manner with the danger of the Churches, loss of Peace, and scandal of
Schism, for those things whereof Christian people may be ignorant without
fault, or loss of Salvation. How wholesome, and necessary this Counsel is, the
rashness, and contrary practice of the Roman Church does easily prove. For
whilst they, not at all content with the Articles of the Apostles or Nicene
Creed, endeavor to thrust upon the Christian world new Articles of the
Conventicle of Trent, Epist. ad Stephan. and ad Jubaja^ prefa. ad Council.
Carthag.
they have left the everlasting matter of an everlasting Schism betwixt the
Churches. How more advisedly did Cyprian, that most holy Martyr, and most
learned Father of his age, who professes that he would offer violence to none
for difference in opinions, or violate the Lords Peace with his Colleagues, or
remove any man from the right of Communion, because he was otherwise minded
than himself? With which Christian charity, and gentleness, erring Cyprian
deserved better of Gods Church, than Stephen Bishop of Rome being in the right
opinion, and rending the Churches, as much as lay in his power, with his
Schismatic spirit. Relying on the Example of this most holy Martyr, and on
the judgment of Augustine in this matter, I doubt not to affirm, that those
Doctors amongst the Dutch Churches which are deceived, Vide Aug. de Bapt. l. 2.
cap. 5.
and yet are ready to retain Brotherly Communion with others, are held more
excused from Schism before God than they who maintain the true opinions in
those controversies, and in the mean time disdain to hold Brotherly Communion
with other Churches desiring the same. Consent therefore being had in
Fundamentalls, although the Doctors cannot fully and perfectly agree in other
things, yet in this let them all agree, that with one mouth, and heart, they
cry out together to God,

Nulla salus bello: pacem te poscimus omnes. In war no safty: Peace, we all
desire thee. But if any here should demand what must be done with those
controversies which cannot be composed, least by occasion of these the Peace
and Union of the Church may either be hindered, or troubled and broken again
after once it is made up, these things seem to me must be observed by the
Divines of both parties.

First, what things hitherto have been spoken or written rather bitterly, and
perversely, than truly, and with good consideration of the adversaries in the
very heat of contention; Let all those things be mutually pardoned for the
public good, and be buried in eternal oblivion. And if such books shall
chance to be reprinted again; let it not be done, except all the gall be
purged out, whence the evil of Brotherly contention may again arise.

Secondly, whereas no man can patiently endure to have himself branded with
the mark of Heresy, we must take heed least any be defamed with the name of
Nestorian, Eutychian, or any other damned Heretic, who expressly condemns the
damnable Doctrines of those Heretics: for they cannot abide firmly in
Brotherly Communion, who persist to exasperate one another, with such railing
speeches for some difference in opinion. Moreover it were to be wished, that
those firnames of Lutherans, Zwinglians, Calvinists, were packt away, and
utterly abolished, which are rather the Ensigns of faction, Epiphan Her. 42.70.
than badges of Brotherly Union, and which never pleased the ancient Fathers.
Epiphanius would not that the Christians should wear any (...), no By-name,
but should only be called by the name of Christians. Nazianz. Orat. 30.
Institut. lib. 4. cap. 30.
We ought not to be called Petrians or Paulines, but Christians, says
Nazianzen. But of all Lactantius most seveerly says; They leave off to be
Christians, who omitting the name of Christ, have put on humane, and outward
names. But that I may speak as the matter is, particular Churches rather have
these firnames put upon them, than that they put them on themselves, or desire
to be clothed therewith.

Thirdly, as much as may be, let all hard, and undetermined controversies be
removed from Sermons preached to the people, and books written in the Mother
tongue, and let them rather be counted amongst exercises fit for the School,
then for food for men's Souls. For these subtle questions, and intricate
controversies may without any discommodity be wanting in the Pulpits; but
charity, which is wont to be wounded by the discussing of such questions,
cannot be wanting from the hearts of Christians, without the extreme peril of
their souls. The Souls of common people do play, and not profit with such
questions, and when they have done playing with them, not at all understanding
these controversies, they begin to fall a fighting and skirmishing betwixt
selves.

Lastly, If it shall please the Doctors themselves for time to come, to enter
discourse, or to set forth their writings concerning these controversies, Orat.
3. de Pace. (...).
Let them meet together, not in an hostile manner, but in a rational way, as
Nazianzen does wisely admonish. Let both aim at this, not to conquer, or shame
their brethren by what means soever, but gently, and courteously to instruct
them, and as it were leading them by the hand, to bring them back into the way
of truth. He that in this manner shall be freed from his error will never
count himself conquered, but better taught; nor will he be confounded as
overcome, and cast down of his Enemy, but will rejoice as one helped and
relieved of his Brother. For, no man that reapes benefit has cause to blush.

Hitherto we have made the draught of the manner of making Peace and preserving
Union betwixt different Churches, standing upon equal terms of Jurisdiction.
But because it may and often does happen, that some both learned, and unlearned
may live under the Government of the same Prince or Church, which are forbidden
by their conscience, either rightly informed, or erroneous, from subscribing to
the common judgment in these controversies, let us make enquiry what is to be
done concerning these. Now as touching the Ministers of Churches, if they
desire to make provision for their weak Brethren in these Articles of Religion,
or if they be willing that their brief forms of Confession be received, and
approved of all subject unto them; let them not cast into them the nice points
of difficult controversies, or decisions of subtle questions, but rather, let
them be ordered to the popular capacity, the edification of the unlearned the
Salvation of all. They must well weigh the wisdom of our Ancestors, whose
ancient Confessions, if we had not, on set purpose to disturb the Church,
interlined and stuffed with new opinions, no man, well in his wits, would have
been found, who would not willingly have subscribed unto them; Neither is there
any need at all, that we should clog and burden the public confessions of the
Church with such additions, when God himself has decreed to bring his people
to a blessed life, not through the rough and rugged places of hard and long
questions, but by the plain, even, and short way of Faith and Charity. To what
purpose therefore are disputes, and strifes about words? What make the
subtleties of the Schoolmen in the Confessions of the Church? All the
Salvation of Christians consists in believing and worshipping, In orat. unum
esse Christum.
as of old it was gravely said of great Athanasius. To these things it may be
added, that they can scarce, or not at all preserve Peace unviolated with other
Churches, not at all subject unto them, who for the same Doctrine they
profess, persecute those which are under them, and persist to cut them off as
Heretics from their Communion. They may seem truly silently to upbraid Heresy
to other Churches, and by this very deed to intimate as much, that though with
their mouth they acknowledge them for Brethren, yet in their hearts they much
detest and abhor them. Lastly, unless the brief forms of public
Confession, be restrained and confined, to doctrines necessary, and not to all
controverted betwixt the Protestants themselves; this inconvenience will follow
thence, that many Pastors, learned, pious, and peaceable, will be excluded and
quite shut out; nor shall they be able to do any service in those Churches in
which they live. But if any doubt, whether lawfully they may keep holy
Communion amongst themselves in one and the self same Church, who embrace not
at all one and the self same opinion in every respect, in all the heads of
Doctrine in Divinity, that I indeed conceive ought to be resolved on, as a
thing beyond all reach of doubting. For as pertaining to that holy Communion,
which Christians have amongst themselves in the Lords Supper, it chiefly
consists in these things; That with the common band of the holy Spirit, we are
joined to Christ the only head of the Church; That by the ties of the self
same holy Spirit, and saving Faith, and Charity, we stick together amongst our
selves, and as it were are made up into one Body, Lastly, that as
fellow-commoners we eat and drink the same living bread, and drink, to wit the
flesh, and blood of Christ, to the salvation of our Souls. In all these things
they profess the same Communion, who are admitted to the same holy Supper.

But in very deed, as by this mutual Communion, we do not profess that we
all have attained a perfect, or the same degree of knowledge in Diviniry; so
neither do we by this deed protest, that we have a perfect consent amongst our
selves in all heads of Doctrine in Divinity, or altogether the same opinion of
every question. If the Communion of Christians amongst themselves should stand
on these hard terms, scarce could Peter and Paul have held Communion amongst
themselves: Sure the Church of the Corinthians had been broken into shivers;
but in these our times, it had not been easy to find many divines of great
credit, who could with a safe conscience be partakers together of the Lords
Supper. All Rulers therefore of Churches ought, being guilty of their own and
the common infirmity, to beware, least whilst they exact and require from their
own people, a too harsh, and not at all necessary confession, they seem to
shake and weaken the most sweet and most necessary Communion of Christians
amongst themselves. So much concerning the Governors of the Churches? We come
now to the Ministers or any other Christians which desire Communion with the
Chruches, wherein they live, and yet cannot work upon their consciences with
any entreaties to approve and profess all the received opinions of the same
Church. It shall be their duty to afford, and express themselves teachable,
and humble, not obstinate and proud, in the maintaining of those opinion,
wherein they step aside from the common opinion of the Church; but he is to be
counted teachable and humble, who willingly, and submissively lends his cares
and heart to the Church teaching him, who rejects not the doctrine propounded
unto him, out of a vicious disposition of his Rebellious will, but is hindered
by the weakness of his understanding, that he sees not the Truth in these hard
controversies; which those, who are more learned, and accurate, perchance with
no difficulty can discern. Now because it is the privilege of God alone to
search hearts, it is our part ever to incline to the most favorable side, and
to presume of every one, where the contrary appears not by manifest evidence,
that rather out of conscience, than stubbornness, he is detained and hindered
from affording his consent. They who shall behave themselves in this manner,
are not for every stubble of erroneous opinion, to be parted and kept off from
the Churches Communion wherein they live. Yet on those terms and conditions
they are not to be driven off, if they presume not at all to oppose the common
Judgment of the Church, or to extol and spread their private opinions amongst
the people. Nor ought they to take this in ill part, who are desirous to
entertain Peace, and Ecclesiastical Communion; for suppose the opinion of any
private Doctor or Christian to be true, and that to be erroneous, which uses
to be defended by the Church, yet if the error be in a matter or opinion which
hinders not the Salvation of Christians, far better is it that the true
opinion of any private Doctor whatsoever lie hid in the dark, than that the
public authority of the Church, be in the broad light openly trampled upon,
or the Peace of the Church be shaken by this altogether unnecessary bickering
of contrary opinions, as with the struggling of winds crossing each other. But
if any one persuades himself, that that opinion which he defends against the
judgment of the Church, be of so great moment, that the Salvation of men does
depend from the knowledge thereof, if he cannot persuade the same to the Rulers
of his own Church, he must either depart unto another Church, or else for the
good of the Souls in that Church, to which he is subject, patiently to
undergo the censure imposed upon him.

These are the things, most learned Duraeus, which I though fit at your request
to write, and send unto you. If they may be useful to you or any other,
toward the furthering of the Union of the Churches; I have abundantly
satisfied mine own desire and purpose. They without doubt may suggest more, and
better things, to whom the present estate of the German Churches is better
known, and looked into. This thing alone remains for me to do, humbly to pray
to the God of Heaven, that he would bow the hearts of Princes, from their
Souls to desire this Union of the Churches; that he would enlighten the minds
of Divines to find out, and apply those means whereby it may foonest be
established; that he would kindle the hearts of all Christians to embrace, and
propagate this Peace to all Posterity. The God of peace grant this for his
Sounes sake, our only Mediator, and Procurer of Peace with the Father: to
whom, with the Holy Spirit, be all Honor, Glory and Thankesgiving for ever and
ever, Amen.

FINIS.
AN EXHORTATION to the restoring of Brotherly COMMUNION betwixt the PROTESTANT
CHURCHES: FOUNDED IN THIS, That they do not differ in any Fundamental Article
of the Catholic Faith.

IN DOMINO CONFIDO printer's device of Richard Badger

LONDON, Printed by R. B. for Richard Badger, and John Williams. 1641.

An Exhortation to the restoring of Brotherly Communion,
CHAP. I. Of the discommodities and occasions of these Discords, together with
the Remedies briefly declared.
WHAT Cicero the Orator said once of the Discords betwixt famous men, Orat. de
harusp. respons.
that may we now truly say of the Dissentions betwixt several Churches; that
they usually end, either in the destruction of them all, or in the injurious
domineering of the Conquerours over the party subdued. Now though it is to be
hoped, that there is none amongst the Reformed Churches, which affects a
sole, and absolute Command over the rest; Yet is it much to be feared, least
all, by these daily, and deadly contentions (which God forbid) hasten their own
overthrow. Whose present condition the godly bemoane, and by the miseries
fallen on some, guess the dangers hanging over all, unless they schooled with
their calamities, at last begin to be wise, and heartily study the advancing of
Peace.

For whilst this strife grows hot amongst Brethren, they afford their enemies
constant matter of rejoicing, and insulting over all Churches, and not only of
rejoicing, and insulting, but also arm them with infinite opportunities to
hurt, and oppress them. Nor do they order the matter well for their own
people, which will have even the unlearned to be distracted about such endless
Controversies, which perchance the Learned are never able to determine. If
Scholars only were to enter the Lists, and to combat with Scholars, the
danger were less; but it is too plain, that Christians of all sorts and
sides, are summoned to the fight, whose minds are no sooner entangled in these
needless controversies, but they are called away from the most necessary duties
of charity, and fruits of new obedience. Moreover these dissentions betwixt the
Reformed Churches, hinder the more moderate Papists (which begin to open their
eyes at the light of the Gospel) from joining with us, whilst they observe,
that we cannot, or (which is worse) will not join among our selves. Lastly,
they scarce seem to acknowledge, that the Gospel, is the power of God unto
salvation to every one that believes, who because of these controversies
lately started, make a separation from other Reformed Churches, as if there
were no hope of the Salvation of all those Christians, which have not attained
an exact knowledge of these Controverted points.

For my part, I conceive it no great difference, whether we place unwritten
Traditions in joint commission with the holy Scriptures, or whether we enforce
our Controversies on all Churches to be known and believed, under the same
necessity of Salvation, with the solid, and manifest doctrine of the Gospel. We
ought therefore to beware, lest whilst the Pastors of the Reformed Churches on
both sides, command theirs to depart from the Tents of those wicked men, Number.
16.26.
as infucted with heresy, the Romish Wolves break in upon both, and drag both
Sheep and Shepherds to their Dens. Indeed if Divines could calmly debate these
disputes with brotherly minds, some good (or less evil at least) would
redound to the Church. But seeing that experience for so many years has
approved, that this can scarce, if at all, be done; better were these disputes
buried in silence, than that the discussing of them should tear, and mangle so
many Churches into pieces. For the Christian Church may now take up the old
complaint of Hilary, Dum propter haec alter alteri Anathema esse coepit, nemo
^e^e Christi est.
Whilst for these things each accounted other occursed, searce any were of
Christ. Seeing these and worse grievances arising from the discords of the
Reformed, are obvious to every ones eyes: Let us enquire, what first might
cause these bitter and hurtful strifes, betwixt Learned, Wise, and Godly men;
what since did daily increase them, what now does persuade them to entaile
these Controversies, as hereditary on their Posterity.

The nature of supernatural knowledge and heavenly things, gave the cause, or
occasion rather to these our contentions. For as it is easy for minds
enlightened, and sanctified to embrace with Obedience to the Faith, all things
needful to be known to Salvation, which are plainly delivered in the holy
Scriptures concerning God and Christ, and all things to be believed, and
practiced; so to desire to dive deeper into the Mysteries of Faith than is
fitting, and thence to draw consequences by the help of our Reason, and to
annexe them to the fundamental Articles, is a matter of difficulty, and
danger, and the necessary occasion of contentions. For it is impossible but that
the wits of men, must often differ, and sometimes err in those things which
are collected by the mediation of humane understanding. Mean time there is
none but dotes on the darlings of his own Brains, as beautiful, and entitles
them to be borne of the Bowels of the Scripture; hating the reasonings, and
inferences of others, as deformed, and springing from the puddles of Reason
corrupted. Thus whilst men desire to see more in the Mysteries of Faith, than
is clearly shown in the Glass of Gods Word, rather the heat of their
dissentions, than light of their knowledge is increased.

It would apply some plaster to this soar, if the Divines of both sides would
remember, that although all the Articles of the Catholic Faith are plain,
and perspicuous, (as written in Gods Word with capital Letters, so that he
that runs may read them) yet what thence is extracted by the chemistry of
man's understanding, are diverse, and of different kinds, most of them so
obscure, that they escape the eyes of the most sharp sighted Divines. We must
therefore confidently lean with all our weight on what the Scriptures have
decided; but not lay so much stresse on the consequences of our own deduction.
Luth. Tom. 1. in Disp. page 413. R. and C. Facessant Dialectici, ubi credendum
est Piscatoribus. Nam in Mysteriis fidei majestas materiae in Angustias
rationis seusyllogismorum includi non potest.
Luther said well out of Ambrose, Away with Logicians, where we must believe
Fishermen. For in the mysteries of Faith the majesty of the matter will not be
pent within the narrow room of Reason, nor come under the roof of Syllogismes;
wherefore the same Luther wisely admonishes us, that in matters surmounting the
capacity of humane Reason, we beware of Etymologies, Analogies, Consequences
and Examples.

Also the imperfection of humane knowledge (chiefly when puffed up with a false
opinion that it is perfect in us) affords a necessary occasion of endless
contentions. We all only know in part, and in part apprehend Divine matters:
Wherefore we ought to conceive that we may as well as others be deceived in
that part, which we know not, wherein we apprehend not. If we were perfect,
Good Men could not fall out with good Men, but those may, which as yet are not
perfect, yea they cannot but fall out, except they continually remember this
their imperfection. That therefore these discords may be avoided, al ought
always to remember the Apostles admonition: Romans 12.3.
Not to think of themselves more highly than they ought to think, but to
think soberly. To which this is to be added, quietly to bear with them who
are of a different opinion from us, praying daily to God, that he would be
pleased to reveal unto us his truth, as yet not fully known. But in the mean
time, whereto we have already attained, Phil. 3.16
let us w^lke by the same rule, and be well affected each to others. That these
things are most true and profitable we cannot deny, which being granted, why
then nevertheless are these controversies daily increased? Why do these wounds
grow more and more raw, and bleed a fresh? If one may speak the plain truth,
there is in all mortal men an inordinate love of themselves, and of their own
inventions, and pleasing conceits, and this fault causes that we see not at
all the falsehood of those opinions we have once entertained, nor vouchsafe
admittance to the truth which is showed unto us by others. August. contra
Julianum, l. 1. Periit siquidem judicium postquam res transi^ in affectum; and
nostram qualem^unque, quia nostra jam facta est, praevalere volumus sententiam.
For judgment perishes, when the matter is passed into the affections, and
we desire that our opinion whatsoever it be, because now it is made ours, may
prevail. For where this Self-love does rule, Divines (whatsoever they
pretend) will study more to tune the Scriptures to their opinion, than their
opinions to the Scripture, and by head and shoulders drag the Fundamental
Articles of the Christian Faith, to the supporting of their doctrines not
Fundamental. If any could find a cure for this Epidemicall disease, we should
presently see many controversies, and all contentions (at least the bitter and
hostile ones) pacified and laid a sleep. But (what is to be bemoand) those
Divines, which are too much drawn away with Self-love, are by the breath of
popular applause, and desire of vainglory driven farther than they themselves
at first intended, or thought it ever possible. For men troubled with this
evil, will trouble all things, humane, and Divine, rather than they will
confess themselves deceived, or weary of the fight, or overcome by their
Adversaries. Yea, except they may conquer, and carry the adverse party captive
before their Triumphant Chariot, they are determined continually to clash the
Protestant Churches together with deadly discords. I am not ignorant that all
pretend the desire of truth, and Gods Glory, but that too many continue these
contentions for the love of vainglory, would I might deny it, and at the same
time speak truth. Surely it is scarce to be believed, that those who must needs
know what damage States, Churches, and Men's souls (bought with Christ's
precious blood) receive from these dissentions betwixt Protestants, can in the
midst of these contentions have their eyes only fastened on the glory of God.
Wherefore let the hot disputants on either side examine their own Consciences,
whether they perpetuate these Controversies and Discords of the Churches, that
God may lose no honor, or rather that there be not wanting an apt and lasting
matter to their own vainglory. Other occasions, and causes of these
dissentions, we have no leisure to recite; but of one we must more largely
dilate, which has made these Controversies as it were hereditary, and will
make them everlasting, except God pitying the Protestant Churches, put new
minds into the Pastors thereof. For this opinion has possessed the minds of
many pious and learned Divines, that the matters controverted betwixt
Protestants are of such moment, that such as are found erroneous therein, are
thereby convicted, to shake, yea to overturne the very Foundations of the
Catholic Faith, and man's Salvation. Hence whilst both parties are fully
persuaded that the truth stands on their side, they must also persuade
themselves, that their Adversaries lay at, and loosen the Foundations of the
Christian Faith. Jonah 4.9
What therefore Jonah once said unto God, that he did well to be angry, even
unto death for his Gourd, which was cut down, these men use to say, that they
do well to contend to death with their Protestant enemies, for overthrowing (as
they conceive) the foundations of man's Salvation. No wonder then if pious men
seasoned with this Opinion, detest such men so far, as to entertain no
peace, or brotherly Communion with them. Seeing therefore this is justly
counted the principal cause of this long dissension, let us a while withdraw
the eyes of our mind from received opinions, and with peaceable affections
enquire concerning the Foundation, and what is Fundamental.

CHAP. II. Of the signification of these words Foundation and Fundamental,
which often offer themselves in this discourse.
HE that will not err in the knowledge of things themselves, must begin from
the expounding of words. In Cratylo. (...).
For rightly Plato, Whosoever knows the Names, will also know the Things.
Foundation therefore is a metaphorical term borrowed from builders, and
signifies the whole groundwork of the building placed in the bottom which
upholds the structure, and which being taken away, the edifice tumbles down
and is shattered into pieces.

Forasmuch therefore as the Church is called the City of God, Psalm. 122. and 47.
the House of the Lord, it must have some Foundation; on which whilst it
leanes, and relyes, it remains safe and sound; from which if it gives off
and starteth aside, it presently perishes, and is brought to nothing. It is
plain therefore, that whilst we speak of the Church founded by God, that has
the name and nature of a Foundation, by which all the parts thereof are
supported, and from which they borrow both their strength and safety. And as in
some great Aedifice, the several parts have not all the same strength, and
beauty, yea some sometimes, may seem somewhat more inclined to fall, which as
yet stand, and stick to the foundation: So in this far stretched building,
which we call the House, and Church of God; there is great difference of
particular Churches. For some are fairer and firmer than the rest, because
better and nearer joined to the Foundation, others, somewhat ruinous, and
shaken, because not so well fastened to the foundation, yet all, which are not
as yet plucked off from the foundation, are sustained by the strength, and
benefit thereof, and are continued to the firmer, and fairer parts of the
building.

Hence it is plain, when we speak of the Churches, what a kind of thing that
is, which challenges to it self the name of a Foundation. Let us see now,
retaining still the former Metaphor, what manner of things they be which we use
to call Fundamental, for this is the word that has made so much work for our
Divines, and hindered them in the advancing of the whole business of the
pacification.

But first of all, here we must observe, that a material Edifice, built of
Wood and Stone, is founded nothing like unto a Spiritual Building, whose
structure consists of Living Trees, and Stones, that is, of Men enjoying the
use of their Reason and Will. For in this Quick and Lively Building, nothing
either has due conjoyning with, or receives any strength from the Foundation,
except it be coupled thereunto by the Act of the Reason, and Knowledge, and by
the Act of the will cleave fast to it, and obey it. Those things therefore are
truly counted and called Fundamental, which being known, Christians may have a
saving conjunction with their Foundation, which they cannot have, if the same
things be not known, or not believed. In like manner if we consider the Will,
those ought to be called practical Fundamentals, by the observation, and doing
whereof, we may remain joined to our Foundation, but may not if we despise, or
neglect them. And let the Knowledge of Christians be never so imperfect, yet if
they know and believe these Fundamentals, they shall not be parted from the
Foundation, for the defects of their Understanding. Let the righteousness of
Christians be never so imperfect, yet if they do these practical Fundamentals,
they shall not be separated from the Foundation, for the defects of their good
will. It being therefore a matter of such moment with God himself, to be
joynted and joined to our Foundation, that to all such, life, and eternal
Salvation is promised, let us be very wary, how rashly we cut off, either
particular Churches, or private Men, from this Conjunction, and by the same
verdict cast them from all hope of life and happiness.

But because besides these Metaphorical words of Foundation and Fundamental,
sometimes other terms are used having the same force, and intimating also the
same dependancy of the Church on another, of them also briefly. What therefore
is called the Foundation of the Church, when it is compared to a Building; when
it is likened to a Man, is termed the Head; when resembled to a Tree, styled
the Root. It is called an Head, because it maintains the members united unto
it, ceasing not to convey spiritual strength, and life into them. In the same
sense, it is named a Root, because it spouteth a vital Sap into all the Boughs
and Sprigs ingrafted in it. As therefore those are counted Fundamental
Doctrines, which are sufficiently effectual, and absolutely necessary to join
Christians to their Foundation; so may they also be called Capit^^^ or Radical
Articles, which being known and believed by any Members of the Mystical Body,
they may be united to their Quickening Head, and any of the Branches may rely
upon that Root of theirs, which conveyeth Life unto them, and stick fast to
the same.

Moreover, as every thing is not sitly called the Foundation, which is usefully
employed about the building, but only that, which is so underlaid beneath the
building, that without it, it cannot be supported; but may stand strongly, if
coupled and conjoined with it: So all Doctrines profitable for the furthering
of edification are not properly termed Fundamental, but only those which are
so necessary to be known, that without them, there is no coupling of the
building to the Foundation, with them a saving conjunction may be had, though
somethings be wanting, which are requisite to the perfecting of the Knowledge
of a Christian.

Lastly, 2 Timothy 3.16.
let us acknowledge with the Apostle, all Scripture to be profitable for
Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction of all Christians in
Righteousness, Godliness and Truth; but we do not call all propositions
founded in Scripture Fundamental Doctrins, because the nature of the thing,
and the propriety of the Metaphor does forbid it. The folly of Tanner in a like
case was laughed at by all, when in Conference at Ratisbone he feircely
maintainedt, hat whatsoever is affirmed in the Scripture is an Article of the
Christian Faith, as for example, that Tobiah had a Dog.

But least we should stay longer than it is meet, in handling the bare
signification of words, be this settled and resolved on, that the names of
Foundation and Fundamental, agree only to those things, which in reference to
what is founded on them, are of absolute necessity and power to bring unto
Salvation.

I find amongst Divines in this Sense, a threefold acception of Foundation. 1.
Personal Foundation of the Church, and this only one, properly so called. 2.
Ministerial Foundations of Churches, so termed, but not in the same Propriety
of Language. 3. Doctrinall Foundations, justly so called, as deserving that
honorable style, not by the Opinion of a few Divines, but the constant Judgment
of the Catholic Church.


All the difference betwixt the Reformed Churches is about the two later: yet
can it not easily be composed,

CHAP. III. Of the only Personal Foundation of the Church, Christ Jesus God
and Man, Mediator betwixt God and Men, and of the true conjunction with him.
THE most wise God, and most loving toward mankind, was pleased to found a
Church, which should endure for ever, and prevail against the Gates of Hell.
Now such a Church could not be, except it stood on a solid and eternal
Foundation, which might not be forced by any strength, or foundred by Engines.
God therefore, thought fit to lay no other Foundation than Jesus Christ, the
eternal Son, of an eternal Father, whom he sent into the World, that every one
which believes on him, might not dye, but have everlasting life. The prophets
and Apostles witness with a joint consent, Him alone to be the Personal
Foundation of the Church. Psalm. 118.22. Esaias. 28.16. Act. 4.11, 12. 1 Cor. 3.11.
Hence David calls Him the corner Stone: Esaiah terms Him a tried Stone,
Precious, and placed in the foundation of Zion. This is the Stone, set at
naught by the Builders, which is become the Head of the Corner, neither is
there Salvation in any other. Other foundation can no man lay, than that is
laid, which is Jesus Christ.

Now what has been said of this one only Foundation, ought also to be
understood of the one only Head, Husband, Root of the Church, and also of all
other Metaphorical Titles, which import the same dignity of Christ, and the
Churches same dependancy on him. For Christ God and man, is the only quickening
and saving Head of the Church, from whom the whole Body is fitly joined
together and compacted: Ephesians. 4.15 16. Ioh. 3.29. Hos. 2.20. Fph. 5.26.
He is the only Bridegrom of the Church who has the Bride, and has espoused
her to himself, that he might Eternally preserve, that is, that he may
sanctify her in this World, and present her glorious in that which is to come.
Lastly, he is the heavenly root of the Church, Col. 2.7.
in whom whosoever are rooted, spring up toward Heaven and shall continually
flourish in Heaven.

This Personal prerogative is so properly invested in Christ God and man, that
it can agree to no other. Heb. 2.11
Not to Angels, because they want that conformity of Nature, which ought to be
betwixt the Foundation and things founded in it, the Head and the Members
joined unto it, the Husband and Wife coupled to him in lawful marriage. Not to
a bare man, because no mortal, by reason of the corruption and weakness of
humane Nature can possibly perform the office of a Foundation, Head, Spouse,
in upholding, quickening, and preserving of the Church. Not to God himself
considered alone in the dreadful nature of his Divine Majesty. For though we
acknowledge God the founder of the Church, we still want a Foundation, to which
we need not fear to approach, draw near, to come, and as it were to glue our
selves. But the Majesty of God considered in it self, is not only a light not
to be approached unto, but also is a consuming fire, and what mortal man can
dwell with a devouring fire? Heb. 12.29. Isa. 33.14.
We cannot therefore have in, or under Heaven, any other personal Foundation,
by the Mediation whereof, we may be reconciled and united to God, save only the
Word, Ioh. 1.14.
Made Man, full of Grace and Truth.

But to what purpose is this dispute about a matter so plain, and granted of
all Protestants? Namely, that it may hence appear, that other Churches neither
may, nor ought to renounce brotherly Communion with those particular Churches,
which retain a saving conjunction with this Foundation. We wonder not that the
Papists, who besides Christ himself make another personal Foundation, another
Head, another Husband of the Church, cut and cast off all Churches, though
firmly and fastly sticking to Christ, which cleave not to the Pope of Rome, as
to their Foundation, Head and Husband. Nor care we for their false clamours,
whereby they think to affright the Churches of Christ.

If ye be founded upon the Rock of Rome ye be living and precious stones, if
not, only spongy and hollow ones. If ye acknowledge the Pope of Rome Head of
the Churches, ye are the true and living members of the holy Catholic Church;
if otherwise, ye are dead and rotten carcasses of Churches. Lastly if ye
embrace the Pope for your Husband, ye are chaste and true-borne Churches; if
otherwise, ye are adulterous and to be accursed to the pit of Hell, So the
Romanists. We can patiently take these taunts and wrongs from their hands, who
dream that our Churches are rent from the true Foundation, because they refuse
to join with a false. But verily if any Protestant Church, which dares not
deny, but that another is built on Christ, should dare notwithstanding to cut
the same off, as a rotten member, and cast it off from all brotherly Communion;
this were to offer an affront to Christ himself, and to do an injury to the
Brethren, both of us and Christ.

That therefore we may know, with what Churches it is meet for us to retain
Brotherly Communion, we ought to know what Churches are to be accounted to have
and to hold true and saving Union with this their Foundation; We deny not, but
that amongst the Churches which cleave to this only Foundation, some may be
fastened firmer and nearer than others, amongst the Churches quickened by this
Head and Root; some may draw more plentiful sense and sap than others: but we
ought not, because of the several degrees of Knowledge and Grace, to separate
our selves from Brotherly Communion with those whom we may, and ought to hope,
as yet to remain conjoined with their saving Foundation.

As touching single Persons, God alone who searches the Heart, can know who
have an inward, spiritual and lively conjunction with this saving Foundation.
But concerning whole Churches, (so far as it is lawful for men to know and
judge) whether or no they be savingly coupled to the Foundation, it may be
judged and determined by the works, which can and use daily to be exercised by
them. For those Churches, wherein those Acts are performed, whereby men may be
united to Christ, remain in him, and by him be brought to eternal life, none
can affirm, or will imagine that such are estranged or plucked asunder, from
this the only Foundation of man's Salvation.

That we may now begin from Infants. In all Reformed Churches, Baptism is
administered in the Name of the most holy Trinity, by benefit whereof such are
grafted into Christ, and rightly coupled to this their Foundation. For as for
these Infants who cannot by any Act of their own, apply themselves to the
Foundation, the holy Spirit vouchsafes by the Laver of Regeneration, to frame,
and apply the Foundation to them. But of those who are capable of Reason, and
can use the Freedom of their own will, it is expected and required from them,
that they bring diverse Acts, both of their Understanding, and Will to the
making and keeping of their due Union with Christ. Amongst which these four
are accounted the Principal, to which all others may easily be reduced.

First, on the part of the Understanding, there is required an Act of knowing
all those things concerning God, and Christ, without which no saving Union can
be established betwixt us, and Christ, nor free Reconciliation betwixt us, and
God the Father. To which purpose those words of our Savior seem to tend, This
is eternal Life, that they might know thee the only true God, Ioh. 17.3.
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. If there be any Congregations of men,
which as yet have not attained to this measure of saving Knowledge, we confess
such to be alienated from the life of God, Ephe. 4.18. and 2.12 13.
through the Ignorance that is in them, and that because of the blindness of
their hearts, as we are taught by the Apostle. But there is none of the
Protestant Churches blinded with such dark Ignorance, but that the Christians
therein may know God and Christ so far as is sufficient to Salvation, if they
assent to the Truth Preached amongst them.

Secondly, besides this speculative Knowledge of God and Christ, there is also
required an Act of believing, that is, Practically with Assurance to rely on
Christ being known. We grant therefore, that those Churches, or Companies of
men, met in one body of a Congregation, however they may put on, and pretend
the Name of Christian, yet to have no intercourse, nor society with Christ the
Foundation, amongst whom, Christ is not so preached, nor acknowledged, that men
may rely on him with a lively and justifying Faith. Such are those, which
dissolve the Hypostaticall Union of two Natures in Christ the Mediator,
without which we can neither have nor hope for a saving conjunction with
Christ, and God the Father. But in all the Reformed Churches, Christ, God and
Man, is so Preached, that there is no doubt to be made, but numberless souls
embrace him, with a true, lively, and justifying Faith. They are therefore, and
do remain conjoined to this Foundation, under that very formal conception,
wherein Christ the Foundation of man's Salvation may be conjoined to men, to
confer Grace, and Life upon them.

Thirdly, on the part of the Will, it is required of all that would not be
parted from this their Foundation, that they practice a daily exercise of
Repentance, without which it must needs come to pass that our daily sins must
divide, and separate us from God and Christ, to our eternal destruction. On
the other side, where this constant practice of Repentance comes betwixt, we
remain founded in Christ, reconciled to God, and ordained to happiness.
Wherefore in what Church soever the Gospel is so preached, and the Foundation
of man's Salvation is so settled and established, that it is to be hoped that
Christians taught by it, and living in it, by believing, and repenting, may
obtain forgiveness of their sins and everlasting life: we ought to pronounce,
and conceive of that Church, that it is truly conjoined, and remains firmly
coupled to Christ, the Author, Fountain, and Foundation of Grace and Salvation.

Fourthly, besides this Practice of Repentance, that this our conjunction with
the foundation may be the more sure and evident, the unfeigned desire, and
endeavor of Obedience, and a new Life, flowing from Faith and Love of Christ,
is required. If the Act of Obeying be wanting, there wants the Act of
Believing, and Loving, there wants all hope of conjoyning such with Christ. For
what Christ said, Ioh. 14.15
If you love me keep my Commandments, was all one as if he had said, If you
be conjoined to me, keep my Commandments: Gal. 6.15. and 5.6.
Because, In Christ neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision, but Faith which works by Love. What Churches then soever of
the Protestants stand in this condition, that men in them are enlightened to
know God, and Christ, are furthered to believe in him, are turned away from
their sins by the Act of Repentance, are made subject to God and his
Commandments, by the act of Loving and Obeying him: No doubt is to be made,
but that these Churches remain firmly fastened to their saving Foundation.
Therefore this saving and undoubted Union of them with Christ, ought to bring a
Tie and a Band of no mean Consequence, to the binding of the Affections of all
Reformed Churches together.

CHAP. IV. Of certain Foundations, which use to be called Ministerial, and of
their Office and Power.
ALTHOUGH We acknowledge our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the only personal
Foundation of his Church, yet do we not deny, but that the name Foundation, is
in a different sense ascribed to others. To whom, in what respect, this high
Title is given, and what Power and Command they have, who are thus entitled, it
must be afterward enquired into.

The name therefore of Foundation is sometimes lent to others, but then always
in a lessened and restrained acception. For they are called Foundations in no
other right, than because the personal Foundation is laid by their Ministry,
through the preaching of the Gospel, and by the continuation of that preaching
always kept in the Church.

Amongst these Ministerial Foundations the Prophets and Apostles possess the
prime place. Hence the wall of the Heavenly Jerusalem is said to have twelve
Foundations, Rev. 21.14.
and in them the names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb. Also Christians are
said to be built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets. Ephesians. 2.20.
In this sense Peter and Paul and all the Apostles were Ministerial
Foundations, because all they as wise Master Builders bestowed their excellent
pains in laying that only Foundation, of which we spoke before. Wherefore when
the Prophets, and Apostles are adorned with this honorable Title, it is rather
to be referred to their saving Doctrine concerning Christ, than to their own
particular Persons. The power of these was far greater than that of their
succeeding Ministers, because they were so enlightened, and governed by the holy
Spirit, that they could not at all err, either in Preaching, or Writing.
Therefore we acknowledge their Doctrine, as the Doctrine of God and Christ,
certain, infallible, and wholly Divine, with Tertullian, that says, There is
no Divine Word but of God alone. In that his book of the Soul.
Which Word was thundered both by the Prophets, by the Apostles, by Christ
himself.

But the Papists to these Ministerial Foundations, endeavor to join another,
in words calling it a Second, and subservient, but in very deed making it a
Principal, and plainly Divine one. This honor the Jesuits think fit to be
conferred on the Pope alone, whom they so appoint to be the Second Foundation
of the Catholic Church, that in the mean time they maintain him to be the
only Foundation of the Church next unto Christ. But there is no need to speak
much of this fading foundation, and palsy-shaking head; the Scriptures being
silent of any such sole Ministerial foundation, as the Papists do feign.
Besides all Protestant Churches long since have cast this filthy Idol of a
secondary head and foundation with others of the like nature to the Moles and
Bats, as fit for so blind companions. We own no power placed in this secondary
foundation of the Papists, to subject the Faith of Christians unto it, counting
those little better than mad, when they write and maintain, Bell^^ praef^t. in
lib. d^ Romans Po^^.
That the power and infallibility of the Pope of Rome, is the sum of
Christian Religion, and his judgment is to be accounted the square and Rule of
Faith.

But leaving the Pope of Rome, lets come to the Catholic Church, which on a
far better title might challenge to her self the name of Ministerial
Foundation, because the Faith of every one may seem in some sort to rely upon
her. For in this even to the end of the World that Doctrine shall be kept and
preached, to which those Christians which afford belief and obedience, are
rightly joined to their foundation, and in it shall obtain eternal Life. To
this purpose that of Paul to Timothy, is often alleged, where he calls the
Church, the Pillar and Ground of Truth. 1 Timothy 3 15.
Neither may we doubt, but that in this Holy Catholic Church, (which we
believe in the Creed) the truth of the Gospel ever has and ever will be
preserved, so far forth, as it shall suffice for the Salvation of those that
believe it. Therefore to know what has been believed, received, and published
of all Christian Churches, always and every where, is to know all those things
which are sufficient for the obtaining of Salvation in Christ, the Foundation
thereof. But this Catholic Church scattered over all the world, is presented,
rather to our mind, than outward senses. Wherefore when we desire to hear the
voice of the Catholic Church, we are forced to fly to the Church, which they
call Representative; that is to say, to a General Council. Of which
Representative Image of the Catholic Church, and of the Ministerial power
thereof we will briefly discourse.

That this Representative Church did excellently discharge the Office of a
Ministerial Foundation in Oecumenicall Synods, is witnessed by those four
Councils of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus and Chalcedon: In which the Divinity
of Christ, against Arius, of the holy Ghost, against Macedonius, the Union of
two Natures in Christ, against Nestorius, the distinction of two Natures,
against Eutyches, were declared, defended, and established. In these and the
like Councils, those Doctrines of the Christian Faith, which were there in
common handled and discussed, because therein all that professed Christianity,
were represented, are therefore with great reverence to be received. For it
ever belongs to the Office and lawful power of this Representative Church,
to divide and distinguish Fundamental Doctrines of the Christian Faith, from
those which were not fundamental, provided always that they passed not the
bounds set by the Apostles and Primitive Church, to multiply or diminish the
Number of these Fundamentals. 2a. 2ae Qu. 1. Art. 7. Resp. ad 4.
For it is credible (what Aquinas observed) that the Apostles and others which
were nearer to Christ, had a fuller Knowledge of the mysteries of the Faith,
than we that are further off, which Cajetan in the same place confesses to be
most true. For however that the Apostles, and the Fathers of the Primitive
Church, were not much given to controversall Divinity, and disputing about
Questions, yet were they of all most skillful, in saving, necessary, and
Fundamental Divinity.

Moreover, after this Representative Church had once published her resolution
founded in Gods Word, of Fundamental Articles, which were simply necessary to
the Salvation of Christians, the care and charge also lay upon her to defend,
fence and fortify those Articles, against all fraud, and force of Heretics.
For it is the wont of Heretics, to undermine the very Foundation of Christian
Religion, whilst they retain the words, but deny the matter of the Articles.
Thus the Arians, in words confessed Christ to be the Son of God, but they
hatched a Monster in their hearts, when they would not acknowledge him to be
coessentiall to the Father. He is but mocked with a Title, to whom the thing
signified by that Title is denied.

It was lawful therefore for the Representative Church (that is for the
general Council) for the better declaring of the true meaning of an Article,
to frame and fit a new (but apt) term, and to compel Christians to confess
Christ's Divinity under this form of words, Christ is Coessentiall with God the
Father. For to be God, and to be the Son of God, though not in sound, in sense
are the same as to be coessentiall with God.

Lastly, we do not straiten and confine the power of an Oecumenicall Synod, or
representative Church, only to the declaring and defending of Fundamental
Articles, such whereof an explicit and clear unfolded Faith must be had to
Salvation; but we confess the same also does extend to any true doctrines,
and profitable for the edification of men's Souls. Yea we conceive this
definitive sentence of the Church to be so armed with the sharp edged sword of
Excommunication, that they may be separated from the outward Communion of the
Catholic Church, which dare stubbornly oppose their private opinions against
her determinations. Notwithstanding if that wherein they do err, be not of the
Fundamental, and absolutely necessary Doctrins, we ought not to despair, but
that some who justly are cut off from the outward Communion of the Church, (God
in his mercy pardoning their errors, arising from the weakness of their
Understanding) may still retain an Inward and saving Communion with Jesus
Christ, their Foundation. For the outward Excommunication, is not a certain,
or infallible sign of the inward Excommunication, Tom. 1 an disp. page 374.
as rightly Luther.

What we have said of the Power of a General Council, we desire should also
be understood of any lawful and free Council, rightly representing the
Catholic Church; not of those Councils which are mere Vassals to the Pope of
Rome, and represent the Catholic Church in the same manner as an Ape does a
Man.

But because it is altogether impossible to call the Catholic Church into a
Council representing the whole body, by reason of the Popes Tyranny, and other
hindrances; let us come to explain what power particular Churches have in
this matter.

If therefore the name of Ministerial Foundation does agree to the
Representative Church, or General Council; for the Ministerial power it has
in publishing, explaining, and defending that Doctrine which joyneth Christians
to their saving foundation, it agrees also in its kind, and degree to every
particular Church, suppose the English, French, Dutch, and others, which take
their denomination from diverse Countries. For what the Catholic Church
assembled in a Council, may, and ought to do toward the founding of all
Christians in the saving Truth of the Gospel; that every Particular and
Provincial Church may and ought to do to those that are under it.

From this Office, the Church of Ephesus, whereof Timothy was President, is
called the pillar and ground of Truth, because it is the duty of every Church
to defend and maintain the Truth (preached by the Apostles to the World)
commending, and explaining the same to the people, and to unsheath, and draw
the Sword of Ecclesiastical censures against forgers and Heretics.

But least every particular Church should advance her power and authority, even
to match, and equal it with the Catholic Church in a General Council, we
must mark and observe, first, that the particular Doctors of particular
Churches met in a Synod, only represent their own, and not foreign Churches;
and therefore to have no power of prescribing to others, what they must
believe, or refuse; much less to cut them off from the Brotherly Communion
which they hold with the Catholic Church, who either out of conscience, or
ignorance cannot assent to their Decrees and Determinations. For an Equal has
no power over him, which is his Equal. Herein the moderation of Cyprian is
commended, who held communion with those Churches, whom he conceived to live in
a grievous error. The African Churches are commended, Apud. August. de Bapt.
cont. Donat. lib. 2. cap. ult. Idem super gestis cum Emerit. Sermon.
for their not condemning of any, nor removing them from the right of
communion, but continuing in fellowship with those Churches, which were of a
different opinion, and would not rest and rely on their judgment. For no
particular Church ought so far to tender her own honor, as thereby to envy,
prejudice, or damage the unity of other Churches.

Secondly, we must observe, that particular Churches (for instance, those of
Saxony and Switzerland) may and ought to commend the Sum of the Doctrine of
the Gospel, which they profess, to such as are subject to their Ministry,
which abridgement of Doctrine, compiled and digested into Articles, we use to
call the Confession of the Churches, or Articles of Religion. But a special
care must be had, that in the framing of these Articles, we insert not into
them, any thing that is subtle, superfluous, and litigious. For it is not the
part of wise Doctors, to stuff those things, which should further Peace, and
the Edification of Souls, with that which may trouble the Learned, help the
Unlearned little or nothing to Salvation. For what is this else, than to
minister to the Learned matter of striffe, and to thrust on the unlearned, Wind
for Milk, and Stones for Bread.

We ought also to have some respect of neighboring Churches, in these our
Confessions, which we set forth, and nor to affect in our Articles, to expose
to the view of all that, whence occasion of wrangling may be given to our
neighbor Protestant Churches, and matter of rejoicing afforded to the Papists.
These inconveniences might easily be avoided, if it would once enter into the
hearts of Divines, to sever hard and obscure Controversies, from the public
Confessions of the Church, and confine them to private exercises in the
Schools. For whilst we place and proclaim our Controversies in the light,
Mat. 10.27.
and as it were on the house top, of our public Confessions, we show abroad
the nakedness of the Reformed Churches, which it was far better, going
backward with our faces, we should desire to cover.

Lastly, when these Confessions are ordered in this manner, it is lawful and
useful for every particular Church, to exercise that Jurisdiction over their
own people, which in no case, they ought or can usurp over the subjects of
another Church. For if their own oppose the received Doctrine of their Church,
established by public consent, they may (both for the errors they scatter,
and for the disturbance they cause in the Church) put them aside from the
Communion of their Church, so long till they leave off to infect others, and
trouble the Church with their errors. But as soon as they repent of their
errors, they are to be received again into the Bosom of their Mother. Thus
may they deal with their own. But when they are to meddle with Churches, not
at all subordinate unto them, they may hold Divine concord, and keep Gods
Peace with those, which think and teach otherwise than themselves, as we may
see it in Cyprian. Epist. 72. ad Stephanum, and 73 ad Julianum.


It will not be from the matter, after this our discourse of Particular
Churches, to add something concerning some famous and eminent Doctors in the
same. For private Doctors, are also in their distance, to be accounted
Ministerial foundations, who in the maintaining, expounding; defending;
preaching, or writing the Truth of the Gospel, have employed their commendable
pains. And here amongst the principal Doctors of the Reformed Churches, we
reckon those Worthyes, Luther and Philip Melancthon, not fearing to join unto
them Bucer, Calvine, Martyr, and others; whom we need not to name. But of all
these, though exellent Divines of our Age, we ought so to esteem, as
accounting them Stars, but not Deities in our Churches, nor do we reverence
them, as the Prophets, and Apostles inspired by God, but value them, as godly
Men, worthily learned, and raised up by God for the general good of the
Church, withal confessing them to be but ordinary Ministers, and subject to
their mistakes.

Besides, we must beware that we do not suffer the Churches themselves, to be
surnamed by Epithets from these famous Men. Lactan. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 30.
For to put off the Name of Christ, and to put on, and wear humane and outward
names, is far from Christians, and most times is the fuel of endless
dissension. That therefore of Nazianzens ought wonderfully to please all
prudent and pious Christians. Orat. 30.
I reverence Peter, yet will I not be called a Petrian; I honor Paul, yet will
I not be called a Paulian. If private Christians can not take this in good
part, how much less is it fitting to nickname a whole Church from a single man?

Last of all, I may add this concerning private Doctors. It is a most in
jurious thing, that a whole Church should be indicted guilty of the errors of
that Doctor, whatsoever he be, which has or does use his Ministry therein,
unless it does appear, that that Church by their public assent does approve
and maintain his errors. But where is there one of an hundred amongst common
Christians, who so searches the books of their Doctors, that he gives his
consent to all their Opinions? Yea, where is there one amongst those Doctors
themselves, which does not from his whole heart abhor such errors, when his
adversaries charge him with them? Lastly, where is there one to be found
amongst the Learned in any Church, who has so sworn to defend the words of
Luther, or Calvin, or any other writer, but that he thinks it lawful to depart
from them, where they depart from the Truth? Now seeing it is manifest these
things are so, if these which we call Ministerial Fundamentals, sometime in
some things do shake, or stagger, we must not pin their Personal errors upon
the whole Church. Apud Luth. Tom. 1. disp. de Author. Eccles. page 439. B.
For the Church properly so called, does not allow whatsoever ill Doctors
mingled in the Church do allow, as rightly Melancthon, to which we add,
neither every thing which good Doctors have taught ill.

CHAP. CHAP. 5.
V. Of the Doctrinall Foundations of the Christian Faith in General, and how
far they are to be believed under the necessity of Salvation.
THE Doctrine of the Holy Scripture contained in the Books of the Prophets,
Evangelists, and Apostles, is that Foundation, on which alone the Faith of
Christians may safely rely, because of the most certain authority of God
revealing it. Nor must we give ear to the Papists when they object: Augustine.
Confess. lib. 6. cap. 5. Irenaeus. li. 3 cap. 1.
Whence know you those Books to have been given to mankind by the Spirit of the
most true God? If God as yet has not persuaded me in this point, he has not
as yet persuaded me that I am a Christian: For the will of God has commended
the Scriptures unto us, to be the Foundation and Pillar of our Faith. If the
Romanists will give no credence, neither to Augustine nor Irenaeus, they ought
notwithstanding undoubtedly to believe Peter, 2 Pet. 1.19 20, 21.
who calls the voice of the Scriptures, a voyee more sure than that which
came down from Heaven, and not brought by the will of man, but holy men of God
spoke it, as they were moved by the holy Ghost. Therefore the holy Scripture so
propounds the foundations of our Faith, and fastens the Rule of our Doctrine,
that the Faith of Christians only trusts and reposeth it self on those
Revelations, which are contained in the canonical Books. I will say nothing
against that fantastic imaginary Doctrinall foundation, which the Papists
trislingly defend, to be in a word not written, and couched in the privy
cabinet of the Popes breast, because I conceive so profane and gross an error,
in a matter of so great moment, amongst well instructed Christians is not worthy
of a confutation. He that seeks for the Doctrine of Salvation, and Eternal
Life out of the Scriptures, shall find it no sooner than if he looked for the
Tree of Knowledge and Life out of Paradise.

But although we straightly maintain that no fundamental Doctrine of Faith, is
to be sought for out of the Books of the Old and New Testament; yet we do
not defend that all things contained in these books are fundamental points, so
necessary to be known and believed, that if any of these be unknown, or denied
of any, we should presently adjudge them to have fallen off from the foundation
of Salvation. Many things in the Books of both Testaments are Historical, some
things are dogmaticall, which are truly affirmed, and profitably placed there,
and yet are accounted not to come into the Number of Fundamental points.
Numberless things there are, which by true and firm consequence may be
deduced out of the Scriptures, and yet mount not up to this high pitch of
honor. Therefore those things only are to be set apart, and owned for
Fundamentals, without the plain, and explicit Knowledge whereof, none can be
saved; and in which, as well Negative infidelity, not at all to know them, as
positive infidelity, to refuse to believe them does condemn. Now such are all
those things without which we can neither savingly believe in Christ, nor rightly
call upon God in Christ, and worship him to the obtaining of eternal Life; In
a word, without which Christians can neither have pious affections toward God,
nor exercise the Religious Acts of Faith, Hope, and Charity, being absolutely
necessary to Salvation.

These two things been yielded, and granted, that our Faith is to trust on the
Scriptures alone, and that all, and every one of those things which may be seen
in the large prospect of the Scriptures, are not to be ranked with
Fundamentals; this is to be added in the third place, that our Faith is so
subject, and tied to the whole word of God, that every one is bound to embrace
every Truth which he sees revealed in the holy Scriptures, or duly derived
from them. For although, out of the nature or matter of a Proposition we are
not bound and obliged to believe, and know it, under the peril of loss of
Eternal Life: Yet notwithstanding because of the authority of the revealer, so
often as it shall appear unto us, that such a proposition is revealed in
Scripture, we are bound not to refuse it. For whatsoever he should pretend on
the contrary, who at his pleasure shall trample on a proposition which he
understands to be founded on the Scripture; he is to be accounted one that
gives not that belief which he ought to any proposition. For Instance sake:
That Christ is God and Man, is a plain Fundamental Article, which if not at
all believed, we can neither believe in Christ himself, nor so worship God, as
to be restored into his favor, and admitted into his Kingdom: But many things
are expressly mentioned in Scripture of this Christ himself Incarnated, which
are not Fundamental; also many things may be deduced from this Fundamental
Article, Christ is God and Man, which are not to be reckoned as Fundamentals.
If notwithstanding they be perceived, and understood to be placed in, or duly
deduced from the Scriptures, he contemnes God speaking in the Scriptures, who
believes not such Propositions. But as often as it shall happen, not out of the
perverseness of the Will, but weakness of the Judgment, that he, being
deceived with an Imagination, Aug lib 4. ad Vinc. Vict. cap. ult.
that Truth and Piety are on his side, shall affirm or deny any thing
repugnant to the Scriptures, even in those his Tenets, which thorough his
Ignorance are not Catholic, his heart and mind notwithstanding is Catholic,
because it is prepared for amendment on better information. Of such therefore
we may rightly say, Heb. 5.14 Romans 14.1
that they have their Senses not so well exercised in heavenly matters, that
they are weak and children in Faith, that they are not to be taken along with
us to doubtful Disputes, but we cannot truly call them, forraigners estranged
from Christ, Apostates from the Faith, and such as are to be separated from
Brotherly Communion with the Godly.

However therefore let it be taken for granted, that the Romish Prelates do not
deny any Fundamental point, truly and properly so called: hence
notwithstanding it appears, that they both hurt the Unity of the Catholic
Faith, and hinder the Union of the Catholic Church. For what Church soever,
shall patch their own uncertain opinions to the fundamental Articles of the
Christian Faith must needs mishape and deforme the body of the Catholic
Faith, by joining to it so many members, both useles and monstrous. But as for
those which use the same, and enforce them on other Churches to be believed,
under the necessity of Salvation, it manifestly appears, that they alone are
guilty of the rents in the Catholic Church. Herein the pride of the Romish
Church, swells so big, that it leaves no room to receive the Truth: but I hope
that all Protestant Churches, will at length consent in this, to renew the
Brotherly Communion betwixt them, and not to thrust their private opinions on
others. That attempt of the Papists, to shut out all from the Catholic
Church, and eternal Salvation, which in all things give not their assent to
the Creed of Trent, ever seemed to me so desperate and foul, that all the
water of the Ocean powered upon Rome, can not wash away the staintherof.

We desire that all which we have spoken be understood, of casting them off
from Brotherly Communion, who either out of obstinacy or ignorance, contradict
the Scriptures, in any Principle of Catholic Faith, which not at all being
known, we can neither have Union with Christ, nor Adoption by him into the Son
of God; which, not at all being believed, we can neither rightly perform Gods
worship, nor from him obtain Eternal Salvation. Such things are neither
denied, nor unknown of any, which challenge to themselves the name of
Christians, save only those, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.
in whom the God of this world has blinded their mind, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ should shine unto them.

Moreover, neither are the things which we have said so to be taken, as if
thereby leave and liberty were given to Christian people, to set up their rest
in fundamentals, and to go no further in searching the Scriptures, as if it
were lawful to slight any Doctrine, which we confess not to be fundamental.
2 Timothy 3.16.
Yea all Scripture given by Inspiration of God, is prositable for Doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness. We must therefore
endeavor, Col. 3.16
that the Word of God may dwell in us plentifully in all wisdom, that we go on
to perfection, and not always make our abode only in Fundamentals. In the words
of Saint Augustine, we thus call upon all Christians: Epist. 222.
Let every one of you gain to himself as much Knowledge of Faith as he can;
greater if he desires more, less if less, yet so that he gives not off from
his journey, till he attain unto perfection.

Last of all, I would not have these things which are spoken in general of the
doctrinall foundations of the Christian Faith to be so understood, as if this
care and duty did not lie upon Doctors, and Pastors to instruct their people in
every Doctrine of the Scripture, whereby they may be furthered, and edifyed in
Faith and Piety: but that principally they urge and inculcate these
Fundamentals, as of principal moment to Salvation. This was the judgment of
Luther in his Preface to the greater Catechism, where he willingly confesses
himself to be a Scholar of the Catechism. Tom. 5. p. 645.
Surely great is the unhappiness of Christian people, where by reason of the
noise, and over much heat of controversies, they have scarce leave or leisure
to hear, or think of the Fundamental, and saving Doctrine of the Scriptures,
and not at all to do those deeds most necessarily required by Gods
Commandments.

Now as concerning foreign Churches, I deny not, but that other Churches may,
and ought to confute their errors, although they contradict not the Foundations
of the Christian Faith. Nazian. orat. in S. Epiph.
But let their Errors be confuted, and not the Parties erring be traduced, let
the matter be handled by Arguments, not by Outcries, by Reasons, not by
Railing; nor let them contend about Words, when the diverse sound of Syllables
may be brought to Spell, and make up the same Sense. To shut up all in a word,
we must so dispute of all Points not Fundamental with the Doctors of other
Churches, that we keep and preserve our own people safe and sound from their
Errors, and not that we may render the others odious, branding them for
obstinate Heretics. Seeing it is easy to call any man an Heretic, but not
so easy to comprise in a certain regular Definition what makes an Heretic:
Yea (if we believe Augustine) it is a matter of very great difficulty,

CHAP. VI. Of the notes and marks whereby we may know that any Point is not
Fundamental.
WE have shown already that Fundamental points have this character plainly
printed upon them, that without the knowledge of them, neither Salvation of
Christians, nor the Worship of God can consist. Now let us add some other
signs and tokens, out of which we may safely set down, that any point is not
Fundamental, although some urge, and enforce it for Fundamental, and they
especially, who have long labored, and sweat soundly in the maintaining of it.

First therefore, that is not Fundamental, which was never clearly revealed
from the beginning, by the Prophets, and Apostles inspired from Heaven, to
Christian people, and to Christian Churches, founded by them through the whole
World. For they had not been pure from the blood of them all, if they had
shunned to declare all the Counsel of God to all; so far forth as it was
necessary to the procuring the Salvation of all by Faith in Christ Jesus. And
the saving Truth in such necessary, and fundamental things was so revealed by
the Apostles, that all might behold it. Mark. 16.15.
Go ye into all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature: Romans 1.16
For it is the power of God unto Salvation to every one that believes. We
preach Christ, Col. 1.28.
warning every man and teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present
every man perfect in Christ Jesus. What therefore in the time of the Apostles
was not declared to all, that cannot in our Age begin to be Fundamental. Yea,
neither the Papists themselves dare deny this, although they arrogate to the
Pope of Rome, and Romish Church more power, than is meet, over the Articles of
the Christian Faith, For Canus set all those things apart from the Doctrines of
the Catholic Faith, Lib. 4. cap. ult. page 145.146.
which were not univorsally preached by the Apostles. How much more then, ought
they to be severed from the Fundamentals? Lib. 12.6.10. p. 391.
The same Author allows that some propositions may be called Truths of the
Christian Doctrine, which he thinks not worthy to be called Truths of the
Catholic Faith. For this name he counts peculiarly to belong to those
Doctrines which so nearly concern the Faith, that by removing them Faith it
self is taken away. Lib. i. quest. 17. p. 148.
And Corduba to the same purpose says, It is no Catholic Truth, nor is the
contrary opinion Heresy, unless such a Truth be revealed, and generally
propounded to all, to be necessarily believed. Last of all, Bellarmine himself
grants us, Lib 4. de Verbo Dei, cap. 11.
That those things, which are absolutely necessary for all to Salvation, were
preached unto all by the Apostles themselves. Let this therefore be the first
sign, of a Doctrine not Fundamental, that it has not been delivered by the
Apostles to all, publicly, generally and plainly.

Secondly, that is no Fundamental Point, which was never admitted and held for
such in the Primitive Church, succeeding the Apostles, and never recommended to
all, by general consent of the Catholic Church. For if any will maintain,
that the Catholic Church did ever refuse, or was ignorant of any Fundamental
Doctrine, he must by the same reason maintain, that the whole Church was
severed from her Foundation, which no man, well in his wits, will ever suffer
to enter into his Thoughts. It was well observed by the right Reverend
Archbishop of Armach, a man of singular Piety, and stored with the
commendation for Learning in all kinds. That if at this day, we should put by
the points, wherein Christians differ one from another, and gather into one
body the rest of the Articles wherein they generally agree: Usher Sermon before
the King, page 43.
(which worship Christ God and Man, and acknowledge him for their Savior) We
should find that in those propositions, which without all Controversy are
Universally received in the Christian World, so much truth is contained, as
being joined with holy Obedience, may be sufficient to bring a man unto
everlasting, Salvation. Which plainly evinceth that these things alone of the
common Faith, are those, which rightly are called Fundamental: but as for
those points, which we so dearly prise, and for love of them clash the
Protestant Churches together, because of the right of near alliance which they
have with the Fundamentals, they may sometimes be ranked amongst true and
profitable Doctrines, but may not be accounted absolutely necessary, or
Fundamental.

Thirdly, it is not a Fundamental maxim of the Christian Religion, which is
so handled or propounded, that to conceive the truth thereof, and to apprehend
it with Faith, we stand in need of the Wit, and cunning of Logicians, and of
the abstracted and abstruse speculation of Metaphysitians. Nazian. Orat. 21.
For nothing were more unjust, than the Christian Faith, if it should only sit
and belong to those, who are Learned and Skillful in these Arts. Nothing is
more usual amongst Learned Men, than in their minds and conceits, to abstract
the manner of things, from the things themselves; nothing more common, than to
propound the same single numericall thing, to be considered under several
formal differences, and to rear and raise these touring speculations, on the
plain Doctrines of the Christian Faith. If any such matter were Fundamental,
or necessary to be known to Salvation; there were no hope of the Salvation of
all unlearned People. But we defend with Augustine, Epist. 3.22.
that the Faith of the holy Church is apprehended, not by the Reason of
Disputation, but the Piety of believing, otherwise none but the Philosophers,
should obtain blessed happiness. Yea, we say with the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.20,
27.
Where is the Wise, where is the Scribe, where is the Disputer of this World?
etc. But God has chosen the foolish things of the World, to confound the Wise.
As if he had said, Where art thou O Learned man, and skillful in lofty
speculations? Art thou alone meet to receive the Doctrine of Life? Yea, every
one of the plain country People is more fit than thy self, and thou
altogether unfit, if thou think that in these things, thou may rely on thy
own Art, and witty apprehension, for the way of Salvation is not only a holy
way, but also so plain and direct, that the foolish cannot wander in it: Isa.
35.8.
So be it, they stick to the Word in the simplicity of their hearts. On the
place.
As Luther well affirms. Therefore, saving and Fundamental Doctrines, are
not to be sought for, in the dark clouds of speculation, but in the plain
propositions of the holy Scriptures, to the conceiving whereof, there is more
need and use of Faith, than Art; of an obedient Heart, than of a subtle and
piercing Wit.

Fourthly, as all points justly challenging to themselves the Title of
Fundamental, are plain and naked, for the manner of their Expression; so
ought they to be few, and so framed, that they do not swell to an infinite
number, yea, that they grow not into so great a bulk, burdensome to be
portable in the memory of Gods little ones. Hence Aquinas calls them the First
things to be believed, 2a. 2ae Qu. 2. de Fide. cap. 2.
and special Articles of the Faith. William Paris terms them the Fundatories
of Religion. Others style them Radical Truths. But although these first,
Fundatory, and Radical Doctrines of the Christian Religion, may beget, and
bring forth a great, uncertain, and numerous offspring of Consequence^ arising
from, and following after ^^^m; yet it bears no proportion with reason, that
they in themselves, should (...) many, or uncertain. When therefore we
behold, that to these First credibles of the Divine Essence, and Attributes of
the Incomprehensible Trinity, of the Hypostatical Union of two Natures in
Christ, of the Comunication of his Properties, and almost of every Object of
Knowledge in Divinity, there is annexed so great a train of several points,
as thick Volumes are not able to contain them, it is most certainly sure that
the greatest part of them is not Fundamental. All Christians ought to hear
the Counsel of Learned Nazianzen, Orat. de Modest. observe. in D sp.
Contemplate (says he) on Divine things, but stay still in the Terms. Speak
the Phrases and Language of the Spirit, and if it be possible, nothing else. Do
not thou curiously pry, through those narrow rifts into the Nature of the
Father, the Essence of the only begotten Son, the Glory of the Holy Ghost,
and one God in three Persons. Use the words accustomed, the reason of them
belongs to those that are Wiser to inquire. Let it satisfy thee that thou have
the Foundation, and let alone to Artificers to build thereupon. Would to God
only Artificers would build upon them; would to God they would not mingle their
many, and almost infinite superstructures, with the few, and plain
Fundamentals, to be embraced with equal affections, and to be received with
honor alike. If they endeavor thus to do; yet it becomes all pious and
prudent Christians to discern and make a difference betwixt those first, and
few things to be believed, immediately revealed by Christ, and his Apostles,
and those numberless deductions of Divines, which they, according to their
several minds and opinions, seek to thrust, and crowd into the same room
with Fundamentals.

Fifthly, it is no Fundamental point, which though furbished and attired in new
terms, is not the same in effect, with the Doctrine expressed in the words of
the Holy Scripture. For if the addition of our new coined words, imports any
thing more than what is in the Scripture, this new accession may be allowed
for a consequent of the Fundamental Doctrine, but it cannot with this new
piece be urged for a direct, downeright Fundamental Doctrine. But if the new
word, or the addition therein, for matter of the Sense of the Proposition,
brings no new thing at all, but so that understanding the Terms, the effect of
both appears to be the same, then we acknowledge both to be Fundamental.
For the disserence of the expression, alters not the nature of a Fundamental
Doctrine, where the essence and meaning of the Proposition, remains the same.
What we have said somewhat obscurely, we will make plain by an example.

Christ is God, and the Son of God.

This is a Fundamental Point, and so also is this,

Christ is coessentiall with God, his eternal Father.

For although in the latter, there is a new Term, yet it adds no new thing,
nor affirms any thing, which will cause the cumberance of a toilesome
deduction, to extract it out of the former; but whosoever understands the
terms of both, presently understands, that they agree so well, as in sense
they are the same. For no man of sound sense can have a conceit of diverse Gods
in the same Essence, or substance. But if the Doctrine or Proposition, decked
in foreign Terms and new language, cannot be annexed to a plain and clear
Fundamental Article, without a busy and artificial deducing of it, it ought
not to be inserted into the Catalogue of Fundamentals. Indeed those which
perceive the force of the Consequence, or Deduction, are bound to afford
belief to such Consectaries. But they, to whom it does not sufficiently
appear, that such a Proposition follows from any Fundamental point, they
are not bound to embrace it for a tried Truth, much less for such a Doctrine,
without which no hope is left to obtain Salvation. To conclude in a word, As
often as it is inquired, whether any Doctrine be Fundamental or no; let us
not give heed to the clamours of Disputants, But have recourse to those Notes,
which now we have reckoned up. If the Doctrines they press on us, be not
clearly recommended by the Apostles themselves to the Catholic Church, in
the first preaching of the Gospel, if in succeeding Ages they were not
Universally received, if they be not suited to the capacity of simple
Christians, but only fitted to the brains of Philosophers, and Logicians, if
they be too many, and not comprised within certain bounds: Lastly, if
expressed in such forms of Speech, that they cannot be reduced to an
equivalent sense, with a clear and of all confessed Fundamental Article,
sometimes they may be Truths, but they can never be^ counted Fundamentals.

CHAP. Of the Sum of Fundamental points, contained in the Creed, and
Commandments, so far as we ought to Believe, or Practice.
MANY of the Papists, and sum of ours, when we maintain that the difference
betwixt the Reformed Churches, is not about Fundamentals, presently require of
us, to bring in a Bill, and set forth an acurate Catalogue of Fundamentals; so
that we may say, so many Fundamentals there be of the Christian Faith, neither
more nor less. We easily answer the Papists, that it were presumption in
Protestants, who confess themselves subject to error, to undertake so hard a
Task: let Papists rather address themselves to the Pope of Rome, who alone
can speak Oracles, and is said to have all Laws, Humane and Divine, locked up
in the Closet of his Breast.

But if any of our men shall earnestly maintain, that unless this first be
done, no Brotherly love, can be renewed betwixt the Protestant Churches, let
him try, (which is somewhat more easy) if he can but only reduce the
Propositions in Controversy, which he desires should be Fundamental, to a
certain and stinted number. If he shrinkes to do this, let him not blame the
backwardness of others in the same matter. Although it be not hard to show the
reasons, why the Fundamental Points, can scarce, or not at all, to be brought
to a set number. First of al, that which hinders is this, that according to the
diverse conceits of diverse men, the forms of Propositions are altered, and
one Divine breaks that into two, which another makes up into one Proposition.
Hence of necessity must arise an uncertainty of their number. Which we see to
have happened in the very Articles of the Creed, Aqu^n. 2. 2. quaest. 1. a^an
co^p.
which Divines commonly count to be twelve, and yet some reckon them up
fourteen. What shall I say? that as yet, Divines are not well agreed amongst
themselves, of the very distinction, of a Fundamental point. Some restrain
this name to those Doctrines alone, which with an express Faith, are to be
believed of all Christians to the obtaining of Salvation and eternal life by
Christ, and this I profess to be mine opinion. Yet are there some most
learned and famous Divines, which term all Propositions Fundamental Doctrines,
which they themselves by good, and strong Consequence, infer out of the
former Fundamentals, although few or none be found in their neighboring
Churches, who plainly perceive the Truth of these Consequences. Many things
deter me from being of this opinion, but this most especially, that this
would be a necessary and everlasting cause, of an unnecessary and everlasting
Rent betwixt the Churches of Christ. Lastly, there never were, nor will be
wanting some, who will require that it may be reckoned amongst the
Fundamentals, whatsoever themselves unlearnedly and erroneously dream, that
they have dug and drawn out of the Word of God. And these for the most part
are those hateful and troublesome Brawlers, who presently give out the Alarm,
that the Foundations of Religion are plucked up from the very roots, if any dare
shake their imaginary Fundamentals. Whilst the very nature and definition of a
Fundamental Doctrine flotes in this manner, it is no more impossible to count
the waves of the Sea, than it is percisely to define the set, and certain
number of Fundamental Doctrines, ebbing and flowing according to men's several
opinions.

But least I might seem wholly to wave and decline the marking out of
Fundamental Doctrines, I will show plainly what was the opinion both of
Ancient and Modern Divines in this matter, by public producing of their
testimonies.

As touching things to be believed, all Foundations of the Christian Faith, are
comprised in the Apostles Creed, neither shall he, who from his heart
professes that he affords belief to all, and every thing therein contained,
be deficient in any thing (so far as concerns things to be believed) to the
partaking of Salvation in Christ, and retaining of Communion with the brethren
of Christ. Now let us see how honorably the ancient Fathers did both think
and speak of this Creed.

Irenaeus says, That the Church dispersed through the whole World received this
Faith from the Apostles, Lib. 1. cap. 2, 3.
and carefully kept it, so that by consent in this Faith, they as it were dwell
all in one house, and have one heart. And he shows that this Faith, does
suffice for the Unity of all Churches together amongst themselves, as the
Dutch, Spanish, French, Eastern, Egyptian, Lybian, in a word all Christian
Churches. Irreformab^^em, lib. de Virgin. velan.
Tertullian calls this Creed, the one Rule of Faith, sole, immovable, and
which need not, or may not be altered, or reformed. Hilary tired with the
contentions of the Arians, takes breath with this speech: Ad Conslat. August.
It is most safe for us to retain the first and sole Evangelicall Faith,
Confessed and Understood in our Baptism.

Augustine calls this Creed the comprehension and Perfection of our Faith* Tom.
10. de temp Sermon. 2. Dom^. in Ramis palmar. page 849. and Sermon. 131.
adding with all, that it is plain, short, and full; so that the plainness
does provide and take order to help the homeliness of simple Auditors: The
shortness eases the memory, and the fullness compriseth all Doctrine. In
another place he calls it the certain rule of Faith, by which Believers may hold
the Catholic Truth, and by which they may convince all heretical
wickedness. Russinus says, Exposit. in the Creed.
that this Creed may also be called the Trial, or Touchstone; if we meet a man
we doubt of, do but examine him by this Creed, and he will presently discover
himself, whether he be a foe or a Friend. Lastly, Sermon of the Creed.
Maximus Taurinensis writes, that the Apostles did deliver the mystery of Faith
to the Church of God, that because there was to be diversity of Believers under
the one name of Christ, the privy signet of the Creed should distinguish the
Faithful from the Unbelievers.

Come we now to see, what was the Schoolmens Judgment of this Creed, Alexander
of Hales brings this reason, why the Creed was composed, Part. 3. quae^. 69.
m^mb 2.
That it might be the Instruction of the Faithful, in one Understanding and
Confession of the Truth, and Devotion of Religion, in which the nature of Man
is to obtain blessedness. Somewhat after, To instruct in the Faith, was the
cause of making the Apostles Creed, for to this purpose was it composed, that
the Faithful might be taught in one Faith, to believe all things necessary to
Salvation. Aquinas determines, that as touching these first believables, 2.2.
quaest. 2. art. 5. in corp.
whith are the Articles of the Faith, every one is bound explicitly to believe
them; but as concerning other believables, he is bound only implicitly to
believe them, and in the Preparation of his mind, that is, having his Heart in
readiness to embrace them, when it shall appear to him, that they are
contained in the Doctrine of the Faith. Bonaventure says, Sent. l. 3. did. 25
qu. 1. in conclu. resp^ad 2.
When it is demanded, whether the Doctrine of the Faith be sufficiently
contained in the Apostles Creed, we may answer, that if we speak of the Doctrine
of Faith, in respect to those things, which therein are most principal and
proper, they are sufficiently contained in the Creed. Neither is there any
thing to be believed, which may not be reduced to the Articles contained in the
Creed, as the principles and stable foundations. I pass other Schoolmen,
because it is their general judgment, that the plain and unfolded belief of
the Apostles Creed, is enough for Common Christians, for the attaining of
Salvation; though a greater measure of Knowledge be required from men of
greater Learning. Whence the Master of the Sentences, after he had concluded,
Sent. lib 3. did. 25.
That in the time of Grace all things ought to be believed, which are contained
in the Creeds; afterward he adds, that it is one thing to know only what a
Man ought to believe, to obtain eternal lift, and another to know how the
same may be maintained, and defended against wicked men opposing it, which
Knowledge many Faithful men cannot skill of, and yet they excel most in Faith
it self.

Nor do the modern Papists, differ herein from the Schoolmen. Let the Fathers
of Trent speak. Ses^ion. 3.
The Apostles Creed is that Principle, in which all that profess the Faith of
Christ do necessarily agree, and it is that firm and only foundation, against
which the gates of Hell shall never prevail. And in the very Catechism of the
Council of Trent, this Creed is called, Page 14.
The short form of the Christian Faith, and Hope, the sum and foundation of
Truth, first, and necessarily to be believed of all. Canifius affirms, That
the words in the Creed tend to this purpose, that we may have the true
Knowledge of God and Heavenly things, which is necessary to every man toward
the leading of a godly and happy life, comprised, in brief abridgement. James
Baius calls it the rule of the Christian faith, prescribed to all Believers,
because by this common Profession of the faith, those of the same household, and
brethren, are distinguished from their Enemies.

Out of which testimonies we gather, that it was the general opinion of
Divines, that all Fundamental Doctrines of the Christian Faith, necessary with
the necessity of the means to the Salvation of men, were comprehended in the
Creed, so that none shall perish, for mere ignorance of God and Christ, who
give an explicit Faith to these things. Yet we say not, that besides these few
Fundamentals, Christians should make no account of all other Doctrines, which
are placed in the Holy Scriptures. Yea all Pastors and Doctors are bound by the
necessity of the Precept, to further the perfecting of the Saints, and edifying
of the Body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
till we all come into the unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son
of God, unto a perfect Man. The people themselves also are bound, where ability
and opportunity is afforded them, to grow unto the riches of the full assurance
of Understanding, Col. 2.2.
to the acknowledgement of the Mystery of God, and of the Father, and of
Christ. But neither Doctors of Particular Churches, nor Christians living in
them, are bound to break off the band of Brotherly Communion with other
Churches, which embrace this Sum of the Christian Faith in that sense,
wherein the Catholic Church, always received it, and profess themselves
enemies to all Heresies that overthrow the same.

Now as we have set down the Apostles Creed, for the brief of Fundamentals
pertaining to the saving Mysteries of Faith, so we acknowledge the Decalogue
as the Symbol and Sum of all things to be done, as touching duties due to
the worship of God, and offices of Charity which we owe to our Neighbor. For
we may fitly enough call Fundamental Doctrines, not only those Mysteries of
Faith, whose explained Knowledge is altogether necessary to the Salvation of
Christians: but also those Doctates of the Divine Law, which if we know not at
all, we cannot worship God as we ought to the obtaining of Salvation. In this
sense we term the Decalogue the Sum of things to be done, even as we
styled the other (of which we have spoken before) the Sum of things to be
believed. For the mere speculative Knowledge of the Divine Mysteries, without
the practical knowledge of the Divine Mandats, can bring none to blessedness.

Therefore, Luth. Tom. 1. in disp. p. 406. Philip. page 436.
the teaching of Gods Law in Churches, is plainly necessary, and altogether to
be retained, without which Christ cannot be retained. For to this Law not only
our corporal life, but also our spiritual life ought to be subjected. Now
those things which are propounded in this Law of God are so fundamental, that
they cannot be broken without the guilt of death, nor opposed and denied
without the stain of Heresy.

The Fundamentals of the Creed aim at this end, that we may know God and
Christ to eternal Life, as either has revealed himself: The Fundamentals of
the Decalogue drive at this; That we may worship both as they have commanded
themselves to be worshipped. If any overthrow the Fundamentals of Gods worship,
he is shut out from Salvation, as much as if he had overturned the Mysteries
of Faith. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God? Be not deceived, Aquin. quaest. disp. de superb. art. 4.
neither fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, etc. As if the Apostle had
said, It is no less damnable to err in these moral, than in speculative
principles. For the corruption of ones opinion, about those things which
pertain to manners, may make an Heretic, no less than about those things
which pertain to Faith, if it be in any Universal Principle of Gods Law. He
that believes he may worship many Gods, or adore the true God in an Image made
with hands, that is of the opinion that theft or fornication are things
lawful, grates upon a Fundamental Doctrine, and runs into a deadly, and
dangerous Heresy. For the practical dictate, which is included in every
mandate of the Law is a Fundamental truth, and ought equally to be believed
as an Article of the Creed, in speculative things. If any man therefore should
believe, or teach that our Parents are not to be honored, or any thing else
against a Commandment of God, although he reverenceth his Parents with due
honor, or keeps that Commandment himself, yet should he be an Hetetique,
and justly to be accused for overturning a Foundation of Faith. Let the Church
of Rome, therefore look to it, which boasts that the Foundations of the
Christian Faith hitherto have been preserved chiefly by her care, whether or no
she has not grossly, and damnably erred in the Fundamentals of the Decalogue;
to say nothing of her other errors.

Now if any will add unto the Fundamental Doctrines of the Creed and
Commandments, the Doctrine also of the Sacraments clearly revealed in the
Gospel, I am not against it: provided on this condition, that as they shall
not all pass for fundamentals, which Divines endeavor to build upon the
fundamental Articles of the Creed, but that those only be counted
fundamental, which are necessary for all to know and believe to Salvation: So
also in the matter of the Sacraments, every thing shall not presently be a
Fundamental, which may be disputed about the Sacraments, or gathered by the
occasion of the Words which Christ spoke; but whatsoever Christ has so set
down, and established, that it is absolutely necessary to the receiving of
Grace and Salvation in the use of the Sacraments. As concerning the Sacrament
of Baptism, it is a Fundamental Doctrine, that Christians must be Baptized in
the Name of the most Holy Trinity, that they may be grafted into Christ. Now
they that believe, and do this, retain the Fundamental doctrine of Baptism,
although it may happen that the same men may in their minds conceive some false
opinions of Baptism, or mingle some vain and useless rites in the
Administration thereof. So in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, this is a
Fundamental Doctrine, That it must be celebrated in bread and wine; that
therein the memory of Christ's Passion is ever to be renewed; that Christians in
that Sacrament have not only an empty, 1 Cor. 10.6.
or shadowy representation of Christ crucified, but do truly, really, and
savingly partake of the body of Christ. He that believes all things soundly,
and sufficiently, embraces the Fundamental Doctrine of this Sacrament, to the
sucking of Grace out of it; Although those difficult questions tossed and
tumbled betwixt Divines, about the manner of the Presence and eating of Christ,
never came into his head, much less did he give his consent to one side, or
other.

To this threefold kind of Fundamentals; Whereof the first is seen in the
Creed: The second, in the Commandments: The third, in the Sacraments of
Baptism, and the Lords Supper: We may add a fourth, contained in the Lords
Prayer. For seeing, invocation or Prayer is a duty belonging to the worship of
God, absolutely necessary for the obtaining of Grace, and Salvation, it must
needs have certain fundamentals, which being unknown, or slighted, it becomes
of no moment, but is effectual if they be retained and observed. This is a
fundamental point: God alone is to be invoked by Religious Prayer, he is to be
called upon through his Son our Mediator, trusting on whom we call him Our
Father: He is to be Prayed unto for all good things we want; but chiefly for
Grace, Pardon, and Glory, which we most stand in need of. Lastly, he is to be
prayed unto in Faith, Charity, and a good Conscience. He that contradicts these
things is a slat Heretic, and perverts the fundamentals in the duty of Prayer.

That these four things, which we have touched are alone to be accounted
Fundamentals of the Christian Religion, seems to me plainly to appear out of
the practice of the Apostles themselves and Primitive Church, well known unto
all. For they have judged no particular Church to have cast away the
Fundamental points of saving Faith, or to have fallen off from the Communion
of the Catholic Church, who holily profess the faith in the Creed, and
obedience to the Commandments, who administered the Sacraments according to
Christ's Institution, and called upon God in the Name of Christ. For they
conceived them to deserve an admonition for their errors of lighter moment, but
would therefore cut off no particular Churches,

CHAP. VIII. That Brotherly Communion is to be kept betwixt the Protestant
Churches, is proved by Reasons drawn from the Communion which they have in
Jesus Christ, the only Personal Foundation.
FORASMUCH as this one thing is the greatest hinderance of settling agreement
betwixt Protestant Churches, that some learned and godly men conceive that such
a Brotherly agreement and Communion is altogether unlawful, we to our ability
shall endeavor to show, that this Communion of particular Churches amongst
themselves, is not only lawful, but acceptable to God, and necessary to
themselves. For the proving whereof, long since we have laid our foundations,
in those things, which were largely discussed, concerning the personal
Foundation and the foundations Ministerial, and Doctrinall.

This one thing remains, that we call our Reasons, which are scattered and
dispersed thorough this whole discourse, to come in to their colors, that they
may present themselves at one view. We will begin (as it is fit) from those
Reasons, which flow from the consideration of that one foundation Jesus Christ,
our Savior, to whom all dostick, and from whom all Good, Temporal,
Spiritual, and Eternal, is derived to all Reformed Churches.

With those Churches it is fitting to retain Brotherly Communion, be broken at
men's pleasures, except they be also broken betwixt them and Christ, who is the
head of all Churches. If the Saxon count the Helvetian or Helvetian the Saxon
Churches, so alienated, and torn asunder from Christ, by their errors, that
they are neither founded in Christ, nor by Christ the Elder Brother, taken into
the brotherly society of fellow members, then they may pretend some reason, why
they renounce communion with them. But if in no wise they dare affirm this,
we cannot have just cause to disclaim Brotherly Communion with those, whom
Christ himself blusheth not to own, and call his Brethren. August. Epist. 162.
It was the peevish frowardness of the Donatists, neither to receive from
other Churches any letters importing a Communion, nor to acknowledge any right
of Brotherhood with them. But in the mean time what did the Orthodox Churches?
Out of Augustine we may learn it, in whom we read, That the Donatists angry
for this thing, Contra Donat. post. Coll. cap. 35
were notwithstanding by the Orthodox acknowledged for Brethren. The same also
appears out of Optatus Milevitanus, who thought, That the name of Brotherhood
was not to be denied unto them, Yea, De schism. Donat. lib. 1. in initio, lib
4. in initio.
thought it an impious act to suppress, or conceal the name of Brethren.
Either therefore it must be justified, that some Protestant Churches have lost
their conjunction with Christ the Foundation of the Church, and forfeited their
Brotherly Communion with Christ their Elder Brother, or else we must not depart
from Brotherly Society with them.

In the second place we argue from most certain Signs and Marks, 2. Reason.
whence we may and ought to be persuaded, that this or that Church, is
conjoined to Christ the corner stone; for from the same notes we may conclude,
that other Churches are bound and obliged, not to separate themselves from the
same. They therefore which want not the knowledge of God and Christ, necessary
to eternal life, who have true Faith, true Repentance, and true Endeavor
after a New life, and holy obedience, to such we ought to grant, that they
enjoy a saving conjunction with Christ their foundation. But none (for ought I
know) as yet is found, which has given this bloody Sentence, That in this or
that Protestant Church there is not so much knowledge of God, and Christ, as
suffices to Salvation; That there is not in it, the ordinary Justification of
Christians by Faith; That there is not the earnest exercise of Repentance, and
endeavor after New Life. But if all these things agree to all Protestant
Churches, it is manifest that they remain conjoined with their Head and
Foundation; not less manifest, that they have inward Brotherly Communion and
ought to have outward with all the members of Christ, Romans 12.5
For we being many are one body with Christ, and every one, one another
members. From the connection with this foundation depends and follows of
necessity the connection and communion, betwixt several Churches and private
single persons, 1 Cor. 12.12. Ephesians. 4.16.
except were account no credit to be given to the Apostle.

Of every single man, Saxony are bound to presume, that those of Swizerland do
adhere to Christ their foundation, till they can prove it to be otherwise, by
some evident, or at least wiseprobable reason: Now they are so far from being
able to prove their Separation from Christ, that most evident Reasons and of
Proof against any doubt, present themselves to the eyes and hearts of all,
that they are savingly united with Christ, Ephesians. 4.5, 6.
who hold this One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism? Who duly worship, one God
and Father of all, who is above all? Either these things ought to suffice, that
Churches be careful to keep betwixt them, the unity of the Spirit, in the
bond of Peace, Ephesians. 4.3.
or Paul the Apostle knew not, what might avail to the soddering of this unity
together.

If any object, that the Churches of Switzerland are not sound in the point of
the presence of Christ's body in the Eucharist, in the manner of the eating of
it, in the Communication of Christ's properties, and in many other heads of
Knowledge in Divinity; I would ask of him but this one thing (for here is no
place to dispute of these matters) whether he conceives these errors to be of
such moment, that they pluck up the erring Church from its foundation, so that
they suffer it not to have the same Lord, the same Faith, the same Baptism,
the same God and Father, of whom the Apostle speaks? If he dare not affirm
this, the Churches may object to those, who deny to entertain Brotherly
Communion with them, De Schismat. Donat: lib. 4. in initio.
that of Optatus Milevitanus, You will not keep and hold peace with us, that is
with your Brethren, whom one Mother Church bred in the same bowels of the
Sacraments, whom God the Father in the same manner received to be his adopted
sons. But if any shall still proceed to distract, and rend asunder those
Churches, which are conjoined in this personal foundation, we conceive those
words of Isayah fit to be objected against him, Destroy them not, for a
blessing is in them. Esaias. 65.8


We may draw a strong argument from the practice of the Apostles, or clasht
together whole Churches, which did stick to Christ the foundation of man's
salvation, taking advantage of the occasion or pretense of their errors
whatsoever. It is well known that there were diverse errors brought into the
Churches of Corinth and Galatia, it is well known that they were maintained of
great men and of great account; and yet Paul never went about to persuade the
purer and sounder Churches of the Ephesians, Philippians and Collossians, not
to retain Brotherly Communion with those Churches more impure. 1 Cor. 1.2.
Gal. 1.3. and 5, 11. and 6, 18.
Yea morover he acknowledges those Churches which are full of errors and
troubles for the Sanctified Churches of Christ, nor disdaineth he to grace and
honor those that erred and were deceived with the name of Brethren. Indeed it
is never lawful for us, to approve and allow those errors which are scattered
in other Churches, but it is ever lawful for us, to profess Brotherly
communion with the Congregations of particular Churches, whilst they profess
and retain saving union with Christ the Foundation of the Catholic Church.
Even as the good ought not otherwise to be separated from the evil in the
Catolique Church, Aug. de Fide, ad Pet. Diaco. cap. 43.
than by the difference of their works; So Churches which are sound in any
point, ought not to be separated from those which are erroneous save only by
their dis-agreeing from their errors. Tom. 4. de fide and open.
To desire by the gulf of wicked Schisms, to part the good from the bad, is
rather the rashness of men, which be mad, than the strictness of those, which
are diligent, says Augustine. Now we say, It savours more of rashness, than
care of the truth, by wicked Schisms, to desire to part the not erring
Churches, from those which be erroneous. Piety commands us to depart from those
heretics, who overturne the very Foundation, because this is necessary. But
Charity forbids us, by unjust dissentions to start asunder from those erring
Churches, who stick to the foundation, because this is Schismatic.

Betwixt particular Churches all those offices should be performed,
destruction, that those Churches which we confess remain conjoined to the
very foundation, we should disjoyne them for any errors they defend. For it
was never heard spoken, that one Church brought back another into the way of
truth, or joined it closer to Christ by raylings, revilings, cursings, and
renouncing of Brotherly Communion. The counsels must be more mild, and
plasters more lenitive, which must be applied to the healing of an erroneous,
and settling of a shaken Church. As for these intentions and decrees of
separation and breaking off Communion, they have not only hither to been vain
and useless, but also mischievous, and much more forcible to the disturbing,
than building up of the Churches. If therefore any Church be not as yet plucked
asunder from its Foundation, it belongs to the neighboring Churches to restore
such a one in the Spirit of meekness, Gal. 6.1.
and not with hostile cruclty to cut them off and cast them away.

They who are founded in the same Christ, in mutual Charity: but no Protestant
will deny, but that the Protestant Churches are founded in the same Christ our
Lord and Savior: It ought therefore to be well weighed and considered, whether
the office and nature of Charity it self, does not wholly detest this, to make
an endless Schism, and rent betwixt Churches, for some diversity of opinions.
It was Augustine's judgment, that Christian Charity could not be kept, Contr.
lit. Petiliani, li. 2. c. 77. and contra. Donat. 1.15. c. and ibid. cap. 12.
except in the unity of the Church, and that those who persist in discord
belong to the lot and portion of Ismael. For who will say that there is not
brotherly hatred in a Schism, when there is no other Original and obstinate
persisting in a Schism but brotherly hatred? Most sure it is that the proper
duties of Charity cannot appear, and show themselves in these differences of
the Protestant Churches. I appeal to the Apostle himself for my witness,
Romans 12.9, 10, 11, Ioh. 13.35 1 Ioh. 3.14. 1 Cor. 13.1, 2.
etc. 1 Cor. 13.5, 6, 7, etc. If we grant those Churches which we conceive
somewhat to err in the Faith, yet to be sanctified and preserved in Christ,
the foundation of the Church, our Faith though something the sounder, August.
de Bapt. contr. Denat. lib. 1 cap. 8.
if our Charity be wanting toward all the Saints: For, saving Faith cannot
be, unless conjoined with Charity or Brotherly love, as the Scriptures, every
where do witness. For what shall a man's sound Faith profit him, where the
soundness of his Charity is baned with the deadly wound of Schism.

CHAP. IX. That Brotherly Communion betwixt the Protestant Churches, is not to
be broken off, for their diverse opinions about questions in Controversy, is
proved by Arguments, drawn from the want of lawful power in Ministers to cause
such a breach or dissolution.
NONE can be ignorant, but that at the first, the very Doctors and Ministers of
the Churches were the chief, yea the sole Authors of this Separation, which
we so desire may be taken away. For it is not to be doubted, but they alone are
the hinderance, why the Reformed Churches, though by woeful experience, they
have found the numberless discommodities of this long lasting dissension, yet
they will not amongst themselves renew the Charter of their Brotherly
Communion. For if it seemed good to their Doctors, to give each to other the
right hands of brotherly fellowship, in this self same hour we should see the
Churches mutually embracing one another. Therefore let us see whether they have
done, or now do rightly, who either have persuaded, that the bands of
Brotherly Communion betwixt the Protestant Churches should be broken, or
earnestly maintain, that for the present they ought not to be renewed again.
We are of the contrary opinion, being induced thereunto by these Arguments.

It is not in the power of the Ministers of any particular Church, which it
has with the Catholic; therefore neither from that which it has with any
part of the Catholic Church, and by the same reason, not from the brotherly
Communion which it ought to have with it self, unless she will confess her
self to be no part of the Catholic Church. The truth of the Antecedent seems
therefore plain to me, because all just and lawful separation of every member
from its body Catholic, ought to lean, and rely on the authority of the
Catholic Church: for one member has not this judiciary power over another.
It is a known Rule of Lawyers, A sentence given by him that is not his Judge,
is void in Law: But particular Churches are not the Judges of private persons
living in foreign churches; how much less then over the Churches themselves?
If therefore any Church should pronounce another to be disjoynted from the
Communion with the Catholic, Her sentence were to be slighted, and
contemned, as of a Judge that presumed to make laws out of the bounds of his
own Jurisdiction. But perchance, they who easily grant the Antecedent of our
Argument, will yet doubt of the Consequent, and set down, that one part of the
Catholic Church may cast off another part thereof (that is, one particular
Church, may separate another particular Church) from Brotherly Communion with
her self, by the power of her own private sentence and authority. I deny, that
any particular Church, has any lawful power to dissolve Christian Brotherhood
with any other, except so far forth as the separation rely on the Authority
of the Catholic Church, which one claspes and contains within her embraces
the Churches of all Nations. Now this separation relyes on this authority, so
often as it is made for those points which are so established by the judgment
of the Catholic Church, that they are to be counted shut out from the
communion of faithful Christians, who are known to oppose or deny them.
Trusting on this authority, we justly deny brotherly Communion to those
Churches, which falsely, and equivocally are entitled with the name of Christ,
who with joy and jeering, hiss out the Divinity of Christ; Who carpe at the
mystery of the Trinity, which is to be adored, or with sacrilegious boldness
overthrow any foundation of the Christian Faith; For all these things have been
passed for things judged on, and that by the well known and famous authority of
the Apostolic and Catholic Church. But this separation is not made rightly,
nor according to the custom of the Catholic Church, as often as one
particular Church, shall deny Brotherly Communion to another, for dissenting
from them in questions newly risen, and never determined on one side or other,
by the authority of the Catholic Church, as points of the Catholic Faith. For
no Church can at its own pleasure break off the Band of Brotherly Communion,
by which all the members of the Catholic Church are coupled together, with any
particular Church, but that with the self same Deed, she divides her self
from the body of the Catholic Church, in which those members can have no
being, which have lost their due joynting and Union with their fellow members.
We will conclude this argument with the Testimony of Augustine, who every where
teaches, Tom. 3. de side ad Petr. Diac. cap. 43.
that this Separation of the good from the evil, being within the Catholic
Church is unlawful, and they which endeavor, to pluck other members from the
joynting of the body; do rather separate themselves from the Unity of Christ.
Tom. 4. de side and oper. cap. 4 and 5.
Lastly, it nothing hurts, or hinders those that are good, that they abide
still in Unity and participation of the Sacraments with those, whose Deeds they
disallow, Neither with those, whose opinions they cannot approve. For, if we
will believe the same Augustine, they cannot be excused of unlawful
presumption, who too much loving their own judgment, arrive at such an height
of boldness, as to cut off Communion with others. Tom. 7. de Bant. contra Don.
For they neither ought, nor can be cut off from communion with particular
Churches, which remain conjoined with the Catholic Church.

Particular Churches ought not in our age, which none ever durst to do in the
time of the Apostles; The Ministers of the Churches ought not to urge that,
which the Apostles themselves durst never persuade to be done: But that one
particular Church should renounce all Brotherly communion with another, is a
thing altogether unheard off, and wholly swerving from the prudence, and
practice of the Apostles. Amongst the seven Churches, to which S. John wrote;
Revel. 2.3.
It is plain there were some infected with errors: from which others were
free, Yet those Churches which were the purer, did entertain Christian and
brotherly Communion with those which were more impure; and the Apostle
persuaded each of them to amend their own faults and errors, but gave counsel
to none on the pretense of vices, and errors to start a sunder from other. For
as in the natural body, the parts which are well in health and strength,
endeavor to cure, not to cut off those that are sick and weak: so in the
Mystical body of the Catholic Church, if any be more pure, and sound than
others, they are bound (as much as lies in their power) to heal the vices, and
errors of others' and not to deny Brotherly Communion to whole Churches. Hither
it may be added, that this denying of Brotherly Communion, may seem to have the
kind, and force of an Excommunication; which censure is not to be drawn, and
used of the Ministers of the Church, for every fault, or for every Error, no
not upon a single person, subject to their Ministry; Decret. 6. de sent. Exc.
but much less on the whole body of a Church, which in no wise is subordinate
unto them. For as the Laws forbid to Excommunicate a Society, or Corporation,
because it may happen, that then those that are inocent may be entangled in
that censure: so right and religion forbids to exclude whole Churches from the
Communion of the faithful, because this cannot be done without an injury, and
contempt to many, that be innocent. If any should determine, that communion
should have been denied to the whole Church of Israel, because of their
worshipping of Baal, besides that be should exercise an act going beyond the
bounds of his Ministerial power, he should have offered an high wrong, and
injury to those seven thousand men, who never bowed knee to Baal. If any should
say, that this denying of Brotherly Communion, which we dissuade from, is not
the Excommunication of an whole commonalty, such as the Laws respect, and take
notice of; I confess there is some difference betwixt these two; yet I deny it
to be of so great moment, that it should make that lawful in the one case,
which is not lawful in the other. Indeed Excommunication, properly so called,
is the act of a lawful Judge, which passes and lays hold on those, which
are subject unto him, and binds them, though against their own wills: But this
renouncing of brotherly communion, whereof we speak, is an act of one judging
only of persons, not at all subject unto him, and declaring them unworthy of
all brotherly Communion, and therefore driving, and repelling them from the
same, although they desire it. By what name so ever any please to call, this
repulse of other Churches from brotherly communion, it does them a great wrong
and disgrace; for it adjudges them unworthy of the honor of Brotherhood, which
Christ our elder Brother, disdaines not to bestow upon them. Ministers
therefore of Churches ought not so much as to think, of shutting out whole
Churches from the communion with them, and theirs: It would be enough, to cast
off single persons, desiring fellowship with them, then at last, when it shall
appear, that they are stained with so heinous sins, or wrapped in so
mischievous errors, as that by good right, they may and ought to be driven and
banished from the communion with all the Faithful.

The Ministers of particular Churches, Saxony or Switzerland) ought not to
deal harder with there Christian Brethren of other Churches, in granting or
refusing communion with them, than they deal with their own. For the
Christian Brotherhood, which is betwixt the members of Christ, is not altered
according to the variety of Places or Nations. But we call not our own to a
strick account, what they conceive of the Articles in controversy, and to what
Doctors they stick therein, but esteem it sufficient, to the right of
communion, if together with us they hold and profess the Fundamental Doctines
of Christianity, comprised in the Catechism, and adhere unto Christ. We
should use the same moderation, and equal dealing toward foreign Churches,
especially to the very body of Churches, which for the most part, is made up of
simple and unskilful Christians, for whom it is not needful, that they should
have any intercourse with controversall D^vinity. Therefore those Protestant
Churches seem not to do well, which detest any fellowship, with others, and
profess an open division and Separation, for some difference in opinions,
about hard questions, of which they cannot know certainly, or inquire, what the
people in foreign Churches therein do hold and maintain. But this we may
know surely out of their Doctors writings, that those gross errors, wherewith
those, which are called Lutherans charge the Calvinists; and those, which are
called Calvinists, charge the Lutherans, are at this day defended, neither by
learned or unlearned, but rejected and damned of both. Therefore the cause of
this Separation, which some esteem necessary, hitherto appears neither
necessary, nor just enough.

The Doctors of any Church cannot bring in such a Separation, Christ, and
Christian brotherhood to the side of Luther or Calvin, as at this day the
Papists straiten the same to the part of the Pope of Rome. For Christ's
inheritance is limited with the same bounds, wherewith the Brotherhood of
Christians is limited, and is crowded into the same straits, whereinto we
thrust this brotherly fellowship. If therefore we acknowledge no
Ecclesiastical communion, and Christian brotherhood with those Churches, which
think otherwise than our selves, it is manifest, that we call home, and confine
the Church of Christ's, which consists of numberless Churches, only to our
own side. For if any Protestant Church profess it self, that it neither can,
nor will have brotherly Communion with the Church of Saxony, or Switzerland, by
reason of some diversity of opinion, I demand of them, with what Churches then,
can or will it hold communion. Not with the Roman, not with the Greek Church;
for it dissenteth from them in more controversies, and of greater moment; not
with any other in any place, for none can be instanced in, from which she has
not some matter of dissenting, for difference in Doctrine. Therefore at last,
the matter will come to this pass, that they which think themselves to have
no brotherly communion, save only with their partners in opinions, must say,
Christ's that Church has perished out of the whole world besides, and only
remains in those Churches which are of their own party. But this is the very
self same thing, which the Catholic Church ever disalowed in the Donatists,
and which Augustine, and Optatus Milevitanus do demonstrate to be repugnant
to most manifest places of Scripture. For the foresaid Augustine, thus urges
it. That Christ has lost his Inheritance, if the Christian Communion be tied
to one place or Country: Aug. Epist. 150, and 161. and Epist. 162, 163, 164.
and Tom. 7. de unitate, Ec. cap. 13. and 16.
and he says, it is an unwise part to go about to condemn the Communion of
the whole world. He shows moreover, That for the good of Unity, we must
bear with some things we approve not at all; and that the known bad,
prejudice not the Good in the Church, if either they want power to forbid, and
drive them from the Communion; or if some reason hinder, for the preserving of
Peace. In a word, he avoucheth, That the Donatists, who would acknowledge no
Brethren besides those on their own part, did erect an altar of sacrilegious
dissension, against the whole world. Thus far Augustine. Also Optatus fights
fiercely against this manner of restraining Brotherly Communion; He says, Lib.
1. in mitio.
That the Donatists were owned of the Orthodox for Brethren. He says that Lib.
2. prope ab initio.
They, by this their restrained Brotherhood, suffer not the Son of God to
possess the Inheritance promised unto him by his Father; but do place the
Church where they please, and where they please not, there again do banish it
out. He says, Lib. 3. init.
That the very name of Brotherhood, however odious to the Donatists, is
notwithstanding necessary for the Orthodox to use toward the Donatists
themselves. He says, Lib. 6.
That those follow Gods Will, and Commandments, who loving Peace, hold
Communion with the Church, in the whole world. Lastly he says, Lib. 7.
That this Separation of some Brethren from others, which the Donatists defend,
was displeasing to God. To finish our fourth Reason, although I persuade my
self, that there is none of the Protestant Churches, which abhor from
Brotherly Communion with others, with as high a strain of Pride, and
malignitie of mind, wherewith the Donatists detested communion with others,
yet I ingenuously profess, that I understand not how they can clear and wind
themselves off, who retain not Brotherly Communion with other Churches, but
endeavor to confine the Privileges of Christian Brotherhood only within the
bounds of their own Churches.

No particular Church, the vices of men living therein, though known,
dispersed, and reigning. Seeing we all know, Gluttony reigns in one place,
Drunkenness in another, Lust in a third; and these national vices, are no
less known to us, than their Opinions: If therefore for these heinous offenses
in life, which reign in many, we take not occasion to dissolve our tie of
brotherhood with whole Churches, neither ought we to do it, for the errors of
the Understanding, which are of less guilt in the sight of God, and often
stretch not to the whole Body of Christian people. 1 Cor. 5.11 2 These. 3.6.
If we will make use of the Apostle for our Counselor, we should depart
from the company of other Christians rather for their wickedness, than for
their ignorance, yet for neither injoyneth he Churches to separate from
Churches, but only private persons to withdraw from the company of private
persons. Yea, it is unlawful for the Heresy of few or many Doctors, ruling in
particular Churches, to cast off any whole Christian Church, and separate it
from Brotherly Communion with us. A man that is an Heretic, after the first
and second admonition, reject: Titus 3.10.
knowing that he that is such, is subverted, and sins, being condemned of
himself, says the Apostle. It is lawful to exclude a single man from the
communion of other Christians, for a damnable Heresy, See Aug. Epist. 162, and
tom. 6. de util. cred. cap. 1.
wherein he is condemned by his own judgment, or convicted of obstinacy: but
it is not lawful, for an error into which he is trained in, by the deceit and
subtlety of others, and which he defends not, with any wilful stomach, but
only being deceived with an imagination, and conceit of Truth and Piety. But
no Protestant Church can separate or banish any other whole Protestant Church
(for example, the English or French) from Brotherly Communion with it, either
for faults in life, or errrors in Doctrine. The reason is at hand; Because it
cannot be proved, that that whole Church has fallen into a damnable heresy;
because the obstinacy of a whole Church in an error whatsoever, can neither be
demonstrated to foreign churches, nor ought to be presumed of them; Lastly,
because we have no command from God, nor Admonition from the Apostles, to
break the bond of Brotherhood betwixt whole Churches. If any here should ask,
why the Doctors of the Churches, who never persuaded their People to disjoynt
themselves from the Brotherly Communion with other Churches, for the gross,
and enormous vices every where reigning amongst Christians, should so
vehemently persuade, that this must be done, because of the Errors they
conceive them to be fallen into; Let him receive this answer; That this
comes thence to pass, because we more affect the praise of knowledge, than
of holiness, and take it in worse part from them who oppose our Dictates,
which are doubtful, than from them that break and violate the plain and open
Commandments of God. If the matter were otherwise, we might easily perceive,
that it was no more lawful to break off Brotherhood, which is betwixt
particular Churches for their errors in Doctrine, than for the sins of Life,
which we behold generally and openly to reign amongst them.

CHAP. X. That Brotherly Communion is not to he broken betwixt the Protestants,
is shown by the nature, and quality of those points whereunto they contend.
THis, as it seems to me, must be premised in the first place, That the Bands
of Brotherly Communion ought not to be dissolved betwixt Christian Churches,
for all discords of Opinions; but only for the opposing or denying of
Fundamental doctrines. For it seems to be confessed amongst all Protestants,
that this separation is not to be made for every straw of Erroneous opinions.
For hence it is, that when they desire to maintain, that this Joynting of
Churches was concluded on good ground, together herewith they always commenced
this suite; That they have made a discession, or departed from some Foundation
of the Catholic Faith: For unless this appear to be done, not of this, or
that Doctor in the Church, but of the Church it self, as it is considered under
the respect of a Body compacted, or conjoined together, it ought not to avail
to the parting of one Protestant Church from another.

But in this place, it will not be unseasonable to advise in a few words, that
the actual exercise of outward Communion with some particular Church (conceive
the Roman) may be hindered and broken off, and yet by no default of ours; as
often as it shall demand and require that we should approve, or exercise any
Idolatrous Acts in the public service of God, or should command, or compel us
to acknowledge, or receive any doctrines repugnant to Scriptures, or Godly men's
consciences. Yet in the mean time, that Church which is counted no whit sound,
or Orthodox, is to be esteemed a visible Church of Christ, and to be ranked
amongst the particular Christian Churches. Yea, as much as lies in us, we are
to afford to the same all offices of brotherly Charity; although our Actual,
and outward Communion with the same, be neither suffered of them, nor may be
retained of us, because of the false doctrine, and superstitious worships
prevailing in the same.

Now out of those things which we before have disputed concerning the
difference of Fundamental points, from those which are not Fundamental, we
will endeavor to show, that those things are not Fundamental, about which
hitherto there has been such strife, with so great heat of men's minds,
betwixt Protestants.

Those points only are to be owned for Fundamental, or not at all believed,
no congregation of men can worship God so, as to obtain from him Pardon,
Grace, and Glory: But no point controverted is of this nature: Therefore not
Fundamental. None will call our Major Proposition into question, because it is
clear, that those who start asunder from the very foundations of saving Faith,
are not capable of those benefits which are promised to the Faithful alone. As
touching the Minor; If any dare affirm, that no hope of pardon, Grace, or
Glory does shine to them, who are otherwise minded, than the rest in these
controverted Doctrines, him I conceive to sin more against charity, than any of
the Protestant Churches sin against verity. Yea I dare add this, if any
converse, or persisteth in this error alone, he more shakes the foundation of
the Protestant Truth, than those, whom he rashly charge to have violated the
foundation, for other errors whatsoever, in controversall Divinity.

Those Points, to the whole world by the Apostles, as all those things were,
which were absolutely necessary to be known and believed to the salvation of
Christians, neither were they, for such recommended by the succeeding Churches
universally to Christian People, whatsoever therefore diverse Churches diversely
determined concerning the Truth of these opinion, yet ought they all to agree
in this, That they ought not to be reckoned, with the fundamental articles of
the Christian Faith. If any man can cast, and contrive any head of controverted
divinity betwixt Protestant Churches, into a short, and no whit doubted of
Proposition, and truly affirm thereof; This Proposition was maintained by the
Apostles, was received of the Universal Church amongst the Articles of
Catholic, and saving Faith, I yield up the bucklers, and grant the cause, I
will call it a Fundamental Doctrine, and I will pronounce those Churches,
which reject it to have fallen off from the Foundation, and I will adjudge them
unworthy of Brotherly communion with other Churches. But if no Protestant can
do this; none ought to call that a fundamental Doctrine, which himself
defends; or to challenge the Divines of other Churches, being of another
opinion, of overthrowing the Foundation, much less for this cause to deny the
Rites of brotherly communion to whole Churches.

The affirming of Fundamental Doctrines is so clearly set down in the holy
Scriptures, Augustine. De Agone Christi, 6.28
But it is plain to all, that in these Doctrines, whereabout Protestant
Churches dissent, that, at the least on the one side numberless Christians are
deceived, and they men godly, pious, and most desirous of the Truth, yea many
Divines of the first rank, being versed and exercised in reading, and
meditating of the Scriptures through the whole course of their life. Neither
let any here object against me, that the modern Anti-Trinitarians daily do
search the Scriptures, and yet nevertheless persist in the obstinate denial
of a Fundamental Article; for they are not only negligent in learning the
Catholic Faith, and drawing it out of holy Scriptures, but also they are
wilfully contemptuous in opposing the Catholic Faith, and furiously bold in
recalling the manifest Doctrine of the Scripture, to the account of their
doting and giddy Reasons, subject to an erroneous Vertigo; therefore to them
agrees, that of the Apostle, 2 These. 2.11
For this cause, God shall send them strong delusion, etc. But none can pass
the same sentence upon those Christians which adhere, either to the Saxon, or
Helvetian Churches: None therefore ought to set down, that those Doctrines are
Fundamental, or necessato be known to Salvation, in which it is probable, that
now this side, now that side is deceived, but impossible that both should be in
the right, as often as they contradict one another.

It is no Fundamental point which cannot otherwise be extracted or deduced
out of the Scriptures, than by the hard, and long paths of controversies,
always untraceable to simple Christians, sometimes scarce, sometimes not at
all evident, even to the learned themselves. Such are all those things which
are in controversy, betwixt Protestant Churches: whose connection with the
Foundations of the Catholic Faith, the Disputants on both sides, say they see
plainly necessary; but the Adversaries on both sides cry it down, that they see
no connection at all: but plain people ignorant of the art of Logic,
oftentimes give a blind assent to their Doctors, being themselves in the mean
time altogether uncertain of the strength of such consequences. Things that in
this manner, are by their Doctors extracted, and propounded to Christians, may
sometimes be true, but can never be fundame^tall, that is, absolutely necessary
for every Christian to be known and believed for the obtaining of eternal
life. For even as they may enjoy the light and benefit of the Sun, who cannot
perceive the Mathematical demonstrations of the bigness, and motions thereof,
so those may enjoy the light, and benefit of fundamental Doctrines, to
Salvation, who cannot behold the Theological inferences, and deductions drawn
out of them. Therefore they are not Fundamentalls, but things rightly deduced
in some men's Judgments, from the Fundamentalls, which are so much urged to be
believed from the Divines which strive amongst themselves.

It is not the part of wise Divines, of many, that what they themselves have
added to any Fundamental Axiom, as over weight, and what they believe to be a
consequence of the same, this they presently require of all, to be counted in
the number of Fundamentalls. If we grant to any particular Churches, or to
their Doctors, this power of creating and multiplying Fundamentalls; all hope
is past of the certainty of the Catholic Faith, all hope is gone of the
Brotherly communion of the Catholic Church. The mad error of the Church of
Rome may confirm the Truth of our opinion, who by stuffing a medley of
uncertain opinions into the Creed of Trent, by the same deed, did both shake
the immovable certainty of the Catholic Faith, and the Union of the Catholic
Chuch, so much desired of all; we ought not therefore to mingle controversies
lately born betwixt us, with the foundations of Catholic Faith, which are few,
and published by the preaching of the Apostles, through the Christian world,
and received by the joint consent of Christians.

In the last place, that these things whereabout we contend, Augustane
confession penned by Ph. Melancthon, and approved, and commended by Luther. It
is not likely, that the Authors of so solemn a confession, would have omitted
any Fundamental Doctrine of the Christian Faith without the knowledge and
belief, whereof, Salvation could not be attained by Christ Jesus. But in this
confession, none of those points do appear, about which so fierce a strife,
has been been maintained betwixt the Helvetian and Saxon Churches. In the
third Articles of the Union of the two Natures in Christ: in the tenth Article
of the presence of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Lords Supper, they have
established nothing, which is not approved by the consent of all the
Protestants. And if we should run over the rest of the Articles, we shall find
very few things, after the last correction, of which there is any dissenting
betwixt the Protestant Churches, nothing of so great moment that it should
bring in a Schism into the Church; But grant some things to be in this
confession to which other Churches cannot afford their consent; it suffices to
the retaining of Peace, that they consent in all things necessary to be known
for the Salvation of Christians. For the confessions of particular Churches are
not streitned to fundamentals alone, but sometimes are extended to the
declaring of their judgment of all heads of Divinity, as they conceive it
expedient for the Aedification of their people, in Truth, and Piety. Therefore
their error is not to be born with; who, what ever they find in their
confessions, will have it counted so fundamental, that they fear not to rank
those foreign Churches, which in all, and every thing, will not admit the same
to be the Rule of saving Faith, among damned Heretics, overthrowers of the
Foundation; in a word, amongst wicked men, estranged from the holy brotherhood
of good Christians. Nothing could be done or thought of more injurious. For if
we weigh the confessions, or disputes of all Reformed Churches, and place on
one side those things, wherein they exactly agree, and set on the other side,
those things which are in controversy; we shall perceive that the former, out
of the very Nature and Quality of the points themselves belong to the
foundations of Faith, and Piety; the later, either to the no wise necessary
speculations of subtle brains, or (if they have any soliditie in them) to the
true inferences of the more skillful Divines, out of well grounded
Propositions: But those things, which in this manner are built upon the
foundation, are not to be made equal with the fundamentalls themselves; nor
are they to be accounted to err in fundamentalls, which swarve somewhat
herein, from the right line of Truth.

CHAP. XI. That there is no Controversy betwixt Protestants about
Fundamentalls, is shown by instancing in three particular questions, which are
conceived before all other of greatest moment to the disjoynting of Churches.
BEFORE we enter into this dispute, we must premise this firm, and
unmovable rule; That Christian Churches are not to be disjoynted, which agree
in all things necessary to be known, or done to the Salvation of Christian men.
For no Authority lies in one particular Church, to make enquiry into others, or
office to compel other particular Churches, to the rule of their own
confessions; or power to dissolve the bands of brotherly Unity, betwixt their
own and other Churches whatsoever, which consent in the same common Faith,
that is, in fundamentalls, and the saving Articles of the Christian Religion.
Let us see therefore, whether the Protestants agree so far forth, and let us
take example only from those three controversies; Of the Presence of the Body
and blood of Christ in the Eucharist; Of the Communication of Properties in the
person of Christ, God and man; Of Divine election, and preterition, according
to the good pleasure of the Divine will. For if in these questions, by occasion
whereof, mighty surges and billows of contention have been blown up betwixt the
Saxon and Helvetian Churches, so much be confessed on both sides, as is
necessary to know to Salvation; All the rest may be left indifferent in the
middle, or to be disputed of betwixt learned men, with peaceable minds, the
brotherly Communion between Churches being no whit broken or torn a pieces.

We will begin from that, which gave beginning to all the rest, namely from
the Presence of the Body of Christ in the Lords Supper, and the eating of the
same.

First of all, nothing can be conceived fundamental, which is not by joint
consent, admitted by, or received on both sides. This is Fundamental, That the
Body and Blood of Christ, are so truly present, in the Administration of the
Sacrament, that Communicants may partake of them so, as to draw life from
thence, and they may justly be condemned, who so receive Bread and Wine, as
that withal they receive not the Flesh and Blood of Christ to the Salvation of
their Souls. Hospin ad annum 1544. p. 191
Of this there is no dissension. For Bucer grants, That the Body of the Lord in
the Eucharist is truly present, and partaken off. An annum 1540. p. 178
Calvin says, We all confess with one mouth, that we when we receive the
Sacrament by Faith, according to the Lords institution, In Cons. Mompelg. p. 66.
are made truly partakers of the Substance of the Body of Christ; Beza says,
we deny not the Body of Christ to be truly present, to be truly given, and
received. I pass by the rest, because no Protestant Church can be named, which
professes not with the Eucharist, the true Presence of the Body and Blood of
Christ, although it acknowledges the very manner of the Presence to be
Supernatural, and plainly divine; And sets down, that the same does consist
not in any Physical touch or contact, but in a lively influence, and mystical
Union, and that most real and near. It is a Fundamental point, That the Bread
and Wine were the means ordained by Christ, by which those which duly eat this
bread being consecrated, and drink this wine, eat the lively Flesh of Christ,
and drink his saving blood to the Salvation of their souls. The agreement of
all Protestants in this point, is so well known, we need not take pains to
prove it; It is a Fundamental, That Bread and Wine are present in the Supper,
and are eaten, and drunk in a local, natural, sensible manner; but that
Christ's Flesh and Blood are present, and partaken of in a Divine admirable
manner, and not to be searched out. So James Andrews, Col. Momp. p. 17. 18.
Concerning the manner, we can only say this; That it is Supernatural, and
imcomprehensible to humane reason; and therefore there is no disputing thereof.
A little after; Page 25. in not is marg.
The manner is heavenly, supernatural, insomuch as it is wholly spiritual.
And as the Church is a mystical body with Christ, so also this receiving is
done in a Mystery: In the Conference lately had at Lipsigh, the Saxons did
grant, That the manner of the receiving, which they defended to be done by
virtue of the Elements, was notwithstanding heavenly, supernatural, and known
to God alone. None is ignorant, that Calvin, Bucer, and all the rest were in
the same opinion, Col. Mompelg. p. 66.
Beza says expressly, The manner of the Receiving, is a Mystery to be believed,
which exceeds the capacity of man's wit, and understanding. Hitherto the
Doctors and Churches well agree amongst themselves.

Secondly, nothing can be conceived contrary to the Fundamental doctrine of
this Sacrament, which is not rejected, and damned of all Protestant Churches:
they are point blanck against all erroenous doctrines of the bare
representation of the Body and Blood of Christ, parted from the true and real
exhibiting of him, of the prodigious Transubstantiation of the bread and wine
into the body and blood of Christ, the Accidents only remaining safe without a
Subject; Of the Local and natural presence of the Body and Blood of Christ in
the Lords Supper; Of the Local Consubstantiation, Coexistency, or Inexistency
of the Body and blood of Christ, with the earthly Elements, or in the same.
These, and if there be any other, which oppose, or fight against the very
nature of a Sacrament, and the truth of the Body of Christ, are condemned by
the common assent, not only of the Helvetian, but Lutheran Churches. Col.
Mompel. p. 16.
Let James Andrews speak for all the rest; We do not determine a Physical
or Local presence of the Body and blood of Christ, in the holy Supper. These
words Substantially, page 183.
Corporally, Really, Orally, signify nothing else to us, but the true
presence, and eating of the Body and Blood of Christ. We reject all Physical
Consubstantiation, whether it be visible, or invisible, and only teach such a
Conjunction as is Sacramental. The same was the opinion of the Saxons in the
conference at Lipsigh, to which these of Brandenburg and Hessland did subscribe.

Thirdly, nothing remains undecided in this Controversy, which can be called
a Fundamental point, or for which the Brotherly Communion of Churches cannot
be established. For that word Orally, which is used of the Saxons, and is
disallowed of other Churches, is so used of these, that they bring in no
Fundamental error, and is so rejected of those, that they overthrow no
fundamental Doctrine. For they that defend the Orall eating, as well of the
Body of Christ, as of the bread, notwithstanding deny such a Presence of the
Body of Christ, as is Local to men's mouths, without which an Orall eating
cannot properly be performed. For that body cannot be eaten with the mouth,
betwixt which and men's mouths there is granted a great distance of place; That
cannot be eaten with the mouth of the Body, which is so present to the place of
the mouth, that it is not locally present to the mouth. When therefore they
allow of such a distance, and give such a Location to the Body of Christ, it is
plain, that they pass and transfer the Orall eating, which is truly, and
properly affirmed of the bread alone, by a new, and figurative manner of
speech, to the Flesh of Christ locally remaining in the Heavens, and not
locally present to the mouths of men. Moreover, when they remove from this
Orall eating, all champing and chewing of the body of Christ, the letting down
of the thing chewed into the stomach, the increasing and nourishing of the body
of man by this flesh thus chewed, it is evident, however they think fit to
retain this form of speech, yet they mean nothing by this Orall eating, that
is joined with the Capernaites, rending of the Flesh of Christ with their
teeth, or agreeable with the signification of the words, as they sound to men's
ears in the Latin. They only seem to desire to affirm this; That this Orall
eating, which truly, properly, usually, and immediately, is affirmed of the
eating of the Bread, may, by the force of the consecrated bread coming
between, by a new, unusual, mystical, and plainly heavenly signification of
Orall eating, be fitted, and applied to the Flesh of Christ. Now as touching
those who on the other side contend, That the eating of the Flesh of Christ, is
not to be called an Orall eating, but rather a Mental, Spiritual, or
Personal; because the Person eating the bread with his mouth, with his mind
together eats the true and lively flesh of Christ: Yet they deny not, but
that the visible bread is the Instrument, or means appointed by Christ, which
the person uses to the cating of the Invisible bread; but they think, that
the eating of that thing is properly called Orall, which may be done by the
Teeth, and instruments in the mouth: but that the eating of that thing cannot
be called Orall, which is neither locally present to the mouth neither, if it
were present, could it be subject to any Act of man's mouth, because of the
Glorious, and impassible nature which it has. Betwixt these Opinions, I see
some contrariety about the propriety of words, and phrase of speech, but of the
maine, and of the Truth of the Catholic Faith, either none at all, or at
least so little, that notwithstanding, there may be place for the establishing
of Brotherly Communion betwixt the Churches. This of the first Controversy; we
pass to the Second.

Of the Person of Christ, and Communication of his Properties.
IT is easy to show out of their Writings, who have handled this Controversy,
that there is a full Consent betwixt Reformed Churches, concerning
Fundamentalls, and that the whole Bickering is either about certain manners of
speech, which are not founded in the Scriptures themselves, or about
consequences, which some affirm, others deny, that they can be rightly
inferred out of the Scriptures; mean time the Fundamentalls, being safe on
both sides, although all error be not excluded about things not Fundamental.
The truth of this Assertion will appear:

First, if with a sincere and prudent Judgment we ponder all those things, in
which those who wrangle about other matters, yet acknowledge there is one
Consent and Harmony of all Protestant Churches. Page 18.
James Andrews reckons up seven Propositions, of all which he confesses there
is no Controversy betwixt the Churches. Page 20.
Also Beza recites certain heads of doctrine, of the Person of Christ, and
Communication of his Properties, in all which, it is evident, That all
Protestant Divines do Consent. Not many years since the Conference at
Lipsigh, Page 5.6.
certain famous Divines summed all these Points up to twelve Articles, in
which there is unanimous consent of the Communication of the Person of Christ,
and his Properties. In these things wherein we have the opinions of all
Protestant Churches so well agreeing, I dare not say, that nothing is wanting
which belongs to knowledge in divinity, yet I confidently affirm, That there
is nothing deficient which pertaines to the Catholic Faith, nothing which is
necessary to be known, and believed to the Salvation of a Christian man;
Lastly, nothing which argues either these, or those to have started asunder
from the Foundation, or that they ought to start from mutual Communion. If
therefore in this Controversy of the Person of Christ, and Properties of his
Natures, there remain some knotty things, which are more smoothly to be
explained; Let Divines afford their helping hand to this matter, and not for
this thing rend their Churches in pieces; Let them kindly bring back their
wandering Brethren into the way, let them not furiously break asunder the bands
of Brotherly Unity: Let them build upon the fundamental Doctrines their own
Gold, Silver, or Precious stones, and let them throw down the hay, and stubble
built up by others; Let them not thrust down others from the Foundation, nor
disjoynt themselves from those whom they themselves see stick fast to the
Foundation, and Fundamental Articles.

Secondly, what has been said of the joint Consent in Fundamentalls, may be
plainly seen, if we weigh all those Heresies that ever opposed the
Fundamental Articles of the Person of Christ, and overturned the Foundation of
man's salvation. For they who damn, and curse all these, cannot be accused of
violating the Foundation, except by Slander, cannot be condemned but by high
injustice. But now it is well known, that no Heresy can be reckoned up,
whether ancient or modern, against which all the Protestant Churches are not
most ready to bring their voice to condemn them.

In the Conference at Lipsigh (whereof we have often made mention for the hope
it gave to us of renewing of unity) all the speakers with joint consent, Page
10.
and from their whole heart did damn and reject all errors of ancient and
later Arians, Nestorians, Eutichians, Monothelites, Marcionites, Photinians,
and by what other names soever they be called: On the other side, with mouth
and heart they gave their consent to the Apostolical, Nicene, and Athanasian
Creed. He that in this manner approves all Points received and allowed of the
Ancient Church, concerning the Person of Christ, and properties of both his
Natures, rejects all things condemned of the same, may perchance in manner of
speech retain a form of words not very sound, or in some consequences, may
make a small swerving from the Truth, but cannot make a departure from the
foundation, or fundamental Doctrine of the Catholic Church; seeing Melanct.
said rightly, Apud. Lutherum, Tom. 1o. in disp. p. 441. B.
That opinions unknown to the ancient church, although at this time they be
generaly received yet are no Doctrines of the Catholic Church: much less such
Fundamental doctrines, as are of force before God to break the Peace and Unity
of Churches.

Thirdly, in this matter of the Person of Christ, and communication of his
Properties, that those things are not fundamental, which as yet hang undecided
may appear, from the very terms and words, which Divines are constrained to use
to express their opinion. For in fundamentalls, we hear Plain and clear
propositions: such as these are.

In Christ God and Man, the humane and divine nature, are most nearly coupled
together: each nature in Christ has, and retains its own proprieties.

The proprieties of one nature, can never be made the proprieties of another
nature. In the person of Christ, there is a Communication of Properties, by
which that is attributed, and ascribed to the whole Person, which is proper to
one of his natures? As when we say, God was crucified for us, or, the Man
Christ is Omnipotent.

In this Communication, the divine nature neither powers forth the properties
of its Divinity, nor infuseth them into the humane nature.

These and all other things, which are clearly spoken of the Person of Christ,
and Communication of his Properties are contradicted by none. But those things
which are conceived, and infolded in strange, foreign, and doubtful terms,
beget strifes upon strifes, and questions upon questions. Such are those
Problems, Whether the proprieties of the Natures, in the Person of Christ be
communicated only verbally, or really; Whether they be communicated in the
abstract, or the concrete, and others of the same stamp: which, by the very
sound of the words, do appear to have sprung out of the School of
Grammarians and Logicians, not of the Apostles, and ancient Fathers, and
therefore not to be recounted in the number of fundamentalls.

But let us add some few things of the questions themselves. That some affirm
that this question is propounded, Whethere there be such an Union of natures in
the person of Christ, in which neither nature communicates any thing to the
other, besides the bare name; they seem to me to feign a question which never
was betwixt the protestant Churches. For with one voice they confess; That
such is the Union of the natures in the Person of Christ, in which many things
are communicated to the humane Nature, yea all things, although excellent
gifts, whereof a created nature can be a subject capable to receive them. And
even as no Protestant, corrupts this Proposition, The Man Christ is God, with
this wicked Interpretation, The Man Christ has the bare, and empty title of
God. So neither do any deprave this proposition, The Man Christ is omnipotent,
with this perverse exposition, The Man Christ is in word only or title
Omnipotent: but acknowledges the matter it self, which is signified in this
Praedicate, truly, and really to agree to the Man Christ, because it truly
agrees to his person, which the term Man does design and denote. They which
on the other side defend, that it is not only truly said, of the Man Christ,
that he is Omnipotent, Omniscient, etc. but also that of the humane nature of
Christ, that the same is Omnipotent, Omniscient, etc. yet do so temper, and
explain this their opinion, that they deny these divine properties to be
powered into the humane nature, or ever become properties fixed, and settled in
the humane nature; and determine them only by the personal Union, and
exaltation that followed upon it, to be attributed to him in his Person, and
not severally. If there be any difference, betwixt these Opinion, it is so
subtle, so far removed from the capacity, and common understanding of
Christian people, that it cannot be in the number of fundamental Doctrines,
except we will feign a new kind of fundamentalls, hitherto unknown, and
unheard of to the Catholic Church, and people of God.

As concerning other questions, which those four words, have bred unto us,
Verbally, Really, in the Concrete, in the Abstract, we may freely say, such
terms of Art ought not to enter into the articles of the Christian Faith; from
the knowledge whereof depends, the life and Salvation, not only of learned men,
and Logicians, but of the unlearned, and of all common Christians: Moreover, it
is little suitable, that we should seek fundamental Doctrines in Propositions,
as long, as it is not agreed on, of the sense and signification of the terms,
which are used in the framing of them. But what comes to be understood, Colloq.
Mompel. page 222. etc. and 22^.
under the name of Concrete, what under the name of Abstract, could not be
consented on, betwixt James Andrews, and Theodore Beza, neither as yet do the
Divines of both sides well agree in the signification of these words, when they
are referred to Christ. Therefore it is enough for the retaining of Unity
betwixt Churches, that all acknowledge the Communication of Properties, not to
be verbal, but real, so far forth as that the same and one only Person to
whom it is attributed, is truly and really God, is also truly and really man,
and therefore things may really be predicated of God which belong to Man, and
of the Man Christ, which belong to God.

But if we should change the name of God, into Godhead; or Man, into Manhood;
all also will acknowledge, that the Propositions are not to be received with
the same certainty; None will doubt of this Proposition.

God was Crucified for our sins:

But if it be thus altered.

The Godhead or Divine Nature was Crucified for our sins,

It will afford occasion, not only of doubting, but of being deceived. So this
Proposition is placed, without the reach of all question.

The Man Christ is omnipotent, omnipresent, etc.

But if the word Man, be changed into the word Manhood, as to say,

The Manhood or humane nature of Christ is omnipotent, omnipresent, etc. it
will not appear so plainly, to the Orthodox in their Judgment. Tom. 2. vide
Epist. 102. and Tom. 6. contra Ser. Arian. tom. 7. De Pecc. mer. lib. 1. c. 31,
and tom. 10. S.N. 14. de verbis Dom. Hist. Sacra. vart. 2. page 15, 16, 17. 18.


Augustine shows us the light, to frame and understand such Propositions,
made of Christ, God, and Man, almost in every book. Let the places noted on the
margin be consulted with. Also Luther himself in Hospinian, has many things
most worthy to be considered, of the Person of Christ, and communication of
his Attributes, and most to the purpose, for the true understanding of this
question: I will add this one thing, that those two Propositions, The Man
Christ is God,
The God Christ is Man.
Which are the foundation of all the rest, in which this communication of
Attributes (whereof the strife is) is made, are above and against all rules of
Logicians and Philosophers. In vain therefore do we lean to the
consequencies of Logic, when we endeavor, to annex other new fundamentalls
unto them: we do it in tearing and rending the unity of the Churches, when
they cannot see alike the force of such consequencies. For those which
acknowledge and embrace the truth of all fundamentals, in this question about
the Person of Christ, are not to be cast off from other Churches, for every
error in the manner of speech, or ignorance in the manner of inferring or
deducing of consequencies. Now in the last place, let us briefly see what is
to be determined in that controversy, which is about divine Predestination.

Of Divine Predestination.
AS concerning this controversy, many things in the very heat of disputation,
have fallen from some private Doctors of great account, which seem not to agree
square to the exact rule of Truth. But these things ought not to be urged, to
the breaking asunder of the Unity, and Communion of the Churches, if once it
appear to all Protestant Churches, that, that is confessed, whatsoever in this
matter is necessary to be believed unto Salvation, and that all errors are
rejected of all, which cross and oppose Man's Salvation to be obtained by
Christ. Look into all the Confessions of the Reformed Churches, you shall find
nothing left out of them, which may be called fundamental; nothing put into
them, which overthrows any fundamental Article. All do consent, that none
is elected or Predestined from Eternity to Salvation, except out of the mere,
and most free mercy and grace of God; that none in time is brought to Salvation
or Eternal Life, except by the way of Faith, Repentance, and new Obedience.
Also all grant, that God from Eternity, did as well decree to give to the
Elect, as he did foresee all those saving goods should be given them, by help
whereof they are brought to Eternal Life; That he did also decree, so to give
to them, and did foresee that this saving grace should so be given, that they
cannot boast of any cause, or occasion found, or foreseen in themselves of this
Gods bounty unto them. Lastly, they grant that all the certainty which single
persons have, or ought to have to eternal Life, ought not to be sought a
Priori, beginning at the Top in the Decree, or Prescience of God; but a
posteriori, beginning at the bottom, in the fruits of Faith and Holiness. And
moreover, they conclude this, That the Elect themselves cannot be sustained or
refreshed with the comfort of their election or salvation, when, and as long as
they wander out of the way of Salvation, because the holy Spirit will not bear
witness to their hearts, Romans 8.14, 15, 16.
that they are the sons and heirs of God, but when they are led by the
Spirit of God. But men cannot have a sure and firm comfort of their Election
and Adoption, except the Spirit witness this unto their spirits.

Now as touching, that Passing men by, or not Electing them, which is commonly
called Reprobation; I see nothing Fundamental whereof there is any dissension
betwixt the Reformed Churches. If as yet all things be not well agreed on
betwixt particular Doctors, Let them so employ their Arms, and use their
strength, that they pluck not asunder the Churches themselves with a dangerous
Schism. The Authors of our English Confession, in the XVII. Article, where
Predestination is handled, would not so much as in a word touch upon the other
Question of Reprobation, both because of the useless speculations which men's
curiosity would extract thence, as also because out of the Doctrine of
Predestination well grounded, so much may easily be gathered as is necessary or
profitable to know or hold of Reprobation. But neither for this thing is there
cause to dissolve the Brotherly Union betwixt Protestants. All grant and agree,
that these Propositions are most true.

That the Act of Reprobation in God, as that of Election, is from Eternity.

That none is Reprobated from Eternity, which might not be Reprobated without
all Cruelty or Injustice.

That no one was fore-damned of God from Eternity, whom he from Eternity did
not foresee wrapped up in the guilt of damnation.

That no one shall in time be damned, but through the most just merit of his
own corruption and impiety.

That the Original, and cause of all Evils, which drownes Reprobates in
perdition, is not found in God Reprobating, but in the Reprobates themselves.

That this Eternal Reprobation cannot appear to any particular Person,
unless out of the fruits most worthy of damnation, which he brings forth, and
loves to bring forth to the end of his life.

That there is no single Person, which may not attain Eternal Life, by
Repenting, Believing, and Persevering, according to the Tenor of the Covenant
of the Gospel.

That there is no such Decree of God, by which Reprobates should be forced, and
necessitated to sin and perish; But always they perish by their own
voluntary unbelief, and impiety, free, and not constrained.

It appeared lately in the Conference of Lipsigh, that there is an agreement in
all these Points. If there be any other things remaining, they are rather
Controversies about words, than about matter; rather discords about subtle
Speculations, than fundamental Articles. Such are those which are disputed
betwixt Schoolmen, of the Signification of the very words, namely
Predestination and Reprobation; of the Imaginary order of Priority, and
Posteriority betwixt the Eternal Acts of Predestinating, and Fore-knowing of
the unsearchable manner of Divine working about all humane Actions, whether
good or bad, of the necessity, or Contingency of all things, which from
Eternity were predestined, or fore-knowne of God. In such perplexed
Controversies, it cannot be, but contradictions must arise oftentimes betwixt
Disputants: Yet brotherly Concord, may be made up, and maintained betwixt the
Churches themselves, as anciently it was preserved betwixt the African and
Latin Churches, Their Doctors in the mean time being of different opinions in
the weighty Question of Baptizing of Heretics. Vid. Cypr. Epist. ad
Jubaiannum. Et in sent. Episc. de de Heret. Bapt.
To close up all in a word; Those Churches (falsely so called) may be forsaken,
which possess not the Foundation of the Apostles preaching: But true Churches
ought not to be deserted and plucked asunder from others, for the Errors of
particular Doctors, because the Faith of Churches leanes not upon the names or
writings of single Persons.

CHAP. XII. Some Objections, wherewith some Learned Divines have been moved to
break off the Communion betwixt Protestant Churches, are answered.
TRuly it is to be bemoaned, That some so far abhor from the Brotherly
Communion of Protestants betwixt themselves, that they charge this very thing
as a fault upon peaceable Divines, that they will not suffer, that these
Controversies which are handled betwixt Learned men, ought to break off the
Bands of holy Brotherhood betwixt the Churches themselves. But let us weigh
what Reasons they chiefly rely on, who contend, that this disjoynting of
Churches is absolutely necessary.

No Communion is to be retained with those Churches which embrace, and with
obstinacy defend corruptions of Doctrine, intrenching on the Glory, and
repugnant to the Word of God; but the Lutherans think that this is done in
many points by the Calvinists; and on the other side, the Calvinists complain,
that the same is done by the Lutherans: Therefore it is not lawful for these
Churches which are ill distinguished by the names of Luther and Calvin, to
retain Brotherly Communion amongst themselves. The major Proposition they
conceive well founded in that most true Maxim, That all things which we do,
are to be referred to the Glory of God. 1 Cor. 10.31.
The minor, they account themselves to have proved, by running over all these
heads of Doctrine whereabout they contend; for the Divines on both sides do
presume, that their Opinions do ever make to the illustration of Gods Glory,
and that the contrary always obscures it.

None deny, that always of it self it is of force to impair the Glory of
God in some part. But that to me seems weak and unfound, which both sides
presume upon, as on a thing to be granted, and not at all to be denied, Namely,
that it tends to the Glory of God, for us to renounce Brotherly communion
with those Churches, wherein Doctrines are defended in some manner, and degree
crossing the glory of God. Those things which so shake the Glory of God, that
they suffer not at all those which are erroneous in them, to have saving
Communion with God, and Christ, neither do they suffer Orthodox Christians to
retain Brotherly Communion with them. But those things which in some measure
are repugnant to the truth of the Scriptures, and glory of God, but yet do not
destroy the said Communion, can in no wise afford to any particular Church just
cause of departing and dividing it self from another: for this is the very
self same fault, which the Ancients endeavored to render odious to all, under
the infamous name of Schism. But that also may be added, that the Churches
which are in the right, do well enough discharge their duties, when they
provide and take care, that their own People be not entangled in the errors of
others, when they endeavor with all gentleness to reduce the wandering Churches
into the way of Truth. But when they depart from the Communion, and Brotherly
Unity of the Church, from which Christ hitherto has not departed, they defend
not, but grievously wound the glory of God and Christ, by this their
separation. Lastly, when the far greater part of particular Churches, consists
not of learned Doctors, but of simple people, it cannot truly be affirmed, that
they understand the Errors propagated by the learned, much less that they
stick to them, least of all that they stick to them with obstinacy and
wilfulness. Therefore under pretense of these, the bands of Christian
Brotherhood are not to be broken betwixt whole Churches. For Jerusalem is built
as a city which is at unity in it self, and which will take it in very ill part,
that her parts are plucked, and broken asunder on any color whatsoever. We
ascribe it therefore to be an act of Piety, that they are fearful to sin
against the Glory of God; but we account it to be from want of wisdom, that
they esteem the division of the Protestant Churches, as either a necessary, or
fit, or lawful means to the advancing of the Glory of God.

Those Churches cannot entertain Brotherly Communion betwixt themselves, Coll.
Mempelg. p. 567.
whose Doctors do mutually arraigne one another, as guilty of horrible errors
and the worst Heresies. But the Doctors of the Protestant Churches have done,
and yet do this in their writings. Therefore the brotherly communion betwixt
the Churches can neither be retained nor renewed.

Whatsoever by angry adversaries, to mollify the harsh speeches of our own
Divines, with a fovourable interpretation, ought not any more to wrest the
crooked opinions of our Adversaries, and to make foul and horrible Heresies,
out of their errors whatsoever. Hitherto it may be added (which all men
skilled in controversies, know to be most true) that those foul Heresies,
which the Protestants charge one another with, for the most part are not
expressly found in the writings of the Doctors themselves, nor are affirmed of
them in very words, but are forcibly racked, out of other words of theirs, by,
I know not what, small threads of consequencies, whilst they themselves
disclaim them, and curse such Heresies from their whole heart. But good men
ought to deal fairly, and not to fasten Heretical sense on other men's words,
when the Writers themselves, which are the best expounders of their own words,
can, and use to reduce them to a Catholic sense. Moreover let it be taken for
granted (which indeed is not to be granted) that these Doctors were convicted
of those horrible errors, whereof they use to be accused; namely, That they
make God the author of sin: That they make numberless men to be created to
destruction, and damnation: That they make Christ's Body and Blood absent in the
Lords Supper, and that others also are justly condemned, for bringing in a
double Omnipotency into the Church, one created, and another increated, of the
Capernaits rending, and mangling of the flesh of Christ, of Christ's flesh
immense and infinite; yet for these errors of the Doctors, were it lawful for
no man to break off that Brotherly communion, which Christ Jesus our elder
Brother will have preserved safe and sound, betwixt all parts of his Catholic
Church; which thing, we so much the more confidently affirm; because
(whatsoever may be determined concerning the private Doctors) most sure it is,
that all the foresaid errors, and others of the same kind, were ever by the
joint consent of all learned, and unlearned, blackd, and branded with the note
of Heretical wickedness in all Protestant Churches. Wherefore, what was
anciently said of Augustine to the Donatists, which ill hated the brotherly
Unity of Churches, Epist. 50.
If Caecilian has sinned, Christ has not therefore lost his inheritance, that
being a little altered, may be used of us; If Luther did err, If Calvin did
slip into an error, Christ therefore has not lost his Unity; nor ought those
Christian Chruches, wherein Luther, or Calvin discharged the function of a
Doctor, to lose their Brotherly Communion. Lastly, whereas all particular
Churches are gathered together out of men subject to error, it is more than
probable, that there is no Church to be found on the Earth, in which either
those that teach others, or are taught by others are free from all error. If
therefore any Protestant Church has determined to have no brotherly communion
with any, in which their famous Doctors have grievously erred, it may safely
communicate which none under heaven, yea not it self, with it self. Therefore
for the Errors of the Doctors, the Separations of the Churches are not to be
made or allowed.

They that sit in the Chair either Doctorall or pastoral,

I answer; condemned in their writings. Let any that can produce any of those
foul Heresies, which he exclaimes to be publicly defended by Luther, or
Calvin; by those they call Lutherans, or Calvinists, one may easily show that
they have been rejected and condemned of the same. John Gerard, a most learned
man, and most famous in the Church of God, has vindicated Luther from such
accusations; Calvin whilst he lived, cleared himself, and since his death,
many of ours have cleared him. Therefore the very foundation of this argument
shakes: as for those things which are built upon it, they likewise do totter
every one of them. For, whosoever sits in the Doctorall Chair, is not
therefore to be presumed to teach nothing besides the doctrine stamped with the
Church mark, and as it were confirmed under their authentical seal: Neither if
more writers should consent in the same error, is the consent of the whole
Church presently involved. For by sending forth their books abroad into the
world, they make them to be of common Right, that any may buy them, but not of
public authority; All may read them, but all ought not to approve, and believe
every thing in them. That the matter is thus, it is plain from hence; Because,
the writings of particular Doctors which have lived in the same Church, have
not the same agreement which is pretended, chiefly in these questions, which
are in the controversy: and if one Doctor let fall that, which may bend toward
so me pernicious Heresy, it may easily be shown, that the same was reproved
and amended by some other.

Therefore with no color of reason, are whole Churches convicted guilty of
Heresy, and to be cut off from the Brotherly communion with others, for the
errors of their private Doctors, whether falsely or truly objected against
them; because the common consent of the whole Church does not in the same
appear.

Those who would not have the Churches themselves, they seem to be of this
opinion, that every one may be saved in his own Religion, and that a
promiscuous multitude of erroneous people may be received into the same Church
Militant, and Triumphant: but this must not be granted.

If we will speak with the Scriptures, that the Faith of Christians be saving
to those that believe, and that the worship which they yield unto God, be
grateful and accepted of him in Christ. But they who think that the perfect
consenting of Churches, is necessary to their meeting together in the Communion
of one Church Militant and Triumphant, can scarce free, and disengage
themselves from their error, who conceived the Catholic Church to reside in
one determinate party. They therefore, who in things either to be done or be
believed, defend such points, with which the saving of Souls, and Spiritual
worship of God cannot consist, they are truly said, to have made a defection
from that which is the alone saving Religion: but they who retaining all
fundamentals of faith and Gods worship, differ from others, and err in some
consequences, or Doctrines of less moment, profess no new or other Religion,
but are convicted not as yet to have attained, in that one only Religion, to
perfect knowledge. For such imperfection of knowledge, God excludes none from
the Church Militant, neither ought we to do it.

We ought not to retain brotherly Communion with those, Lutherans in taking
the Lords Supper to communicate with the Helvetian or French Churches. See the
pres. to the confer. at Mompelg.
For the holy Supper of the Lord, amongst other ends has this use, that it
should be the note and badge of the Religion, which every one professes. For
they who communicate with any Church, in the receiving of this Sacrament, by
this deed do publicly profess that they embrace the doctrine of the same
Church, and reject the contrary, and separate themselves from others. We must
therefore in no case sport and play with the receiving of the Lords Supper, nor
therein dissemble any thing from which our heart does abhor; and therefore we
cannot communicate with those Churches, which embrace not our Confession. For
by such communicating, we should seem to derogate from our Confession, and
sincere Religion, and either to Patronize, or surely closely to favor the
errors of other Churches. It is more safe therefore to Imitate the Christian
Emperors, who when the Arians did request to be received into Communion with
the Orthodoxe, they would not grant it unto them, before they did approve the
doctrine of the Orthodoxe.

We make no strife about that which is affirmed in the first place. 1 Cor.
10.17.
and with Christ Jesus their head. Lastly, we confess, that this Sacrament (as
also that other of Baptism) is the note and badge of that Religion which we
profess. Aug. cont. ^austum. 19.12.
For men can be united together into no name of Religion, whether true or
false, unless they be bound together in some fellowship of signer and visible
Sacraments. But as Baptism is indeed the badge of the Christian Religion we
profess, and not of the particular opinions and confessions which we embrace
before others: so also must we conclude of the Lords Supper; For to the mutual
Communion of all Christians in the Eucharist, it is not required, that all who
Communicate together, should agree in the same confession, either the English,
or the French, or the Dutch; but that they agree in one Profession of the
Christian and Catholic Faith. Let us leave these rigid and Tyrannical
domineerings to the Papists, who adjudge all to be separated from their
Communion, which would not swear unto the Confession of Trent. Cyprianus.
Cornelius.
The holy Fathers did not do so: but they kept the Lords peace with those
Churches which were of different opinions from themselves; removing none from
the right Communion, because he refused to consent to the private Judgment of
another particular Church; for they acknowledged the Catholic Faith, received
with an unanimous consent of the Catholic Church, to be the certain, Aug.
Ser. 181.
and sole Rule of Faith, by which Believers retain the Catholic Unity. But
let him who can show that Particular Churches ever usurped this to themselves,
that they did cut off others from the Brotherly Communion with themselves, for
diversity of opinions in matters not as yet determined by the Judgment of the
Catholic Church, Socrat. l. 5. c. 21.
on one side or other. Victor indeed attempted to do this, and after him
Stephen, Lib. 5. cap. 23. and lib. 7. cap. 4.
both Bishops of Rome. But it is plain out of Eusebius, that this Separation
was founded on no right, and therefore highly displeased the pious and Godly
Fathers.

Therefore far be it from us, that in the very Communion of the Lords Supper,
we should as it were proclaim war against all other Churches, which will not
make our particular Confession their own, or will not forsake their own, that
they may embrace ours. If we conceive our Churches to be of the righter and
truer opinion than other Churches in certain Questions, not as yet determined,
we have just cause not to Communicate with them in their errorss but thence
have no cause at all to Communicate with them in the Sacraments. Forasmuch as
no error in which men may err, preserving still the Faith whereby we are
Christians, gives us power to depart from other Churches, or to abhor from
holy and brotherly Communion with them. Vid. Aug. contra. Jul. Pelag. lib. 1.
cap. 2. and de peccat. Orig. lib. 2. c. 23.
Neither do those Christians play with the Sacraments, and incur the guilt
of dissembling, when they celebrate one Lords Supper with them, whom they know
to differ from themselves in some heads of Doctrine in divinity. For the
Sacrament of the Eucharists is not instituted of Christ to this end, that it
should be a note or token of perfect Knowledge in all which are
fellow-partakers of the same: Therefore neither of perfect Agreement: which
perfect Agreement it is altogether impossible to find in the imperfect
Knowledge of Christians. They therefore who use this moderation toward other
Churches, that they reject them not from Communion with them; under pretense of
difference in particular confessions, even themselves also enjoy the same
benefit amongst others. Neither in the mean time do they derogate any thing
from their own confession, or favor, and Patronize a strange one; but they do
not at all challenge to themselves the power of dividing of Churches, or
dissolving of Brotherly Union betwixt Christians, from that cause which neither
Christ nor the Apostles, nor the Primitive Church would ever have approved.
Lastly, the Example fetched from the Arians, is altogether diverse, and far
off from the matter in hand; for we willingly grant, that Brotherly Communion
is to be denied to them, not only of some one particular Church, but even of
all, who durst deny the Eternal divinity of Christ; For this is to overturne
the most solid foundation of Christian Faith, and man's Salvation. But far
different is the Reason and nature of those Controversies which are disputed of
in the Protestant Churches, and in which they differ, and disagree amongst
themselves; For in none of these can any truly say, That either the Foundation
of man's salvation is overthrown, or the Authority of the Catholic Church
contemned, or lastly, that any particular Church ever was for errors in such
points separated, or to be separated from the Brotherly Communion of all
Christians, by the Judgment and power of the Catholic Church. But this seems
to have no doubt at all in it, that one particular Church does unjustly cut off
any other from her Communion, when for the same opinions, according to the
ancient discipline of the Catholic Church, and rules Catholikely established,
she was not to be cut and cast off from all other Churches.

But through the love of Peace, and desire of renewing concord betwixt most
famous Churches, I am carried much farther, than at first I propounded to my
self. I will now turn my Speech to God himself; whom I humbly beseech, that
at last he would be pleased to bind up the differences of all the Protestant
Churches, and to make them up into one, and that he would show unto all, That
it agrees with the nature of this One God, to be worshipped in Unity. Now I
take my farewell of my most dear Brethren of the foreign Churches, with the
Exhortation of most holy Augustine, If you will live of the Holy Spirit, hold
Charity, love Verity, desire Unity, that you may come to Eternity. To the God
of heaven, who is the God of Peace; to Jesus Christ our Lord, who is the Prince
of Peace; to the Holy Spirit, who is the Bond of Peace, be Glory, Honor, and
Thankesgiving, for ever, and ever, Amen.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

THO. WYKES.
April. 8. 1641.

