AN ESSAY FOR ADVANCEMENT OF Husbandry-Learning: OR PROPOSITIONS For the
Errecting COLLEGE OF HUSBANDRY: AND In order thereunto, for the taking in of
Pupills or Apprentices.

AND ALSO Friends or Fellows of the same College or Society.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills. 1651.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Find by Experience, that it is nothing but the Narrownes of our Spirits that
makes us miserable; for if our Hearts were enlarged beyond our selves, and
opened to lay hold of the Advantages which God does offer, whereby we may
become jointly serviceable unto one another in Public Concernments; we could
not be without Lucriferous Employments for our selves; nor Unfruitful to our
neighbors, as now for the most part we are, only because we mind not the
Objects of that Industriousness, which without a mutual Concurrence cannot be
advanced. For mine own part, although J can contribute but little; yet being
carried forth to watch for the Opportunities of provoking others, who can do
more, to improve their Talents, J have found experimentally that my Endeavors
have not been without effect as to this undertaking: for GOD has brought
beyond what J could imagine unto my hand from time to time, Objects of Service
answerable to the enlargement of my Spirit: So that J must conclude* that it is
nothing but the Narrowness of all men's Spirits that makes their Miseries to ly
heavy upon them: for there are infinite Means of Relief and Comfort, for all
sorts of Calamities to be found in Nature, and well ordered Societies, if men
were not enviously, or covetously, or peevishly, or ambitiously, or drousily
straightened within themselves, in the use of that which God has given them to
serve the Glory of his Goodness withal; toward the relief of themselves and
others. And to waken such as are Upright in heart, but yet Lazy and Drowsy
under their Distractions, J have thought good to offer these Hints to the
Public, which have a long time lain by me; that in this Hopeful Appearance
of your Settlement, those that droope might see a possibility (if they will not
be wanting to themselves) to make themselves and others in this Nation, and
juncture of time, more happy and Plentiful in outward Possessions then their
Forefathers have been; by a College or Corporation of Husbandry. For if in all
other Trades and Sciences, Colleges and Corporations have been and are
exceedingly Advantageous (if rightly ordered) for the Improvement of the
Talents of those that betake themselves thereunto; Why may we not conclude that
in the Science and Trade of Husbandry, which is the Mother of all other Trades
and Scientificall Industries, a Collegiall way of Teaching the Art thereof will
be of infinite Usefulness? J shall leave the thing to thy rational
Consideration, that if the least part of Industry is highly improved by
Collegiall Institution and Education, how much more may the Chief part and as
it were the very Root of all Wealth, be advanced to perfection by this means?
This Essay therefore is but an Overture, and a Hint of this matter, that it may
be further in due time ripened, and with more mature considerations brought to
perfection, for the good of the Commonwealth, and the relief of the poor
therein, which is the very earnest desire of

Thine and the Publiques Faithful Servant, SAMUEL HARTLIB.

PROPOSITIONS for Advancement of Husbandry-Learning.
IN humane affairs, and which relate not immediately unto God; nothing does
more tend to the good and wel-being of a Nation (God giving his blessing
thereunto in an humble and right use of it) then plenty of Food and Raiment,
and of all other Merchantable Commodities to send abroad; which will not fail
to return the prosperity and happiness of other Nations again in exchange.
And surely a Nation thus blessed can want no Earthly Comfort; but will
doubtless be hated of some, feared of others, and sought to of all. But
neither the one, nor the other of these are any other, then the fruits of or in
the Earth: And those are not to be obtained but by the help of Ingenuity and
Industry. The first wisely teaching, what is to be done; the second acting
according to those good and right instructions diligently and carefully. By
these two (instrumentally) we enjoy all outward things; and without them
nothing. These are the first movers to all Trades or Professions under heaven;
and particularly, to that most Ancient, most Noble, and most necessary Trade
of all others ( viz.) good Husbandry, consisting of abundance of Parts, of
which these are some.

1. Tillage, or setting or sowing of several sorts of Corn and Grain, for the
relief and sustenance of man and beast.

2. The breeding of Cattle, (in which the breeding of Sheep may seem
particular.)

3. The feeding of Cattle.

4. The Use of the Dairie.

5. The planting of Orchards.

7. The planting of Gardens.

8. The breeding and feeding of Swine.

^. The breeding and feeding of the several sorts of tame Poultry.

9. The planting of Hops.

10. The sowing of Hemp, Flax, or Rape.

11. The breeding, preserving and taking of wild Beasts, as Conies etc.

12. The breeding, preserving or taking of wild foul, particularly of Duckes
in and by a Decoy.

13. The making and managing of Rivers, Moats, Ponds, etc. for the preserving
and taking Fish of all sorts for the use and sustenance of man.

14. The planting of Woad, and all outlandish rare or extraordinary Roots,
fruits or plants.

15. The dreining, fencing, mowing, and making of Grass in Meadows into Hey.

16. The making of Malt.

17. And (that now so exceeding necessary endeavor) the planting all sorts of
Wood for Timber or fire.

Besides very many others which I forbear to name, as either not so easily
practicable in this Nation, or included in or subordinate to the former, as
Shearing of Sheep, Thrashing of Corn etc. or not vulgarly taken for the parts
of Husbandry (though indeed they are so) as the digging of Coal-pits, and
production of all Minerals, Quarries of Stone, or useful Earths etc.

As these are encouraged and enabled: so is a Nation more or less prosperous,
or outwardly happy; both these in their distinct natures or uses are most
excellent; and are also (at least ought to be) inseparable companions: of which
if either precede it is Ingenuity; for that Industry as it is distinct from
Ingenuity, can do nothing till the other have contrived what and how.

Men take him for a fool or a mad man, that having store of wealth in his
trunck, does yet complain of want. What though the key be rusty for want of
use? it is easier to get that scoured, then to obtain such another treasure.
And surely I may upon most sure grounds say, that our Native Country, has in
its bowels an (even almost) infinite, and inexhaustible treasure; much of which
has long lain hid, and is but new begun to be discovered. It may seem a large
boast or mere Hyperbole to say, we enjoy not, know not, use not, the one tenth
part of that plenty or wealth and happiness, that our Earth can, and (
Ingenuity and Industry well encouraged) will (by Gods blessing) yield.

Now whereas there has been earnestly desired (in the mean time, till the
public Magistrate shall be at leisure, to give a more strong and ample
encouragement and assistance to a Design so exceedingly for the honor and
Advancement of the whole Nation) the erection of a private College or Society
of good Husbandry; wherein some may teach, some learn, and all practice the
whole and every part of this so honorable an Art, so deep a Mystery, and that
not only in the more customary and Common way; but according to the most
Excellent Rules, that Ingenuity and Experience gained by rational trials and
real Experiments have or can attain to; that so the honor, wealth, and
happiness of this State maybe multiplied, even before it self is aware, and the
duller members thereof won by emulation or example to such practices for
their own private and Public Good, as no persuasion nor force could ever have
effectually led them to. And in respect that there are already diverse
Propositions made, and some Engagements also in order thereto; so as the Work
has begun to move, and is daily advanced, and endeavored to be advanced by
some such faithful branches; as first and chiefly seek the Prosperity of the
whole Stock, but have not sufficient power in their own hands to go through
with, and bring to perfection this great and good Work:

It is therefore PROPOVNDED First, to those, whose great Wealth is joined with
as great Virtue and Love to their Country; And Will as well as Power to
advance the Public Good, without seeking their own Private Benefit.

THat whereas it is manifest, that such a College or Society cannot be erected
without the building or buying (at least a long lease at an easy rent, if not
the inheritance) of some large and convenient House, with some good quantity of
Land adjoining and belonging to it (though that is not all the Land which must
be had for this purpose); and it is as manifest that such a purchase cannot be
made without good Sums of Money.

It is therefore desired, that all such Well-wishers to their Countrey's wealth
and prosperity; be pleased to contribute such sums to this good and laudable
Work, as in their own Wisdoms and bounties appear necessary, and deliver the
same into the hands of Mr. Samuel Hartlib, whose abundant Zeal for the
Public Good, renders him most worthy to be entrusted therewith, till there
shall be a competent Stock obtained for the setting forward of this great and
good Work before mentioned: And to subscribe their Names and Sums; that so the
whole Society (when erected) and the whole Nation (when in due time they shall
have tasted the sweet effects from hence proceeding) may know to whom to
render all due thanks through all Ages, as to the bountiful Promoters of; by
contributing to a Design so much conducing to the good of the present and
Prosperity of all Ages to come: a Plentiful Reward to every Noble Spirit.

It is therefore also PROPOUNDED Secondly, to those whose good Wills possibly
are great, but their Powers lesser then the former; and are therefore
necessarily withheld from such free and voluntary contributing.

THat whereas the knowledge and good influence of the actings of this Society
and its members, cannot without a good, large, and considerable Stock increase
in its number and power, nor cast it self into all the forms of Practice in
the several parts of this Art before mentioned, or that may be mentioned: and
for want of which, the maine End of the erection of this College or Society
would not be obtained, viz. the infusing into the more sturdy Husbandmen of the
Nation in general (now too much wedded to their more customary and lesser
profitable workings) the more perfect Principles of their own Art, and such
additional Uses and Instruments, as shall make their Practices more rational,
easy, and really effectual and beneficial, as to themselves: so to the
advancement and increase of public plenty and welfare.

It is therefore Offered, that whosoever shall disburse and engage any sum, for
the increase of that Stock, and consequently the employment of the Society:
shall by an unerring, unaltering rule, receive yearly; while his money remains
in the hands of the said College, for every 100. pound, 20. pound, and so for
a greater or lesser sum proportionably. And if any particular Person shall
desire to have his sum disbursed, to be employed in any one particular single
part of this copious Art here before mentioned; he shall have his desire
fulfilled: provided that his Stock be sufficient to drive on that way; and that
he be contented to forbear his revenue till nature has produced the return.

And whosoever shall thus engage, shall at any time (upon six months warning
given) call in and again receive his sum formerly disbursed.

And all those that shall thus engage, are desired to enter their Names and
Sums, by subscribing and delivering the money into the hands of Mr. Samuel
Hartlib. And for Security they shall have; As to Law, the Propounders bond; As
to Love, the word of him that desires to prove himself a just and honest man,
to God and man, (to his utmost power) and to all Engagers a faithful Steward.

PROPOSITIONS, for the erecting a College of Husbandry: and in order thereto
for the taking in of Pupills or Apprentices: and also Friends or Fellows of
the same College or Society.

I PROPOUND, That there may be a College or school of all the sorts and parts
of Good-Hu^bandry erected; that so the knowledge and practice m(...) come more
universal, and men may have more sweet invitations and stronger allurements, to
seek the knowledge of this deep and excellent Mystery; and practice it to the
advancement of a more general and Public good: not as now in a sordid
clownish way, for mere selfe-profit; nor as now according to unsound and rather
Customary then rational rules and grounds; nor as now in a dishonorable
drudging way; which indeed is the grand cause that hinders or takes off the
most ingenious spirits (which yet are most fit to be engaged.) For it is plain,
that the chief reason, why this so excellent an Art, has hitherto arrived at
no greater perfection, is; that no Public course of encouragement and high
prizing the same has been thought of; and so the best wits shut out, that
should have searched it out, and discovered this Art more perfectly; which once
generally known, together with the vast advantages thereby arising, as to the
whole Nation: so to every particular practitioner; we need not fear to want
Disciples. It is most evident, that those few Ingenious persons, that have
looked into the ways of improvement, (having something also to work upon) of
late years have advanced their particular Interests to a double or trebble
proportion. I am very confident, that those very improvements may again be
doubled by yet better ways.

That therefore Ingenuity may be ransomed from her too tedious captivity; And
Industry awaked from a kind of lethargy; occasioned through wonted discontent:
I PROPOUND more particularly, (to lay a little foundation for such a College
or Society, which I doubt not, time, emulation, and my own profit, will agree
to finish) That

If any Person of quality have a Son or Kinsman 15. years old or upwards, with
whom he will give (besides well-suiting him with all necessary wearing apparel,
and more, to the value of twenty marks; in such other necessaries, as the
Undertaker shall appoint) 60. l. in ready money at his first Entrance, and bind
him Apprentice for seven years; he shall be in that time faithfully instructed
in both the Theorick and Practick parts of this (of all others) most Ancient,
Noble, and honestly gainful Art, Trade, or Mystery. And at the end of that
time, he shall receive at one entire payment, to set up withal, 300. pound. And
shall for four years next ensuing the end of the said 7. years, receive at the
end of every year 100. pound more; the better to support him till he have taken
sufficient root.

Note, that none are to be actually entertained till there be at least 10.
entered: at which entrance, they are to pay only 10. pound apiece, and for
farther performances reciprocal subscriptions. And when there are 10. entered,
they are all to be ready upon a months warning to appear, to pay down the
other 50. pound apiece.

Note, that not above 36. will be entertained at first, neither afterward; but
as by death, expiration of time etc. there shall happen to be some wanting of
that number.

Into this College also any man may enter himself as a freeman, or Friend
to, and Member of the Society; upon the following conditions.

1. He must pay down at his Entrance 50. pound, as given to the Society for the
encouragement of Ingenuity in the practice of Experiments, for the obtaining of
yet more and more perfection in this (almost) infinite Science.

2. He must bring with him some skill, at least Ingenuity; and testify
himself to be a Well-willer to the profession and professors of
Good-Husbandry; and particularly to the Master and Fellows of this Society.

3. He must produce at least 250. pound as a Stock to set up for himself, to
be driven by himself, according to the best direction and assistance to be
given by the Master and Fellows of the Colledge^

4. He shall (not swear, but) subscribe himself under hand and seal, a
faithful Seeker of the Advancement of the Mystery and Society; and to be aiding
and assisting, to the Master and the Fellows to his power, at all times, and
in all cases, (his own interest always preserved) and to consent and submit to
all such Orders, as shall be from time to time made, by the agreement of the
Master and the Major part of the Fellows of the said College, for and
concerning the same Society, and to stand to their Award in any case of
difference: And not directly or indirectly to discover all or any part of the
same Art or Mystery to any person whatsoever, upon any pretense whatsoever,
without their consent first had and obtained.

5. He must be always in Commons at the Hall of the said Society* at the rate
of 8. s. per week, or such other rates more or less, as the then present state
of things shall require. And he is always to pay off all arreares at the end
of each month at the farthest, without any deductions for absence how long or
short soever. But if he keep a Servant (who must also be in Commons when
present) he shall be allowed to deduct for his absence. As also he is not to be
accomptable to the Stable for his Horse when absent.

6. He shall at his first Entrance, pay for Himself 10. pound, for his Servant
5. pound, for his Horse 40. s. for their habitation: besides providing of all
necessary furniture; but be ever after free till death or departure.

7. Lastly, he must be a single man; and if he shall at any time marry, he is
from thenceforth to be accounted dead to the Society, to all intents and
purposes whatsoever; save only in point of debt or discovery.

HONORED SIR,

THe more I find and consider of the general Backwardness of men, to accept
or join with me in the ways by me Propounded for mutual Prosperity; the more
I am taught to view and review the things Propounded, and that impartially. In
order to this, I find upon enquiry, that the maine Objections against what I
offer are three, viz.

First, the supposed Impossibility of performing (on my part) the thing
promised.

Secondly, the Newness of the Invention or Contrivance, which renders it
within the list of things suspected.

Thirdly, the Nonappearance of any such good Security as is held sufficient to
encourage men to join with me freely, fully and speedily (that is,
seasonably.) To these I answer thus.

First, upon most assured, and generally experimented grounds I affirm; that
one Acre of good ground to be sowed with Wheat in the more usual way of
Husbandry, will (one place in this Nation with another) require the charges or
expense following* viz. for rent 13. s. 4. d. dung 24. loads at 1. s. 3. d. per
load, 1. pound 10. s. seed 9. pecks usually worth 13. s. 6. d. (now more) twice
ploughing, sowing, harrowing etc. usually 10. s. (now more) for weeding 3 s.
for reaping etc. 6. s. 8. d. for fencing one (Acre amongst many) 3. s. 4. d.
which in all amounts to 3. pound ^9. s. 10. d. out of which deduct 20. s. which
will remain to be accounted with the following crops, in respect of the virtue
of the dung remaining still in the land. Thus the Charge of sowing one Acre of
Wheat, amounts to 2. pound 19. s. 10. d. and for the return of this, it is
not unusual to have 3.4. or 5. quarters: But take it at the lesser, and more
generally certain rate, of three quarters on an Acre, and value that at the
more constant and lesser price, of 5 s. a bushel, or 40. s. a quarter; yet the
return amounts to 6. pound, which is double to the charge. I could illustrate
this with many other examples as full: but let this suffice.

To the second I say, that the Newness of my better way of planting or
disposing of Corn into the ground, so as (God blessing my endeavors) to
obtain a yet greater increase; is so far (well weighed) from being a reason
to hinder: that it is to me, and may be to others (when once rightly
understood) a spur to hasten toward such an Engagement or conjunction: When
it is considered that the Invention is yet our own, entirely; and consequently
the most just and ready way to wealth and all that outward honor and
happiness (that accompanies riches well gotten) is open to us, and to us
principally; we having the opportunity (while we prepare for, and open the door
to so great a Public Good) to Christen our own child first (as they say)
which also is most lawful, and appointed, that the Ox that treads out the
fodder, shall not be muzled. Which of all those (almost infinite) ways or
means, by which man has been made Instrumental to the increase of his own
well-being, was not in one age or other, as new as this Invention of mine does
seem to be in this?

Certainly it is not the Newness, but the Vanity or Invalidity of any
Invention, that lays it open to the dislike of the more wise and Noble
persons: Or if the Newness of an Invention can any way render it fit to be
suspected, it is only in such as being altogether New, seem also to disagree
with Natural reason, and tread quite beside the path of Experience: Of this
kind it would be, if a man should pretend to make bread of stones; but to say,
that I can make more or better bread of the same Wheat, will appear impossible
to none but inconsiderate persons. And the thing which I hold forth is nothing
else, but to screw the most profound Mystery of good Husbandry a note or two
higher; but to do the same thing by a better way, and to more advantage.

To the the third and last, before I answer I will so far digress, as to
enquire, what is or can be here meant by Security? If it be required in the
most high and strict sense, it is vain and impossible to be had in humane
affairs, and is not to be had or hoped for in this world, where the Moth and
rust do corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal: this is only to be
had in Heaven; and can be no way procured on Earth; but by laying up the
Treasures of GOOD WORKS: Therefore he that will put forth his money upon good
Security indeed, must vent it in the ways of Charity and Piety, as relating to
Gods glory and his souls Eternal happiness; at least in a way of bounty and
nobleness for the Public good of his Neighbor and Native Country, as
relating to his good fame after death. But if by security be meant something
more moderate and ingenuous, only a providential care to defend a man's self
from being abused; so far as such prosecutions are just, and agreeable to
good reason, and the Nature of the thing in question, I allow; and approve of
it altogether: but not when it rather proceeds from frowardness, base and
groundless suspicion, and a natural averseness and enmity to all good. Thus
when a man lends to another politically as a mere man, he requires bills,
bonds, morgages, or the like. But if he gives, he does not so, neither if he
lend to the Poor, or to persons so just that he esteems their word sufficient.
I suppose there are very many in London, that do frequently take up great sums
without giving any formal security; nay that would take it for a great afront
to have such a thing required of them; and yet surely it is no absolute miracle
to see such a one break; why then are men so easy in that, and so difficult in
this? or is it for the mutual Advance of Trade? why, that very argument serves
here too; unless they be resolved to advance no trade, but their own. And even
that also comes in here; for what trade can more advance the Engagers Private,
then that which is faithfully driven on for the Prosperity of him and his
Posterity? Or what can more magnify a great and populous City, then to stand in
the midst of a fertile soil, that affords her plenty and abundance of all good
things, which is already the happiness of London? and this happiness shall by
this means, by Gods blessing given unto and upon this means, be continually
increased.

Again, it is rational, when men lend money for little or no advantage to
themselves, but only to do their friend a courtesy; it is but reasonable,
that they should by all good means secure the repayment of their principal.
But when men put forth their moneys in hope of great Advantage, they must, and
do usually forbear to stand upon such precise Security; rightly considering,
that Gods providence is (as the best Inheritance; so also) the best Security
that can be named, and will not fail to return with a blessing, any thing
that shall be thereto entrusted faithfully. Thus, what other Security (more
then rational Probabilities) has the Soldier; that ventures his life, limbs,
liberty and all, and this without any other Security then a good conscience,
(or a good confidence at least) in life or death; resting in that success the
Lord of hoasts shall please to appoint. Thus the Merchant puts (if not always
himself; yet) his Estate into a weak wooden vessel; and commits it to the
mercy of the winds and waves, having set up his rest in the goodness of that
God that parted the Red Sea by his power. Thus, the Mineralist lays out much
money in sincking his pits and quarries, only in hope to find that richer
vein he conceives to be there. Thus the Patient commits his life health and
ease (under God) into the physicians hands, as relying on his care and skill. I
say, that all these, and many more, even all men in almost all humane actions,
run some kind of hazard; and more or less do and must depend upon Gods mercy
and man's integrity, without any other outward formal Security. Thus also do I
propound (and that upon Probabilities as certain and rational (if not more as
any of these) that we may agree, engage, and sow in hope; that that God that
never suffers hope (rightly placed) to be frustrate; may make us return and
bear our sheafes with us, may make our valleys stand so thick with Corn, hat
they shall laugh and sing. Which that it may be thus, shall always be the
faithful desire and earnest prayer of* Sir,

Your most obliged, faithful and humbly thankful friend and Servant

SIr, by what is above said, and by many other very evident reasons, it is or
may be proved, that in such a case as this, it is not much rational to demand
any other Security then the Propounders own obligation for performance of
Covenants. Yet that all men may know, that my Intentions are fair and just, and
my Aims not simply at my own private profit; but that I also much more desire
the Prosperity of my Nation, and of all persons that shall join with me. I
OFFER and am content, that if the Subscribers and consequently Engagers shall
think fit to meet, and amongst themselves choose three such as I shall also like
of, I will endeavor to give them (in the behalf, and as the Trustees of and
for all the rest) some more plain and satisfactory Security, which is
impossible to be done to every particular person, that shall perhaps underwrite
and engage only 25. pound. or some such sum.

FINIS.

