THE SIEGE OF RHODES Made a Representation by the Art of Prospective in Scenes,
And the Story sung in Recitative Music.

At the Cockpit in DRURY Lane.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop,
at the Sign of the Anchor, on the Lower-walk in the New-Exchange, 1658.

To the Reader.
I May receive disadvantage by this Address designed for excuses; for it will
too hastily put you in mind that errors are not far off when excuses are at
hand; this refers to our Representation: and some may be willing to be led to
find the blemishes of it; but would be left to their own conduct to discover
the beauties, if there be any. Yet I may forewarn you that the defects which I
intend to excuse are chiefly such, as you cannot reform but only with your
Purse; that is, by building us a larger Room; a design which we began and shall
not be left for you to finish, because we have observed that many who are
liberal of their understanding when they would issue it out toward discovery
of imperfections, have not always Money to expend in things necessary toward
the making up of perfection.

It has been often wished that our Scenes (we having obliged our selves to the
variety of Five changes, according to the Ancient Drammatick distinctions made
for time) had not been confined to eleven foot in height, and about fifteen in
depth, including the places of passage reserved for the Music. This is so
narrow an allowance for the Fleet of Solomon the Magnicent, his Army, the
Island of Rhodes, and the varieties attending the Siege of the City; that I
fear you will think, we invite you to such a contracted Trifle as that of the
Caesar's carved upon a Nut.

As these Limits have hindered the splendour of our Scene, so we are like to
give no great satisfaction in the quantity of our Argument, which is in story
very copious; but shrinks to a small narration here, because we could not
convey it by more then seven Persons; being constrained to prevent the length
of Recitative Music, as well as to conserve, without encumbrance, the
narrowness of the place. Therefore you cannot expect the chief Ornaments
belonging to a History Drammatically digested into Turns and Counter-turns, to
double Walks, and interweavings of design.

This is expressed to forbid your excess of expectation; but we must take care
not to deterr you from the hope of some satisfaction; for that were, not only
to hang out no Bush, but likewise to shut up our Doors. Therefore, as you have
heard what kind of excellencies you should not expect: So I will in brief (I
hope without vanity) give you encouragement, by telling you, there are some
things at least excusable which you may resolve to meet.

We conceive, it will not be unacceptable to you if we recompense the
narrowness of the Room, by containing in it so much as could be conveniently
accomplished by Art and Industry: which will not be doubted in the Scenes by
those who can judge that kind of Illustration and know the excellency of Mr.
John Web, who designed and ordered it. The Music was composed, and both the
Vocal and Instrumental is exercised by the most transcendent of England in that
Art, and perhaps not unequal to the best masters abroad; but being Recitative,
and therefore unpracticed here; though of great reputation amongst other
Nations, the very attempt of it is an obligation to our own. The Story
represented (which will not require much apology because it expects but little
praise) is Heroical, and not withstanding the continual hurry and busy
agitations of a hot Siege, is (I hope) intelligibly conveyed to advance the
Characters of Virtue in the shapes of Valor and conjugal Love. And though the
main Argument has but a single Walk, yet perhaps the movings of it will not
seem unpleasant. You may inquire, being a Reader, why in an heroic Argument my
numbers are so often diversified and fall into short fractions; considering
that a continuation of the usual length of English verse would appear more
Heroical in reading. But when you are an Auditor you will find that in this, I
rather deserve approbation then need excuse; for frequent alterations of
measure (which cannot be so unpleasant to him that reads as troublesome to him
that writes) are necessary to Recitative Music for variation of Airs. If what
I have said, be taken for excuses, I have my intent; because excuses are not
always signs of Error, but are often modest explanations* of things that might
otherwise be mistaken. But I have said so much to vindicate my self from having
occasion to be excused for the Poem, that it brings me at last to ask pardon
for the length of the Epistle.

August 17. 1656. Will. D'avenant.

The Persons Represented.
Solomon The Magnificent. Villerius Grand Master of Rhodes. Alphonso A Cicilian
Duke. Admiral Of Rhodes* Pirrhus Bassa. Mustapha Bassa. Ianthe Wife to
Alphonso.
The Scene, RHODES.

The SIEGE OF RHODES.
THe Ornament which encompassed the Scene, consisted of several Columns, of
gross Rustic work; which bore up a large Freese. In the middle of the Freese
was a Compartiment, wherein was written RHODES. The Compartiment was supported
by diverse Habiliments of War; intermixed with the Military Ensigns of those
several Nations who were famous for defense of that Island; which were the
French, Germans, and Spaniards, the Italians, Avergnois, and English: The
Renown of the English valor made the Grand Master Villerius, to select their
Station to be most frequently commanded by himself. The principal enrichment of
the Freese was a Crimson Drapery, whereon several Trophies of Arms were fixed,
Those on the Right hand, representing such as are chiefly in use amongst the
Western Nations; together with the proper cognizance of the Order of the
Rhodian Knights; and on the left, such as are most esteemed in the Eastern
Countries; and on an Antique Shield the Crescent of the Ottomans.

The Scene before the First Entry.
THe Curtain being drawn up, a lightsome Sky appeared, discov'ring a Maritime
Coast, full of craggy Rocks, and high Cliffs, with several Verdures naturally
growing upon such Scituations; and afar off, the true Prospect of the City
RHODES, when it was in prosperous estate: with so much view of the Gardens and
Hills about it, as the narrowness of the Room could allow the Scene. In that
part of the Horizon, terminated by the Sea, was represented the Turkish Fleet
making toward a Promontory some few miles distant from the Town.

The First Entry.
The ENTRY is prepared by Instrumental Music.
Enter Admiral. Admir. ARm, Arm, Villerius, Arm!
Thou have no leisure to grow old;
Those now must feel thy courage warm,
Who think thy blood is cold.

Enter Villerius. Viller. Our Admiral from Sea?
What storm transporteth thee?
Or bring'st thou storms that can do more
Then drive an Admiral on shore?

Admir. Arm, Arm, the Bassa's Fleet appears;
To Rhodes his Course from Chios steers;
Her shady vvings to distant sight,
Spread like the Curtains of the Night.
Each Squadron thicker and still darker grovvs;
The Fleet like many floating Forests shovvs,

Viller. Arm, Arm! Let our Drums beat
To all our Out-Guards, a Retreat;
And to our Main Guards add
Files double lined from the Parade.
Send Horse to drive the Fields;
Prevent what ripening Summer yields.
To all the Foe would save
Set fire, or give a secret Grave.

Admir. I Will to our Galleys haste,
Untackle every Mast;
Hale 'em within the Peer,
To range and chain 'em there,
And then behind St Nic'las Cliffs
Shelter our Brigants, Land our Skiffs.

Viller. Our Field and Bulwark-Cannon mount with haste;
Fix to their Blocks their brazen bodies fast:
Whilst to the Foe their Iron Entrails fly:
Display our Colors, raise our Standard high!

Exit Adm. Enter Alphonso. Alpon. What various Noises do mines ears invade?
And have a Consort of confusion made?
The shriller Trumpet, and tempestuous Drum:
The deaf'ning clamor from the Canons womb;
Which through the Air like sudden Thunder breaks,
Seems calm to Soldiers shouts and Women's shrieks.
What danger (Reverend Lord) does this portend?

Viller. Danger begins what must in honor end.


Alphon. What Vizards does it wear?


Viller. Such, gentle Prince,
As cannot fright, but yet must warn you hence.
What can to Rhodes more fatally appear
Then the bright Crescents which those Ensigns vvear?
Wise Emblems that increasing Empire show;
Which must be still in Nonage and still grow.
All these are yet but the forerunning Van
Of the prodigious Gross or Solomon.

Alphon. Pale show those Crescents to our bloody Cross!
Sink not the Western Kingdoms in our loss?
Will not the Austrian Eagle moult her Wings,
That long has hovered over the Gallick Kings?
Whose Lilies too will wither when we fade;
And 'th' English Lion shrink into a shade.

Viller. Thou see not, whilst so young and guiltless too,
That Kings mean seldom what their Statesmen do,
Who measure not the compass of a Crown
To fit the Head that vvears it but their own;
Still hind'ring peace, because they Stevvards are,
Without account, to that vvild Spender, War.
Still Christian Wars they will pursue, and boast
Unjust successes gained, whilst Rhodes is lost:
Whilst we build Monuments of Death, to shame
Those who forsook us in the Chase of Fame.

Alphon. We will endure the Colds of Court-delays;
Honor grovvs vvarm in Airy Vests of Praise.
On Rocky Rhodes we will like Rocks abide:

Viller. Away, away, and hasten to thy Bride!
It Is scarce a Month since from thy Nuptial Rites
Thou came to honor here our Rhodian Knights
To dignifie our sacred annual Feast:
We love to Lodge, not to entombe a Guest.
Honor must yield where Reason should prevail.
A Board, A board, and hoyse up every Sail
What gathers any Wind for Cicilie!
Men lose their Virtu's Pattern losing thee.
Thy Bride does yield her Sex no less a Light:
But, thy life gone, will set in endless Night.
Ye must like Stars shine long er'e ye expire!

Alphon. Honor, is colder Virtue set on fire:
My honor lost, her Love would soon decay:
Here for my Tomb or Triumph I will stay.
My Sword against proud Solomon I draw,
His cursed Prophet and his sensual Law.
Chorus, Our Swords against proud Solomon we draw,
His cursed Prophet and his sensual Law.

Exeunt. Chorus. By Soldiers of several Nations.
1.
Come ye termagant Turks,
If your Bassa dare Land ye,
Whilst the Wine bravely works
That was brought us from Candy.
2.
Wealth, the least of our care is,
For the Poor never are undone;
A vous, Monsieur of Paris,
To the Back-Swords of London.
3.
Diego, thou, in a trice,
Shall advance thy lean Belly.
For their Hens and their Rice
Make Pillau like a jelly.
4.
Let 'em Land fine and free;
For my Cap though an old one,
Such a Turbant shall be,
Thou will think it a Gold one.
5.
It is seven to one odds,
They had safer sailed by us:
Whilst our Wine lasts in Rhodes.
They shall water at Chios.
End of the first Entry.
The Second Entry.
The Entry is again prepared by Instrumental Music.
The Scene is changed, and the City, Rhodes, appears beleaguered at Sea and
Land. Enter Villerius and Admiral. Admir. THe blood of Rhodes grows cold! Life
must expire!


Viller. The Duke still warms it with his valors fire!


Admir. If he has much in Honors presence done,
Has saved our Ensigns or has others won,
Then he but well by your Example wrought;
Who well in Honors School his Childhood taught,

Viller. The Foe three Moons tempestuously has spent
Where we will never yield nor he relent;
Still we, but raise what must be beaten down;
Defending Walls, yet cannot keep the Town;
Vent'ring last Stakes where we can nothing vvin;
And, shutting slaughter out, keep Famine in.

Admir. How often and vainly Rhodes for succor waits
From triple Diadems, and Scarlet Hats?
Rome keeps her Gold, cheaply her VVarriours pays,
At first with Blessings, and at last with praise.

Viller. By Armies, stovv'd in Fleets, exhausted Spain
Leaves half her Land unplough'd, to plough the Main;
And still would more of the old World subdue,
As if unsatisfi'd with all the New.

Admir. France strives to have her Lilies grow as fair
In others Realms as where they Native are.

Viller. The English Lion ever loves to change
His Walks, and in remoter Forests range.

Chorus. All gaining vainly from each others loss;
Whilst still the Crescent drives away the Cross.

Enter Alphonso. Alphon. 1.
How bravely fought the fiery French.
Their Bulwark being stormed?
The colder Almans kept their Trench,
By more then Valor warmed.
2.
The grave Italians paused and fought,
The solemn Spaniards too;
Study'ng more Deaths then could be wrought
By what the rash could do.
3.
The Avergnian Colors high were raised,
Twice taken, and twice relieved.
Our Foes, like friends to Valor, praised
The mischiefs they received.
4.
The cheerful English got renown;
Fought merrily and fast:
'lis time, they cried to mow them down,
Wars Harvest cannot last.
5.
If Death be rest, here let us dye,
Where weariness is all
We daily get by Victory,
Who must by Famine fall.
6.
Great Solomon is landed now;
All Fate he seems to be;
And brings those Tempests in his Brow
Which he deserved at Sea.

Viller. He can at most but once prevail,
Though armed with Nations that were brought by more
Gross Galleys then would serve to hale
This Island to the Lycian Shore.

Adm. Let us a pace do worthily and give
Our Story length, though long we cannot live.

Chorus. So greatly do, that being dead,
Brave Wonders may be wrought
By such as shall our Story read
And study how we fought.

Exeunt. Enter Solomon, Pirrhus. Soly. What sudden halt has stayed thy swift
Renown;
O're-running Kingdoms, stopping at a Town?
He that will win the Prize in Honors Race
Must nearer to the Gole still mend his pace.
If Age thou feel'st, the active Camp forbear;
In sleepy Cities rest, the Caves of fear.
Thy mind was never valiant, if, when old,
Thy Courage cools because thy blood is cold.

Pirrhus. How can ambitious Manhood be expressed
More then by marks of our disdain of rest?
What less then toyls incessant can, despite
Of Canon, raise these Mounts to Castle-height?
Or less then utmost or unwearied strength
Can draw these Lines of Batt'ry to that length?

Soly. The toils of Ants, and Mole-hills raised, in scorn
Of Labor, to be levelled with a Spurn.
These are the Pyramids that show your pains;
But of your Armies valor, where remains
One Trophy to excuse a Bassa's boast?

Pirrh. Valor may reckon what she bravely lost;
Not from Successes all her Count does raise:
By life well lost we gain a share of praise.
If we in dangers Glass all Valor see,
And Death the farthest step of danger be,
Behold our Mount of Bodies made a Grave*
And prize our loss by what we scorned to save.

Soly. Away! range all the Camp for an Assault!
Tell them, they tread in Graves who make a halt.
Fat Slaves, who have been lulled to a Disease;
Crammed out of breath, and crippled by their ease!
Whose active Fathers leapt over Walls too high
For them to climb: Hence, from my anger fly:
Which is too worthy for thee being mine,
And must be quenched by Rhodian blood or thine.
Exit Pirrhus, bowing. In Honor's Orb the Christians shine;
Their light in War does still increase;
Though often misled by mists of Wine,
Or blinder love the Crime of Peace.
Bold in Adult'ries frequent change;
And every loud expensive Vice;
Ebbing out wealth by ways as strange
As it flowed in by a varice.
Thus vildly they dare live, and yet dare dye.
If Courage be a virtue, it is allowed
But to those few on whom our Crowns rely,
And is condemned as madness in the Crowd.

Enter Mustapha, Ianthe veiled. Musta. Great Sultan, Hail! though here at Land
Lost Fools in opposition in stand;
Yet thou at Sea do all command.

Soly. What is it thou would show, and yet do shroud?


Musta. I bring the Morning pictured in a Cloud;
A Wealth more worth then all the Sea does hide;
Or Courts display in their triumphant pride.

Soly. Thou seem to bring the Daughter of the Night;
And giv'st her many Stars to make her bright.
Dispatch my wonder and relate her Story.

Musta. It Is full of Fate, and yet has much of Glory.
A Squadron of our Galleys that did ply,
West from this Coast, met two of Cicily;
Both fraught to furnish Rhodes, we gave 'em chase;
And had, but for our Number, met disgrace.
For, grapling, they maintained a bloody Fight,
Which did begin with Day and end with Night.
And though this bashful Lady then did wear
Her Face still veiled, her valor did appear:
She urged their courage when they boldly Fought;
And many shunned the dangers, which she sought.

Soly. Where are the limits thou would set for praise?
Or to what height will thou my wonder raise?

Must. This is Ianthe, the Cicilian Flower,
Sweeter then Buds unfolded in a shower,
Bride to Alphonso, who in Rhodes so long
The Theme has been of each Heroic Song;
And she for his relief those Galleys fraught;
Both stowed with what her Dower and Jewels bought.

Soly. O wondrous virtue of a Christian Wife!
Adven'tring life's support and then her Life
To save her ruined Lord! Bid her unvail!

Ianthe steps back. Ianthe. It were more honor, Sultan, to assail
A public strength against thy forces bent
Then to unwall this private Tenement;
To which no Monarch but my Lord has right;
Nor will it yield to Treaty or to Might:
Where Heaven's great Law defends him from surprise:
This Curtain only opens to his eyes.

Soly. If Beauty veiled so virtuous be,
It Is more then Christian Husbands know;
Whose Ladies wear their faces free;
Which they to more then Husband show.

Ianthe. Your Bassa swore, and by his dreadful Law,
None but my Lords dear hand this Vail should draw;
And that to Rhodes I should conducted be
To take my share of all his destiny:
Else I had quickly found
Sure means to get some vvound,
Which would in Deaths cold Arms
My honor instant safety give
From all those rude Alarms
Which keep it waking whilst I live.

Soly. Have thou engaged our Prophets plight
To keep her Beauty from my sight;
And to conduct her Person free
To harbor with mine Enemy?

Musta. Virtue constrained the privildge I gave:
Shall I for sacred Virtue pardon crave?

Soly. I envy not the conquests of thy Sword:
Thrive still in wicked War;
But, Slave, how did thou dare,
In virtuous Love, thus to transcend thy Lord?
Thou did thy utmost virtue show:
Yet somewhat more does rest,
Not yet by thee expressed;
Which virtue left for me to do.
Thou great example of a Christian Wife,
Enjoy thy Lord and give him happy Life.
Thy Galleys with their freight,
For which the Hungry wait,
Shall strait to Rhodes conducted be;
And as thy passage to him shall be free,
So both my safe return to Cicilie.

Ianthe. May Solomon be ever far
From impious honors of the War;
Since worthy to receive renown
From things repaired not overthrown.
And when in peace his virtue thrives,
Let all the race of Loyal Wives
Sing this his bounty to his Glory
And teach their Princes by his story:
Of which, if any Victors be,
Let them, because he conquered me,
Strip cheerfully each others Brow,
And at his feet their Laurel throw.

Soly. Strait to the Port her Galleys steer;
Then hale the Sentry at the Peer.
And though our Flags never use to bow,
They shall do Virtue homage now.
Give Fire still as she passes by,
And let our Streamers lower fly.

Exeunt several ways* Chorus of Women.
1.
LEt us live, live! for being dead,
The pretty Spots,
Ribbands and Knots,
And the fine French dress for the Head;
No Lady wears upon her
In the cold, cold, bed of Honor.
Beat down our Grottoes, and hew down our Bowers,
Dig up our Arbours, and root up our Flowers.
Our Gardens are Bulwarks* and Bastions become;
Then hang up our Lutes, we must sing to the Drum.
2.
Our Patches and our Curles
(So exact in each Station)
Our Powders and our Purls
Are now out of Fashion.
Hence with our Needles, and give us your Spades;
We, that were Ladies, grow course as our Maids.
Our Coaches have drove us to Balls at the Court;
We now must drive Barrovvs to earth up the Port,
The End of the second Entry.
The Third Entry.
The ENTRY is again prepared by Instrumental Music.
The further part of the Scene is opened, and a Royal Pavilion appears
displayed; representing Solimans Imperial Throne; and about it are discerned
the Quarters of his Bassa's, and Inferior Officers. Enter Soliman, Pirrhus,
Mustapha. Solym. PIrrhus, Draw up our Army wide!
Then from the Gross two strong Reserves divide;
And spread the wings;
As if we were to fight,
In the lost Rhodians sight,
With all the Western Kings!
Each wing with Janissaries line;
The Right and Left to Hally's Sons assign;
The Gross to Zangiban*
The Main Artillery
With Mustapha shall be:
Bring thou the Rear, We lead the Van.

Pirrhus. It shall be done as early as the Dawn;
As if the Figure by thy hand were drawn.

Mustap. We wish that we, to ease thee, could prevent
All thy Commands, by guessing thy intent.

Soly. These Rhodians, who of Honor boast,
A loss excuse, when bravely lost:
Now they may bravely lose their Rhodes,
Which never played against such odds.
To morrow let them see our strength, and weep
Whilst they their want of losing blame;
Their valiant folly strives too long to keep
What might be rendered without shame.

Pirrhus. It Is well our valiant Prophet did
In us not only loss forbid,
But has enjoined us still to get.
Empire must move a pace,
When she begins the Race,
And apter is for wings then feet.

Mustap. They vainly interrupt our speed.
And civil Reason lack,
To know they should go back
When we determine to proceed.

Pirrhus. When to all Rhodes our Army does appear
Shall we then make a sudden halt,
And give a general Assault?

Soly. Pirrhus not yet, Ianthe being there*
Let them our Valor, by our Mercy prize.
The respit of this day
To virtuous Love shall pay
A debt long due for all my Victories.

Must. If virtuous Beauty can attain such grace
Whilst she a Captive was, and hid,
What wisdom can his Love forbid
When Virtue's free and Beauty shows her Face?

Soly. Dispatch a Trumpet to the Town;
Summon Ianthe to be gone
Safe with her Lord. When both are free
And in their Course to Cicily,
Then Rhodes shall for that valor mourn
Which stops the haste of our return.

Pirrhus. Those that in Grecian Quarries wrought,
And Pioners from Lycia brought,
Who like a Nation in a throng appear,
So great their number is, are landed here:
Where shall they work?

Soly. Upon Philermus Hill.
There, ere this Moon her Circle fills with days,
They shall, by punish sloth and cherished skill,
A spacious Palace in a Castle raise:
A Neighborhood within the Rhodians view;
Where, if my anger cannot them subdue.
My patience shall out-wait them, whilst they long
Attend to see weak Princes make them strong:
There I Will grow old, and dye too, if they have
The secret art to Fast me to my Grave.

Exeunt. The Scene is changed to that of the Town Besieged. Enter Villerius,
Admiral, Alphonso, Ianthe. Vill. WHen we, Ianthe, would this act commend,
We know no more how to begin
Then we should do, if we were in,
How, suddenly, to make an end.

Adm. What love was yours which these strong bars of Fate
Were all too weak to separate?
Which Seas and Storms could not divide
Nor all the dreadful Turkish pride?
Which passed secure though not unseen
Even double Guards of Death that lay between.

Vill. What more could Honor for fair Virtue do?
What could Alphonso venture more for you?

Adm. With wonder and with shame we must confess,
All we our selves can do for Rhodes, is less.

Vill. Nor did your love and courage act alone,
Your bounty too has no less wonders done.
And for our Guard you have brought wisely down
A Troop of Virtues to defend the Town:
The only Troop that can a Town defend;
Which Heaven before for ruin did intend.

Adm. Look here ye VVestern Monarchs, look with shame,
Who fear not a remote, though common Foe;
The Cabinet of one illustrious Dame
Does more then your Exchequers joined did do.

Alphon. Indeed I think, Ianthe, few
So young and flourishing as you,
Whose Beauties might so well adorn
The Jewels which by them are worn,
Did ever Muskets for them take,
Nor of their Pearls did Bullets make.

Ianthe. When you my Lord are shut up here
Expense of treasure must appear
So far from bounty, that, alas,
It covetous advantage was:
For with small cost I sought to save
Even all the Treasure that I have.
Who would not all her trifling Jewels give,
Which but from Number can their worth derive,
If she could purchase or redeem with them
One great inestimable Gem?

Adam. Oh ripe perfection in a Breast so young


Vill. Virtue has tuned her heart, and Wit her tongue


Adm. Though Rhodes no pleasure can allow,
I dare secure the safety of it now;
All will so labor to save you
As that will save the City too.

Ianthe. Alas, the utmost I have done
More then a just reward has won,
If by my Lord and you it be but thought
I had the care, to serve him as I ought.

Vill. Brave Duke farewell, the Scouts for Orders wait,
And the Parade does fill.

Alphon. Great Master, I Will attend your pleasure strait,
And strive to serve your will. Exeunt, Vill. Adm.
Ianthe after all this praise
Which, Fame so fully to you pays,
For that which all the world beside
Admires you, I alone must chide.
Are you that kind and virtuous Wife,
Who thus expose your Husbands Life?
The hazards, both at Land and Sea,
Through which so boldly thou have run,
Did more assault and threaten me
Then all the Sultan could have done.
Thy dangers, could, I them have seen,
Would not to me have dangers been,
But certain death: Now thou are here
A danger worse then death I fear.
Thou have, Ianthe, honor won,
But mine, alas, will be undone:
For as thou valiant were for me,
I shall a Coward grow for thee.

Ianthe. Take heed Alphonso, for this care of me,
VVil to my Fame injurious be;
Your love will brighter by it shine,
But it eclipses mine.
Since I would here before, or with you fall,
Death needs but becken when he means to call.

Alphon. Ianthe, even in this you shall command.
And this my strongest passion guide;
Your virtue will not be denied:
It could even Solomon himself withstand;
To whom it did so beauteous show
It seemed to civilize a barbarous Foe.
Of this your strange escape, Ianthe say,
Briefly the motive and the way.

Ianthe. Did I not tell you how we fought,
How I was taken, and how brought
Before great Solomon? but there
I think we interrupted were.

Alpho. Yes, but we will not be so here,
Should Solomon himself appear.

Ianthe. It seems that what the Bassa of me said,
Had some respect and admiration bred
In Solomon; and this to me increast
The jealousies which Honor did suggest.
All that of Turks and Tyrants I had heard,
But that I feared not Death, I should have feared.
I, to excuse my Voyage, urged my Love
To your high worth; which did such pity move
That straight his usage did reclaim my fear;
He seemed in civil France, and Monarch there:
For soon my Person, Galleys, Freight, were free
By his command.

Alphon. O wondrous Enemy!


Ianthe. These are the smallest Gifts his bounty knew.


Alp. What could he give you more?


Ianthe. He gave me you;
And you may homewards now securely go
Through all his Fleet.

Alph. But Honor says not so.


Ianthe. If that forbid it you shall never see
That I and that will disagree:
Honor will speak the same to me.

Alph. This Christian Turk amazes me, my Dear!
How long Ianthe stayed you there?

Ianthe. Two days with Mustapha.


Alph. How do you say?
Two days, and two whole nights? alas*

Ianth. That it, my Lord, no longer was,
Is such a mercy, as too long I stay,
E're at the Altar thanks to Heaven I pay.

Alph. To Heaven, Confession should prepare the way.

Exit Ianthe. She is all Harmony and fair as light
But brings me discord and the Clouds of night.
And Solomon does think Heavens joys to be
In Women not so fair as she.
It Is strange! Dismiss so fair an Enemy?
She was his own by right of War,
We are his Dogs, and such as she, his Angels are.
O wondrous Turkish chastity!
Her Galleys, freight, and those to send
Into a Town which he would take!
Are we besieged then by a friend?
Could Honor such a Present make,
Then when his Honor is at stake?
Against it self, does Honor booty play?
We have the liberty to go away!
Strange above miracle! But who can say
If in his hands we once should be
What would become of her? For what of me
Though Love is blind, even Love may see.
Come back my thoughts, you must not rove!
For sure Ianthe does Alphonso love.
Oh Solomon this mistique act of thine,
Does all my quiet undermine:
But on thy Troops, if not on Thee,
This Sword my cure and my revenge shall be.

Exit. Chorus. Of Men and Women.
Men. YE wives all that are, and wives that would be,
Unlearn all ye learnt here, of one another.
And all ye have learnt of an Aunt or a Mother,
Then strait hither come, a New Pattern to see:
Which in a good humor kind Fortune did send;
A Glass for your minds as well as your faces;
Make haste then, and break your own Looking-glasses:
If you see but your selves, you will never amend.
Women. You, that would teach us what your wives ought to do,
Take heed; there is a pattern in Town too for you.
Be you but Alphonsos, and we
Perhaps Ianthes will be.

Men. Be you but Ianthes, and we
Alphonsos a while will be.

Both. Let both sides begin then, rather then neither;
Let Us both join our hands, and both mend together.

End of the third Entry.
The Fourth Entry.
The Entry is again prepared by Instrumental Music.
The Scene is varied to the Prospect of Mount Philermus: Artificers appearing
at work about that Castle which was there, with wonderful expedition, erected
by Solomon. His great Army is discovered in the Plain below, drawn up in
Battalia; as if it were prepared for a general Assault. Enter Solomon, Pirrhus,
Mustapha. Solomon. REfuse my Passport, and resolve to dye?
Only for fashions sake, for company?
Oh costly scruples! But I Will try to be,
Thou stubborn Honor, obstinate as Thee.
My Power thou shall not vanquish by thy will;
I will enforce to live whom thou would kill.

Pirrhus. They in to morrows storm will change their mind;
Then, though too late instructed, they shall find.
That those who your protection dare reject
No humane Power dares venture to protect.
They are not Foes, but Rebels, who withstand
The power that does their Fate command.

Soly. Oh Mustapha, our strength we measure ill;
We want the half of what we think we have;
For we enjoy the Beast-like power to kill,
But not the God-like power to save.
Who laughs at death, laughs at our highest power;
The valiant man is his own Emperor.

Musta. Your power to save, you have to them made known,
Who scorned it with ungrateful pride;
Now, how you can destroy, must next be shown;
And that the Christian world has tried.

Soly. It Is such a single pair
As only equal are
Unto themselves; but many steps above
All others who attempt to make up Love.
Their Lives will noble History afford,
And must adorn my Scepter, not my Sword.
My strength in vain has with their virtue strove;
In vain their hate would overcome my love.
My favors I Will compel them to receive.
Go Mustapha, and strictest Orders give,
Through all the Camp, that in Assault they spare
(And in the Sack of this presumptuous Town)
The lives of these two strangers, with a care
Above the preservation of their own.
Alphonso has so often his courage shown,
That he to all but Cowards must be known.
Ianthe is so fair, that none can be
Mistaken, amongst thousands, which is she.

Exeunt* The Scene returns to that of the Town Besieged. Enter Alphonso,
Ianthe. Ianthe. Alphonso, Now the danger grovvs so near,
Give her, that loves you, leave to fear.
Nor do I blush this passion to confess,
Since it for object has no less
Then even your liberty, or life;
I fear not as a woman but a wife.
We were too proud no use to make
Of Solymans obliging proffer;
For why should Honor scorn to take
What Honor's self does to it offer.

Alph. To be overcome by his victorious Svvord,
Will comfort to our fall afford:
Our strength may yield to his; but it is not fit
Our virtue should to his submit;
In that, Ianthe, I must be
Advanced, and greater far then he.

Ianthe. Fighting with him who strives to be your friend,
You not with Virtue but with Povv'r contend.

Alph. Forbid it Heaven our friends should think that we
Did merit friendship from an Enemy.

Ianthe. He is a Foe to Rhodes, and not to you.


Alph. In Rhodes besieged we must be Rhodians too.


Ianthe. 'Tvvas Fortune that engaged you in this War.


Alph. 'Tvvas Providence! Heaven's Prisoners here we are.


Ianthe. That Providence our freedom does restore;
The hand that shut, now opens us the Door.

Alph. Had Heaven that Passport for our freedom sent
It would have chose some better Instrument
Then faithless Solomon.

Ianthe. O say not so!
To strike and wound the virtue of your Foe
Is cruelty, which war does not allow:
Sure he has better words deserved from you.

Alphon. From me Ianthe, No;
What he deserves from you, you best must know.

Ianthe. What means my Lord?


Alphon. For I confess, I must
The poisoned bounties of a Foe mistrust:
And when upon the Bait I look,
Though all seem fair, suspect the Hook.

Ianthe. He, though a Foe, is generous and true:
What he has done declares what he will do.

Alphon. He in two Days your high esteem has won:
What he would do I know; who knows what he has done?
Done? Wicked Tongue what have thou said? Aside.
What horrid falsehood from thee fled?
Oh Jealousy (if Jealousy it be)
Would I had here an Asp instead of Thee.

Ianthe. Sure you are sick, your words, alas,
Gestures, and looks distempers show.

Alphon. Ianthe, you may safely pass;
The Pass, no doubt, was meant to you.

Ianthe. He Is jealous sure; Oh virtue can it be?
Have I for this served Virtue faithfully?
Alphonso --

Alphon. Speak, Ianthe, and be free.


Ianthe. Have I deserved this change?


Alphon. Thou do deserve
So much, that Emperors are proud to serve
The fair Ianthe; and not dare
To hurt a Land whilst she is there.
Return (Renowned Ianthe) safely home;
And force thy passage with thine Eyes;
To conquer Rhodes will be a prize
Less glorious then by thee to be or'ecome.
But since he longs (it seems) so much to see,
And be possessed of me,
Tell him, I shall not fly beyond his reach:
Would he could dare to meet me in the Breach.

Exit. Ianthe. Tell him! tell him? Oh no, Alphonso, no
Let never man thy weakness know;
Thy sudden fall will be a shame
To Man's and Virtue's Name.
Alphonso's false! for what can falser be
Then to suspect that falsehood dwells in me?
Could Solomon both Life and Honor give?
And can Alphonso me of both deprive?
Of both Alphonso; for believe
Ianthe will disdain to live
So long as to let others see
Thy true, and her imputed infamy.
No more let Lovers think they can possess
More then a Month of happiness.
We thought our Hold of it was strong,
We thought our Lease of it was long:
But now, that all may ever happy prove,
Let never any love.
And yet these troubles of my love to me
Shall shorter then the pleasures be.
I Will till to morrow last; then the Assault
Shall finish my misfortune and his fault.
I to my Enemies shall doubly owe,
For saving me before, for killing now.

Exit. Enter Villerius, Admiral. Adm. From out the Camp a valiant Christian
Slave
Escaped, and to our Knights assurance gave
That at the break of day
Their Mine will play.

Vill. Often Martiningus struck and tried the ground,
And Counter-digg'd, and has the hollows found:
We shall prevent
Their dire intent.
Where is the Duke, whose valor strives to keep
Rhodes still awake, which else would dully sleep?

Adm. His Courage and his Reason is overthrown.


Vill. Thou sing'st the sad destruction of our Town.


Adm. I met him wild as all the winds,
When in the Ocean they contest:
And diligent Suspicion finds
He is with jealousy possessed.

Vill. That Arrow, once misdrawn, must ever rove.
O weakness sprung from mightiness of love!
O pitty'd Crime!
Alphonso will be overthrown
Unless we take this Ladder down,
Where, though the Rounds are broke,
He does himself provoke
Too hastily to Climb.

Adm. Invisibly, as dreams, Fame's wings
Fly every where;
Hovering all Day over Palaces of Kings;
At Night she lodges in the people's ear:
Already they perceive Alphonso wild,
And the beloved Ianthe grieved.

Vill. Let us no more by Honor be beguiled;
This Town can never be relieved;
Alphonso and Ianthe being lost,
Rhodes, thou do cherish life with too much cost!
Chorus. Away, unchain the streets, unearth the Ports.
Pull down each Barracade
Which women's fears have made,
And bravely fally out from all the Forts!
Drive back the Crescents, and advance the Cross,
Or sink all humane Empires in our loss!

Chorus of Wives.
1.
1. THis cursed Jealousy, what is it?
2. It Is Love that has lost it self in a Mist.
3. It Is Love being frighted out of his wits.
4. It Is Love that has a Fever got;
Love that is violently hot;
But troubled with cold and trembling fits.
It Is yet a more unnatural evil:
It Is the God of Love, it is the God of Love, possessed with a Devil. Chorus.

2.
1. 'This rich corrupted wine of Love;
Which sharpest vinegar does prove.
2. From all the sweet Flowers which might Honey make,
It does a deadly poison bring.
3. Strange Serpent which it self does sting!
4. It never can sleep, and dreams still awake.
5. It stuffs up the Marriage Bed with thorns!
It gores it self, it gores it self, with imagined horns. Chorus.

The End of the Fourth Entry.
The Fifth Entry
The ENTRY is again prepared by Instrumental Music.
The Scene is changed into a Representation of a general Assault given to the
Town; the greatest fury of the Army being discerned at the English Station.
Enter Pirrhus. Pirrhus. TRaverse the Canon! mount the Batrys higher!
More Gabions, and renew the Blinds!
Like dust they powder spend,
And to our faces send
The heat of all the Element of fire;
And to their Backs have all the winds.

Enter Mustapha. Musta. More Ladders, and reliefs to scale!
The Fire-crooks are too short! Help, help to hale!
That Battlement is loose, and strait will down!
Point well the Canon, and play fast!
Their fury is too hot to last.
That Rampire shakes, they fly into the Town.

Pirrh. March up with those Reserves to that Redout!
Faint slaves! the Janissaries reel!
They bend, they bend! and seem to feel
The terrors of a Rout.

Musta. Old Zanger halts, and re-inforcment lacks!


Pirrh. March on!


Musta. Advance those Pikes, and charge their Backs!


Enter Solomon. Solym. Those Platforms are too low to reach!
Haste, haste! call Haly to the Breach!
Can my domestique Janissaries fly!
And not adventure life for victory!
Whose childhood with my Palace-milk I fed;
Their youth, as if I were their Parent, bred.
What is this Monster Death, that our poor Slaves,
Still vexed with toil, are loath to rest in Graves?

Musta. If life so precious be, why do not they,
Who in War's trade can only live by prey,
Their own afflicted lives expose
To take the happier from their foes?

Pirrh. Our Troops renew the Fight!
And those that sallied out
To give the Rout,
Are now returned in flight!

Solym. Follow, follow, follow! make good the Line!
In, Pirrhus, in! Look, we have sprung the Mine!

Exit Pirrhus. Musta. Those desperate English never will fly!
Their firmness still does hinder others flight,
As if their Mistresses were by
To see and praise them whilst they fight.

Solym. That flame of valor in Alphonso's eyes
Outshines the light of all my victories!
Those who were slain when they his Bulwark stormed,
Contented fell,
As vanquished well;
Those who were left alive may now,
Because their valor is by his reformed,
Hope to make others bow.

Musta. E're while I in the English station saw
Beauty, that did my wonder forward draw,
Whose valor did my Forces back disperse;
Fairer than Woman, and then Man more fierce*
It showed such courage as disdained to yield,
And yet seemed willing to be killed.

Solym. This Vision did to me appear;
Which moved my pity and my fear:
It had a Dress much like the Imag'rie
For Heroes drawn, and may Ianthe be.

Enter Pirrhus. Pirrh. Fall on! the English stoop when they give fire!
They seem to furl their Colors and retire!

Solym. Advance! I only would the honor have
To conquer two, whom I by force would save.

Enter Alphonso with his Sword drawn. Alph. My reason by my Courage is misled!
Why chase I those who would from dying fly,
Enforcing them to sleep amongst the dead,
Yet keep my self unslain that fain would die?
Do not the Prisoners whom we take declare
How Solomon proclaimed through all his Host,
That they Ianthe's life and mine should spare?
Life ill preserved is worse then basely lost.
Mine by dispatch of War he will not take,
But means to leave it lingering on the Rack;
That in his Palace I might live, and know
Her shame, and be afraid to call it so.
Tyrants and Devils think all pleasures vain,
But what are still derived from others pain.

Enter Admiral. Adm. Renowned Alphonso, thou have fought to day,
As if all Asia were thy valor's prey.
But now thou must do more
Then thou have done before;
Else the important life of Rhodes is gone.

Alph. Why from the peaceful grave
Should I still strive to save
The lives of others, that would lose mine own?

Adm. The Soldiers call, Alphonso! thou have taught
The way to all the wonders they have wrought;
Who now refuse to fight
But in thy valor's sight.

Alphon. I would to none example be to fly;
But fain would teach all human kind to die.

Adm. Haste, haste! Ianthe in disguise
At The English Bulwark wounded lies;
And in the French, our old great Master strives
From many hands to rescue many lives.

Alphon. Ianthe wounded? where, alas,
Has mourning Pity hid her face?
Let Pity fly, fly far from the oppressed,
Since she removes her Lodging from my Breast!

Adm. You have but too great Cruelties to choose
By staying here; you must Ianthe lose
Who ventured life and fame for you;
Or your great Master quite forsake.
Who to your childhood first did show
The ways you did to Honor take.

Alphon. Ianthe cannot be
In safer company:
For what will not the valiant English do
When Beauty is distressed and Virtue too.

Adm. Dispatch your choice, if you will either save
Occasion bids you run;
You must redeem the one
And I the other from a common Grave.
Alphonso, haste!

Alphon. Thou urgest me too fast.
This riddle is too sad and intricate;
The hardest that was e're proposed by Fate.
Honor and pity have
Of both too short a time to choose:
Honor, the one would save,
Pity, would not the other loose.

Adm. Away, brave Duke, away!
Both perish by our stay.

Alphon. I to my Noble Master owe
All that my Youth did Nobly do*
He in War's School my Master was,
The Ruler of my life;
She my loved Mistress; but, alas,
My now suspected Wife.

Adm. By this delay we both of them forsake!
Which of their rescues will thou undertake?

Alph. Hence Admiral, and to my Master hy!
I will as swiftly to my Mistress fly;
Through Ambush, Fire, and all impediments
The witty cruelty of War invents:
For there does yet some taste of kindness last,
Still relishing the virtue that is past.
But how, Ianthe, can my sword successful prove,
Where honor stops, and only pity leads my love?

Exeunt, several ways. Enter Pirrhus. Pirrhus. O sudden change! repulst in
all the heat
Of Victory, and forced to lose retreat!
Seven Crescents, fixed on their Redouts, are gone!
Horse, horse! we fly
From Victory!
Wheel, wheel from their Reserves, and charge our own!
Divide that Wing!
More succors bring!
Rally the Fled,
And quit our Dead!
Rescue that Ensign and that Drum!
Bold slaves? they to our Trenches come:
Though still our Army does in posture stay
Drawn up, to judge, not act the business of the day;
As Rome in Theaters saw Fencers play.

Enter Mustapha. Musta. Who can be loud enough to give command?
Stand, Haly, make a stand!
Those Horses to that Carriage span! Drive, drive!
Zanger is shot again, yet still alive!
C^yns for the Culv'rin, then give fire
To clear the Turn-Pikes, and let Zanger in!
Look, Pirrhus, look, they all begin
To alter their bold Countenance, and retire!

The Scene returns to that of the Castle on the Mount Philermus. Enter Solomon.
Soly. How cowardly my numerous Slaves fall back?
Slow to Assault, but dext'rous when they sack.
Wild Wolves in times of peace they are;
Tame sheep, and harmless in the War.
Crowds fit to stop up Breaches; and prevail
But so as shoals of Herrings choke a Whale.
This Dragon-Duke so nimbly fought to day,
As if he wings had got to stoop at Prey.
Ianthe is triumphant, but not gone;
And sees Rhodes still beleaguered, though not won.
Audacious Town! thou keep'st thy staion still;
And so my Castle tarries on that Hill;
Where I will dwell till Famine enter Thee;
And prove more fatal then my Sword could be.
Nor shall Ianthe from my favors run,
But stay to meet and praise what she did shun.

The Scene is changed to that of the Town besieged. Enter Villerius, Admiral,
Ianthe. She in a Nightgown and a Chair is brought in. Viller. FAir Virtue, we
have found
No danger in your Wound.
Securely live,
And credit give
To us, and to the Surgeons Art.

Ianthe. Alas, my wound is in the Heart;
Or else, where e're it be,
Imprisoned life it comes to free,
By seconding a worser wound that hid does lie.
What practice can assure
That Patient of a Cure,
Whose kind of grief still makes her doubt the remedy?

Adm. The wounded that would soon be eased
Should keep their spirits tuned and pleased;
No discord should their mind subdue:
And who in such distress
As this, ought to express
More joyful harmony than you?
It Is not alone that we assure
Your certain cure;
But pray remember that your blood's expense
Was in defense
Of Rhodes, which gained to day a most important Victory:
For our success, repelling this Assault,
Has taught the Ottomans to halt;
Who may, wasting their heavy Body, learn to fly.

Adm. Not only this should hasten your content;
But you shall joy to know the Instrument
That wrought the triumph of this day;
Alphonso did the Sally sway;
To whom our Rhodes all that she is does owe,
And all that from her Root of Hope can grow.

Ianthe. Has he so greatly done?
Indeed he used to run
As swift in Honor's Race as any He
Who thinks he merits Wreaths for Victory.
This is to all a comfort, and should be,
If he were kind, the greatest joy to me.
Where is my altered Lord? I cannot tell
If I may ask, if he be safe and well?
For whilst all strangers may his actions boast,
Who in their Songs repeat
The Triumphs he does get,
I only must lament his favors lost.

Vill. Some wounds he has; none dangerous but yours;
Ianthe cured, his own he quickly cures.

Ianthe. If his be little, mine will soon grow less.
Ay me! What Sword
Durst give my Lord
Those wounds, which now Ianthe cannot dress?

Adm. Ianthe will rejoice when she did hear
How greater then himself he does appear
In rescue of her life, all acts were slight,
And cold, even in our hottest Fight
Compared to what he did,
When with Death's Vizard she her beauty hid.

Vill. Love urged his anger, till it made such haste
And rusht so swiftly in,
That scarce he did begin
Ere we could say, the mighty work was past.

Ianthe. All this for me? something he did for you:
But when his Svvord begun
Much more it would have done
If he, alas, had thought Ianthe true.

Adm. Be kind, Ianthe, and be well!
It is too pitiful to tell
What way of dying he expressed
When he that Letter read
You vvrote before your vvounds were dressed;
When you and we dispair'd you could recover;
Then he was more than dead:
And much out-vvept a Husband and a Lover.

Enter Alphonso wounded, led in by two Mutes. Alphon: Tear up my vvounds! I had
a passion, coorse,
And rude enough to strengthen Jealousy;
But want that more refined and quicker force
Which does out-vvrestle Nature when vvedye.
Turn to a Tempest all my inward strife:
Let it not last,
But in a blast
Spend this infectious vapor, Life!

Ianthe. It is my Lord! Enough of strength I feel
To bear me to him, or but let me kneel.
He bled for me when he achieved for you
This daye's success; and much from me is due.
Let me but bless him for his Victory,
And hasten to forgive him e're I dye.

Alphon. Keep back Ianthe, for my strength will fail
If on thy Cheeks I see thy Roses pale.
Draw all the Curtains and then lead her in;
Let me in darkness mourn away my sin.

Exeunt. Chorus of Soldiers:
1.
WIth a fine merry Gale,
Fit to fill every sail,
They did cut the smooth Sea
That our Skins they might flea:
Still as they landed, we firkt them with Sallys;
We did bang their silk Shashes,
Through Sands and through Plashes,
Till amain they did run to their Galleys.
2.
They first were so mad
As they Jealousies had
That our Isle durst not stay,
But would float strait away;
For they landed still faster and faster:
And their old Bassa Pirrhus
Did think he could fear us;
But himself sooner feared our Grand-Master.
3.
Then the hug'ous great Turk,
Came to make us more work;
With enough men to eat
All he meant to defeat;
Whose wonderful worship did confirm us
In the fear he would bide here
So long till he died here,
By the Castle he built on Philermus.
4.
You began the Assault
With a very long Hault;
And, as haulting ye came,
So ye went off as lame;
And have left our Alphonso to scoff ye.
To himself, as a Dainty,
He keeps his Ianthe;
Whilst we drink good Wine, and you drink but Coffy.
The Curtain is let fall. The End of the Fifth ENTRY.
FINIS.
THE SIEGE OF RHODES:

The Second Part,

As it was lately Represented at His Highness the Duke of YORK'S Theater In
Lincoln's End Fields.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
Sign of the Anchor, on the Lower-walk in the New-Exchange. 1663.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE the EARL of CLARENDON Lord High Chancellor of England,
etc.
MY LORD,
THough Poems have lost much of their Ancient value, yet I will presume to make
this a Present to your Lordship; and the rather, because Poems (if they have
any thing precious in them) do, like Jewels, attract a greater esteem when they
come into the possession of great Persons, than when they are in ordinary hands.

The excuse which men have had for dedication of Books, has been to protect
them from the malice of Readers: but a defense of of this nature was fitter for
your forces when you were early known to Learned men (and had no other occasion
for your abilities, but to vindicate Authors) than at this Season when you are
of extraordinary use to the whole Nation.

Yet when I consider how many and how violent they are who persecute Dramatick
Poetry, I will then rather call this a Dedication than a Present; as not
intending by it to pass any kind of obligation, but to receive a great benefit;
since I cannot be safe unless I am sheltered behind your Lordship.

Your name is so eminent in the Justice which yon convey through all the
different Members of this great Empire, that my Rhodians seem to enjoy a better
Harbor in the Pacifique Thames, than they had on the Mediterranean; and I have
brought Solomon to be arraigned at your Tribunal, where you are the Censor of
his civility and magnificence.

Dramatick Poetry meets with the same persecution now, from such who esteem
themselves the most refined and civil, as it ever did from the Barbarous. And
yet whilst those virtuous Enemies deny heroique Plays to the Gentry, they
entertain the People with a Seditious Farce of their own counterfeit Gravity.
But I hope you will not be unwilling to receive (in this Poetical dress)
neither the Besieged nor the Besiegers, since they come without their vices:
for as others have purged the Stage from corruptions of the Art of the Drama,
so I have endeavored to cleanse it from the corruption of manners; nor have I
wanted care to render the Ideas of Greatness and Virtue pleasing and familiar.

In old Rome the Magistrates did not only protect but exhibit Plays; and, not
long since, the two wise Cardinals did kindly entertain the great Images
represented in Tragedy by Monsieur Corneille. My Lord, it proceeds from the
same mind not to be pleased with Princes on the Stage, and not to affect them
in the Throne; for those are ever most inclined to break the Mirror who are
unwilling to see the Images of such as have just authority over their guilt.

In this Poem I have revived the remembrance of that fatal desolation which was
permitted by Christian Princes when they favored the ambition of such as
defended the diversity of Religions (begot by the factions of Learning) in
Germany; whilst those who would never admit Learning into their Empire (lest it
should meddle with Religion and entangle it with Controversy) did make Rhodes
defenseless; which was the only fortified Academy in Christendom where
Divinity and Arms were equally professed. I have likewise, for variety,
softened the Martial encounters between Solomon and the Rhodians, with
intermingling the conjugal virtues of Alphonso and Ianthe.

If I should proceed, and tell your Lordship of what use Theaters have
anciently been, and may be now, by heightening the Characters of Valor,
Temperance, Natural Juststice, and complacency to Government, I should fall
into the ill manners and indiscretion of ordinary Dedicators, who go about to
instruct those from whose abilities they expect protection. The apprehension of
this error makes me hasten to crave pardon for what has been already said by

MY LORD, Your Lordships most humble and most odedient Servant WILL. D'AVENANT.

The Persons represented.
Solomon The Magnificent. Pirrhus Vizier Bassa. Mustapha Bassa. Rustan Bassa.
Haly Eunuch Bassa. Villerius Grand Master of Rhodes. Alphonso A Cicilian Duke.
Admiral Of Rhodes. High Marshal Of Rhodes. Roxolana Wife to Solomon. Ianthe
Wife to Alphonso. Women Attendants to Roxolana. Women Attendants to Ianthe.
Four Pages Attendants to Roxolana.
The Scene, RHODES.

Prologue.
WHat if we serve you now a Trick? and do
Like him who posted Bills that he would show
So many active feats, and those so high,
That Court and City came to see him fly?
But he, good man, careful to empty still
The Money-Boxes, as the House did fill,
Of all his Tricks, had time to show but one:
He lined his Purse, and, Presto! he was gone! --
Many were then as fond, as you are now,
Of seeing stranger things than Art can show.
We may perform as much as he did do;
We have your Money, and a Backdoor too.
Go, and be cozened thus, rather than stay
And wait to be worse cozened with our Play.
For you shall hear such course complaints of Love,
Such silly sighing, as no more will move
Your Passion then Dutch Madrigals can do,
When Skippers, with wit Beards, at Wapping woo.
Hope little from our Poets withered Wit;
From Infant-Players, scarce grown Puppets yet.
Hope from our Women less, whose bashful fear,
Wondered to see me dare to enter here:
Each took her leave, and wished my danger past;
And though I come back safe, and undisgrac'd,
Yet when they spy the WITS here then I doubt
No Amazon can make 'em venture out.
Though I advised 'em not to fear you much;
For I presume not half of you are such.
But many Trav'lers here as Judges come;
From Paris, Florence, Venice, and from Rome:
Who will describe, when any Scene we draw,
By each of ours, all that they ever Saw.
Those praising, for extensive breadth and height;
And inward distance to deceive the sight.
When greater Objects, moving in broad Space,
You rank with lesser, in this narrow Place,
Then we like Chess-men, on a Chess-board are,
And seem to play like Pawns the Rhodian War.
Oh Money! Money! if the WITS would dress,
With Ornaments, the present face of Peace;
And to our Poet half that Treasure spare,
Which Faction gets from Fools to nourish War;
Then his contracted Scenes should wider be,
And move by greater Engines, till you see
(Whilst you Securely sit) fierce Armies meet,
And raging Seas disperse a fighting Fleet.
Thus much he bad me say; and I confess
I think he would, if rich, mean nothing less;
But, leaving you your selves to entertain,
Like an old Rat retire to Parmazan.
THE SIEGE OF RHODES. The Second Part,
Act the First,
Scene the First.
The SCENE is a Prospect of Rhodes beleaguered at Sea and Land by the Fleet and
Army of SOLOMON. Enter Alphonso, Admiral, Marshal of Rhodes. Alph. WHen shall
we escape from the delays of Rome?
And when, slow Venice, will thy Succors come?

Mar. How often too have we in vain
Sought aid from long consulting Spain?

Adm. The German Eagle does no more
About our barren Island Sore.
Thy Region, famisht Rhodes, she does forsake;
And cruelly at home her Quarrie make.

Alph. The furious French, and fiercer English fail.


Adm. We watch from Steeples and the Peer
What Flaggs remoter Vessels bear;
But no glad Voice cries out, a Sail! a Sail!

Mar. Brave Duke! I find we are to blame
In playing slowly Honor's Game,
Whilst lingering Famine wastes our strength,
And tires afflicted Life with length.

Alph. The Council does it rashness call
When we propose to hazard all
The parcells we have left in one bold Cast:
But their Discretion makes our Torments last.

Adm. When lessening Hope flies from our Ken,
And still Despair shows great and near,
Discretion seems to Valor then
A formal shape to cover fear.

Alph. Courage, when it at once adventures all,
And dares with human aids dispense,
Resembles that high confidence
Which Priests may Faith and Heav'nly-Valour call.

Adm. Those who in latter dangers of fierce War
To distant hope and long consults are given,
Depend too proudly on their own wise care;
And seem to trust themselves much more than Heaven.

Alph. Let then the Elder of our Rhodian Knights
Discourse of slow designs in ancient Fights;
Let them sit long in Council to contrive
How they may longest keep lean Fools alive:
Whilst ( Marshal) thou, the Admiral, and I
(Grown weary of this tedious strife
Which but prolongs imprisoned Life)
Since we are freely Born will freely Dye.

Adm. From several Ports we will Sally out
With all the bolder Youth our Seas have bred.

Mar. And we at Land through storms of War have led,
Then meet at Mustapha's Redoubt.

Alph. And this last Race of Honor being run,
We Will meet again, far, far, above the Sun.

Adm. Already Fame her Trumpet sounds:
Which more provokes and warms
Our Courage than the smart of Wounds*
Away! to Arms! to Arms! --

Enter Villerius. Vill. What from the Camp, when no Assault is near,
Fierce Duke does thee to Slaughter call?
Or what bold Fleet does now at Sea appear,
To hale and board our Admiral?

Adm. We give, Great Master, this alarm
Not to forwarn your Chiefs of harm:
To whom assaults from Land or Sea
Would now but too much welcome be.

Alph. We want great dangers, and of mischiefs know
No greater ill but that they come too slow.

Adm. Why should we thus, with Arts great care
Of Empire, against Nature War?
Nature, with sleep and food, would make Life last;
But artfull Empire makes us watch and fast.

Alph. If Valor virtue be, why should we lack
The means to make it move?
Which progress would improve;
But cannot march when Famine keeps it back.

Adm. When general Dearth
Afflicts the Earth,
Then even our loudest Warriors calmly pine.
High courage (though with Sourness still
It yields to Yoaks of human will)
Yet gracefully does bow to Power Divine.

Alph. But when but mortal Foes
Imperiously impose
A Martial Lent
Where strength is spent;
That Famine, doubly horrid, wears the face
Both of a Lingering death, and of disgrace.

Mar. For those, whose Valor makes them quickly Dye,
Prevent the Fast to shun the infamy.

Vill. Whom have I heard? It Is time all Power should cease
When men high born, and higher bred
(Who have outdone what most have read,)
Grow like the Gowd, impatient of distress.
Is there no room for Hope in any Breast?

Adm. Not, since she does appear
Boldly a dweller where
She first was intertain'd but as a Guest.

Alph. She may in Sieges be received
Be courted too, and much believed;
And thus continue after wants begin;
But is thrust out when Famine enters in.

Vill. You have been tired in vain with passiveness;
But where; when active, can you meet Success?

Alph. With all the strength of all our Forts
We Will sally out from all the Ports;
And with a hot and hot alarm
Still keep the Turkish Tents so warm
That Solomon shall in a Fever lie:

Mar. His Bassas, marking what we do,
Shall find that we were taught by you
To manage Life, and teach them how to Dye.

Vill. Valor's designs are many heights above
All pleasures fancied in the dreams of Love.
But whilst, voluptuously, you thus devise
Delightful ways to end those miseries
Which over-charge your own impatient mind*
Where shall the softer Sex their safety find?
When you with numerous Foes lie dead,
(I mean asleep in Honor's Bed)
They then may subject be
To all the wild and fouler force
Of rudest Victory;
Where noise shall Deafen all remorse.

Alph. If still concerned to watch and arm
That we may keep from harm
All who defenseless are
And seldom safe in War,
When, Admiral, shall we
From weariness be free?

Vill. The Rhodians by your general Sally may
Get high renown;
Though you at last must bravely lose the Day,
And they their Town.
Then when by angered Solomon it is swayed,
On whom shall climbing Infants smile for aid?
Or who shall lift and rescue falling Age,
When it can only frown at Turkish rage?
The living thus advise you to esteem
And keep your Life that it may succor them:
But though you are inclined to hear Death plead
As strongly to invite you to the Dead,
Whilst glory does beyond compassion move,
Yet stay till your Ianthe speaks for Love!

Alph. Ianthe's name is such a double charm,
As strait does arm me, and as soon unarm.
Valor as far as ever Valor went,
Dares go, not stopping at the Sultans Tent,
To free Ianthe when to Rhodes confined:
But halts, when it considers I
Amidst ten Thousand Turks may Dye,
Yet leave her then to many more behind.

Adm. Since life is to be kept, what must be done?


Vill. All those attempts of Valor we must shun
Which may the Sultan vex; And, since bereft
Of food, there is no help but Treaty left.

Adm. Rhodes, when the World shall thy submission know,
Honor, thy ancient friend, will court thy Foe.

Mar. Honor begins to blush, and hide his face:
For those who Treat sheath all their Swords,
To try by length of fencing words
How far they may consent to meet Disgrace.

Alph. As noble minds with shame their wants confess;
So Rhodes will bashfully declare distress.

A Shout within, and a Noise of forcing of Doors. Vill. Our guards will turn
confed'rates with the crowd,
Whose mis'ries now insult and make them loud.
Their leaders strive with praises to appease,
And soften the misled with promises.

[ Exit Admiral. Alph. These used with awe to wait
Far from your Palace gate;
But, like lean Birds in Frosts, their hunger now
Makes them approach us and familiar grow.

Vill. They have so long been Dying that it is fit
They Deaths great privilege should have;
Which does in all a parity admit:
No rooms of State are in the Grave.

Enter Admiral. Adm. The Peoples various minds
(Which are like sudden winds,
Such as from Hilly-coasts still changing blow)
Were lately as a secret kept
In many whispers of so soft a breath,
And in a calm so deeply low,
As if all Life had soundly slept;
But now, as if they meant to waken Death,
They rashly rise, and loud in Tumults grow.

Mar. They see our strength is hourly less,
Whilst Solyman's does still increase.

Adm. Thus, being to their last expectance driven,
Ianthe, now they cry!
Whose name they raise so high
And often that it fills the vault of Heaven.

Alph. If Solomon does much her Looks esteem,
Looks captive him, and may enfranchise them.

Adm. By many prisoners, since our Siege began,
They have been told, how Potent Solomon,
In all assaults, severely did command
That you and she
Should still be free
From all attempts of every Turkish hand.

Alph. It rudeness were in me, not to confess
That Solomon has civil been,
And did much Christian honor winn
When he Ianthe rescued from distress.

Adm. They were from many more advertised too,
That he has Passports sent for her and you:
Which makes them hope the Power divine
Does by some blessed cause design
Ianthe to procure their Liberty:
Or if by Heaven it is not entirely me'nt
That powerful Beauties force should set them free,
Yet they would have her strait in Treaty sent
To gain some rest for those,
Who of their restless foes
Continual wounds and fasts are weary grown.

Mar. Whose mighty hearts conceived before,
That they were built to suffer more
Assaults and Battries than our Rocky Town.

Vill. Those who, with Gyant-stature, shocks received,
Now down to Dwarfish size and weakness fall.

Mar. Who once no more of harm from shot believed
Than that an arrow hurts a wounded Wall.

Alph. She Treat? What pleasant, but what frantic dreams,
Rise from the Peoples fever of extremes?
I will allay their Rage, or try
How far Ianthe will comply.

[Exit. Enter Ianthe and her two Women at the other Door. Iant. Why wise
Villerius, had you power to sway
That Rhodian Valor, which did yours obey?
Was not that power derived from awful Heaven
Which to your Valor has your Wisdom given?
And that directs you to the Seasons meet
For deeds of War, and when it is fit to treat.

Vill. Ere we to Solomon can sue,
Ianthe, we must treat with you.
The people find that they have no defense
But in your Beauty and your Eloquence.

Mar. To your requests Great Solomon may yield.


Iant. Can hope on such a weak Foundation build?


Mar. In you the famish't peoples hopes are fed.


Iant. Can your discerning eyes
(Which may inform the wise)
Be by vain hope, their blind Conductor, led?

Vill. When winds in Tempests rise
Pilots may shut their eyes.

Mar. And, though their practice knows their way,
Must be content a while to stray.

Iant. Though Solomon should softer grow;
And to my tears compassion show;
What shape of comfort can appear to me,
When all your outward War shall cease,
If then my Lord renew his jealousy
And strait destroy my inward peace?

Vill. The Rhodian Knights shall all in Council sit;
And with persuasions, by the public Voice,
Your Lord shall woo till you to that submit
Which is the Peoples will, and not your Choice.
No arguments, by forms of Senate made,
Can Magisterial Jealousy persuade;
It takes no Counsel, nor will be in awe
Of Reasons force, necessity, or Law.

[Exit with the Marshal and her women. Vill. Call thy experience back,
Which safely coasted every shore;
And let thy reason lack
No wings to make it higher soar;
For all those aids will much too weak appear,
With all that gathering fancy can supply,
When she has traveled round about the Sphere,
To give us strength to govern Jealousy.

Adm. Will you believe that Fair Ianthe can
Consent to go, and treat with Solomon,
Vainly in hope to move him to remorse?

Vill. 'Twill not be said by me
That she consents, when she
Does yield to what the People would enforce.
Their strength they now will in our weakness find,
Whom in their plenty we can sway,
But in their wants must them obey,
And wink when they the Cords of power unbind.

Adm. It Is likely then that she must yield, to go.


Vill. Who can resist, if they will have it so?


Adm. Where 'ere she moves she will last innocent.


Vill. Heavens spotless Lights are not by motion spent.


Adm. Alphonso's Love cannot so sickly be
As to express relapse of Jealousy.

Vill. Examine Jealousy and it will prove
To be the careful tenderness of Love.
It can no sooner than Celestial fire
Be either quenched, or of it self expire.

Adm. No signs are seen of Embers that remain
For windy passion to provoke.

Vill. Talk not of signs; Celestial fires contain
No matter which appears in smoke.
Be heedfull Admiral; The private peace
Of Lovers so Renowned requires your care:
Their League, renewed of late, will if it cease
As much perplex us as the Rhodian War.

[Exit. Adm. How vainly must I keep mine eyes awake,
Who now, Alphonso, am enjoined to take,
For public good, a private care of thee;
When I shall rather heed thy care of me?
Love, in Ianthe's shape, passed through my eyes
And tarries in my breast. But if the wise
Villerius does high Jealousy approve
As Virtue, and because it springs from Love:
My Love, I hope, will so much Virtue be
As shall, at least, take place of Jealousy.
For all will more respect
The cause than the effect.
What I discern of Love, seems virtue yet,
And whilst that Face appears I Will cherish it.

Exit. The Second Act.
The same Scene continues. A great Noise is heard of the People within. Enter
Villerius, Admiral, Marshal. Adm. THeir murmurs with their hunger will increase:
Their noises are effects of emptiness.
Murmurs, like Winds, will louder prove
When they with larger freedom move.

Vill. Winds which in hollow Caverns dwell,
Do first their force in murmurs waste;
Then soon, in many a sighing blast,
Get out, and up in Tempests swell.

Adm. Your practiced strength no public burden fears;
Nor stoops when it the weight of Empire bears.

Vill. Power is an Arch which every common hand
Does help to raise to a magnifique height;
And it requites their aid when it does stand
With firmer strength beneath increasing weight.

Adm. It Is noble to endure and not resent
The bruises of Afflictions heavy hand.
But can we not this Embassy prevent?

Vill. Ianthe needs must go. Those who withstand
The Tide of Flood, which is the Peoples will,
Fall back when they in vain would onward row:
We strength and way preserve by lying still.
And sure, since Tides ebb longer than they flow,
Patience, which waits their Ebbs, regains
Lost time, and does prevent our pains.

Adm. Can we of saving and of gaining boast
In that by which Ianthe may be lost?
She wholly Honor is; and, when bereft.
Of any part of that, has nothing left.
For Honor is the Soul, which by the Art
Of Schools, is all contained in every part.

Vill. The Guiltless cannot Honor lose, and she
Can never more than Virtue guilty be.

Adm. The talking World may persecute her name.


Vill. Her Honor bleeds not when they wound her Fame.
Honor's the Soul which naught but Guilt can wound;
Fame is the Trumpet which the People sound.

Mar. The Trumpet where still variously they blow,
And seeking Ecchos, sound both high and low.

Adm. Can no expedient stop their will?


Vill. The practice grows above our skill.
Last Night, in secret, I a Prisoner sent
To Mustapha, with deep acknowledgment.
For fair Ianthes former Liberty,
And Passports, offered since, to set her free.
My Letters have no ill acceptance met;
But his reply forbids all means to treat,
Unless Ianthe, who has often refused
That Pass, which Honor might have safely used,
Appear before Great Solomon, and sue
To save those Lives which Famine must subdue.

Adm. Sad Fate! Were all those drowsy Sirrups here [Aside*
Which Art prescribes to madness, or to fear,
To Jealousy, or careful Statesmens Eyes,
To waking Tyrants, or their watchful Spies,
They could not make me sleep when she is sent
To lie Love's Lieger in the Sultans Tent.

[A great shout within. Mar. What sudden pleasure makes the Crowd rejoice?
What comfort can thus raise the public Voice?

Vill. It Is fit that with the Peoples insolence,
When in their sorrows rude, we should dispense;
Since they are seldom civil in their joys:
Their gladness is but an uncivil Noise.

Adm. They seldom are in tune; and their tunes last
But like their Loves rash Sparkles struck in haste.

Vill. Still brief, as the concordance of a Shout.


Adm. What is so short as Music of the Rout?


Vill. Though short, yet it is as hearty as it is loud.


Adm. Dissembling is an Art above the Crowd.


Vill. Whom do they dignifie with this applause?


Enter Alphonso, Ianthe. Alph. Of this, grave Prince, Ianthe is the cause.
I from the Temple led her now:
Where she for Rhodes paid many a Vow;
And did for every Rhodian mourn
With sorrows gracefully devout:
But they paid back at our return
More vows to her than she laid out.

Vill. If they such gratitude express
For your kind Prayers in their distress,
Ianthe, think, what the Besieged will do
When the Besieger is or'ecome by you?
Though Rhodes by Kings has quite forsaken bin
Without, whilst all forsake their Chiefs within;
Yet who can tell but Heaven has now designed
Your shining beauty and your brighter mind
To lead us from the darkness of this War,
Where the Besieged, forgotten Prisoners are:
Where glorious minds have been so much obscured
That Fame has hardly known
What they have boldly done,
And with a greater boldness have endured.

Alph. If Heaven of Innocence unmindfull were,
Ianthe then might many dangers fear.
Your hazards, and what Rhodes does hazard too,
Are less than mine when I adventure you;
Who doubtful perils run
That we may try to shun
Such certain loss as naught can else prevent.

Adm. Revolted Jealousy! can he consent?


[Aside. Iant. If Rhodes were not concerned at all
In what I am desired to undertake
I should it less than Duty call
To seek the Sultan for Alphonso's sake.

Alph. The Sultan has with forward haste
Climbed to the top of high Renown;
And sure, he cannot now as fast,
By breaking trust, run backward down.

Iant. We should not any with Suspicion wound
Whom none detect, much less believe that those
In whom by trial we much virtue found
Can quickly all their stock of virtue lose.

Adm. How sweetly she, like Infant-Innocence, [Aside.
Runs harmlessly to harm?
High Honor will unarm
It self to furnish others with defense.

Mar. Her mind, ascending still over human heights,
Has all the Valor of our Rhodian Knights.

Vil. What more remains but Prayers to recommend
Your safety to the Heavenly Powers,
You being theirs much more than ours.
I Will to the Sultan for your Passport send.

Iant. That may disgrace the trust which we should give,
And lessen the effects we should receive.
Let such use forms so low
As not by trial know
How high the Honor is of Solomon:
Who never will descend
Till he in Valleys end
That race which he on lofty Hills began.
His power does every day increase,
And can his honor then grow less?
Bright power does like the Sun
Toward chief perfection run,
When it does high and higher rise.
From both the best effects proceed,
When they from heights their glories spread,
And when they Dazzle gazing eyes.

Alph. How far, Ianthe, will these thoughts extend?
Vain question, Honor has no Journeys end!

Adm. Her honor's such, as he who limits it
Must draw a Line to bound an infinite.

Vill. Since Fate has long resolved that you must go,
And you a pass decline, what can we do?

Iant. The great Example which the Sultan gave
Of virtue, when he did my honor save,
And yours, Alphonso, too in me,
When I was then his Enemy,
Shall bring me now a Suppliant to his Tent;
Without his plighted Word or Passport sent.
So great a test of our entire belief
Of Clemency, in so Renowned a Chief,
Is now the greatest present we can make:
His Passport is the least that we can take.

Alph. Ianthe, I am learning not to prize
Those dangers, which your virtue can despise.

Adm. My Love is better taught;
For with the pangs of thought,
I must that safety much suspect,
Which she too nobly does neglect.

[A shout within. Vill. You hear them Admiral!


Adm. Again the people call.
Our have provoking by a shout.

Vill. Go hang a Flag of Treaty out,
High on Saint Nich'las Fort!
Then clear the Western port
To make renowned Ianthe way!

[Shout again. Adm. Hark! they grow loud!
That tide, the Crowd,
Will not for Lovers leisure stay.

Mar. That storm by suddenness prevails,
And makes us lower all our Sails.

Vill. To Mustapha I Will strait a Herald send,
That Solomon may melt when he shall know
How much we on his mighty mind depend
By trusting more than Rhodes to such a Foe.

[ Exeunt Villerius, Admiral, Marshal. Alph. How long Ianthe should I grieve
If I perceived you could believe
That I the Rhodians can so much esteem,
As to adventure you to rescue them?
Yet I for Rhodes would frankly hazard all
That I could mine, and not Ianthes call.
But now I yield to let you go
A pledge of Treaty to the foe,
In hope that saving Rhodes you may
Prepare to Cicily your way.
Were Rhodes subdued, Ianthe being there,
Ianthe should the only loss appear.

Iant. Much from us both is to the Rhodians due,
But when I sue for Rhodes, it is for you.

Alph. Ianthe, we must part! you shall rely
On hope, whilst I in parting learn to Dye.

Iant. Take back that hope! your dealing is not fair
To give me hope, and leave your self despair.

Alph. I will but dream of Death, and then
As virtuously as Dying men
Let me to escape from future punishment
Come to a clear confession, and repent.

Iant. I cannot any story fear
Which of Alphonso I shall hear,
Unless his Foes in malice tell it wrong.

Alph. Ianthe, my confession is not long,
For since it tells what folly did commit
Against your honor, shame will shorten it.

Iant. Lend me a little of that shame;
For I perceive I grow too blame
In practicing to guess what it can be.

Alph. It is my late ignoble Jealousy.
Though parting now seems Death, yet but forgive
That crime, and after parting I may Live.
And as I now again great sorrow show,
Though I repented well for it before;
So let your pardon with my sorrows grow;
You much forgave me, but forgive me more.

Iant. Away! Away! How soon will this augment
The troubled peoples fears,
When they shall see me by Alphonso sent
To treat for Rhodes in tears?

Alph. What in your absence shall I do
Worthy of Fame, though not of you?

Iant. By patience, not by action now,
Your virtue must successful grow.

[A shout within. Alph. In throngs the longing people wait
Your coming at the Palace gate.
Let me attend you to the Peer.

Iant. But we must leave our sorrows here.
Let not a Rhodian witness be
Of any grief in you or me;
For Rhodes, by seeing us at parting mourn,
Will look for weeping Clouds at my return.

[Exeunt. The Scene is Changed to the Camp of Solomon, the Tents and Guards
seem near, and part of Rhodes at a distance. Enter Solomon, Pirrhus, Rustan.
Pirrh. NOne (Glorious Sultan) can your Conquest doubt
When Rhodes has hung a Flagg of Treaty out.

Soly. Thy courage, haughty Rhodes,
(When I account the Odds
Thou have opposed, by long and vain defense)
Is but a braver kind of Impudence.
Thou knew'st my strength, but thou did better know*
How much I prized the brav'ry's of a Foe.

Pirrh. Their Sallies were by stealth, and faint of late.


Soly. Can flowing Valor stay at standing flood?


Pirrh. No, it will quickly from the mark abate.


Rust. And then soon show the Dead low Ebb of Blood.


Soly. When those who did such mighty Deeds before,
Shall less, but by a little, do,
It shows to me and you,
Old Pirrhus, that they mean to do no more.
By Treaty they but boldly beg a Peace.

Pirrh Shall I command that all our Battries cease?


Soly. You may, then draw our our-Guards to the Line.


Pirrh. And I Will prevent the springing of the Mine.


[Exit. Enter Mustapha. Must. Villerius sends his Homage to your feet:
And, to declare how low
The pride of Rhodes can bow,
Ianthe will be here to Kneel and Treat.

Rust. What more can fortune in your favor do?
Beauty, which Conquers Victors, yields to you.

Solym. What wandering Star does lead her forth? Can she
Who scorned a Passport for her Liberty,
Vouchsafe to come, and Treat without it now?
The first did Glory, this respect may show.
Powers best Religion she,
Perhaps does civilly believe
To be established, and reformed in me,
Which counsels Monarchs to forgive.

Enter Pirrhus. Pirrh. A second Morn begins to break from Rhodes;
And now that threatening Sky grows clear,
Which was over cast with smoke of Cannon-Clouds,
The fair Ianthe does appear.

Soly. Pirrhus, our Forces from the Trenches lead,
And open as our Flying Ensigns spread.
And, Mustapha, let her Reception be
As great as is the Faith she has in me.
I keep high Interest hid in this command;
Which you with safety may
Implicitly obey,
But not without your Danger understand.
Your tried obedience I shall much engage,
Joined to the prudence of your practiced age.

Must. We are content with age, because we live
So long beneath your sway.

Pirrh. Age makes us fit to obey
Commands which none but Solomon can give.

[ Exeunt Pirrhus, Mustapha, Rustan. Soly. Of spacious Empire, what can I enjoy?
Gaining at last but what I first Destroy.
It Is fatal ( Rhodes) to thee,
And troublesome to me
That I was born to govern swarms
Of Vassals boldly bred to arms:
For whose accursed diversion, I must still
Provide new Towns to Sack, new Foes to Kill.
Excuse that Power, which by my Slaves is awed:
For I shall find my peace
Destroyed at home, unless
I seek for them destructive War abroad.

[Exit. Enter Roxolana, Haly, Pirrhus, Mustapha, Rustan, Pages, Women. Roxol.
The Ambassadors of Persia, are they come?


Haly. They seek your Favor and attend their Doom.


Roxol. The Vizier Bashaw, did you bid him wait?


Haly. Sultana, he does here expect his Fate.


Roxol. You take up all our Sultans bosom now;
Have we no place, but that which you allow?

Rust. Your Beauteous greatness does your ear incline
To Rumors of those crimes which are not mine.
My Foes are prosperous in their diligence,
And turn even my submission to offense.

Roxol. Rustan, your Glories rise, and swell too fast.
You must shrink back, and shall repent your haste.

Must. The Egyptian presents, which you pleased to assign
As a Reward to the Eunuch Salladine,
Are part of those allotments Haly had.

Roxol. Let a Division be to Haly made.


Pirrh. The Armenian Cities have their Tribute paid,
And all the Georgian Princes sue for ay'd.

Roxol. Those Cities, Mustapha, deserve our care.
Pirrhus, send succors to the Georgian War.

Must. The Ambassador which did the Jewels bring
From the Hungarian Queen, does Audience crave.

Roxol. Pirrhus, be tender of her Infant King.
Who dares Destory that Throne which I would save?

Rust. Sultana, humbly at your feet I fall,
Do not your Sultan's will, my Counsel call.

Roxol. Rustan! Go mourn! But you may long repent*
My busy Power wants leisure to relent.

Rust. Think me not wicked, till I doubt to find
Some small compassion in so great a mind.

Roxol. These are Court-Monsters, Corm'rants of the Crown:
They feed on Favor till the are overgrown;
Then sawcily believe, we Monarchs Wives
Were made but to be Dress't
For a Continued Feast;
To hear soft Sounds, and play away our Lives.
They think our Fullness is to wain so soon
As if our Sexes Governess, the Moon,
Had placed us, but for Sport on Fortunes lapp;
They with bold Pencils, by the changing shape
Of our frail Beauty, have our Fortune drawn;
And judge our Breasts transparent as our Lawn;
Our hearts as loose, and soft, and slight
As are our Summer vests of Silk;
Our brains, like to our Feathers light;
Our blood, as sweet as is our Milk:
And think, when Favorites rise, we are to fall
Meekly as Doves, whose Livers have no Gall.
But they shall find, I Am no European Queen,
Who in a Throne does sit but to be seen;
And Lives in Peace with such State-Thieves as these
Who Robb us of our business for our ease.

Exeunt omnes. The Third Act.
The Scene continues. Enter Solomon, Mustapha, Pirrhus, Rustan. Must. Majestic
Sultan! at your feet we fall:
Our Duty it is and just
To say, you have encompassed us with all
That we can private trust
Or public Honors call.

Pirrh. In Fields our weak retiring Age you grace
With forward action; and in Court,
Where all your mighty Chiefs resort,
Even they to us, as Kings to them, give place.

Rust. The Cords by which we are obliged are strong.


Soly. You all have Loyal been, and Loyal long.
To show I this retain in full belief,
I Will doubly trust you, with my shame, and grief.
A grief which takes up all my Breast:
Yet finds the Room so narrow too
That being straightned there it takes no rest,
But must get out to trouble you.
That grief begets a shame which would disgrace
My power if it were published in my face.

Must. Your outward calm does well
Your inward storm disguise.

Rust. But long dead calms foretell
That tempests are to rise.

Soly. My Roxolana, by ambitious strife,
To get unjust Succession for her Son,
Has put in doubt
Or blotted out
All the Heroique story of my Life;
And will lose back the Battails* I have wonn.

Pirrh. E're ill advice shall lead her far she will skorn
Her Guide, and, faster than she went, return.

Must. Those who advised her ill, in that did do
Much more than we dare hear except from you.

Soly. O Mustapha! is it too much for me
To think, I justly may possessor be
Of one soft Bosom, where released from care,
I should securely rest from toils of War?
But now, when daily tired with watchful Life,
(With various turns in doubtful Fight,
And length of talking Councils) I at night
In vain seek Sleep with a tempestuous Wife.
Wink at my shame, that I, whose Banners brave
The world, should thus to Beauty be a Slave.

Pirrh. This Cloud will quickly pass
From Roxolana's face.

Must. The weather then will change from foul to fair.


Rust. Tempests are short, and serve to clear the Air.


Soly. Since I have told my Sickness, it is fit
You hear what Cure I have prescribed to it.
Those Lovers Knots I cannot strait untwine,
Which, sure, were made to last
Since they were once ry'd fast
With strings of Roxolana's heart and mine.

Must. How can she vast Possession more improve?
Has she not all in having all your Love?

Soly. I have designed a way to check her Pride.
It is not yet forgot,
That even the Gordian Knot
At last was cut, which could not be untied.
Does not the fair Ianthe wait
Without, in hope to mitigate,
By softening Looks, the Rhodians fate?
Let that new Moon appear,
And try her Infiuence here.

Exit Mustapha. Pirrh. What Lab'rynth does our Sultan mean to tread?
Shall straying Love the Worlds great Leader lead?

Enter Mustapha, Ianthe. Soly. When warlick Cities (fair Embassadress)
Begin to treat, they cover their distress.
In showing you, the Artfull Rhodians know
They hide distress and all their triumphs show.
From withering Rhodes you fresher Beauty bring,
And sweeter than the bosom of the Spring.

Iant. Cities (propitious Sultan) when they treat,
Conceal their wanrs, and strength may counterfeit:
But sure the Rhodians would not get esteem,
By ought pretended in my self or them.
If I could any Beauty wear
Where Roxolana fills the Sphere,
Yet I bring griefs to cloud it here.

Soly. Your Rhodes has hung a Flagg of Treaty out.


Iant. You can as little then my sorrows doubt
As I can fear that any humble grief
May sue to Solomon and want relief.

Soly. You often the proffered Freedom did refuse,
Which now you seek, and would have others use.

Iant. I then did make my want of merit known;
And thought that gift too much for me alone;
And as 'twas fit
To reckon it
More favor than Ianthe should receive;
So it did then appear
That single favors were
Too little for great Solomon to give.

Soly. Much is to every Beauty due:
Then how much more to all
Those diverse forms we Beauty call;
And all are reconciled in you?
But those who here for Peace by Treaty look
Must meet with that which Beauty least can brook;
Delay of Court, which makes the Blood so cold
That youngest Agents here look Pale and Old.
Here you must tedious forms of Power obey. --
Your business will all Night require your stay.

Iant. Business, abroad at Night? sure business then
Only becomes the confidence of Men.
Those who the greatest Wand'rers are,
Wild Birds, that in the day
Frequent no certain way,
And know no limits in the Air,
Will still at Night discreetly come
And take their civil rest at home.

Soly. Is the protection of my power so slight,
That in my Camp you are afraid of Night?

Iant. Stay in the Camp at Night, and Rhodes so near,
Honor my guide, and grieved Alphonso there?

Soly. Treaties are long, my Bassas old and slow:
With whom you must debate before you go.
Let not your cause by any absence fail.
Your beauteous presence may on Age prevail.

Iant. Alas, I came not to capitulate,
And show a love of Speech by long debate: She kneels.
But to implore from Solymon what he
To Rhodes may quickly grant,
And never feel a want
Of that which by dispatch would doubled be.

Soly. Ianthe rise! your grief may pity move;
But graceful grief,
Whilst it does seek relief
May pity lead to dangerous ways of Love.

Iant. Why Heaven, was I mistaken when I thought
That I the coursest shape had brought
And the most withered too that sorrow wears?

Soly. If you would withered seem restrain your Tears.
The morning Dew makes Roses blow
And sweter smell and fresher show.
Take heed, Ianthe, you may be too blame.
Did you not trust me when you hither came?
Will you my honor now too late suspect,
When only that can yours protect?

Iant. If of your virtue my extreme belief
May virtuous favor gain,
My tears I will restrain.
It is my faith shall save me not my grief.

Soly. Conduct her strait to Roxolana's Tent:
And tell my haughty Empress I have sent
Such a mysterious Present as will prove
A Riddle both to Honor and to Love.

[Exeunt several ways. The Scene returns to that of the Town Besieged. Enter
Admiral. Adm. Dwells not Alphonso in Ianthes Breast*
As Prince of that fair Palace, not a Guest?
Can it be virtue in a Rhodian Knight
To seek possession of another right?
Yet how can I his Title there destroy
By loving that which he may still enjoy?
My passion will no less than virtue prove
Whilst it does much Ianthes virtue love.
If in her absence I her safety fear,
It Is virtuous kindness then to wish her here.
But of her dangers I in vain
Shall with my watchful fears complain
Till he grow fearful too, whose fears must be
Raised to the Husbands virtue, Jealousy. --

Enter Villerius, Marshal. Vill. Does he not seem
As if in Dream,
His course by strom were on the Ocean lost?

Mar. He now draws Cards to shun a rocky Coast.


Adm. The foolish world does Jealousy mistake:
It Is civil care, which kindness does improve.
Perhaps the Jealous are too much awake;
But others dully sleep over those they love.
He must be jealous made, for that kind fear,
When known, will quickly bring and stay her here.

Vill. What can thy silence now portend,
When the assembled People send
Their thankfullness to Heaven in one loud Voice?
The hungry, wounded, and the sick rejoice.

Mar. Our Quires in long procession sing,
The Bells of all our Temples ring,
Our Enemies
Begin to rise,
And from our Walls are to their Camp retired
To see Ianthe there in triumph shown.
Their Canon in a loud Salute are fired,
And echoed too by louder of our own.
Who is so dully bred,
Or rather who so dead
Whom fair Ianthes triumph cannot move?
From the Oceans bosom it will call,
A sinking Admiral
Who flies to stormy Seas from storms of Love.

Enter Alphonso. Alph. Our Foes (great Master) wear the looks of friends.
A Zanjack from the Camp attends
Behind the outlet of the Peer;
And he demands your private ear.

[ Exit Villerius. Adm. Would you had met Ianthe there.


Alph. Since well received, you wish her here too soon.
The morning led her out
And we may doubt
How her dispatch could bring her back e're Noon.

Adm. Her high reception was but justly due;
Who with such noble confidence,
Could with her Sexes fears dispense,
And trusting Solomon could part from you.

Alph. By that we may discern her rising mind
Over all the Pinnacles of Female kind.

Adm. Strangely she shunned what Custom does afford,
The pledges of his Pass and plighted word.

Alph. Not knowing guilt, she knows no fear,
And still must strange in all appear,
As well as singular in this;
The Crowd of Common gazers fill
Their eyes with objects low and ill,
But she a high and good Example is.

Enter Villerius, Marshal. Mar. Ianthes Laurels hourly will increase!


Vill. I have received some secret signs of peace
From Mustapha, whose trusted Messenger
Has brought me counsel how to counsel her.
She must a while make such appliances
As may the haughty Roxolana please,
To whom she now by Solomon is sent,
And does remain our Lieger in her Tent.

Adm. In Turkish Dialect, that word, remain,
May many sums of tedious hours contain:
And in a Rhodian Lovers swift account,
To what a Debt will that sad reckoning mount?

Vill. To night, Alphonso, you must sleep alone.
But Time is swift, a night is quickly gone.
For Lovers nights are like their slumbers, short. --
I must dispatch this Zanjack to the Court.

Alph. The quiet Bed of Lovers is the Grave; Exeunt Villerius, Marshal.
For we in Death, no sense of absence have.

Adm. Rhodes in her view, her Tent within your sight!
And yet to be divided a whole Night!

Alph. A single night would many ages seem,
Were I not sure that we shall meet in Dream.

Adm. She must no more such dangerous Visits make,
Methinks I grow malicious for your sake,
And rather wish Rhodes should of freedom fail,
Than that Ianthes power should now prevail.

Alph. Your words mysterious grow.


Adm. Alphonso, no.
For if whilst thus you for her absence mourn*
Her power should much appear,
She Will want excuse,
Unless she use
A little of that power, for her Return
To day, and nightly resting here.

Alph. The hardened Steel of Solomon is such,
As with the Edge does all the World command,
And yet that Edge is softened with the touch
Of Roxolana's gentle hand.
And as his hardness yields, when she is near,
So may Ianthes softness govern her.

Adm. The day sufficient seems for all address,
And is at Court the season of access;
Deprive not Roxolana of her right;
Let the Empress lie with Solomon at night.
And as that privilege to her is due,
So should Ianthe sleep at Rhodes with you.

Alph. I Will write! The Zanjack for my Letter stays;
Love walks his round, and leads me in a Maze.

Exit. Adm. Love does Alphonso in a Circle lead;
And none can trace the ways which I must tread.
Lovers, in searching Loves Records, will find
But very few like me,
That still would Virtuous be,
Whilst to another Wife I still am kind.
And whilst that Wife I like a Lover woo,
I use all art
That from her Husband she may never part,
And yet even then would make him Jealous too.

Exit. The Scene returns to that of the Camp. Enter Roxolana, Haly. Roxol.
Think, Haly, think, what I should swiftly do?
A Rhodian Lady, and a Beauty too,
In my Pavilion lodged? It serves to prove
His settled hatred and his wandering Love.
Who did he send to plant this Canker here?

Haly. Old Bassa Mustapha.


Roxol. Bid him appear. Exit Haly.
Hope, thou grow'st weak, and thou have been too strong.
Like Night, thou come too soon, and stay'st too long.
Hence! smiling Hope! with growing Infants play:
If I dismiss thee not, I know
Thou of thy self wilt go,
And can no longer than my Beauty stay.
I Will open all the Doors to let thee out:
And then call in thy next Successor, Doubt.
Come Doubt, and bring thy lean Companion, Care.
And, when you both are lodged, bring in Despair.

Enter Mustapha, Haly. Must. Our opening Buds, and falling Blossoms, all
That we can fresh and fragrant call,
That Spring can promise, and the Summer pay,
Be strewn in Roxolana's way.
On Natures fairest Carpets let her tread;
And there, through Calms of peace, long may she lead
That Power which we have followed far,
And painfully, through storms of War.

Roxol. Blessings are cheap, and those you can afford:
Yet you are kinder than your frowning Lord.
I dare accuse him; but it is too late. -- Weeps.
What means that pretty property of State,
Which is from Rhodes for Midnight Treaties sent?
Private Caballs of Lovers in my Tent?
Your Valor, Mustapha, served to convay
Loves fresh supplies. You Soldiers can make way.
Was it not greatly done to bring her here?

Must. Duty in that did overruled my fear.
It was the Mighty Solymans command.

Roxol. Thou fatal Fool! how can thou think
To find a Basis where thou firm may stand
On those rough Waters where I sink?

Must. If Roxolana were not ranked above
Mankind, she strait would fall
Before that Power which all
The valiant follow, and the virtuous love.

Roxol. I grow immortal; for I Life disdain:
Which ill with thy dislike of Dying suits.
Yet thou, for safety, fear great power in vain;
Who here, art but a Subject to my Mutes. --

Mastapha Draws a Parchment. Must. Peruse the dreaded Will of angered Power;
Touched with the Signet of the Emperor:
It does enjoin Ianthes safety here:
She must be sought with Love, and served with Fear.
This disobeyed; your Mutes, who still make haste
To cruelty, may rest for want of breath.
It Is ordered they shall suddenly be past
Their making signs, and shall be dumb with Death.
This dreadful Doom from Solomon I give.
But if his will, which is our Law,
Be met with an obedient awe,
The Empress then may long in triumph Live.

She weeps. Roxol. Begone! thy Duty is officious fear.
If I am soft enough to grieve,
It is to see the Sultan leave
The Warring World, and end his Conquests here. --
Crawl to my Sultan still, officious grow!
Ebb with his love, and with his anger flow.

Exit Mustapha. Haly. Preserve with temper your Imperial mind;
And, till you can express
Your wrath with good success,
By angring others to your self be kind. --

Roxol. If thou can weep, thou can endure to bleed:
Men who Compassion feel have Valor too:
I shall thy Courage more than Pity need:
Dare thou contrive as much as I dare do?

Haly. I Will on, as far as weary Life can go.


Roxol. Then I shall want no aid to my design:
We Will digg below them, and blow up their Mine.

Exeunt. The Fourth Act.
The Scene returns to that of the Town Beleaguered. Enter Solomon, Mustapha,
Rustan. Soly. CAn Roxolana such a Rival bear?


Must. She has her fits of courage and of fear.
As she does high against your anger grow,
So, trusting strait your Love, she stoops as low.

Soly. Her Chamber-Tempests I have known too well:
She quickly can with winds of passion swell;
And then as quickly has the Woman's power
Of laying Tempests with a weeping shower.
What looks does the detained Ianthe show?

Must. She still is calm in all her fears,


Rust. And seems so Lovely in her Tears
As when the Mornings face is washed in Dew.

Enter Pirrhus. Pirrh. The world salutes you Sultan! Every Power
Does shrink before your Throne; and every how'r
A flying Packet or an Agent brings
From Asia, Afrique, and European Kings. --

Soly. With Packets to old Zanger go;
Who, freed from action, can with sleep dispense;
And having little now to do,
May read dull Volumes of Intelligence.
These Writing-Princes covet to seem wise
In Packets, and by formal Embassies:
They would with Symphonies of civil words
(Sweet sounds of Court) charm rudeness from our Swords:
Teach us to lay our Gauntlets by,
That they unarmed, and harmlessly,
From farthest Realms, by Proxy, might shake hands;
And, offering useless friendship, save their Lands.

Exeunt. Enter Villerius, Alphonso, Admiral, Marshal. Adm. He came disguised,
who brought your Letter here,
And sought such privacy as argued fear.

Mar. But (Sovereign Master) yours did seem to be
Conveyed by one less pained with Secrecy;
Who does for answer stay.

Vill. Mine came from Mustapha.
It would import a promising increase
Of our Conditions by approaching peace.
But does request us to consent
That fair Ianthe may yet longer stay
In powerful Roxolana's Tent;
And that request we understand
As a command
Which, though we would not grant, we must obey.

Alph. Mine by a Christian Slave was brought;
Who from the E'unuch Bassa, Haly, came;
And was by Roxolana wrote:
See the Sultana's Signet and her Name.
She writes -- but oh! why have I breath
To tell, how much it is worse than Death
Not to be Dead
Ere I again this Letter read?

Adm. Oh my prophetic fear!


Alph. She writes, that if I hold my honor dear;
Or if Ianthe does that honor prize,
I should with all the art
Of love, confirm her heart,
And strait from Solomon divert her Eyes.

Adm. Who knows what end this dire beginning bodes?


Alph. And here she likewise says,
He to Ianthe lays
A closer Siege than ere he did to Rhodes.

Adm. Ianthe, I will still my Love pursue; Aside.
Be kind to thee, and to Alphonso true:
But Loves small policies Great Honor now
Will hardly to my Rival-ship allow:
Those little Arts, bold Duke, I must lay by
And urge thy Courage more than Jealousy.

Vill. Where is thy honor now, famed Eastern Lord?


Adm. Why sought we not his Passport or his Word?


Alph. How durst Ianthe have so little fear
As to believe
That in the Camp she could receive
Freedom from him who did besiege her here?

Adm. Whilst in her own dispose she here remained
I of the brav'ry of her trust complained:
Her generous faith too meanly was deceived,
And must not be upbraided but relieved.

Vill. To rescue Rhodes she did her self forsake;
And Rhodes shall nobly pay that virtue back.

Alph. Great Master! what shall poor Alphonso do?
Since all he has Ianthe's is;
And now in this
Must owe Ianthe and her fame to you.

Vill. If any virtue can in Valor be:


Adm. Or any Valor in a Rhodian Knight:


Alph. Or any Lover can have Loyalty.


Vill. Or any Warrior can in Love delight.


Mar. If absence makes not mighty Love grow less.


Adm. Or gentle Lovers can compassion feel.


Alph. If Loyal Beauty, when in deep distress,
Can melt our hearts, and harden all our Steel.

Vill. Then let us here in sacred Vows combine.
My Vow is sealed --

They join their Swords. Adm. And mine. --


Mar. And mine. --


Alph. And trebly mine. --


Vill. Behold us, Fame, then stay thy flight,
And hover over our Towers to Night.
Fresh wings together with the Morning take;
As early as afflicted Lovers wake.
Then Tell the World that we have joined our Swords;
But it is for grieved Ianthe, not for Rhodes.

Alph. Now we shall prosper, who were weary grown
In Rhodes, and never could successful prove
When Empire led us forth to seek Renown,
For honor should no Leader have but Love.

Exeunt omnes. The Scene is Changed. Being wholly filled with Roxolana's Rich
Pavilion, Wherein is discerned at distance, Ianthe sleeping on a Couch;
Roxolana at one End of it, and Haly at the other; Guards of Eunuchs are
Discovered at the wings of the Pavilion; Roxolana having a Turkish Embroidered
Handkerchief in her left hand, And a naked Poniard in her right. Roxol. THou
do from beauty Solomon,
As much refrain as nature can;
Who, making Beauty, meant it should be loved.
But how can I my Station keep
Till thou, Ianthe, art by Death removed?
To Dye, when thou art young,
Is but too soon to fall asleep
And lie asleep too long.

Haly. Your Dreadful will what power can here Command
But pity? Oh let pity stay your hand! --

Roxol. Sultan, I will not weep, because my tears
Cannot suffice to Quench thy loves false flame:
Nor will I to a paleness bleed,
To show my loves true fears,
Because I rather need
More blood to help to blush away thy shame.

Haly. How far are all his former Virtues gone?
Turn back the progress of forgetful Time:
The many Favors by your Sultan done
Should now excuse him for one purposed crime.

Roxol. Haly, Consult! Can I do ill
If many foul adult'ries I prevent,
When I but one Fair Mistress kill?

Haly. Be not too early here with Punishment.
Your Sultan now
Does only show
The grudgings of a Lovers feavrish fit.
You find his inclinations strange,
But, being new, they soon may change;
And they have reached but to intention yet.

Roxol. Long before deeds Heaven calls intention sin.
It Is good to end what he would ill begin.

Haly. Do not relinquish yet your first design.
Before you darken all her Light
Examine, by your judging Sight,
If in your Sphere she can unblemisht shine.
You meant to prove her Virtue and first try
How well she here could as a Rival live,
E're as a judged Adultress she should Dye:
In pard'ning her you Solomon forgive.
And can you add to your loved greatness more
When able to forgive the greatest power?

Roxol. Tell me again Alphonso's short reply
When I by letter waked his Jealousy;
And counseled him to write and to advise
His wife to lock her Breast, and shut her Eyes?

Haly. With silence first he did his sorrows bear;
Then anger raised him, till he fell with fear:
At last, said she was now past Counsel grown;
Or else could take no better than her own.

Roxol. His thoughts a double Vizard wear,
And only lead me to suspense,
It seems he does her dangers fear,
And fain would trust her innocence.
Wake her! I will pursue my first design. --

Haly. I go to draw the Curtain of a shrine. --
Awake! Behold the powerful Empress here.

Ianthe rises and walks at distance from Roxolana. Iant. Heaven has the
greatest power;
Heaven seeks our love, and kindly comforts fear.
This is my fatal how'r.

Roxol. Though beauteous when she slept
Yet now would I had kept
Her safely sleeping still.
She, waking, turns my Envy into shame;
And does it so reclaim
That I am Conquered who came here to kill.

Iant. What dangers should I fear?
Her brow grows smooth and clear:
Yet so much greatness cannot want disguise.
The Great live all within;
And are but seldom seen
Looking abroad through Casements of their Eyes.

Roxol. Have courage fair Sicilian, and come near. --


Iant. My distance shows my Duty more than fear.


Roxol. I have a Present for you, and it is such
As comes from one who does believe
It is for you too little to receive;
And I, perhaps, may think it is too much.

Iant. Who dares be bountiful to low distress?
Who to Ianthe can a Present make
When Rhodes besieged has all she would possess;
And all the world does ruined Rhodes forsake?

Roxol. The Present will not make the Giver poor;
And, though it is single now, it quickly can
Be multiplied; you shall have many more.
It is this kiss -- It comes from Solomon.

Iant. You did your Creature courage give;
And made me hope that I had leave to live
When you from dutious distance called me near:
But now I soon shall courage lack:
I am amazed, and must go back:
Amazement is the uggli'st shape of fear.

Roxol. Are Christian Ladies so reserved and shy?


Iant. Our sacred Law does give
Them precepts how to live,
And Nature tells them they must Dye.

Roxol. It Is well they to their Husbands are so true.
But speak, Ianthe, are they all like you?

Iant. I hope they are, and better too,
Or, if they are not, will be so.

Roxol. They have been strangely injured then.
But Rumor does mistake.
Some say they visits make;
And they are visited by Men.

Iant. What custom does avow
Our Laws in Time allow;
And those who never guilty be
Suspect not others liberty.

Roxol. This would in Asia wonderful appear:
But Time may introduce that Fashion here.
Come nearer! Is your Husband kind and true?

Iant. If good to good I may compare
(Excepting Greatness) I would dare
To say, he is as Solomon to you.

Roxol. As he to me? How strong is innocence?
Prevailing till it is free to give offense.
Indeed, Alphonso, has a large renown;
Which does so daily spread
As it the world may lead;
And should not be contracted in a Town.

Iant. As we in all agree
So he will prove like me
A lowly servant to your rising Fame.

Roxol. But is he kind to you, and free from blame?
Civil by day, and loyal too at Night?

Iant. By Nature not by skill
He is as cheerful still
And as unblemisht as unshaded light.

Roxol. These Christian-Turtles live too happily.
I wish, for breed, they would to Asia fly. --
You must not at such distance stand;
Draw near, and give me your fair hand. --
I have another Present for you now;
And such a Present as I know
You will much better than the first allow;
Though Solomon will not esteem it so.
It Is from my self -- of friendship such a Seal -- [Kisses her.
As you to Solomon must never reveal. --
And that I may be more assured,
By this again you are conjured. --

Iant. Presents so good and great as these
I should receive upon my knees.

Roxol. I will not, lest I may revive your fear,
Relate the cause of your confinement here.
But know, I must
Your virtue trust;
Which, proving loyal, you are safe in mine.

Iant. The light of Angels still about you shine!


Haly. The dangerous secrets of the Imperial Bed Haly takes Ianthe aside.
Are darker than the riddles of the Throne.
The Glass, in which their Characters are read
We Eunuchs grin'd, and it is but seldom shown.

Iant. I shall with close and wary Eyes
Retire from all your Mysteries.
And when occasion shall my honor trust,
You Will find I have some courage, and am just.

Roxol. Perhaps, Ianthe, you may shortly hear
Of Clouds, which threatening me, may urge your fear.
Be virtuous still! it is true my Sultan frowns, -- [She weeps.
But, let him winn more Battails, take more Towns;
And be all day the fore-most in the Fight;
Yet he shall find that I will rule at Night.

[ Haly looks in. Haly. The Guards increase, and many Mutes appear,
Lifting their Lights, to show the Sultan near.

Roxol. My new sealed friendship I must now lay by
A while, and seem your jealous Enemy.
Be to your self, and to Alphonso true.

Iant. As he to me, and virtue is to you.


[ Ianthe steps at distance. Enter Solomon. Soly. Has Night lost all her dark
dominion here?
High hopes disturb your sleep;
But I suspect you keep
Ianthe waking not with hope but fear.

Roxol. Too well, and much too soon I know
Whom you are pleased to grace:
However, since it must be so,
You Will find I can give place.

Soly. You had a place, too near me, and too high.
If but a little you remove
From place of Empire or of love
You soon become but as a stander-by.
One step descending from a shining Throne,
You to the darkest depth fall swiftly down.

Roxol. If I sat nearer to you than 'twas fit
For Empires Heralds to admit,
(I being born below, and you above)
Pray call in Death, and I Will, even then, bring Love.
To these all places equal be;
For Love and Death know no degree.

Soly. I cannot Passions riddles understand.


Roxol. You still have present Death at your Command;
But former Love you have laid by:
Which, being gone, you know that I can Dye. --

[Weeps. Soly. I better know that you have cause to weep. [Turns to Ianthe.
Ianthe, all is calm within your Breast,
Retire into the quiet shade of sleep,
And let not watchful fear divert your rest.
Let all the Nations of my Camp suffice,
As Guards, to keep you from my Enemies;
(For of your own
You can have none)
Whilst I but as Loves Sent'nel on you wait,
Armed with his Bow, at your Pavilion Gate.

Iant. Heaven put it in your mighty mind
Quickly to be,
More than to me,
To all the Valiant Rhodians kind.
And may you grieve to think how many mourn
Till you shall end their griefs at my return.

Soly. You shall not Languish with delay.
But this is business for the day.
It Is now so late at Night that all Loves spies,
Parents, and Husbands too,
The watchful, and the Watched seal up their Eyes;
And Lovers cease to woo.

[Exeunt Haly, Ianthe. Roxol. You alter every year the Worlds known face;
Whilst Cities you remove, and Nations chase.
These great mutations (which, with shril
And ceaseless sounds, Fame's Trumpet fill,
And shall seem wonders in her brazen Books)
Much les^ amaze me than your altered looks;
Where I can read your Loves more fatal change.

Soly. You make my frowns, yet seem to think them strange.


Roxol. You seek a Stranger, and abandon me.


Soly. Strange Coasts are welcome after Storms at Sea.


Roxol. That various mind will wander very far,
Which, more than home, a foreign Land preferrs.

Soly. The wise, for quietness, when civil War
Does rage at home, turn private Travailers.

Roxol. Your loves long frost has made my bosom cold.


Soly. Let not the cause be in your Story told.


Roxol. A colder heart Death's hand has never felt:
But it is such Ice as you may break, or melt. --

[She weeps. Soly. I never shall complain
When you are wet with Rain,
Which softer passion, does thus gently power.
What more in Season is than such a shower?
You still, through little Clouds, would lovely show,
Were all your April-weather calm as now.
But March resembles more your haughty Mind;
Froward and loud oftener than calmly kind.
Weather which may not inconvenient prove
To Country Lovers, born but to make love:
Who grieve not when they mutual kindness doubt,
But with indiff'rence meet a frown or smile;
As having frequent leisure to fall out,
And their divided breasts to reconcile.

Roxol. The world had less sad business known, if you
Had been ordained for so much leisure too.

Soly. Monarchs, who onward still with Conquest move
Can only for their short diversion love.
When a black Cloud in Beauties sky appears,
They cannot wait till Time the Tempest clears.
Whilst they, to save a sullen Mistress, stay,
The worlds Dominion may be cast away.

Roxol. Why is Dominion prized above
Wise Natures great concernment, Love?

Soly. Of Heaven what have we found, which we do more
And sooner, than exceeding Power adore?
The wondrous things which that Chief Power has done,
Are to those early Spies, our Senses, shown:
And must at length to Reason be assured:
Yet how, or what, Heaven loves is much obscured,
And our uncertain love
(Perhaps not bred above,
But in low Regions, like the wandering winds)
Shows different Sexes more than equal Minds.

Roxol. Your love, indeed, is prone to change,
And like the wandering Wind does range.
The gale a while toward Cyprus blew;
It turned to Creet, and stronger grew;
Then, on the Lycian shore, it favored me:
But now, Ianthe seeks in Sicily.

Soly. In progresses of War and Love
Victors with equal haste must move:
And in attempts of either make no stay:
They can but Visit, Conquer, and away.

Roxol. Love's most Victorious and most cruel Foe!
Forsake me, and to meaner Conquests go*
To Wars, where you may Sack and Over run,
Till your Success has all the World undone.
Advance those Trophies which you ought to hide;
For wherefore are they raised
But to have slaughter praised,
And courage, which is but applauded pride?

Soly. In so much Rain I knew a Gust would come:
I Will shun the rising Storm and give it room.

Roxol. Loves Foes are ever hasty in Retreat;
You can march off; but it is for fear
Lest you should hear
Those Mournings which your cruelties beget.

Soly. The fear is wise which you upbray'd;
For, whilst thus terrible you grow,
I must confess, I am afraid,
And not ashamed of being so.

Roxol. Go where you cover greater fear
Than that which you dissemble here:
Where you breed ill your mis-begotten Fame,
When charging Armies and assaulting Towns,
You ravish Nations with as little shame
As now you show in your injurious frowns.

Soly. If we grow fearful at the face of War,
You, justly, may our terror blame,
Since, by your darings, we might learn to dare.
Would you as well could teach us shame.

Roxol. Your fears appear, even in your darings, great;
You would not else sound cheerful Trumpets when
The charge begins, whilst Drumms with Clamor beat,
To raise the courage of your mighty Men.
With Wars loud Music showts are mingled too;
Which boastingly such cruel deeds proclaim
As Beasts, through thickest Furrs, would blush to do.
Your wives may breed up Wolves to teach you shame.

Soly. It Is not still dangerous when you angry grow:
For, Roxolana, you can anger show
To those whom you, perhaps, can never hate.
This passion is; but you have crimes of State.

Roxol. Call Nature to be Judge! what have I done?


Soly. You have a Husband lost to save a Son.


Roxol. Sultan, that Son is yours as much mine.


Soly. He has some luster got in Fight;
But yet, beyond the dawning light
Of his new glory, Mustapha does shine;
Who is the Pledge of my Circasian Wife;
And from my blood as great a share of life
May challenge as your Son. Has he not worn
A Victors Wreath? He is my Eldest born.

Roxol. Because her Son the Empire shall enjoy,
Must therefore strangling Mutes my Sons destroy?
Since Eldest born you may him Empire give:
But mine, as well as he were born to Live.
They may, as yours, though by a second Wife,
Inherit that which Nature gave them, Life.

Soly. Whilst any Life I show by any breath,
Who dares approach them in the shape of Death?

Roxol. When you to Heav^ns high Palace shall remove,
To meet much more compassion there
Than you have ever felt, and far more love
Than ere your heart required here;
Will not your Bassas then presume to do
What custom warrants and our Priesthood too?

Soly. Those are the secret Nerves of Empires force.
Empire grows often high.
By rules of cruelty,
But seldom prospers when it feels remorse.

Roxol. Accursed Empire! got and bred by Art!
Let Nature govern, or at least
Divide our Mutual interest:
Yield yours to Death, and keep alive my part.

Soly. Beauty retire! Thou do my pity move!
Believe my pity, and then trust my love! -- [ Exit Roxolana.
At first I thought her by our Prophet sent
As a reward for Valors toils;
More worth than all my Fathers spoils:
And now, she is become my punishment.
But thou art just, O Power Divine!
With new and painful Arts
Of studied War I break the Hearts
Of half the World, and she breaks mine.

[Exit. The Fifth Act.
The Scene is changed to a Prospect of Rhodes by night, and the Grand Masters
Palace on Fire. Enter Solomon, Pirrhus, Rustan. Soly. LOok Pirrhus, Look! what
means that sudden light,
Which casts a paleness over the face of Night?
The Flame shows dreadful, and ascends still higher?

Pirrh. The Rhodian Masters Palace is on Fire!


Rust. A greater from Saint Georges Tower does shine!


Soly. Chance it would seem, but does import design!


Enter Mustapha. Must. Their Flagg of Treaty they have taken in!


Soly. Dare they this ending War again begin?


Pirrh. They feed their flames to light their forces out!


Rust. And now, seem sallying from the French Redoubt!


Must. Old Orcan takes already the Alarm!


Soly. Need they make fires to keep their Courage warm?


Pirrh. The English now advance!


Soly. Let them proceed!
Their Cross is bloody, and they come to bleed.
Set all the Turn-pikes open, let them in!
Those Island Gamesters may,
(Who Desperately for honor play)
Behold fair stakes, and try what they can winn.

[Exeunt omnes. Enter Villerius, Alphonso, Admiral, Marshal. Vill. Burn,
Palace, burn! Thy flame more beauteous grows
Whilst higher it ascends.
That now must serve to light us to our Foes
Which long has lodged our Friends.

Alph. It serves not only as a light
To guide us in so black a Night;
But to our Enemies will terror give.

Mar. Who (seeing we so much destroy,
What we in triumph did enjoy,
That now we know not where to Live)
Will strait conclude that boldly we dare Dye.

Vill. And those, who to themselves loved life deny,
Want seldom Power to aid their will
When they would others kill.

Adm. Speak both of killing and of saving too.
The utmost that our Valor now can do
Is when, by many Bassas, Prisoners taken,
We freedom for distressed Ianthe gain.

Alph. A Jewel too sufficient to redeem
Great Solomon were he in Chains with them.

Vill. Here spread our Front! Our Rear is all come forth.
We lead Two Thousand Rhodian Knights;
All skilled in various Fights:
Fame's Role contains no names of higher worth.
In whispers give command
To make a stand!

Adm. Stand!


Within. 1 Stand! 2 Stand! 3 Stand!


Vill. Divide our Knights, and all their Martial Train!


Alph. Let me by Storm the Sultan's Quarter gain.


Adm. My Lot directs my Wing to Mustapha.


Mar. To Pirrhus, over his Trench, I Will force my way.


Vill. Our honor bids us give a brave defeat;
Whilst Prudence ^aves Reserves for a Retreat.
All Lovers are concerned in what we do.
Loves Crown depends on you, on you, and you.
Love's Bow is not so fatal as my Sword.

Alph. As mine.


Adm. And mine.


Together. Ianthe is the Word.


[Exeunt. A Symphony expressing a Battle is played awhile. Enter Solomon.
Soly. MOre Horse! more Horse, to shake their Ranks!
Bid Orchan haste to gaul their Flanks.
Few Rhodian Knights, making their several stands,
Out-strike Assemblies of our many Hands.

Enter Mustapha, Rustan. Must. Morat, and Valiant Zangiban are slain.


Rust. But Orcan does their yielded ground regain.


Soly. Our Crescents shine not in the shade of Night.
But now the Crescent of the Sky appears;
Our valor rises with her lucky light;
And all our Fighters blush away their fears.

Enter Pirrhus. Pirrh. More Pikes! and pass the French! fall in! fall in!
That we may gain the day e're day begin.

Soly. Advance with all our Guards! This doubtful strife
Less grieves me than our odds
Of number against Rhodes;
By which we honor lose to rescue Life.

[Exeunt. A Symphany sounds a Battle again. The Scene Returns to the Town
Besieged. Enter Villerius, Marshal. Vill. SEnd back! send back! to quench our
fatal fire!
E're Morning does advance we must retire;
Justly ashamed to let the days great Light
Show what a little we have done to Night.

Enter Admiral. Adm. We have been Shipwrackt in a Midnight storm;
Who hither came (Great Master) to perform
Such deeds as might have given us cause to boast.

Mar. We found the Night too black,
And now no use can make
Of Day but to discern that we are lost.

Vill. Can thy great Courage mention our defeat
Whilst any Life is left to make retreat?

Adm. It is a just rebuke.


Vill. Where is the Duke?


Adm. Long tired with Valor's toils, and in his Breast
Over charged with Lovers griefs, he sought for rest.
To Fames eternal Temple he is gone.
And I may fear
Is entered there,
Where Death does keep the narrow Gate,
And lets in none
But those whom painful Honor brings,
Many, without, in vain for entrance wait,
With warrants sealed by mighty Kings.

Vill. Villerius never yet by Turkish Swords
Was cut so deep as by thy wounding words.
Is that great Youth, the Prince of Lovers, slain?

Adm. Who knows how much of Life he does retain?
Twice I relieved him from the double force
Of Zangibans old foot, and Orcan's Horse.
My strength was over-pow'rd; and he still bent
To follow Honor to the Sultans Tent.

Mar. Alphonso's Story has this sudden end:
Ianthe may a longer fate attend.

Vill. Of Life's chief hope we are bereft.
Go rally all whom Death has left.
Let our remaining Knights make good the Peer.
Our hearts will serve to beat,
Unheard, a stolen Retreat.

Adm. But shall we leave Ianthe Captive here?


Vill. I Will to our Temple force our way;
And there for her redemption pray:
Her freedom now depends on our return.
In Temples we shall nothing gain
From Heaven, whilst we of loss complain:
We Will for our Crimes, not for our Losses, mourn.

[Exeunt. Enter Solomon, Pirrhus. Soly. Let us no more the Rhodians flight
pursue;
Who since below our anger, need our care.
Compassion is to vanquished Valor due
Which was not cruel in successful War.

Pirrh. Our Sultan does his power from Heaven derive,
It Is raised above the reach of human force:
It could not else with soft compassion thrive:
For few are gained or mended by remorse.
The world is wicked grown, and wicked men
(Since jealous still of those whom they have harmed)
Are but enabled to offend again
When they are pardoned and left armed.

Enter Mustapha, Rustan. Must. The Rhodians will no more in Arms appear:
They now are lost before they lose their Town.

Rust. They may their Standards hide and Ensigns tear:
For what is the Body when the Soul is gone?

Must. The Prisoner whom in doubtful fight we took
(Who long maintained the strife,
For freedom more than life)
Is young Alphonso, the Sicilian Duke.

Soly. Fortune could never find, if she had Eyes,
A Present for me which I more would prize.

[ Enter Haly. Haly. Your Bosom-slave (the Creature which your power
Has made in all the world the greatest Wife)
Did all this dangerous Night kneel and implore
That Heaven would give you length of happy life,
In measure to your breadth of spreading Fame,
And to the height of Ottamans high name.

Soly. Tell Roxolana I esteem her love
So much that I her anger fear;
And whilst with passion I the one approve
The other I with temper bear.

Haly. She charged me not to undertake to express
With how much grief her Eyes did melt
When she this Night your dangers felt;
Nor how much joy she showed at your Success.
She hears that you have Prisoner took
The bold Sicilian Duke:
And begs he may be strait at her dispose;
That you may try how she can use your Foes.

Soly. This furious Rhodian Sally could not be
Provokt but by his Jealousy of me.

Must. He wanted honor who could yours suspect.


Pirrh. The rash, by Jealousy, themselves detect.


Soly. His jealousy shall meet with punishment.
Convay him strait to Roxolana's Tent. Exit Pirrhus.
But, Haly, know, the fair Ianthe must
Be safe, and free, who did my honor trust.
You want no Mutes, nor can they want good skill
To torture or dispatch those whom they Kill.
But since this Duke's renown did spread and rise
(Who in attempt at Night
Has often escaped my sight)
Take care that I may see him e're he Dies.

Exeunt several ways. The Scene returns to Roxolana's Pavilion. Enter Ianthe in
her Night Dress. Iant. IN this Pavilion all have been alarmed.
The Eunuchs, Mutes, and very Dwarfs were armed.
The Rhodians have a fatal Sally made;
And many now, to shun
The griefs of Love, are run
Through nights dark walks to Death's detested shade.
An Eunuch lately cried, Alphonso's slain;
Now others change my grief,
And give some small relief,
By new report that he is but Prisoner taken.
Where, my afflicted Lord,
Is thy victorions Sword?
For now (though 'twas too weak to rescue thee)
It might successful grow
If thy triumphant Foe
Would make an end of Love by ending me.

Enter Roxolana. Roxol. How fares my Rival, the Sicilian Flower?


Iant. As wet with Tears as Roses in a shower.


Roxol. I brought you Presents when I saw you last.


Iant. Presents? If you have more,
Like those you brought before,
They come too late, unless they make great haste.

Roxol. Are you departing without taking leave?


Iant. I would not you, nor can your Guards deceive.


Roxol. You Will pay a farewell to a civil Court?


Iant. Souls make their parting Ceremonies short.


Roxol. The Present which the Sultan sent before
(Who means to vex your bashfulness no more)
Was to your Lips, and that you did refuse:
But this is to your Ear. I bring you news.

Iant. I hear, my Lord and Rhodes have been too blame.


Roxol. It seems you keep intelligence with Fame:
Or with some frighted Eunuch, her swift Post;
Who often has from Camps to Cities brought
The dreadful News of Battails lost
Before the Field was fought.

Iant. Then I may hope this is a false alarm;
And Rhodes has neither done nor taken harm.

Roxol. You may believe Alphonso is not slain.


Iant. Blessed Angel, speak! Nor is he Prisoner taken?


Roxol. He is a Prisoner, and is given to me.


Iant. Angels are kind, I know you will set him free.


Roxol. He has some Wounds, placed nobly in his Breast.


Iant. You soon take back the comfort you have given.


Roxol. They are not deep, and are securely dressed.


Iant. Now you are good again! O heal them Heaven!


Roxol. In Heaven, Ianthe, he may mercy find,
He must go thither, and leave you behind.

Iant. I hope I shall discern your looks less strange;
And your expressions not so full of change. --

Roxol. Weep'st thou for him, whose saucy Jealousy
Durst think the Sultan could be false to me?

Iant. Though his offense makes him unfit to live,
I hope it is no crime in me to grieve.

Roxol. Soft Fool! bred up in narrow Western Courts;
Which are by Subjects stormed like Paper-Forts:
Italian Courts, fair Inns for foreign Posts;
Where little Princes are but civil Hosts.
Think thou that she, who does wide Empire sway,
Can breed such storms as Lovers showers allay?
Can half the World be governed by a Mind
That shows Domestic pity, and grows kind?

Iant. Where are those virtuous Vows you lately sealed?


Roxol. I did enjoin they should not be revealed.


Iant. But could you mean they should be broken too?


Roxol. Those Seals were counterfeit, and pass
For nothing, since my Sealing was
But to a Christian when I sealed to you.

Iant. Sealed by your precious Lips? What is so sure
As that which makes the Sultan's heart secure?
You to Religion many Temples rere;
Justice may find one Lodging in your breast.

Roxol. Religion is but public fashion here;
And Justice is but private interest.
Nature our Sex does to revenge incite;
And interest counsels us to keep our own.
Were you not sent to rule with me at Night?
Love is as shy of Partners as the Throne.
Haly, prepare the Prisoner; he must Dye.

Enter Haly. Iant. If any has offended, it is I. --
O think! think upward on the Thrones above.
Disdain not mercy, since they mercy love.
If mercy were not mingled with their power,
This wretched world could not subsist an how'r.
Excuse his innocence; and seize my life!
Can you mistake the Husband for the Wife?

Roxol. Are Christian Wives, so true, and wondrous kind?
Ianthe, you can never change my Mind:
For I did ever mean to keep my Vow:
Which I renew, and seal it faster now. -- Kisses her.
The Sultan franckly gave thy Lord to me;
And I as freely render him to thee.

Iant. To all the world be all your virtues known
More than the Triumphs of your Sultans Throne.

Roxol. Send in her Lord, to calm her troubled Breast.


Exeunt Roxolana, Haly, several ways. Iant. Now his departing life may stay;
But he has Wounds. Yet she did say
They were not deep, and are securely Dressed.

Enter Haly, Alphonso, his Arms bound. Haly. Fate holds your Dice; and here
expect the Cast.
Your chance, if it be bad, will soon be past.

[Exit. Alph. My doom contains not much diversity.
To live, to dye, to be a slave, or free?
Death sums up all! by Dying we remove
From all the frowns of Power, and griefs of Love.
Ianthe, are you here?
I will dismiss my fear.
Deaths dreaded Journey I
Have ended e're I Dye.
Death does to Heaven the virtuous lead;
Which I enjoy ere I am Dead.
For it is Heaven to me where e're thou art,
And those who meet in Heaven shall never part.

Iant. Stay, stay, Alphonso! you proceed too fast;
For I am changed since you beheld me last.
In Rhodes I wholly did my self resign
To serve your power, but you are now in mine.
And that you may perceive how soon I can
Melt the Obdurate heart of Solomon;
Let this confirm your restless Jealousy:
You came in bound, and thus I make you free. --

[Unbinds him. Alph. By this, Ianthe, you express no more
Dominion over me than you had before.
In Rhodes I was a Subject to your will:
Your smiles preserved me, and your frowns did Kill.

Iant. I know your Tongue too well; which should deceive,
One who had Studied all the Art
Of Love rather than her whose heart
Too simply would your very looks believe.
But now you know, that though you are unbound,
Yet still your walk is on the Sultans ground.

Alph. Ianthe, you are changed indeed
If, cruelly, you thus proceed.

Iant. In tracing human Story we shall find
The cruel more successful than the kind.
Whilst you are here submitted to my sway,
It safe discretion were to make you pay
For all those Sighs and Tears my Heart and Eyes
Have lost to make you lose your Jealousies.
But I was bred in Natures simple School;
And am but Loves great Fool,
With whom you rudely play,
And strike me hard, then stroke the pain away. --
How are your Wounds? I hope you find them slight?

Alph. They scarce will need the ripening of a Night:
Unless, severe Ianthe, you
By chiding me, their pains renew.

Iant. Was it not Jealousy which brought you here?


Alph. It was my love, conducted by my fear.
Fear of your safety, not of virtue, made
The Rhodians, by surprise, this Camp invade.
In hope, by bringing home great Prisoners, we
Might set the Rhodians greater Mistress free.

Iant. The safety of Ianthe was not worth
That courage which misled the Rhodians forth.
The worlds Contagion, Vice, could never infect
The Sultans heart: but when you did suspect
His favors were too great for me to take,
You then, Alphonso, did unkindly make
My merit small; as if you knew
There was to that but little due.
Or if he wicked were,
What danger could you fear?
Since Virtues force all vicious power controles.
Lucrece a Poniard found, and Porcia Coals.

Alph. How low to your high virtue shall I fall?


Iant. What chance attended in this fatal Night
The Master, Marshal, and the Admiral?

Alph. I lost them in the thickest Mist of Fight.
Yet did from Haly this short comfort get
That they to Rhodes have made a brave Retreat.
As Love's great Champions we must them adore.

Iant. Be well, Alphonso, I will chide no more.


Enter Solomon, Roxolana, Mustapha, Pirrhus, Haly, Rustan. Soly. Haly, I did
declare that I would see
The jealous Prisoner e're he Died.

Roxol. Look there! you are obeyed. Yet pardon me
Who, e're you pardoned him, did make him free.

Soly. In this I have your virtue tried.
If Roxolana thus revengeless proves
To him whom such a beauteous Rival loves,
It does denote she Rivals can endure,
Yet think she still is of my heart secure.
Duke, this Example of her trust may be
A cure for your distrustful thoughts of me,
You may imbark for the Sicilian Coast;
And there possess your Wife when Rhodes is lost.

Alph. Since freedom, which is more than Life, you give
To him, who durst not ask you leave to Live;
I cannot doubt your bounty when I crave
That, granting freedom, you will Honor save.
My honor I shall lose, unless I share
In Rhodes, the Rhodians worst effects of War.
To Sicily let chaste Ianthe steer;
And sing long Stories of your virtue there:
Whilst, by your mercy sent, to Rhodes I go,
To be in Rhodes your Suppliant, not your Foe.

Iant. Alphonso, I have honor too;
Which calls me back to Rhodes with you.
Were this, through tenderness, by you denied
For soft concerns of Life,
Yet gracious Solomon will never divide
The Husband from the Wife.

Soly. Both may to Rhodes return: But it is just
That you, who nobly did my honor trust,
(Without my Pass, or plighted Word)
Should more by your adventurous visit get
Than Empires interest would afford,
Or you expected when you came to Treat.
Go back Ianthe; make your own
Conditions boldly for the Town.
I am content it should recorded be,
That, when I vanquished Rhodes, you Conquered me.

Iant. Not Fames free Voice, nor lasting Numbers can
Disperse, or keep, enough of Solomon.

Soly. From Lovers Beds, and Thrones of Monarchs, fly
Thou ever waking Madness, Jealousy.
And still, to Natures Darling, Love
(That all the World may happy prove)
Let Giant-Virtue be the watchful Guard,
Honor, the cautious Guide, and sure reward:
Honor, adorned in such a Poets Song
As may prescribe to Fame
What loyal Lovers name
Shall far be spread, and shall continue long.

Exeunt omnes. EPILOGUE.
THough, bashfully, we fear to give offense;
Yet, pray allow our Poet confidence.
He has the priv'lege of old Servants got;
Who are connived at, and have leave to Dote;
To boast past service, and be chol'rique too,
Till they believe at last that all they do
Does far above their Masters Judgments grow:
Much like to theirs, is his presumption now.
For free, assured, and bold his Brow appears,
Because, he served your Fathers many years.
He says he pleased them too, but he may find,
You Wits; not of your Duller-Fathers mind.
Which, well considered Mistress Muse will then
Wish for her old Gallants at Fri'rs again;
Rather than be by those neglected here,
Whose Fathers civilly did Court her there.
But as old Mistresses, who meet disdain,
Forbear through Pride, or Prudence, to complain;
And satisfy their hearts, when they are sad,
With thoughts of former Lovers they have had:
Even so poor Madam-Muse this night must bear,
With equal pulse, the fits of hope and fear;
And never will against your Passion strive:
But, being old, and therefore Narrative,
Comfort her self with telling Tales, too long,
Of many Plaudits had when she was young.
FINIS.

