AN INVENTION OF Engines of Motion LATELY Brought to perfection.

WHEREBY May be dispatched any work now done in ENGLAND or elsewhere,
(especially Works that require strength and swiftness) either by Wind, Water,
Cattle or Men.

AND That with better accommodation, and more profit then by any thing hitherto
known and used.

LONDON, Printed by I. C. for Richard Woodnoth next door to the Golden heart,
In Leaden-Hall-street. 1651.

A PASSAGE OUT OF THE Lord VERULAN'S Novum Organon, Translated out of Latin.
THe Introduction of Noble Inventions seems to be the very chief of all
humane actions, which former Ages sufficiently witnessed; in as much as they
attributed Divine Honors to such Inventors, whereas they allotted only the
Honor or Title of Heroes to the well-deserving in civil Affairs; such as are
the Founders of Cities and Empires, Lawmakers, the deliverers of their
Country from long and tedious mischiefs, the suppressions of Tyrannies, and
the like. And truly, whosoever shall well scan the matter, he shall find this
verdict of the auucients to be very just. For the benefits of new Inventions
may extend to all ankind universally; but the good of civil achievements can
respect but some particular Cantons of men: these latter do not endure above a
few ages, the former for ever. Moreover, the Reformation of States in civil
affairs for the most part, is not compassed without violence and disturbances:
But Inventions make all men happy without either injury or damage to any one
single person. Furthermore, new Inventions are as it were new Creations, and
Imitations of Gods own works.

Again, it were good to take notice of the virtue efficacy, and consequences of
Inventions, which are scarce more conspicuous in any then in these 3. unknown
to to the Ancients, and whose beginnings (although but of late) are obscure
and unrenowned, to wit, the Art of Printing, Gunpowder, and the Mariners
Needle. For these three have changed the face and state of things throughout
the whole world. The first in the matter of Learning, the second in that of
War, and the last in Navigation: From whence have followed an innumerable
change of things, so that no Empire, no Sect; nor no Constellation seems to
have had a greater influence upon humane affairs then these Mechanical
Inventions have had.

A LETTER TO Mr. Samuel Hartlib, CONCERNING An Invention of Engines of Motion
lately brought to perfection.
SIR,
WHereas by the blessing of God, who only is the giver of every good and
perfect gift, while I was searching after that which many far before me in all
humane learning have sought, but not yet found, ( viz.) a Perpetual Motion or
selfmotion, or a lessoning the distance between strength and time; though I say
not that I have yet fully obtained the thing it self, yet I have advanced so
near it, that already I can with the strength or help of 4. men, do any work
which is done in England, whether by wind, water, or horses, as the grinding of
Wheat, Rape, or raising of waters: Not by any power or wisdom of mine own, but
by Gods assistance, and (I humbly hope after a sort) immediate direction, I
have been guided in that search to tread in another path, then ever any other
man that I can hear or read of, did tread before me, yet with so good succes
that I have already erected one little Engine or great Model at Lambath, able
to give sufficient demonstration to either Artist or any other person, that my
Invention is as useful and beneficial (let others say upon proof how much more)
as any other way of working hitherto known or used.

Having therefore brought it to the birth, I confess I am pained to be
delivered; but want the help of some good Neighbors, or rather the Child being
indeed born, and that kind and faithful Office performed by your self, without
whose help as the chief Instrument, I could hardly have brought it forth. The
next care is for a good Nurse, lest the Infant perish for want of timely
nourishment. And this also I hope to obtain by your farther negotiation and
assistance, that so this talent may not be hid under a Bushel, but be imparted
for the general use of Mankind, and for the comfort of all that Family, to whom
this so hopeful an issue does belong. I must confess ingenuously, that if God
as the efficient cause, and your self as his proper Instrument, had not (in a
manner alone) supported and encouraged both my spirit and hands from time to
time, there would have been little or nothing of it extant at this time, if the
undertaking had not quite miscarried, so good a Nurse have you been both to me
and it. This (dear Sir) I speak the rather, that I may encourage you through
the love of God to every good and laudable purpose, not to grow weary in your
mind, notwithstanding that infinite corruption you meet in the ways of men to
stop your course, but to continue still as hitherto you have done in a course
of patient well-doing, and to cast your bread upon many waters; for assuredly
of this seed you will reap an abundant Harvest in due time, if you faint not;
And if this age should not resent so gratefully as they ought, all the labors
of your love; which you have, and I know more and more intend to express by the
grace of God, for the universal good of the whole Nation: yet Posterity perhaps
may, when they shall consider now instrumental you have been not only to
contribute to the building of many Colleges of Piety and Learning; but also to
set forwards the best means, that can be held forth to any industrious or
ingenious people, of livelihood and outward riches, by a reformed way of
Husbandry: Of which that of saving and multiplying Corn is one of the chief and
most substantial parts.

As for the Invention formerly mentioned, of better and more accomodate ways
of grinding, my purpose is not (at present) to enlarge my self therein, nor
mention those very many uses for which they are to be fitted; but only to
intimate the goodness of these kind of Engines, as they stand compared to other
common Mills, by a short measuring scale here enclosed. And so I commend you to
Gods favor and blessing, as also my self and the whole business, which is the
continued prayer of

Sir, Your most faithful and obliged Friend and humblest Servant.
March the 10. 1651.
A Scale to measure the Uses and profits of my Engine by as it stands compared
with others. All commonly known Causes of strong and swift Motion are concluded
under these 6. heads. Springs Weights Men Wind Water Horses.

FOr the first, two viz. Springs and Weights, they are rather used for Watches,
or Clocks, or Jacks, then for Mill-works, and are therefore not necessary to be
taken notice of here.

For the third, viz. Men, they are used for strong Motions often; but those
motions are slow, as craining up of Goods or the like, and as for Mill-works,
they are only used for grinding of small quantities of Malt, in those Engines,
commonly called Quernes or Hand-Mills, and for turning of grinding-Stones, and
for hand-Pumps which make but small riddance.

For the fourth viz. Wind, this is used in great and strong Mill-works, as for
the grinding of Corn or Rape, etc. for sawing of Timber, or for draining of
drowned Lands, etc. But these Wind-Mills are liable to these Inconveniences.

First, they are only to be erected upon Hills, or open plains, and therefore
not useful in all places.

Secondly, they are not without some danger of being broken, and that not the
Sails only, (which though frequent are mendable) but sometimes to be torn in
pieces, yea tumbled quite down by violent and sudden storms, which (though it
happen but seldom) yet in respect it may so be, and in respect of the great
loss, both of life and goods that necessarily follows, there is sufficient
argument to deter any man from building such Mills where others (less
hazardous) can be set up. Though not to neglect the use of them, where no other
can be had.

Thirdly, such storms and gustie winds, though they always break not the whole
Mill nor its sails, yet it often compels it to stand still, or if it go it
grinds untowardly, sometimes too high, presently too low, and is apt to heat,
etc. And the same makes the deale-boards that are sawed by such Mills so ruff
and shagged, from hence also it is that in drayning works of this nature, the
tackling is very apt to break.

Fourthly, Calmes are all the year long, and especially in Summer so frequent,
that upon enquiry, I am confident it will appear that most Wind-Mills stand
still above half the year, though not altogether at one time. And for this
cause no man will grind at a Windmil, that can as conveniently grind at a
Water-Mill; And he may have grist when the wind serves not, or want when the
wind serves.

Fifthly, The Cog-wheels in most Wind-Mills are (in the diameter) 8. foot or
under (I take the example from one of the best Wind-Mills in Moore-fields,
which I think is not much inferior to any in England) the trundle is at the
least two foot, which is 4. to one. Now I have observed in a pretty stiff
gale, that the sails, and consequently the Cog-wheele has gone about 8. times
in a minute, that is 24. turns in a minute for the stones: And for the most
part of the time they work, it is not much above this rate, which cannot
dispatch above 3. bushels in one hour, but a good Mill of mine may grind a
quarter.

The 5th. principle of Motion is Water, or the Water-Mills: These also are
liable to some inconveniences.

First, if the foundation be not carefully and skilfully laid* all is in danger
to be eradicated.

Secondly, if the banks of the dam break, the water runs the wrong way.

Thirdly, in great floods she stirs not.

Fourthly, in droughts in Summer most VVater-Mils want water.

Fifthly, not one of a hundred has water at any time of the year to serve day
and night too, unless they go very weakly and so dispatch but little.

Sixthly, he that will erect a VVater-Mill is bound to set it up where Nature
has provided a sufficient stream, and cannot have one elsewhere upon any
terms.

Lastly, (although VVater-Mills be of all other the best yet known or used yet)
one with the other through England, will not grind above four bushells in an
hour; whereas a good Mil of mine will (as is aforesaid) grind a quarter or more;
therefore has a manifest advantage of all other Mills, and especially in this,
that the profit and charge of mine are present or absent to*gether, so that no
custom or profit, not a penny charge.

The Sixth and last Principle of Motion is the Horse-Mill, (I have heard they
use Oxen in the Barbado's) These (though weaker then wind, or VVater-Mills) are
the best, for so much as they can do, in respect they may be set up, and made
use of almost at all times and places, and are liable to some defects or
inconveniences, though fewer then the other.

First, If any or all the Horses dye or be dangerously sick, the dead horse
what ever he cost or was worth, is clearly lost to the Master, and the sick
must be supplied, and maintained idle till recovered.

Secondly, (and this is the only most considerable defect or difference,
between mine and this, and that is a great one indred) The horse Mill is
absolutely incapable of being carried on to the grinding of Corn or such
strong wrks: For, The Brewers Mills (the best or greatest, I mean now used in
London) move by the strength of 4 horses under a wheel of 24 foot diameter,
which may contain at 4 Inches pitch 216 Cogs, the horses path is not above 18
foot, so that the Cog-wheel over-hangs one further part, these Horse* one time
with another, draw not above 112 pound weight apiece at most, and move (at
most) 3 times about in a minute, the whole strength of the 4 is 448. out of
which deduct one 4th. part, there remains 336. And 216 Cogs is 648. Cogs at
work in a minute, these work upon a stone of 4 foot it may be 4. and a half,
by a trundle of one foot, or 9 staves at the same pitch, (if of 10 staves it
goes stronger but slower) by this account 72 is the respective number of
turns, the stone runs about in a minute.

Note that if this Mill were to grind Wheat with the same stone, it could not
move by this trundle, nor with this sterngth, and a larger trundle would not
turn the stone so often in a minute, whereas my Engine prepared for Wheat, will
bring at least twice so much strength with the Cogs, yet turn the stone at
least 72 times in a minute.

Let this serve as a Scale to measure all other Applications by; for what ever
will hold in grinding Wheat, will hold (to give the advantage to my Engines)
much more in any other Application, and particularly for Grinding or squeesing
of Sugarcanes, and raising water; for which last I have an Invention yet to
come far above this or any thing hitherto known (as I at least) humbly
conceave.)

Another Letter to Mr. Samuel Hartlib, concerning the forementioned Invention.
SIR,
I Here withal present you with a List of some of the Uses or Applications,
for which these Engines are fit (for it is very difficult, if not impossible,
to name or find them all at the same time) viz.

To grind Malt or hard Corn.

To grind Seed for the making of Oil.

To grind Colors for Potters, Painters or Glasse-houses.

To grind Bark for Tanners.

To grind Woods for Dyers.

To grind Spices or Snuffe-Tobacco.

To grind Brick, Tile, Stones, or Earth for plaster.

To grind Sugarcanes.

To draw up Coals, Stones, Ure or the like, or Materials for great and high
buildings.

To draw Wyre.

To draw water from Mines.

To draw water from Meers or Fens.

To draw water to serve Cities, Towns, Castles, etc:

To draw up water to flood dry grounds, or to water grounds.

To draw or hale ships, boats, etc. up Rivers against the stream.

To draw Carts, Wagons, etc. as fast without Cattle.

To draw the Plough without Cattle to the same dispatch if need be.

To brake Hemp, Flax, etc.

To beat Hemp, Flax, etc.

To weigh Anchors with less trouble and sooner.

To spin Cordage, or Cables.

To bolt meal faster and finer.

To saw stone.

To saw Timber.

To pollish any stones, or Mettalls.

To turn any great works in wood, Stone, Metals, etc. that could hardly be
done before.

To file much cheaper in all great works.

To bore Wood, Stone, Mettalls.

To thrash Corn if need be.

To winnow Corn at all times, better, cheaper, etc.

For Paper-Mills, Thread-Mills, Iron-Mills,

Plate-Mills, Cum multis aliis, etc.

Having thus according to your commands given you an account in part of these
things; give me leave by way of repetition to give you as it were an abridgement
of this whole business for a close; that so you may in a closer order review
what perfection God has brought this work unto; to the intent we may the more
rejoice in and admire his goodness, and the more admire but lament the
dullness of this present Age, in which there is so few that will pull their
hands out of their bosoms to receive so great blessings. The happy success of
my Endeavors have arrived at this.

To choose the best ground, or fittest for the then present purpose, which if
it be already good and rich enough, it is well; but if not, To know not only all
the Common sorts of Dung, Manures, or Composts, with their Common uses, but
diverse others perhaps of better use, and a distinct and better use of those
already known (in a word) so as that out of any twenty Acres in England, that
lies together, and is in any degree of goodness, to take right good and
sufficient Compost for that 20. Acres, and that from generation to generation,
and that in such a sort that the ground shall be continually rather improved
and of more profit thereby, if the owners will themselves; and also to the
great ease of many parts of England, where their tillage Lands lie far from
home; To make two loads of Dung or other Compost more effectual then ten is
now. This Land thus chosen and soyled, to plough after a better and more
advantageous manner, with cattle, or if need be, to plough or dig without
cattle as cheap, and as fast as now, (this is more advantage to the Public
then the Private, though no loss to any.) To sow, or rather to set or plant in
a way so much superior and more advantageous then the common way as is hard to
believe. This Land thus sowed, set, or planted, to manage the Crop when above
ground yet more to a double advantage by ways not formerly known or hardly
thought on.

The Crop thus come up to be inned, and preserved till thrashed with more
safety; and if Barely, etc. being malted to dry better and far cheaper, if hard
c^rne to grind by virtue of the Engines or Mills abovesaid, if Rape-seed or the
like to grind and make into oil, if Hemp or Flax, etc. to brake and beat, etc.
And for Corn, to thrash if need be, with less charge and more expedition far,
but this I will never consent to make common till I perceive that there is
other ways actually on foot to set the poor on work, or that we want hands to
dispatch our necessary business.

The Corn however thrasht to winnow great quantities without staying for the
wind as some do, or without taking a whole family from all other employments
as others do, and without those many losses, charges, inconveniences that
attend this business too commonly throughout England, yet shall the corn be
cleaner dressed by much: and that so seasonably to answer your own desires, which
is very often frustrated in the useful way, especially where there is great
quantities: The charge to every great Corne-Master will not be great to erect
or prepare, but the benefit much more then he himself thinks of, or will
easily believe till experience has indeared him to it; for a taste, consider
what advantage it will be (after preparation made) to keep your corn in the
chafe, free from Hogs or Hens, or two-legged or foure-handed Thieves, etc.
free from the danger of heating or growing as long as you please, and at an
hours warning to make purely clean as little or as much as you please, without
any more then one person engaged, except for very great quantities, and then
but two at most, and that but for a while; from hence we can for a need draw it
without cattle into the field to sow, or into the Market to sell; and so this
double invention never forsakes the good husband, till his hands be quit of it
till next year, or for ever.

And if any ground be over-flowed against the owners will, or to his hurt, the
Engine is ready to dress it and lay it dry; or if too dry by nature to flood
it; or if too dry by accident, that is by drought, to water it, morning or
evening as there is cause with more ease, less charge, and a more regular way
by far, then any Garden is watered, so shall thy Crop flourish when thy
neighbors (that takes not the same course) shall fade away. And in ground that
affords any Coale-pits, or other deep Mines, it will take them up with more
ease, speed, and less charge; or if you build a stately house, the Engine will
much facilitate the work both in respect of time and charge.

Finally, By the blessing of the same God, there are begotten by the same
Father Industry, and conceived by the same Mother Ingenuity, some other
offsprings of no small or less use; in order to the preservation of the Lives
and Estates of very many thousands; from or in the most common and eminent
dangers, and to persuade and prevail with the Sea also, to disclose and impart
her treasury whether her own naturally, or that of which she has robbed us.

But first let us see what kind entertainment the world will give to these
before any others show themselves. If the Land be converted to pasture for
Sheep, the Engine will full the cloth.

If for a dayry, it will churn the cream into butter.

If to feed or breed cattle, it will grind bark that tans the skins.

And if for planting and nourishing of Timber, the same Engine will saw it to
great gain and advantage.

Thus you see there is so near an alliance between these two Inventions, and
both so agree to assist and reward the good Husband, that there is no
essential part of Husbandry, wherein they do not naturally assist each other
more or less. I remain always

SIR, Your most faithful and obliged Friend to serve you.
July the 18, 1651.
FINIS.

