An EXPLANATION OF THE ROMAN CATHOLICK'S BELIEF. Concerning the principal
Points Controverted. Charitably offered to all moderate Persons.

The Fourth Edition.

Anno Dom. MDCLXX.

I. Of the Scripture.
WE believe the Holy Scriptures to be of Divine inspiration and infallible
Authority; and whatsoever is therein contained, we firmly assent unto, as the
Word of God, the Author of all Truth.

But since in the Holy Scriptures there are some things hard to be understood,
2 Pet. 3.16.
which the ignorant and unstable wrest to their own destruction; we therefore
profess (for the ending of Controversies in our Religion, and settling of peace
in our Consciences) to submit our private Judgments to the Judgment of the
Church, represented in a Free General Council.

II. Of the B. Trinity. Of Prayer to Saints. Of Images.
WE humbly believe the sacred Mystery of the Blessed Trinity, one Eternal,
Almighty, and incomprehensible God, whom only we adore and worship, as alone
having Sovereign Dominion over all things, to whom only, we acknowledge as due
from men and Angels, 1 Timothy 1.^.
all glory, service and obedience, abhorring from our hearts (as a most
detestable Sacrilege,) to give our Creators honor to any Creature whatsoever.

And therefore we solemnly profess, that by the Prayers we address to Angels
and Saints, we intend no other than humbly to solicit their assistance before
the Throne of God, as we desire the Prayers of one another here upon earth; not
that we hope any thing from them, as original Authors thereof, but from God the
Fountain of all Goodness, through Jesus Christ, our only Mediator and Redeemer.

Neither do we believe any divinity or virtue to be in Images, for which they
ought to be worshipped, as the Gentiles did their Idols, but we retain them
with due and decent respect in our Churches, as instruments, which we find by
experience, do often assist our memories, and excite our affections.

III. Of Justificatton. Of Merits.
WE firmly believe, that no force of nature, nor dignity of our best works can
merit our Justification, but we are justified freely by grace, Romans 3^.14.
through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ.

And although we should by the grace of God persevere unto the end in a godly
life and holy obedience to the Commandments; yet are our hopes of eternal glory
still built upon the mercy of God, and the merits of Jesus Christ.

All other merits (according to our sense of that word) signify no more, than
Actions done by the assistance of Gods grace, to which it has pleased his
goodness to promise a reward; a Doctrine so far from being unsuitable to the
sense of the Holy Scriptures, that it is their principal design to invite and
provoke us to a diligent observance of the Commandments, by promising heaven as
the Reward of our obedience, 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness is profitable to all things*
having the promise of this life, and of that which is to come, And Romans 2.8.
God will render to every man according to his deeds, to them, who by patient
confidence in well-doing, seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, eternal
life. And again, Romans 8.3. If you live after the flesh you shall die, but if
through the spirit you mortify the deeds of the body, you shall live. And Heb.
6.10. God is not unjust to forget your work and labor of love, which you have
showed for his name, etc. Nothing being so frequently repeated in the Word of
God, as his gracious promises to recompense with everlasting glory the faith
and obedience of his servants; Luke 6.38.
Nor is the bounty of God barely according to our works, but high and
plentiful, even beyond our capacities, giving full measure, heaped up, pressed
down, and running over into the bosoms of all that love him.

Thus we believe the merit or rewardableness of holy living (both which
signify the same thing with us) arises not from the self-value even of our
best actions, as they are ours, but from the Grace and bounty of God; Luke
17.10.
and for our selves, we sincerely profess, when we have done all those things,
which are commanded us, we are unprofitable servants, having done nothing but
that which was our duty, so that our boasting is not in our selves, but all our
glorying is in Christ.

IV. Of the H. Eucharist.
IN the holy Eucharist, or most venerable Sacrament of the body and blood of
our Lord: We acknowledge that there are, as in all other Sacraments, two
things. The visible sign, which is the forms of bread and wine, to which no
Catholic may or does direct his worship. There is also invisible Grace
signified, the body of our blessed Lord, whom being present we adore and
worship with all possible reverence and thanksgiving from our hearts for so
great a blessing, warranted herein by our blessed Lord himself in each of the
Gospels.

V. Of Communion in one kind.
WE humbly confess that from the beginning of Christianity, the holy Communion
was administered frequently in both, and sometimes in each kind, according to
several circumstances: and hence the holy Church following the piety of
Christians, who insensibly became accustomed to receive it almost universally
in one kind, upon great motives did afterward ordain to have it in one, as now
it is commonly administered, though the receiving of it so is not matter of
faith. Neither do we believe that religious and devout communicants, are hereby
bereaved of any benefit or comfort in obeying the Churches orders, Trid. ses.
21. Can. 3^
since our holy belief instructs us, that our blessed Lord the fountain of all
grace is as equally present in one kind as in both.

VI. Of the Sacrifice of the Altar.
THe holy Sacrifice indeed of the altar, we clearly believe ought to be
celebrated in both kinds, as now it is according to the divine institution,
Luke 21.9.
as being done in representation and commemoration of our Lords blessed passion
on the Cross, wherein the body and blood were separated: Whatsoever therefore
propitiatory power our holy Religion attributes to this commemorative
Sacrifice, it is by virtue of the Sacrifice of the Cross, as being by this
applied to us. This is the substance of our faith expressed in the Council of
Trent, so that still we humbly acknowledge the ground of our salvation to be
derived from our Lords blessed and bitter passion. Ses. 22. c. 1.


VII. Of Prayer in Latin.
WE freely acknowledge that it is no way commanded by the Church, that the
people should pray in a language which they understand not, nay, there is given
them all possible encouragement to increase their devotions, and with the
Apostle to allure all, if it may be, to continual prayer, (which is the life of
our souls) by ordaining and publishing most excellent Prayers in vulgar
languages for their use.

As to the Liturgies of the Church which properly belong to Churchmen, and
therefore were anciently styled the Priests Books, lest the people should not
receive full benefit by their public use, there is an express command of our
holy mother the Church in the Council of Trent, Ses. 5. c. 8.
that the Pastors and all who have charge of souls, in the very time of divine
service, should expound and make them plain to the peoples capacity, as in the
old times of the Church we find it was also ordained and practiced.

VIII. Of Prayer for the dead.
OUr faith teaches us to exercise Christian Charity by humbling our selves
before the divine throne of Gods mercy, to beg forgiveness (as we do for one
another here upon earth) of the debts and trespasses of those middle sort of
Christians, In Enchiridio ad Laurentium and de Civ. l. 21. c. 24.
as S. Augustine and the Council of Florence call them, who had not brought
forth sufficient fruits of Repentance, dying in communion of the Faithful;
which indigent condition of theirs, relievable by the Churches, or the Prayers
of the Faithful surviving, speaks what the ancient call Purgatory: warranted
herein by the practice under the Law recorded and recommended in the Maccabees,
which being in no sort reprehended by our Lord or his Apostles amongst the rest
of the Jews unlawful practices, was and is justly presumed to have been allowed
by him, as many of the Fathers understood his sermon in the Mount, and by them,
as is hinted by S. Paul: Mat. 5.29. 1 Cor. 15.29. 2 Cor. 3.
whereupon it has continued ever since in general practice throughout all
ages, as even Gravestones and all other Christian Monuments do witness,
especially all ancient Liturgies of the Saints, and Books of common prayers
used in all Churches: neither can we discern how possibly this may be conceived
offensive to God, whose justice herein we hope and do humbly endeavor to
appease by our exercise of brotherly compassion.

If you should ask how any man's acts can satisfy for another faults, since
each man's burdens are much too heavy for him without Christ's Passion: To this
our Holy Religion teaches us, that there is no Law of God, which assures us in
rigor of justice, of Gods acceptance of the acts of another man for my sins,
(this was only the privilege of the actions of our blessed Lord) yet this
hinders not, but that they may prevail by way of suffrage and impetration for
our pardon; and therefore it is great piety for us to pray for each other, as
Holy Scripture and constant practice of Holy Church warrant us.

IX. Of the Moral Law: Of Obedience to Civil Magistrates.
WE further do firmly believe, and highly reverence the Moral Law, Exodus 20.
Mat. 19. Eccles. 12.13.
being so solemnly delivered to Moses upon the Mount, so exprefly confirmed by
our Savior in the Gospel, and containing in it self so perfect an Abridgment
of our whole duty both to God and man.

Which Moral Law we believe obliges all men to proceed with faithfulness and
sincerity in their mutual contracts one toward another; and therefore our
constant Profession is, that we are most strictly and absolutely bound to the
exact and entire performance of our promises, made to any person of what
Religion soever; much more to the Magistrates and Civil Powers, under whose
protection we live, whom we are taught by the Word of God (from whom their
power is derived) to obey, not only for fear, but conscience sake; and to whom
we will most faithfully observe our promises of duty and obedience,
notwithstanding any dispensation, absolution, or other proceedings of any
foreign Power or Authority whatsoever.

Wherefore we utterly deny and renounce that false and scandalous position,
that Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, as most uncharitably imputed to
our practices, and most unjustly pinned upon our Religion.

X. Of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy.
IN Order to our better instruction how to comport our selves in this, and all
other occurrences relating to Gods service: We firmly believe, that according
to Divine Ordination in the Catholic Church, there is a Hierarchy consisting
of Bishops, Priests and Ministers.

He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and other Evangelists, and other
Pastors and Doctors, to the consummation of the Saints, unto the work of the
Ministry, unto the edifying of the body of Christ: until we all meet in the
unity of Faith, and the knowledge of the Son of God etc. That now we be not
children, wavering and carried about with every wind of doctrine in the
wickedness of men, incraftiness to the circumvention of error etc. Ephesians. 4.

These we sincerely and solemnly profess, as in the sight of God, the searcher
of all hearts, taking the words plainly and simply, in their usual and familiar
sense, without any Equivocation or Mental Reservation whatsoever.

FINIS.

