An Explanation of the Roman Catholics Belief, concerning these four Points:
Their Church; Worship; Justification; and civil Government.
As it was presented to some Persons of Quality, for their particular
satisfaction.
Scriptures to be of divine inspiration and infallible Authority; and
whatsoever of therein contained we firmly assent unto, as to the Word of God,
the Author of all Truth.

But since in the holy Scriptures there are some things hard to be understood,
2 Pet. 3.16
which the ignorant and stable wrest to their own destruction; we therefore
profess (for the ending of controvers^^^ in our Religion, and settling of peace
in our Consciences) to submit our private judgments to the Judgment of the
Church, represented in a free General (...).

Blessed Trinity, one Eternal, Almighty, and Incomprehensible God, whom only,
we adore and worship, as alone having Sovereign Dominion over all things, to
whom only, 1 Timothy 1.17.
we acknowledge as due from men and Angels, all glory, service, and obedience;
abhorring from our hearts, as a most detestable Sacrilege, to give our
Creators honor to any creature whatsoever.

And therefore we solemnly protest, that by the prayers we address to Angels
and Saints, we intend no other then humbly to solicit their assistance before
the Throne of God, as we desire the prayers of one another here upon earth, not
that we hope any thing from them, as original Authors thereof, but from God
the Fountain of all Goodness, through Jesus Christ, our only Mediator and
Redeemer.

Neither do we believe any divinity or virtue to be in Images, for which they
ought to be worshiped, as the Gentiles did their Idols, but we retain them
with due and decent respect in our Churches, as instruments, which we find by
experience, do often assist our memories, and excite our affections.

Justification, but we are justified freely by grace, Romans 3.24.
through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ.

And although we should by the grace of God persevere unto the end in a godly
life and holy obedience to the Commandments; yet are our hopes of eternal
glory still built upon the mercy of God, and the merits of Christ Jesus.

All other merits, (according to our sense of that word) signify no more, then
Actions done by the assistance of Gods grace, to which it has pleased his
goodness to promise a reward; a Doctrine so far from being insuitable to the
sense of the holy Scriptures, the (...) their principal design to invite and
provoke us to a diligent observance of the Commandments, by promising heaven
as the reward of our obedience, 1 Timothy 4.2. Godliness is profitable to all
things, having the promise of this life, and of that which is to come. And Romans
2.6. God will render to every man according to his deeds, to them, who by
patient confidence in well-doing, seek for glory, and honor, and immortality,
eternal life. And again, Romans 8.13. If you live after the flesh you shall die,
but if through the spirit you mortify the deeds of the body, you shall live.
And Heb. 6.10. God is not unjust to forget your work and labor of love which
you have showed for his name, etc. Nothing being so frequently repeated in the
Word of God, as his ^^^^^ons promises to recompense with everlasting glory the
faith and obedience of his servants; Nor is the county of God barely according
to our works, but high and plentiful, Luke 6.38.
even beyond our capacities, giving (...) measure, heaped up, pressed down, and
running over into the bosoms of all that love him.

Thus we believe the merit or rewardable (...) holy living (both which signify
the same thing with us) arises not from the self-value even of our be (...), as
they are ours, but from the Grace and Bounty of God; and for our selves, we
sincerely profess when we have done all those things, which are commanded us,
we are unprofitable servants, Luke 17.10
having done nothing but that which was our duty, so that our boasting is not
in our selves, but all our glorying is in Christ.

Mor all Law, being so solemnly delivered to Moses upon the Mount, Exodus 10.
so expressly confirmed by our Savior in the Gospel, and containing in it
self so perfect an Abridgment of our whole duty both to God and man. Mat. 19.


Which Moral Law we believe obliges all men to proceed with faithfulness and
sincerity in their (...) all contracts one toward another; Eccles. 12.13.
and therefore our constant Profession is, that we are most strictly and
absolutely bound to the exact and entire performance of our promises, made to
any person of what Religion soever; much more to the Magistrates and Civil
Powers, under whose protection we live, whom (...) taught by the Word of God to
obey, not only for fear, but conscience lake; and to whom we will most
faithfully observe our promises of duty and obedience, notwithstanding any
dispensation, absolution, or other proceedings of any foreign Power or
Authority whatsoever.

Wherefore we utterly deny and renounce that false and scandalous position,
that Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, as most uncharitably imputed to
our practices, and most unjustly pinned upon our Religion.

These we sincerely and solemnly profess, as in the sight of God, the searcher
of all hearts, taking the words: plainly and simply, in their usual and
familiar sense, without any Equivocation or Mental Reservation whatsoever.

