King John AND MATILDA, A TRAGEDY. As it was Acted with great Applause by her
Majesty's Servants at the Cockpit in Drury Lane.

Written by ROBERT DAVENPORT Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Andrew Pennycuicke, in the Year 1655.

The Names of the Persons in the Play, And of the Actors that first Acted it on
the Stage, and often before their Majesty's.
King John, M. Bowyer. Fitzwater, M. Perkins Whose action gave Grace to the
Play. Old Lord Bruce, M. Turner. Young Bruce, M. Sumner. Chester, M. Iackson.
Oxford, M. Goat. Leister, M. Young. Hubert, M. Clarke. Pandolph, M. Allen.
Brand, M. Shirelock, who performed excellently well.
Other Lords and Gentlemen, Attendants on the King.
Queen Isabel. Matilda. Ladies of honor. Lady Abbess.
To the knowing Reader.
A Good Reader, helps to make a Book; a bad injuries it: The Author of this,
had no mind to be a man in Print; nor took he any care for a Sculpture, to
illustrate the Frontis-piece by crowning himself with Laurel: Neither did he
write his own Encomiums, and (to prejudicate the simple) say his friends
forced them upon him; they may help to sell the Book, not better the Matter.
And since this Tragedy is come to tell its own tale, and to speak for it self,
he will he glad to know it able to ca^ry its own commendation; And (being an
Infant, newly delivered to the world from the womb of the Press) he hopes the
knowing Reader will rather Crown it by his Candor, then kill it in the Cradle.

R. D.

To the Right Honorable, Mountague Berty, Earl of Lindsey, Lord Willougbby to
Eresby etc.
YOu are no stranger to things of this nature, and therefore the Dedication
will not startle you; such there are (my Lord) whose souls are confined to
their Chinck, and these look squint-eyed upon a Dedication, because they fear
there is a Spirit in it will separate them: But my Lord, your Nobleness to
learning, and wit raises your estimate to so high an account among knowing
men, thi^ from thence I have derived this boldness, which I hope is pardonable
not only for that your justice calls upon me for a duty I long since owed your
Honor, but also in regard the Thing presented is no slight Piece, but such
(my Lord) at I presume will accord with your judgment and likeing: It past the
Stage with general Applause (my self being the last that that Acted Matilda
in it) and since through the absurdity of times, it has lain obscured. My
Lord, though it does not appear in it is ancient and full glory, yet it comes
dressed; first, with an humble regard to your Honor, and then a confidence of
it is naked worth, but both it and my self, are willingly subjected unto your
Honors sentence, which I hope will not be too heavy, especially upon

My Lord, Your Honors Honourer, Andrew Pennycuicke.

King John AND Matilda.
Actus 1. Scoena 1.
Enter King, Queen, and Oxford. King THey will not come?

Ox. They will not.

King They had been better --
What was their answer?

Ox. Thus said Fitzwater, father of the faction,
That was General for the Barrons against your Majesty:
Tell John,

Ki. John!

Ox. That was his Epithet;
(Alleging how you stood at Rome, put from
Your Kingly office.) Tell John, quoth he, (and frowned)
That here at Baynards Castle, we intend
A settled stay for private reformations.
Of conceived injuries, which by the peace
The King made with us, were not thoroughly searched,
But like green wounds, closed with too swift a salve,
(Upon your private ends) are with more danger
Doubts and distracted difficulties again
Broke forth; but having drawn them to a head,
They would send them to you to be ratified,
And then give their attendance.

King. This is brave;
Who was there else?

Ox. Richmond, imperious Leister, and old Bruce.
(The second in this revolt,) who sent the same return.

K. A^nest of Rebels; to try the truth of these fine florishes,
You with Lord Mowbray, post unto Guilford,
And being there, (pretending a visit unto Bruces Lady,)
Wind into observation of the Castle so from her,
(The engine upon which these factions move,)
Discover the intent of their disignes.

Queen. Sure sir, the Lady is noble; but your Majesty's
Injunction shall be obeyed.

Exit. Enter Chester. K. This not only advantages
Our meeting with Fitzwaters Daughter,
(O how the thought) startles my blood)
But likewise furthers our resolved proceedings:
Chester the news?

Chest. Conceal your self sir,
I have trapt her with a snare.

K. Again, then I shall see he^ --

Exit. Enter Matilda. Ma. You told me Chester
That the Queen did earnestly request my attendance:
You said she was here in the Garden,
But it seems you were mis-inform'd.

Ches. Excellent innocence how art thou trapt!
I must attend the King; please you walk Madam
But toward the Grove, I was told the Queen and Ladies
Retired there for shade.

Mat. I shall,

Ches. And I must vanish

Exit Chest. Ent. King. Mat. Oh heaven, the King!

K. Thy friend.

Mat. False Chester!

K. Fair Matilda,
Mistress of youth and beauty, sweet as a spring,
And comely as the holy shining Priest
Decked in his glorious sacerdotall vestment;
Yet hear the passions of a love sick Prince,
And crown thy too too cruel heart with pity.

Mat. Yet let fall your too too passionate plea^ings,
And crown your royal heart with excellent reason.

K. Hear me.

Mat. The Queen will hear you.

K. Speak but a word that --

Mat. What?

K. That may sound like something,
That may but busy my strong laboring heart,
With hope that thou will grant, and every morning
I will walk forth and watch the early Lark,
And at her sweetest note I will protest,
Matilda spoke a word was like that note.

Mat. Oh how you tempt: remember pray your vows
To my betrothed Earl Robert Huntington;
Did you not wish just as the poison touched
His manly heart, i^ ever you again
Laid battery to the fair fort of my unvanquish'd
Virtue, your death might be like his untimely,
And be poisoned. Oh take heed sir,
Saints stand upon heavens silver battlements,
When Kings make vows, and lay their
Listening ears to Princes Protestations.

K. So did Matilda swear to live and die a maid,
At which fair Nature like a Snail shrunck back,
As loath to hear from one so fair, so foul
A wound: my vow was vain, made without
Recollection of my reason; and yours, Oh madness!
Maids have sure forsworn such vows:
For Huntington, he like a heap of summers
Dust into his Grave is swept; and bad vows
Still are better broke then kept.

Mat. Alas great sir, your Queen you cannot make me;
What is it then instructs your tongue? Oh sir!
In things not right,
Lust is but loves well languag'd hypocrite.

K. Words shall convert to deeds then; I am the King.

Mat. Do but touch me,
And as I graspe steel in my trembling hand,
Offers violence, she draws a knife. So sure the King shall see Matilda fall
A sacrifice to virtue.

K. Cruel Maid,
Crueller then the Kid that eanes her young
On the rough bosom of a ragged flint:
Go get thee to the woods, for thou art wild
As flame, or winter; where so e're thou walk'st
May wild winds chide thee, and the reeling Trees
Like a confused fall of many waters
Rail on thy rudeness; may the birds that build
Among the wanton branches, stead of teaching
Notes to their young, sing something like thy niceness:
And lastly, may the Brooks when thou shall lie
And cast a pair of cruel busy eyes
Upon their subtle slydings, may the water,
The troubled image of my passions war
With the stones, the matter of thy heart, that thou may learn
Thy hardness and my sufferings to discern;
And so whilst I (if it be possible) study to forget you,
May beasts, and bird^, and brooks, and trees, and wind,
Hear me, and call Matilda too unkind.

Exit. Mat. I Will unto Baynards Castle to my father,
Oh she had a violent need of Castles, where a King
Lays such violent seige; but Oh truth,
Thou art (whilst tenant in a noble breast,)
A crown of Crystal in an Ivory chest.

Exit. Enter King and Chester. K. Shall I be dazzled with effeminate darings?

Ches. With a woman's ward, a knife too.

K. Here I left her.

Chapter But here she is not now sir.

K. Oh Chester run, run as thou love my peace,
Feather thy feet with lovers wishes, let but my desires
Dwell in thy eyes, thou wilt find her, were she compast
With a Cimerian mist.

Chapter I will do my best sir.

Exit. K. Thy best; do every thing, do any thing,
Do all things that may find her; whether Love
Leads thy dark Labyrinth; cannot Kings be free
From thy impetuous buffets? I have de^^'d
A heardned heart, obdurate to thy shafts,
And some times am so, when in the very minute
Calling to mind Matilda's tears, like drops
Continued upon marble, they pierce through,
And I am soft again. Have found her?

Ent. Chester Chapter No sir, she is by this in Baynards Castle,
Where her Father and the Lords --

K. Command our Barge, we will after her like lightning:
We must have pledges Chester for their faiths; if they refuse,
Thunder shall meet with thunder, and each eye
Shall see strange Comets in this troubled sky.

Exeunt. Enter Fitzwater, old Bruise, young Bruise, Richmond and Leister, as in
Baynards Castle. Fitz. My noble Lords, and honorable friends,
Not to particularlize (what need plain dealing
Be apparelled in particulars?) to a short supper,
Or a poor pittance rather, ye are all
Heartily welcome, very heartily, I must tell truth still.

O Br. Brother we thank you.

Eitz. I would we had my sister your wife, at Guilford with us.

Rich. Where are the Ladies?

Leis. Comfo^ting Matilda, sad returned from Court.

Y. Bru. Betrayed by Chester, and again escaped
Like a chaste Dove out of the fowlers Net,
The lustful King.

Fitz. Oh John, John, will thou never
Leave thy wags tricks? but let it pass, it is best
Because indeed it is past.

Leis. I wonder how he received our resolved answer.

Y B^u. No matter how, he is like to have no other;
Now by my blood, you vexed my very soul
That you s^nt any.

O. Bru. Son, have a tamer spirit.

Y Bru. Yes, and like horses,
Be held by the nose by frivilous respect,
Whilst he casts Copperis into our sores, and searches
Past honors patience.

Fitz. Nephew, Nephew, hear me,
Lets bear a little; faith he is the King,
And though at Rome he does stand interdicted,
Yet now and then takes a good start or two
Toward regularity, till the fit comes on him;
And for your neat horse simile observe me,
Richmond and you are young men, we three old,
But not too old to tell truth; the horse that will not
Stand till and endure searching, how e're in summer
With warmth and pasture, he may strike at flies,
And play the wanton in a wealthy meadow,
For all his summer pastime, yet it is said,
Winter will leave him but a lean scaled jade;
Come, come, you are fools, you are fools.

Leis. Well let us -- bear then.

Y Bru. ^et us? Oh my blood!
Besides, our in uries in his breach of promise,
He made by stains and public grievances,
How in the flames of his adulterate heart
Pursues he my chaste Cousin, by flights gets her
Within his tallon, and but this afternoon,
(Had not her friendly knife enfranchised her)
Even in the face of he^ven, in his own Garden
He would have ravished her.

O. Bru. Bro^her, we are bound in honor not to bear it.

Leis. Let him know our griefs, and if --

Fitz. Well, well, with iss and ands
Mad men leave Rocks, and leap into the Sands;
But something shall be thought on.

Ent. Richmond. Rich^ The King attended
Only with the Earl of Chester, Oxford, and some
Other Gentlement, is new landed on the Stairs.

Om. The King!

Y Bru. Shut the stairs Gate.

Fitz. Twere better Gate and stairs
Were floating through bridge; we are safe my choleric cousin,
As in a Sanctuary; it is enough
(A man would think,) to see a great Prince thus,
Cause we would not go to him, to come to us,
Ent. King, Oxford, Chester. and other Lords Indeed, indeed, you speak unkindly.

K. Behold great Lords,
The Cedars of the Kingdom, how the King
(A shrub) shrincks out of majesty.
And comes to you; here is a fine Conventicle,
Are ye blowing up new sires? and must Fitz^waters
(Plain-breasted as his unaffected habit,)
Be General again, again be called
The Marshall of Heavens Army and the Churches?
Are you Planet st uck^ you cannot talk.

Fitz. Your pardon sir,
I led the Barrons, but it was when they could not choose
But choose a leader, and then me they chose;
And why so think ye? they all loved your Grace,
And grieve, grieve very heartily, I tell you,
To see you by some state mice so misled:
This state mice that nibble so upon the Lands impaired freedom
That would not so play in the Lions ear,
But that by tickling him themselves to advantage;
This troubled us, and grieved the body Politic,
And this we sought to mend; I tell truth John, I,
We are thy friends John, and if ye take from friendship
The liberty of modest admonition,
Ye leave no mark whereby to distinguish it
From the fawning passion of a Dog-base flattery;
If I speak plain, this truth be my desence,
A good man's comsort is his Conscience:
And so much for plain Robin.

K. Fitzwater, Bruce, Richmond, and stubborn Leister,
This is the last of our admonitions,
Either lay by those Arms, those lawless arms,
Which you have listed against your Lord the King,
And give such pledges as we shall accept
For settling of your loyalties, or here
By the abused sufferings of a King,
And by the unkind scars with which you have
Deformed the face of England; misery
Shall over take you in a shape shall fright
The Iron heart of faction, and the King
Shall come no more acquainted with compassion,
But call the bloodiest ends a righteous vengeance.

Leis. I will not leave mine arms,
Nor break my word to you,
Unless provoked, and justly; you have my faith,
If you mislike that pledge --

K. We do.

Leis. And I reply that I can spare no another.

Ches. D'ce hear sir?

O Bru. Already we have pawned the now scorned gage
Of our afflicted honors, which refused
Flies back again, and so we stand discharged.

Fitz. King John, King John,
Perform but the sealed Covenants you are fled from,
The Charter running thus, given by our hand
The seventeenth day of June, and in the year
215 (the whole Realm being sworn to it,)
And six and twenty Peers and Barrons sworn
To the execution (who if you fail) are perjured
Do this, and like a plat of Osier wands
We shall bow any way, and you shall work us
Into what fashion you shall fancy; but
if you be melancholy, lovesick John,
Or Lion, unyoak'd Heifer, headstrong John,
(As in the matter of the Loss of Normandy,
When Anjou, Britain, Main, Poictou, and Turwin,
Were delivered up to Philip) you will find your friends
Not facile Willowes, but abrupt brambles,
Whose intricate irregularity
Whilst you shall go about to rectify,
They Will prick your fingers, and with unkind scratches,
Expose you to a late deplored experience:
Come, come, know this, when love in our side sings,
The unkindest wounds are those we take from Kings;
I am plain Robin.

K. A down right Rebel.

Fitz. Rebel!

K. So are ye all.

Om. Rebels!

K. Traitors.

Om. Traitors!

K. Rebels and Traitors; Chester, Oxford, Gentlemen,
Stand on your guards, there is danger in the room.

O. Bru. You ate too passionate, perform with us,
You shall walk over us, if not, we stand
Our injured Countries Justicers.

K. Proud boaster.
This night shall raise a storm: Braved? with you Bruce
We will begin; and yet he is the Brother
aside Unto Matilda's Father, but his insolence,
Oh love; a little while let revenge reign,
This night shall beget passages shall prove
Your King a Lion (vexed) as (pleased) a Dove.

Exit Ox. Lights for the King; there Gentlemen.

Kings party. Y. Bru. What will you do? a tempest curled his forehead
Into the fashion of an angry Ocean,
Made wild with winds.

Rich. We must resolve on something.

Ol. Bru. And suddenly, for in his executions
He is swift as lightning, air is not more light.

Leis. Pandulph the Popes stern Legate, it is divulged,
Is again come over from the Pope, to proffer
The King his readmission into the Church,
And take off his six years interdiction
Upon some propositions yet concealed,
And this may busy the King yet.

Y. Bru. This? the Greyhound
Is not more eager at his flying game,
Then I know King John is in his passions
Gf love or anger.

Ol. Bru. Why Brother, is this a time to study?

Fitz. Troth I was thinking of -- stay, stay, I hav't,
I was thinking brother Bruce, -- now it is gone again,
And farewell it, lets ply our business now:
If you marked, he said he would begin with you;
I Would have you to night (stay not for the Sun,
Which sure will rise blushing at this nights brawling)
Do you and Richmond, with some score of men
Post to your house, it is but an hours riding,
And something more; there fortify your selves,
Your Lady, and your pretty little Sonnne,
Poor knave he dreams not of these Thunderbolts:
You my young mad cap, with your Cuz my daughter,
Shall unto Hartford Castle, she is the brand
I fear will fire our Troy; Leister and I
Will gather Powers, and thither after you;
You two for Guilford, you two for Hartford,
And we two, wheither wast we two must go?

Leis. Go? we two must stay in the City.

Fitz. Passion of me, where was my memory;
But come, come, when Kings our Dials retrograde do run,
We leave to look on them, and go by the Sun:
Lights, lights, good Gentlemen:

Exeunt. Enter Queen, Lady, Bruce, and Hubert. Qu. Good Lady take not on so,
Oxford says all
Is very well at London.

Lady. Yes, very well;
Why then followed he your Grace with a Troop of horse,
A band of men? why has he seizd the Castle,
Cashierd my Servants? Oh Madam can it be,
Your Grace (the Alter where I ever paid
A Subjects devout Love,) should by a slight,
a fained accidental visit make,
An entrance for hostility and terror.

Qu. Hubert, redeem you in this Ladies faith,
And relate the truth.

Hub. Only upon mine honor
Was I sent to seize this Ladies young Son George,
As a pledge to the King for her Lords loyalty.

Lady. No Hubert, my Son is far enough from thee,
Thou fatal keeper of poor Boys.

Hub. You mean
Concerning Arthur, the unfortunate Son
Of Jeffery Plantaganet; Oh mad rumor!
Who would trust thee but with so much reputation
An honest beggar boasts of?

Q. In that believe me Madam, report has wronged him,
Which I can witness Lady.

Enter King and Chester. Lady. The King come to,
Oh my sweet George, my joy; what will thou do?

K. All is to our desire; where is Bruces Son?

Hub. Conveyed to Wales she affirms Sir.

Lady. Where thou shall never see him John.

K. Good Madam,
We Will speak with you anon, Queen Isabell,
Thou must be still an agent to secure
Me and my Kingdom, straight with the Earl of Chester;
Post thou to Hartford Castle, whither we are certifi'd
Young Bruce is fled with old Fitzwaters daughter,
Try if by fair means thou can win her to
Attend on thee at Court; if we have not her
A pledge, (as this) for her Fathers faith, we stand
The food of faction, get her any way;
If she deny, Chester with forces ready,
Of from the Castle, shall give them fierce assault,
And force them past entreaties; go my love
And play the Amazon, with her surprisall,
Secure a Kingdom.

Qu. This craves have and care; come noble Chester
You shall along; but good my Lord forget not
That Ladies kindness to me.

K. Oh my sweet.

Kiss. Exit. Hu. What a fine thing he makes the Queen; Oh lust,
With what smooth craft thou creeptst to things unjust.

K. Oh my Matilda, if power or policy
may get thee once more in these arms, I will hazard
Even to a Kingdom for thee; come Madam fear not
I wear no frowns, I am all mirth, lets see your pretty Son.

La. I fear your mirth is like the Porpoist pastimes,
My Son has been in Wales this month.

K. Hubert, see the Gates locked, a guard upon the Walls,
Whilst we take some to search.

La. Where will you search King John?
For heavens sake do not search.

Hu. Nay and't be come to that.

Exit. K. Let me go,
In these proceedings the Kings safety rests,
The Lion must not bend to baser breasts.

Exit. La. Heaven to thee I kneel, who affrighted Mother am,
Oh from this Lions claws keep my poor Lamb.

Exit. Enter old Bruce, and Richmond, and above Oxford. Ol. Bru. The Castle
Gates are shut, swift footed Tyranie,
That can when thou pursu'st thy wild desires,
Out run the wantan Roe; Oh Richmond, Richmond,
I fear our stay all night, has made me witness
Of a day darker then night.

Rich. Yonr fears and your afflictions
Meet in one Center, for it seems the King
Sent Oxford in the night on the walls;
Behold where Oxford stands, I fear they have seized
Your Son, your Wife and Castle.

Ol. Bru. Oxford, thou sign
Set up to show me where my sorrows dwell,
Martyr me not with circumstances; but tell me,
Is it (as from thy ominous presence there)
We may conjecture.

Ox. Because you request brevity,
Then by my ominous presence here great Lords
You conjecture that you come too late.

Rich. Let force our entrance,
We have tweuty men of spirit to dare.

Ol. Bru. A score of Cowards, Oxford,
Dare thou be honorable?

Ox. An other time,
But now I have no leisure, the King is here.

Rich. In person.

Ox. Yes, and power;
And if the Queen and Chester speed as the King has,
We shall have a pledget too for Fitzwaters loyalty,
And so good day, ye meet the proverb here,
Ye both are early up but near the near.

Exit. Rich. We strongly may conclude from their intelligence
Of your Son, and fair Matilda's flight to Hartford,
Thither the Queen and Chester are repaired,
Either by force or policy to obtain her,
So that the nearest path to our proceedings.
Is to post back to London, and to hasten
Her Father thither with his powers, and so
Secure your Son, his Daughter, and it may be,
Surprise the Queen and Chester.

Ol. Bru. If we do,
If but a hair of my betrayed wife,
Or my poor boy do perish, a head royal
Shall be sent back, slight scratches leave no scars
But deep wounds are seeds of Civil wars.

Exit. Actus 2. Scoena 1.
Enter King, Hubert, Lady, and Bruce. K. YOu would not then produce him.

Hu. Think of it Madam,
And for your own discharge, give up your Son.

La. I have him not to give.

K. We will no more be mocked, are all the people,
Enter 2 Soldiers with a Hamper, the Boy in it. Horses, and Cattle voided
forth the Castle?

Hub. All but this Hamper which stood underneath
The stairs that led into the Dungeon.

K. A place suspicious, search it.

La. Let not rudeness boast sir,
She was born in the presence of a Prince.

Hub. It Is locked my Lord.

K. Where is the Key?

La. I know not, lost.

K. Cut it open.

La. Do not, do not, indeed you will spoil it then.

K. Well then they shall not.

La. Now the King is gracious.

K. But fetch each man a Torch, and here before me Set it a fire.


La. Oh rather cut it sir in a thousand pieces;
Why did you tell me that they should not cut it,
And now would burn it? who did teach you sir
To mock a wounded heart? look, look, and they do not go
To cut it too; good sir, I have a Jewel
Lies concealed there, which I hid for fear o'th soldiers,
Of infinite value.

The Boy rises. Hub. It Is open my Lord.

K. what is in it?

Hub. Marry youth in a basket sir, here is the pretty Jewel Of infinite value.


K. Hold him fast fellow, Hubert keep back the mother.

La. I would be kept back, is that a Boy
To crush with a rude hand, alas a grisle
Look, and his very looks do not fright my Child.

Boy. Oh mother here is a man looks very black,
(Pray do not hurt me) indeed, and if you do,
You Will make my mother cry

La. For heavens sakellet me kiss him, I warrant you the Child was almost
smotherd, come from him George.


Boy. A wo'not let me go, if I were your match,
I Would give you a good sound box o'th ear,

K. Come, Come, 'we will not part you, Hubert there waits
One Brand without, servant to the Earl of Chester,
With a guard, let him Convey them both to Winsor Castle,
And by this signet to sir Walter Blunt,
Deteyne them in his custody, until
We shall direct him further.

Boy. Oh brave, mother I have heard of Wiusor Castle, my father
Told me there are brave bows and arrows; and drums there.

La. Oh happy Innocent, who in spite of foes
Can play the pretty wanton with thy woes.

Exit. Hub. The Lord Steward sir
Enter Winchester. Is come it seems from London.

K. My Lord of Winchester the meaning of your speed?

Win. The Popes legate Sir,
The Cardinal Pandulp is ariv'd at London,

K. What news with him; Six years we have stood
An inte^dicted man, can he bring louder thunder?

Win. He brings proffers of peace sir,
Advantagable peace too, if that you please
To make a resignation of your Crown:

K. Ha!

Win. Good sir suffer me,
And that to him to the Popes use; withal;
(Paying an Annual tribute for your Kingdoms
Of England, and of Ircland, in the presence
Of the whole body of the Peers,) he has power
From his Holiness to reinvest your temples
With the rich Diadem; and with all pronounce you
Again admitted into the Church, your power
Weakened and wounded, yet may by this means
Lion like, rowse it self and remove all obstacles
Twixt you and the high calling of a King,
Which by the reason you stood Cursed at Rome,
Received affronts so frequent; besides Fitzwaters,
With Leister (who by the return of Bruce and Richmand
From thence to London, were upon expedition,
With there powers for Hartford Castle to intercept
The proceedings of the Queen and Chester;)
I have staid upon the Legates special chardge
To attend your resignation, potent nessesity
(The great dispenser with all Cerimony,)
Calls it a point of Policy, whereby
You build your self, ruin your enemy.

Hu. And then you stand again, sir a King absolute
And dazel faction.

Ki. Come we will catch craft
With imitation, he that would screw his ends
To his own aims, must mingle (when he wins)
Secret dissemblings amongst his venial sins.

Enter Soldiers, and young Bruce prisoner. Ches. You are mine Sir.

Y. Bru. It Is false, I am Fortunes.

Ches. This day to fortune then I sacrifice,
As to my Mistress.

Y. Br. A Whore is then your Mistress.

Ches. A Whore!

Y. Bru. A rascal Jade,
That takes with the dixterity she gives; tell me
Of your Mistress and the Devil: Oh my stars.

Ches. O sir we have ways to tame you, you remember
You braved me in the presence of the King,
At Baynards Castle.

Y. Bru. Oh I am mad,
Yet not so mad, but I dare still brave Chester,
And from the top of my affliction,
Upon thy light heel'd Mrs. wanton fortune,
Cast from the manly temper of my blood
A noble scorn.

Chapter You shall be fettered first.

Y. Bru. Fettered:

Chapter Yes, and sent
Up to the King as an arch Rebel, to whom,
To whom (before) we have by Letters sent our happy fortune.

Y. Bru. Rebel:
By that boiling sea of blood which thou have troubled,
Had my desires but bodies, I would burst
Fetters of steel, tear off thy cankered flesh,
And with thy Jaw Bone, (thou honor wounding man)
I would kill a thousand of these Rascals.

Chapter Drag him
Into the Castle, since your fortunes move you,
We^'l force you to a madness.

Y. Bru. Fool thou can not;
Frost makes fire fervent, he that wisely knows
His wealthy fate, bravely becomes his woes.

Charge. Exit. Ches. Are you so armed, away with him.

Enter the Queen, dragging in Matilda, her hair loose, and Face bloody. Qu.
Come forward fury, witch.

Mat. Alas, why thus
Great Queen do you mis-use me? credit me
I do not fear to die, young Infants do it;
Nor wish I life, the murderer enjoyes it;
But let me know my trespass.

Qu. I Am made your stale,
The King, the King your strumpet; oh thou wretch,
The matter my spleen!

tears her. Mat. Hear me but speak.

Qu. Yes, I will thee speak,
That every syllable may serve instead
Of a fierce wind to blow my fiercer fury
Into the fashion of a punishmen,
Fitting the daring of thy trespass.

Mat. Hear me;
By these red marks, registers of your rashness,
And by these tears, the fruits of my affliction,
That the King passionately pursues my love,
Is truth uncontr^dicted; but if I
Did ever think you wrong, let mine honor be
buried in dark oblivion.

Qu. Sin's a sweet tame Serpent, they must beguile
Cloth rude errors, in a soft smooth style:
Enter Chester. ^ut str^mpst thou shall ruin't.

Charge. Ches. Shift for your self Madam,
Richmond escaped from London with the powers
Leavied by Leister, and Fitzwater, (who
Were stayed by Winchester, and the Legate Pandulph)
Has rescued Bruce, got again the Castle,
Ent. Y. Bruce, and Richmond with Soldiers. And make you now their search.

Exit. Rich. Cease on the Queen;
Madam you are our prisoner,

Y. Bru. Keep Chester safe good Ricmond;
Ha! oh what rude hand
Has rased this Book of beauty? a face where virtue
Intelligibly stood to charm the Reader: Tell me Cozen,
And by the thousands of thy tears, and fears
No tittle, place, degree, the very Grave
Shall not secure the offender.

Qu. There is death in's angry eyes.

aside. Mat The rude Soldiers
My noble Cozen hailed me thus, and tore me,
And would have sure done worse, but that the Queen,
The wondrou^ kind Queen in her royal person,
Came with a troop of well appointed Soldiers,
and rescued me.

Qu. She mocks me sure.

Y. Bru. The Queen so kind.

Ma. O Cousin had you seen
How good she was in her quick speed, how zealous
To relieve innocence, you would have thought
She Would killed them with her frowns e're she came at them,
So lamentably miserable were my sufferings,
So excellently noble was her charity.

Y. Bru. Now by my life, 'twas honor in the highest,
Because a foe, and gracious Madam, not
To be out bid in this brave Mart of honor,
You shall have a safe Convoy, and of quality
Fitting your person, to convey (with your freedom)
To the angry King our loves, that he may see
How plain to him we mean, and how nobly
Unto a goodness of so fair deservings
As this now shown; see there be present order
For her Majesty's attendance, and swee Coz
Withdraw from the cold air.

Exit, Qu. Farewell Matilda;
Oh pardon me for heavens sake, now I find
Thy soul is Crystal.

Ma. Remember to the King
Good Madam my great sorrows; and forget not
To tell him this, that woman in whose heart
Virtue and honor stand a pair of Sentinels;
The Sea may sooner flame, fire admit frost,
E're such a woman fall from heaven: Oh she,
Who as a regular star, keeps virtues spear,
Shows like a Pearl hung in an Angel^ ear.

Qu. Thou noble soul of goodness.

Exit. A Chair of state discovered Tables and Chaires responcible, a Guard
making a lane: Enter between the^, King John, Pandulph the Popes Legate,
Chester Oxford, and all the Kings Party: After them, Fitzwater, Richmond,
Leister, and Bruce; the King (holding the Crown) kneeling on the left side of
the Chair, Pandulph possessing it. K. Lo in the sight of Prelates Peers,
Of Earth and Heaven, of all that hears
My words; I John Plantagaent,
(With all submissive reverence,) set
My Crown at the most sacred foot
Of Innocent the Third, unto't
I join my Kingdom^, give them free
Unto his pious clemency:
And for the follies of my Reign,
Heats of my youth, and the rough strain
Of riper years, my Rebellions, my high hand,
My six years Interdictien, and
A^l my mis-doings; I this, and those,
Submit to the Popes power to disclose.

Pan. You have by times recracted, and your foot now
Beats out a certain path; in these Lords sights of I do
Produce the Letter, drawn Obligatory
From John of England to his Holiness,
Peruse it sir, you are there obliged to pay,
(As yearly from this day Renting your Kingdoms)
To Innocent the Third, and to his Successors
A thousand marks per annum.

K. It runs so.

Pan. Yes, three hundred for Ireland, and seven for England.

Fitz. Do not peruse it John, though thou and we
Have had some bickerings, yet let me counsel thee,
This is my Countries Cause.

Pan. You, and your Country
Have cause in this Cause to rejoice.

Eitz. Good, good, Sir Pandvlph,
Though in our filial love to our Mother Church,
By his Holiness command, we stayed from Hartford,
Yet lets have fair play, do not wrong that mother,
Apparelling her comely holy face,
With a forehead full of frowns, pleited proceedings.

Pan. You rail.

Fitz. I do not rail,
Although I hold and reverence the Chair,
(We had been at Hartford else, and not at London,)
Yet in a true breast we should nothing see,
But holy pure, unmixt simplicy.

K. Give me the pen.

Leis. Will you then sign?

K. Yes, you rough Sons of faction,
And hook your stubborn nostrils, this is Rubarb
To your smooth pallats: give me the pen to write.

Fitz. Do not write John.

K. Do not prate fool.

Fitz. In sooth that write
Will wrong thee; Children and Fools tell truth,
Remember that.

Pan. There was no way like this,
To beat a path out to your peace.

Ki. Right Reverend
Pand. proffers to descend. And holy Sir, receive to the Popes use,
His will, and your own charge: Sir, descend not,
But ere you re-invest me, hear me tell
A tale of sorrow, behold here these Lords,
Who had been now bruising the face of peace
With unkind buffets, but for Winchester,
Your strict compulsion, and their seeming fear
Of deserved interdiction; but oh spright,
No Devil deceives like th'houshold hypocrite,
These of my Court, with young Brace now insconc'd
At Hartford, whither it may hair brained Richmond
has retired his discontents.

O. Bru. We miss our hopes else.

K. These bandy faction with me, and with their drum^
(Lewd linguists to interpret their disloyalties)
Brave me in the field, deform the afflicted face
Of trembling England with foul bloody stain^,
Larums at hideous midnight, they break my sleeps,
Fill them with fearful dreams, terrible startings,
And with the grief of my unfriendly fears,
Force me to pierce my pillow with my tears.

Pan. Unnatural cruellty,
Able to melt marble into compassionate tears.

Ox. Dainty dissembler.

O. Bru. Now may it please you --

Pan. Peace until his holiness command be sinished;
Ascend your now true Seat sir, and from the hand
Pan. gives John the Chair. Of my self Pandulph, Legate for the Pope,
Observing the due payments specified,)
Receive your Crown and Kingdoms; and with them
We here pronounce your absolute readmission
Into the Church, and from his holnesse
We re-invest you, with all Powers, Prerogatives,
Freedoms, Communities, (and in the strength of effecacy,)
That constantly adhears to lawful Princes,
And an obedient Son unto the Church,
Long life to John of England, Wales and Ireland,
The lawful King!

Flourish. Leis. I am mad.

Fitz. So, so, now we must suffer
The Kingdoms ancient Liberties, Land, lives,
And all to run the course that he shall steer,
Good heaven that I were dead, what do I here.

weeps. O Bru. But i will not asse-like bear my Countries wrongs,
Mine own at home, and like a Court Camelion,
Give thanks unto mine injurer: hear me King John.

K. You shall hear us sir first; we have been clouded
Six years, but like the Sun in his Meridian,
We now again are glorious; thus in brief,
Leister we require strong pledge for your loyalty;
Bruce call your mad Son home from Hartford,
Your Wife and Son shall better speed at Guilford,
For Richmond in our reassumed power.
We will proclaim him Traitor, and Fitzwater,
Either give up Matilda for your faith, or hear
What we shall sentence.

Leis. We must stand then
What thunder you shall throw, perform with us,
We kiss your royal hands.

O. Bru. If not, we stand
Rocks in our resoluton.

K. Do You hear them now sir?

Fitz. Nay, nay, let him hear me too then:
Lord Legate Pandulph; thus it is,
And thus you may inform his holiness,
In a field called running- Mead' twixt Stains and VVinsor,
After some bloody noses on both sides,
I tell truth I; there the King and Barrons
Met for discussion of conceived wrongs,
And indeed not misconceiv'd, our Houses, Honors,
Our Fathers freedoms, the Lands ancient Liberties
(Unjustly to increase some private Cofers)
Felt daily Demunition, there to Covenants drawn,
(Bearing the name and sense of Magna Charta,
Which many hundred years may be seen hereafter)
King John subscribed, we swore him fealty.

K. Which fealty they denied, till our assoylment
Of our six years Interdiction, forcing us therefore
To seal unlawful liberties.

Leis. Upon our honors,
They were but what Antiquity proved lawful.

Ox. Oh but my Lord.

Fitz. Tut, tut, Lord me no Lords,
He broak, we powted, I tell plain truth I,
Yet fell into no relapse of hostility,
But wot ye what, he casts a covetous eye,
Upon my Daughter, passionately pursues her,
There had been other pledges but our oaths else,
(For heaven knows thtm he had) and (amongst the rest)
Matilda must be my pledge, for well he deemed
They yielding their^, shame would brand my denial,
But catch craft, when we put truth to trial,
Kings should have shining souls, and white desires
Enflamed with zeal, not parched by Paphian fires;
So shines the soul in which virtue does shroud,
Is a serene sky bespotted with no cloud,
But a Copper conscience whilst the head wears Gold,
Is but a plain downright untruth well told,
Come, come, I cannot fawn.

K. But in the passion
Gf a Dog sir you can snarl; have you talk all your words?

Fitz. I have told truth I.

K. Then we will fall to deeds,
Oxford command a Guard, and presently
Take them to the Tower; we can now talk and do,
Away with them, and muzzel those fierce Mastiffes,
That durst leap at the face of Majesty,
And strike their killing fangs into honors heart;
Are they not gone? we shall be passionate
In your delay.

O. Bru. Come Leister, let us wear
Our sufferings like Garland.

Leis. Tempest nor death,
Could never ou^ do Leister, who dares dye
Laughing at times poisoned integrity.

Fitz Now by my troth 'twas very nobly spoken,
Shall I turn tale; no, no, no, lets go,
But how things will be carried; ha! are these tears
Body of me? they are; Shall I go like a sheep
With this pair of Lions; ha, ha, ha,
I do laugh now John, and i will tell thee why,
Thou Art yet in thy green May, twenty seven summers
Set in our Kalends, but when forty Winters more
Shall roun'd thy forehead with a field of snow,
And when thy comely veins shall cease to flow,
When those majestic eyes shall float in rhumes,
When giant Nature her own self consumes,
When thy swift Pulses shall but slowly pant,
When thou art all a Volum of my want,
(That like a tale-sp^nt fire thou shall s^nck,)
Then John upon this lesson thou will think^
He dies a happy old man, whose sweet youth
Was a continued sacrifice to truth;
I must weep now indeed.

Ki. Away with them.

Exit. Pan. Unto King John, the favor of his holiness,
With peace and happiness.

Exit. K. Which we return
With all filial obedience -- look up Oxford,
The day breaks, and the Sun has chaste the night
Out of our Hemispheare.

Enter a Gentleman. Ox. Your news sir?

Genesis Letters from the Queen sir.

K. Was the Earl Richmond there with any powers
E're your departure.

K reads. Genesis No may it please your Majesty, we heard not of him,
But all on your part went fair and fortunate

K. Oh Oxford now they have her, fly back like lightning,
Tell him this day we will meet them all at Barnet.

Exit Gent. Ox But her Father and her friends imprisonment
May obdurate her heart, they dare not sure
On the great peril of a curse to fall
Into a Relapse now you are absolute.
Faith (...) try smooth paths to your ends, to release them,
I hold the winningst way to captivate
Their duties, and Matilda to your wishes.

K. Good, do not kill me ^oy before our going
Instantly thou shall fly with the Lords release,
We pine in our delays, oh Cupid swiftly
Fly into Paphoes, and from thy Mothers shrine,
Catch but a nimble wanton flame, and cast it
Into the busy Kingdom of my heart,
That it may teach my tongue the art of victory,
And every year unto thy well-spent Quiver
I Will add a shaft, and call it Cupids love Dart;
Come Oxford, I tread methinks on air,
Until I read that Volum of sweet grace,
The well writ story of Matild^'s face.

Ox. She yields at last my life on it sir.

Exit. Actus 3. Scoena 1.
En^er Brand reading of a Letter. WIll Brand, these are to certify, That
Fortune, Mistresses of Changes, with my unluckie stars, hathrendred m^ a
prisoner to my most mortal Enemy young Bruce.


Bra. That mad Tamberlaine.


Let. My entreaty is none of the noblest, but direct against my blood, my
desires, and my deservings.


Bra. Oh that I had a leg of that young Bruce, but minced and buttered.


Let. I am credibly possessed, his Majesty has into your custody comm^ited his
Mother, and her young Son George, whereby you have occasion cast into your
hand to parallel their; sufferings with my fortunes, not that I would have you
banish humanity.


Bra. He need never have writ that Bawds and Sergeants have saved me the labor.


Let. Nor give to deep a wound to Conscience.


Bran. Another labor saved too,
Usurers do it daily

Let. But as I let you understand how I am here accommodated, so shape the duty
of a Servant to parallel in their persons, your villified Mr Ralph Chester.


Bran. Brave Lord, the Laddar of my fortunes, (...) suffer on that side, and
for humanities sake, and thred-b^^ conscience (a couple of cousin- Germans,
that thrice a week know not where to get a supper;) shall the friends of him
that stands Lord of thy fortunes, and thy professed foe, fare well here; now I
talk of fare, I received this Letter yesterday, and since they have uei^h^r
eaten bit, nor drunk drop, nor by these ten stealers shall not, till I hear
again from my Lord --: Come o^lt madam Mother, and your youg prating brat --
they do look hungry already.


Enter Lady and Boy. La. What would our unkind Jailer?

Boy. Sure Mother Mr. Brand has brought us v^ctuals.

Bra. No sirrah, I come to tell you to day i^ fasting day.

La. Two days together,
Good Mr. Brand, it is not mine own want beggs,
But my poor Boys; I have held him pretty pastime,
To have him yet forget that wild woolf hunger,
And still the harmless soul would point each period
Of his sport, erying Mother give me bread.

Bra. She has a winning way,
Her carriage and her person are both exquisite:
Fai^^ tell me Madam, what would you give for some victuals
To give your Son?

La. Any thing, set thou the price thou shall have Gold.

Boy. And truly sir, if you will but give me a Cake,
Or a Capons leg, when I am a man,
I Will give you twenty shillings to buy your Boy fine things.

Bra. If you dare lie with me,
You and your Son shall both have sustenance.

La. Hearken good heaven, what says the man?

Boy. He would I Will with you Mother,
But then when I am a bed too, there
Will be no room for my, Father.

Bra. Be as plain and brief as I was, dare ye do'^?

La. No thou bad man, I dare no^.

Bra. No body shall see^ by this hand,

La. Thou lie thou feind, should thou (...) Ca^^e do'^,
The Towers would tremble, and turn Intelligencers
To all the passengers; the walls would shudder,
The E^cutchions, Streamers, Baune^ s, all the Relics
Of fame and honor, would fall down, to see
Honor and Fame so wounded.

Bra. See! I am ashamed to hear you,
If such sins could not be done without being seen,
Informers would have a fine trade on it, a Parators place
Would counvaile five Sergeants; ha, ha, seen kither;
Why there would not be sheets en ugh in the Land
For the penitent, and innocent Beadles enough to correct the
Guilty; Come, come, we will do it i'^h dark then,

La. In he dark said thou?
Oh in the deepest darkness, the white Angels
Will stare upon thee, and with flaming eyes.
Will make make the room appear to thy wild conscience,
Twice lighter then the Sun:
It Is a foul Devil that insinuates to thee,
The sower sweetness of a d^^uded minute;
He has borrowed a white robe, pluck it off from him,
And thou will see him a black hideous monster,
How with a slavish look he will creep from thee,
Displeased that thou art fallen again in love,
With holy goodness.

Bra. How my Conscience wambles.

Boy. Do, do, good sir, think of it,
It will make you give's some bread.
And then you will be a very honest man,

Bra. I have heard you.

La. And with a thirsty soul I hope.

Bra. Yes, as Usurers hear Sermons, more for novelty then integrity, I love
good words when I pay nothing for (...); what do you see in me that I should
appear unworthy of your grant^


La. Because in that request,
Thou appear'st to me as ugly as a Toad.

Bra. A Toad ^

Boy. I, and a Frog to if you go to that,
Do not cry Mother.

Bra. Get you both in, by this victorious sword,
And by the horrid odious comparison,
(for such a one first ^u e made comparisons odious)
Ye get not a bit this seven days.

Lady. By that time
My Boy and I shall make a pair of happy ones
In youder glorious Kingdom; tell me George,
Shall this bad man abnse thy Fathers bed?
Or shall we fast yet longer?

Bra. The boy will consent I warrant you,
The Pages have instructed him.

Boy. Indeed I am very hungry:

Bra. Did I not tell you so.

Boy. But rather then this Goat shall lie in my fathers place,
Indeed ^'le fast this seven years.

La. Ah noble boy,
Sweet plant of goodness, thou have proved it true,
Virtue will wish the good it cannot do.

Bra. Aterribly ugly Toad.

Exeunt. Enter King, Queen, and Oxford. Ox. Good sir ye must be patient.

K. Patient,
Bitterness dwells with me: if I do not put him
To an eternal patience, that shall dare
To witch me into that dull fit of fools;
Matilda won and lost^

Qu. Good sir

K. Away;
Struggle not with the tempest of my blood,
That will undo th^e.

Qu. Richmond Lion like,
(After we sent our Letter with the Foree^
The Barrous had prepared,) clouded our day,
And made our fortunes his.

Ches. They ^out o'th Tower to,
Fitzwater Bruce, and Leister, with fresh powers,
Are not a league hence.

K. The Lion Richmond, a Hare had he met with any
But field Mice, Rats, Run-awayes, and Weezles,
Frighted even with the waving of a Flag,
They would have call'd^ scar-crow stufi'd with straw,
And bound upon a ten groats Irish Garron,
The Glorious Richmond upon his fiery Steed;
Oh there is nothing certain but our sorrows,
Our borrowed bliss is but the shuttl^-cock
Of a days pastime.

Qu. I have pastim'd her, if tearing be a pastime,
Let that comfort you,
I have torn her almost to d: ath.

K. Matilda.

Qu. Yes.

K. And would you have it comfort me?

Qu. I know it does, call but up your Troops
Brayely again, recover her, and read
Upon her face my fury.

K. Oh ye cruel one,
Crueller then the flame that turned to Clnders
The fair Ephesian Temple; wild as a Woolf,
The Bear is not so bloody, tear her hairs,
Which when they took their ^astime with the winds,
Would charm the astonished gazer; tear that face,
Lovely as is the morning in whose eyes
Stands writ the history of her heart, intioing
The ravished Reader to run on, 'pon whose eye lids
Discretion dwells, which when a wild thought
Would at those Casements like a Thief steal in,
Plays her heart's noble friend, and shuts out sin.

Qu. O why then sir, if she be such a volum
Of white unvanquish'd (...) would you stain.
And blot the sair leaves with your (...) desir^
Ghaste, frostie bosoms, brook no lust-born fires.

K. She has put me to my sophistry.

Qu. I knew I was made
Your stay for her obtaining.
Oh why
Raise you so high a Piramis to her praise,
And prostrate your own virtue? if she be
Such a Book of goodness (with bad desires)
Why do you read her? He no truth intends,
Seeks to corrupt that Text which he commends,
Good sir consider it.

Enter Hubert. K. Well, I will think on'^, and you will have done.

Hu. Now is the time my Lord,
If e're you would be fortunate in your desires,
Richmond, young Bruce, Matilda,
(With the Earl of Chester prisoner,) ^and a slight convoy
But of some threescore Horse, and two hundred Archer^
Are now in the valley crossing of the County,
It Is thought for Essex.

K. Where are their main Forces?

Hub. Inscon'st in Hartford Castle, our Forces yet
Not so diminished, or in rout for want
Of their lost General, but if you please,
We dare with hope assail them.

K. I will be General,
Order the Powers you have for present onset.

Qu. My Lord, you said you would consider.

K. I am considering bravely how to charge
The Foe just in the face: Matilda I am now thy Soldier,
Friend of my heart, the King himself comes for thee,
Who shall in this days doings amply prove,
Honor takes fire from the flame of love.

Hu. Good fortune on our side sir.

Exeunt. Manet Queen. A Charge afar off. Qu. Hear not that prayer
Good heaven, oh tempt not virtue to adorn
A foul Cause with fair fortunes: Hark, hark, they meet,
And now pell mell the angry Lords do list
Unnatural swords, good heaven keep safe the King,
But let his Cause miscarry; I w ll not stay
To see him so pursue those wild desires,
Which cannot sure end well; i will to the Lords
So near at hand, and with Matilda's Father,
Accommodate my griefs, and let there be
Her fears, my tears, the Kings infirmity.

Exit Enter King, Oxford, and Matilda. K. Oxford, sh^'s now the Kings.

Ma. Most miserable Maid.

K. Most excellent Matilda all are thy friends,
Imperious love fat on my l^ance just then,
When on the pan^ing breast of daring Richmond.
(Who like a me^ancholly sullen Cloud,
Eclipsed thy Chariot) thou did see me print
My re^^lesse passion: Oxford keep my happiness,
Just with that care thou would oreserve that pair
Of pr^c ous things, thine eye; Chesters engaged
Deep in the Cha^e, and we must te^ch him off;
Pardon me honor that I plac^d love first,
My doings now are thine.

Exit. Ox. Keep near the King, Gentlemen,
His unbounded spirit may loose him el^e; good Madam
Do not lament so, though your friends are ^catter'd,
You Are in a sphere of happiness.

Mat. Oh that great power,
That many times out of this toy I has taken me,
Deliver me again, because again,
Virtue has made me miserabl.

Ent. young Bruce. Y. Bru. Oh that necessity
Should force us unto flight, base flight, repugnant
To man and honor. Ha! nappy flight now,
That brought me this way.

Mat. Cozen.

Y. Bru. Oxford, either give back
That pure unspotted Dove, from the killing Tallon
Of the forgetful King, or thou or I
Must never see him more. ^

Ox. That to our fortunes,
I must not fail the King sir.

Y. Bru. I must not fail then
Enter Richmond. Fight, Oxford falls! To get her as I can sir.

Rich. We are scattered now
Paste making head again.

Y. Bru. But I have made shift to get my Cuz again sir.

Rich. Let us not stay now to expostulate, Necessity
Directs us to our friends not a league distant,
If we not fly we are lost.

Ma. Good Cuz lets fly,
It Is no difgrace to obey necessity.

Y. Bru. Oh I could stamp and tear that hagge necessity,
Bitter necessity, thou scourge of things
That forces Lions to wear Swallows wings.

Exe. Manet Ox. to him enter King, Chester, and others. Ches. You have played
the Soldier sir.

K. The Soldier Chester; I am so light with joy,
I could do any thing.

Ches. Troth sir would it might please you then to grace
Me with the President-ship of Picardy,
Fallen in this last Rebellion from the Lord
Bruce un^o your Crown.

K. It Is thine as certain
As Matilda is the Kings: Oh Chester, now Matilda
Is in the Kings power.

Ox. No sir, she is in heavens.

Ches. Who Is this, Oxford, lets help to raise him up.

K. What say thou man? Matilda, where is Matilda?

Ox. Young Bruce in his flight happening upon this way
For her recovery gave me fierce assault;
I did stand for you sir as much as man could,
Till my misfortune found me, then I fell;
To him eame Richmond, and with all speed possible
They have carried her to the Lords on the other side the h^ath.

K. Oh villain, villaine^
Suppose he had cut thy hear^ strings, had thou cast^
Thy dying eye upon Matilda's face?
She would have shot another spirit into thee,
More daring then the first, at least more fortunate.

Ches. Let him be conveyed to'ch Town and dressed,
Our best course is now to withdraw, the Lords
Are strong, and may give us dangerous chase else.

K. What are our hopes
Like Garlands, upon afflictions forehead worn,
Kissed in the morning, and at evening torn.

Exit. A Table and Chaires set out. Enter Fitzwater, Old Bruce, young Bruce,
Richmond, and Leister. O. Bru. The day is then the Kings.

Rich. White victory
Clapped on her silver wings, with a sullen face,
Took leave of us, and pitched upon his Tent,
Where she sat smiling, while necessity.
Enforced our flight.

Y. Bru. Oh that witch Necessity.

Fitz. Well, well, away with the witch,
It Is well you brought Matilda off; come, come,
Sit to Council. And brther Bruce you have a Wife and Son
Unjustly detayn'd from you, I am injured,
I pray set you our feet into the path
Of our proceedings.

Y. Bru. Lets with our powers
Raze Winsor walls.

Fitz. Now you are in the field straight,
Give old men leave; you would raze! what would you raze^
Your reputation with your rash proceedings;
Come, come, hear your Father.

Y. Bru. Why let him speak them,

O. Bru. First let us take up our affronts in order,
And fix by ours, the Generals grievances,
The crying groans of England, whose blubberd cheeks
Are stiff with tears, to see their privildedges
Daily impaired.

Rich. What Is to be done?

Leis. Let Us send to the French King,
Proffer him our assistance, to trans-fer
The Crown from John to him, if at such a day
He will put over a strong Navy Royal,
With an Army for the attempt, with which (our Forces
Making one body) both at at Sea and Land,
We bid fair for our freedoms.

Fitz. I do not like it.

Y. Eru. S'foot, you will like nothing;
Let us be ring'd and nooz'd,

O. Bru. Besides, being assoil'd of his six years Interdiction,
Those that before fled from him as a Leaper,
Will now flock to him.

Rich. They begin already,
(Although we seek (with our own) their good,) to censure
And call hostility plain faction.

Leis. This is my resolve, I say there is no way
To fix our freedoms, but to call in Philip
And make him King.

Exit Richmend. Om. So think we all.

Fitz. I but I think not so,
Though you are all wise for Philip, he will be a gainer,
But what will you get by it? They run on Rocks and shelves,
Can can counsel others, not secure themselves.

Y. Bru. We must and will do something.

Fitz. You will send to Philip,
Instruct him to proceed, it may be furnish
His Navy with our Pilots, he lands, we proffer
Change, John for Philip; oh can you think,
That we can undergo a heavier stroke
From a Natural, then from a Foreign yoke;
Go to, go to, who in no estate can rest,
They may change often, but seldom comes the best.

Ol. Bru. I am diverted.

Leis. Which way would you steer then?

Fitz. By the same Compass, but not upon this parallel,
I do not like the line; but this we will do,
We Will send for Lewis, Philips Son the Dolphine,
And to him (seemingly) preter the proffer,
A Crown will fire him; may be he shall land,
But with no more Force then we please; and it may be
He shall take a fisher Town, for every Nation
Can take away their trading as the time goes,
Our m^ine Force being ready, we will hover
'Twixt John and Lewis; if John deny an oath
To redress our griefs, and become regular
And Hostage for the keeping it, we join
With the French and fright him further; If he consent,
We fall on his part then, expulse Lewis,
And send him to the Seas again; the Dolphine
Is young and may be wrought on, but old Philip
Is dangerously politic, with foot ashore,
He Will brook no juggling, both ease, and safety
We work on Willowes, but when we strike at Oaks,
We sweat, and sometimes hurt with our own strokes.

Om. It shall be thus effected.

Leis. But let report divulge his Landing,
With more eminent danger then we will let him practice.

Fitz. For this time
Ent. Queen, Matilda and Ladies. Rise then; See the Queen and Ladies,
Good Madam cast off sadness,
Matilda we are all here in the City safe;
The very hearts o'th Citizens (men injured
In their privileges as we are) they are ours,
What should we fear then?

Enter Richmond. Mat. You are all such friends,
I am poor in my well-meaning thankfuln^esse.

Rich. A Barge with diverse youthful Citizens,
Apparelled rich like Masquers, is now land'd
Upon the Stairs, hearing the Queen was here,
^ithall this meeting of their noble friends,
Proffer their loves and duties to conclude
And grace the evening with their Revels.

Fitz. In the Hall we will meet them. Did not I tell you
These Citizens were noble lads our friends?
Wait on the Ladies Lords, I am here your Graces servant,
By my troth I thank'em, they will crown our feast,
And credit me, having such a princely guest.

Exeunt. Loud Music. Enter at one door Fitzwater, old Bruce, young Bruce,
Leister, Matilda and Ladies; at the other door, the King, Chester, Oxford,
Masquers. A Dance. Fitz. Now by my troth they are gallants,
Citizens said you; now I remember to,
Ye do go gallant in your Shops, no wonder then,
If in Masks you cut it. I remember Gentlemen,
Your Fathers wore a king of comely habit,
Comely, because it well became the reverend name of Citizens,
But now let a Knight walk with you in your shops,
(And I commend you for it, ye keep the fashion)
We know not which is which --; how my tongue ranges,
And night grows old, mad times, must have mad changes;
Come, come, a Hall, a hall.

The Masquers take the Ladies, and fall to the Dance. Qu. Believe me you have
done well.

Y. Bru. Pox a' these Cats guts, how they squeak.
Methinks a rattling sheep-skin lustily boxt,
Would thunder brave amongst them.

One of the Torch bearers takes Matilda. Mat. I can dance no more indeed sir.

Fitz. I am deceived if that fellow did not carry
A Torch e'n now;
Will you shame the Gentleman?
Dance when I bid you.

Mat. Oh me, that graspe was like the Kings.

O. Bru. Dance Cuz.

Fitz. In good deed dance,
Or you will make me angry.
The K. pulls her violently. Body of me, that is too much for a Torch-bearer,
You sir Jack, sir Jack, she is no whit-leather,
She will not stretch I assure you, if you come hither
For love so it is.

K. For love.

Eitz. But if you and your Company,
Put on forgetful rudeness, pray take your Cupid yonder,
Your thing of feathers, and your Barge stands ready
To bear ye all aboard the ship of Fools,
I am plain Robin -- passion of me!
Look if he do not threaten me; I will see thee,
Were thou King John himself.

Pulls off his Vizard. Om. The King!

Mat. Oh which way shall I fly?

Qu. I would not leave so sweet a chaste companion.

Exeunt Qu. Mat. Rich, and Ladies. In the bussle, Fitzwater drops one of his
Gloves, Hubert takes it up, and goes after the Ladies. Hub. What Is this, one of
her Fathers Gloves?
This shall be drawn upon the luckie hand of a thriving plot.

K. Behold thy King, thine Bruce, one of the Fathers
Of these retired factions; Richmond, the King,
And thine ^ough Leister; is this still your nest
Wherein to hatch another Scorpions Egg,
To sting the afflicted bosom of your Country,
To bruise her sides with the earth-wounding hoofes
Of War-apparell'd Horses, whose dreadful neighings
May fright her pale face to a bloody blush,
And again make her groan.

Fitz. Your pardon sir,
By my good Sword I knew ye not.

Ches. No, if you had,
Your dangerous Brother Bruce and you, had laid
Some plot for his sacred person; then pleaded ignorance,
That ye took him as he seemed, a saucy stranger.

Y. Bru. Chester, Thou art not noble in thy c^nsure,
And sawn 'st thy self into the abused favor
Of the to-credulous King.

Ches. Oh temptation, what a Devil art thou;
Now by my blood young man, you court my spleen
In a vain glorious shape; Chester fawn,
Just heaven forbid it.

Y. Bru. An Axe upon your neck, che just heavens give you^
And that in heaven were justice --

Ol. Bru. Son, you are too full of choler.

Y. Bru. Choler, Halter.

Fitz. By the mass that is near the choler.

K. Upon your lives no more, the King is here;
Fitzwater, I did not come to quarrel with thee,
I would have such a good man ever near me,
And for a flourish to the rest (of whom
As of old Bruce we have) we will require strict pledges, and
Fitzwater let thy Daughter live at Court, she shall be kept.
In The custody of the Queen, but as no pledge.

Fitz. The Queen is gracioue.

K. Come, to their ruins leave these turbulent Lords.

Fitz. But suppose the Queen should ride abroad to hunt,
And leave Matilda solitary at home,
I think the King would come and comfort her.

Ki. I am of thy mind, I think he would.

Fitz. Would he so? -- I would have no one hear.

Takes the K. aside, K. They cannot man.

Fitz. Pray tell the King, i will keep my Girl at home,
And comfort her my self.

K. You will.

Fitz. John, John, now I speak out;
You made your Masque for this, a Masque indeed,
And we-aday! that it should prove a Cover
For such a night of Tempests, such wild affections,
Such an ill-favored night.

Enter Hubert. K. Hubert, is it done?

Hub. Past expectation, I have bettered your plot,
And got the Queen too,
And will bring them early in the morning to the Court.

K. Have the Torch-bearers given fire to the plot?

Hub. They mixed with oppertunity.

Enter Richmond. Fitz. I do not like this whispering,
Where are the Ladies and Matilda?

Rich. The Ladies are at the further side the Castle,
But by a Glove you sent by a Gentleman,
That said he served Earl Leister, that with him
She and the Queen should fly for safety whither
You had directed him, glad of any scare,
They took a Barge, another leapt in after them,
But whom he was I know not.

Exit. Ol. Bru. Sent you a Glove.

Fitz. A Glove indeed I miss, but I sent none.

Leis. This is a Riddle.

K. I will play Oedipus, and expound it for you,
As Hubert has infused; you dropped your Glove,
Ingenius Hubert found it, and (though we
Had directed otherwise,) he employed a Gentleman
Of our own Chamber, one unknown to Matilda,
To bring it as your close intellige ce
For her flight with him; he that leapt into 'th Barge,
As they put of, was Oxford, now we have her
Never again to lose her.

Leis. By my vexed blood
King John, this is not honorable.

Enter Richmond. Rich. We are betrayed,
All that bore Torches in the Masque to night,
Were of the Guard, who upon a received watchword,
Fell to their Arms, beat down all opposed them,
And are shaping their course this way.

Y. Bru. Lets meet'em,
We have an injured patience, came death in whirle-winds,
I Will be the first shall front him; to thy prayers John,
Pray heartily, that thy friends fatal points
May pierce these hearts; for if they miss 'tshall prove
The bloodi st beauty story ever told
To fright the Readers souls; a purple cloud
Shall shadow England, the whole Land shall ^ele,
The Center gr^a^s, thy very Crown shall stand
Trembling upon thy Temples, till it fall
A Mourner at thy fames black funeral.

Exit. Fitz. Oh noble Nephew.

Exeunt Barrons. K. Ha, ha, ha, let 'em rave on; Ingenious Hubert^
That could so swifty apprehend a smooth
Path to the possession of Matilda!
Quit Oxford from her charge; unto thy care
The King commends the Mistress of his heart,
In The morning let me see her.

Hu. She shall wait upon you sir.

Ches. The Barrons threaten high sir.

K. Let them burst.
Come Gentlemen, to the Barge, and so to the Court,
To clip our wishes, perils appear sport.

Exeunt. Actus 4. Scoena 1.
Enter Brand. Bran. I Wonder how my pair of Prisoners fadge?
I am something dogged too a to'ther side,
That thus long have not seen them, nor have they eaten
I am sure since they came in; in yon Madams eye
I am as ugly as a Toad, I will see her,
And contemn her --, you and your brat come out,
Ent. Lady and Boy. Here Is meat, I am sure you are hungry.

Boy. O Mother, will you be sick now?
Mr. Boand has brought us meat.

La. Oh on my knee sir
I thank you, not for my want, for I feel
Nature almost quite vanquished; but for my Son;
He may live long to thank you.

Boy. Give but my Mother
A little piece of bread, and if I live,
(as yet I may do, if you can be merciful)
I will tell my Father such good things of you,
He shall return your kindness treble back
To your honest bosom; Oh Mother for some bread.

Era. Some bread?
Why to have an honest bosom (as the world goes)
Is the next way to want bread; i^ faith tell me,
How have you past the time you wanted Victu^^l^?

Lady. Very hardly,
And still the poor Boy sighin^, would say, Mother
You look very hungry, I did think straight how hand
Your heart was, then we both did fall a weeping,
Cling'd our lean arms about each others neck,
And sat a pair of mou^ers.

Bra. Delicate pastime, Toads love no other;
Look ye, here is bread.

Boy. Oh if you be a good man, give me but a bit
To give my Mother, poor soul look how she looks!
Indeed she is very hungry.

Bra. Yes, so is my Dog,
Puts it up again. I must keep this for his breakfast.

La. Give but my boy one bi^,
And the Saints sure will look how good you are,
They will be glad to see you charitable,
And call it excellent compassion.

Bra. No, cunning from a Toad 'twill p^yson him.

Boy. It will not sir, indeed I am so hungry,
I could eat Rats or Mice.

Bra. Your to'ther hair brain,
Your wild mad Son, retains my Lord a Prisoner,
Uses him basely, and you must suffer for it.

Lady. Give me but Paper, Pen and Inck, i will wrile,
And charge him to fall down, and li^k the dust.
Thy Lord shall set his foot on, I will conjure him:
And woe away his wildness by the groars
I su^fer'd for him, I Will threaten his denial
With a Mothers family-consounding curse:
This I will do, or any thing that may
But purchase my poor Boy one bit of bread.

Bra. No.

La. O harder then the Rocks, more merciless
Then the wild evening Woolf.

falls. Boy. Mother do not die,
For heavens sake help my Mother; look up
And ye shall see me dance, and then the Gentleman
Will sure bestow a piece of bread upon us.

La. Look here thou Iron-hearted man. upon
A palre of piercing miseries.

Bra. A Scoene of mirth;
I am all hard, the heat of lust which stood
To clip revenge, we stem a stream of blood.

Exit. Boy. How do ye Mother?

La. How does my Boy.

Boy. Very sick indeed; but I warrant you are more hungry
Then I a great deal, are you not?

La. Oh no,
Thou art weak, and famine plays the Tyrant with thee;
Look here my boy, bite on thy Mothers arm,
The blood will nourish thee.

Boy. Will your blood nourish me?

La. Yes, yes, I pre^hee try.

Boy. Why should not mine then nourish you? it is the same;
Good Mother eat my arm, bite but a bite,
Truly I shall hurt you if I bite yours,
I warrant you will be better presently.

La. I shall my Son, and so shall thou, come near me,
Let us go hand in hand to Heaven.

Boy. Oh mother, something pinched my very heart,
And I shall die, my dear, dear mother.

D^es. Lady. Art thou gone my Son?
My soul shall overtake thee: oh friendly death
That gav'st that gripe, sure when thou kill'st the guilty,
Frowns curle thy angry forehead; but when thou steal'st
Toward innocence, (their pale fears to beguile)
Enter Brand reading a Letter. Thou deck'st thy lean face with a lovely smile.

Dies. Bra. My Lord recovered by the valiant King!
In all his battles he is fortunate,
And now tdey shall have meat; ha! meat said I?
I have made them worms meat;
Oh what a talking is within me! if I stay,
The building sure will crush me, i will ha^ to'^h Court,
My Lord here intimates the Kings observance of me,
I must hence; oh gnilt, thou draw'st deaths image horrid,
When we begin to like our ills, how sweet a face has sin!
Which but past by, a cheater she appears,
Joys are her promise, but she paies us fears.

Exit. Enter Hubert, Queen, and Matilda, a Gentleman. Hub. Your care in the
conveyance of Matilda
To this appoited place, the King shall recompense,
Withdraw your self.

Gent. I shall my Lord.

Exit. Qu. Matilda, where is that spirit that kept thy virtue
Valiant and bold^

Mat. If virtue so ill pay us,
Who would be virtuous?

Hu. Virtue! pale poverty
Reproach, disaster, shame sits on her forehead,
Despisings fill her sleep^, ill (...)
Meet her at every turn, tears are her triumphs,
Her drink affliction, Calumny attends her,
The unclean tongue of slander daily licks her
Out of her fashion; but if you be Kings John's friend --

Mat. Oh strong temptation.

Qu. Matilda --

Hub. You may like
A nimble wind, play on the ruslling bosom
Of that fantastic wood, the world; your sleeps a paradise
hung round with glittering dreams, then your dissemblings
(...) called dev^tions, your rigged (...) hypocrisy
Religions holy heats, mirth dee^^ the Court d^i^s,
The wanton minutes glide just like a stream,
That clips the bosom of a wealthy meade,
Till't get it great with child, a sweet green blassing.
Consider, it is the King.

Ma. I, I, the King.

Qu. Trust not this tempter, lusts irreligious linguist,
Remember virtue is a holy flame,
A sacred inclination of the soul
To all things honest.

Mat. I can resist no longer,
Oh Hubert, you are a victorious tempter.

Qu. Can this be possible?

Hub. Forget not, at the beginning
Of this sweet race, honor hold out for you
A golden Garland.

Qu. Oh remember,
At the end of chastities white race, an Angel
Holds in his hand (shot through a silver Cloud,)
A Crown for Conquerers.

Hub Will ye loose the pleasure that --

Ma. I, I, those pleasures Hubert, there is a voice
Of flesh and frailty in me, that still cries,
Matilda take those pleasures, and I am now
The Kings for ever.

Qu. Let the Queen then cut from earth
Such a dissembler.

Offers violence to Matil. Hubert stays her. Hub. Nay but you shall not.

Qu. Shame and death dwell
With a goodness so short-si^'d, thou hansome hypocrite,
Thou faith-defrauder, a religious qualme
Crossing the stomach of a seeming Saint,
Which falls straight into humoor, all thy devotions
Prove now but well-clad cheaters of Times Charity,
Thy griefs, and sighs, are but sins crafty games,
Matilda and Hub. whisper. Their soon sp^nt flashes play like holy flames.

Hub. It shall be so: to some remote place, shut
from the danger of the angry Queen i will carry you,
And thither bring the King.

Mat. I long to see him.

Qu. Hubert, will thou play the Court Camclion,
The persum'd Pander.

Hub. Yes marry will I, Panders have need of perfumes.

Qu. Oh merry sin!
We smile toward Hell, but howl when we are in,

Hub. Name but the place Madam, and religiously I vow,
By th'unstain'd honor of my Name and Hou^e,
By the white reputation of a Gentleman,
And as I wish for after happiness, my care
Shall I see it instantly in execution.

Mat. My Cosen Bruce, Earl Richmond, with the convoy,
The King discomfited, they would madly have carried me
To Dunmow Abbey in fruitful Essex.

Hub. S^^oot a thousand Kings
could not thence recover ye, but name the place
Whither I shall carry you, good Madam whither?

Mat. Good Hubert thither.

Falls on her knees. Hub. What to a Monastory?

Qu. Call her dissembling,
No ^^nne good heaven, for she is still a Saint.

Mat. Upon my knee I beg it, and every day
When I shall drop a Bead, I Will strongly pray
That you may find a blessing.

Qu. Hark Hubert.

Hub. There is something telis me there is honor in it,
To grant her good request.

Mat. Mark how your Oath ran,
By the honor of your House,
By the white reputation of a Gentleman.
And as you wish for after happiness.
You Would put my wish in speedy execution.
Oh Hubert mark, he his house pulls down,
That wounds his honor, though to please a Crown,
By Heraul'ds he is a Gentleman maintained,
Whose reputations whiteness stands unstained,
And he in after happiness stands high,
That dares not with a sin by sovereignty.

Hub. Excellent Oratory!

Qu. Hubert, for truths sake.

Mat. Oh Hubert, for the glorious Crown of chastity,

Qu. For the victorious Palm of Wedlock faith,

Mat. By the immaculate souls of holy Maids,

Qu. And by the unstained truth of honest wives,

Mat. By the tears of Virgins,

Qu. By the truth of virtue,

Mat. Oh now to honor Hubert give thy name,
Sweet blooming virtue knows no blush of shame.

Hub. The rareness of your souls has ravished me,
We Will change our course, steer through bridge, and so
For Essex and for Dunmow, victorious Maid,
Rhetoric is poor in thy praise, whom a King,
Nor sovereignty, (the soul of women's longings,)
Cannot corrupt! -- Oh women! Men-subduers!
Natures extremes! no mean is to be had;
Excellent Good, or infinitely bad!

Ambo. Most noble Hubert.

Exeunt. Enter King, Fitzwater, Chester and Oxford. K. 'Twas well yet that the
trick has caught this old one,
Where are the rest?

Ches. Richmond is gone for France,
Leister escaped to Winsor.

K. How I thirst
To make mine arms walthy with sweet Matilda.

Fitz. Oh if a Fathers prayers, an old man's tears,
An injured old man's tears, were ever prevalent,
Good heaven keep my Girl a Crystal Fort,
Firm and unvuanquish'd.

K. Hnbert my friend now has her:
Will it please the mighty Emporor of the Barrons,
The King may kiss Matilda, she will be here presently,
Then^ shall the great Fitzwater sit in state,
And see Matilda and the poor King dally,
And teach the winds to wanton; Hubert now has her,
The faithful'st of my friends, from contrari^ties
We will produce soft pleasures, sweet perfections;
Sir^ah, Chester shall tell me when she then frowns, and
We Will Court her checks into a comely smile;
If she but raise that milkie hill, her breast,
With respirations, Oxford shall swear
it is a sigh, and I will seem to chide
His rashness, and protest love raised that gale,
Just as her heart for my heart had set sale.

Fitz. Hear heaven!

K. Chester shall watch her when she weeps, and tell me
They are Matilda', tears, when I will presently
With a lovers pleasing fervency, protest
They are Pearls, by passion forced from Cupids Chest.

Oxf. But what shall Hubert do,
Your bosom friend?

Ki. He shall with pretty thwarting passages
(To please Matilda,) seem to make me angry,
And tell me'tis impossible now t'obtain her;
Whereupon (impatient, to illustrate love
With a new passion) oh how I will rave!
Misuse him strangely, and close up the sweet Sco^ne
Upon Matilda's lip.

Enter a Gentleman. Gent. Letters from th'Earl Hubert sir,

K. His name but now,
(Like a beloved passenger,) took leave
Of my unwilling lips, he waits directions
Concerning her from me, good Chester read it,
I cannot read and rejoice too, Fitzwater
Listen, and rave.

Chester reads. Letter. May it please your excellent Majesty, it has, pleased
heaven so thoroughly to captivate my reason by the potent pleadings of your
virtuous Queen, and unmatched Matilda, that I hold it now impossible for your
Majesty ever to obtain her.

K. Ha!

Fitz. That last was music.

K. Nay kill us all, kill us all; will ye read on sir?

Let.
Briefly, by that time these Letters kiss your Royal hands, she will be
cloysterd up in Dunmow Abbey, and end her days a Vestall, wheither I could not
choose but convey her, being thereunto forcibly charmed by her tears and
entreaties, and especially forced by a secret command from heaven to mine own
conscience; I remain your most excellent Majesty's transgressing servant

Hubert.


K. Most excellent villain!

Fitz. Observe King John, e're heaven will virtue fail,
Contrary means, all winds shall sill her sail.

Ches. How like a Hare, the Greyhounds chaps still at her,
Yet still she scapes! the King is full of tempest.

K. She Is gone for ever.
Oh Hubert let us never meet again,
Never more meet; Fitzwater fetch herbut back,
As from the first, so from this Isabell
We Will be divorced, marry and set Matilda
In The regal Chair, the Kings admired Mistress.

Fitz. But will ye say and do sir?

K. Yet there is hope; now by my Crown I will,
We shall be Son and Father, thou and I
Will walk upon our Palace battlements,
And thou shall carty up a covetous eye,
And thou shall cast that covetous eye about
The fair, delightful village-spotted valleys,
Thou shall stand still, and think, and recollect
The troubled longings of thy large desires,
And whatsoever thou shall ask the King,
(Of all thou see) the King shall give it thee.

Fitz. Well, let one one ride before, and certify
That we are coming.

K. Chester, put on wings:
To himself. Thou good old man, the bird that croak'd now sings.

Exeunt Actus 5. Scoena 1.
Enter King and Fitzwater, Oxford meeting them. K. THese are the Abbey walls,
Oxford what news?

Ox. Matilda is afraid to venture forth,
But on yon battlements it was her promise,
Ent. Abbess and Matilda above. With the Lady Abbess to appear -- and see sir.

K. Give us leave^ Oh were that habit
Not so unkind, a foe to fair increase,
I Would call it then celestial, and swear.
A bright star moved in that immaculate sphere:
Matilda! Mistress of many Graces!
And lovely as the blush that breaks the day!
Cast thy commanding eyes upon a King,
Whom love has made a beggar;

Ab. Why hunts the King
With such a violent poursuit, a chaste Dove,
That has given up her name to heaven, and stands
White as her spotless vesture.

Fitz. Lady Abbess,
Pray give me leave, and hearken my Matilda,
I bring thee gol^n news my Girl, we have cast
An ill-becomming Calumny upon
The Kings love all this while; for he protest^
To be divorced from Isabell the Queen,
And by marriage set thee in his B^d,
A plant to spring and prosper; women naturally
Do aflect sovereignty; will thou run retrograde
In (...) fair Zodiac? though all ways yet
Have failed, this will take I am sure.

To the King. Mat. Who has taught my Father
To tum Apostate to that integrity
Slept in his noble breast? through a divorce
I run to golden ruin; the King marry me?

K. And make thee Queen of him, and two large Kingdoms,
The Christian world when they shall hear, shall wonder,
And magnify in their abundant praises,
The glory of our Marriage.

Mat. Oh my Lord, here I can call necessity,
Excellent Pyhsick for a vast desire,
Our wants are holy waters, cast on lust's fire.

Fitz. Oh brave, brave Girl!
That I had thee here to buss thee,
Her very breath did smell of heaven.

K. Matilda!

Fitz. I have found thee Gold my Girl,
These are glorious wrestlings,
Celestial struglings; passion of me, that joy
Should carry April eyes.

weeps. K. Matilda, Look upon thy sovereign courting,
Thy cruelty with a pair of wooing eyes,
Laboring for mercy.

Fitz. No, no, Matilda, look upon thy sovereign,
Thy chastity with tempting wanton eyes,
Laboring in lust.

K. Thou man of rude defects, let me alone.

Fitz. Thou man of wild desires, let me alone.

K. Ha!

Fitz. Tut, tut, I know whose Cause I have in hand,
And neither has nor hems can fright plain Robin,
The wound that foolish love-Boy there (what call ye him?)
Had struck your heart with, because your smooth tongue,
You could not come to supple it, as the Dog does his foot,
With fair fine words you could lick me, and then
Lift me to stroke it, and heal it by Attorney,
He steers not steady thae delights to roame,
Craft sets out swift, but ever comes short home:
I tell ye truth I.

K. Abbess, deliver up Mattlda,
Or with an Army filled with Ruffians, Ra^ishers,
The very Sons of darkness, we will level
This building to the bottom.

A. We know the King,
(Being reconciled unto his mother Church,)
cannot conceive such outrage.

Appears passionate Fitz. Now ye stamp, do ye.

Mat. Father farewell, and to my Lord my King,
The service of his most obseq^^ous Handmaid,;
And good your Majesty be ^l^as'd to remember,
How excellently-admirable your Crown
Will then become ye, when you shall ^ast off
The habit of your passions, I will pray for you sir,
And if it be possible with prayers and tears,
Quench your de^res, and fortify my fears.

Exit. Fitz. A Fathers blessing, like a welcome cloud
With child of friendly showers, hover over thy goodness,
And keep it evergreen --; she is gone sir.

K. Go thou and run into the Sea.

Fitz. Ha, ha, So the great Emperor of the Ba^rons,
As you called him,
May come out aagin in the guts of a poor John:
No, no, I will live and laugh, you would have made her
The mistress of the King, and she is married
To ^he Kings Master, oh to the noblest King
Poor supplicant ever kneeled to, to your King,
And her King, and to my King she is married;
Oh married, married, let the Satyrs dance it,
The sweet Birds sing it, let the winds be wanton,
And as they softly with an evening whisper,
Steal through the curled locks of the lofty woods,
Let them in their sweet language seem to say,
This, this was chaste Matilda's Marriage day.

Exit Fitz. K. It resolved irrevocable; who waits?

Enter Chester. Ches. Sir?

Enter Confessor. K. Have an eye upon that Fox; where is our Confessor?

Con. Attending sir.

K. Your ear -- do this,

Con. I shall sir.

K. And hark you, without all expostulation, speedily
Make Brand the Instrument.

Con. I shall not fail sir.

Exit. K. All my blood turns, she is now past all recovery;
Oh day draw in thy light, Time do not keep
This Deed for story; Memory fall asleep
In black oblivions Cavern; let this day
Still skip the Kalend, and be wiped away
From all discourse; oh let no chaste Maid.
(Remembering how Matilda was betrayed,)
With bitter tears, curse the too cruel King;
No Satyr dance this day, no sweet bird sing,
But let the Raven and Screcth. Owl cry,
Matilda the chaste Maid, must this day dye.

Exit. Enter Brand and the Abbess reading a Letter. Let.
Madam,
These are to giye you to understund, that instantly, and without any the least
expostulation, you see convey'n into the outward Garden adjoining to the Abbey,
your new Votary Matilda, that the bearer (this Gentleman) may without the least
interception, have freedom of access unto her; let this from me be your
safety, and forget not, the wills of Princes are indisputable --

Fustace Confessor to his Majesty.


Ab. No, no, no cloud of niceness, order, or regularity,
Must intercept this Mandate; Sir, the Kings will,
The Confessors advertizement, and your hopes,
Shall meet this minute; but virtue is I hope
The Rudder of your voyage.

Bra. I tell you Madam, it is unspotted truth,
The King is changed so excellent, such a lover
Now of Matilda's noble constancy,
That therefore as his (Confessor there certifies,)
Your duty is expected
To work my admittance to her, which is only
To let her know, how heartily his Majesty
Admires and commends her.

Ab. It Is a joyful hearing,
Enter Matilda. See where she walks, souls ^o heavenly simple,
It seems the Court digests not, and (being cloyed,)
Commends them to the Cloister.

Exit. Bra. And she be so simple,
She Is the fitter for the Saints, things I near think of,
Unless to stuff our similies -- excellent Lady.
There Is such a deal of heaven in her face,
It makes my black soul tremble -- excellent Lady,

Ma. Your will sir.

Bra. To let you understand the will of him,
Whose will the will of heaven has new made;
Thus said King John in brief, tell that sweet Saint,
(And there he wept as I do at the thought on it)
weeps. The immaculate Mistress of my dear devotions.
The King by this (with her eye not unacquainted)
Commends to her his hate of all that love,
The feavor of his blood contaminated:
Oh tell her (and he sighed there bitterly)
That as I was her tempter, I am now
Mine own despiser; as mine own despiser,
I will remain her virtues strong admirer;
And there just thus he kissed it --; if it chance, quoth he,
Her gentle lip return the Kings chaste meaning,
Mark but which place of this (then happy (Glove
Receives that heavenly print, and bring it back,
That my lips there (like a pair of willing Pilgrims)
May pay my hearts devotions. This was all,
And this, his Glove, the Token.

Mat. Excellence Change!
Heaven now has heard my prayers, return his goodness;
I am sorry thou have kissed the Glove before me,
For fear thy lips have lay'n where the Kings did,
And cosen'd mine of that grace fell from them,
When he spoke things thus good, Give me the Glove.

Bra. Ha: He looks toward the Garden door, and whilst she turns her self that
way, he changes the Glove, and gives her the other poisoned.


Mat. Thy looks made me believe, that some were coming.

Bra. No Madam, I have cosen'd you, it was but the wind.

Mat. No wind shall keep my duty from his Majesty
With my observance; say thus, I returned
Kisses the poisoned Glove. My love of his great goodness; and if he ask thee
How I received the news of his rare change,
Say, as a teeming soil after a drought,
Welcomes a wished for shower: what a strange sent
Strongly beats up into my brains, while I hold this Glove
So near my breast! thou art not honest sure?

Bra. Near death we prophecy, and it is so sure,
You cannot breath three minutes.

Mat. Ha!

Bra. It Is neatly don, and there is no dallying,
I know it is strong and swift, as by a Glove
You were carried from your Fathers to this Cloister,
So by a Glove you are from this Cloister sent
To the chaste Court of Saints.

Mat. Heaven! is this right?

Bra. No, 'twas a left handed Glove, look ye,
I kissed the right and cosen'd you,
So that a sinister act with a left handed Glove, very prettily
Imports a wittynesse in wickedness.

Mat. Thou art a merry murderer, the King was wont
To call me friend; oh if he bestows
On's friends such gifts, what sends he to his foes?
Uncharitable love-token; oh what harsh hand
Temperd this dram of death.

Bra. I could do it no better.

Mat. Merciless man, Tyg^rs to thee are tame;
Oh cozening Crocadile, that with thy tears could take me^
How will thou house
When thou and I meet next? when I shall sit
Above my sufferings, then will my blood be
A cloud betwixt eternity and thee.

Bra. Clouds? yes, much clouds.

Mat. There was the last call; to the King, commend me,
And tell him, when in stories he shall stand,
When men shall read the Conquerors great name,
Voluptuous Rusus, that unkind brother Beaucla^k,
Comely King Steven, Henry the Wedlock-breaker,
And Lyon-hearted Richard; when they come
unto his name, with sighs it shall be said,
This was King John -- the murderer of a Maid;
Oh tell him I am past his strong temptations,
And though wild burning backed his hot desire,
Like perfect Gold I did outlive the fire.

Dies. Bra. She Is dead and I must shift for one,
I hear some trampling,
Enter young Bruce. What Is he has leaped the Garden walls? has awenching look,
And should be a good Vaulter, guilty knaves make excellent
Eves droppers, and I love to sound strange bosoms, I will lie
To see and hear, and yet not heard nor seen,

stands aside. Y. Bru. Here rumor gives, my cousin, chaste Matilda
To live a Votary: ha! on the ground!
Murdered most certainly, and so warm, that yet
The murderer at my approach, may lurk
About the Garden, for through the Abbey it is
Impossible to pass; oh my grieved blood,
Who made it so unfortunate to be good.

Bra. He mumbles something to himself.

Y. Bru. This parallels my Mother and my Brother:
Ha! something sti^s in the Grove, passion I know thee not,
With a new art we must catch old Bloodhounds: well,
Although I am the Kings well-wishing friend,
And have raised forces for his part at Winsor,
Yet with my heart I am glad, a friendly hand
Has ma le thee happy.

Bra. S'foot this is one of our side,
But it seems he knows not it was the Kings injunction.

Y. Bru. Now business will be minded, state affairs,
With vigilance effected, which before
Were so entangled in your hair forsooth,
Suitors could find no end of their beginnings.

Bra. By this light I have done a good deed.

Y. Bru. Thou honest soul,
That (by the heat of thy happy hany-work,)
Can not I am sure but be in hearing; If
My irregular start (upon private necessity)
Frighted thee off, be not ashamed to let
Thy unknown friend possess thee.

Bra. Oh braze young spark.

Y. Eru. Or if thy modesty must keep thee off,
So well I love thy work (and as I the Kingdom)
Let this Purse of Gold, this Diamond fastened to it,
Tell thee thy friend was here, if thoul'dst know him,
He is a kinsman to the Earl of Chester;
And because thou shall not doubt thy friends fair meanings,
I will return the way I came, although
With danger to my person.

Bra. Here is one sir, wishes better to his friends.

Y. Bru. What art thou?

Shows himself. Bra. One that will take your honoorable Purse,
And yet pass quit at the Common Law.

Y. Bru. Were thou the expert Master of this piece.

Bra. You being kinsman to my Lord and Master,
(Who ever hated this blood;) I dare tell you,
I practi^'d first a business late at Winsor,
Upon a Mother and her Son --

Y. Bru. Hold heart, old Bruces Lady,
And the brat her Son?
Were thou the happy instrument
To cut these Houses down? did thou do that?

Bra. It would deserve (well prized) another Purse sir.

Y. Bru. Gold must not part us, did do it?

Gives him more Gold. Bra. Both that and this, by this stand sir.

Y. Bru. Son of the Devil have I sound thee?

Bra. Sure he knows me.

Y. Bru. Fool, do thou draw a sword;
What a loud lie thou do give heaven, to think
A sword can shield the guilty, look here villain
Upon my horrid point, where death in tempest
And whirle-winds, stares upon thee, thou murderer:
Of my Mother, Brother, and my Kinswoman.

Bra. S'root here was a Purse wi^h a bob at the end ont,
Pray take your Purse again.

Y. Bru. Toad, I will take thy heart first.

Bra. I deny nothing then,
Resolution crowns my craft; for those at Winsor,
(Let me free the King) I ^ami^^'d them, because
Your Mother was too coy, you may guess the rest;
For this it was King John's in junction,
And I have done it daintily by this light.

Y. Bru. By darkness and ^er Angels,
Thy near kinsmen,
Thou shall not live five minutes for it.

They fight, Bran^ falls, young Bruce keeps him down. Bra. O sir, what mean ye?

Y. Bru. To ask thee for a Mother, a sweet Brother,
A chaste kinswoman; oh that thou could be
Ten days a dying; Slave! i will stick thy Trunck
So thick with wounds, it shall appear a Book
Full of red Letters,
Characters of thy cruelty

stabs him. Bra. This is no bleeding month fir.

Y. Bru. Thon lie, look yonder;
There lies mine Almanac, a celestial body,
Points to Matilda's Course. Stabs. Whose revolution, period, pale aspect,
All tell me'tis high time that thou should bleed.

Bra. Oh.

Y. Bru. Thy veins are all corruption,
Toads belch not fouler;
And should thy Trunck be thrown upon a dunghill,
(As it deserves no better burial)
The sent would poison swine, the very dogs
Would with howlings fly as from a midnight ^end,
And every Raven that should (...) upon it,
Would seek forsaken Deserts, and there die
Full of infection.

Stabs. Bra. Oh that last has finished me,
And where I go I know not, a bloody Cloud
Has hid heaven from me like a purple shroud.

Dies. Y. Bru. Feast thou the Crows,
This body i will convey to Winsor, where my Mother,
And my sweet murdered Brother, we will expose
(As spurs of righteous vengeance) to all eyes;
Conscience, and Blood, are strong incessant cries.

Exit. Enter King and Lords below, old Bruce, Leister Oxford and Fitzwater
above. Charge. K. You Sons of death and disobedience;
Why is the King kept out?

Ol. Bru. You shall know sir;
Is It not enough the whole Lands Liberties
Lie yet a gasping by your head strong passions,
Wounded by your neglect, but through blood
D'^e chase your vast desires, my Wife and Son sir.

K. A game as we are Prince, in our Royal word,
The villain past our precept.

Ol. Bru. As you past heavens
In your bloody masquing night at Baynards Castle,
When all the floores, and the white walls wore bloody
Deep crimson blushes, to behold a Prince
In blood pursue his passions.

K. Barred out and braved,
You bate and chafe a Lion; bring old Fitzwater,
Thou Bruce and grumbling Leister, either speedily
Give up the Castle, and upon your knees
Fall to the mercy you have scorned, or here
Before a pair of minutes pass, the sword
Of incensed justice shall even in your eyes,
Leave this old Rebel headless.

Fitz. Now by the blood
I lost in holy Palestine with Richard,
Oh that right real Soldier! King John I swear,
That foul-word Rebel ha^unrivited
The ba^s of reason, and made me very angry;
Is it to take truths part to be a Rebel?
To ease my groaning Country, is that Rebellion?
To preserve the unstained honor of a Maid,
(And that maid my daughter) to preserve your glory,
That you stand not branded in our Chronicles,
By the black name of Wedlock-breaker; is this
(Good, heaven!) is this Rebellion? Come, come, the Axe;
Oh that wronged soul to death so falsely given,
Ent. Mowbra^ Flies sweetly singing her own truth to heaven.

Mow. Stand on your guard-sir,
Young Bruce with twenty thousand
Strong able men from Cambridge and Essex,
With a speedy march, and with as dreadful threatenings,
Comes thundering toward Winsor, all his Ensigns
Crimson and black, which in their want^n wavings,
Cry to the frighted Country (as he marches)
Nothing but blood and death.

Ol. Bru. Oh noble Son of a murpered M^ther.

Leis. Honorable young man.

K. Draw up our forces like a pair of angry winds,
That have got a hollow Cloud with child of tempests,
We Will make the valleys tremble.

Enter Chester. Ches. Resist now sir,
Or the whole Kingdom trembles, ^ewis the Dolphines
By th'politique working of ingenius Richmond,
(Who was sent for him) with six hundred sail,
And fourscore Flat-boats is let in at Dover,
Subduing as they march, and the Towns willingly
Givin^ them way; they have reached Rochester,
And if a speedy swift prevention meet not,
They will for London certainly.

Leis. Now John thy Crown sits quivering.

Ches. These here so resolute --

Mow. Youug Bruce so potent --

Ox^. And which strikes deep, a factious foreign foot
Upon our earth, it is a dangerous triplcity,
So that our Forces were they three times trebl'd,
(Distracted with a division thus trianguler)
Cannot promise safety.

K. Take it not Time, for now
The goodliest Oak in the whole wood must bow.

Fitz. Oh that was very well said sir, nor shall ye bow,
But unto heaven and virtue, for Kings have boasted
To be her servants; oh in this tempest sir,
Give her the helm, good brother Bruce, the King
Has faithfully acquitted him of the bloods
Of your Wife and Son,; Leister, the King now looks
Upon his passions with a displeased eye,
Trust to our faiths sir, give the Land her Liberties,
And do but look upon my poor Matilda.

K. Oh, oh.

Fitz. With Kingly chaste eyes; and a holy soul;
My brother shall command his Son to obedience,
Leister and he shall give ye up the Castle,
We will call Richmond with his powers from Lewis,
We will be all one soul again, and force
The skipping French to put to Sea again,
And you shall stand a King then absolute;
Good brother Leister, sir upon my knee,
I urge your goodness now; shall we still stand
And chain our freedoms to a foreign hand?
When we shun seen Rocks, then we safely sail;
Good, good, King John, let the old man prevail.

K. Oh Chester run to Dunmow, and if Brand yet
Have kept his hand while, bid that Brand forbear,
For fear of burning everlastingly.

Ches. I shall sir.

Exit. K. Mowbray, with the bendings of the King,
Go meet that angry young man Bruce, and tell him,
Here Is now no use for steel.

Mow. 'Twill be good news sir.

K. Meet us at least (you stubborn men,)
In our facile affections:
Why send ye not for Richmond? must we bend, and
And beseech too?

Leis. Pass but your Royal promise
In the words of a King, to perform what
You Are fled from, the wind not with more swiftness,
Shall fly to play with Richmonds lofty Plume,
Then shall be shown in his repeal.

K. It Is granted upon our Kingly word -- that time in me,
shall read that Giants force necessity!

Ol. Bru. With all submissive reverence we descend,
And kiss your Highness hand.

Fitz. Right happy day,
My Girl is safe, and all clouds blown away.

Exeunt from the walls Hoboyes sound, whilst the Barrons descend, each on his
knee kissing the Kings hand, both Parties joyfully embrace; suddenly the
Hoboyes cease and a sad Music of Flutes heard. Enter to the King and Lords,
the Lady Abbess, Ushering Matilda's Hearse, born by Virgins, this Motto fasmed
unto it -- To Piety and Chastity. The Body of Matilda lying on the Hearse, and
attended by the Queen, bearing in her hand a Garland, composed of Roses and
Lillies; after her, young Bruce, Hubert, Chester, and other Gentlemen, all in
mourning habites. The Song in parts.
1
Look what Death has done! here laid
(In one) a Martyr, and a Maid.
2.
Angels Crown Those with just applause.
Dye in defense of Virtues Laws.
Chorus
Such was her cause! Death! boast not of thy hands^
Cruelty, since the uanquish'd victor stands.
2.
Her Chastity, to Time shall last
Like Laurel, which no lightning can blast.
1.
Sweet Maids, with Roses deck her Hearse,
Whose Virtue stands above the reach of Verse.
Chorus
Heaven has her pure part, whilst on Earth, ^her Name
Moves in the Sphere of aresulgent Fame.
K. Hubert interpret this Apparition.

Hub. Behold sir,
A fad writ Tragedy so ferlingly,
Languag'd, and cast, with such a crafty cruelty,
Contrived and acted, that wild Savages,
Satyrs, and the rude rabble of the Woods,
Would weep to lay their ears to, and (admiring
To see themselves out done) they would conceive
Their wildness, mildness to this deed, and call
Men more then Savage, themselves rational;
And thou Fitzwater, reflect upon thy name,
And turn the son of tears, oh forget
That Cupid ever spent a dart upon thee,
That Hymen ever coupled thee, or that ever
The hasty, happy, willing messenger,
Told thee thou had a Daughter; oh look here,
Look here King John, and with a tembling eye,
Unvailes her face. Read your sad act, Matilda's Tragedy.

Om. Matilda!

Fitz. By the laboring soul of a much injured man,
It is my child Matilda.

Qu Oh cruel King, go ^ate thy bloody eye
With thy black command, which there lies executed.

Ol. Bru. Sweet Niece,

Leis. Chaste soul,

Y. Bru. King, go and read thy cruelty.

K. Do I stir Chester?
Good Oxford, do I move? stand I not still
To watch the when the grieved friends of dead Matilda,
Will with a thousand stabs turn me to dust?
That in a thousand prays they may be happy;
Will no one do it? then give a mourner room,
Falls passionately upon the Hearse. A man of tears; oh immaculate Matilda,
These sheed but sailing heat drops, missing showers,
The faint dews of a doubtful April-morning;
But from mine eyes, ship-sincking Ca^aracts,
Whold clouds of waters, wealthy exhalations
Shall fall into the Sea of my affliction,
Till it amaze the Mourners.

Hub. Unmatched Matilda,
Celestial Soldier that keep'st a Fort of Chastity
Against all temptations.

Fitz. Not to be a Queen
Would she break her chaste vow, truth crowns your reed,
Unmatched Matilda was her name indeed.

K. Oh take into your spirit-piercing praise,
My Scoene of sorrow; I have wel-clad woes,
Pathetick epethites to illustrate passion,
And steal true tears so sweetly from all these,
'tshall touch the soul, and at one pierce and please.

Ches. What will he do?

The Ki. takes the Gar and from the Queen, and peruses the Motto of the Hearse.
K. To Pretty and Purity, and Lillies mixed with Roses.
How well you have apparelled woe, this pendant
To Piety and Purity directed,
Insinuates a chaste soul in a clean body:
Virtues white Virgin, Chastities red Martyr,
Suffer me then with this well-suited wreath,
To make our griefs ingenious, let all be dumb,
Whilst the King speaks her Epicedium.

Ches. His very soul speaks sorrow.

Ox. And it becomes him sweetly.

K. Hail Maid and Marty! lo on thy breast,
Devotions Alter, chaste truths chest,
I offer (as my guilt imposes)
Thy merrits Laurel, Lillies and Roses,
Lillies, intimating plain,
Thy immaculate life stuck with no stain;
Roses red, and sweet, to tell
How sweet red sacrifices smell;
Sets the Garland on her breast. Hang round then as you walk about this Hearse,
The songs of holy hearts, sweet, virtuous verse,

Fitz. Bring Persian silks to deck her Monument,

K. Arabian spices quickening by their sent.

Fitz. Numidian Marble to preserve her praise,

K. Corinthian Ivory her sweet shape to raise.

Fitz. And write in gold upon it, in this breast,
Virtue sat Mistress passion but a guest;

K. Virtue is sweet, and since griefs bitter be.
Strew her with Roses, and give Rue to me.

Ol. Bru. My noble Brother, I have lost a Wife and Son,
You a sweet Daughter, look on the Kings penitence,
His promise for the Kindomes peace, perfer
A public benefit. When it shall please,
Let heaven question him, let us secure,
And quit the Land of Lewis.

Fitz. Do any thing,
Do all things that are honorable, and the great King,
Make you a good King sir; and when your soul.
Shall at any time reflect upon your follies,
Good King John weep, weep very heartily,
It will become you sweetly, at your eyes
Your sin stole in, there pay your sacrifie.

K. Back unto Dunmow Abbey, where we will pay
To sweet Matilda's memory and her sufferings,
A monthly obsequie, which (sweetened by
The wealthy woes of a tear-troubl'd eye)
Shall by those sharp afflictions of my face,
Court Mercy, and make Grief (...)
Let my wil'd errors, tell to time this truth;
Wh^l'st passion holds the Helm, Reason and Honor.
Do suffer wrack; but they sail safe, and clear,
Who constantly by Virtues Compass steer.

Song.
1.
MAtilda! Now go take thy Bed,
In the dark dwellings of the dead.
2.
And rise in the great Waking-day,
Sweet as Incense, fresh as May.
1.
Rest thou chaste soul, (fixed in thy proper sphere,)
Amongst heavens fair Ones; All are fair ones there.
Cho.
Rest there chaste soul, whilst we (here troubled) say,
Time gives us Griefs, Death takes our joys away.
Exeunt omnes.
