Ius Imponendi Vectigalia: OR The Learning touching CUSTOMS, Tonnage, Poundage,
And Impositions on MERCHANDISES ASSERTED; As well from the Rules of the Common
and Civil Law, As of General Reason and Policy OF STATE.

By Sir JOHN DAVIS Knight, etc.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Twyford in Vine-Court Middle Temple, MDCLIX.

TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY.
THis Question, SIR, Concerning your Majesty's Prerogative in laying
Impositions upon Merchandises, ought not to have been made or moved at all;
howbeit, it has been stirred and debated in Parliament, it is now become an
Argument of such Dignity and Importance, as the best-able amongst your Servants
learned in the Law, may well employ their best learning in the discussing
thereof. For my part, though I find myself unable to handle this Noble
Question, as the weight and worthiness requires; yet have I upon sundry
occasions arising from the course of my service, collected such notes, and
drawn together such materials, as may be of use in the building of a Fortress
in the defense of this Prerogative; and sure I am, that if your Majesty will
vouchsafe to cast your eye upon these Collections, that your Judgment will make
a far better use and application thereof, than I who have gathered the same,
can posible do; these little sparks of knowledge being taken into your
Majesty's consideration, will instantly multiply and arise into a flame, and so
give a great light for clearing of this Question: This learning within my hand,
is but a Spade, in your Majesty's hand will become a Scepter. I have only like
the poor Indian, dug up the Oar of Mine, which being brought into the Kings
Mint, and refined there, becomes part of the royal Treasure. For the Argument
it self, it will hardly receive any Ornament, Ornari res ipsa negat, contenta
doceri.

The best light I can give it, is Lucidws ordo, by breaking it into Capita
rerum, and casting it into a plain and natural method; it is somewhat long,
and in Multiloquio non deest peccatum, says Solomon; it is also mixed with some
reasons of State, wherein a common Lawyer may easily make a Solaecism; yet such
as it is, my zeal to advance your Majesty's Service has moved me to present it
to your Majesty, with all humbleness, and with some hope, that this dutiful
pains shall purchase a pardon for the errors therein committed,

By your Majesty's unprofitable Servant and humble Subject, John Davies

THE CONTENTS Of this BOOK.
CHAP. I.
THe Exposition and meaning of certain words, which do show the true state of
the Question. page 1
CHAP. II.
Of the general Law of Nations, or Jus Gentium, and the force thereof in all
Kingdoms, that traffic and commerce is a principal subject of that Law, and
that it gives power unto all Kings to take Customs and Impositions upon
Merchandises, and that the Crown of England has many Prerogatives annexed to
it by the Law of Nations, of which our Common Law takes notice, and does admit
and approve the same. 4
CHAP. III.
Of the Law Merchant, which is a branch of the Law of Nations, and how it
differs from our Common Law; and how in the judgment of our Law, Merchandises
do differ from other Goods and Chattels which do not cross the Seas; and how
the Common Law and Statute Law of England do admit and allow of the Law
Merchant. 10
CHAP. IV.
Of the Imperial or Civil Law, and of the extent of the Jurisdiction thereof;
of what force it is at this day within the Monarchies of Europe, and in what
case it is received within the King of Englands Dominions, and how it
warranteth all Kings and Absolute Princes to lay Impositions upon Merchandises.
20
CHAP. V.
Of the Canon or Ecclesiastical Law, and how far forth it does examine and
resolve this Question in cases of Conscience only. 25
CHAP. VI.
That this Question of Imposition may be examined and decided as well by the
rules of the Laws before mentioned, as by the rules of our Municipiall Laws or
Common Law of England. 27
CHAP. VII.
Of the Kings Prerogatives in general, and that the same do consist in certain
special points or cases reserved to the absolute power of the Crown; when the
Positive Law was first established, and that the Common Law of England does
acknowledge and submit it self to those Prerogatives 29
CHAP. VIII.
Of the Kings Prerogative in the ordering and governing of all Trade and
Traffic in Corporations, Markets, and Fairs within the Land, and the Common
Law does acknowledge this Prerogative, and submit it self there unto. 34
CHAP. IX.
That the King has another Prerogative in the Government in the Trade of
Merchandises crossing the Seas, differing from the Prerogative which he uses
and orders in Trade and Traffic in Markets an Fairs within the Land, and of
the difference between Custom and Toll by the rules of the Common Law. 38
CHAP. X.
Of the ancient duty called Custom, payable for our principal Commodities
exported, and that it was originally an Imposition. 41
CHAP. XI.
Of the ancient duties called Prizes, taken out of Foreign goods imported,
except Wines, and the petty-Customes of three pence of the pound were accepted
by King Edw. 1. in lien of Prizes. 46
CHAP. XII.
Of the ancient Customs payable for Wines, called Prizoge and Butlerage. 50
CHAP. XIII.
Of the ancient Officers which our Kings have created by virtue of their
Prerogatives, to search and over-see all sorts of Merchandises, and to collect
the duties payable for the same. 52
CHAP. XIV.
Of other Impositions, besides the ancient Customs before mentioned, laid upon
Merchandises, by several Kings and Queens since the Conquest; some of which
Impositions have been discontinued or remitted, and some of them are continued
and paid at this day; and first of the Imposition set by King Edw. 1. over and
besides the Customs spoken of before. 53
CHAP. XV.
Of the Imposition set and taken by King Edward the second. 55
CHAP. XVI.
Of the Impositions laid and levied upon Merchandises, by King Edw.3. 57
CHAP. XVII.
Of the Profits raised unto the Crown out of Merchandises during the reigns of
several Kings who succeeded K. Edw.3. until the reign of Queen Mary. 62
CHAP. XVIII.
That Queen Mary did use her Prerogative in laying Impositions upon
Merchandises. 70
CHAP. XIX.
That Queen Elizabeth also used her Prerogative in laying Impositions upon
Merchandises. 71
CHAP XX.
That our Sovereign Lord King James has by virtue of the same Prerogative,
without Act of Parliament, laid several Impositions upon Merchandises. 73
CHAP. XXI.
The general reasons whereupon this Prerogative is grounded. 76
CHAP. XXII.
Of the several Objections that are made against the Kings Prerogative in
laying Impositions upon Merchandises, and the soveral Answers thereunto. 94
CHAP. XXIII.
The Answer to the first Objection. 96
CHAP. XXIV.
Of the second Objection touching the uncertainty and unbounded largeness of
this Prerogative. 99
CHAP. XXV.
The Answer to the second Objection. 101
CHAP. XXVI.
The third Objection, touching the repeal of Charta Mercatoria by King Edw.2.
and the remit all of diverse Impositions by King Edw.3. upon sundry Petitions of
the Commons in Parliament, and the punishment of diverse Persons in Parliament
for procuring Impositions to be set up. 106
CHAP. XXVII.
The Answer to the third Objection. 110
CHAP. XXVIII.
The fourth Objection, that the Prerogative is bound or taken away by diverse
Acts of Parliament. 129
CHAP. XXIX.
The Answer to the fourth Objection: 131
CHAP. XXX.
The fifth Objection, that Tonnage and Poundage were never taken, but when the
same was granted by Parliament. 140
CHAP. XXXI.
The Answer to the fifth Objection. 141
CHAP. XXXII.
The Conclusion. 146
CHAP. XXXIII.
A Comparison of the Impositions set and taken in England, by the Kings
Prerogative, with the Exceptions and Gabells in Foreign States and Kingdoms,
whereby it will appear, that the Subjects of the Crown of England, do not bear
so heavy a burden by many degrees, as the Subjects of other Nations do bear in
this kind. 147
AN ARGUMENT UP ON The Question of Imposition, digested and divided into
sundry Chapters; by one of His Majesty's learned Counsel in IRELAND.
CHAP. I.
The Exposition and meaning of certain words, which do show the true state of
the Question.

THe Question it self is no more than this, Whether the Impositions which the
King ^f England has laid and levied upon Merchandise, by virtue of his
Prerogative only, without Act of Parliament, be lawful or warranted by the Law
of England.

By the word Imposition, we mean only such rates or sums of money as the King
by Letters Patents, under the Great Seal of England or Ireland, has set upon
Merchandises imported and exported, and commanded the same to be paid and
levied to His Majesty's use, over and above the Customs and Subsidies formerly
due and payable for the same Merchandises.

By the word Merchandises, we mean only such goods or Merchandises as are
transported over the Seas, from one Realm or Dominion unto another, to be sold
or exchanged for reasonable gain or profit; for upon the ingate or outgate of
Commodities so crossing the Seas only; Customs, Subsidies, and Impositions for
Merchandises are paid and taken, and not for any Commodities carried too and
fro by Sea and Land, within one and the same Realm and Dominion.

By the Law of England, we understand not only our customary Common Law, and
our Statutes of England, which are Native and peculiar to our Nation only, but
such other Laws also as be common to other Nations as well as us; have been
received and used time out of mind by the Kings and people of England in diverse
cases, and by such ancient usage, are become the Laws of England in such
cases; namely, the general Law of Nations, and the Law-Merchant which is a
branch of the Law, the Imperial or Civil Law, the Common or Ecclesiastical Law,
every of which Laws so far forth as the same have been received and used in
England, time out of mind, may properly be said to be the Laws of England.

CHAP. II.
Of the general Law of Nations, or Jus Gentium, and the force thereof in all
Kingdoms, that traffic and commerce is a principal subject of that Law, and
that it gives power unto all Kings to take Customs and Impositions upon
Merchandises, and that the Crown of England has many Prerogatives annexed to
it by the Law of Nations, of which our Common Law takes notice, and does admit
and approve the same.

JUs Gentium, or the general Law of Nations is of equal force in all Kingdoms,
for all Kingdoms had their beginning by the Law of Nations; therefore it
stands with good reason that the Law of Nations should be of force, and of
like force in all Kingdoms; and for this cause in the Realms subject to the
Crown of England, the Law of Nations also is in force in such cases, especially
wherein the King himself, or his Subjects, have correspondence or commerce with
other Nations who are not bound in those cases by the Municipall Laws of
England.

Omnes populi( says Justinian) Justinian
qui legibus and moribus reguntur, partim suo proprio, partim co^muni omnium
hominum jure utuntur: nam quod quisque populus ipse sibi Ius constituit id
ipsius proprium Civitatis est, vocaturque jus Civil; quod vero naturalis ratio
inter omnes homines constituit, id apud omnes homines plerumque custoditur,
vocaturque Jus gentium, quasi quo jure omnes gentes utuntur; and in the same
place it is said, Ius Gentium omni hominum generi common est, and exhoc Iure
Gentium omnes pene contractus introducti sunt, ut emptio, venditio, locatio,
conductio, societas, depositum mutuum, etc.

And with this agrees our Doctor and Student, lib. 1. cap. 2. Dict. and
Stud.1.lib.cap.2.
where it is said, that Trade and Traffic is by the Law of Nations; so that
Commerce, Trade, and Traffic for Merchandise, between the people of several
Nations and Kingdoms, is a principal subject of the Law of Nations; and
therefore to that questistion that has been made in England, Whether the
ancient Customs payable for Merchandises, did first grow due by our customary
Common Law or Statute Law of England? Why may I not answer, that neither the
Customary Law, nor the Statute Law of England, but the general Law of Nations
did first give these duties unto the Crown of England?

For as the Law of Nations was before Kings, for Kings were made by the Law of
Nations, Ex jure Gentium Reges originem traxerunt, says Baldus; Baldus.
So Kings were no sooner made by the Law of Nations, but presently the same
Law, cum creatus fuerit Rex ei omnia regalia conceduntur, and competit omnibus
Regibus jus imponendi quantum habet Begalia, says Baldus, Baldus.
Vectigalia introduct a sunt a jure, etc. which is the Law of Nature or
Nations, Ideo non otiosased favoralia, says another Doctor, did annex this
Prerogative to their several Crowns, Vectigalorigine ipsa jus Caesarum and
Regum partimoniale est, says another, Inhaeret Sceptro says another; and
therefore when our ancient British Kings took up Customs for Merchandises
transported into France, as Strabo Strabo.
writes, Britanni vectigalia tollebant gravia earum rerum quas brevi trajectu
in Galliam importabant; Shall we presume they did it by Act of Parliament? no,
for doubtless they did it by virtue of this Prerogative given unto them by the
Law of Nations; for Kings upon their first institution did greater things than
this, by their Prerogative, without the consent of the people, Vetusissima
coronae jura ex singulari Regum decreto primitus orta, says a learned Doctor;
and at first says Justinian, Justinian
Arbitria Regum prolegibus fuere, and so says Halicarnassus, lib. 3.
Halicar.lib.3.
Cicero offic. lib. 2. And truly as Customs and Impositions taken upon
importations of Merchandises, being most properly called Vectigalia, a mercibm
evectis and invectis, are the most ancient duties payable to the King; so are
the same grounded, says Bodin, upon the greatest reason and equity in the
world, quid est enim rationi and aequitati magis consentaneum quam and is qui
in nostro territorio and ex nostris questum facit principi nostro cujus
permissu and sub cujus protectione negotiatur aliquod perdat and presolvat? And
this common reason and equity which is the ground of these duties payable for
Merchandises, what is it else but the Law of Nations? which is nothing else but
that which common reason has established amongst all men for the common good of
all men, and which all Nations have received and embraced for their mutual
benefit and commodity.

Neither is this the only Prerogative which the King of England has by the
Law of Nations, habet and Rex in regno suo (says Bracton) Bracton.
alia privilegia de jure Gentium propria, viz. Soreceum maris thesaurum
insentum grossos pisces, and balenas and sturgiones Wavias, etc. huiusmodi de
jure Gentiune pertinent ad Coronam, says Stampford Prerogativa Regis, fol. 37.
6. Add hereunto the absolute power of the King, to make War and Peace, League
and Truces, to grant safe Conducts, to pardon all Offenders, to distribute all
degrees of Honor, and the like, wherein the King has sole and absolute power,
Merune imperium and non mixtum, and which Prerogative is as ancient as the
Crown, and incident to the Crown by the Law of Nations. stampford prarogat.
Regis fol.37.6.


Lastly, for the proof that our Common Law does acknowledge and prove the Law
of Nations in most of these cases. The Book 19 Edw. 4. 6. 19 E.4.6.
does approve the Kings absolute power in making War, Peace, and Leagues; and
in 37 Edw. 6. 20. 37 E.6.20
That part of the Law of Nations, whereby the High Constable and Marshall of
England, do proceed in their Courts of War, and Chivalrie, is called the Law of
the Land. We find also the Kings sole power in 11 Hen. 4. 11 H.4.
Rot. Parliament. in Archivis turris London, for Coining of Money; we have the
case of Mines, Com. 316. Com.316
for safe conduct of Merchants, and stop of Trades, tempore guerrae, and
Letters of Reprisall we have 7 Edw.4.19.2 R.3.2. Magna Charta cap. 30. 7
E.4.19.3.R.3.2. Magna Charta.cap.30.
and the Register wherein we find Writs of Reprisall.

CHAP. III.
Of the Law Merchant, which is a branch of the Law of Nations, and how it
differs from our Common Law, and how in the judgment of our Law; Merchandises
do differ from other Goods and Chattels which do not cross the Seas, and how
the Common Law and Statute Law of England do admit and allow of the Law
Merchant.

MErcaturavel Societas Mercatorum est magna Respublica (says Vlpian) Vlpian
and therefore that Commonwealth of Merchants has always had a peculiar and
proper Law to rule and govern it; this Law is called the Law Merchant, whereof
the Laws of all Nations do take special knowledge; first both the Common Law
and Statute Law of England do take notice of the Law Merchant, and do leave the
causes of Merchants and Merchandises to be decided by the rules of that Law;
for what says the Book of 13 Edw. 4.9, 10? 13 Edw. 4.9,10.
A Merchant Stranger made suit before the Kings Privy council, for certain
Bailes of silk feloniously taken from him, and it was moved that this matter
might be determined by Common Law, unto which motion the Lord Chancellor does
there answer; This suit is brought by a Merchant, who is not bound to sue
according to the Law of the Land, nor to tarry the trial of twelve men, nor
other solemnity of the Law of the Land; albeit, the King has jurisdiction of
him within the Realm, and may cause him to stand to his Judgment, yet this
must be according to the Law of Nature, which some call the Law Merchant, which
is a Law universal throughout the word; these are the words of that Book, and
it is there resolved by all the Justices, That if the Merchandises of such a
Merchant stranger, be stolen and waved by the Felon, the King himself shall
not take those Merchandises as waifes, though in that case the goods of another
person were lost by the Common Law of England. Does not this case make it
manifest, that in the judgment of our Common Law, Merchandises that cross the
Seas, are goods of another nature, quality, and consideration, than other goods
and Chattels which are possessed within the Realm, and do not cross the Seas?
This learning is not common in our Books, and therefore I think it meet to
exemplify this difference with more cases in this point.

If two Merchants be Joynt-Owners, or Partners in Merchandises, which they have
acquired by a Joynt-Contract, in this case the one shall have an Action of
Account against the other, die legem mercatoriam, says the Register, fol. 135.
and F. N. 117. D. Reg.fol.135.F.N.117.D.
and yet by the rule of the Common Law, if two men be jointly possessed of
other goods which are not Merchandises, the one shall not call the other to
account for the same.

Again, if two Merchants have a joint Interest in Merchandises, if the own die
the Survivor shall not have all, but the Executor of the party deceased, shall
by the Law Merchant call the Survivour to an account for the moytie F.N. 117.
D. F.N.117.D.
whereas if there be two Joints of other goods which are not Merchandises, the
Survivor shall have all, per jus accrescendi, even by rule of the Common Law.

Again, in an Action of Debt, upon a simple Contract which is without Deed in
writing, the Defendant by the Common Law may wage his Law, that is, he may bar
the Plantiff of his Action by taking an Oath that he does not ow the Debt nor
any part thereof, and yet in Itin. Derby 2 Edw. 3. 2 E.3.
John Crompton Merchant, upon a Contract without Deed, the Defendant would have
waged his Law, but was not permitted so to do, and so Judgment was given
against the said Defendant.

Again, the goods of Ecclesiastical persons are discharged of Toll by the
Common Law, si non exerceat Marchandizas de eisdem, says the Register, 259. a.
Regist. 259.a.
for then their goods are charged, being now become goods of another nature,
when the same are turned into Merchandises; so are the goods of the French
Nobility discharged by Gabels and Impositions if they traffic not, but if
they traffic, says Bodin, Bodin.
their goods are charged like other Merchandises.

Again, for goods wrongfully taken within the Land, the Common Law gives
remedy against the Trespasser, or the wrongful Taker only; but if an English
Merchant be spoiled of his Merchandises upon the Sea, or beyond the Sea, by the
Subject of another King, the Register does give him a Writ of Reprisall against
all the Subjects of that Nation, Regist. 122. 6. and 46 Hen. 3. Register 122 6.
46 Hen.3
we find a more brief cause of Justice, for there the King in respect of the
loss which certain Merchants of London had sustained, by an arrest made of
their goods, made by the Countess of Flanders, does grant unto them all the
Merchandises whereof the Flemings were possessed in England, Rot. Pa.3 E.1.m. 19.
in Archivis turris London: Rot. Pa. 3.E:I.m. 19.in Archis turris London.
Whereupon the Lord Mayor of London, did seize so much goods of the Flemish
Merchants as amounted to 730. Marks and delivered the same to Thomas Debassing,
and other Merchants, who had suffered loss by that arrest; and in the same Roll
of 3 Ed. 1. 3 Edw.1.
the Lord Mayor of London, and Bailiffs of Southampton, are commanded by the
Kings Writ, Quodomnes Mercatores Londienses ad parts Angliae accedentes per
bona and catalla sua distrin guantur sed in legem mercatoria^ and consueti
dinem Regni ad satisfaciendum Mercatoribus Florentinis de pecuniis ipfi mutuo
tradiderunt Willielmo Episcopo Leodiensi. Here we see that Lex mercatoria,
which does apparently differ from the ordinary Common Law of this Kingdom, is
said to be Consuetudo Regni.

And lastly, in a suit at the Common Law no man's Writing can be pleaded against
him as his Act and Deed, unless the same be sealed and delivered; but in a
suit between Merchants, Bills of Lading, Bills of Exchange, being but Tickets
without Seals, Letters of advice and credences, Policies of assurance,
Assignations of debts, all which are of no force at the Common Law, are of good
credit and force by the Law Merchant.

Thus we see how Merchandises do differ from other goods and Chattles in the
eye of the Law, and how the Law Merchant does differ from the common Law of
England, and how the Common Law does admit and allow thereof. Our Parliaments
likewise have not only made extraordinary provision for the more speedy
recovery of Debts due unto Merchants for their Merchandises, than is provided
by our Common Law, as appears by the Statute of Acton Burnell, made the 11
Ed. 1. and the Statute de Mercatoribus made 13 Ed. 1. but also have course of
proceedings, in cases of Merchants differing from the course of our Common Law,
for by the Statute of 27 Ed.3. cap. 2. 27 E.3. Cap.2.
it is declared, that the proceedings in causes of Merchants shall be from day
to day, and hour to hour, according to the Law of the Staple, and not according
to the course of the Common Law; and by another Article in the same Parliament,
that all Merchants coming to the Staple, should be ruled according to the Law
of Merchants touching all things coming to the Staple, and not by the Common
Law of the Land; and by another Article, that neither of the Benches, nor any
ordinary Judges of the Common Law shall have any Jurisdiction in those cases;
and lastly, that the Law of Marque and Reprisall, which is a branch of the Law
Merchant, shall be used as it had been used in times past. So as the Parliament
does but declare the ancient Law, and does not introduce a new Law in those
cases.

Until I understood this difference between Merchandises and other goods, and
between the Law Merchant and the Common law of England, I confess I did not a
little marvel, England being so rich, and entertaining Traffic with all
Nations of the World, having so many fair Ports and so good Shipping, the King
of England also being the Lord of the Sea, and also a principal part of his
Royal Revenue consisting in duties payable for Merchandises, so as many
Questions must of necessity arise in all ages touching Merchants and
Merchandises, What should be the cause that in our Books of the Common Law of
England, there are to be found so few cases concerning Ships or Merchants, or
concerning Customs or Impositions payable for Merchandises.

But now the reason thereof is apparent, for the Common Law of the Land does
leave these cases to be ruled by another Law, namely the Law Merchant, which is
a branch of the Law of Nations.

The Law Merchant, as it is a part of the Law of Nature and Nations, is
universal and one and the same in all Countries in the World, for as Ciccro
Cicero
says of the Law of Nations, Non orit alia lex Romae, alia Athenis, alia nune,
alia posthac, sed and omnes gentes and omni tempore unalex eademque perpetua
continebit, etc. So may we say of the Law Merchant, there is not one Law in
England, another in France, another in Spain, another in Germany, but the same
rules of reason, and the like proceedings of the Law Merchant are observed in
every Nations; for as our Chancellor of England affirms, 13 E. 4. 9. 13 E.4.9.
That the proceedings of the Law Merchant ought to be according to the Law of
Nature, which is universal; so say the Civilians of several Nations. The
Italian Doctor says, In curia mercatorum naturalis aequitas praecipue
expectanda, and ex aequo and bono causas dirimendas esse; The French man says,
In curia mercatorum proceditur de mer a aequitate omissis solemnitatibus and
apicibus juris; The Spaniard likewise says, Apices and subtilitas juris non
considerantur in foro mercatorio; whereby it is manifest, that causes
concerning Merchants and Merchandises, are not wont to be decided by the
peculiar and ordinary Laws of every Country, but by the general Law of Nature
and Nations, out of which resulteth this Conclusion. Suppose it be admitted
that by the positive Law of the land Taxes and Tallages may not be laid upon
our goods within the land, without an Act of Parliament, yet by the Law of
Nations, and by the Law Merchant, which are also the Law of England, in cases
of Merchandises the King of England, as well as other Kings, may by virtue of
his Prerogative, without Act of Parliament, lay Impositions upon Merchandises
crossing the Seas, being goods whereupon the Law does set another character
than goods possessed in the land, as is before expressed.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Imperial or Civil Law, and of the extent of the Jurisdiction thereof,
of what force it is at this day within the Monarchies of Europe, and in what
case it is received within the King of Englands Dominions, and how it
warranteth all Kings and Absolute Princes to lay Impositions upon Merchandises.

WHen the City of Rome was Gentium Domina and Civitas illa magna quae regnab at
super Reges terrae, The Roman Civil Lex Civilis.
Law being communicated unto all the Subjects of that Empire, became the Common
Law, as it were, of the greatest part of the inhabited world; yet the extent
thereof was never so large as that of the general Law of Nature, as it is noted
by Cicero, offic. lib. 2. Cicero offic. li.2.
Majores nosiri aliud jus Geutium, aliud Civil jus esse voluerunt, quod enim
civil non idem continue, Gentium, quod autem idem civil esse debet, whereby
it is manifest, that the Law of Nations is and ought to be a binding Law in all
States and Countries; as it is binding, so it is perpetual, and cannot be
rejected, as the Roman Civil Law is rejected in most of the Kingdoms in Europe,
in such cases as do arise within the body of every Kingdom.

In France, Philip le Bell (says Bodin) de Repub. lib. 2. cap. 8. Bodin de
repub.li.2.cap.8.
when he erected the Courts of Parliament at Paris, and Mountpelier, did
expressly declare, That they should not be bound in their judgments by the rule
of the Roman Civil Law, and in erecting of all the Universities of France, they
are charged in their several Charters, not to revive the profession of the
Civil and Common Law, as of binding Laws in that Kingdom, and therefore Earum
non imperio sed ratione utimur, says another learned Doctor of France.

In Spain, says Bodin, Bodin
in the same place, several Kings have made Edicts, that no man upon pain of
death, should allege the Roman Civil Law as a binding Law in their Dominions.

And that Stephen King of Spain Stephen King of Spain.
did forbid the public pleading of the Civil Law.

As for England, to omit what Pope Elutherius Pope Eluther.
wrote in his Epistle to Lucius the first Christian Monarch of the Britains,
and whereof mention is made in Saint Edwards Laws de protestate Regia and
Ecclesiastica, published in the time of 3 Hen.8. petiistis (says he) leges
Romanas and Caesaris vobis transmitti quibus in regno Britaniae uti voluistis,
leges Romanas and Caesaris reprobare possumus, legem Dei nequaquam, etc. In a
Parliament holden in England 11 R. 2. when a course of proceedings in Criminal
causes, according to the Civil Law was propounded, an answer was made by all
the States assembled, That the Realm of England neither had been informer
times, nor hereafter should be ruled and governed by the Civil Law, Rot.
Parliament. 11 R. 2. in Archivis turris London, and accordingly Chopinus II
R.2. Chopinns.
the French Lawyer in his Book de Domino Franciae tit. 28. speaking of the
Civil law, hujus Romani juris (says he) nullus apud Anglos usus, sed ex veteri
gentis instituto Britani reguntur legibus municipialibus quas illis majorum
mores praescripserunt.

But this is to be understood of causes arising within the Land only; for all
Marine and Sea causes which do arise for the most part concerning Merch. and
Merchandises crossing the seas, our Kings have ever used the Roman Civil Law
for the deciding and determining thereof, as the Romans did use the Law of the
Rhodians Rhodians.
in those cases, according to the memorable rescript of the Emperor Anthonius,
terram suis legibus Rhodiis Regi. How be it now, those Laws of the Rhodians are
digested and incorporated into one body of the Civil Law; the jurisdiction
touching causes arising upon the Sea, is committed by the King of England to
his Admiral, who in his Court of Admiralty does proceed in those cases
according to the rule of the Civil Law.

Now for the Rules of the Civil Law touching the power of Kings, in laying
Impositions upon Merchandises, the same are clear without question, and
observed without contradiction in all the nations of the world, Regiitantum
juris ac muneris est vectigalia imponere, redditus, seu vectigalia portus quae
perveniant ex his quae in portum vel ex portu vehentur regalia sunt, Rex qui
non recognoscit superior em potest instituere nova vectigalia, etc. hoc est jus
totius mundi, totus mundus hoc jure utitur, the D. Doctors who interpret the
Imperial Law, have their Books full of these Rules.

And if it be objected, That these rules of the Imperial Law are only
intended of the Emperor, a learned Civilian has this position, plus juris
habet Rex in Regno quam Imperator in imperio, quia Rex transmittit regnum ad
successionem quod non facit imperator, quiest tantum electionis, etc.

Lastly, when I speak of the rules of the Civil Law, and make use thereof, I do
apply the same only in cases of Merchandises crossing the Seas, which I do
express by way of protestation, that I may not be mistaken here, and in other
places where I cite the Text of the Imperial Law, as if I intended that Law to
be of force in England generally, as in other places.

CHAP. V.
Of the Canon or Ecelesiastical Law, and how far forth it does examine and
resolve this Question in cases of Conscience only.

THe Canon Law The Canon Law.
is received and admitted in England, as a binding-Law in cases
Ecclesiastical, which are indeed the proper Subjects of that Law. But this
question of Imposition is merely Civil, and therefore the Canon Law does not
handle it but in cases of Conscience only, and so indeed it does examine and
determine in what cases an absolute Prince may with a good conscience lay and
demand new Impositions, Decret. causae 24. Quaesti. 3. Decret.cause 24 Quaest.3.
Princeps potest indicere nova vectigalia, and in Summa Summarum tit.
degabellis and exactionibus, these rules and distinctions are laid down.

Quilibet Monarcha potest imponere novum vectigal, quod tamen boni viri
arbitrio moderaudum est, potest Princeps imponere vectigal ultra conventiouem
in duobue casibus. i. quando redditus ejus non sufficient ad segime^ boni and
co^munis and decentiam status ejus. 2. quando non sufficient ex nova emergentia
principes enim sunt a Deo instituti ut no^ quaerant propria Lucra, sed co^munem
utilitatem populorum, lilia agri neque arant neque nent, which may be applied,
says a French Monk, to all Princes, but espicially to the Kings of France,
because they bore the Lilies.

The Canonists Canonists.
do likewise allege the example of our Savior, who paid an Imposition of
Poll-money, Poll-money.
and wrought a miracle to enable himself to do it; that the Tribute-money which
Christ commanded to be paid, Date Caefari quae sunt Caesaris, and the Custom
which Saint Paul St. Paul.
wills every Christian to pay willingly, reddite omnibus, cui tributum,
cuivectigal, were but Impositions raised by the Emperors Edict only, without
the consent of the people; and yet Saint Paul requires obedience to Princes in
that case, not only for fear of the Princes displeasure, but for conscience
sake, non solum propter iram sed propter conscientiam.

CHAP. VI.
That this Question of Imposition may be examined and decided as well by the
rules of the Laws before mentioned, as by the rules of our Municipiall Laws or
Common Law of England.

FOrasmuch as the general Law of Nations, which is and ought to be Law in all
King doms, and the Law Merchant is also a branch of that Law, and likewise the
Imperial or Roman Law have been ever admitted, had, received, by the Kings and
people of England, in causes concerning Merchants and Merchandises, and so are
become the Law of the Land in those cases; why should not this Question of
Impositions be examined and decided by the rules of those Laws so far forth as
the same does concern Merchants and Merchandises, as well as by the rules of
our Customary or Common Law of England, especially be cause the rules of those
other Laws are well known to the other Nations, with whom we have commerce, and
to who^ and from whom all Merchandises are transported, whereas the rules of our
own Municipall Laws are only known within our Islands; and if this Question may
be decided either by the Laws of Nations, or by the Law Merchant which is but a
member thereof, or by the Roman Civil Law, we find this point clearly and
absolutely determined, and overruled by the rules of those Laws, viz. That
all absolute Kings and Princes may set Impositions upon Merchandises by their
Prerogatives, and thereupon we may conclude, that since one Monarch has as
much power as another, as Fortescue Fortescue
in his Book de Laudibus legum Angliae, affirms, the K. of England, as well
as any other King, as the Emperor himself, cum ipse omnes libertates habet in
regno suo quas imperator vindicat in imperio, As King William Rufus told the
Archbishop Anselm, may by virtue of his Royal Prerogative annexed to his
Crown, and inherent to his Scepter, lay Impositions upon Merchandises exported
or imported into any of his Kingdoms or Doninions.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Kings Prerogatives in general, and that the same do consist in certain
special points or cases reserved to the absolute power of the Crown; when the
Positive Law was first established, and that the Canon Law of England does
acknowledge and submit it self to these Prerogatives.

BY the Law of Nature all things were common, and all persons equal, there was
neither Meum nor Tuum, there was neither King nor Subject; then came in the Law
of Nations, which did limit the Law of Nature, and brought in property, which
brought in community of things, which brought in Kings and Rulers, which took
away equality of persons, for property caused Contracts, Trade, and Traffic,
which could not be ministered without a King or Magistrate; so as the first and
principal cause of making Kings, was to maintain property and Contracts, and
Traffic, and Commerce amongst men. Hereupon by the same Law of Nations,
Tributes and Cust^omes became due to the King or Prince to maintain him in his
place of Government, quasi Ministerii sui stipendia, says the School-man, Deo
Minister est tibi in bonum ideo and tributa potestas, says Saint Paul, and all
these things, namely Property, and Contract, and Kings, and Customs, were
before any positive Law was made; then came the positive Law, and limited the
Law of Nations, whereas by the Law of Nations the King had an absolute and
unlimited power in all matters whatsoever. By the positive Law the King himself
was pleased to limit and stint his absolute power, and to tie himself to the
ordinary rules of the Law, in common and ordinary cases, worthily and princely,
according to the Roman Emperor, Dignissimum Principe Rex se allegatum legibus
consiteri, retaining and reserving notwithstanding in many points that absolute
and unlimited power which was given unto him by the Law of Nations, and in
these cases or points, the Kings Prerogatives do consist; so as the Kings
Prerogatives were not granted unto him by the people, but reserved by himself
to himself, when the positive Law was first established; and the King does
exercise a double power, viz. an absolute power, or Merum Imperium, when he
does use Prerogatives only, which is not bound by the positive Law; and an
ordinary power of Jurisdiction, which does cooperate with the Law, and whereby
he does minister Justice to the people, according to the prescript rule of the
positive Law; as for example, the King does not condemn all Malefactors, but by
the rule of the positive Law; but when the Malefactor is condemned by the Law,
he gives him a pardon by his absolute Prerogative.

Again, the King does punish the breach of the Peace within the Land, by the
ordinary course of the Common Law, but he does make War and Peace with Foreign
Nations, Quod pertinet ad liberum jus gladii, as a Doctor speaks, by that
absolute and unlimited power, which the Law of Nations has given unto him.

Again, the King does establish the Standard of Money by virtue of his
Prerogative only, for the Common Law does give no rule touching the matter, or
form, or value thereof; but when those Moneys are dispersed into the hands of
the Subjects, the same do become subject in respect of the property thereof, to
the ordinary rules of the Common Law.

Again, the right of Freehold and all Inheritance, and all Contracts real and
personal, arising within the Land, are left to be decided by the positive Law
of the Land; but the Government and ordering of Traffic, Trade, and Commerce,
both within the Land and without, does rest in the Crown as a principal
Prerogative, wherein the King is like to Primum mobile, which carries about
all the inferior Spheres in his superior Course, and yet does suffer all the
Planets underneath him to finish all their diverse and particular courses; or
rather he does imitate the Divine Majesty, which in the Government of the world
does suffer things for the most part to pass according to the order and course
of Nature, yet many times does show his extraordinary power in working of
miracles above Nature.

And truly, as the King does suffer the customary Law of England to have her
course on the one side, so does the same Law yield, submit, and give way to the
Kings Prerogative over the other; and therefore in the 1 Hen. 7. fol. 23.
1H.7.fol.23.
there is a rule, That every Custom is void in Law quae exaltat in
praerogativum Regis, which is an argument, that the Kings Prerogative is more
ancient than the customary Law of the Realm; besides, the power of the Kings
Prerogative above the Common Law does appear in this, That whereas all
privileges do flow, and are derived from the Kings Prerogative, and every
privilege in one point or other private communem legem, yet the Common Law does
admit and allow of privileges granted by virtue of the King Prerogative.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Kings Prerogative in the ordering and governing of all Trade and
Traffic in Corporations, Markets, and Fairs within the Land, and the Common
Law does acknowledge this Prerogative, and submit it self there unto.

FIrst, it is manifest that all Corporations of Cities and Boroughes within the
Land, were chiefly instituted for Trade and Commerce, and not by the rule of
Common Law; no such Corporation can be made but by the Kings Charter; for
though there have been some Corporations which have been time out of mind, yet
the Law presumes that the same at first had their beginnings by the Grant of
the King; besides, we find in diverse ancient Charters made unto those
Corporations, a power granted unto the King to take de omnibus rebus venalibus
within their Liberties, certain sums of Money, viz. delibra piperis, so much,
de libra zinziberis, so much, de quolibet panno, etc. for murage, or toward
the reparation of their Walls, which is nothing else but an Imposition laid by
the Kings Charter to maintain those Cities and Boroughs wherein Trade and
Traffic is maintained; we find such a Charter granted to Nottingham, 3 Edw.
1. pat. m. 21. 3 Edw. 1 pat.m 21
in Arch. turris London. The like is granted to Cloneniell, and to some other
Towns in Ireland. F.N. 170. B. F.N. 170 D.
We find a Patent granted to a Borough in England, to take for five years a
certain sum of Money of every Passenger, toward the paving of the same Town.

Again, no Fair or Market may be holden within the Realm, neither can a
multitude of Subjects assemble themselves together to that end, without a
special Warrant or Grant of the King; and when a Subject has a Grant of a
Fair, he has a Court of Py-powder incident thereunto, wherein the proceeding
in Summary and de plano from hour to hour, as in the Court of Merchants; And
for the Government of all Fairs and Markets, especially touching Weights and
Measures, the Standard whereof was first established by the Kings Ordinance, to
whom the establishing of the Standard Moneys, which is mensura publica omnium
rerum commut abilium, is also reserved as a special Commodity.

Besides, in every Fair and Market where things are bought by retail, for the
necessary use of the Buyer, and not to sell the same again as Merchandises in
another Market, for that is regrating and unlawful, by the rule of the Common
Law, There is a Toll taken, which is nothing else but an Imposition laid upon
the Buyer, and that that Toll was originally imposed by the Kings Prerogative,
it is manifest in this, that the ancient Tenants of the Crown, namely the
Tenants in ancient Demeasne, are discharged of Toll in all Markets and Fairs;
and that the King by Charter has discharged diverse other persons of Toll, as
appears in the Register of Writs, and Pitz. Na. Brevium, where we find diverse
Writs essend quiet de Theolneo. But this discharge of Toll is only for things
bought for necessary use of the Buyer, and for Merchandises, for the Tenants in
ancient Demeasne are discharged of Toll, for such things only as are for their
provisions, or manurance of their lands, and in the Writ which discharges the
goods of Ecclesiastical persons of this Toll, there is this clause, dummodo
non faciat Merchandiz as de iisdem, as is before declared.

Lastly, the Kings Prerogative in the Ordering and Government of Trade within
the Realm, does appear in that notable Charter granted to the Abbot of
Westminster, recited in the Register of Writs, fol. 107. Register of Writs,
fol.107.
wherein the King does grant to the Abbot and his Successors, to hold a Fair at
Westminster for thirty two days together, with a prohibition that no man
should buy or sell within seven miles of that Fair, during that time.

CHAP. IX.
That the King has another Prerogative in the Government in the Trade of
Merchandises crossing the Seas, differening from the Prerogative which he uses
and orders in Trade and Traffic in Markets and Fairs within the Land, and
of the difference between Custom and Toll by the rules of the Common Law.

TOuching Merchandises crossing the Seas outward and inward, the same are of
another quality, and the Law has another consideration thereof, than it has
of such things as are bought and sold in Fairs and Markets within the Land, as
is before expressed; and therefore the duties payable upon the exportation and
importation of Merchandises, have another name, being called Customs, and not
Toll, and are also paid in another manner, for Customs Custom and Toll.
must be paid before the Merchandises be discharged and brought to Land;
whereas toll is not paiable but for goods brought into the Fair or Market.

Again, Custom must be paid whether the Merchandises be sold or not, but Toll
is not due but for goods bought and sold in the Market.

Again, Custom is always paid by the Merchant, who sells or intends to
sell his Merchandises in gross; but Toll is ever paid by the party who buyeth
some Commodity for his proper use and provision by retail.

Lastly, if Customs be not paid or agreed for before the Merchandises be
discharged and brought to Land, the Merchandises are ipso facto forfeited, and
may presently be seized to the use of the King; but if Toll be not paid, the
thing sold is not forfeited, only it may be distrained and detained till the
Toll be paid; or an Action upon the Case may be brought for the Toll. These
differences between Custom and Toll do apparently prove that Merchandises for
which Customs are paid, do differ from other goods sold in the Markets and
Fairs, for which Toll is taken, and that the Trade of Merchandises crossing the
Seas, and the Trade that is used in Markets and Fairs, are ordered by different
Prerogatives; and as the Tolls of several kinds which are taken in Markets,
Fairs, and Towns Corporate, were first imposed by virtue of that Prerogative,
whereby the King orders all Trade within the Land; so by virtue of that other
Prerogative whereby the King governs the Trade of Merchandises crossing the
Seas, the Crown of England, ever since the first institution of the Monarchy,
has from time to time raised and received out of Merchandises, Customs, and
Impositions, of diverse Nature and Natures, according to the diversities of
Merchandises exported and imported, and the diverse occasions and necessities of
the comercion.

CHAP. X.
Of the ancient duty called Custom, payable for our principal Commodities
exported, and that it was originally an Imposition.

THE ancient duties payable for Merchandises, were but of two kinds, and known
by two names, Customs and Prizes; Customs were paid for Homebred and Native
Commodities exported, and Prizes were taken out of Foreign Commodities
imported.

The Native Commodities out of which Custom was paid, were Wool, Woollfells,
and Leather, and this Custom did consist of rertain rates or sums of Money,
imposed by the King upon those Merchandises exported, which rates were raised
and reduced higher or lower, from time to time, as occasion did arise; for
although in the time of King Edw.1.the Customs payable for those Commodities
were reduced to this certainty, viz. to a demi mark for every Sack of Wool, a
demi mark for every three hundred Wooll-fells, and a mark for every last of
Leather, which we call now the great and ancient Custom, ab initio non fuit
sic, these were not the rates from the beginning, for not long before that time
there was a greater and more ancient Custom paid for the exportation of those
Commodities, Britanni (says Strabo) Strabo.
vectigalia tollebant gravia earum rerum quas brevi trajectu in Galliam
importabant; this was Magna Customa in the time of the Britans; and though the
certain rates thereof does not appear, yet because the same were gravia
vectigalia in those days, we may easily believe that Custom to have been
greater than the demi mark for a Sack of Wool.

Again, the Statute of Magna Charta, which was as ancient as King John,
speaks of ancient Customs payable for Merchandises, and the Book of 29 Edw.
3. makes mention of ancient Customs granted to King John, in the Town of
Southampton, which doubtless were other Customs than that of the demi mark,
etc. for that in the Record of the Tower, 3 Edw. 1. Rot. sin. 24. and Rot.
Patent of the same year, m. 9. the demi mark which was first established by the
Kings Letters Patents, is called Nova Custuma, and this was a diminution of the
ancient Custom, says the Book of 30 H. 8. Dyer 43. 38 H.8.Dyer 43.


Again, when the same King Edw. 1. had by his Writ only, without Act of
Parliament, established the Custom of the demi mark, etc. in Ireland, in all
the Customers Accounts, which are found in the Pipe-Rolls, in the time of Edw.
1. Edw.1.
Edw. 2. Edw. 2.
Edw. 3. Edw.3.
in that Realm, it is also called Nova Custuma, which imports as much as a
new Imposition, for Imposition is a new name, and has been of use but of late
years, whereas every new charge laid upon Merchandises in ancient times, was
called Nova Custuma, as the Lord chief Baron Fleming observed in his Argument
in Bates Case Bates case de Currants in Sccio. per Fleming chief Baron.
of Currants, in the Exchequor of England; but because this Custom of a demi
mark was a reducement made by King Edw. 1. of the great and ancient Custom to
that proportion which was then thought reasonable (as after upon sundry
Petitions of the Commons, was allowed by the succeeding Princes) it obtained in
tract of time the name of the great and ancient Custom; this Custom of demi
mark was not granted to the King by Parliament, but reduced to that rate by the
King, by the prayer of the Commons, as is expressed in the Record of 3 Edw. 1.
3 Edw. 1.
fin. memb. 24. for albeit the Charter for confirmation of Magna Charta, made
in 25 Edw. 1. does recite, That the demi mark was granted by the Cominaltie,
yet is there no Act of P. printed or recorded, wherein that grant of the
Cominaltie does appear, neither can it stand with the rule of reason that the
demi mark being a diminution of the ancient Custom should proceed from the
grant of the Cominalty to the King, for the King would never have accepted of
such a grant as did diminish his Revenue, neither had it been thank-worthy or
acceptable, and therefore the King having a Negative voice, would never have
given his assent to such a grant in Parliament; but it is to be presumed that
this diminution of the ancient Custom was made in Parliament, and not by
Parliament, and that by prayer of the Commons, as the Record of 3 Edw. 1. Rot.
fin. memb. 24. 3 Edw.1.Rot.fin.memb.24.
testifies, the King was then well pleased for that time to draw down the
ancient Custom to that rate, and the people did willingly yield and consent to
the payment thereof; and this I take to be the true interpretation of the
Charter or Statute made in 25 Edw. 1. Statute 25 E.1.
And therefore because we find no Act of Parliament whereby the people did
originally grant the great and ancient Customs to the King, and because we
find it was uncertain and subject to diminution and alteration, we may
conclude, that it was but an imposition laid by the King from time to time by
virtue of his Prerogative, without any grant from the Cominalty of the Realm
who can make no grant but by Act of Parliament; and in truth it were absurd to
aff^rme, that the great and ancient Custom imposed upon Native commodities of
the Kingdom was first granted by Act of Parliament; since it cannot be imagined
that ever those commodities did pass out of the Kingdom, without Custom,
being equal in time with the first Scepter; and since the Scepter was
established many hundred years before the people were called to be in
Parliament; besides, the very name of Custom does note and argue that it began
before any Act of Parliament was made, for that it signifies a duty payable or
accustomable to be paid time out of mind, which in presumption of Law, is
before any Record; wherefore the rules in the Lord Dyers Dyer 29.
Book are good Law, viz. The King has an Estate of Inheritance in the Custom
payable for Merchandises, as being a Prerogative annexed to his Crown. And
again, 30 Hen 8. 43. 30 H.8.43.
Custom is an Inheritance in the King by the Common Law, and not given by any
Statute.

CHAP. XI.
Of the ancient duties called Prizes, taken out of Foreign goods imported,
except Wines, and the petty-Customes of three pence of the pound were accepted
by King Edw. 1. in lieu of Prizes.

FOr the Foreign commodities which are brought into England, our Kings in
ancient times did not take any Rates, or Customs, or Sums of Money, but took
such part of the several commodities in specie, as they thought fit for their
proper use, paying for that they took a price as themselves did likewise think
fit and reasonable, which was called the Kings price; this Prerogative is
proved by the rule of the Imperial Law, Rex nonrecognoscens superiorem potest
e India in propria causa, and also by the rule which is given 31 Edw. 3. 60. 31
Fd 3.60.
where the Bishop of Norwich having forfeited to the King thirty Talents of
Beasants of Gold, because the quantity and value thereof was uncertain, it was
adjudged that the Kings House should set down of what quantity and value every
Talent should be, and that the same should be paid accordingly; and by the same
Prerogative, whenever any Subject is to pay a Fine or Ransom unto the King
for a contempt, The King himself does limit and set the Fine or Ransom at his
own will or pleasure.

The Foreign commodities thus taken by the King in Spain, at his own price,
were called Prizes, but because these prizes were many times grievances to the
Merchants, and brought little or nothing to the Kings Coffers, That prudent
Prince Edw. 1. by that famous Charter called Charta Mercatoria, made in the 31
year of his reign, did remit unto all Merchant Strangers their prizes, and did
grant quod de caetero super mercimonia Merchandizas vel bona ipsorum per ipsum
Regem vel Ministros suos nullos nulla appretiatio vel estimatio apponeretur,
and quod nulla prisa vel arrestatio ratione prisae inde fieret, etc. and the
Charter does further recite, That for the remission of these prizes the
Merchants Strangers did grant unto the King three pence upon the pound, now
called the petty-custome, out of all Foreign Merchandises imported, except
Wines; and for our Native commodities exported, they would pay for every Sack
of Wool four pence, and for every three hundred Wooll-fells six shillings and
four pence, and for every last of Leather a demi mark, over and above the
duties payable by Denizens for the same commodities; which grant being made by
the Merchants of every Nation, not being incorporated and made a body politic,
is in respect of them of no force of the rule of the common Law, until the
Kings charter made it good and maintained it, until it was confirmed by
Parliament 27 Edw. 3. 27 E.3.
which was fifty years after the date of the Charter, upon the matter these
duties payable by Merchant Strangers, were only Impositions raised and
established by the Kings charter, which Charter being made in England, was
after wards established, exemplised under the Great Seal of England, and
transmitted into Ireland, with a special Writ directed to the Officers of the
Customs there, to levy three pence of the pound, and other duties mentioned in
that Charter, as appears in the Red Book of the Exchequer there; by virtue of
which Writ only, without Act of parliament, the three pence of the pound and
other duties were levied and paid to the Crown in Ireland.

CHAP. XII.
Of the ancient Customs payable for Wines, called Prizage and Butlerage.

THe most ancient Custom payable for Wines is Prizage, Prizage and Butlerage.
which is not any sum of Money, but two Tunns of Wine in specie, out of every
Ship freighted with twenty Tun, the one to be taken before the Mast, and the
other behind the Mast of the Ship; and the price which the King himself did
limit to pay, was twenty shillings only, for every Tun, as appears by an
ancient Record of 52 Hen. 3. 52 H.3
whereby we may conjecture, what easy rates the King gave for the prizes of
other Merchandises. This Custom of Prizage was merely an Imposition, for it
could not be granted by the Merchants of Foreign Nations, being no body
politic, as is before declared; neither is there any Act of Parliament whereby
our own Merchants did ever grant it unto the Crown.

This duty of Prizage was remitted unto the Stranger, by the Charter of 31 Edw.
1. 31 Ed.1.
before mentioned, and in lieu thereof, by virtue of the same Charter, the King
before mentioned receives two shillings for every Tun of Wine brought in by
Strangers, which we now call Butlerage; but Prizage is paid in Specie by all
our own Merchants at this day, the Citizens of London only excepted, who having
remission of Prizage by a special charge, were charged with a new Imposition
called Gauge, viz. de quolibet dolio 1 d. de vinis venientibus London, which
was accounted Foreign, Magno Rot. An. 1 Edw. 1. in the Office of the Pipe at
Westminster; the last of these Impositions, which by the continuance have
gotten the name of Custom, was laid and imposed three hundred years since, and
have ever since been approved, and are now maintained by the Common Law of
England, as the lawful and ancient Inheritance of the Crown.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the ancient Officers which our Kings have created by virtue of their
Prerogatives, to search and over-see all sorts of Merchandises, and to collect
the duties payable for the same.

AS our ancient Kings by virtue of their Prerogative without Parliament, have
laid the Customs or Impositions before expressed, upon all sorts of
Merchandises exported and imported; so by the same Prerogative have they
ordained several sorts of Officers to search and over-see those Merchandises
on which they had laid those Impositions, namely the Gauger Gauger.
of Wines, a high Officer, is as ancient as the Imposition of the Gauge it self
before mentioned; the Alneger Alneger.
of the cloths which is more ancient than any Act of Parliament that makes
mention of the cloths, for there is a Record of 14 Edw. 2. 14 Ed.2.
in Archivis turris which speaks of the Alneger, the Packer of Woolls, the
Garbellor of spices; besides, the Officer of the Customs, viz. the Customer
Comtroller and Searcher; Customer. Comtroller. Searcher
all which Officers have ever taken Fees of Merthants, both Denizens and
Aliens, not by grant of the Merchants or Act of Parliament, but by virtue of
their several Patents granted from the King.

CHAP. XIV.
Of other Impositions, besides the ancient Customs before mentioned, laid upon
Merchandises, by several Kings and Queens since the Conquest; some of which
Impositions have been discontinued or remitted, and some of them are continued
and paid at this day; and first of the Imposition set by King Edw. 1. over and
besides the Customs spoken of before.

IT appears in the Record of the Exchequer of England, That in 16 Edw. 1. an
Imposition of four shillings was laid upon every Tun of Wine brought into
England, from certain Towns in Gascogine and Spain, and at this day answered
and compted for duty, for the space of ten years, until the 26 Edw. 1. when it
was remitted but during the Kings pleasure only; it appears likewise 25 Edw.
1. 25 E.1.
by the Charter of the confirmation then made of the Great Charter, that King
Edw. 1. had for diverse years before, set and laid an Imposition of forty
shillings upon every Sack of Wool exported, which ad instantiam Communitatis
he was pleased to remit; which remittall was of mere Grace, upon the Petition
of the Commons, after that Imposition had been laid many years before; and it
is to be noted, that this Imposition of forty shillings upon a Sack of Wool,
was taken and levied above twenty years together, after the new Imposition of
the demi mark upon a Sack of Wool, which was set and established; for that
begun in 3 Edw. 1. and this Imposition of forty shillings continued till 25
Edw. 1. which is a strong argument that the first establishment of the demi
mark, was not by a binding Act of Parliament, with a Negative voice, that no
other duties should be taken for those Merchandises, as was surmized, but was
only a mitigation or reducement of a greater Custom paid before, which was
done of mere Grace, upon some reason of State at that time.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Imposition set and taken by King Edward the second.

KIng Edward the second, in the beginning of his Reign, did as well take the
ancient as the new Custom upon Wool, Wooll-fells, and Leather, which ancient
Custom must needs be intended an ancient Imposition over and besides the demi
mark, which was then called the new Custom, and this appears by a Record in
the Tower, 3 Ed. 2. Ed.2.
Claus. memb. 16. where the King directs his Writ, collectoribus suis tam
antiquae quam novae customae lanarum pellium and corriorum, and requires them
to pay certain Debts of his Fathers, King Edward 1. out of their old and new
Customs, and a hundred thousand pound pro damnis occasion retardationis
solutionis debitis, etc. and howbeit afterward, he being a weak Prince and
misguided by ill Counsel, and overruled by his unruly Barons, was driven
first to suspend the payments of his Customs of three pence the pound, and
other duties contained in Charta Mercatoria, during pleasure only, as appears
by his Writs of Supersedeas, directed to the Collectors of his Customs, 3 E.
2. Claus. memb. 16. and after that by an Ordinance made 5 Edw. 2. utterly to
repeal that Charter, and to abloish all other Impositions raised or levied
since the coronation of his Father, Ed. 1. except the customs of the demi
mark; not withstanding after that, again Anno 11. of his Reign, when he wanted
Money for his Expedition 11 E.2.
into Scotland, exquirentes vias says he in his Writ to the collectors of his
customs The Writ to his Collecttors of his Customs.
at London, Rot. fin. memb. 12. in Archivis turris, quibus possemus pecuniam
habere commodius and decentius, tandem de consilio and advisamento quorundam
mercatorum inveniemus subscriptum, which was, that he should receive by way of
loan forsooth (which never was repaid) a greater increase of custom upon all
merchandises imported and exported, for it is expressed in the Writ, that
praeter incrementum de lanis coriis and pellibus lanutis, which was a third
part more than the demi mark, viz. twenty shillings for every Noble; the King
was to receive for every colored cloth worth three pound sterling, a Noble;
for every other cloth worth forty shillings, four shillings; for every piece
of Scarlet, a Mark; for every Tun of Wine, five shillings; for all Foreign
commodities called Averdepois, two shillings the pound; all which sums of Money
he commands the Collectors of his customs Collectors of his Customs.
to collect to his use upon their Merchandises; which levy or collection,
though it bear the name of a loan, being not made by authority of Parliament,
nor with the consent of the whole cominalty, but taken up by the Kings Writ
only, was nothing else but an Imposition laid upon Merchandises by the Kings
Prerogative.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Impositions laid and levied upon Merchandises, by King Edward 3.

KIng Edward the third reigned a full Jubilee of years, for he dyed in the
fiftieth year of his reign; and during all this time, as there lay upon him a
continual charge for the continuance of his Wars, so was he continually
supplied with his customs and Impositions which he had laid upon Merchandises,
whereof he was so great a husband, and by reason of his good husbandryspent
such huge sums of Money, as there went a report in those days, that Raimundus:
Lullius Raimundus Lullius.
the famous Alchimist, did make that Elixer for him, whereas his improving of
those duties which were paid for Merchandises, was the true Philosophers Stone,
which did enrich him, and enable him to spend so many Millions in his Wars in
France.

In the first year of his reign, by his wit only, without Act of Parliament, he
gave new life to Charta Mercatoria, made by Edw. 1. and repealed by Edw. 2. or
rather by unruly Barons, for the words of the Writ are, That the customs and
duties payable by the Charter, praetextu ordinationum per quosdam magnates in
regno nostro factos, ad tempus aliquod cessarunt, and jam adnullatis diciis
ordinationibus colligi debent and levari, sicut tempore dicti Avi nostri, etc.
1 Edw. 1. 1 Ed.1.
Rot. fin. memb. 39. Rot. fin. m.30. in Archivis Turris.
in Archivis turris.

Afterward the Records of this Kings time do plentifully declare, That he by
virtue of his Prerogative, without Act of Parliament, laid many great
Impositions, and raised extraordinary profit upon Merchandises, though not
always after one manner, yet all the means he used may be reduced unto three
kinds.

Sometimes he did impose certain rates or sums of Money upon Merchandises, as
forty shillings upon a Sack of Wool, with a ratable proportion upon other
commodities, for levying whereof he only sent out his Writs to the Collectors
of his Customs in every Port; and this kind of Imposition being of the nature
of the Impositions now in question, was more usual and frequent than any other
in this Kings reign, as appears by sundry Records Le Records.
in the Exchequer, and in the Tower of London, 17 E. 3. Rot. 308. in Sccio
Angliae. 17 Ed:3. Rot.308. in Sccio. Angliae, etc:
21 E. 3. Rot. Parliament. numb. 11. in Arch. turris, 24 F. 3. Rot. 12. Sccio
Angliae. 25 E. 3. Rot. Parliament. 11, 22. in Arch. turris. 27 E. 3. Rot. 7. in
Sccio Angliae. 30 E. 3. Rot. 10. Sccio Angliae. 38 E. 3. Rot.Parliament. numb.
26. in Arch. turris. 40 E. 3. Rot.7. Sccio Angliae. 50 E. 3. Rot. Parliament.
numb. 163. in Arch. turris.

At other times he sent out Commissions to take up great quantities of Wool
and other commodities, at a low price, set by himself, and transported the same
beyond the Seas, where he made the best profit thereof, for payment of the
wages of his Army there, as appears by a special Record in the Tower, 12 E.
3. Rot. Almaniae pars 1. numb. 3. 12 Ed.3. Rot. Almaniae. pars 1. numb.3.
in dorso. These taking prizes of English Merchandises, are the first I find in
any Record (for the Kings provision of Household, is of another nature.) But the
King took these Woolls in point of Prerogative, as his Predecessors were wont
to take prizes of all Foreign commodities, until King E. 1. did remit all
prizes to Merchant Strangers, by Charta Mercatoria, as is before expressed; and
also such of English Merchants as would pay the customs restrained by that
Charter, were offered the like immunition from prizes, 31 Ed. 3. Rot.
Parliament, numb. 24. 31 Ed.3.Rot.Parl.numb.24
But our English Merchants refused the benefit of that Charter, and therefore
the King it seems was at liberty to take prizes of them as well as Strangers.

The King did many times shut up all the Ports, and stop all Trade, and then
granted licenses to all particular persons to transport Wool and other
commodities, for which licenses he took forty shillings, sometimes fifty
shillings for a Sack of Wool, and the like rate for other Merchandises, and
this is manifest by these Records, 13 Ed. 3. 13 Ed.1.
Rot. 2. in Sccio Angliae, 14 Edw. 3. 14 Ed.3.
Rot. Parliament. in Arch. Turris.

Thus did this warlike and politic Prince, King Edw. 3. by his Prerogative,
without Act of Parliament, lay sundry Impositions and charges upon all sorts of
Merchandises; and although upon Petition of his Subjects in Parliament, when
they granted him other Aids and Subsidies of greater value than these his
Impositions, he did many times remit and release those Impositions, yet did he
often times renew the same, or impose the like again, when the Aid or Subsidy
granted in recompense was speut, as shall be showed more particularly when I
com to answer the Objections which have been against His Majesty's rightful
prerogative, in laying Impositions upon Merchandises.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Profits raised unto the Crown out of Merchandises during the reigns of
several Kings who succeeded K. Edw. 3. until the reign of Queen Mary.

TRue it is, that during the reign of these Princes, we find no Impositions
directly set upon Merchandises by their absolute power or prerogative; but they
did not forbear to lay Impositions directly, for that they wanted right so to
do, or because they doubted of their right in that behalf; for they well knew
they had the same right, the same prerogative, and absolute power that their
Predecessors had; but because they found other means to make other profit upon
transporting of Merchandises, and that in another manner, and in so high
measure, as the trade of Merchandises in those days could hardly bear any
greater charge, without danger of overthrowing all Trade and Comerce: And
therefore those Princes did in their wisdoms forbear to lay any further
Impositions by their Prerogatives: For these Kings who reigned after King Edw.
3. who conquered Callis in France, and before Queen Mary lost Callis, had two
principal ways and means to raise extraordinary profits upon Merchandises,
but proceeding from one cause, namely, from establishing the Staple at Callis;
for King Edw. 3. some few years before his death, did by his Prerogative in
point of Government, without Act of Parliament, erect a Staple at his Town of
Callis, Staple at Callis.
and did ordain, and command, that all the Merchandises exported out of
England, Wales, and Ireland, by any Merchant Denison, or Alien, should
presently be carried to the Staple at Callis, and to no other place beyond the
Seas. This Staple at Callis was first settled and fixed there by an Ordinance
which the King made by virtue of his Prerogative and absolute power in the
government of Trade and Comerce, without Act of Parliament: And if this
Ordinance so made had been thought unlawful, and against the liberty of the
Subject, it would never have been approved and confirmed by the Judgments of
so many Parliaments in the times of Rich 2. Hen. 4. Hen. 5. and Edw 4. Neither
could there have been such heavy penalties laid by those Parliaments upon the
transgressors of those Ordinances: Insomuch as in the time of King Henry the
sixth, it was made Felony to Transport any Merchandises to any part beyond the
Seas but to Callis only. Now the Staple of Callis being thus established,
there did arise a double profit to the Crown for transportieg of Merchandises
over and above the ancient Customs and other Subsidies granted by Parliament.

First it came to pass, that the Customs and Subsidies for Merchandises
transported out of England, Wales, and Ireland, which before was single, and
paid but once, that is, upon the outgate; after the establishing of the Staple
at Callis, the duties for the same Merchandises became double at the least, and
for the most part treble, and were ever paid twice, and for the most part
thrice; namely, once upon the outgate in the Ports of England, Wales, and
Ireland; secondly, upon the ingate at Callis; and because all the commodities
brought into Callis could not be vented into the main Land there, but the
greatest part was to be exported again by Sea into higher or lower Germany, and
other the North East Countries, and some into Spain, and Italy, and the Islands
of the Levant, there did arise a third payment of Customs and Subsidies for so
much of their commodities as were exported again cut of Callis, by means
whereof the Customs and Subsidies did amount to threescore thousand, or
threescore and ten thousand pounds sterling, per annum,in the latter times of
King Edw. 3. E.3.
and during the reign of Rich. 2. Hen. 4. Hen. 5. R.2.H.4.H.5.
and the beginning of the reign of Hen. 6. as appears by the Records of the
Exchequer of England, which according to the valuation of Moneys at this day,
the ounce of Silver being now raised from two shillings to five shillings, do
make two hundred thousand pound sterling, per annum, which does equal, or
surmount all the Customs, Subsidies, and Impositions received at this day,
though that plenty of money, and price of all things, and consequently the
expenses of the Crown be exceedingly increased in these times.

And albeit the breach of Amity between the Crown of England and the Duke of
Burgundy, who was the Lord of the Lower Germany, in the weak and unfortunate
time of King Hen. 6. did cause a stop of Trade between us, and that Country
into which the greatest part of our Staple wares, especially Wool and Cloth
were vented, and uttered, and was likewise the cause of loss of all our
Territories in France, except Callis, and all the Merchandises thereof, whereby
the Customs, and other duties payable for Merchandises were in the time of
that unhappy Prince withdrawn, and diminished to a low proportion; yet
afterward upon the Marriage of Margaret, Sister to King E. 4. unto the Lord
Duke of Burgundy, as that in honor of the English Wool, which brought so much
Gold into his Country, he instituted the Order of the Golden Fleece; and
thereupon the Customs, Subsidies, and Impositions were raised again to so high
a Revenue, as our Kings could not well, in policy, strain that strength of
profit upon Merchandises any higher.

Secondly, albeit the Staple established at Callis being first established by
an order made by the Kings Prerogative and absolute power, was afterward
approved and confirmed by sundry Acts of Parliament, yet did the King by
another Prerogative retain a power to dispense with that Ordinance, and those
Acts of Parliament, and to give license to such, and so many Merchants as
himself thought fit, to export any Merchandises out of England, Wales, and
Ireland, unto any other parts beyond the Seas besides, a non obstante of the
first Ordinance, and of the Statutes which did establish the Staple at Callis.
By virtue of this Prerogative and power, the several Kings who had Callis in
their possessions, did grant so many Licenses to Merchants, as well Aliens as
Denizens, to transport our Staple commodities immediately into other places
without coming to Callis, for which Licenses, whereof there are an incredible
number found in the Records of England, the Merchants paid so dear for their
commodities, especially the Genoeses, and the Venetians, and other Merchants of
the Levant, as by the profits made of those Licenses did amount to double the
value of those Customs and Subsidies payable for exportation thereof; and
thereof those Princes as they had the less need, so had they no reason at all
to charge the Trade of Merchandises with any other, or greater Impositions.

In these two points before expressed do consist the principal cause why the
Princes of England who succeeded King Edw. 3. who won Callis, until the reign
of Queen Mary, who lost Callis, did not directly use their Prerogative in
setting any other Impositions upon Merchandises above the ancient Customs and
Subsidies granted by Parliament: For it is to be observed, that most part of
those Princes who reigned after K. Edw. 3. and before Queen Mary, had the
Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage granted unto them by Parliament, which being
added to the gain of the Staple of Callis, did augment not a little the profit
laid upon Merchandises. And may be a reason likewise why those Kings did
forbear to lay any other Impositions by their Prerogative.

We may add hereunto other reasons. First, Rich. 2. was a Minor, and overruled
by the great Princes of the Blood, who would not suffer him to use his
Prerogative.

Secondly, that during the Wars of Lancaster and York there was no fit time to
make use of that Prerogative, while both parties did strive to win the favor
of the people.

Thirdly, that King Hen. 7. had much ado to settle himself in the quiet
possession of the Kingdom after those troubles.

Fourthly, that King H. 8. had such a mass of Treasure left him by his Father,
and did so enrich himself by dissolution of Abbyes, as he had no need to make
use of this Prerogative.

Fifthly, that K. E. 6. was also a Minor, and that his chiefest Council did more
contend to advance their own houses than the Kings profit.

CHAP. XVIII.
That Queen Mary did use her Frerogative in laying Impositions upon
Merchandises.

QUeen Mary, in whose time the Town of Callis was lost, and consequently the
benefit of the Staple at Callis was lost, did by her absolute power, as
appears by the Report of the Lord Dyer, 1 Eliz. Dyer 165. Dyer 165 12 Eliz.
raise an Imposition upon Clothes, viz. six shillings and eight pence upon
every Cloth, over and above all Customs and Subsidies. True it is, that the
Merchants petitioned to be disburthened of this Imposition, which was referred
to the consideration of the Justices, and others; whereupon they had many
assemblies and conference, as that Book reports: And albeit the Resolution of
the Judges in that behalf be not found in that book, it is to be presumed, That
they adjudged the Imposition to be just and lawful, because it was continued
and answered during all the Reign of Queen Mary. This Queen Mary likewise by
her Preroonely, laid and Imposition of four Marks upon every Tun of French
Wines over and above the Prizage and Buttlerage, which during her life time was
paid without contradiction.

CHAP. XIX.
That Queen Elizabeth alsoused her Prerogative in laying Impositions upon
Merchandises.

QUeen Elizabeth also by virtue of the same Prerogative, did not only continue
the Impositions laid by Queen Mary upon Cloths and French Wines, but did raise
other Impositions of sundry sorts of Merchandises by the same absolute power;
namely, upon every Tun of sweet Wines, upon every Tun of Rhenish Wines, upon
every Kental of Allom, which during the time of the prudent Princess were paid
and received without question. Besides, the same Queen, upon complaint made
unto her in the twelfth year of her Reign, That the State of Venice did impose
one Ducket upon every hundred of Currants exported out of their Dominions by the
Merchants of England, did by her Letters Patents, grant unto the English
Merchants who traded into the Levant, That they only, and their Assigns, might
bring Currants into England. 12 Eliz.
The English Merchants having this privilege, did take five shillings and six
pence upon every hundred weight of Currants brought into England by Strangers,
which was duly paid, although it was taken by the Merchants by virtue of their
privilege only of sortiori; yet it ought to have been paid if it had been
payable to the Queen her self, as the Lord Chief Baron Fleming did observe in
his Argument of Bates's case of Currants in the Court of Exchequer in England.

CHAP. XX.
That our Sovereign Lord King James has by virtue of the same Prerogative,
without Act of Parliament, laid several Impositions upon Merchandises.

HIS Majesty likewise when he came to be King of England finding his Crown to
be seized of this Prerogative, and finding withal the necessary charge of the
Crown exceedingly to increase, did for the supportation thereof, not only
continue the Impositions laid by Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, but also laid
new Impositions upon sundry sorts of Merchandises, over and above all Customs
and Subsidies formerly due and payable for the same: And these are the
Impositions now; the principal of these is twelve pence upon the pound, or a
second poundage set upon Merchandises as well exported as imported, by Letters
Patents 28. July, Letters Patents 28, July, 6. Iac.
in the sixth year of his Majesty's Reign; but how is it set and imposed,
surely with such moderation, and limitations, and such receptations full of
grace and favor, as no Monarch or State in the world did ever impart to their
Subjects the like in the like case; for, besides other gracious clauses
contained in the same Letters Patents, All commodities serving either for food,
or sustenance of the Kings people, or seting the poor on work, or for munition
or defense of the Realm, or for maintenance of Navigation, or which especially
tends to the enriching of a Kingdom, are excepted and discharged by this
Imposition.

As for the special Impositions which his Majesty has set upon certain foreign
commodities, as Currants, Logwood, Tobacco, etc. As touching the first of these,
the Imposition has been adjudged lawful in the Court of Exchequer of England:
And for the other commodities, they are of such nature, as no man ever made
question but that the Impositions set upon them were lawful. Besides these
Impositions laid in England, his Majesty by his Prerogative only, since the
beginning of his Reign, received the Impost of Wines in Ireland; and has
likewise, to make equality of Trade in that Realm, laid an Imposition of twelve
pence on the pound of all other Merchandises imported and exported out of the
Ports of Dublin, Waterford, Drogheda, and Galway, the Citizens of which Cities
and Towns are exempted and discharged of Poundage granted by Act of Parliament
there, which Imposition was never impugned in Ireland, but has since the
setting thereof been levied and paid without contradiction. And that we see
how long the Crown of England has been seized of this Prerogative, in laying
Impositions upon Merchandises, and how the same has been put in practice by
the most prudent Princes since the Conquest.

CHAP. XXI.
The general reasons whereupon this Prerogative is grounded.

ALthough it be a matter of difficulty, and does savor withal of curiosity
and presumption, to search a reason for every Prerogative that is incident to
the Crown; for Sacrilegii est disputare de Principis facto, says the Imperial
Law; and Scrutator Majestal is opprimitur a gloria, says the Wise man: Yet the
reasons whereupon this Prerogative is grounded are so many, and manifest, as it
were not amiss to collect the principal of them, rather for the confirmation,
than the satisfaction of such as have moved this question touching the
lawfulness of Impositions laid by his Majesty upon Merchandises.

First, the King is the Fountain of all Justice, and therefore the first reason
drawn from the Kings charge in doing Justice, and procuring Justice to be done
to Merchants, not only distributive Justice, wherein consists Praemium and
Paena, but co^mutative Justice is also derived from the King. Now his Majesty
does exercise commutative Justice chiefly in the ordering and government of
Trade and Comerce, wherein he is to do Justice, or to procure Justice to be
done to his Subjects, who do make contracts real and personal within the Land:
But to his Merchants that trade and traffic with Foreign Nations, and to
Strangers that trade and traffic with us, for the Administration of
co^mutative Justice within the Land, the King receives sundry profits, which
grew first by way of Imposition. A man cannot recover a Debt in the Kings
Court, but first he pays the King a Fine for his first Process: Land cannot
be conveyed by a Common Recovery but a Fine for the Original must be paid to
the King. Neither can Land be passed from one to another by Fine in the Kings
Court, but the Kings Silver must be paid, pro licentia concordandi. Add
hereunto the profit of the Seals in all the Kings Courts, for all manner of
Writs: And yet the King in Charta magna did promise, Nulli negabimus, nulli
vendemus Iustitiam vel rectum; but the Kings taking of these, and the like
Duties, is no breach of the great Charter, for that the same was imposed by the
King long before the Charter was made and taken, ut Ministerii sui stipendia,
as the Schoolman speaks; and withal to recompense the charge of the Crown in
maintaining the Court of Justice: See Bodin lib. 6. de Repub. cap. 2. Bodin
lib. 6: de repub. ca.2.
where he speaks of the like profit made upon the Process in France: And
shows that the ancient Romans did the like: And the Emperor Caligula Caligula:
took the fortieth penny of that which was demanded in every several Civil
Action. If then such profits be taken for the King in his Courts of Justice
within the Land, toward the charge which he sustaineth in the maintenance of
these Courts and the Offices thereof, which duties were at first limited and
imposed by the King himself without any Act of Parliament; for who ever heard
of an Act of Parliament whereby the same were granted? Is there not as good
reason why the charge of the King in doing Justice, and procuring Justice to be
done unto Merchants, whose residence and comerce is for the most part out of
the Land, should be recompensed out of Merchandises imported, and exported, not
according to the will of the Merchant, and pleasure of the people, out
proportionable according to the Kings charge, which being best known to
himself, it is most meet that the recompense should be limited by himself?

Touching the charge of the King in doing, and appointing Justice to be done to
Merchants; Are not all Leagues, Truces, and Treaties of State with Foreign
Princes, wherein the public Trade and Comerce of Merchants are ever included,
concluded, and made at the Kings charge? Did not the Kings Council of State,
and high Court of Chancery give more speedy hearing to the causes of Merchants
than to the causes of other Subjects? Does not the King maintain a Court of
Admiralty for deciding of Marine causes, which do for the most part concern
Merchants? Does he not bear the charge of several Le^ger Ambassadors in Italy,
in Spain, in France, in the Low Countries, in Turkey, whose principal
Negotiation does consist in procuring Justice to be done to our Merchants? And
if our Merchants do suffer wrong in any Foreign Country by reason of any
defective neglect in doing Justice there, does not the King by his Prerogative
grant them Letters of Mart, or Reprisal, that they may right themselves, which
is a Species justi Belli, as the Civilians call it? And if the injury done to
the Merchants be multiplied and continued with a high hand, Is it not the
Kings Office to denounce and prosecute War against such a people as does refuse
to do Justice unto his Merchants? For this cause the Romans began the first
Punick War, says Appian, Cicero Appian. Cicero.
in his Oration pro Lege Manlia, affirms, Populum Romanum saepe Mercatoribus
Injuria suis tractata bella gessisse. Briefly, the plenty of Money being
greater in this Age than ever was there by reason of so many Millions of Gold
and Silver brought from the Indies into Europe, and the price of all
Merchandises being withal greatly enhanced, and the charges and expenses of
Princes exceedingly increased, is it meet or just that the King at this day
should be stinted or bound to that old Demimark only for Native commodities,
or the three pence of the pound for the Foreign commodities which Edw. 1. was
content to accept of four hundred years since, or a single poundage only,
which in the time of King Edw. 4. was not sufficient to maintain the necessary
charges of keeping the Sea, as the Acts of Parliament, 12 Edw. 4. cap. 5. 12
Ed.4.cap.5.
which grants that Subsidy to the King, recites all the Kings charge in
supporting the Trade of Merchants being unlimited, and infinite: And shall the
duties payable for Merchandises be stinted and restrained to such a proportion
only as the Subject shall be pleased to grant unto him? Assuredly if the King
had not a Prerogative of his own absolute power without Act of Parliament, to
increase the duties payable for Merchandises at this day, a Merchants
Counting House would be richer than the Kings Exchequer; and the Subject who
may live privately, and moderate his expenses, and yet raise the Fines of his
Coppyholds, and Rents of his Demeans without controlement, would be in better
case than the King, who by reason of the Majesty of his Estate cannot abridge
his charges, and yet should have no power of himself without leave of his
Subjects to increase his Revenue.

Again, the King is not only at charge in doing of Justice to his Merchants at
home, and in procuring Justice to be done to them abroad, but the does withal
maintain a Royal Navy of Ships, the best, the fairest, the strongest in the
world at this day, to protect all Merchants from spoil and Piracy on the sea.
In the maintenance of this Navy, the King does expend more Treasure than the
whole Revenue of some of his Predecessors did amount to.

And he does not only secure Merchants by Sea, but he gives them safe conduct
by Land also, as appears by the great Charter: So as they may well give our
King that title which Virgil Virgil.
gives to the King of Bees, Ille operum custos: And seeing Merchants are most
likely resembled to those Industrious creatures, because they bring the honey to
the Kings Hives, to wit, to his Havens and Ports, where they, and their
Merchandises be protected and reserved, why should they not imitate the Bees
in observing their King, and in making him partaker of the fruit of their
labors? Neither is it a new thing, or an invention of this Age, to lay
Impositions upon Merchants for their Wastage and Protection at Sea; for Plinius
tells us, lib. 19. cap 4. Plin.lib.19.cap.4.
Merces praetiosae ut ex India, Arabia, Ethiopia, tuto in Europam a
Mercatoribus conveherentur, necessario classem parandam esse adversas Piraticas
incursiones, inde maritimi exercitus habendi causa vectigal rubri maris
institutum.

A third reason drawn from the Interest the King, has in the parts of the
Kingdom, and the custody thereof, which gives him power to shut and open the
fame at his pleasure.

Again, all the Ports of the Kingdom are the Kings, not only the CinquePorts,
which have a special Warden appointed by the King, but the rest of the Ports
are also his, and many of them bear a mark of the Kings Inheritance in their
Additions, as Linn Regis, Waymouth, Melcombe Regis, Pool Regis; for the King is
Custos totius Angliae Regni; as the four Seas are the Walls of the Kingdom, so
the Havens and Creeks are the Gates, and Posterns of it. They are Ostia, they
are Ianua Regni; and we find two Ports in Italy called by those names, the one
at the mouth of Tiber, the other corruptly called Genoa, but the true name
thereof is Ianua. And as the Havens are Ianua Regni, the King himself is Ianus,
and has power to open and shut them at his pleasure.

Omnia sunt nostra clausa patentque manu. Says Ianus in the Poet. And again,
Modo namque patulchus idem and modo sacrifico Clusius ore vocor.

The King of England has ever had this Prerogative incident to his Crown, to
shut and open the Ports when it pleased him, as appears by many Records,
especially by the Parliament Rolls in the time of King Edw. 3. Tempore Edw.3.
wherein are found many Petitions that the Sea might be open, which during that
Kings time was often shut by virtue of his Prerogative only, and never fully
opened again, but when the King laid an Imposition upon Merchandises.

And this Prerogative of Custody of the Ports, and of shutting and opening the
same, is reserved unto the Crown upon an excellent reason: For Trade and
Comerce is not fit to be holden with all persons, neither are all things fit to
be imported or exported: For such persons as are enemies to the Crown, and come
to discover Arcana Regni, such persons as come to corrupt Religion, or the
manners of the people, such persons as under color of Merchandises come to set
up Monopolies, or a dry Exchange to drain or draw away our commodities or money
out of the Kingdom, are not fit to enter in at the Gates of the Kingdom. And
again, such commodities as the Kingdom cannot spare, as Corn in time of dearth,
and such as may advantage our Enemies and hurt us in time of War, as Horses,
Armor, Gunpowder, etc. are not fit to be exported out of the Realm: And
Poisons, Heretical books, and other things which are apparently hurtful to the
people, are not to be imported; and therefore the Prerogative of opening and
shutting the Ports is accompanied with another absolute power, of stoping and
imbarring of Trade and Comerce, sometimes generally, sometimes between us and
particular Nations, and sometimes for particular Merchandises only, whereof
there are many presidents and examples both in Records and Histories of our
Nation, 2 Edw. 1. 2 Edw.1.
Rot. Parliament. m. 18. in Archivis Turris. 2 Edw. 3. 2 Edw.3.
Rot. fin. m. 17 ibid. 10 Edw. 3. 10 Ed.3.
Chaunc. m. 3. in dorso ibid. 17 Hen. 6. 17 Hen.4
Sccio Angliae, Matthew Paris Hist. Magna P. 568. Matthew Paris Histor. Magna
p. 568.
10 Hen. 7 Stow. 10 Hen.7 Stow
And this Prerogative of imbarring Trade, does result out of the undoubted
Prerogative which the King has to make Peace and War with Foreign Nations, for
open War is no sooner denounced, but all Trade of Merchandise is stopped and
imbarred between the Nations which are engaged in the War, durante bello
inter Reges Christianos merces quascunque exportare vetamur ne Regni arcana
serutentur, says a Doctor of the Imperial Law; whereupon we make this
Argument, That since the King has absolute power of shut the Ports, and stop
Trade, it stands with as good reason that he should have the like power to lay
reasonable Impositions upon Merchandises for opening of the Ports, and for
giving of freedom of Trade again; he that may do the more, may do the less,
Non debet ei cui id quod majus est, id quod minus est non licere, says the
Rule of the Law; he that may prohibit Merchants not to Trade or pass, may
dispense with that prohibition, and give them leave to go and Traffic sub
modo.

Again, the King of England is Dominus Maris, which flows about the Island,
as diverse ancient Books and Records do testify, as Fitz Avowry 192. 6 Rich. 2.
protection. 46. Rot. Scotiae. m. 16. in Arch. Turris. Fitz Avowry 192.6 Rich.2.
protection 46 Rot. Scotiae. nu.16 in Arch Turris.
And he is Lord of the Sea, not only quoad protectionem and jurisdictionem, sed
quoad proprietatem, and this is our Neptunes trident, for God gave unto man as
well the Dominion of the Sea as of the Earth, where it is said, Genesis 1. Gen.1.
replete terram and subjicite eam, and dominamini piscibus maris, etc. and in
Psalm. 8. Omnia Subjecit pedibus ejus, Pisces maris and. quicquid perambulat
Semitas maris.

And therefore Baldus Baldus.
affirms, de jure Gentium distincta esse dominia in mare sicut in terra
arida, and again, mare attribuitur terrae Circunstanti. Hence it is, though
there be but one Ocean, in respect whereof the whole Earth is quasi insula,
says Strabo, Strabo.
yet is there Mare Gallicum, Sardicum, Creticum, AEgypticum, and oceanus
Britanicus, Germanicus, etc. which particular names do note a propriety in the
Princes and States, who are Lords of the Land adjoining. Hence it is that our
Common Law does give unto ourKing all the land which is gained from the Sea,
which Stampford Stampford
in the Book of the Kings Prerogative does affirm to belong to the King, de
jure Gentium, quia Mare seu particula Maris est de Territorio illius Civitatis
vel Regni cui magis appropinquat, says one learned Doctor, Mare se extendit
cum aquae flnt mensurabiles, says another; hence it is, that all navigable
Rivers, as the River of Thames, and the River of Lee, and diverse others, are
called in our Books, the Kings Streams, 19. Ass.p.6. 19. Ass.p.6.
Dyer 117. a. because cause such Rivers are arms of the Sea, so far as the Sea
does flow in them, 22. Ass. p. 93. 22.Ass.p:93.
and lastly, hence it is, that by the Common Law, the King may prohibit all
Subjects whatsoever to pass over the Seas without his license; and to that end
in 22 Edw. 4. 22 Ed.4.
the King commanded the Warden of the Cinque Ports, and the Bailifs of all
other Ports of the Kingdom, that they should not suffer any Man, Ship, or Boat,
to pass beyond the Seas, quousque Rex illud mandaverit, and the like
Commandments were given, 4 Edw. 3. 4 Edw.3.
21 Edw. 3. 21 Ed.3
16 Rich. 2. 16 Ri.2.
17 Hen. 6. 17 H.6.
If therefore the king has such an absolute Interest in the Ports, and in the
Sea, and in all Navigable Rivers wherein the Kings Ports are situated for the
main part, why should he not have the like absolute power to limit and
prescribe unto Merchants what duties they shall pay, and upon what terms and
conditions they shall pass to and fro upon the Seas, and come in and out of
his Streams and Ports with their Ships and Merchandises? Podagium in Mari debet
solvi sicut in terra si sit impositum per dominum Maris, says Baldus, and the
rights belonging to the Lord of the Sea, says another Doctor, are Ius
navigandi, jus piscandi, jus imponendi vectigalia pro utroque.

Again, the Kings of England have the like Prerogative in the government of
Trade and Comerce belonging to this Kingdom, as other Princes and States have
within their Dominions; he must of necessity have the like absolute power as
they all have to lay Impositions upon Merchandises imported and exported,
otherwise he cannot possible hold the balance of Trade upright, or perserve an
equality of Traffic between his own Subjects and the Subjects of Foreign
Princes, and consequently it will lie in the power of our Neighbors to drain
and draw away all our wealth in a short time, or else to overthrow all Trade
and Comerce between us and them at their pleasure, and we shall have no means
to encounter or avoid the mischief; for their Princes, having sole power to
impose, will have the sole making and managing of the Market between their
Subjects and us, and consequently may set what price they please upon all
Merchandises, enforcing us to sell our Commodities cheap, and buy their
Commodities dear, only by this advantage of laying Impositions.

And therefore the King of England must of necessity have the same absolute
power to lay Impositions upon Mercha^dizes, as other Princes have, as well, ut
evitetur absurdum, as to prevent the ruin of the Commonwealth, by the equal
ballancing of Trade and Comerce between his Subjects and the Subjects of Foreign
Princes. Upon this reason when the Duke of Venice, in the time of Q. Eliz. as
is before expressed, had laid an Imposition of one Ducket upon a 100 li. weight
of Currants carried out of his Dominions by any English Merchant, the Queen by
special Patent in the twelfth year of the Reign, did enable the Merchants
which did Trade into the Levant, to levy five shillings and six pence upon
every 100 li. weight of Currants brought into England by any Merchant Stranger.
Tempore.
Upon the like reason, when in the time of King Hen. 8. Henry 8.
the Emperor and the French King had raised the valuation of their moneys both
so high, as there grew not only an inequality of Trade between their Subjects,
and the Subjects of England, but our moneys standing at their former values,
were carried out of the Realm in great quantities; The King in the 24 year of
his Reign granted a Commission unto Cadinall Woolsey to enhance the values of
English moneys likewise, by that means to set balance of trade even again, and
to keep our moneys within the Realm.

Upon the same reason of State, when the King of Spain The K. of Spain's
Imposition in An. 1614.
that now is, in the year 1614. had laid an Imposition of thirty upon the
hundred on all Merchandises imported and exported by Strangers; the French King
Hen. 4. was quickly sensible of it, and did forthwith impose the like in his
Kingdom; then it followed of necessity that other Nations should follow and
imitate them, whereby it came to pass that Comerce of Merchants generally
throughout Christendom, began to decay, which being perceived by these two
great Princes, they agreed to take away those excessive Impositions, upon
several Treaties between them and the Italians, and after between them and the
English, and the Dutch.

Briefly we find examples in all ages, that whenever by reason of War, or
for any other cause, any Foreign Prince gave the least impediment to Merchants
in their Trade, our Princes gave the like entertainment to their Merchants
again; This is declared in Magna Charta, cap. 30. Magna Charta cap.30.
where it is plainly expressed what entertainment the Merchants of all Nations
should expect in England, Habeant Salvum and securum conductum (says the
Charter) Praeterquam in tempore guerrae and si fuerint de terra contra nos
guerrina, then as our Merchants are used with them, so shall their Merchants be
used with us, 46 Edw. 3. 46 Ed.3.
The Countess of Flanders having arrested the goods of the English Merchants
there, the King in recompense of their losses, granted unto them all the goods
of the Flemings in England, whereof there is a notable Record mentioned before,
1 Edw. 3. I Edw.3.
pat.m. 19. in Arch. Turris. There are many other examples of mutual
embarments of Trade between the Flemings and us, and also between us and the
French men during our Wars with France, which I omit; I will recite only one
president in the 40 year of Queen Elizabeth, Anno 40. Elizabeth
at which times the Merchants of the Haunce Towns having by sinister
information procured the Emperor to banish our English Merchants out of the
Empire; the Queen by her special Commission, did authorize the Mayor and
Sheriffs of London to repair to the Still-yard, being the Hostell of the
Haunces, to seize that House into her Majesty's hands, and there to give
warning to the Merchants of the Haunce Towns to forbear Traffic with any of
her Subjects in England, and to depart the Realm upon that very day, which was
assigned to our Merchants to depart out of the Empire.

Lastly, for the ordering and government of Trade among our own Merchants in
Foreign Countries and at home, our Kings by their Prerogatives have instituted
diverse Societies and Companies of Merchants, as the Company of Merchant.
Adventures, the Muscovia Company the Turkey Company, the East India Company,
etc. all which are created, upholden, and ruled, by the Kings Charter only;
whereupon I may conclude, that the Kings of England having the same power in
governing and ballancing Trade, as other Princes have, may justly execute the
same power, as well by laying Impositions upon Merchandises, as by the other
means which are before expressed.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the several objections that are made against the Kings Prerogative in
laying Impositions upon Merchandises, and the several Answers thereunto.

THE first Objection Object.1.
touching the property which all free Subjects have in their goods.

First, it is objected, that under a Royal Monarchy where the Prince does
govern by a positive Law, the Subjects have a property in their Goods, and
inheritance in their Lands; Ad Reges potestas omnium pertinet ad singulos
proprietas, So as the King has no such Prerogative, say they, whereby he may
take away the Lands or Goods of a Subject without his consent, unless it be in
a case of Forfeiture.

And therefore though Samuel foretold the people when they desired a King, Hoc
erit Ius Regis, tollere agros vestros, and vineas, and oliveta, and dare servis
suis: Yet Ahab, though he were a wicked King, did not claim that Prerogative
when he coveted Naboths Vineyard, neither did he enter into it until Naboth by
false witnesses was condemned and stoned to death for blasphemy, and then he
took it for a lawful Escheat; but when the King does lay an Imposition upon
Merchandises without the consent of the Merchants, and does cause the Officers
of his Customs to take and levy the same; it seems sat they, they take away
the goods of the Subject without his consent, and without cause of forfeiture,
which is not warranted either by Law of Nations, which brought in property, nor
by the Law of the Land, which does maintain property.

CHAP. XXIII.
The Answer to the first Objection.

TO this Objection The Answer to the 1. Object.
we answer, That the King does not take the Land or Goods of any without his
consent; but here we must distinguish, there is a particular and express
consent, and there is an implicit and general consent, when a man does give his
Goods, or surrender his Lands to the King by deed enrolled, or when in
Parliament which represents the body of the whole Realm, and wherein everyman
does give his consent, either by himself, or his Deputy. A subsidy is granted
to the King, there is an express consent; but when subjects who live under a
Royal Monarchy, do submit themselves to the obedience of that Law of that
Monarchy, whatsoever the Law does give to that Monarch, the subjects who take
the benefit of the Law in other things, and do live under the protection of
the Law, do agree to that which the Law gives by an implicit and general
consent, and therefore there are many cases where the King does lawfully take
the goods of a Subject without his particular and express consent, though the
same be not forfeited for any crime or contempt of the Owner.

If a Thief do steal my goods and waive them, the King may lawfully take those
goods without my particular consent, and without any fault or forfeiture of
mine; but in regard I live under the Law, which gives such wayves unto the
King, he takes not the same without my implicit consent; so if my Horse kill a
man, the King may lawfully take my Horse a Deodand without my fault or consent
in particular; but in that I have consented to the obedience of the law which
gives all Deodands to the King, he takes not my Horse without the implicit or
general consent of mine.

In the time of War the King does take my House to build a Fort, or does build
a Bulwark upon my Land, he does me no wrong, though he does it without my
consent, for my implicit consent does concur with it, for that I being a member
of the Commonweal, cannot but consent to all Acts of necessity tending to the
preservation of the Commonwealth.

So if the King does grant me a Fair or Market, with a power to take a
reasonable Toll; If a man will buy any thing in my Fair or Market, I may take
Toll of him, though I give no particular consent to the grant, because the Law
whereunto every Subject does give consent and obedience, does warrant the
taking of Toll in every Market and Fair granted by the King.

So it is in case of Impositions, the Law does warrant the Kings Prerogative to
impose upon Merchandises, as is before declared, and therefore though the
Merchants give not their particular consents to the laying of these
Impositions, yet in regard they live under the protection and obedience of the
Law, which submits it self to this Prerogative, and allow and approve the same;
it cannot be said that the King does take these Impositions of them without
their implicit and general consent.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of the second objection touching the uncertainty and unbounded largeness of
this Prerogative.

THe second Objection Object.2.
is against the uncertainty and unlimited largeness of this Prerogative, for
in other cases they say, where the King takes the goods of a Subject by his
Prerogative, there is a certainty what he may take, as in the case of way us,
he may take only the goods wayved, and no more.

In case of Deodand, he may take only the thing that causes the death of a
man, and no more.

In case of wreck, he may take only the goods that are wreckt, and no more.

In case of Wardship of Land holden in Capite, the King may take the profits of
the Land, till the Heir sues his Livery, and no longer.

In case where the King has Annum Diem and vastum, he may retain of the Lands
of the Felon attainted, which are holden of other Lords for a year and a day,
and no longer.

In all these cases there is a certainty what the King shall have, and how long
he shall have it; but in case of Imposition, the quantity or rate thereof high
or low, is left to the Kings own will or pleasure; so as if he should be
misled, as many Princes have been, with evil Counsel, he might with his
Prerogative do hurt the Commonwealth, by laying too heavy burdens upon his
Subjects; for though hitherto his Majesty has imposed upon Merchandises only
twelve pence on the pound over and above the ancient Custom and the Subsidies
granted by Parliament, yet this Prerogative being unlimitted, he may hereafter
(say they) set five shillings or ten shillings upon the pound, if it please
him, and so undo the Merchants, or discontinue and overthrow all Trade and
Comerce.

CHAP. XXV.
The Answer to the second Objection.

TO this Objection The Answer to the 2. Object.
the fittest answer is, That it is an undutifull Objection, and withal too
busy, too bold, and too presumptuous; for it is an Objection against the
wisdom of the King in point of Government, and against the bounty and
goodness of the King toward his people: the Text of the Civil Law cited
before, does call it a kind of Sacrilege to dispute of Princes Judgments or
Actions; and for the Law of England, sure I am, that it trusts the Wisdom
and Judgment of the King alone in matter of greater importance than in laying
of Impositions, or setting of rates upon Merchandises.

Is not the Kings wisdom only trusted with the absolute power of making War
and Peace with foreign Nations, whereby he may when he pleases interrupt all
Trade of Merchandising? Is not the King alone trusted with the like power of
making and decrying of moneys which is the only Medium of all Traffic and
Comerce? Is not he solely and without limitation trusted with the nomination
and creation of all Judges and Magistrates, who are to give Judgment in cases
concerning the Liberties, Lands, and Lives of all his Subjects? has not he a
sole and unlimited power to pardon all Malefactors, to dispense with all penal
Laws, to distribute all Honors, to grant to whom he pleases Protections,
Denizations, Exemptions, not only from Juries, but from all other Services of
the Commonwealth? and yet these Prerogatives if the same be not used with
judgment and moderation, may prove prejudicial to the Commonwealth, as well
as the laying of Impositions upon Merchandises. Shall therefore any undutifull
Subject make these conclusions? The King may have a continual War with
Foreign States and Princes, and so continually corrupt all courses of
Merchandises; Ergo, he shall lose his Prerogative of making War or Peace, when
himself in wisdom shall think fit so to do. The King may decry all moneys of
Gold and Silver in Bullion, and establish a Standard of Copper or Leather;
therefore he shall coin no moneys without the consent of the people. The King
may if he please, break up all the Prisons, pardon all Offenders, and so give
impunity to all Offenders; Ergo, he shall pardon no Malefactors by Act of
Parliament. These are found absurd, or rather wicked conclusions, a posse ad
esse is an absurd Argument, but a posse and nolle nobile est. The Law presumes
the King to be so noble and so wise, that all Acts done by him, or in his Name
during his Infancy, are of as good force in Law, as if the Law had bin done in
his ripest years. The Law presumes the King to be most just in all his actions,
and therefore it has these rules; the Prerogative of the King can do no wrong,
the King can commit no diffeisin, the King can make no discontinuance, and the
like, Cor Regis in manu Domini, says Solomon, Solomon.
and therefore the Law presumes, that God will ever direct him to that which
is just; is it not then too much curiosity to instruct where the Law trusts,
and too much presumption to presume against the presu^ption of the Law,
especially in the time of such a King who is the wisest, and justest, the most
religious, and most gracious King that ever reigned in Europe? Can any man
imagine that so great a Master in the Art of Government, the most prudent King
of great Britain and Ireland, the two greatest Islands in this Hemisphere, and
seated most commodiously for Traffic, which all the World knowing that the
duties paid unto him for Merchandises, are the most certain, settled, and
assured, and withal the best and richest part of his Revenues at this day,
will lay heavier Impositions upon Merchandises than they are able to bear, and
so destroy all Trade and Comerce? When King Hen. 7. Henry 7.
his most prudent Predecessor, did lend money to his Merchants to maintain
Traffic, will he for a little extraordinary profit for the time present,
pluck up at once the Root, and dry up the Fountain of this Revenue for the time
to come? it is unprobable, it is uncredible, it is impossible; But suppose that
this is credible, that the King should lay such heavy Impositions upon
Merchandises, as all Merchants should refuse to Traffic, who should lose most
by that, the King or his people? assuredly he should suffer an exceeding great
loss in his Customs; but we that are of the Commons should save by it, having
all things necessary for the Life of man within the Land, which is. Terra suis
contenta bonis, non indiga mercis. Poeta.


We should spare these vain expenses which we now make upon Foreign Commodities,
namely Cloth of Gold, Cloth of Silver, Silks, Spices, Wines, and many other
superfluous and unnecessary things, which do nourish Pride, and Luxury, Riot
and Excess amongst us, which corrupt our manners, and in the end will be the
ruin of the Commonwealth; I may therefore conclude this point, That since the
King has power by his Prerogative to lay Impositions upon Merchandises, he
has also a power coincident thereunto, to limit and rate the proportion and
quantity thereof, according to his own wisdom and reasons of State, from time
to time; for either the King must set down the rates, or the people, or the
King and people both by Act of Parliament; but if the people will not assent or
agree to a reasonable limitation thereof in Parliament, shall the King lose
those Royal Duties which all other Kings do take by virtue of their
Prerogative? it were most unreasonable, absurd, and unjust.

CHAP. XXVI.
The third objection, touching the repeal of Charta Mercatoria by King Edw. 2.
and the remitall of diverse Impositions by king Edw. 3. upon sundry Petitions of
the commons in Parliament, and the punishment of diverse Persons in Parliament
for procurtng Impositions to be set up.

THirdly, it is objected, Object.3.
that this Prerogative of laying Impositions upon Merchandises, has never at
any time been set a foot and used by any of His Majesty's Progenitors, but it
has been contradicted, and upon Petitions of the people, such Impositions have
been suspended, remitted, and abolished; first, King Edw. 1. say they, in the
31 year of his Reign, did by his Charter called Mercatoria, spoken of before,
lay the Imposition of three pence in the pound, now called the petty-Custome,
with an increase of other duties upon Merchandises imported by Strangers;
howbeit, this Imposition stood not above seven years by virtue of that Charter,
but it was discontinued and quite taken way; for in 3 Edw. 2. the Charter it
self was suspended by the Kings Writ, 3 Edw. 2. 3 Edw.2
Claus. m. 23. in Arch. Iurris, and 5 Edw. 2. 5 Edw. 2.
it was utterly repealed by a solemn Ordinance of State, Rot. Ordina. 3 Edw.2.
in Arch. Turris.

Secondly, King Edw. 3. did at sundry times during his Reign, lay several
Impositions upon Woolls and other Staple commodities, sometimes forty
shillings, sometimes fifty shillings upon a Sack of Wool, and other the like
rates upon Merchandises, yet could he never fix nor settle the same upon His
Subjects; for upon sundry Petitions of the Commons in Parliament, who found
themselves grieved therewith, these Impositions were from time to time
remitted, 13 Edw. 3. 13 Ed.3.
Rot. Parliament. in Arch. Turris. 14 Edw. 3. 14 Ed.3.
cap. 21. 17 Ed 3. Rot. Parliament. numb. 12. 12 Ed. 3. 12 Ed.3.
Rot. Parliament. numb. 11.

Again, the same King many times did shut up all the Ports, and thereby
restrained the exportation of Merchandises; then would he take great sums of
Money to grant licenses to transport, which proved as great a charge as
Impositions, and yet upon sundry complaints of the people in Parliament, the
Sea was set open, and liberty of Trade permitted again, Stat. 18 Edw. 3. 18
Ed.3.
cap. 3. 22 Edw. 3. 22 Ed.3.
Rot. Parliament.numb. 8. in Arch. Turris: 13 Edw. 3. in Sccio Angliae. Rot.
12. 13 Edw. 3. 13 Ed.3.
Rot. Parliament. numb. 5. in Arch. Turris.

Lastly, in the last year of this Kings Reign, diverse persons were accused and
punished in Parliament, for procuring new Impositions to be set upon
Merchandises, namely, the Lord Latimer, Lord Latimer
who albeit he were a Noble man, and a Privy Counselor to the King, yet was he
fined, committed to the Mafhalsce, and put out of the Council, 50 Edw. 3. Rot.
Parliament. nu. 34 in Arch. Turris. Richard Lions Richard Lions.
likewise, a Citizen of London, and Farmer of the Customs, an Instrument of
the L. Latimers in raising the new Impositions, was sined, ransomed, and
imprisoned, and put from the Franchise of the City. 50 Edw. 3. Rot.
Parliament. numb. 17. in Arch. Turris. And one John Peachy, I. Peachy
who had gotten a Monoply of Sweet Wines, by Letters Patents, and by color
thereof had extorted three shillings and four pence out of every Pipe or
Vessel of Wine vented by others, was also fined and imprisoned, and made
satisfaction to the parties grieved, 50 Edw. 3. 50 Ed. 3. Rot. Parli. numb. 33.
Rot. Parli. numb. 33. and more than this, a Bill was preferred by the Commons
in this Parliament, that such as should set new Impositions, should have
Judgment of life and member, 50 Edw.3. Rot. Parliament. number. 191. in Arch.
Turris. 50 Ed.3.Rot.Parl.number.191. in Arch.Turris.
These examples struck such a terror at that time, as from the time of King
Edw. 3. till the Reign of Queen Mary, being a hundred and fifty years and
upwards, there was no man found that would advise the King of England to set or
levy any Impositions upon Merchandises by Prerogative, and therefore we find
no Imposition laid upon Merchandises all that space of time; Queen Mary indeed
began to set on foot this Prerogative again, and laid an Imposition of three
shillings and eight pence upon every Cloth transported out of the Kingdom; but
what does the Lord Dyer report, 1 Eliz.f.165? Dyer.1 Eliz.fol.165.
the Merchants. of London (says he) found themselves greatly grieved, and made
exclamation and suit to Queen Elizabeth to be disburthened of that Imposition,
because it was not granted by Parliament, but assessed by Queen Mary her
absolute power; these frequent Petitions, complaints, and exclamations, these
suspensions and remitalls of Impositions, are good arguments (say they) against
the right of this Prerogative.

CHAP. XXI.
The Answer to the third Objection.

THis Objection consists of several parts, and shall recieve an Answer The
Answer to Object.3.
consisting of diverse parts; the first part of this answer, King Edw. 1. being
a prudent and resolute Prince, did not only impose the three pence upon the
pound upon Merchant Strangers, by his Charta Mercatoria, but justified and
maintained that Imposition during his life. True it is, that after his death,
King Edw. 2. it was repealed, as is before objected; but whose Act was this? by
whom was this Ordinance made, which did repeal this Charter? not by the King
and his Parliament, but by certain rebellious Barons, who took upon them the
Government of the Realm, and called themselves Ordainers; Wherefore King Edw.
3. in the first year of his Reign, did revive that Charter, and commanded by
his Writ that the Customs and Duties therein contained should be collected and
levied to his use; He makes mention of these Ordinances of 5 Edw. 2. 5 Edw.2:
and says the same were made per quosda^ Magnates, and not by the King, as
appears by the Record, 1 Edw. 3. Rot. fin. memb. 30. in Arch. Turris, which
in another place before I have recited, by which Record it likewise appears,
that those Ordinances 5 Edw. 2. were before that time repealed and made void,
and therefore that which was done in that time of that unfortunate Prince,
overruled by his unruly Barons, is not to be urged and used as an example,
especially since they that urge this repeal of Charta Mercatoria, might, if
they would find any thing which makes against their contradicting humor, find
in the said Roll of Ordinance, made in 5 Edw. 2. diverse Arcles wherein those
Ordainers did wrong and wound the Prerogative in matter of greater importance
than in the repeal of that Charter, for they might have found among the same
Ordinances these things ordained.

First, that the King should not make gifts of Lands, Rents, Franhises, Wards,
or Escheats, without the consent of the Ordainers.

Secondly, that all gifts and grants formerly made by the King, not only of
Land and other things in England, but in Gasconie, Ireland, and Scotland,
should be resumed and made void.

Thirdly, that the King should not depart out of the Realm, nor make War,
without the assent of his Barons, and of his Parliament.

That because the King was misguided and counseled by evil Counselors, it
was ordained, that all his Counsel should be renewed, and new Officers and
Servants appointed for him.

These traitorous Ordinances were made against the King at that time, and
therefore it is a shame that any part of these Ordinances should be made an
argument against the right of the Crown in laying Impositions upon
Merchandises; for with the same reasons they might argue the King had no right
to grant his Lands, Rents, Wards, or Escheats, that he might not go out of the
Realm, nor make War, nor choose his own Counselors or Servants without an
Act of Parliament; and it is manifest, that those factious Barons did cause the
King to forego the said Impositions, rather ad faciendum populum, and to
gratify the Commons, and to draw them to their party, than for the good of the
Commonwealth; for if they had been good Counselors they would have done as
the Senate Senatus Rome.
of Rome did, when Nero in a glorious humor to please the people, would needs
have discharged at once all Customs and Impositions; the Senate gave him
thanks for his favor toward the people, but utterly diswaded him so to do;
telling him, that in so doing, he would ruin the state of the Commonwealth;
for indeed no Commonwealth can stand without these duties, they are Nervi,
they are succus and sanguis Reipublicae, and therefore no Commonwealth was
ever without them, but the imaginary Commonwealths of Plato and Sir Thomas
More, for they do both agree; for in the Commonwealths of which they dream,
there was nothing to be paid for Merchandises exported and imported. But to
return to King Edw. 2. what followed upon the Repeal of Charta Mercatoria, and
the discharge of Impositions which King Edw. 1. established? was not that poor
Prince King Edw. 2. enforced to take up great sums of money of his Merchants,
by way of loan, which he never repaid again? 11 Edw. 2. Rot.fin. m. 12. whereby
the Merchants received a greater detriment than if they had made a double
payment of Customs and Impositions which the King had discharged, and
therefore the example of this weak Prince does make but a weak argument against
the right of the Crown, in laying Impositions upon Merchandises; and here I
think it fit to observe that they were all wise and worthy Princes which are
spoken of in former ages, to have laid Impositions upon Merchandises, namely
Solomon Solomon.
in the Holy Land, Julius Caesar Julius Caesar.
and Augustus Caesar Augustus Caesar.
in the Empire, King Ed. 1. Edw.1.
and King Ed. 3. Edw.3.
in England; but on the other part, they which released all Customs and
Impositions, were but weak Princes, and destroyed themselves and the
Commonwealth wherein they lived; namely Nero Nero.
in the Empire of Rome, King Edw.2. Edw.2.
and King Rich. 2. Rich.2.
with us; and truly by the rule of our Common Law, the King cannot, if he
would, release all Subsides and Aids of his Subjects, that they should be for
ever discharged of all Subsidies to be given to the Crown, such a grant were
made void, and against the Law.

Secondly, touching the Petitions exhibited to the King in sundry Parliaments,
against Impositions laid by that King upon Merchandises, upon view of the
Record wherein these Petitions are contained, with their answers made by the
King thereunto, it is evident, that neither the Petitions of the people, nor
the Kings answers thereunto, do disprove this right of the Crown to lay
Impositions upon Merchandises; for Petitions do not of necessity prove or
suppose the Petitioners have received wrong; Petitions are of diverse kinds. 1.
There are Petitions Petitions are of diverse kinds, and have diverse Answers.
of Grace, which do not insist upon any right, but upon mere Grace and Favor.
2. There are Petitions of Right, wherein the Petitioner does set forth a
pretended right, and yet perhaps upon examination it is found that they have no
right at all, and commonly they ask more than their right is, Iniquum petas ut
aequum feras. 3. There are Petitions Armatae, when a company of Rebels armed
against the Crown, do yet prefer their Petitions, but with an intent to
effect their desire, whether it be right or wrong, if their Petitions be not
granted, Et stricto supplicat ense petens, many of their armed Petitions were
exhibited during the Barons Wars, during the Wars of Lancaster and York, and in
sundry popular comotions since the Conquest; but these Petitions which we speak
of were made by the Commons, or by some factious Spirits, in the name of the
Commons, in sundry Parliaments holden during the Reign of King Edw. 3. howbeit,
if we look upon the form of these Petitions, we shall find there is nothing
sought but Grace and Favor; and if we consider the Kings answers, though many
of them be very gracious, we shall find him therein much reserved, and withal
circumspect not to prejudice or conclude his Prerogative in point of right; the
form of these Petitions was for most part but thus, The Commons pray, that the
Imsitions or Maletolt of forty shillings upon every Sack of Wool may cease or
be taken away, and that the Custom of the demi mark may only be taken: Or
thus, The Commons pray, that the passage of the Sea may be open to all manner
of Merchants and Merchandises, as it had been in former times; herein we find
no claim or challenge of right, but a modest prayer of Grace and Favor,
unless the word Mayletolt Mayletolt
may seem to imply a wrong, because some do conceive that the word does
signify an evil Toll, whereas indeed the word does signify Tollmoney, for
Mayle in old French is a small piece of money, and therefore the rents taken by
force in the Borders of Scotland, was called Blackmayle, and the word
Mayletolt, in some of our old Statutes is taken in bonam partem, which speaks
of Droiturell Mayletolts. But in what form does Edw. 3. make his Answers to
those Petitions? in diverse forms, according to the diversity of the occasions
and reasons of State, but always in a gentle and gracious manner, sometime he
grants the Petition in part only, for a certain time, or after a certain
time expired, that his people may know, that as he receives part of the
Petition, so he might have rejected the whole if he might have been so pleased;
sometimes he granted the whole Petition, yet not absolutely but conditionally,
that he may receive a greater recompense; but wheresoever he does franckly
yield to remit any Imposition, we find in the same Record a Subsidy granted
unto him of far greater value and profit than the Imposition by him remitted,
wherein we perceive that he followed the wise counsel of Roabohams old
Counselors, given in the like case of Impositions, 3 Kings cap. 12. 3 Kings
cap.12.
Se hodie obedieris populo huic and petitioni eorum cesseris locutusque,
diebus, etc. Sometimes he gives a general or doubtful answer, and sometimes
he is silent and gives no answer at all; so as he does never bind nor conclude
himself by any of those answers to those Petitions, but with such reservation
as he might still make use of his Prerogative in laying Impositions upon
Merchandises; to demonstrate this point more plainly, it were not amiss out of
many Records which I have seen, and whereof I have the Copies transcribed out
of the Records themselves, with mine own hands, to select and set down some of
those Answers in any of the kinds aforesaid. In 14 Edw. 3. cap. 21. 14
Ed.3.cap.13.
the Commons pray the King that he would grant an Act of Parliament that no
more Custom should be taken for a Sack of Wool but a demi mark, nor for Lead,
nor Tin, nor Leather, nor Wooll-fells, but the old Customs. This Petition is
general and extending to all Staple Commodities without exceptions of persons,
or limitation of times; but what is the Kings answer? That from the Feast of
Pentecost, which comes, unto a year, neither he nor his Heirs shall take of
any Englishman for a Sack of Wool, more Custom than the half Mark, upon
Wooll-fells, and Leather, no more than the old Custom.

Here this Petition is granted but in part; First, in respect of the persons,
for Englishmen only are favored, and Strangers are omitted; Secondly, only in
respect of the Commodities, for Woollfells and Leather only are exempted, and
Tin and Lead remain to be charged as before; Thirdly, in respect of the time,
for the King continues his Impositions formerly laid for a year and more,
notwithstanding that Petition.

But let us see withal what the King did gain in Parliament, upon yielding to
the peoples Petition but in part; in the first Sessions of this Parliament, it
was granted that every man who should ship Woolls over the Seas, should find
Sureties to bring in upon his first return, for every Sack of Wool, two Marks
of Silver, Plate or Bullion, and to deliver it to the Kings Executors; and in
the next Sessions there was granted unto him the nineth Fleece, the nineth
Lamb, and the nineth Sheaf of Corn throughout the Realm, which the people did
often times redeem with a gift of twenty thousand Sacks of Wool.

Here we see the fruit that the King made by following of Rehoboams old
Counselors, and yet out of this grant and remission made by the King, who can
draw an Argument against the Kings right in laying Impositions upon
Merchandises?

Again, 29 Edw. 3. Anno 29 Ed.3.
when there lay an Imposition of forty shillings upon a Sack of Wool above
the old Customs, A Conferrence was had between the Lords and Commons in the
White Chamber at Westmin. where after a short Parliament, says the Record, 29
Edw. 3. Roll. Parliament.numb. 11. in Arch. Turris. It was concluded, that the
King should have a greater Subsidy out of Wool, Wooll-fells, and Leather, for
six years; so as during that time, the King did lay no other Impositions or
Charge upon the Commons. Here is a conditional agreement between the King and
the poople, and here the King does remit his power of Imposition, for a
recompense of greater value.

And this is a strong Argument, That the King had right to impose, otherwise
the people would never have bought their freedom from Impositions at so high a
rate or price.

The like conditional agreement between the King and the people, we find in 6
Edw.3. Rot.Parliament. numb. 4. 6 Edw.3. Rot.Parl.nu.4.
13 Ed. 3. Rot. Parliament. numb. 5. 13 Edw.3.Rot.Parl.numb.5.
18 Edw. 3. Rot. Parliament.numb.10.26. in Arch. Turris. 18 Ed
3.Rot.Parl.nu.10.26 in Arch. Turris.


In 28 Edw. 3. Rot. Parliament. numb. 26. 28 Ed. 3. Rot. Parl. numb. 27.
The Commons complain of an excessive Imposition upon Wooll-fells, and desire
that the old Custom might he paid. The Kings Answer is, the old Custom ought
not to be withdrawn.

In 38 Edw. 3. Rot. Parliament. numb. 26. 38 Ed. 3. Rot.Parl.numb.26.
The Commons desire that an Imposition of three shillings and four pence upon
every Sack of Wool at Callis, and all unreasonable Impositions, be repealed.

The Kings answer unto this is, It pleases the King that all unreasonable
Impositions be repealed; like unto this is that answer which is contained in
the Parliament Rolls of 6 Edw. 3. numb. 4. 6 Edw.3.Rot.Parl.numb.4.
in Arch. Turris. When Petition was made for remittall of Impositions, I shall
says the King, assesse no such Tallages in time to come, but in manner as it
has been in time of mine Ancestors, and ought to be by reason.

Can any wit of man pick any Arguments out of these Answers against the right
of the Crown, in setting Impositiout upon Merchandises?

Lastly, in 13 Edw. 3. Rot. Parliament. numb. 13. the Commons pray, that the
Maletolts of Wool may be taken as it was used in former times, being then
enhaunsed without the Assent of the Commons.

To this Petition there is no answer found of Record, the King is silent, and
gives no answer at all; which doubtless the King had not refused to do, if the
Petition had been exhibited in point of right, and not in point of favor.

Thirdly, touching the punishing of the persons before mentioned, for procuring
of new Impositions to be set upon Merchandises, we are to consider two
circumstances; first, the time when, and next the causes wherefore these
persons were called in question.

The time when these persons were called to account, was a Parliament holden in
50 Edw. 3. the last year of that Kings Reign, at which time that great and
renowned Prince, who had been formerly assisted by a most wise and politic
Council, was become weak and stupid, and almost in despair, through sickness,
age, melancholy, conceipted upon the death of his eldest Son the Black Prince,
and suffered himself to be ^ll-governed by a Woman called Alice Perrey, and her
Favorite the Lord Latimer; upon which occasion and advantage, the Commons grew
more bold than they were wont to be in former Parliaments, and therefore if
ought had been done in that Parliament, which might prejudice the Kings
Prerogative, it is ^ot to be urged as an example or presi^ent in these times;
but in truth, the ^auses for which these persons were cen^ured, do rather
approve the right of the Crown in laying Impositions, than any way disaffirm
the same. First, Richard ^ions, a Farmer of the Customs, was accused in this
Parliament by the Commons, that he had set and procured to be set upon Wool,
and other Merchandises, certain new Impositions without assent of Parliament,
converting the same to his own use without control, the High Treasurer not
being acquainted therewith, the said Richard assuming to himself in diverse
things as a King, 50 Edw. 3. Rot. Parliament. numb. 17, 18, Lionscase 50
Ed.3.Rot.Parl.nu.17,18.
19, 20. This was his Accusation, and though his answer were, that he set those
Impositions by the Kings Commandment, yet did he show no Warrant for it, and
therefore was justly punished with fine, ransom, disfranchisment, and
imprisonment.

But how may this insolency and misdemeanour of a Subject, be an argument
against the right or Prerogative of the King? Lions a Merchant of his own head
cannot set Impositions upon Merchandises; Ergo, King Edw. 3. a Monarch, of his
royal Authority cannot do it; what an absurd argument were this? as if a man
should say, it were High Treason in a Subject to Coin money; Ergo, the King
himself cannot do it, or cause it to be done; besides, the accusation it self
does imply, that the King has power to impose upon Merchandises, because Lions
is charged, being a Subject, to take upon him as a King in diverse things, and
namely, in setting of Impositio^s; as if they should have said a King may do
it, but not a Subject, according to the rules of the Imperial Law, Solus
Princeps instituit vectigalia Regni tantum juris and muneris est indicere
vectialia, imponere vectigalia maximi Imperii est, inferior a Principe non
potest imponere, and the like.

And the Bill exhibited by the Commons in this Parliament, 50 Edw. 3. Rot.
Parliament. 191. praying that those that should set new Impositions by their
own Authority, encroaching unto themselves Royal Power, might have Judgment of
life and member, seems to be grounded upon good reason, and does prove it is
a Mark of Sovereignty and Royal Power to set Impositions; and therefore if a
Subject of his own head, of his own authority will presume to do it, he is
worthy to dye for it; and yet this Bill did receive but a general answer, viz.
Let the Common Law run as it has been used heretofore.

Touching the Lord Latimers Lord Latimers case
censure, he had not only upon his own head and authority set sundry
Impositions upon Merchandises at Callis, where the Staple there was much
decayed; but he was charged with sundry other misdemeanors mentioned in the
said Roll, namely, that he brought in diverse Tallies and Tickets, whereby the
King was indebted unto his Soldiers and Pensioners, for which he gave little
or nothing to the parties, and yet had an entire allowance in the Exchequer, to
the great damage of the King, and scandal of the Court; that he had also
deceived the King of the pay and wages which he had sent unto his Soldiers in
Britain; that he had sold a great quantity of the Kings provisions for his Army
there, and converted the same to his own use; and that he had delivered up the
Town of Saint Saviors in Normandy, and the Town and Fort of Betherell in
Britainy, not without suspicion of Corruption and Treason.

How can the Lord Latimers censure for these deceits and misdemeanors make an
argument against the right of the Crown in laying Impositions upon Merchandises?

And the like may be said of the punishment of John Peachy, Peachies Case.
who having got a Patent that none should sell sweet Wines within the City of
London but himself, his Deputies, and Assigns, by color thereof did extort
three shillings and four pence, out of every Pipe or Vessel of sweet Wine sold
by others within the City. Shall this extortion committed by a Subject, by
color of a Patent, where perhaps the Patent does not warrant it, be objected
as an argument, that the King himself might not lay the like Imsition upon
every Pipe or Vessel by virtue of his Prerogative? therefore the punishment of
these presons was not the cause, that for an 150. years after that, no
Impositions were laid upon Merchandises by Prerogative; but the Princes who
succeeded Edw. 3. until Queen Mary, did forbear to use their Prerogative in
that kind, for those other notable and true causes which are before at large
expressed in the seventeenth Chapter.

Lastly, touching the Imposition of six shillings and eight pence upon every
Cloth, laid by Queen Mary, after the loss of Callis; she held the same with a
new Imposition upon French Wines, without any question during her life; and
albeit complaint were made against the Imposition set upon Clothes unto Queen
Elizabeth, upon her first entry (as it is usual for the people to complain of
burdens and charges upon every change of Government.) Yet we find that after
the Conference of the Judges spoken of by my Lord Dyer, 1 Eliz. f. 165. 1
Eliz.Dyer.fol.165.
Dyer. (though their resolution be not their reported) Queen Elizabeth did
continue that Imposition, and also the Impost upon French Wines, as being
lawful set for the space of forty four years without any further
contradiction; besides, Queen Elizabeth did raise diverse other new Impositions,
as is before declared, whereunto there was never made any opposition during her
Reign, and which His Majesty that now is, has received without any question
for the fpace of fifteen years; and thus much may suffice for answer to the
several points in the third Objection.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The fourth Objection, that the Prerogative is bound or taken away by diverse
Acts of Parliament.

FOurthly, It is objected, Object.4.
That though it were granted and admitted, that the King de jure communi, has
a rightful Prerogative to lay Impositions upon Merchandises, yet that power say
they, is restrained and taken away by sundry Acts of Parliament.

First, the Statute of Magna Charta, cap. 30. does give safe conduct and free
passage to all Merchants to buy and sell, absque aliquibus malis tolnetis per
antiquas and rectas consuctudines. Secondly, by the Act or Charrer of
confirmation in 25 Edw. 3. The King does release a Mayltolt of forty shillings
upon a Sack of Wool, and does grant for him and His Heirs, unto the Commons,
that he shall not take such things without the Commons consent or good will;
and in the same Act or Charter reciting, that whereas diverse people of the Realm
were in fear, that the Aids and Taxes which they had given to the King before
that time, was toward his War, and other businesses of their own grant and
good will, might turn to a bondage of them and their heirs, because in time to
come they might be found in the Rolls, and were likewise grieved for Prizes
taken throught the Realm, The King does grant for him and his Heirs, That he
will not draw such Ayds, Taxes, or Prizes, into a Custom, for any thing that
had been done before that time, be it by Roll or any other president that may
be found. Thirdly, by the Statute 14 Edw. 3. cap. 12. the King does grant that
all Merchants Denizens, and Aliens, may freely come into the Realm with their
goods and Merchandises, and freely tarry there, and safely return, paying their
Customs, Subsidies, and profits thereof, reasonably due. Fourthly, by the
Statute 11 Rich. 2. cap. 9. it is enacted, That no Imposition or Charge be put
upon Wools, Wooll-fells, or Leather, other than the Custom or Subsidy granted
to the King in that Parliament, if any be, the same to be adnulled and
repealed, saving to the King his ancient right; there are other Acts of
Parliament containing the same sense and substance, but these principally have
been singled out, and cited as specially Statutes restraining and taking away
the Kings Prerogative in laying Impositions upon Merchandises.

CHAP. XXIX.
The Answer to the fourth Objection.

TO this Objection first I answer, The Answer to the forth Object.
That this being a Prerogative in point of Government, as well as in point of
profit, it cannot be restrained or bound by Act of Parliament, it cannot be
limited by any certain or fixed Rule of Law, no more than the course of a Pilot
upon the Sea, who must turn the Helm, or bear higher or lower sail according
to the wind and weather; and therefore it may be properly said, That the Kings
Prerogative in this point is as strong as Samson, it cannot be bound; for
though an Act of Parliament be made to restrain it, and the King does give his
consent unto it, as Samson was bound with his own consent, yet if the
Philistines come, that is, if any just or important occasion do arise, it cannot
hold or restrain the Prerogative, it will be as thread, and broken as easy as
the bonds of Samson; and again, Ius imponendi vectigalia inhaeret sceptro,
says the Law Imperial, and quod Sceptro inhaeret non potest tolli nisi
sublato Sceptro. The Kings Prerogatives are the Sunbeams of his Crown, and as
inseparable from it as the Sunbeams from the Sun; The Kings Crown must be
taken from his head, before his Prerogative can be taken away from him; Samsons
hair must be cut off, before his courage can be any jot abated. Hence it is,
that the Kings Act, nor any Act of Parliament can give away his Prerogative;
for in his own Act the King cannot release a tenure in Capite, nor grant it to
any Subject, Dyer 44. Dyer 44.
If the King grant Land to I.S. to hold as freely as the King himself holds
his Crown, he shall hold his Land still of the King in Capite, and if he Alien
it he shall pay a Fine, for the tenure is vested in the King by his
Prerogative, says the Book, 14 Hen. 6. 12. and therefore when King Edw. 3. did
grant unto the Black Prince his eldest Son, the Duchy of Cornwall, una cum
omnibus wardis maritagiis and releviis, etc. non obstante Prerogativa Regis,
the Prince could not seize a Ward that held of the Kings Ward, who held in
Capite of the King, because it belonged to the King by his Prerogative. 34 Ass.
pl. 25. whereby it is manifest, that the King by his own Grant cannot sever his
Prerogative from the Crown, nor communicate any part thereof to any one, not to
the Prince his eldest Son; and in this case of Tenure it was resolved in the
last Assembly of Parliament in England, That no Act of Parliament could be
framed by the wit of man, whereby all Tenures of the Crown might be
extinguished; neither can any Act of Parliament in the flat Negative, take away
the Kings Prerogative in the affirmative.

The King has a Prerogative in the affirmation, that he may pardon all
Malefactors; There is a Statute made at Northampton, 2 Edw. 3. Statute of
Northampton. 2 Edw.3
That no Charter of pardon for killing a man should thence forth be granted, but
in one case, where one man kills another in his own defense by misfortune:
Has this Statute so bound the Prerogative, as no man ever since has been
pardoned for killing a man, but in the cases before mentioned? The King has a
Prerogative in point of Government, to make choice of the Sheriff in every
County; there is a Statute made, 28 Edw. 3. cap. 7. That no man shall be
Sheriff two years together, and that no Commission shall be granted or renewed
for the year following, to him that has been Sheriff the year before; Was the
Kings Prerogative bound by this Statute when he granted the Sheriffwick of
Northumberland, to the Earl of Northumberland during his life, with non
obstante of that Statute 2 Hen. 7. fol. 6. Again, the King has no ancient and
absolute power to grant dispensation for holding Ecclesiastical Benefices in
Co^mendum. There is a Statute made 7 Edw. 3 in Ireland, whereby it is enacted
and declared, that the Kings dispensation in this case shall be utterly void,
if it be not by Act of Parliament; did this Statute so derogate from the Kings
Prerogative, and so restrain it, that he might not only by his Letters Patents,
Grant Co^mendamus, before the Statute of 28 Hen. 8. in this Realm? assuredly
the Kings dispensation non obstante the Statute would have taken away the force
thereof, as if no such Law had ever been made: There are manyother cases of
like nature which I omit; as for the particular Statutes before recited, the
words thereof are too general to bind or restrain this Prerogative in laying
Impositions upon Merchandises. First, that Statute of Magna Charta does give
safe conduct to all Merchants to come and go, and to tarry within the Realm,
and to buy and sell their Merchandises, sine malis tolne^is per antiqnas and
rectas consuetudines. How do these general words restrain the Kings
Prerogative in this Case? for the ancient Common Law of the Land, which is the
Common Custom of the Realm, does warrant and approve the Kings Prerogative in
laying Impositions upon Merchandises, as before I have fully and clearly
proved, then a reasonable Imposition laid by the King is Antiqua and rect a
consuetudo warranted and approved by the Great Charter.

Secondly, albeit King Edw. 1. by Act or Charter of confirmation of Charta
Mercatoria, made in Anno 25. of his Reign, does release the Maletolt of forty
shillings upon a Sack of Wool; and does grant for him and his heirs, that he
will take no such thing without the assent and good will of the Commons. That
word ( such) does not absolutely bind the Kings Prerog. that he shall lay no
Imposition at all, for it is to be intended such in quantity, such in excess,
for foury shillings at that time was as much as six pound at this day, which
the scarcity of money in those days being considered, and compared with the
plenty of money at this day, might then be said to be a great burden, and yet
this strong band does not bind K. Ed. 3. his Grandchild but that,
notwithstanding this Charter or Act of Parliament, he took these things in
greater quantities, sometimes forty shillings, sometimes fifty shillings, upon
a Sack of Wool, when the Philistines came upon him, that is, when the Wars of
France, and other urgent occasions did press him to it; as to the other
Article contained in the Act or Charter of 25 Edw. 3. where it is said the
people did fear, left the Aids and Taxes granted of their good will to the King
might turn to a bondage to them and their heirs, when the same in time to come
should be found in the Rolls; and the King did grant for him and his heirs,
That he would not draw such Ayds and Taxes into a Custom; that Act in this
point restrains not the Kings Prerogative in setting Impositions upon
Merchandises, for it speaks only of Ayds and Taxes willingly granted by the
people in Parliament, and therefore I marvel that this Article was ever
objected or used as an argument against Impositions; and where^^ the King does
grant that such Ayds shall not be drawn into a Custom, such words are usual
in the preambles of Acts of Subsidies where the grant is large and
extraordinary, viz. That it may not be drawn into an example, that it may not
be a president in future times; and yet succeeding Parliaments have not forborne
to grant as large Subsidies as formerly were granted.

Thirdly, the Statute of 14 Edw. 3. cap. 12. does rather maintain the Kings
Prerogative in this case, than any way impugn or impeach it, for by that Law
free passage is granted to all Merchants, paying the Customs, Subsidies, and
profits thereof reasonably due. Now certain it is, that all duties payable to
the King for Merchandises, are of three kinds only, Customs, which are these
ancient and certain duties, wherein the Crown has no Inheritance, as is before
expressed; Subsidies which are granted by Act of Parliament, and Impositions
which are raised from time to time by the Kings Prerogative only, we find not
a fourth kind, and therefore the word Profits must needs be taken for
Impositions.

Fourthly, the Statue of 11 Rich. 2. cap. 9. though it provide in express
terms, that no Imposition or Charge be laid upon Wool, Wooll-fells, or
Leather, other than the Custom or Subsidy granted in that Parliament, yet it
saves always to the King his ancient rights; this was as turbulent a
Parliament as ever was holden in England, and yet was the Kings Right
acknowledged, though the unruly Lords and Commons did in a manner force his
Assent to limit his Prerogative at that time.

Lastly, if these Acts had absolutely bound the Kings Prerogative, and had been
observed literally and punctually until this time, the King should only have
had at this day the Demi mark for our own Staple Wares, and perhaps the three
pence Custom for Foreign Commodities, and no more. What an inconvenience, what
an absurdity had this been at this day, when all Foreign Princes have raised
their Customs to an exceeding height? when as I have noted before the
necessary expenses of the Crown are so much increased, when the prizes of all
Commodities are so much enhanced, when there is so great a plenty of money in
this part of the World, when the Kings Revenue within the Land is so much
improved; Is it fit that Duties payable for Merchandises should stand at a stay
and keep the old rates without augmentation?

CHAP. XXX.
The fifth Objection, that Tonnage and Poundage were never taken, but when the
same was granted by Parliament.

Fifthly, it is objected, Object.5.
That the Subsidies of Tonnage and Poundage, were never taken by any King of
England, but when the same were granted by Act of Parliament, which is an
Argument, say they, that the King could never take those duties but by his
absolute power, for if his Prerogative could have imposed those rates of it
self, what need was there of an Act of Parliament? why should the King have
expected the consent of the Commons? cum Dominus eis opus habet, and when the
Exchequor were so empty, as the Jewels of the Crown were laid to pawn by some
of those Kings who were glad to take these Subsidies by Acts of Parliament.

CHAP. XXXI.
The Answer to the fifth Objection.

THe Answer to this Objection The Answer to the 5. Object.
is twofold; First, That which is objected is not true, for Tonnage and
Poundage have been taken by the Kings Prerogative without Act of Parliament;
Secondly, If it had been true, it is no Argument against the Kings Prerogative
in this point, for what is Tonnage but a certain sum of money payable for every
Tun of Wine imported? did not King Edw. 3 by force of his Charter Mercatoria,
without Act of Parliament, take two shillings for every Tun of Wine imported
by Strangers? did not the same King set a new Imposition of Gauge, viz. upon
every Tun of Wine brought into London, as is before expressed? and are not the
several Impositions of VVines taken by His Majesty in England and Ireland, a
kind of Tonnage? being nothing else but extraordinary rates imposed upon ever
Tun of Wine, and levied and taken by the Kings Prerogative.

Again, was not the three pence upon the pound imposed by King Edw. 1. by his
Charta Mercatoria, a kind of Poundage, and well nigh as great an Imposition as
twelve of the pound granted at this day by Act of Parliament? if we consider
the Standard of Moneys in the time of King Edw. 1. when a penny sterling did
contain as much or more pure Silver, as the three pence sterling does contain
at this day; but admit that no Tonnage or Poundage had ever been taken, but by
grant in Parliament; yet it is no Argument, but that the King might impose the
like or the same by his Prerogative, for three particular reasons: The first,
because these Subsidies were granted for maintenance of the Navy Royal, the
charges whereof were grown so great in the time of King Edw. 4. K. Ed.4.
as appears by the Act of Tonnage and Poundage granted in the 12 year of that
Kings Reign, that it sufficed not, nor in time to come was like to suffice or
defray the charge of the Crown in keeping the Sea: these are the words of that
Act, if then in the time of King Edw. 4. the Subsidy of Tonnage being three
shillings upon a Tun of Wine brought in by Denizens, and six shillings upon a
tun brought in by Strangers; and the Subsidy of Poundage or of twelve pence of
the pound upon other Commodities was not then sufficient to bear the charge of
the Royal Navy, which was not comparable by many degrees in strength, and
beauty, and multitude of Ships to the Kings Navy at this day; Does it stand
with reason, that the Crown should be stinted or limited ever after to take no
more than those poor Subsidies granted at that time? that the King should wait
for a Parliament, and pray an aid of the Commons for a competent means to
maintain the Walls of the Kingdom, when by the Common Law of the Realm he may
grant Letters Patents for Murage, to maintain the Walls of a Corporate Town. If
any unexpected necessity should arise for repairing of the Navy Royal, and
making a Navall War, should the King expect a Parliament for a greater Subsidy
to be granted by the Commons before he should rigge and make ready his Ships,
perhaps a Kingdom might be lost in the mean time; as if a Pilot sitting at the
Helm, and seeing a sudden gust of wind, would over-set the Ship, or perceiving
her to be running on a Rock, should forbear to turn the Helm, or cause the Sail
to be stricken, until he had consulted with the Mariners or Passengers, and
demanded their consent or counsel in the business; the Pilot himself with his
Mariners and Passengers might be cast away, before they were agreed what course
to take.

Secondly, these Subsidies of Tonnage and Poundage were first granted by Act of
Parliament, in the time of the Civil Wars between the two great Houses of
Lancaster and York, when the several Kings were loath to make use of their
Prerogatives, but were glad to please their people, and loath to impose any
charge upon them, but by common consent in those troublesome times.

Thirdly, Kings and Princes oftentimes of their own noble nature, and sometimes
in policy, do accept that of their Subjects as a gift, which they might exact
and take as a duty, and therefore our most potent and politic Kings have
ordained and accepted many things in Parliament, which they might have done in
their private Chambers by their own prerogative, without any other Ceremony;
who ever made doubt of the Kings Prerogative in establishing the Standard of
moneys, and yet how many Acts of Parliament do we find touching Moneys, in the
times of King E. 1. and King Edw. 2? the Kings Prerotative in making and
establishing Marshall Law, was never yet in question, yet are there Acts of
Parliament touching Musters, departures of Soldiers without their Captains
Licenses, or the like.

The King only does give Honors, and places of precedence, yet King Hen. 8.
made an Act of Parliament, whereby he rancked the great Offices of the Crown in
their several places, as well in Council as in Parliament.

No man ever doubted but the King being the Fountain of Justice, may erect
Courts of Justice by his Prerogative, yet we find the Court of Augmentations,
and the Court of Wards, erected by Act of Parliament.

Lastly, in the time of Edw. 2. we find an Act of Declaration of the principal
Prerogatives of the Crown of England, were most undoubted and clear, yet His
Majesty was pleased in his first Parliament to accept of an Act of Recognition.

CHAP. XXXII.
The Conclusion

BY these reasons and demonstrations which are before expressed, it is evident,
that the King of England by virtue of an ancient Prerogative inherent to the
Crown and Scepter, may justly and lawfully set Impositions upon Merchandises,
and may limit and rate the quantity and proportion thereof by his own wisdom
and discretion, without Act of Parliament; and this Prerogative is warranted
and approved by the general Law of Nations, and the Law Merchant, which is a
principal branch of the Law of Nations; by the Imperial Law, the
Ecclesiastical Law, and by the rule of the Common Law of England, and by the
practice of the most prudent Kings and Queens of England since the Conquest;
and that this Prerogative is grounded upon many excellent reasons, and that the
several Objections made against this Prerogative, are but shadows and colors
of reason, and clearly removed and washed away by the several Answers
thereunto.

CHAP. XXXIII.
A comparison of the Impositions set and taken in England, by the Kings
Prerogative, with the Exceptions and Gabells in Foreign States and Kingdoms,
whereby it will appear, that the subjects of the Crown of England, do not bear
so heavy a burden by many degrees, as the Subjects of other Nations do bear in
this kind.

ALbeit, indeed the King of England being no Emperor, and having all Imperial
Rights within his own Kingdoms, has and ever had as absolute a Prerogative
Imponere vectigalia, or to lay Impositions, as the Emperor of Rome or Germany,
or any other King, Prince, or State in the world, now have, or ever had; yet
let it be truly said for the honor of the Crown of England, That His Majesty
that now is, and all his Noble Progenitors, have used and put in practice this
Prerogative with more moderation and favor toward the people, than any Foreign
State or Prince in the world have besides, and that in three respects.

First, the King of England does make use of this Prerogative only, in laying
Impositions upon Merchandises crossing the Seas, upon such only, and not upon
any other goods which are bought and sold within the Land; neither does he by
his absolute power alone, impose any Tax upon Lands or Capita hominum, or
Capita animalium, or upon other things innumerable, whereof there are strange
presidents and examples, both Ancient and Modern, in other Countries.

Secondly, the King does not charge all Merchandises crossing the Seas, with
this Imposition now in question, for in the Letters Patent whereby the
Imposition of twelve pence in the pound over and above the Subsidy of
Poundage, is laid and limited, diverse kinds of Commodities are excepted,
especially such as serve for food and subsistence of the Kings people, for
setting the poor on work, for maintenance of Navigation, and other things of
like nature, as before is declared.

Thirdly, the Impositions which are laid by the Kings of England upon
Merchandises, are not so high as the Impositions and Exactions set and taken by
other Princes and States; for the highest Imposition in Ireland is but twelve
pence upon the pound, or but a single Poundage, which is but five in the
hundred, and is the lowest rate in Christendom at this day, and in England
there is added but twelve pence in the pound more, which is but ten pound upon
the hundred pound, and yet diverse sorts of Merchandises, as I said before, are
excepted and discharged of that Imposition of the second Imposition of twelve
pence.

But on the other side let us see the practice of other Princes and States in
laying Impositions, and how far they have extended and strained their
Prerogative in that point, beyond and above the Impositions in England; I will
begin with the Romans, when they had gained the Monarchy of the World, so as
all Kingly power did rest in their Emperor.

First, Julius Caesar laid the first Imposition Julius Caesar's Impositions.
upon Foreign Merchandises, says Suctonius, peregrinarum mercium portaria
primus instituit, and that Imposition was Octava rerum pars, which was more by
a fifth part than our highest Imposition in England, for it is two shillings
and six pence upon the pound. Next, Augustus Caesar about the time of our
Saviors Birth, sent out an Edict, whereby he did tax all the world, and this
Tax was Capitatio, or an Imposition, super capita hominum, though the quantity
thereof does not appear; but the poll-money which our Savior did pay, and
wrought a miracle, it seems to be an high Imsition, for the pieces of money
taken out of the Fishes mouth, which is called didrachma, or stater, is said to
be worth two shillings and six pence sterling, which being given for himself
and Peter, da illis pro me et te, shows that fifteen pence sterling was given
for a Poll, which must needs amount to an infinite thing, if it were collected
over all the World, then subject to the Roman Emperor.

Tiberius the Roman Emperor, Tiberius the Roman Emperor.
who succeeded Augustus, took the hundred part of all things bought and sold
within the Empire, which perhaps was an Imposition of greater value and profit
than the other. Caligula Caligula.
the Emperor, laid an Imposition upon all Suits in Law, and took the fourth
part of the value of the value of the thing sued for, and set a pain upon the
Plaintiff if he compounded, or were Non-suted without his License. He likewise
imposed a number of Sesterii upon every Marriage contracted or made within the
whole Empire.

Vespasian Vespasian
in meaner and more homelier matters, took by way of Imposition, a part of
every poor Laborers wages, and part of every Beggars alms; he set likewise an
Imposition upon Urine, and pleased himself with this Apothegm, Dulcis odor
lucri ex re qualibet. Severus the Emperor did impose upon the dishonest gains
of the Stews, and took part of the Prostitutes there, as the Bishop of Rome
does at this day; all the Emperors before Trajan, took the twentieth part of
all Legacies and Lands descended, as things which came unlooked for, and as a
clear gain, and therefore the Heirs and Legatories might easily spare a part to
the Emperor; and Nicephorus, one of the Emperors of the East, did not only
take sumaria tributa Smoke-money out of every Chimney, but he laid an
Imposition upon every man's Estate that grew suddenly rich, upon a presumption
that he had found a Treasury which did belong to the Emperor by Prerogative.
With a little more search I might find out other Impositions of several kinds,
set by the ancient Emperors upon the heads of Beasts, upon the tiles of Houses,
and the like; I might add hereunto the Impositions set by Lorrain, upon every
pane of Glass in Windows; but these may suffice how high they strained, and
how far they extended their Prerogatives in this point of Impositions.

Secondly, the Roman Empire being overcome by the Goths and Vandalls, and
other barbarous Nations, and thereby broken into Kingdoms and Free States,
their passed diverse ages before these Monarchies could be well settled, and
before peace bred plenty, any plenty bred civility, and before Trade,
Traffic, Comerce, and Intercourse could be established between these States,
and Kingdoms, and therefore while these States and Kingdoms were yet but poor,
and while there was a general scarcity of Gold and Silver in these parts of
the World, and so for want of money there was but little Trade and Traffic
among the people, either at home or broad, Kings and Princes did not, neither
could they make that use of their Prerogative in laying Impositions, as they
had done in those latter times; since all Arts and Sciences have been
increased, all Commodities improved, and the Riches of the East and West Indies
have been transported into this Hemisphere. But now let us see whether the
Kings and Princes of other Countries round about us at this day, make not a far
more profitable use of their Prerogatives in laying Impositions upon their
people, than the King of England does, albeit his Kingly power be full as large
as any of theirs.

In France, The Imposition of France.
the most richest and ancientest of the Neighbor Kingdoms, the Impositions not
only upon Merchandises crossing the Seas, but also upon Lands, Goods, persons
of men, within the Realm are so many in number, and in name so diverse, as it is
a pain to name and collect them all, and therefore it must needs be a more
painful thing for the people of that Kingdom to bear them all, La tallie, le
tallon, les aids, les aquavalentes, les equi pollentes, les cruces, or
augmentations of diverse kinds, le hop benevolence la Cabelle, upon Salt,
amounting to an exceeding great Revenue; the Impost of Wines upon every Vessel
carried into any walled Towns or Suburbs thereof, and payable, although it be
transported thence again, before it be sold, la hault passage or de maine
foreign, for Merchandises exported, le traject forrene, for Merchandises
imported, la solid de Cinquants mil holmes, imposed upon Cities, and walled
Towns, and the Suburbs only, and after laid upon Town and Country, without
distinction, the common positions for provisions; the tenthes paid by all
Ecclesiastical persons: These and other Impositions of the like nature, are
laid and levied upon the Subjects of France, by the absolute power and
Prerogative of the King, and though many of these were imposed at first upon
extraordinary occasions, and set but for a time, yet the succeeding Princes
have continued them from time to time, and the most part of them made ordinary
and perpetual by King Lewis the 11. who was wont to say, France was a Meadow,
which he could have mowed as often as he pleased.

In Spain there is an Imposition The Spanish Impositions.
named Alcavala, imposed as well upon the Nobility, as the Commons, which was
first raised by Alphonsus the 12. to expel the Mores, and for the expurgation
of Algiers, but afterward it wss made perpetual, and is now a principal part
of the Royal Patrimony, Gutturis de Gabellis, Quaest.174. Gutturis de gabellis
Quaest. 174.
this Imposition was at first but the twentieth part, but afterwrds it was
raised to the tenth of every man's Estate, which does far surmount the highest
Impositions that ever were laid in England, by the Kings Prerogative, without
Act of Parliament.

This Alcavala is an Imposition within the Land, but the Impositions upon
Merchandises exported and imported, are far higher, especially upon Merchants
Strangers, for their common Impositions upon Strangers is five parts upon the
hundred, and in the year 1604, they imposed thirty of the hundred, as is before
declared; and upon the Ingate of Indian Spices into Portugal, the King of
Spain does lay the greatest rates that ever were set in Christendom, although
upon the outgate the rates are more moderate.

In Italy the Impositions and Gabells set upon every kind of thing by the
States and Princes there, are intolerable and innumerable.

Non mihi si Centum Linguae sunt oraque Centum,
Ferrea vox Italorum omnes numerare gabellas,
Cunct a gabellarum percurrere nomina possem.
Especially upon the great Towns and Teritories that are subject to the Great
Duke of Tusknie, The D. of Tuskanies Impositions.
where there is not any roots, nor any herb, nor the least thing that is
necessary for the life of man, that is bought and sold, or brought into any
Town, but there is a Gabell or Imposition set upon it; where no Inholder,
Baker, Brewer, or Artificer, can exercise his Trade, but the Great Duke will
share with him in his gain, by laying some Imposition upon him; where no man
can travel by Land, or by Water, but at every Bridge, at every Ferry, at every
Wharf or Key, at every Gate of a Town, the Garbellor arrests him, and is ready
to strip him naked, to search what goods he has about him, for which he ought
to pay the Garbell.

In the Popes Territories the Impositions The Impositions by the Pope.
which His Holiness does lay upon his Subjects as a Temporal Prince, are as
many, and as heavy, as those that are levied by the Duke of Tuskanie, in so
much as when Sixtus Quintus Sixtus Quintus.
had set an Imposition upon every thing that served for the use of man's life,
Pasquill made have to dry his Shirt in the Sun, fearing the Pope would set some
Imposition upon the heat of the Sun, miastingo (says he) in the 16. sole
sevenda; I omit to speak of the Exactions of the Court of Rome, in another
kind, which are infinite, and which long lay heavy upon the Western Countries
of Christendom, until of late years some Nations did free themselves thereof,
by rejecting the Yoke of the Bishop of Rome.

In the Seigniory of Venice, The Impositions of the Seigniory of Venice.
the Gabells upon the Land were more moderate than in the other parts of Italy;
But that City being the Lady of the Adriatique Sea, does use by prescription a
high Prerogative, in laying Impositions upon all Merchandises arriving within
the Gulf, Civitas Venetiorum (says Baltholus) Baltholus
potest pro maritmeis mercibus Gabellas imponere, quia est Civitas in Mari
situata, and Veneti (says Baldus) Baidus:
ex consuetudine sunt domini maris Adriatici and possunt statuere super
Gabellis maris, wherein they observe a profitable and politic course, for
upon the Commodities of other Nations which are of goods in their
Commonwealth, they lay the easier Impositions, sometimes five, sometimes
seven, sometimes ten, upon the hundred, which does exceed the highest
Imposition in England, five in the hundred at the least.

In the Low Countries the Impositions The Impositions of the Low countries
which they call Excizes, paid by the Retaylors of Wines and other Commodities,
and not by the Merchant, are the highest in Christendom; and yet we perceive
that people to thrive and grow rich withal, for an improved high rent does so
quicken the industry of the Farmer, as he thriveth oftentimes better than his
Neighbor who is a Freeholder and pays no rent at all; howbeit, to draw
Trade, and to invite all Nations to Comerce with them, and so to make their
Country a Staple, Store house, or Magizen of all Europe, they do set but easy
rates upon Merchandises imported, but when they once have gotten their
commodities in to their hands, if any Merchant will export the same again, he
shall pay a greater Custom.

The Grand Seignior of Turkey The Impositions of the Grand Seignior of Turkey
does impose sometimes ten in the hundred, sometimes twenty in the hundred upon
Merchant Strangers, who Trade into the Levant; and I could speak of his other
Exactions and Impositions upon his Vassalls, but that I think it not meet to
compare that Regions Tyrant, to the Princes and States of Christendom.

I may remember at last, the Great Toll which the King of Denmark The
Impositions of Denmark.
takes of every Ship that passes into the Sound, taking advantage of a narrow
Straight between Elsmore and Copman Haven; whereas the King of England being
the undoubted Lord of the Narrow Seas, between Dover and Callis, might take the
like Toll if it pleased him, and by the same right might participate of the
great gain of Fishing which the Busses of Holland and Zeland do make yearly
upon the Coasts of Great Britain.

Thus we see by this comparison, that the King of England does lay but his
little Finger upon his Subjects, when other Princes and States do lay the(...)
heavy loins upon their people; wh(...)the reason of this difference?
fro(...)hence comes it? assuredly not from a different Power or Prerogative,
for the King of England is as absolute a Monarch, as any Emperor or King in the
world, and has as many Prerogatives incident to his Crown; whence then
proceeds it? to what profitable cause may we ascribe it? certainly to diverse
causes profitable, and principally to these causes, following. First, our King
of England has always gone before, and beyond all other Kings in Christendom
in many points of Magnificency, and especially in this, That they have always
had a more Rich and Royal Demean belonging to the Crown, I mean more large and
Royal Patrimony in Lands and Rents, than ever any Christian King had before,
or now has at this day; for it is certain, that the Revenues of other Princes
and States do principally consist in such Gabells, Impositions, and Exactions,
as are before remembered, and not in terr a firma, not in such a Real and
Royal Patrimony as has ever belonged to the Crown of England, and
therefo(...) other Kings being less able to (...)ntain their Estates, or more
covetous in their own Nature,have laid heavier Burdens upon their Subjects,
than ever the King of England has laid, or will do, or hereafter has need to
do, God be blessed for it; the Kings of England have had the Princes Portion
spoken of before in 45 of Ezekiel, Ezekiel.45.
and therefore they had no need so to oppress the people.

Again, we may ascribe this difference to the bounty and noble nature of our
Kings, that they would never descend to those poor and sordid Exactions which
other Princes and States do take of their Subjects, Sordidum putandum est aurum
quod ex lachrimis oritur, as a good Counselor told Vespasian.

Again, we may ascribe it to the wisdom and policy of our Kings, who would
never follow the Counsel of Rehoboams younger Counselors, boni pastoris est
oves tondere non diglubere, as Tiberius the Emperor was wont to say, Odi
hortulanum (says Alexander) qui ab radice olera excindit; qui nimis emergit
elicit sanguinem, says Solomon, Solomon.
they well considered that the money levied by Taxes and Impositions, is the
blood of the people, which is not to be let out in any great quantity, but to
save the life, as it were, of the Commonwealth, when she is sick, indebted,
and in great danger.

Again, it may be ascribed to their Piety and Religion which moved them to
follow the counsel of the Divine Rule, Deuteronomy. 17. Deuteronomy.17:
where the King is warned not to multiply upon him much Gold and Silver, for
that indeed there does seldom come good by great Treasure heapt up by a great
Prince, for it does but nourish Pride and Ambition in him, and stir him up many
times to make an unjust War upon his Neighbors; or if he leave it unto his
Successers, it makes them luxurious and vicious, which draws with it
sometimes the ruin of the kingdom, sed optimus and certissimus thesaurus
Principis est in loculis subditorum, says the learned Buterus, in his Book
against Machiavill, Buterus contra Machiavill.
let the King, says he, have a care to maintain Religion, and Justice, and
Peace, in his Kingdom, this will soon bring plenty, with a continual increase,
and make a rich and wealthy people; then shall the King never want money to
serve his just, and necessary, and honorable occasions; for it is impossible
the Sovereign should be poor when the Subjects are rich, and until occasions
do arise, the Coffers of his Subjects will be his best Exchequer; they will be
his Treasures, they will be his Receivers, his Tellers without fees or wages,
no bad Accomptant shall deceive him, nor no Bankrupt Officer shall deceive him,
they will keep the Treasure of the Kingdom so frugally, as no Importunate
Courtier shall be able to withdraw the same from a Prince, but that it shall
still remain in store to supply the necessities of the Common wealth.

Lastly, our Kings of England in their wisdoms, well understood the natures and
dispositions of their people, and knowing them to be a free, generous, and
noble Nation, held them not fit to be beaten with Rehoboams Rod, esteemed them
too good to be whipped with Scorpions, and therefore God be blessed, we have not
in England, the Gabeller standing at every Towns end; we have not a Publican in
every Market, we pay not a Gabell for every Bunch of Reddish, or Branch of
Rosemary sold in Cheap Side, we have none of those Harpies which do swarm in
other Countries, we have no complaining in the streets, as is said in the 144.
Psalm; Psa.144.
and therefore I may well conclude with the conclusion of that Psalm, Happy are
the people that are in such a case, blessed is the people that have the Lord
for their God above in Heaven, and King James for their King here upon Earth.

FINIS.
These Books following, are printed for Henry Twyford, and Partners, and are to
be sold at his Shop in Vine-Court Middle Temple.

THe Complete Attorney, or the Practick part of the Law. A Learned Treatise of
Wards and Liveries, by Sir James Ley Knight. The Life of the Apostle St. Paul.
Soliloquies, Meditations, and Prayers, of St. Bonaventure. The discontented
Colonel, by Sir John Sucklin. The European Mercury. The humble Remonstranee of
Sir John Stawell. Hebdomada Magna, or the great Week of Christ's Passion. Sir
Robert Brooks Reading on the Statute of Limitations. Kitchens Jurisdictions of
Courts Leet, Courts Baron, etc. Rich. Brownlow Esquire Prothonotary to the Court of
Common Pleas. His Reports, the first and second Part. Declarations and
Pleadings English. Judicial Writs.

Plowdens Abridgment. Abridgment of Lord Cook's Littleton. Abridgement of
Pulton's Statutes at large, by Edmund Wingate Esquire The Books of the drawing up
of all manner of Judgments. The Body of Law, by Edmund Wingate Esquire The Marrow
of Law, or the second part of the Faithful Counselor. Office and duty of
Executors in 8. Lay-mans Lawyer, or the second part of the Practick part of the
Law. A Commentary on the Original Writs, by William Hughes Esquire Stevenson's
Poems. The Anabaptists Anatomised, in a Dispute between Mr. Crag, and Mr.
Tombs. Caesar's Commentaries, with Sir Clement Edmunds Observations. The
Complete Clark, and Scriveners guide, being the exact Forms of all manner of
Conveyances and Instruments now in use; as they were Penned by Learned Counsel,
both Ancient and Modern. The Counesse of Arundells Secrets in Physic and
Surgery, etc. The History of the Troubles of Swethland and Poland.

