HISTORICAL RELATIONS: OR, A DISCOVERY Of the true causes why IRELAND Was never
entirely Subdued nor brought under obedience OF THE CROWN OF ENGLAND.

UNTIL The beginning of the Reign of King James of happy memory.

By Sir John Davis Knight.

His Majesty's Attorney General of Ireland.

The third Edition corrected and amended.

Dublin, Printed for Samuel Dancer, Bookseller in Castlestreet. 1666.

THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
THE former Edition of this Book being rarely now to be got, and much sought
after by many, for the worth thereof, I procured from the Honorable Sir James
Ware, one of the former printed Books, according to which I now publish this
second Edition.

The Author of the Work, was Sir John Davis, a Learned man, and an excellent
Orator, who for his great Abilities, was by King James first made His
Solicitor, and afterward his Attorney General in this Kingdom of Ireland:
Which Place he discharged for diverse years, and having access to the Records,
from them, for the most part, as from the purest Fountains, he gathered these
his Observations.

A DISCOVERY OF THE True causes why Ireland was never entirely subdued, and
brought under obedience of the Crown of England, until the beginning of His
Majesty's happy Reign.
DUring the time of my Service in IRELAND (which began in the first year of His
Majesty's Reign) I have visited also the Provinces of that Kingdom, in sundry
journeys and circuits. Wherein I have observed the good Temperature of the
Air; the Fruitfulness of the Soil; the pleasant and commodious seats for
habitation; the safe and large Ports and Havens lying open for Traffic, into
all the West parts of the World; the long Inlets of many Navigable Rivers, and
so many great Lakes, and fresh Ponds within the Land; (as the like are not to
be seen in any part of Europe) the rich Fishings, and Wild Fowl of all kinds;
and lastly, the Bodies and Minds of the people, endued with extraordinary
abilities of Nature.

THe observation whereof, has bred in me some curiosity, to consider, what
were the true causes, why this Kingdom, whereof our Kings of England have borne
the Title of Sovereign Lords, for the space of four hundred and odd years (a
period of time wherein diverse great Monarchies have risen from Barbarism to
Civility, and fallen again to ruin) was not in all that space of time,
thoroughly subdued and reduced to Obedience of the Crown of England, although
there has been almost a continual War between the English and the Irish; and
why the manners of the mere Irish are so little altered since the days of King
Henry the second, as appears by the description made by Giraldus Cambrensis,
(who lived and wrote in that time) albeit, there have been since that time, so
many English Colonies planted in Ireland, as that, if the people were numbered
at this day by the poll, such as are descended of English race, would be found
more in number than the ancient Natives.

AND truly, upon consideration of the conduct and passage of affairs in former
times, I find, that the State of England ought to be cleared of an imputation,
which a vulgar error has cast upon it, in one point; namely, That Ireland
long since might have been subdued and reduced to Civility, if some Statesmen
in policy, had not thought it more fit to continue that Realm in Barbarism.
Doubtless, this vulgar opinion (or report) has no true ground, but did first
arise either out of Ignorance, or out of Malice. For it will appear by that
which shall hereafter be laid down in this Discourse, that ever since Our
Nation had any footing in this Land, the State of England did earnestly desire,
and I did accordingly endeavor from time to time, to perfect the Conquest of
this Kingdom, but that in every age there were found such impediments and
defects in both Realms, as caused almost an impossibility, that things should
have been otherwise than they were.

Two main impediments of the conquest.
THe Defects which hindered the Perfection of the Conquest of Ireland, were of
two kinds, and consisted, first, In the faint prosecution of the war, and
next, In the looseness of the Civil Government. For, the Husbandman must first
break the Land, before it be made capable of good seed: and when it is
thoroughly broken and manured, if we do not forthwith cast good seed into it,
it will grow wild again, and bear nothing but weeds. So a barbarous Country
must be first broken by a war, before it will be capable of good Government;
and when it is fully subdued and conquered, if it be not well planted and
governed after the Conquest, it will eft soons return to the former Barbarism.

TOuching the carriage of the Martial affairs, The faint prosecution of the war.
from the seventeenth year of King Henry the second, when the first overture
was made for the Conquest of Ireland (I mean, the first after the Norman
Conquest of England) until the nine and thirtieth year of Queen ELIZABETH, when
that) Royal Army was sent over to suppress Tirones Rebellion, which made in the
end an universal and absolute conquest of all the Irishrie: It is most certain,
that the English forces sent hither, or raised here from time to time, were
ever too weak to subdue and master so many warlike Nations (or Septs) of the
Irish, as did possess this Island; and besides their weakness, they were Ill
paid, and worse Governed. And if at any time there came over an Army of
competent strength and power, it did rather terrify, than break and subdue
this people, being ever broken and dissolved by some one accident or other,
before the perfection of the Conquest.

What is a perfect Conquest
FOR, that I call a Perfect Conquest of a Country, which does reduce all the
people thereof to the Condition of Subjects: and those I call Subjects, which
are governed by the ordinary Laws and Magistrates of the Sovereign. For, though
the Prince does bear the Title of Sovereign Lord of an entire Country, (as our
Kings did of all Ireland) yet if there be two third parts of that Country
wherein he cannot punish Treasons, Murders, or Thefts, unless he send an Army
to do it; if the Jurisdiction of his ordinary Courts of Justice does not extend
into those parts to protect the people from wrong and Oppression; if he have no
certain Revenue, no Escheates or Forfeitures out of the same, I cannot justly
say, that such a Country is wholly conquered.

FIrst then, How the war has been prosecuted since the 17 year of Henry the
second.
That we may judge and discern whether the English Forces in Ireland were at
any time of sufficient strength, to make a full and final Conquest of that
Land, let us see what extraordinary Armies have been transmitted out of England
thither, and what ordinary Forces have been maintained there, and what service
they have performed from time to time, since the seventeenth year of King Henry
the second.

IN that year, In the time of Henry the second.
Mac Murugh Lord of Leinster, being oppressed by the Lords of Mead and
Connaught, and expelled out of his Territory, moved King Henry the second to
invade Ireland, and made an overture unto him for the obtaining of the
Sovereign Lordship thereof. The King refused to undertake the War himself, to
avoid the charge (as King Henry the seventh refused to undertake the discovery
of the Indies for the same cause) but he gave license by His Letters Patents,
Giraldus Cambrensis.
that such of his Subjects might pass over into Ireland, as would at their own
charge become adventurers in that enterprise.

The first attempt but an adventure of private Gentlemen.
SO as the first attempt to conquer this Kingdom, was but an adventure of a few
private Gentlemen. Fitz-Stephen and Fitzgerald first brake the ice, with a
party of three hundred ninety men. The Earl Strongbow followed them with twelve
hundred more, whose good success upon the Seacoasts of Leinster and Mounster,
drew over the King in person the next year after, cum quingentis Militibus,
With what forces the King himself come over.
as Giraldus Cambrensis reports, who was present in Ireland at that time.
Which, if they were but five hundred Soldiers, seems too small a train for
so great a Prince. But admit they were five hundred Knights, yet because in
those days every Knight was not a Commander of a Regiment, or Company, Archiu.
Remem. Regis. apud West
but most of them served as private men, (sometimes a hundred Knights under a
Spear) as appears by the Lists of the ancient Armies, we cannot conjecture
his army to have been so great, as might suffice to conquer all Ireland, being
divided into so many Principalities, and having so many Hydraes heads, as it
had at that time.

For albeit, Tacitus in the life of Agricola does report, that Agricola having
subdued the greatest part of Great Britain, did signify to the Senate of
Rome, that he thought Ireland might also be conquered with one Legion, and a
few aids: I make no doubt, but that if he had attempted the conquest thereof
with a far greater army, he would have found himself deceived in this
conjecture. For, a Barbarous Country is not so easily conquered, as a Civil,
whereof Caesar had experience in his Wars against the Gau^es, Germans, and
Britains, who were subdued to the Roman Empire, with far greater difficulty,
than the rich Kingdoms of Asia. And again, a Country possessed with many petty
Lords and States, is not so soon brought under entirely, as an entire Kingdom
Governed by one Prince or Monarch. And therefore, the late King of Spain, could
sooner win the Kingdom of Portugal, than reduce the States of the Low Countries.

What manner of Conquest K. Henry the second made of Ireland.
BUt let us see the success of King Henry the Second, doubtless his expedition
was such, as he might have said with Caesar, veni, vidi, vici. For, upon his
first arrival, his very Presence without drawing his Sword, prevailed so much,
as all the Petty-Kings, or great Lords within Leinster, Conaght, and Mounster,
submitted themselves unto him, promised to pay him tribute, and acknowledged
him their chief and Sovereign Lord. Besides, the better to assure this
inconstant Sea-Nymph, who was so easily won, the Pope would needs give her
unto him with a Ring, Conjugio jungam stabili, propriamque dicabo. But as the
Conquest was but slight and superficial, so the Popes Donation, and the Irish
Submissions, were but weak and fickle assurances. For as the Pope had no more
Interest in this Kingdom, than He which offered to Christ all the Kingdoms of
the earth; so the Irish pretend, That by their Law, a Tanist might do no act
that might bind his successor. But this was the best assurance he could get
from so many strong Nations of people, with so weak a power: and yet he was so
well pleased with this title of the Lordship of Ireland, as he placed it in his
Royal Style, before the Dutchies of Normandy and Aquitain. And so being
advertised of some stirs raised by his unnatural Sons in England, within five
months after his first arrival, he departed out of Ireland, without striking
one blow, or building one Castle, or planting one Garrison among the Irish,
neither left he behind him one true subject more than those he found there at
his coming over, which were only the English Adventurers spoken of before, who
had gained the Port Towns in Leinster and Mounster, and possessed some scopes
of Land thereunto adjoining, partly by Strongbow's alliance with the Lord of
Leinster, and partly, by plain invasion and Conquest.

And this is that Conquest of King Henry the second, so much spoken of, by so
many Writers, which, though it were in no other manner than is before
expressed, yet is the entire Conquest of all Ireland, attributed unto him.

But the troth is, the conquest of Ireland was made by piece and piece, by slow
steps and degrees, and by several attempts, in several ages. There were sundry
revolutions, as well of the English fortunes, as of the Irish; some-whiles one
prevailing, some-whiles the other, and it was never brought to a full period,
till his Majesty that now is, came to the Crown.

As for King Henry the second, he was far from obtaining that Monarchy Royal,
and true Sovereignty which His Majesty (who now reigns) has over the Irish.
For the Irish Lords did only promise to become Tributaries to King Henry the
Second. And such as pay on^y Tribute, though they be placed by Bodin, Bodin de
Repub.
in the first degree of Subjection, are not properly Subjects but Sovereigns.
For, though they be less and inferior unto the Prince to whom they pay
Tribute, yet they hold all other points of Sovereignty; and having paid their
Tribute, which they promised, to have their peace, they are quit of all other
duties, as the same Bodin writes. And therefore, though King Henry the second
had the title of Sovereign Lord over the Irish, yet did he not put those things
in execution, which are the true marks and differences of Sovereignty.

FOr to give Laws unto a people, The true marks of Sovereignty.
to institute Magistrates and Officers over them, to punish and pardon
Malefactors, to have the sole authority of making war and peace, and the like,
are the true marks of Sovereignty; which K. Henry the second had not in the
Irish countries, but the Irish Lords did still retain all these prerogatives to
themselves.

For they governed their people by the Brehon Law, they made their own
Magistrates and Officers, they pardoned and punished all Malefactors within
their several Countries, they made war and peace one with another, without
controulment, and this they did, not only during the Reign of King Henry the
Second, but afterward in all times, even until the Reign of Queen Elizabeth:
and it appears what manner of Subjects these Irish Lords were, by the Concord
made between King Henry the Second, and Roderick o Connor the Irish King of
Conaght, in the year 1175. Hoveden in Henrico secundo fol. 312.
which is recorded by Hoveden in this form: Hic est finis and Concordia, inter
Dominum regem Angliae Henricum, filium Imperatricis, and Rodoricum Regem
Conactae, scilicet, quod Rex Angliae concessit praedict' Roderico Ligeo homini
suo, ut sit Rex sub eo paratus ad servitium suum, ut homo suus, etc. And the
Commission, whereby King Henry the Second made William Fitz-Adelme his
Lieutenant of Ireland, has this direction; Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Regibus,
Comitibus, Baronibus, and omnibus fidelibus suis in Hibernia, Salutem. Whereby
it is manifest, that he gave those Irish Lords the Title and style of Kings.

King John likewise did grant diverse Charters to the King of Conaght, 6
Johannis Claus. membrana. 18.17. Johannis Chart. m. 3. 6. Hen. 3. chart. m. 2.
which remain in the Tower of London. And afterward in the time of King Henry
the Third, we find in the Tower, a grant made to the King of Thomond, in these
words. Rex Regi Tosmond salutem. Concessimus vobis terram Tosmond quam prius
tenuistis, per firmam centum and triginta marcarum; Tenendum de nobis usque ad
aetatem nostram. And in the pipe Rolls remaining in Bremighams Tower, in the
Castle of Dublin, upon sundry Accounts of the Seneshall of Vlster (when that
Earldom was in the Kings hands, Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
by reason of the minority of the Earl) the entry of all such charges as were
made upon Oneale, for Rent-Beeves, or for aids toward the maintenance of the
Kings wars, ^2. Hen. 3. Co^po^^^ Will de la Zouch 36. H^n. 3. ^om^^tus Huberti
de Rouly.
are in this form. Oneal Regulus 400. vaccas pro arreragio Reddit; Oneal
Regulus, 100. ^i. de Auxilio Domini Regis ad guerram suam in Wasconia
sustinendam. And in one Roll the 36. of Henry the third, Oneal Rex, 100 li. de
auxilio Domini Regis ad guerram suam in Wallia sustinendam. Which seemed
strange to me, that the Kings civil Officer should give him that style upon
Record, unless he meant it in that sense as Maximilian the Emperor did, when
speaking of his disobedient Subjects; The Title (said he) of Rex Regum, does
more properly belong to me, than to any mortal Prince, for all my Subjects do
live as Kings, they obey me in nothing, but do what they list. And truly, in
that sense these Irish Lords might not unfitly be termed Kings. But to speak in
proper terms, we must say with the Latin Poet, Qui rex est, Regnum maxim non
habeat. But touching these Irish Kings, I will add this note out of an ancient
Manuscript, the black book of Christ-Church in Dublin, Isti Reges non fuerunt
ordinati solemnitate alicujus ordinis, nec unctionis Sacramento, nec jure
haereditario; vel aliqua proprietatis successione, sed vi and armis quilibet
Regnum suum obtinuit: and therefore they had no just cause to complain, when a
stronger King than themselves, became a King and Lord over them. But let us
return to our purpose, and see the proceeding of the Martial affairs.

King Henry the second, How the war^ was prosecuted in the time of King John.
Giraldus Cambrensis.
being returned into England, gave the Lordship of Ireland unto the Lord John
his youngest son, sur-named before that time, Sans Terre. And the Pope
confirming that gift, sent him a Crown of Pea-cocks, feathers (as Pope Clement
the eighth, sent the Feather of a Phoenix (as he called it) to the Traitor
Tirone. (This young Prince the Kings Son, being but twelve years of age, with a
train of young Noblemen and Gentlemen, to the number of 300. but not with any
main army, came over to take possession of his new Patrimony, and being arrived
at Waterford, diverse Irish Lords (who had submitted themselves to his father)
came to perform the like duty to him. But that youthful company using them with
scorn, because their demeanours were but rude and barbarous, Giraldus
Cambrensis.
they went away much discontented, and rraised a general rebellion against him.
Whereby it was made manifest, that the Submission of the Irish Lords, and the
Donation of the Pope, were but slender and weak assurances for a Kingdom.

Hereupon this young Lord was revoked, and Sir John de Courcy sent over, not
with the Kings Army, but with a company of Voluntaries, in number four hundred,
or thereabout. With these he attempted the conquest of Vlster, and in four or
five encounters, did so beat the Irishry of that Province, Geraldus Cambrensis.
as that he gained the Maritime Coasts thereof, from the Boyne to the Bann; and
thereupon, was made Earl of Vlster. So as now the English had gotten good
footing in all the Provinces of Ireland. In the first three Provinces of
Leinster, Mounster, and Conaght, part by the Sword, and part by submission and
alliance. And lastly, in Vlster, by the invasion and victories of Sir John de
Courcy.

From this time forward, until the seventeenth year of King John (which was a
space of more than 30. years) there was no army transmitted out of England, to
finish the Conquest. Howbeit in the mean time, the English Adventurers and
Colonies already planted in Ireland, did win much ground upon the Irish;
Namely, the Earl Strongbow, having married the Daughter of Mac Murrogh, in
Leinster; the Lacies in Meth; the Geraldines, and other Adventurers in
Mounster, the Audleyes, Gernons, Clintons, Russels, and other Voluntaries of
Sir John de Courcies retinue, in Vlster; and the Bourkes (planted by William
Fitz-Adelme) in Conaght. Yet were the English reputed but Part-Owners of
Ireland at this time, as appears by the Commission of the Popes Legate in the
time of King Richard the first, whereby he had power to exercise his
Jurisdiction, in Anglia, Wallia, ac illis Hiberniae partibus, Matthew. Pacis in
Richardo primo ^^ 15 19.
in quibus Johannes Moretonii Comes potestatem habet and dominium, as it is
recorded by Mat. Paris.

King John; in the twelfth year of his Reign, came over again into Ireland: the
Stories of that time say, with a great army, but the certain numbers are not
recorded: yet it is credible, in regard of the troubles wherewith this King was
distressed in England, that this army was not of sufficient strength to make an
entire Conquest of Ireland; Matthew. Paris.
and if it had been of sufficient strength, yet did not the King stay a
sufficient time to perform so great an action, for he came over in June, and
returned in September, the same year. Howbeit in that time, the Irish Lords for
the most part, submitted themselves to him, as they had done before to his
Father: which was but a mear mockery and imposture. For his back was no sooner
turned, but they returned to their former Rebellion: and yet this was reputed a
second Conquest. And so this King giving order for the building of some Castles
upon the Borders of the English Colonies, left behind him the Bishop of
Norwich, for the civil Government of the Land; but he left no standing army to
prosecute the conquest: only the English Colonies which were already planted,
were left to themselves to maintain what they had got, and to gain more if they
could.

The personal presence of these two great Princes, King Henry the second, and
King John, though they performed no great thing with their armies, gave such
countenance to the English Colonies, which increased daily by the coming over
of new Voluntaries and Adventurers out of England, as that they enlarged their
Territories very much. Howbeit after this time the Kings of England, either
because they presumed that the English Colonies were strong enough to root out
the Irish by degrees, or else because they were diverted or disabled otherwise
(as shall be declared hereafter) never sent over any Royal army, or any numbers
of men worthy to be called an army into Ireland, until the thirty sixth year
of King Edward the third, when Lionel Duke of Clarence, the Kings second Son,
having married the Daughter and Heir of Vlster, was sent over with an
extraordinary power in respect of the time (for the wars betwixt England and
France, were then in their heat) as well to recover his Earldom of Vlster,
which was then overrun and possessed by the Irish, as to reform the English
Colonies, which were become strangely degenerate throughout the whole Kingdom.

FOr though King Henry the Third, gave the whole Land of Ireland to Edward the
Prince, This Charter yet remains perfect, with an entire Seal in the treasury
at Westminster* Archiu. in Castro Dublin and Archiu Turr. 52^ Hen. 3 patent. m.
9.
his eldest Son, and his Heirs, Ita quod non Separetur a Corona Angliae.
Whereupon it was styled the Land of the Lord Edward, the Kings eldest Son: and
all the Officers of the Land, were called the Officers of Edward Lord of
Ireland; and though this Edward were one of the most active Princes that ever
lived in England, yet did he not either in the life time of his father, or
during his own Reign, come over in person, or transmit any army into Ireland,
but on the other side, he drew sundry aids and supplies of men out of Ireland,
to serve him in his wars in Scotland, Wales, and Gascoigne. And again, though
King Edward the Second sent over Piers Gaveston with a great retinue, it was
never intended he should perfect the Conquest of Ireland; for the King could
not want his company so long a time, as must have been spent in the finishing
of so tedious a work.

So then, in all that space of time, How the martial affairs were carried from
the 12* year of King John, to the 36. year of King Edward the Third.
between the twelfth year of King John, and the 36. year of King Edward the
Th^rd, containing 150. years, or thereabouts, although there were a continual
bordering war between the English and the Irish, there came no Royal Army out
of England, to make an end of the War. But the chief Governors of the Realm,
who were at first called Custodes Hiberniae; and afterward Lords Justices, and
the English Lords, who had gotten so great possessions and Royalties, as that
they presumed to make war and peace without direction from the State, did levy
all their forces within the land. But those forces were weakly supplied, and
ill governed, as I said before. Weakly supplied with men and Money; and governed
with the worst Discipline that ever was seen among men of war. And no marvel,
for it is an infallible rule, that an army ill paid, is ever unruly, and ill
governed. The standing forces here, were seldom or never re-enforced out of
England, and such as were either sent from thence, or raised here, did commonly
do more hu^t and damage to the English Subjects, than to the Irish enemies, by
their continual Sess and Extortion. Which mischief did arise, by reason that
little or no Treasure was sent out of England, to pay the soldiers wages: Only
the Kings revenue in Ireland was spent, and wholly spent in the public
service; and therefore, Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
in all the ancient Pipe-Rols in the times of Henry the Third, Edward the
first, Edward the second, and Edward the third, between the Receipts and
allowances, there is this entry; In Thesauro nihil. For the Officers of the
State and the Army, spent a^l* so, as there was no surplusage of Treasure, and
yet that All was not sufficient. For in default of the Kings pay, as well the
ordinary Forces which stood continually, as the extraordinary, which were
levied by the chief Governor, upon journeys, and general hoastings, were for
the most part laid upon the poor subject descended of English race; howbeit
this burden was in some measure tolerable in the time of King Henry the third,
and King Edward the first; but in the time of King Edward the second, Maurice
fitz-Thomas of Desmond, being chief Commander of the Army against the Scots,
began that wicked extortion of Coigne and Livery, and pay; that is, He and his
Army took Horse meat and Man's meat, and money, Stat. 10. H. 7. c. 4. rot.
Parliam. in Castro Dublin.
at their pleasure, without any Ticket, or other satisfaction. And this was
after that time, the general fault of all the Governors and Commanders of the
Army in this Land. Only the Golden saying of Sir Thomas Rookesby, Annals
Hiberniae in Camden.
who was Justice in the thirtieth year of King Edward the third, is recorded in
all the Annals of this Kingdom, That he would eat in wodden dishes, but would
pay for his meat Gold and Silver. Besides, the English Colonies being dispersed
in every Province of this Kingdom, were enforced to keep continual guards upon
the Borders and Marches round about them; which Guards, consisting of idle
Soldiers, were likewise imposed as a continual burden upon the poor Engglish
Freeholders, whom they oppressed and impoverished in the same manner. Baron
Finglas. Manus. Stat. 10. H 7. cap. 4. Rot. Parli. in Castro Dublin.
And because the great English Lords and Captains had power to impose this
charge, when, and where they pleased, many of the poor Freeholders, were glad
to give unto those Lords, a great part of their Lands, to hold the rest free
from that extortion: And many others, not being able to endure that intolerable
oppression, did utterly quit their freeholds, and returned into England. By
this mean, the English Colonies grew poor and weak, though the English Lords
grew rich and mighty: for they placed Irish Tenants upon the Lands relinquished
by the English; upon them they levied all Irish exactions, with them they
married, and fostered, and made Gossips; so as within one age, the English,
both Lords and Freeholders, became degenerate and mere Irish in their Language,
in their apparel, in their arms and manner of fight, and all other Customs of
life whatsoever.

By this it appears, why the extortion of Coigne and Livery, Stat. 11. H. 4.
c. 6. Baron Finglas. M. S.
is called in the old Statutes of Ireland, A damnable custom; and the imposing
and taking thereof, made High Treason. And it is said in an ancient Discourse,
Of the Decay of Ireland, that though it were first invented in Hell, yet if it
had been used and practiced there, as it has been in Ireland, it had long
since destroyed the very Kingdom of Beelzebub. In this manner was the War of
Ireland carried, before the coming over of Lionel Duke of Clarence.

This young Prince, being Earl of Vlster, and Lord of Conaght, in right of his
wife (who was daughter and Heir of the Lord William Bourk, the last Earl of
Vlster of that Family, slain by treachery at Knockefergus) was made the Kings
Lieutenant of Ireland, The Army transmitted with Lionel Duke of Clarence, the
36 of Edw. 3. Archiu. Remem. Regis apud Westminster.
and sent over with an Army, in the six and thirtieth year of King Edward the
third. The Roll and List of which Army, does remain of Record in the Kings
Remembrancers Office in England (in the press de Rebus tangentibus Hiberniam)
and does not contain above fifteen hundred men by the Poll; which because it
differs somewhat from the manner of this age, both in respect of the Command,
and the Entertainment, I think it not impertinent to take a brief view thereof.

The Lord Lionel was General, and under him Raulf Earl of Stafford, James Earl
of Ormond, Sir John Carew Banneret, Sir William Winsor, and other Knights were
Commanders.

The entertainment of the General upon his first arrival, was but six shillings
eight pence per diem, for himself; for five Knights, two shillings a piece, per
diem; for sixty four Esquires, twelve pence a piece, per diem; for 70 Archers,
six pence a piece, per diem. But being shortly after created Duke of Clarence,
(which honor was conferred upon him being here in Ireland) his entertainment
was raised to thirteen shillings four pence per diem, for himself, and for
eight Knights, two shillings a piece per diem, with an increase of the number
of his Archers, viz. three hundred and sixty Archers on horseback, out of
Lancashire, at six pence a piece per diem; and twenty three Archers out of
Wales, at two pence a piece per diem.

The Earl of Staffords entertainment, was for himself six shillings eight pence
per diem; for a Banneret, four shillings per diem; for seventeen Kn^ghts, two
shillings a piece per diem; for seventy eight Esquires, twelve pence a piece
per diem; for one hundred Archers on Horseback, six pence a piece per diem.
Besides, he had the command of four and twenty Archers out Staffordshire,
forty Archers out of Worcestershire, and six Archers out of Shropshire, at
four pence a piece per diem.

The entertainment of James Earl of Ormond, was for himself four shillings per
diem; for two Knights, two shillings a piece per diem; for seven and twenty
Esquires twelve pence a piece per diem; for twenty Hoblers armed (the Irish
Horsemen were so called, because they served on Hobbies) six pence a piece per
diem, and for twenty Hoblers not armed, four pence a piece per diem.

The entertainment of Sir John Carew Banneret, was for himself four shillings
per diem; for one Knight, two shillings per diem; for eight Esquires, twelve
pence a piece, per diem; for ten Archers on Horseback, six pence a piece per
diem.

The entertainment of Sir William Winsore, was for himself two shillings per
diem; for two Knights, two shillings a piece per diem; for forty nine Squires
twelve pence a piece per diem; for six Archers on Horseback, six pence a piece
per diem.

The like entertainment rateably, were allowed to diverse Knights and Gentlemen
upon that List, for themselves, and their several retinues, whereof some were
greater, and some less, as they themselves could raise them among their Tenants
and Followers.

FOr in ancient times, The manner of levying Soldiers informer ages.
the King himself did not levy his Armies by his own immediate Authority or
Commission, but the Lords and Captains did by Indenture Covenant with the King,
to serve him in his Wars with certain numbers of men, for certain wages and
entertainments, which they raised in greater or less numbers, as they had
favor or power with the people. This course has been changed in latter times
upon good reason of State: For the Barons and Chief Gentlemen of the Realm,
having power to use the Kings Prerogative in that point, became too popular;
whereby they were enabled to raise Forces even against the Crown it self, which
since the Statutes made for levying and mustering of Soldiers by the Kings
special Commission, they cannot so easily perform, if they should forget their
duties.

What service Lionel Duke of Clarence performed.
THis Lord Lieutenant, with this small Army, performed no great service; and yet
upon his coming over, all men who had Land in Ireland, were by Proclamation
remanded back out of England thither, and both the Clergy and Laity of this
Land, Archiu. Tur. 36. Edw. 3 Claus. m. 21. in dorso. and m. 30.
gave two years profits of all their Lands and Tithes, toward the maintenance
of the War here: only he suppressed some Rebe^s in low Leinster, and recovered
the Maritime parts of his Earldome of Vlster. But his best service did consist
in the well-governing of his Army, and in holding that famous Parliament at
Kilkenny; wherein the extortion of the Soldier, and the degenerate manners of
the English (briefly spoken of before) were discovered, and Laws made to reform
the same: which shall be declared more at large hereafter.

^^r Will. Winsor. Lieutenant, 47 Ed. 3. his forces and service.
THe next Lieutenant, transmitted with any Forces out of England, was Sir
William Winsore; who in the 47 year of King Edward the third, undertook the
Custody, not the Conquest of this Land (for now the English made rather a
Defensive than an Invasive war) and withal, to defray the whole charge of the
Kingdom, for eleven thousand two hundred thirteen pounds, six shillings and
eight pence, as appears by the Indenture between him and the King, remaining
of Record in the Tower of London. 47 Ed: 3. Claus. m. 1.
But it appears by that which Froissard reports, that Sir William Winsore
was so far from subduing the Irish, as that himself reported, Stow in Rich 2.
That he could never have access to understand and know their Countries, albeit
he had spent more time in the service of Ireland, than any Englishman then
living.

AND here I may well take occasion, The state of the revenue of Ireland, in the
time of Edw. 3.
to show the vanity of that which is reported in the Story of Walsingham,
touching the Revenue of the Crown in Ireland, in the time of King Edward the
third. For he setting forth the state of things there, in the time of King
Richard the second, writes thus, Cum Rex Angliae illusiris, Walsingham in
Rich. 2.
Edwardus tertius illic posuisset Bancum suum atque Judices, cum Scaccario,
percepit inde ad Regalem Fis^um annuatim triginta millia librarum; modo propter
absentiam ligeorum, and hostium potentiam, nihil inde venit: sed Rex per annos
singulos, de suo Marsupio, terrae defensoribus solvit Triginta millia marcarum,
ad regni sui dedecus and fisci gravissimum detrimentum.

If this Writer had known, that the Kings Courts had been established in
Ireland, more than a hundred years before King Edward the third was born, or
had seen either the Parliament Rolls in England, or the Records of the Receipts
and Issues in Ireland, he had not left this vain report to posterity. For both
the Benches and the Exchequer were erected in the twelfth year of King John.
Archiu Turr. 11 H. 3. patent m. 3. 21 Ed. 3. m. 41.
And it is recorded in the Parliament Rolls of 21 of Edward the third,
remaining in the Tower, that the Commons of England made petition that it might
be enquired, why the King received no benefit of his Land of Ireland,
considering he possessed more there, than any of his Ancestors had before him.
Now, if the King at that time, when there were no standing Forces maintained
there, had received Thirty thousand pound yearly at his Exchequer in Ireland,
he must needs have made profit by that Land, considering that the whole charge
of the Kingdom in the 47 year of Edward the third (when the King did pay an
Army there) did amount to no more than Eleven thousand and two hundred pounds
per annum, 47 Ed. 3. claus. pers. 2. m. 24. and 26.
as appears by the Contract of Sir William Winsore.

Besides, it is manifest by the Pipe-Rolls of that time, whereof many are yet
preserved in Breminghams Tower; and are of better credit than any Monks story,
Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
that during the Reign of King Edward the third, the Revenue of the Crown of
Ireland, both certain and casual, did not rise unto Ten thousand pound per
annum, though the Medium be taken of the best seven years that are to be found
in that Kings time. Hollingshead in R. 2.
The like Fable has Hollingshead touching the Revenue of the Earldom of
Vlster; which (says he) in the time of King Richard the second was thirty
thousand Marks by the year; whereas in truth, though the Lordships of Conaght
and Mead (which were then parcel of the inheritance of the Earl of Vlster) be
added to the account, the Revenue of that Earldom came not to the third part of
that he writes. For the Account of the profits of Vlster yet remaining in
Breminghams Tower, made by William fitz-Warren, Archiu. in Castro Dublin. 5 Edw
3.
Seneshal and Farmour of the Lands in Vlster, seized into the Kings hands after
the death of Walter de Burgo, Earl of Vlster, from the fifth year of Edward the
third, until the eight year, do amount but to nine hundred and odd pounds, at
what time the Irishry had not made so great an invasion upon the Earldome of
Vlster, as they had done in the time of King Richard the second.

As vain a thing it is, that I have seen written in an ancient Manuscript,
touching the Customs of this Realm in the time of King Edward the third, that
those duties in those days should yearly amount to Ten thousand Marks, which by
mine own search and view of the Records here, I can justly control. For upon
the late reducing of this ancient Inheritance of the Crown, which had been
detained in most of the Port-Towns of this Realm, for the space of a hundred
years and upwards, I took some pains (according to the duty of my place) to
visit all the Pipe-Rolls, wherein the Accounts of Customs are contained, and
found those duties answered in every Port, for two hundred and fifty years
together, but did not find that at any time they did exceed a thousand pound
per annum; and no marvel, for the subsidy of Pondage was not then known, and
the greatest profit did arise by the Cocquet of Hides; for Wool, and Wool-fels
were ever of little value in this Kingdom.

But now again let us see how the Martial affairs proceeded in Ireland. Sir
William Winsor continued his government till the latter end of the Reign of
King Edward the third, keeping, but not enlarging, the English borders.

How the war proceeded in the time of King Richard the second. 3 Rich. 2.
Archiu. Tur Rot. Parl. 42.
IN the beginning of the Reign of King Richard the second, the State of England
began to think of the recovery of Ireland: For then was the first Statute made
against Absentes, commanding all such as had Land in Ireland, to return and
reside thereupon, upon pain to forfeit two third parts of the profit thereof.
Again, this King, before himself intended to pass over, committed the
Government of this Realm to such great Lords successively, as he did most love
and favor: First, to the Earl of Oxford, and chief Minion, whom he created
Marquess of Dublin, and Duke of Ireland: next to the Duke of Surry, his half
Brother: and lastly, to the Lord Mortimer, Earl of March and Vlster, his Cousin
and Heir apparent. Pat. 2. pars. 9. Rich. 2. m. 24.


Among the Patent Rolls in the Tower, the ninth year of Richard the second, we
find five hundred men at Arms at twelve pence a piece per diem, and a thousand
Archers at six pence a piece, per diem, appointed for the Duke of Ireland,
Super Conquestu illius terrae per duos annos: For those are the words of that
Record; But for the other two Lieutenants, I do not find the certain numbers,
whereof their Armies did consist. But certain it is, that they were scarce able
to defend the English borders, much less to reduce the whole Island. For one of
them; namely, the Earl of March, was himself slain upon the borders of Mead;
for revenge of whose death, the King himself made his second voyage into
Ireland, in the last year of his Reign. For his first voyage in the eighteenth
year of his Reign, (which was indeed a Voyage-Royal) was made upon another
motive and occasion, which was this; Walsingham in Rich. 2.
Upon the vacancy of the Empire, this King having married the King of Bohemiahs
Daughter (whereby he had great alliance in Germany) did by his Ambassadors
solicit the Princes Electors to choose him Emperor: Annals, Tho. Otterbourne
Manuscript.
but another being elected, and his Ambassadors returned, he would needs know
of them the cause of his repulse in that Competition: They told him plainly,
that the Princes of Germany did not think him fit to Command the Empire, who
was neither able to hold that which his Ancestors had gained in France, nor to
rule his insolent Subjects in England, nor to Master his Rebellious people of
Ireland. This was enough to kindle in the heart of a young Prince, a desire to
perform some great enterprise. And therefore finding it no fit time to attempt
France, he resolved to finish the Conquest of Ireland; and to that end, he
levied a mighty Army, consisting of four thousand men at Arms, and thirty
thousand Archers, which was a sufficient power to have reduced the whole
Island, if he had first broken the Irish with a War, and after established the
English Laws among them, and not have been satisfied with their light
submissions only, wherewith, in all ages they have mocked and abused the State
of England. But the Irish Lords knowing this to be a sure policy to dissolve
the forces, which they were not able to resist (for their Ancestors had put the
same trick and imposture upon King John, and King Henry the second) as soon as
the King was arrived with his army, which he brought over under S. Edwards
Banner (whose name was had in great veneration amongst the Irish) they all made
offer to submit themselves. Stow in Rich. 2^
Whereupon the Lord Thomas Mowbray, Earl of Nottingham, Archiu. in officio
Rememorat. regis apud Westmon.
and Marshal of England, was authorized by special Commission, to receive the
homages and Oaths of fidelity, of all the Irishry of Leinster. And the King
himself having received humble Letters from Oneal, (wherein he styles himself
Prince of the Irishry in Vlster, and yet acknowledges the King to be his
Sovereign Lord, and perpetuus Dominus Hiberniae) removed to Droghedah, to
accept the like submissions from the Irish of Vlster. The Men of Leinster,
namely, Mac Murrogh, O Byrne, O Moore, O Murrogh, O Nolan, and the chief of the
Kinshelaghes, in an humble and solemn manner did their homages, and made their
Oaths of fidelity to the Earl Marshal, laying aside their girdles, their skeins
and their Caps, and falling down at his feet upon their knees. Which when they
had performed, the Earl gave unto each of them, Osculum pacis.

Besides they were bound by several Indentures, upon great pains to be paid to
the Apostolic Chamber, not only to continue loyal subjects, but that by a
certain day prefixed, they and all their Swordmen, should clearly relinquish
and give up unto the King and his successors all their Lands and possessions
which they held in Leinster, and (taking with them only their moveable goods)
should serve him in his wars against his other Rebels. In consideration
whereof; the King should give them pay and pensions during their lives, and
bestow the inheritance of all such Lands upon them, as they should recover from
the Rebels, in any other part of the Realm. And thereupon, a pension of eighty
Marks per annum, was granted to Art' Mac Murrogh, chief of the Kavanaghes; the
enroulment whereof, I found in the White book of the Exchequer here. And this
was the effect of the service performed by the Earl Marshal, by virtue of his
Commission. The King in like manner received the submissions of the Lords of
Vlster, namely; O Neal, O Hanlon, Mac Donel, Mac Mahon, and others; who with
the like Humility and Ceremony, did homage and fealty to the Kings own person;
the words of O Neales homage, as they are recorded are not unfit, to be
remembered: Ego Nelanus Oneal Senior tam pro meipso, quam pro filiis meis, and
tota Natione mea and Parentelis meis, and pro omnibus subditis meis devenio
Ligeus homo vester, etc. And in the Indenture between him and the King, he is
not only bound to remain faithful to the Crown of England, but to restore the
Bonaght of Vlster, to the Earl of Vlster, as of right belonging to that
Earldom, and usurped among other things by the Oneals.

These Indentures and submissions, with many other of the same kind, (for there
was not a Chieftain or head of an Irish sept, but submitted himself in one form
or other) the King himself caused to be enrolled and testified by a Notary
public, and delivered the enrolments with his own hands to the Bishop of
Salisbury, then Lord Treasurer of England, so as they have been preserved, and
are now to be found in the Office of the Kings Remembrance^ there.

With these humilities they satisfied the young King, and by their bowing and
bending, avoided the present storm, and so brake that Army, which was prepared
to break them. For the King having accepted their submissions, received them in
Osculo pacis, feasted them, and given the honor of Knighthood to diverse of
them, did break up and dissolve his army, and returned into England with much
honor, and small profit, (says Froissard.) For though he had spent a huge mass
of Treasure in transporting his army, by the countenance whereof he drew on
their submissions, yet did he not increase his revenue thereby one sterling
pound, nor enlarged the English borders the breadth of one Acre of Land; neither
did he extend the Jurisdiction of his Courts of Justice one foot further than
the English Colonies, wherein it was used and exercised before. Besides, he was
no sooner returned into England, but those Irish Lords laid aside their masks
of humility, and scorning the weak forces which the King had left behind him,
began to infest the borders; in defense whereof, the Lord Roger Mortimer being
then the Kings Lieutenant, and Heir apparent to the Crown of England, was
slain, as I said before. Whereupon the King being moved with a just appetite of
revenge, came over again in person, in the 22. year of his Reign, with as
potent an army, as he had done before, with a full purpose to make a full
Conquest of Ireland: he landed at Waterford, and passing from thence to Dublin,
through the wast Countries of the Murroghes, Kinshelaghes, Cauanaghes, Birnes,
and Tools, his great army was much distressed for want of victuals and
carriages, so as he performed no memorable thing in that journey; only in the
Cavanaghes Country, he cut and cleared the paces, and bestowed the honor of
Knighthood upon the Lord Henry, the Duke of Lancasters son, who was afterward
King Henry the fifth, and so came to Dublin, Hollingshead in Richard the 2.
where entering into Counsel how to proceed in the war, he received news out of
England, of the arrival of the banished Duke of Lancaster at Ravenspurgh,
usurping the Regal authority, and arresting and putting to death his principal
Officers.

This advertisement suddenly brake off the Kings purpose touching the
prosecution of the war in Ireland, and transported him into England, where
shortly after he ended both his Reign and his life. Since whose time, until the
39. year of Queen Elizabeth, there was never any Army sent ^ver of a Competent
strength or power to subdue the Irish, but the war was made by the English
Colonies, only to defend their borders; or if any forces were transmitted over,
they were sent only to suppress the rebellions of such as were descended of
English race, and not to enlarge our Dominion over the Irish.

DUring the Reign of King Henry the Fourth, Henry 4.
the Lord Thomas of Lancaster, the Kings second Son, The Lord Thomas of
Lancaster his service.
was Lieutenant of Ireland, who for the first eight years of that Kings Reign,
made the Lord Scroope, and others his Deputies, who only defended the Marches
with forces levied within the Land. In the eighth year that Prince came over in
person with a small retinue. So as wanting a sufficient power to attempt or
perform any great service, he returned within seven months after into England.
Yet during his personal abode there, he was hurt in his own person within one
mile of Dublin, upon an encounter with the Irish enemy. He took the submissions
of O Birne of the Mountains, Mac Mahon, and O Rely, Archiu. Rememorat. regis
apud Westminster.
by several Indentures, wherein O Birne does Covenant, that the King shall
quietly enjoy the Manor of New Castle; Mac Mahon accepts a State in the
Ferny for life, rendering ten pound a year; and O Rely does promise to perform
such duties to the Earl of March and Vlster, as were contained in an Indenture
dated the 18. of Richard the second.

Henry 5.
IN the time of K. Henry the fifth, there came no forces out of England. The
Lord Furnival his service.
Howbeit the Lord Furnival being the Kings Lieutenant, made a martial circuit,
or journey, round about the Marches and Borders of the pale, Alb. libr. Scacc.
Dublin.
and brought all the Irish to the Kings peace, beginning with the Birnes,
Tools, and Cauanaghes on the South, and so passing to the Moors, O Connors,
and O Forals in the West; and ending with the O Relies, Mac Mahons, O Neales,
and O Hanlons in the North. He had power to make them seek the Kings peace, but
not power to reduce them to the Obedience of Subjects: yet this was then held
so great and worthy a service, as that the Lords and chief Gentlemen of the
Pale, made certificate thereof in French unto the King, being then in France:
which I have seen Recorded in the White Book, of the Exchequer at Dublin.
Howbeit his Army was so ill paid and governed, as the English suffered more
damage by the Sess of his Soldiers (for now that Monster ( Coigne, and Livery)
which the Statute of Kilkenny had for a time abolished, was risen again from
hell) than they gained profit or security, by abating the pride of their
enemies for a time.

DUring the minority of King Henry the sixth, Henry 6.
and for the space of seven or eight years after, the Lieutenants and Deputies
made only a bordering war upon the Irish, with small and scattered forces;
howbeit because there came no Treasure out of England to pay the Sou^dier, the
poor English Subject, did bear the burden of the men of war in every place,
and were thereby so weakened and impoverished, as the State of things in
Ireland, stood very desperately.

Whereupon, the Cardinal of Winchester (who after the death of Humfrey Duke of
Gloucester, did wholly sway the State of England) being desirous to place the
Duke of Somerset, in the Regency of France, Richard Duke of York his service.
took occasion to remove Richard Duke of York from that Government, and to send
him into Ireland, pretending that he was a most able and willing person, to
perform service there, because he had a great inheritance of his own in
Ireland; namely, the Earldom of Vlster, and the Lordships of Conaght and Meth,
by descent from Lionel Duke of Clarence.

We do not find that this great Lord came over with any numbers of waged
Soldiers, but it appears upon what good terms he took that Government, by
the Covenants between the King and him, which are recorded and confirmed by Act
of Parliament in Ireland, Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
and were to this effect.

1. That he should be the Kings Lieutenant of Ireland, for ten years.

2. That to support the charge of that Country, he should receive all the Kings
Revenues there, both certain and casual, without account.

3. That he should be supplied also with treasure out of England, in this
manner; he should have four thousand Marks for the first year, whereof he
should be imprested 2000. li. before hand; and for the other nine years, he
should receive 2000. li. per annum.

4. That he might Let to Ferm the Kings Lands, and place and dis-place all
Officers at his pleasure.

5. That he might levy and wage what numbers of men, he thought fit.

6. That he might make a Deputy, and return at his pleasure.

We cannot presume that this Prince kept any great army on foot, as well
because his means out of England were so mean, and those ill paid, as appears
by his passionate letter written to the Earl of Salisbury his Brother in Law;
Hollingshead in Henry the sixth.
the Copy whereof, is Registered in the Story of this time: as also because the
whole Land, except the English Pale, and some part of the Earldome of Vlster,
upon the Seacoasts, were possessed by the Irish. So as the Revenue of the
Kingdom, which he was to receive, d^d amount to little. He kept the borders and
Marches of the Pale with much ado; he held many Parliaments, wherein sundry
Laws were made, for erecting of Castles in Louth, Mead and Kildare, to stop
the incursions of the Irishry. And because the Soldiers for want of pay were
sessed and laid upon the Subjects against their wills; upon the prayer and
importunity of the Commons, this extortion was declared to be High Treason.
Rot. Parl. in Castro Dublin.
But to the end, that some means might be raised to nourish some forces for
defense of the Pale, by another Act of Parliament, every twenty pound Land was
charged with the furnishing and maintenance of one Archer on horseback,

Besides, the native subjects of Ireland seeing the Kingdom utterly ruined,
Archiu. Tur. 17. Hen. 6. Clausam. 20.
did pass in such numbers into England, as one Law was made in England, to
transmit them back again; and another Law made here to stop their passage in
every Port and Creek. Manuscript of Baron Finglas.
Yet afterward, the greatest parts of the Nobility and Gentry of Meth, past
over into England, and were slain with him at Wakefield in Yorkshire.

Lastly, the State of England was so far from sending an army to subdue the
Irish at this time, as among the Articles of grievances exhibited by the Duke
of York against King Henry the sixth, this was one; Hollingshead in Hen. 6.
That diverse Lords about the King, had caused his Highness to write Letters
unto some of his Irish enemies; whereby they were encouraged to attempt the
conquest of the said Land. Which Letters, the same Irish enemies had sent unto
the Duke; marvailing greatly, that such Letters should be sent unto them, and
speaking therein great shame of the Realm of England.

After this, when this great Lord was returned into England, and making claim
to the Crown, began the War betwixt the two Houses; It cannot he conceived, but
that the Kingdom fell into a worse and weaker estate.

Edw. 4. How the War was maintained in the time of King Edw. 4.
WHen Edward the fourth was settled in the Kingdom of England, he made his
Brother George Duke of Clarence, Lieutenant of Ireland. This Prince was born in
the Castle of Dublin, during the Government of his father the Duke of York; yet
did he never pass over into this Kingdom, to govern it in person, though he
held the Lieutenancy many years. But it is manifest, that King Edward the
fourth did not pay any Army in Ireland during his Reign; but the Men of War did
pay themselves by taking Coigne and Livery upon the Country: Hollingshead in
Edw. 4.
which extortion grew so excesssive and intolerable, Book of Howth M^rus.
as the Lord Tiptoft being Deputy to the Duke of Clarence, was enforced to
execute the Law upon the greatest Earl in the Kingdom; namely, Desmond; who
lost his head at Droghedagh for this offense. Howbeit, The fraternity of Saint
George in Ireland.
that the State might not seem utterly to neglect the defense of the Pale,
there was a fraternity of men at arms, called the Brotherhood of St. George,
erected by Parliament, the 14. of Edward the fourth, consisting of thirteen the
most Noble and worthy persons within the four shires. 14. of Edw. 4. Rot. Parl.
Dublin.
Of the first foundation, were Thomas Earl of Kildare, Sir Rowland Eustace,
Lord of Port-lester, and Sir Robert Eustace for the County of Kildare, Robert
Lord of Howth, the Mayor of Dublin, and Sir Robert Dowdal, for the County of
Dublin; the Viscount of Gormanston, Edward Plunket, Senesha I of Meth;
Alexander Plunket, and Barnabe Barnewale, for the County of Meth, the Mayor of
Droghedagh, Sir Lawrence Taaffe, and Richard Bellewe, for the County of Lowth.
These and their Successors, were to meet yearly upon St. Georges day; and to
choose one of themselves to be Captain of that Brotherhood, for the next year
to come. Which Captain, should have at his command, 120. Archers on horseback,
forty horsemen, and forty Pages, to suppress Outlaws and rebels. The wages of
every Archer, should be six pence, Per diem; and every Horseman, five pence,
Per diem; and four marks, Per annum. And to pay these entertainments, and to
maintain this new fraternity, there was granted unto them by the same Act of
Parliament a subsidy of Poundage, out of all Marchandizes exported or imported
thoroughout the Realm (hydes, and the goods of Freemen of Dublin and Droghedah
only excepted. (These 200. men were all the standing forces that were then
maintained in Ireland. And as they were Natives of the Kingdom, so the Kingdom
it self did pay their wages without expecting any treasure out of England.

Henry 7. How the war was prosecuted in time of K Hen. 7.
BUt now the wars of Lancaster and York being ended, and Henry the seventh being
in the actual and peaceable possession of the Kingdom of England, let us see if
this King did send over a Competent Army to make a perfect Conquest of Ireland.
Assuredly, if those two Idols or Counterfeits which were set up against him in
the beginning of his Reign, had not found footing and followers in this Land,
King Henry the seventh had sent neither Horse nor Foot hither, but let the Pale
to the Guard and defense of the Fraternity of Saint George, which stood till
the tenth year of his Reign. And therefore, upon the erection of the first
Idol, Ar^^^^. Remem. Regis apud West.
which was Lambert the Priests Boy, he transmitted no Forces, but sent over Sir
Richard Edgecomb, with Commission to take an Oath of Allegiance of all the
Nobility, Gentry, and Citizens of this Kingdom; which service he performed
fully, and made an exact return of his Commission to the King. And immediately
after that, the King sent for all the Lords of Parliament in this Realm; The
book of Howth Manus.
who repairing to his presence, were first in a Kingly manner reproved by him;
for among other things he told them, that if their King were still absent from
them, they would at length Crown Apes; but at last entertained them, and
dismissed them graciously. This course of clemency he held at first. But after,
when Perkin Warbeck, who was set up, and fo^lowed chiefly by the Giraldines in
Leinster, and Citizens of Cork in Munster; to suppress this Counterfeit, the
King sent over Sir Edward Poynings, Holinshead in Hen. 7.
with an Army (as the Histories call it) which did not consist of a thousand
men by the Poll; and yet it brought such terror with it, as all the Adherents
of Perkin Warbeck were scattered, Sir Ed: Poynings service.
and retired for succor into the Irish Countries: to the Marches whereof, he
marched with his weak Forces, but eft-soons returned, and held a Parliament.
Rot. Parl. in Castro Dublin.
Wherein among many good Laws, one Act was made, That no Subject should make
any War or Peace within the Land, without the special License of the Kings
Lieutenant or Deputy. A manifest argument, that at that time the bordering Wars
in this Kingdom, were made altogether by Voluntaries, upon their own head,
without any pay or entertainment, and without any Order or Commission from the
State. The book of Howth
And though the Lords and Gentlemen of the Pale, in the nineteenth of year of
this Kings Reign, joined the famous Battle of Knocktow in Conaght; The battle
of Knocktow.
wherein Mac William with four thousand of the Irish, and degenerate Engglish
were slain; yet was not this journey made by Warrant from the King, or upon his
charge (as it is expressed in the Book of Howth) but only upon a private
quarrel of the Earl of Kildare: so loosly were the Martial affairs of Ireland
carried, during the Reign of King Henry the seventh.

IN the time of King Henry the eighth, Henry 8.
the Earl of Surrey, Lord Admiral, How the war was carried, during the reign of
King Henry the eight.
was made Lieutenant; and though he were the greatest Captain of the English
Nation then living; yet brought he with him rather an honorable Guard for his
person, than a competent Army to recover Ireland. The Earl of Surries service.
For he had in his Retinue, two hundred tall Yeomen of the Kings Guard: But
because he wanted means to perform any great action, he made means to return
the sooner: yet in the mean time he was not idle, but passed the short time he
spent here, in holding a Parliament, and diverse journeys against the Rebels of
Leinster; insomuch as he was hurt in his own person, upon the borders of Leix.
After the revocation of this honorable personage, King Henry the eighth, sent
no Forces into Ireland, till the Rebellion of the Giraldines, which happened in
the seven and twentieth year of his Reign. Then sent he over Sir William
Skevington, with five hundred men, only to quench that fire, and not to
enlarge the border, or to rectify the Government. This Deputy dyed in the
midst of the service, The Lord Leonard Grayes service.
so as the Lord Leonard Gray was sent to finish it: Who arriving with a supply
of two hundred men, or thereabouts, did so prosecute the Rebels, as the Lord
Garret their Chieftain, and his five Uncles, submitted themselves unto him, and
were by him transmitted into England.

But this service being ended, that active Nobleman with his little Army, and
some aids of the Pale, did oftentimes repel O Neal, and O Donel, attempting the
invasion of the Civil Shires, and at last made that prosperous fight at
Belahoo, on the Confines of Mead; The fight at Belahoo.
the memory whereof, is yet famous, as that he defeated (well-nigh) all the
power of the North; Book of Howth. Manus*
and so quieted the border for many years.

Hitherto then it is manifest, that since the last transfretation of King
Richard the second, the Crown of England never sent over, either numbers of
men, or quantities of treasure, sufficient to defend the small Territory of the
Pale, much less to reduce that which was lost, or to finish the Conquest of the
whole Island.

After this, Sir Anthony S. Ledger, Sir Anthony St. Ledger.
was made chief Governor, who performed great service in a Civil course, Sir
Edw. B^llingham, in the time of King Edw. 6.
as shall be expressed hereafter. But Sir Edward Bellingham, who succeeded him,
proceeded in a Martial course against the Irishry, and was the first Deputy,
from the time of King Edward the third, till the Reign of King Edward the
sixth, that extended the border beyond the limits of the English Pale, by
beating and breaking the Moors and Connors, and building the Forts of Leix and
Offaly. This service he performed with six hundred horse; the monthly charge
whereof, did arise to seven hundred and seventy pound. And four hundred foot,
whose pay did amount to four hundred and forty six pound per mensem; Archiu.
Remem. Regis apud West
as appears upon the Treasurers Account, remaining in the Office of the Kings
Remembrancer in England. Yet were not these Countries so fully recovered by
this Deputy, but that Thomas Earl of Sussex did put the last hand to this work;
'Tho: Earl of Sussex in the time of Queen Mary.
and rooting out these two rebellious Septs, planted English Colonies in their
rooms, which in all the tumultuous times since, have kept their Habitations,
their Loyalty, and Religion.

Queen Elizabeth.
And now are we come to the time of Queen ELIZABETH, who sent over more men, and
spent more treasure to save and reduce the Land of Ireland, than all her
Progenitors since the Conquest.

DUring her Reign, How the war was prosecuted in the time of Qu Elizabeth.
there arose three notorious and main Rebellions, which drew several Armies out
of England. The first of Shane O Neal; the second, of Desmond; the last of
Tyrone; (for the particular insurrections of the Viscount Baltinglass, and Sir
Edmund Butler; the Moors; the Cavanaghes; the Birnes, and the Bourkes of
Conaght, were all suppressed by the standing Forces here.)

To subdue Shane O Neal, Shane O Neales Rebellion.
in the height of his Rebellion, in the year, 1566. Captain Randal transported
a Regiment of one thousand men into Vlster, and planted a Garrison at
Loughfo^le. Before the coming of which supply (viz.) in the year 1565. the List
of the standing Army of Horse and foot, Eng^ish and Irish, did not exceed the
number of twelve hundred men, as appears by the Treasurers Account of
Ireland, Archiu. Remem. Regis apud Westminster.
now remaining in the Exchequer of England. With these Forces did Sir Henry
Sidney (then Lord Deputy) march into the farthest parts of Tirone, and joining
with Captain Randal, did much distress (but not fully defeat) O Neal, who was
afterward slain upon a mere accident by the Scots, and not by the Queens Army.

Desmonds Rebellion.
TO prosecute the Wars in Munster, against Desmond and his Adherents, there were
transmitted out of England at several times, three or four thousand men, which
together, with the standing Garrisons, and some other supplies raised here,
made at one time, an Army of six thousand and upwards: which with the Virtue
and Valor of Arthur Lord Gray, and others the Commanders, did prove a
sufficient power to extinguish that Rebellion. But that being done, it was
never intended that these Forces should stand, Tyrones Rebellion.
till the rest of the Kingdom were settled and reduced: only, that Army which
was brought over by the Earl of Essex, Lord Lieutenant and Governor General of
this Kingdom, in the nine and thirtieth year of Queen Elizabeth, to suppress
the Rebellion of Tirone, which was spread universally over the whole Realm;
That Army, I say (the command whereof, with the Government of the Realm, was
shortly after transferred to the command of the Lord Montjoy, afterward Earl
of Devonshire, who with singular wisdom, valor, and industry, did prosecute
and finish the War) did consist of such good men of War, and of such numbers,
being well-nigh twenty thousand by the Poll, and was so royally supplied and
paid, and continued in full strength so long a time, as that it brake and
absolutely subdued all the Lords and Chieftains of the Irishry, and degenerate
or rebellious English. Whereupon, the multitude, who ever loved to be followers
of such as could master and defend them, admiring the power of the Crown of
England, being brayed (as it were) in a Mortar, with the Sword, Famine, and
Pestilence altogether, submitted themselves to the English Government, received
the Laws and Magistrates, and most gladly embraced the Kings Pardon and Peace
in all parts of the Realm, with demonstration of joy and comfort; which made
indeed, an entire, perfect, and final Conquest of Ireland. And though upon the
finishing of the War, this great Army was reduced to less numbers, yet has His
Majesty in his Wisdom, thought it fit, still to maintain such competent Forces
here, as the Law may make her progress and Circuit about the Realm, under the
protection of the Sword (as Virgo, the figure of Justice, is by Leo in the
Zodiac) until the people have perfectly learned the Lesson of Obedience, and
the Conquest be established in the hearts of all men.

THus far have I endeavored to make it manifest, that from the first adventure
and attempt of the English (to subdue and conquer Ireland) until the last War
with Tyrone, Four main defects in the prosecution of the War.
(which as it was Royally undertaken, so it was really prosecuted to the end)
there has been four main defects in the carriage of the Martial Affairs here.
First, the Armies for the most part, were too weak for a Conquest: Secondly,
when they were of a competent strength (as in both the journeys of Richard the
second) they were too soon broken up and dissolved: Thirdly, they were ill
paid: And fourthly, they were ill governed, which is always a consequent of ill
payment.

BUt why was not this great work performed, Why none of the Kings of England,
before Qu. Elizabeth, did finish the conquest of Ireland.
before the latter end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, considering that many of the
Kings her Progenitors, were as great Captains as any in the World, and had
elsewhere larger Dominions and Territories? First, who can tell whether the
Divine Wisdom, to abate the glory of those Kings, did not reserve this Work to
be done by a Queen, that it might rather appear to be his own immediate work?
And yet for her greater Honor, made it the last of her great actions, as it
were, to Crown all the rest? And to the end, that a secure peace might settle
the Conquest, and make it firm and perpetual to Posterity; caused it to be made
in that fullness of time, when England and Scotland became to be united under
one Imperial Crown; and when the Monarchy of Great Britany was in League and
Amity with all the World. Besides, the Conquest at this time, does perhaps
fulfill that prophecy, wherein the four great Prophets of Ireland do concur, as
it is recorded by Giraldus Cambrensis, to this effect, That after the first
Invasion of the English, they should spend many ages, in crebris conflictibus,
Giraldus Cambrensis.
longoque certamine and multis caedibus. And that, Omnes fere Anglici ab
Hibernia turbabuntur: nihilominus orientalia maritima semper obtinebunt; Sed
vix paulo ante diem Judicii; plenam Anglorum populo victoriam compromittunt;
Insula Hibernica de mari usque ad mare de toto subacta and incastellata. If S.
Patrick and the rest did not utter this Prophecy; certainly Giraldus is a
Prophet, who has reported it. To this, we may add the Prophecy of Merlin,
spoken of also by Giraldus, Sextus moenia Hiberniae subvertet, and regiones in
Regnum redigentur. Which is performed in the time of King James the sixth; in
that all the paces are cleared, and places of fastness laid open, which are the
proper Walls and Castles of the Irish, as they were of the British in the time
of Agricola; and withal, the Irish Countries being reduced into Counties, make
but one entire and undivided Kingdom.

But to leave these high and obscure causes, the plain and manifest truth is,
that the Kings of England in all ages, had been powerful enough to make an
absolute Conquest of Ireland, if their whole power had been employed in that
enterprise: but still there arose sundry occasions, which divided and diverted
their power some other way. How the several Kings of England were diverted from
the Conquest of Ireland.


Let us therefore take a brief view of the several impediments which arose in
every Kings time, since the first Overture of the Conquest, whereby they were
so employed and busied, as they could not intend the final Conquest of Ireland.

King Henry 2.
KIng Henry the second, was no sooner returned out of Ireland, but all his four
Sons conspired with his Enemies, rose in Arms, and moved War against him, both
in France, and in England.

The book of Howth Manus.
This unnatural Treason of his Sons, did the King express in an Emblem painted
in his Chamber at Winchester, wherein was an Eagle, with three Eglets tiring ^n
her breast; and the fourth pecking at one of her eyes. And the troth is, these
ungracious practices of his Sons, did impeach his journey to the Holy Land,
which he had once vowed, vexed him all the days of his life, and brought his
gray hairs with sorrow to the grave. Besides, this King having given the
Lordship of Ireland to John his youngest Son ^ his ingratitude afterward made
the King careless to settle him in the quiet and absolute possession of that
Kingdom.

RIchard the first, Rich. 1.
which succeeded Henry the second in the Kingdom of England, had less reason to
bend his power toward the Conquest of this Land, which was given in perpetuity
to the Lord John his Brother. And therefore, went he in person to the Holy War;
by which journey, and his Captivity in Austria, and the heavy ransom that he
paid for his liberty, he was hindered, and utterly disabled to pursue any so
great an action as the Conquest of Ireland; And after his delivery and return,
hardly was he able to maintain a Frontier War in Normandy, where by hard
fortune he lost his life.

KIng John his Brother, K. John.
had greatest reason to prosecute the War of Ireland, because the Lordship
thereof was the portion of his inheritance, given unto him, when he was called
John Sans-Terre. Therefore, he made two journeys thither; one, when he was Earl
of Morton, and very young, about twelve years of age; the other, when he was
King, in the twelfth year of his Reign. In the the first, his own youth, and
his youthful company, Roboams Counselors, made him hazard the loss of all that
his Father had won. But in the latter, he showed a resolution to recover the
entire Kingdom, in taking the submissions of all the Irishry, and settling the
estates of the English, and giving order for the building of many Castles and
Forts, whereof some remain until this day. But he came to the Crown of England,
by a defeasible Title, so as he was never well settled in the hearts of the
people, which drew him the sooner back out of Ireland into England: where
shortly after, he fell into such trouble and distress; The Clergy cursing him
on the one side; and the Barons Rebelling against him on the other, as he
became so far unable to return to the Conquest of Ireland, as besides the
forfeiture of the Territories in France, he did in a manner lose both the
Kingdoms. For he surrendered both to the Pope, and took them back again to hold
in Fee-farm; which brought him into such hatred at home, and such contempt
abroad, as all his life time after, he was possessed rather with fear of loosing
his head, than with hope of reducing the Kingdom of Ireland.

DUring the infancy of Henry the third, Henry 3.
the Barons were troubled in expelling the French, whom they had drawn in
against King John. But this Prince was no sooner come to his majority, but the
Barons raised a long and cruel war against him.

Into these troubled waters, the Bishops of Rome did cast their Nets, and drew
away all the wealth of the realm by their provisions, and infinite exactions,
whereby the Kingdom was so impoverished, as the King was scarce able to feed
his own household and train, much less to nourish Armies for the conquest of
Foreign Kingdoms. And albeit he had given this Land to the Lord Edward his
eldest son, yet could not that worthy Prince ever find means or opportunity to
visit this Kingdom in person. For, from the time he was able to bear arms, he
served continually against the Barons, by whom he was taken prisoner at the
battle of Jews. And when that rebellion was appeased, he made a journey to the
Holy Land, (an employment which in those days diverted all Christian Princes
from performing any great actions in Europe) from whence he was returned, when
the Crown of England descended upon him.

Edw. 1.
THis King Edward the first, who was a Prince adorned with all virtues, did in
the managing of his affairs, show himself a right good husband, who being Owner
of a Lordship ill husbanded, does first enclose and mannure his demeasnes near
his principal house, before he does improve his wastes afar off. Therefore, he
began first to establish the Commonwealth of England, by making many excellent
Laws, and instituting the form of public Justice, which remains to this day.
Next, he fully subdued and reduced the Dominion of Wales; then by his power and
authority he settled the Kingdom of Scotland; and lastly, he sent a Royal army
into Cascoigne, to recover the Duchy of Aquitain. These four great actions,
did take up all the reign of this Prince. And therefore, we find not in any
Record, that this King transmitted any Forces into Ireland; but on the other
side, we find it recorded both in the Annals, Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
and in the Pipe-Rolls of this Kingdom, that three several Armies were raised
of the Kings subjects in Ireland, Annals Hiberniae in Camden.
and transported one into Scotland, another into Wales; and the third into
Cascoigne; and that several aids were levied here, for the setting forth of
those armies.

THe Son and Successor of this excellent Prince, Edw. 2.
was Edward the second, who much against his will sent one small army into
Ireland; not with a purpose to finish the Conquest, but to guard the person of
his Minion, Piers Gaveston, who being banished out of England, was made
Lieutenant of Ireland, that so his exile might seem more honorable.

He was no sooner arrived here, but he made a journey into the Mountains of
Dublin; brake and subdued the Rebels there; Annals Hiberniae in Camden.
built New Castle in the Birnes Country, and repaired Castlekeuin; and after
passed up into Mounster and Thomond, Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
performing every where great service, with much Virtue and Valor. But the
King, who could not live without him, revokt him within less than a year. After
which time the invasion of the Scots, and Rebellion of the Barons, did not only
disable this King to be a Conqueror, but deprived him both of his Kingdom and
life. And when the Scottish nation had overrun all this land under the conduct
of Edw. le Bruce (who styled himself King of Ireland) England was not then able
to send either men or money to save this Kingdom. Manuscript of Friar Clinn.
Only Roger de Mortimer then Justice of Ireland, arrived at Youghall, cum 38.
milit. says Friar Clinn in his Annals.

But Bremingham, Verdon, Stapleton, and some other private Gentlemen, rose out
with the Commons of Meth and Vriel, and at Fagher near Dondalke, a fatal place
to the enemies of the Crown of England, overthrew a potent army of them. Et sic
(says the red Book of the Exchequer, Rubr. libr. Scac. Dublin:
wherein the victory was briefly recorded) per manus communis populi, and
dextram dei deliberatur populus dei a servitute machinata and praecogitata.

IN the time of King Edward the third, Edw. 3.
the impediments of the Conquest of Ireland, are so notorious, as I shall not
need to express them; to wit, the war which the King had with the Realms of
Scotland, and of France; but especially the Wars of France, which were almost
continual for the space of forty years. And indeed, France was a fairer mark to
shoot at, than Ireland, and could better reward the Conqueror. Besides, it was
an inheritance newly descended upon the King; and therefore, he had great
reason to bend all his power, and spend all his time and treasure in the
recovery thereof. And this is the true cause why Edward the third sent no army
into Ireland, till the 36. year of his Reign, when the Lord Lionel brought over
a Regiment of 1500. men, as is before expressed: which that wise and warlick
Prince did not transmit as a competent power, to make a full conquest, but as
an honorable retinue for his son; and withal, to enable him to recover some
part of his Earldom of Vlster, which was then overrun with the Irish. But on
the other part, though the English Colonies were much degenerate in this Kings
time, and had lost a great part of their possessions, yet lying at the siege of
Callis, he sent for a supply of men out of Ireland, Annals Hiberniae in Came
den.
which were transported under the conduct of the Earl of Kildare, and Fulco de
l^ Freyn, in the year 1347.

Rich. 2.
AND now are we come again to the time of King Richard the second; who for the
first ten years of his Reign, was a Minor, and much disquieted with popular
Commotions; and after that, was more troubled with the factions that arose
between his Minions, and the Princes of the blood. But at last, he took a
resolution to finish the Conquest of this Realm. And to that end he made two
Royal voyages hither. Upon the first, he was deluded by the feigned submissions
of the Irish; but upon the latter, when he was fully bent to prosecute the war
with effect, he was diverted and drawn from hence by the return of the Duke of
Lancaster, into England, and the general defection of the whole Realm.

AS for Henry the Fourth, Henry 4.
he being an Intruder upon the Crown of England, was hindered from all Foreign
actions, by sundry Conspiracies and Rebellions at home, moved by the house of
Northumberland in the North; by the Dukes of Surrey and Exceter in the South;
and by Owen Glendour in Wales; so as he spent his short Reign in establishing
and settling himself in the quiet possession of England, and had neither leisure
nor opportunity to undertake the final conquest of Ireland. Much less could
King Henry the fifth perform that work: Henry 5.
for in the second year of his Reign, he transported an Army into France, for
the recovery of that Kingdom, and drew over to the siege of Harflew, Annals
Hiberniae in Camden.
the Prior of Kilmaineham, with 1500. Irish. In which great action, this
victorious Prince, spent the rest of his life.

AND after his death, the two Noble Princes his Brothers, the Duke of Bedford
and Gloucester, who during the minority of King Henry the sixth, Henry 6.
had the Government of the Kingdoms of England and France, did employ all their
Counsels and endeavors to perfect the Conquest of France, the greater part
whereof being gained by Henry the fifth, and retained by the Duke of Bedford,
was again lost by King Henry the sixth; a manifest argument of his disability
to finish the Conquest of this Land. But when the civil War between the two
Houses was kindled, the Kings of England were so far from reducing all the
Irish under their Obedience, as they drew out of Ireland to strengthen their
parties, all the Nobility and Gentry descended of English race, which gave
opportunity to the Irishry, to invade the Lands of the English Colonies, and
did hazard the Loss of the whole Kingdom. For, though the Duke of York did,
while he lived in Ireland, carry himself respectively toward all the Nobility,
Hollingshead in Hen. 6.
to win the general love of all, bearing equal favor to the Giraldines and the
Butlers (as appeared at the Christning of George Duke of Clarence, who was born
in the Castle of Dublin, where he made both the Earl of Kildare, and the Earl
of Ormonde his Gossips:) And having occasion diverse times to pass into England;
he left the sword with Kildare at one time, and with Ormonde at another: and
when he lost his life at Wakefield, there were slain with him diverse of both
those families. Yet afterward, th^se two Noble houses of Ireland, did
severally follow the two Royal houses of England; the Giraldines adhering to
the house of York, and the Butlers to the house of Lancaster. Manuscript of
Baron Finglas.
Whereby it came to pass, that not only the principal Gentlemen of both those
Sur-names, but all their friends and dependants did pass into England, leaving
their Lands and possessions to be overrun by the Irish. These impediments, or
rather impossibilities of finishing the Conquest of Ireland, did continue till
the Wars of Lancaster and York were ended: which was about the twelfth year of
King Edward the fourth.

Thus hitherto the Kings of England were hindered from finishing this Conquest
by great and apparent impediments: Henry the second, by the rebellion of his
Sons: King John, Henry the third, and Edward the second, by the Barons Wars:
Edward the first by his Wars in Wales and Scotland: Edward the third, and Henry
the fifth, by the Wars of France: Richard the second, Henry the fourth, Henry
the sixth, and Edward the fourth, by Domestic contention for the Crown of
England it self.

BUT the fire of the civil war being utterly quenched, Edw. 4.
and King Edward the fourth settled in the peaceable possession of the Crown of
England, what did then hinder that war^ick Prince from reducing of Ireland
also? First the whole Realm of England was miserably wasted, depopulated and
impoverished by the late civil dissentions; yet as soon as it had recovered it
self with a little peace and rest, this King raised an Army and revived the
Title of France again: howbeit this Army was no sooner transmitted and brought
into the field, but the two Kings also were brought to an interview. Whereupon,
partly by the fair and white promises of Lewis the 11. and partly by the
corruption of some of King Edwards Minions, the English forces were broken and
dismissed, and King Edward returned into England, where shortly after find^ng
himself deluded and abused by the French, he dyed with melancholy, and vexation
of spirit.

Rich. 3.
I Omit to speak of Richard the Usurper, who never got the quiet possession of
England, but was cast out by Henry the seventh within two years and a half,
after his Usurpation.

Henry 7.
AND for King Henry the seventh himself, though he made that happy Union of the
two houses, yet for more than half the space of his Reign, there were walking
spirits of the house of York, as well in Ireland as in England, which he could
not conjure down, without expense of some blood and Treasure. But in his later
times, he did wholly study to improve the Revenues of the Crown in both
Kingdoms; with an intent to provide means for some great action which he
intended: which doubtless, if he had lived, would rather have proved a journey
into France, than into Ireland, because in the eyes of all men, it was a fairer
enterprise.

Henry 8.
THerefore King Henry the eighth, in the beginning of his reign, made a Voyage
Royal into France; wherein he spent the greatest part of that treasure, which
his Father had frugally reserved; perhaps for the like purpose. In the latter
end of his Reign, he made the like journey, being enricht with the Revenues of
the Abbey Lands. But in the middle time between these two attempts, the great
alteration which he made in the State Ecclesiastical, caused him to stand upon
his guard at home; the Pope having solicited all the Princes of Christendom to
revenge his quarrel in that behalf. And thus was King Henry the eighth,
detained and diverted from the absolute reducing of the Kingdom of Ireland.

LAstly, King Edward 6. and Qu. Mary.
the infancy of King Edward the sixth, and the Coverture of Qu. Mary (which are
both Non abilities in the Law) did in fact disable them to accomplish the
Conquest of Ireland.

SO as now this great work did remain to be performed by Queen ELIZABETH; Qu.
Elizabeth.
who though she were diverted by suppressing the open rebellion in the North;
by preventing diverse secret Conspiracies against her person; by giving aids to
the French, and States of the Low Countries; by maintaining a Naval war with
Spain, for many years together: yet the sundry rebellions, joined with foreign
invasions upon this Island, whereby it was in danger to be utterly lost, and to
be possessed by the Enemies of the Crown of England, did quicken her Majesty's
care for the preservation thereof; and to that end, from time to time during
her Reign, she sent over such supplies of men and treasure, as did suppress the
Rebels, and repel the invaders. Howbeit, before the transmitting of the last
great army, the forces sent over by Queen Elizabeth, were not of sufficient
power to break and subdue a^l the Irishry, and to reduce and reform the whole
Kingdom; but when the general defection came, which came not without a special
providence for the final good of that Kingdom (though the second causes
thereof, were the faint prosecution of the War against Tyrone; the practices of
Priests and Jesuits, and the expectation of the aids from Spain) Then the
extreme peril of loosing the Kingdom; the dishonor and danger that might
thereby grow to the Crown of England; together with a just disdain conceived by
that great minded Queen, that so wicked and ungrateful a Rebel should prevail
against Her, who had ever been victorious against all her enemies, did move,
and almost enforce her to send over that mighty army: and did withal inflame
the hearts of the Subjects of England, cheerfully to contribute toward the
maintaining thereof, a Million of sterling pounds at least: which was done with
a purpose only to Save, and not to Gain a Kingdom; To keep and retain that
Sovereignty, which the Crown of England had in Ireland (such as it was) and not
to recover a more absolute Dominion. But, as it fails out many times, that
when a house is on fire, the Owner to save it from burning, pulls it down to
the ground; but that pulling down, does give occasion of building it up again
in a better form: So these last Wars, which to save the Kingdom did utterly
break and destroy this people, produced a better effect than was at first
expected. For, every Rebellion, when it is suppressed, does make the subject
weaker and the Prince stronger. So, this general revolt, when it was overcome,
did produce a general Obedience and Reformation of all the Irishry, which ever
before had been disobedient and unreformed; and thereupon ensued the final and
full conquest of Ireland.

And thus much may suffice to be spoken touching the defects in the martial
affairs and the weak and faint prosecution of the war; and of the several
Impediments or employments, which did hinder or divert every King of England
successively, from reducing Ireland to their absolute subjection.

IT now remains, 2. The defects in the Civil Policy and government.
that we show the defects of the Civil Policy and Government, which gave no
less impediment to the perfection of this Conquest.

THe first of that kind, 1. The Laws of England were not given to the mere
Irish.
does consist in this, That the Crown of England did not from the beginning
give Laws to the Irishry; whereas to give Laws to a conquered people, is the
principal mark and effect of a perfect Conquest. For, albeit King Henry the
second, before his return out of Ireland, Matthew. Paris Hist. major, fol. 121.
held a Council or Parliament at Lissemore; Vbi Leges Angliae ab omnibus sunt
gratanter receptae, and Juratoria Cautione praestita confirmatae, as Matthew.
Paris writes.

And though King John in the twelfth year of his Reign, Matthew. Paris Histor.
major. 220 b.
did establish the English Laws and Customs here, and placed Sheriffs and
other Ministers to rule and govern the people, according to the Law of England:
and to that end, 11 Hen. 3. pat. m. 3.
Ipse duxit secum viros discretos and legis peritos, quorum communi consilio
scatuit and praecepit, leges Anglicanas teneri in Hibernia, etc. as we find it
recorded among the Patent Rolls in the Tower, 11 Hen. 3. m. 3. Though likewise,
King Henry the third did grant and transmit the like Charter of Liberties to
his Subjects of Ireland, as himself and his Father had granted to the Subjects
of England, as appears by another Record in the Tower, 1 Hen. 3. Pat. m. 13.
And afterward, by a special Writ, did command the Lord Justice of Ireland,
Quod convocatis Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Comitibus, Baronibus, etc. Coram:
eis legi faceret Chartam Regis Johannis; quam ipse legi fecit and jurari a
Magnatibus Hiberniae, de legibus and Constitutionibus Angliae observandis, and
quod leges illas teneant and observent, 12 Hen. 3. Claus. m. 8. And after that
again, the same King by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, did
confirm the Establishment of the English Laws made by King John, in this form,
Quia pro Communi utilitate terrae Hiberniae, ac unitate terrarum, de Communi
Consilio provisum sit, quod omnes leges and consuetudines quae in regno Angliae
tenentur, in Hibernia teneantur, and eadem terra ejusdem legibus subjaceat, ac
per easdem regatur, sicut Johannes Rex, cum illic esset, Statuit and firmiter
mandavit; ideo volumus quod omnia brevia de Communi Jure, quae currunt in
Anglia, similiter current in Hibernia, sub novo sigillo nostro, 30 H. 3. pat.
m. 20
etc. Test meipso apud Woodstock, etc. Which Confirmation is found among the
Patent Rolls in the Tower, Anno 30. Hen. 3. Notwithstanding, it is evident by
all the Records of this Kingdom, that only the English Colonies, and some fews
Septs of the Irishry, which were enfranchised by special Charters, The mere
Irish not admitted to have the benefit of the Laws of England.
were admitted to the benefit and protection of the Laws of England; and that
the Irish generally, were held and reputed Aliens, or rather enemies to the
Crown of England; insomuch, as they were not only disabled to bring any
actions, but they were so far out of the protection of the law, as it was often
adjudg'd no felony to kill a mere Irishman in the time of peace. The mere Irish
reputed Aliens.


That the mere Irish were reputed Aliens, appears by sundry Records; wherein
Judgment is demanded, if they shall be answered in Actions brought by them:
and likewise, by the Charters of Denization, which in all ages were purchased
by them.

In the Common Plea Rolls of 28 Edward the third (which are yet preserved in
Breminghams Tower) this Case is adjudged. Simon Neal brought an action of
Trespass against William Newlagh for breaking his Close in Clandalkin, Archiu.
in Castro Dublin.
in the County of Dublin; the Defendant does plead, that the Plaintiff is
Hibernicus, and non de Quinque sanguinibus; and demands Judgment, if he
shall be answered. The Plaintiff replieth, Quod ipse est de quinque sanguinibus
(viz,) De les Oneiles de Vlton, qui per Concessionem progenitorum Domini Regis;
Libertatibus Anglicis gaudere debent and utuntur, and proliberis hominibus
reputantur. The Defendant rejoyneth, that the Plaintiff is not of the Oneals of
Vlster, Nec de quinque sanguinibus. And thereupon they are at issue. Which
being found for the Plaintiff, he had Judgment to recover his damages against
the Defendant. By this Record it appears, that five principal Bloods, or
Septs, of the Irishry, were by special grace enfranchised and enabled to take
benefit of the Laws of England; And that the Nation of o Neals in Vlster, was
one of the five. Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
And in the like case, 3 of Edward the second, among the Plea-Rolls in
Breminghams Tower: All the five Septs or Bloods, Qui gaudeant lege Anglicana
quoad brevia portanda, are expressed, namely, Oneil de Vltonia; O Molaghlin de
Minia; O Connoghor de Connacia; O Brin de Thotmonia; and Mac Murrogh de
Lagenia: And yet I find, that O Neal himself long after, (viz.) in 20 Edw. 4.
upon his marriage with a Daughter of the house of Kildare (to satisfy the
friends of the Lady) was made denizen by a special Act of Parliament, 20 Edw.
4. C. 8.

Again, in the 29 of Edw, 1. Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
before the Justices in Eire at Droghedah, Thomas le Botteler brought an action
of Detinue against Robert de Almain, for certain goods. The Defendant pleads,
Quod non tenetur ei inde respondere, eo quod est Hibernicus, and non de libero
sanguine. Et praedictus Thomas dicit, quod Anglicus est, and hoc petit quod
inquiratur per patriam, Ideo fiat inde Jurat. etc. Jurat. dicunt super
Sacrament suum, quod praedict Thomas Anglicus est, ideo consideratum est quod
recuperet, etc.

These two Records among many other, do sufficiently show, that the Irish were
disabled to bring any actions at the Common Law. Touching their Denizations,
they were common in every Kings Reign, since Henry the second, and were never
out of use, till His Majesty that now is, came to the Crown.

Among the Pleas of the Crown of 4. Edw. 2. we find a Confirmation made by
Edward the first, of a Charter of Denization granted by Henry the second, to
certain Oostmen, or Easterlings, who were Inhabitants of Waterford long before
Henry the second attempted the Conquest of Ireland. Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
Edwardus Dei gratia, etc. Justitiario suo Hiberniae Salutem: Quia per
Inspectionem Chartae Dom. Hen. Reg. filii Imperatricis quondam Dom. Hiberniae
proavi nostri nobis Constat, quod Ostmanni de Waterford legem Anglicorum in
Hibernia habere, and secundum ipsam legam Judicari and deduci debent: vobis
mandamus quod Gillicrist Mac Gilmurrii, Willielmum and Johannem Mac Gilmurrii
and alios Ostmannos de civitate and Comitatu Waterford, qui de predictis
Ostmannis praedict. Dom. Henr. proavi nostri originem duxerunt, legem
Anglicorum in partibus illis juxta tenorem Chartae praedict. habere, and eos
secundum ipsam legem (quantum in nobis est, deduci faciatis) donec aliud de
Consilio nostro inde duxerimus ordinand. In cujus rei, etc. Test meipso apud
Acton Burnell. 15. Octobris anno regni nostri undecimo.

Again, Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
among the Patent Rolls of 1 Edward the fourth, remaining in the Chancery here,
we find a Patent of Denization granted the 13 of Edward the first, in these
words, Edwardus Dei gratia, Rex Angliae, Dom. Hiberniae, Dux Aquitaniae, etc.
Omnibus Ballivis and fidelibus suis in Hibernia, Salutem: Volentes Christophero
filio Donaldi Hibernico gratiam sacere specialem, concedimus pro nobis and
haeredibus nostris, quod idem Christopherus hanc habeat libertatem, (viz.) Quod
ipse de catero in Hibernia utatur legibus Anglicanis, and prohibemus ne
quisquam contra hanc concessionem nostram dictum Christopherum vexet in aliquo
vel perturbet. In cujus rei Testimonium, etc. Test meipso apud Westminster. 27. die
Junii, anno regni nostri, 13.

In the same Roll, we find another Charter of Denization, granted in the first
of Edward the fourth, in a more larger and beneficial form. Edw. Dei gratia,
Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
etc. Omnibus Ballivis, etc. Salutem. Sciatis quod nos volentes Willielmum O
Bolgir capellanum de Hibernica Natione existentem, favore prosequi gratioso, de
gratia nostra speciali, etc. Concessimus eidem Willielmo, quod ipse liberi sit
Status, and liberae conditionis, and ab omni servitute Hibernica liber and
quietus, and quod ipse legibus Anglicanis in omnibus and per omnia uti possit
and gaudere, eodem modo, quo homines Anglici infra dictam terram eas habent,
and iis gaudent and utuntur, quodque ipse respondeat, and respondeatur, in
quibuscumque Curiis nostris: ac omnimod. terras, tenementa, redditus, and
servitia perquirere possit sibi and haere dibus suis imperpetuum, etc.

If I should collect out of the Records, all the Charters of this kind, I
should make a Volume thereof; but these may suffice to show, that the mere
Irish were not reputed free Subjects; nor admitted to the benefit of the Laws
of England, until they had purchased Charters of Denization.

Lastly, the mere Irish were not only accounted Aliens, but Enemies; That the
mere Irish were reputed enemies to the Crown.
and altogether out of the Protection of the Law; so as it was no capital
Offense to kill them; and this is manifest by many Records. At a Jail-deliver
at Waterford, before John Wogan Lord Justice of Ireland, the fourth of Edward
the second, we find it recorded among the Pleas of the Crown of that year,
Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
Quod Robertus le Wayleys rectatus de morte Johannis filii Juor Mac Gillemory
felonice per ipsum interfecti, etc Venit and been cognovit quod praedictum
Johannem interfecit: dicit tamon quod peri^ ejus interfectionem feloniam
committere non potuit, quia dicit, quod praedictus Johannes fuit purus
Hibernicus, and non de libero sanguine, etc. Et cum Dominus dicti Johannis
(cujus Hibernicus idem Johannes suit) die quo interfectus fuit, solutionem pro
ipso Johanne Hibernico suo sic interfecto petere voluerit, ipse Robertus
paratus erat ad respondend' de solutione praedict prout Justitia suadebit. Et
super hoc venit quidam Johannes le Poer, and dicit pro Domino Rege, quod
praedict. Johannes filius Iuor Mac Gillemory, and antecessores sui de cognonime
praedict. a tempore quo Dominus Henricus filius Imperatricis, quondam Dominus
Hiberniae, Tritavus Domini Regis nunc, fuit in Hibernia, legem Anglicorum in
Hibernia usque ad hunc diem haberc, and secundum ipsam legem judicari and
deduci debent. And so pleaded the Charter of Denization granted to the Oostmen
recited before; All which appears at large in the said Record: Wherein we may
note, that the killing of an Irish man, was not punished by our Law, as
Manslaughter, which is Felony, and Capital, (for our Law did neither protect
his life, nor revenge his death) but by a Fine or pecuniary punishment, which
is called an Erick, according to the Brehon, or Irish Law.

Again, at a Jail-deliver, before the same Lord Justice at Limerick, in the
Roll of the same year, we find, Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
that Willielmus filius Rogeri rectatus de morre Rogeri de Canteton felonice
per ipsum interfecti, venit and dicit, quod feloniam per interfectionem
praedictam committere non potuit, quia dicit quod praedict. Rogerus Hibernic.
est, and non de libero sanguine; dicit etiam quod praedict. Rogerus fuit de
Cognomine de Ohederiscal and non de cognonime de Cantetons, and de hoc ponit se
super patriam, etc. Et Jurati dicunt super Sacram. suum, quod praedictus
Rogerus Hibernicus fuit and de cognonime de Ohederiscal and pro Hibernico
habebatur tota vita sua: Ideo praedict. Willielmus quoad feloniam praedict.
quietus. Sed quia praedictus Rogerus Ottederiscal fuit Hibernicus Domini Regis,
praedict. Willielmus recommittatur Gaolae, quousque plegios invenerit de
quinque marcis solvendis Domino Regi pro solutione praedicti Hibernici.

But on the other side, if the Jury had found, that the party slain had been of
English race and Nation, it had been adjudged Felony; as appears by a Record
of 29 of Edward the first, in the Crown-Office here. Coram Waltero Lenfant and
sociis suis Justitiariis Itinerantibus apud Drogheda in Comitatu Louth. Archiu.
in Castro Dublin.
Johannes Laurens indictat. de morte Galfridi Douedal venit and non dedicit
mortem praedictam: sed dicit quod praedict. Galfridus fuit Hibernicus, and non
de libero sanguine, and d^ bono and malo ponit se super patriam, etc. Et Jurat.
dicunt super Sacram. suum quod praedict. Galfridus Anglicus fuit, and ideo
praedict. Johannes culpabilis e^^ de morte Galfridi praedict. Ideo suspend
Catalla 13. s. unde Hugo de Clinton Vic^ com. respondet.

Hence it is, that in all the Parliament Rolls which are extant from the
fortieth year of Edward the third when the Statutes of Kilkenny were enacted,
till the Reign of King Henry the eighth, we find the degenerate and
disobedient English, called Rebels; but the Irish which were not in the Kings
peace, are called Enemies. Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
Statute Kilkenny. c. 1.10. and 11.11 Hen. 4. c. 24.10 Hen. 6. c. 1.18.18 Hen.
6. c. 4.5 Edw. 4. c. 6.10 Hen. 7. c. 17. All these Statutes speak of English
Rebels, and Irish Enemies; as if the Irish had never been in condition of
Subjects, but always out of the Protection of the Law; and were indeed in worse
case than Aliens of any Foreign Realm that was in Amity with the Crown of
England. For, by diverse heavy Penal Laws, the English were forbidden to marry,
to foster, to make Gossips with the Irish; or to have any trade or commerce in
their Markets or Fairs; nay, there was a Law made no longer since, than the 28
year of Henry the eighth, Stat. de Kilkenny c 2. and 3.10 Hen. 6. c. 1.28 Hen.
8 c. 13.
that the English should not marry with any person of Irish blood, though he
had gotten a Charter of Denization, unless he had done both Homage and Fealty
to the King in the Chancery, and were also bound by Recognizance with sureties,
to continue a Loyal Subject. Whereby it is manifest, that such as had the
Government of Ireland under the Crown of England, did intend to make a
perpetual separation and enmity between the English and the Irish; pretendng
(no doubt) that the English should in the end root cut the Irish; which the
English not being able to do, did cause a perpetual War between the Nations:
which continued four hundred and odd years, and would have lasted to the
Worlds end; if in the end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, the Irishry had not been
broken and conquered by the Sword: And since the beginning of his Majesty's
Reign, had not been protected and governed by the Law.

BUt perhaps, the Irishry in former times did wilfully refuse to be subject to
the Laws of England, and would not be partakers of the benefit thereof, though
the Crown of England did desire; and therefore, they were reputed Aliens,
Outlaws, The Irish did desire to be admitted to the benefit and protection of
the English Laws, but could not obtain it.
and Enemies. Assuredly, the contrary does appear, as well by the Charters of
Denization purchased by the Irish in all ages, as by a Petition preferred by
them to the King, Anno 2 Edward the third: desiring, that an Act might pass in
Ireland, whereby all the Irishry might be enabled to use and enjoy the Laws of
England, without purchasing of particular Denizations: 2. Ed. 3. claus. 17.
Upon which Petition, the King directed a special Writ to the Lord Justice;
which is found amongst the Close-Rolls in the Tower of London, in this form;
Rex dilecto and fideli suo Johanni Darcile Mepieu Justic. suo Hiberniae,
Salutem. Ex part quorundam hominum de Hibernia nobis extitit supplicatum, ut
per Statutum inde faciendum concedere velimus, quod omnes Hibernici qui
voluerint, legibus utatur Anglicanis: ita quod necesse non habeant super hoc
Chartas alienas a nobis impetrare: nos igitur Certiorari volentes si sine
alieno praejudicio praemissis annuere valeamus, vobis mandamus quod voluntatem
magnatum terrae illius in proximo Parliamento nostro ibidem tenendo super hoc
cum diligentia perscrutari facias: and de eo quod inde inveneritis una cum
Consilio and advisamento nobis certificetis, etc. Whereby I collect, that the
great Lords of Ireland had informed the King, that the Irishry might not be
naturalized, without damage and prejudice either to themselves, or to the Crown.

But I am well assured, that the Irishry did desire to be admitted to the
benefit of the Law, not only in this Petition exhibited to King Edward the
third; but by all their submissions made to King Richard the second, and to the
Lord Thomas of Lancaster before the Wars of the two Houses; and afterward to
the Lord Leonard Gray, and Sir Anthony Saint-Leger, The Council Book of
Ireland, 34 Hen 8
when King Henry the eighth began to reform this Kingdom. In particular, the
Birns of the Mountains, in the 34 of Henry the eighth, desire that their
Country might be made Shire-ground, and called the County of Wicklow: And in
the 23 of Henry the eighth, O Donnel does Covenant with Sir William
Skeffington, Quod si Dominus Rex velit reformare Hiberniam, (whereof it should
seem he made some doubt) that he and his people would gladly be governed by the
Laws of England. Only that ungrateful Traitor Tirone, though he had no color
or shadow of Title to that great Lordship, but only by grant from the Crown,
and by the Law of England (for by the Irish Law he had been ranked with the
meanest of his Sept) yet in one of his Capitulations with the State, he
required that no Sheriff might have Jurisdiction within Tyrone; and
consequently that the Laws of England might not be executed there: Which
request, was never before made by O Neale, or any other Lord of the Irishry,
when they submitted themselves: but contrariwise they were humble suitors to
have the benefit and protection of the English Laws. What mischief did grow by
not Communicating the English Laws to the Irish.


THis then I note as a great defect in the civil policy of this Kingdom, in
that for the space of three hundred and fifty years at least after the Conquest
first attempted, the English laws were not communicated to the Irish, nor the
benefit and protection thereof allowed unto them, though they earnestly desired
and sought the same. For, as long as they were out of the protection of the
Law; so as every Englishman might oppress, spoil, and kill them without
controulment, how was it possible they should be other than Outlaws and
Enemies to the Crown of England? If the King would not admit them to the
condition of Subjects, how could they learn to acknowledge and obey him as
their Sovereign? When they might not converse or Commerce with any Civil Men,
nor enter into any Town or City without peril of their Lives; whither should
they fly but into the Woods and Mountains, and there live in a wild and
barbarous manner? If the English Magistrates would not rule them by the Law,
which does punish Treason, and Murder, and Theft with death; but leave them to
be ruled by their own Lords and Laws, why should they not embrace their own
Brehon Law, which punishes no offense, but with a Fine or Ericke? If the Irish
be not permitted to purchase Estates of Free-holds or Inheritance, which might
descend to their Children, according to the course of our Common Law, must they
not continue their custom of Tanistrie? which makes all their possessions
uncertain, and brings Confusion, Barbarism, and Incivility? In a word, if the
English would neither in peace Govern them by the Law, nor could in war root
them out by the sword; must they not needs be pricks in their eyes, and thorns
in their sides, till the worlds end? and so the Conquest never be brought to
perfection.

BUT on the other side; What good would have ensued, if the mere Irish had been
governed by the English Laws.
If from the beginning, the Laws of England had been established, and the
Brehon or Irish Law utterly abolished, as well in the Irish Countries, as the
English Colonies; If there had been no difference made between the Nations in
point of Justice and protection, but all had been governed by one Equal, Just,
and Honorable Law, as Dido speaks in Virgil; Tros, Tyriusve mihi nullo
discrimine habetur. If upon the first submission made by the Irish Lords to
King Henry the second; Three general submissiof the Irish.
Quem in Regem and Dominum receperunt, says Matthew. Paris; or upon the second
submission made to King John, when, Plusquam viginti Reguli maximo timore
perterriti homagium ei and fidelitatem fecerunt, as the same Author writes; or
upon the third general submission made to King Richard the second; when they
did not only do Homage and fealty, but bound themselves by Indentures and Oaths
(as is before expressed) to become and continue loyal subjects to the Crown of
England; If any of these three Kings, who came each of them twice in person
into this Kingdom, had upon these submissions of the Irishry, received them
all, both Lords and Tenants into their immediate protection, divided their
several Countries into Counties; made Sheriffs, Coroners, and Wardens of the
peace therein: sent Justices Itinerants half yearly into every part of the
Kingdom, as well to punish Malefactors, as to hear and determine causes between
party and party, according to the course of the Laws of England; taken
surrenders of their Lands and Territories, and granted Estates unto them, to
hold by English Tenures; granted them Markers, Fairs, and other Franchises, and
erected Corporate Towns among them; (all which, has been performed since his
Majesty came to the Crown,) assuredly the Irish Countries had long since been
reformed and reduced to Peace, Plenty, and Civility, which are the effects of
Laws and good Government: they had builded Houses, planted Orchards and
Gardens, erected Town-ships, and made provision for their posterities; there
had been a perfect Union betwixt the Nations, and consequently, a perfect
Conquest of Ireland. For the Conquest is never perfect, till the war be at an
end; and the war is not at an end till their be peace and unity; and there can
never be Unity and Concord in any one Kingdom, but where there is but one King,
one Allegiance, and one Law.

The English Laws were executed only in the English Colonies.
TRue it is, that King John made twelve shires in Leinster and Mounster: namely,
Dublin, Kildare, Meth, Vriel, Catherlogh, Kilkenny, Wexford, Waterford, Cork,
Limerick, Kerrie, and Tipperary. Yet these Counties did stretch no farther than
the Lands of the English Colonies did extend. In them only, were the English
Laws published and put in Execution; and in them only did the Itinerant Judges
make their circuits and visitations of Justice, and not in the Countries
possessed by the Irishry, which contained two third parts of the Kingdom at
least. And therefore King Edward the first, before the Court of Parliament was
established in Ireland, did transmit the Statutes of England in this form:
Dominus Rex mandavit Breve suum in haec verba: Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
Edwardus Dei gratia, Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, etc. Cancellario suo
Hiberniae, Salutem. Quaedam statuta per nos de assensu Praelatorum, Comitum,
Baronum and Communitat. regni nostri nuper apud Lincoln, and quaedam alia
statuta postmodum apud Eborum facta, quae in dicta terra nostra Hiberniae ad
Communem utilitatem populi nostri ejusdem terrae observari volumus, vobis
mittimus sub sigillo nostro, mandantes quod statuta illa in dicta Cancellaria
nostra Custodiri, ac in rotulis ejusdem Cancellariae irrotulari, and ad
singulas placeas nostras in terra nostra Hiberniae, and singulos Commitatus
ejusdem terrae mitti faciatis ministris nostris placearum illarum, and
Vicecomitibus dictorum Comitatum: mandantes, quod statuta illa coram ipsis
publicari and ea in omnibus and singulis Articulis suis observari firmiter
faciatis. Test meipso apud Nottingham, etc. By which Writ, and by all the
Pipe-Rolls of that time it is manifest, that the Laws of England were published
and put in execution only in the Counties, which were then made and limited,
and not in the Irish Countries, which were neglected and left wild; and have
but of late years been divided in one and twenty Counties more.

Again, true it is that by the Statute of Kilkenny, enacted in this Kingdom, in
the fortieth year of King Edward the Third, the Brehon Law was condemned and
abolished, and the use and practice thereof made High Treason. But this Law
extended to the English only, and not to the Irish: For the Law is penned in
this form: Item, Forasmuch as the diversity of Government by diverse Laws in one
Land, Statut. de Kilkenny. c. 4.
does make diversity of ligeance and debates between the people, It is accorded
and established, that hereafter no English man have debate with another English
man, but according to the course of the Common Law; And that no English man be
ruled in the definition of their debates, by the March-Law, or the Brehon Law,
which by reason ought not to be named a Law, but an evil Custom; but that they
be ruled as right is, by the common Law of the Land, as the Lieges of our
Sovereign Lord the King; And if any do to the contrary and thereof be
attainted, that he be taken and imprisoned and judged as a Traitor: And that
hereafter there be no diversity of ligeance between the English born in
Ireland, and the English born in England, but that all be called and reputed
English, and the Lieges of our Sovereign Lord the KING, etc. This Law, was made
only to reform the degenerate English, but there was no care taken for the
reformation of the mere Irish; no Ordinance, no provision made for the
abolishing of their barbarous Customs and manners. Insomuch as the Law then
made for Apparel, and riding in Saddles, after the English fashion, is penal
only to English men, and not to the Irish. But the Roman State, which conquered
so many Nations both barbarous and Civil; The Romans did communicate their laws
to the nations, which they conquerred.
and therefore knew by experience, the best and readiest way of making a
perfect and absolute conquest, refused not to communicate their Laws to the
rude and barbarous people, whom they had Conquered; neither did they put them
out of their protection, after they had once submitted themselves. But
contrariwise, it is said of Julius Caesar: Qua, vicit, victos protegit, ille
manu. And again, of another Emperor:

Fecisti patriam diversis gentibus unam,
Profuit invitis te dominante capi;
Dumque offers victis proprii consortia juris,
Vrbem fecisti, quod prius orbis erat,
And of Rome it self; Haec est, in gremium vict os quae sola recepit,
Humanumque genus communi nomine fovit,
Matris, non dominae, ritu; Civesque vocavit,
Quos domuit, nexusque pio longinqua revinxit.


Tacitus in vita Agricolae.
Therefore (as Tacitus writes) Julius Agricola the Roman General in Brittany,
used this policy to make a perfect Conquest of our Ancestors, the ancient
Britains; They were (says he) rude, and dispersed; and therefore prone upon
every occasion to make war, but to induce them by pleasure to quietness and
rest, he exhorted them in private, and gave them helps in common, to build
Temples, Houses, and places of public resort. The Noblemens Sons, he took and
instructed in the Liberal Sciences, etc. preferring the wits of the Britains,
before the Students of France; as being now curious to attain the Eloquence of
the Roman Language, whereas they lately rejected that speech. After that, the
Roman Attire grew to be in account, and the Gown to be in use among them; and
so by little and little they proceeded to curiosity and delicacies in Buildings
and furniture of Household; in Bathes, and exquisite Banquets; and so being
come to the height of Civility, they were thereby brought to an absolute
subjection.

LIkewise, our Norman Conqueror, William the Conqueror governed both the
Normans and the English under one Law.
though he oppressed the English Nobility very sore, and gave away to his
servitors, the Lands and possessions of such, as did oppose his first invasion,
though he caused all his Acts of Counsel to be published in French; and some
legal proceedings and pleadings to be framed and used in the same tongue, as a
mark and badge of a conquest; yet he governed All, both English and Normans, by
one and the same Law; which was the ancient common Law of England, long before
the Conquest. Neither did he deny any English Man (that submitted himself unto
him:) The benefit of that Law though it were against a Norman of the best rank,
and in greatest favor (as appeared in the notable Controversy between Warren
the Norman, and Sherburne of Sherburne Castle in Norfolk; Camden in Norfolk.
for the Conqueror had given that Castle to Warren; yet when the Inheritors
thereof, had alleged before the King, that he never boar Arms against him;
that he was his subject, as well as the other, and that he did inherit and hold
his Lands, by the rules of that Law, which the King had established among all
his Subjects; The King gave judgment against Warren, and commanded that
Sherborne should hold his land in peace. By this means, himself obtained a
peaceable possession of the Kingdom within few years; whereas, if he had cast
all the English out of his protection, and held them as Aliens and Enemies to
the Crown, the Normans (perhaps) might have spent as much time in the Conquest
of England, as the English have spent in the Conquest of Ireland.

THe like prudent course has been observed in reducing of Wales; K. Edw. 1.
did communicate the English laws to the Welshmen.
which was performed partly by King Edward the first, and altogether finished
by King Henry the eighth. For we find by the Statute of Rutland, made the 12.
of Edward the first, when the Welshmen had submitted themselves, De alto and
Basso, to that King, he did not reject and cast them off, as Out-lawes and
Enemies, but caused their Laws and customs to be examined, which were in many
points agreeable to the Irish or Brehon Law. Quibus diligenter auditis and
before intellectis, quasdam illarum (says the King in that Ordinance)
Consilio procerum delevimus; quasdam permissimus; quasdam correximus; ac etiam
quasdam alias adjiciendas and faciend. decrevimus; and so established a
Commonwealth among them, according to the form of the English Government. After
this, by reason of the sundry insurrections of the Barons; the Wars in France;
and the dissension between the houses of York and Lancaster, the State of
England, neglected or omitted the execution of this Statute of Rutland; so as a
great part of Wales grew wild and barbarous again. And therefore King Henry
the eighth, by the Statutes of 27. and 32. of his reign, did revive and
recontinue that Noble work begun by King Edward the first; and brought it
indeed to full perfection; For he united the Dominion of Wales, to the Crown of
England, and divided it into Shires, and erected in every Shire, one Borough,
as in England; and enabled them to send Knights and Burgesses to the
Parliament; established a Court of Presidency, and orda^ned that Justices of
Assise, and Jail-deliver, should make their half year circuits there, as in
England; made all the Laws and Statutes of England, in force there; and among
other Welsh Customs, abolished that of Gavel-kinde: whereby the Heirs-Females
were utterly excluded, and the Bastards did inherit, as well as the Legitimate,
which is the very Irish Gavel-kinde. By means whereof; that entire Country in a
short time was securely settled in peace and Obedience, and has attained to
that Civility of Manners, and plenty of all things, as now we find it not
inferior, to the best parts of England.

I will therefore knit up this point with these conclusions; First, that the
Kings of England, which in former Ages attempted the Conquest of Ireland, being
ill advised and counseled by the great men here, did not upon the submissions
of the Irish, communicate their Laws unto them, nor admit them to the state and
condition of Free-subjects: Secondly, that for the space of 200. years at
^east, after the first arrival of Henry the second in Ireland, the Irish would
gladly have embraced the Laws of England, and did earnestly desire the benefit
and protection thereof; which being denied them, did of necessity cause a
continual, bordering war between the English and the Irish. And lastly, if
according to the examples before recited, they had reduced as well the Irish
Countries, as the English Colonies, under one form of civil government (as now
they are,) the Meers and Bounds of the Marches and Borders, had been long since
worn out and forgotten, Giraldus Cambrensis. l. 2. de Hibernia expugnata.
(for it is not fit, as Cambrensis writes) that a King of an Island should
have any Marches or Borders, (but the four Seas) both Nations had been
incorporated and united; Ireland had been entirely Conquered, Planted, and
Improved; and returned a rich Revenue to the Cr^wn of England. 2. The Lands
conquered from the Ir^sh were not well distributed.


THE next error in the Civil policy which hindered the perfection of the
Conquest of Ireland, did consist in the Distribution of the Lands and
Possessions which were won and conquered from the Irish. For, the Scopes of
Land which were granted to the first Adventures, were too large; and the
Liberties and Royalties, which they obtained therein, were too great for
Subjects: though it stood with reason that they should be rewarded liberally
out of the fruits of their own Labors, since they did Militare propriis
stipendiis, and received no pay from the Crown of England. Notwithstanding
there ensued diverse inconveniences, that gave great impediment to the Conquest.

FIrst, The proportions of Land granted to the first Adventurers were too
large^ Giraldus Cambrensis, l. 2. de l^^bernia expugnata.
the Earl Strongbow was entitled to the whole Kingdom of Leinster; partly by
Invasion, and partly by Marriage; albeit, he surrendered the same entirely to
King Henry the second his Sovereign; for that with his license he came over;
and with the Aid of his Subjects, he had gained that great inheritance; yet did
the King regrant back again to him and his Heirs all that Province, reserving
only the City of Dublin, In Arch. Tur. 5 Ed. 3. escheat numero 104.
and the Cantreds next adjoining, with the Maritime Towns, and principal Forts
and Castles. Next, the same King granted to Robert Fitz-Stephen, and Miles
Cogan, the whole Kingdom of Cork, 2 Johan. Chart. m. 15. and m. 38.
from Lismore to the Sea. To Phillip Bruce, he gave the whole Kingdom of
Limerick, with the Donation of Bishopwricks, and Abbeys (except the City, and
one Cantred of land adjoining.) 6 Johan Chart. m. 1. 7 Johan. Chart. m. 12. and
n. 109. 6 Edw. 1. Chart. m. 19.18 Ed. 1. m. 29. Girald. Cambr. l. 2. de
Hibernia expug. All Ireland distributed to ten persons of the English Nation.
To Sir Hugh de Lacy, all Mead. To Sir John de Courcy, all Vlster. To William
Burke Fitz-Adelm, the greatest part of Conaght. In like manner, Sir Thomas de
Clare, obtained a grant of all Thomond; and Otho de Grandison of all Tipperary;
and Robert le Poer, of the Territory of Waterford, (the City it self, and the
Cantred of the Oastmen only excepted.) And thus was all Ireland Cantonized
among ten persons of the English Nation; and though they had not gained the
possession of one third part of the whole Kingdom, yet in Title they were
Owners and Lords of all, so as nothing was left to be granted to the Natives.
And therefore we do not find in any Record or story for the space of three
hundred years, after these Adventurers first arived in Ireland, 6 H. 3. Chart.
m. 2.
that any Irish Lord obtained a grant of his Country from the Crown, but only
the King of Thomond, who had a grant but during King Henry the third his
Minority: and Rotherick O Connor, King of Conaght, to whom King Henry the
second, Hovend. in H. 2. fol. 302. Archiu. tur. 17 Johan. Chart. m. 3.
before this distribution made, did grant (as is before declared.) Vt sit Rex
sub eo; and moreover, Vt teneat terram suam Conactiae it a been and in pace,
sicut tenuit antequam Dominus Rex intravit Hiberniam. And whose Successor, 6
Johan. Claus. m. 18.
in the 24 of Henry the third, when the Bourkes had made a strong Plantation
there, and had well-nigh expelled him out of his Territory, he came over into
England, (as Matthew. Matthew. Paris in Henry the third
Paris writes) and made complaint to King Henry the third of this Invasion
made by the Bourkes upon his Land, insisting upon the grants of King Henry the
second, and King John; and affirming, that he had duly paid an yearly tribute
of five thousand marks for his Kingdom. Whereupon, the King called unto him the
Lord Maurice fitz-Girald, who was then Lord Justice of Ireland, and President
in the Court; and commanded him that he should root out that unjust plantation,
which Hubert Earl of Kent had in the time of his greatness, planted in those
parts; and wrote withal to the great men of Ireland to remove the Bourks, and
to establish the King of Conaght in the quiet possession of his Kingdom.
Howbeit, I do not read, that the King of Englands commandment or direction in
this behalf was ever put in execution. For, the troth is; 3 Hen. 3.
Richard de Burgo had obtained a grant of all Conaght, after the death of the
King of Conaght, then living. For which he gave a thousand pound, as the Record
in the Tower recites, the third of Henry the third, claus. 2. And besides, our
great English Lords could not endure that any Kings should Reign in Ireland,
but themselves; nay, they could hardly endure that the Crown of England it
self, should have any Jurisdiction or Power over them. For many of these Lords,
The liberties granted to the first Adventurers were too great. Eight Counties
Palatines in Ireland at one time.
to whom our Kings had granted these petty Kingdoms, did by virtue and color
of these Grants, claim and exercise Jura Regalia within their Territories;
insomuch, as there were no less than eight Counties Palatines in Ireland at one
time.

For William Marshal, Earl of Pembroke, who married the Daughter and Heir of
Strongbow, being Lord of all Leinster, had Royal Jurisdiction thoroughout all
that Province. Annals Hiberniae in Camden.
This great Lord had five sons, and five daughters; every of his sons enjoyed
that Seigniory successively, and yet all dyed without issue. Then this great
Lordship was broken and divided, and partition made between the five daughters,
who were married into the Noblest Houses of England. The County of Catherlough
was allotted to the eldest; In Arch^u^. 1^ E^w 3. (...).
Wexford to the sec^nd; Kilkenny to the third; Kildare to the fourth; the
greatest part of Leix, now called the Queens County, to the fifth: In every of
these portions, the Ceparceners severally exercised the same Jurisdiction
Royal, which the Earl Marshal and his Sons had used in the whole Province. Five
Counties Palatines in Leinster.
Whereby it came to pass, that there were five County Palatines erected in
Leinster. Then had the Lord of Mead the same Royal liberty in all that
Territory; the Earl of Vlster in all that Province; Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
and the Lord of Desmond and Kerry within that County. All these appear upon
Record, and were all as ancient as the time of King John; Archiu. Tur. pat. 3.
E. 3. m. 28.
only the liberty of Tipperary, which is the only Liberty that remains at
this day, was granted to James Butler the first Earl of Ormond, in the third
year of King Edward the third.

These absolute Palatines made Barons and Knights, did exercise high Justice in
all points within their Territories, erected Courts for Criminal and Civil
Causes, Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
and for their own Revenues; in the same form, as the Kings Courts were
established at Dublin; made their own Judges, Seneshals, Sheriffs, Coroners,
and Escheators; so as the Kings Writ did not run in these Counties (which took
up more than two parts of the English Colonies) but only in the Church Lands
lying within the same, which were called the Cross, wherein the King made a
Sheriff: And so, in each of these Counties Palatines, there were two Sheriffs;
One, of the Liberty; and another of the Cross: As in Mead we find a Sheriff of
the Liberty, and a Sheriff of the Cross: And so in Vlster, and so in Wexford:
And so at this day, the Earl of Ormond makes a Sheriff of the Liberty, and the
King a Sheriff of the Cross of Tipperary. Hereby it is manifest, how much the
Kings Jurisdiction was restrained, and the power of these Lords enlarged by
these High Privileges. And it does further appear, by one Article among
others, preferred to King Edward the third, touching the Reformation of the
state of Ireland, which we find in the Tower, in these words, Item les
Francheses grantes in Ireland, que sont Roialles, tells come Duresme and
Cestre, vous oustont cybien de les profits, Come de graunde party de Obeisance
des persons enfrancheses; and en quescum frenchese est Chancellerie, Chequer
and conusans de pleas, cybien de la Coronne, Come autres communes, and grantont
auxi Charters de pardon; and sont sovent per ley et reasonable cause seisses en
vostre main, a grand profit de vous; and leigerment restitues per maundement
horse de Englettere, a damage, etc. Unto which Article, the King made answer, Le
Roy voet que les franchese que sont et serront per just cause prises en sa
main, ne soent my restitues, auant que le Roy soit certify de la cause de la
prise de acelles, 26 Ed. 3. claus. m. 1. Again, these great Undertakers, were
not tied to any form of Plantation, but all was left to their discretion and
pleasure. And although they builded Castles, and made Freeholders, yet were
there no Tenures or Services reserved to the Crown; but the Lords drew all the
respect and dependancy of the common people, unto Themselves. Now let us see
what inconveniences did arise by these large and ample Grants of Lands and
Liberties, to the first Adventurers in the Conquest.

ASsuredly by these Grants of whole Provinces, and petty Kingdoms, The
inconveniences which grew by the large grants of lands and liberties.
those few English Lords pretended to be Proprietors of all the Land, so as
there was no possibility left of settling the Natives in their Possessions, and
by consequence the conquest became impossible, without the utter extirpation of
all the Irish; which these English Lords were not able to do, nor perhaps
willing, if they had been able. Notwithstanding, because they did still hope to
become Lords of those Lands which were possessed by the Irish, whereunto they
pretended Title by their large Grants; and because they did fear, that if the
Irish were received into the Kings protection, and made Liege-men and
Free-Subjects, the State of England would establish them in their Possessions
by Grants from the Crown; reduce their Countries into Counties, ennoble some of
them; and enfranchise all, and make them amesueable to the Law, which would
have abridged and cut off a great part of that greatness which they had
promised unto themselves: they persuaded the King of England, that it was unfit
to communicate the Laws of England unto them; that it was the best policy to
hold them as Aliens and Enemies, and to prosecute them with a continual War.
The English Lords in Ireland made war and peace at their pleasure.
Hereby they obtained another Royal Prerogative and Power: which was, to make
War and Peace at their pleasure, in every part of the Kingdom. Which gave them
an absolute command over the bodies, lands, and goods of the English Subjects
here. And besides, the Irish inhabiting the lands fully conquered and reduced,
being in condition of Slaves and Villains, did render a greater Profit and
Revenue, than if they had been made the Kings Free-Subjects.

And for these two causes last expressed, they were not willing to root out all
the Irishry. We may not therefore marvel, that when King Edward the third, upon
the Petition of the Irish (as is before remembered) was desirous to be
certified, De voluntate magnatum suorum in proximo Parliamento in Hibernia
tenend. si sine alieno praejudicio concedere possit, quod per statut. inde
fact. Hibernici utantur legibus Anglicanis, sive Chartis Regiis inde
Impetrandis, that there was never any Statute made to that effect. For the
troth is, that those great English Lords did to the uttermost of their power,
cross and withstand the enfranchisement of the Irish, for the causes before
expressed; Wherein I must still clear and acquit the Crown and State of
England, of negligence or ill policy, and lay the fault upon the Pride,
Covetousness, and ill counsel of the English planted here, which in all former
ages have been the chief impediments of the final conquest of Ireland.

AGain, those large scopes of Land, The war and dissension of the English Lords
one with another.
and great Liberties, with the absolute power to make War and Peace, did raise
the English Lords to that height of Pride and Ambition, as that they could not
endure one another, but grew to a mortal War and Dissension among themselves:
as appears by all the Records and Stories of this Kingdom. First, in the
year, 1204. the Lacies of Mead, made War upon Sir John Courcy; who having
taken him by treachery, sent him prisoner into England. Annals Hiberniae in
Camd.
In the year, 1210. King John coming over in person, expelled the Lacies out of
the Kingdom, for their Tyranny and oppression of the English: howbeit, upon
payment of great Fines* they were afterward restored. In the year, 1228. that
family being risen to a greater height (for Hugh de Lacy the younger, was
created Earl of Vlster, after the death of Courcy without issue) there arose
dissension and War between that house, and William Marshal Lord of Leinster;
whereby all Mead was destroyed and laid waste. In the year, 1264. Sir Walter
Bourke having married the Daughter and Heir of Lacy, whereby he was Earl of
Vlster in right of his Wife, had mortal debate with Maurice Fitz-Morice the
Geraldine, for certain Lands in Conaght. So as all Ireland was full of Wars
between the Bourkes and the Geraldines (say our Annals.) Wherein Maurice
Fitz-Morice grew so insolent, as that upon a meeting at Thistledermot, he took
the Lord Justice himself, Sir Richard Capel, Prisoner, with diverse Lords of
Munster being then in his Company. In the year, 1288. Richard Bourke, Earl of
Vlster, (commonly called the Red Earl) pretending title to the Lordship of
Mead, made war upon Sir Theobald de Verdun, and besieged him in the Castle of
Athlone. Again, in the year, 1292. John Fitz-Thomas the Geraldine, having by
contention with the Lord Vesci, gotten a goodly inheritance in Kildare, grew to
that height of imagination (says the story) as he fell into difference with
diverse great Noblemen; and among many others, with Richard the Red Earl, whom
he took Prisoner, Annal Hiber in Ca^
and detained him in Castle-Ley; and by that dissension, the English on the one
side, and the Irish on the other, did waste and destroy all the Country.

After, in the year, 1311. the same Red Earl (coming to besiege Bonratty in
Thomond, Annals Johan. Clyn. Manusc.
which was then held by Sir Richard de Clare as his inheritance) was again
taken prisoner; And all his Army (consisting for the most part of English)
overthrown and cut in pieces, by Sir Richard de Clare. And after this again, in
the year, 1327. most of the great Houses were banded one against another,
(viz.) The Giraldines, Butlers, and Breminghams, on the one side, and the
Bourks and Poers on the other. The ground of the quarrel being none other, but
that the Lord Arnold Poer, had called the Earl of Kildare Rimer: But this
quarrel was prosecuted with such malice and violence, as the Counties of
Waterford and Kilkenny were destroyed with fire and sword, till a Parliament
was called of purpose, to quiet this dissension.

Shortly after, the Lord John Bremingham, who was not long before made Earl of
Louth, for that noble service which he performed upon the Scots, between
^undalk and the Faher, was so extremely envied by the Gernons, Verdons, and
others of the ancient Colony, planted in the County of Louth, as that in the
year, 1329. they did most wickedly betray and murder that Earl, with diverse
principal Gentlemen of his name and family; using the same speech that the
Rebellious Jews are said to use in the Gospel: Nolumus hunc regnare super nos.

After this, the Geraldines and the Butlers being become the most potent
families in the Kingdom (for the great Lordship of Leinster was divided among
Coparceners, whose Heirs for the most part lived in England; and the Earldom of
Vlster, with the Lordship of Mead, by the match of Lionel Duke of Clarence, at
last descended upon the Crown) had almost a continual war one with another.
Baron Finglas Manusc
In the time of King Henry the sixth (says Baron Finglas in his Discourse of
the Decay of Ireland,) in a sight between the Earls of Ormond and Desmond,
almost all the Townes-men of Kilkenny were slain. And as they followed
contrary parties during the Wars of York and Lancaster, so after that civil
dissension ended in England, these Houses in Ireland continued their opposition
and feud still, even till the time of K. Henry the eight; when by the Marriage
of Margaret Fitz-Girald to the Earl of Ossory, the houses of Kildare and Ormond
were reconciled, and have continued in amity ever since.

Thus these great Estates and Royalties granted to the English Lords in
Ireland, begat Pride; and Pride, begat Contention among themselves, which
brought forth diverse mischiefs, that did not only disable the English to
finish the conquest of all Ireland, but did endanger the loss of what was
already gained; And of Conquerors, made them Slaves to that Nation which they
did intend to Conquer. For, whenever one English Lord had vanquished another,
the Irish waited and took the opportunity, and fell upon that Country which
had received the blow; and so daily recovered some part of the Lands, which
were possessed by the English Colonies.

Besides, the English Lords to strengthen their parties, did ally themselves
with the Irish, and drew them in, Stat. 10 H. 7. c. 4.
to dwell among them, gave their Children to be fostered by them; and having no
other means to pay or reward them, suffered them to take Coigne and Livery upon
the English Freeholders; Rot. Parl. in castro Dublin.
which Oppression was so intolerable, as that the better sort were enforced to
quit their Free-holds and fly into England; and never returned, though many
Laws were made in both Realms, to remand them back again: and the rest which
remained, became degenerate and mere Irish, as is before declared. And the
English Lords finding the Irish exactions to be more profitable than the
English Rents and services; and loving the Irish Tyranny, which was tied to no
Rules of Law or Honor, better than a just and lawful Seigniory, did reject and
cast off the English Law and Government, received the Irish Laws and Customs,
took Irish Surnames, as Mac William, Baron Finglas, Manuscript.
Mac Pheris, Mac Yoris, refused to come to the Parliaments which were summoned
by the King of Englands Authority, and scorned to obey those English Knights
which were sent to command and govern this Kingdom; Namely, Sir Richard Capel,
Sir John Morris, Sir John Darcy, and Sir Raphe Vfford. And when Sir Anthony
Lucy, a man of great Authority in the time of King Edward the third, was sent
over to reform the notorious abuses of this Kingdom, Archiu. Tur. 5. Ed. 3.
claus. m. 4.
the King doubting that he should not be obeyed, directed a special Writ or
Mandate to the Earl of Vlster, and the rest of the Nobility to assist him. And
afterward, the same King (upon good advise and Counsel) resumed those
excessive Grants of Lands and Liberties in Ireland, by a special ordinance made
in England, which remains of Record in the Tower, in this form: Quia plures
excessivoe donationes terrarum and libertatum in Hibernia ad subdolam
machinationem petentium factae sunt, etc. Rex delusorias hujusmodi
machinationes volens elidere, Archiu. tur. 15. Ed. 3. claus. m. 4.
de consilio peritorum sibi assistentium, omnes donationes Terrarum and
libertatum praedict. duxit revocandas, quousque de meritis donatoriorum and
causis ac qualitatibus donationum melius fuerit informat. and ideo mandatum est
Justiciario Hiberniae quod seisiri faciat, etc. Howbeit, there followed upon
this resumption, such a division and faction between the English of Birth, and
the English of blood and race, as they summoned and held several Parliaments
apart one from the other. Whereupon, there had risen a general war betwixt
them, to the utter extinguishing of the English Name and Nation in Ireland, if
the Earl of Desmond, Annals Hiberniae in Camden.
who was head of the faction against the English of Birth, had not been sent
into England, and detained there for a time: yet afterward, these liberties
being restored by direction out of England, the 26. of Edward the third
complaint was made to the King of the easy restitution; whereunto the King
made answer, as is before expressed: so as we may conclude this point with that
which we find in the A^nals, published by Master Camden: H^bernici debellati
and consumpti fuissent nisi seditio Anglicorum impedivisse^ Whereunto I may add
this note, that though some are of opinion, that Grants of extraordinary
Honors and Liberties made by a King to his Subjects, do no more diminish his
greatness, than when one Torch lightet^ another; for it has no less light,
that it had before, Quis vetat apposito lumen de lumine sumi? Yet many time^
inconveniences do arise thereupon and those Princes have held up their
Sovereignty best, The first Adventurers obtained these liberal Grants, because
the Kings of England d^d not prosecute the war at their own charge.
which have been sparing in those Grants. And truly as these Grants of little
Kingdoms, and great Royalties, to a few private persons, did produce the
mischiefs spoken of before: So the true cause of the making of these Grants,
did proceed from this; That the Kings of England being otherwise employed and
diverted, did not make the Conquest of Ireland, their own work, and undertake
it not royally at their own charge; but as it was first begun by particular
Adventurers, so they left the prosecution thereof, to them, and other
voluntaries, who came to seek their fortunes in Ireland; wherein if they could
prevail, they thought that in reason and honor they could do no less, than
make them proprietors of such scopes of Land as they could conquer, people, and
plant at their own charge, reserving only the Sovereign Lordship to the Crown
of England. But if the Lion had gone to hunt himself, the shares of the
Inferior Beasts had not been so great: If the invasion had been made by an
army transmitted, furnished, and supplied only at the Kings charges, and wholly
paid with the Kings Treasure, as the Armies of Queen Elizabeth, and King James
have been; as the conquest had been sooner achieved, so the serviters had been
contented with lesser proportions.

For, when Scipio, Pompey, Caesar, and other Generals of the Roman Armies, as
Subjects and Servants of that State, How the State of Rome rewarded their men
of war.
and with the public charge had conquered many Kingdoms and Commonweals, we
find them rewarded with Honorable Offices and Triumphs at their return; and
not made Lords and proprietors of whole Provinces and Kingdoms, which they had
subdued, William the Conqueror.
to the Empire of Rome. Likewise when the Duke of Normandy had conquered
England, which he made his own work, and performed it in his own person, he
distributed sundry Lordships and Manors unto his followers, but gave not away
whole Shires and Countries in demeasne to any of his servitors, whom he most
desired to advance. Camden in Chester.
Only, he made Hugh Lupus County Palatine of Chester, and gave that Earldom to
him and his Heirs, to hold the same, Ita libere ad gladium, sicut Rex tenebat
Angliam ad Coronam. Whereby that Earldom indeed had a royal Jurisdiction and
Seigniory, though the Lands of that County in demeasne, were possessed for the
most part by the ancient Inheritors.

Again, from the time of the Norman Conquest, Wales distributed to the L.
Marchers.
till the reign of King Edward the first, many of our English Lords, made war
upon the Welshmen at their own charge; the Lands which they gained they held to
their own use, were called Lords Marchers, and had Royal Liberties within their
Lordships. Howbeit, these particular Adventurers, could never make a perfect
Conquest of Wales.

But when King Edward the first, came in person with his army thither, kept his
residence and Court there; made the reducing of Wales, an enterprise of his
own; he finished that work in a year or two, whereof the Lords Marchers had not
performed a third part, with their continual bordering war, for two hundred
years before. And withal we may observe, that though this King had now the
Dominion of Wales in Jure proprietatis, as the Statute of Rutland affirms;
which before was subject unto him, but in Jure feodali: And though he had lost
diverse principal Knights and Noblemen in that war, yet did he not reward his
servitors with whole Countries or Counties, but with particular Manors and
Lordships: as to Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, he gave the Lordship of Denbigh;
and to Reignold Gray, the Lordship of Ruthen, and so to others. And if the like
course had been used in the winning and distributing the lands of Ireland, that
Island had been fully conquered before the continent of Wales had been reduced.
But the troth is, when Private men attempt the Conquest of Countries at their
own charge, commonly their enterprises do perish without success: as when, in
the time of Queen Elizabeth, Sir Thomas Smith, undertook to recover the Ardes:
and Chatterton, to reconquer then Fues and Orier. The one lost his Son; and the
other, Himself; and both their Adventures came to nothing. And as for the Crown
of England, it has had the like fortune in the Conquest of this land, as some
purchasers have; who desire to buy land at too easy a Rate: they find those
cheap purchases so full of trouble, as they spend twice as much as the Land is
worth, before they get the quiet possession thereof.

And as the best policy was not observed in the distribution of the conquered
Lands; so as I conceive, that the first Adventurers, intending to make a full
Conquest of the Irish, were deceived in the choice of the fittest places for
their plantation. For they sat down, and erected their Castles and Habitations
in the Plains and open Countries; where they found most fruitful and profitable
Lands, and turned the Irish into the Woods and Mountains: Which, as they were
proper places for Outlaws and Thieves, so were they their Natural Castles and
Fortifications; thither they drove their preys and stealths: there they lurkt,
and lay in wait to do mischief. These fast places they kept unknown, by making
the ways and Entries thereunto impassible; there they kept their Creaghts or
Heardes of Cattle, living by the milk of the Cow, without Husbandry or
Tillage; there they increased and multiplied unto infinite numbers by
promiscuous generation among themselves; there they made their Assemblies and
Conspiracies without discovery: But they discovered the weakness of the English
dwelling in the open plains; and thereupon made their sallies and retreats with
great advantage. Whereas, on the other side, if the English had builded their
Castles and Towns in those places of fastness, and had driven the Irish into
the Plains and open Countries, where they might have had an eye and observation
upon them, the Irish had been easily kept in Order, and in short time reclaimed
from their wildeness; there they would have used Tillage, dwelt together in
Town-ships, and learned Mechanical Arts and Sciences. The woods had been wasted
with the English Habitations, as they are about the Forts of Mariborough and
Philipston, which were built in the fastest places in Leinster, and the ways
and passages throughout Ireland, would have been as clear and open, as they are
in England at this day.

AGain, if King Henry the Second, The English Lords did not reduce the woods
and wastes in Forests and Parks Chart. de forest. c. 2. and. 3.
who is said to be the King that Conquered this Land, had made Forests in
Ireland, as he did enlarge the Forests in England (for it appears by Charta
de Foresta, that he afforrested many woods and wastes, to the grievance of the
Subject, which by that Law were disaforrested,) or if those English Lords,
amongst whom the whole Kingdom was divided, had been good Hunters, and had
reduced the Mountains, Boggs, and Woods within the limits of Forests, Chases,
and Parks; assuredly, the very Forest Law, and the Law de Malefactoribus in
parcis, would in time have driven them into the Plains and Countries inhabited
and manured, and have made them yield up their fast places to those wild
Beasts, which were indeed less hurtful and wild than they. But it seems
strange to me, that in all the Records of this Kingdom, I seldom find any
mention made of a Forest; and never of any Park or Free Warren; considering
the great plenty both of Vert and Venison within this Land; and that the chief
of the Nobility and Gentry are descended of English race; and yet at this day,
there is but one Park stored with Deer in all this Kingdom: which is a Park
of the Earl of Ormonds, near Kilkenny. It is then manifest, by that which is
before expressed; that the not communicating of the English laws to the Irish;
the over large Grants of Lands and Liberties to the English; the plantation
made by the English in the Plains and open Countries, leaving the Woods and
Mountains to the Irish, were great Defects in the Civil policy, and hindered
the perfection of the Conquest very much. Howbeit, notwithstanding these
Defects and Errors, the English Colonies stood and maintained themselves in a
reasonable good estate, as long as they retained their own ancient Laws and
customs, according to that of Ennius: The English Colonies rejected the English
laws and customs, and embraced the Irish.
Moribus antiquis res stat. Romana virisque. But when the civil Government grew
so weak and so loose, as that the English Lords would not suffer the English
laws to be put in execution within their Territories and Seigniories, but in
place thereof, both they and their people, embraced the Irish customs: Then the
estate of things, like a Game at Irish, was so turned about, as the English,
which hoped to make a perfect Conquest of the Irish, were by them perfectly and
absolutely conquered; because Victi victoribus leges dedere. A just punishment
to our Nation, that would not give Laws to the Irish, when they might: and
therefore now the Irish gave Laws to them. Therefore, this Defect and failing
of the English Justice, in the English Colonies; and the inducing of the Irish
customs in lieu thereof, was the main impediment that did arrest and stop the
course of the Conquest; and was the only mean that enabled the Irishry to
recover their strength again.

The Nature of Irish Customs.
FOr, if we consider the Nature of the Irish Customs, we shall find that the
people, which does use them, must of necessity be Rebels to all good
Government, destroy the commonwealth wherein they live, and bring Barbarism
and desolation upon the richest and most fruitful Land of the World. The Irish
laws and customs, differing from the laws and customs of all civil Nations.
For, whereas by the just and Honorable Law of England, and by the Laws of all
other well-governed Kingdoms and Commonweals, Murder, Manslaughter, Rape,
Robbery, and Theft, are punished with death; By the Irish Custom, or Brehon
Law, the highest of these offenses was punished only by Fine, which they called
an Ericke. Therefore, when Sir William Fitz-Williams, (being Lord Deputy, The
Irish law in criminal causes.
) told Maguyre, that he was to send a Sheriff into Fermannagh, being lately
before made a County; your Sheriff (sa^d Maguyre) shall be welcome to me, but
let me know his Ericke, or the price of his head before hand; that if my people
cut it off, I may cut the Ericke upon the Country. As for Oppression,
Exto^tion, and other trespasses, the weaker had never any remedy against the
stronger: whereby it came to pass, that no man could enjoy his Life, his Wife,
his Lands or Goods in safety, if a mightier man than himself had an appetite to
take the same from him. Wherein they were little better than Cannibal, who do
hunt one another; and he that has most strength and swiftness, does eat and
devour all his fellows.

Again, in England, and all well ordered Common-wea^s, Men have certain estates
in their Lands and possessions, and their inheritances descend from Father to
Son, which does give them encouragement to build, and to plant, and to improve
their Lands, and to make them better for their posterities. But by the Irish
Custom of Tanistry, The Irish custom of tanistry.
the Chieftanes of every Country, and the chief of every Sept, had no longer
estate than for life in their Cheefe^ies, the inheritance whereof, did ^est in
no man. And these Cheeferies, though they had some portions of Lands allotted
unto them, did consist chiefly in cuttings and Cosheries, and other Irish
exactions, whereby they did spoil and impoverish the people at their pleasure.
And when their Chieftanes were dead, their Sons or next heirs did not succeed
them, but their Tanistes, who were Elective, and purchased their elections by
strong hand; And by the Irish Custom of Gavel-kinde, The Irish Custom of
Gavel-kind.
the inferior Tennanties were partible amongst all the Males of the Sept, both
Bastards and Legitimate: and after partition made, if any one of the Sept had
dyed, his portion was not divided among his Sons, but the chief of the sept,
made a new partition of all the Lands belonging to that Sept, and gave every
one his part according to his antiquity.

The mischiefs that arise, by these two customs.
THese two Irish Customs made all their possessions uncertain, being shuffled,
and changed, and removed so often from one to another, by new elections and
partitions; which uncertainty of estates, has been the true cause of such
Desolation and Barbarism in this Land, as the like was never seen in any
Country, that professed the name of Christ. For though the Irishry be a Nation
of great Antiquity, and wanted neither wit nor valor; and though they had
received the Christian Faith, above 1200 years since; and were lovers of
Music, Poetry, and all kind of Learning; and possessed a Land abounding with
all things necessary for the civil life of man; yet (which is strange to be
related) they did never build any houses of brick or stone (some few poor
Religious Houses excepted) before the Reign of King Henry the second, though
they were Lords of this Island for many hundred years before, and since the
Conquest attempted by the English: Albeit, when they saw us build Castles upon
their borders, they have only in imitation of us, erected some few piles for
the Captains of the Country: yet I dare boldly say, that never any particular
person, either before or since, did build any stone or brick house for his
private habitation; but such as have lately obtained estates, according to the
course of the Law of England. Neither did any of them in all this time, plant
any Ga^dens or Orchards, enclose or improve their Lands, live together in
sett^ed Vi^lages or Towns, nor made any provision for posterity; which being
against all common sense and reason, must needs be imputed to those
unreasonable Customs, which made their estates so uncertain and transitory in
their possessions.

For, who would plant or improve, or build upon that Land, which a stranger,
whom he knew not, should possess after his death? For that (as Solomon notes)
is one of the strangest vanities under the Sun. And th^s is the true reason why
Vlster, and all the Ir^sh Countries are found so waste and desolate at this
day; and so would they continue till the worlds end, if these customs were not
abolished by the Law of England.

Again, that Irish custom of Gavil-kinde, did breed another mischief; for
thereby, every man, being born to Land, as well Bastard, as Legitimate, they
all held themselves to be Gentlemen. And though their portions were never so
small, and themselves never so poor (For Gavel-kinde must needs in the and make
a poor Gentility) yet did they scorn to descend to H^sbandry or Merchandise, or
to learn any Mechanical Art or Science. And this is the true cause why there
were never any Corporate Towns erected in the Irish Countries. As for the
Maritime Cities and Towns, most certain it is, that they were built and peopled
by the Oostmen or Easterlings: for the Natives of Ireland never performed so
good a work, as to build a City. Besides, these poor Gentlemen were so affected
unto their small portions of Land, as they rather chose to live at home by
Theft, Extortion, and Coshering, than to seek any better fortunes abroad: which
increased their Septs or Sirnames into such numbers, as the^e are not to be
found in any Kingdom of Europe, so many Gentlemen of one Blood, Family, and
Surname, as there are of the Oneals in Vlster; of the Bourks, in Conaght; of
the Geraldine^ and Butlers, in Munster and Leinster. And the like may be said
of the inferior Bloods and Families; whereby it came to pass in times of
Trouble and Dissension, that they made great parties and factions, adhering one
to another, with much constancy; because they were tied together, Vinculo
sanguinis; whereas Rebels and Malefactors, which are tied to their Leaders by
no band, either of Duty or blood, do more easily break and fall off one from
another. And besides, their co-habitation in one Country or Territory, gave
them opportunity suddenly to assemble, and conspire, and rise in multitudes
against the Crown. And even now, in the time of peace, we find this
inconvenience, that there can hardly be an indifferent trial had between the
King and the Subject, or between party and party, by reason of this general
Kindred and Consanguinity.

BUT the most wicked and michievous custom of all others, The wicked customs of
Coigne and Livery.
was that of Coigne and Livery, often before mentioned; which consisted in
taking of Mans-meat, Horse-meat, and Money, of all the inhabitants of the
Country, at the will and pleasure of the Soldier, who as the phrase of
Scripture is, Did eat up the people as it were bread; for that he had no other
entertainment. This Extortion was originally Irish, for they used to lay
Bonaght upon their people, and never gave their Soldier any other pay. The
mischiefs that did arise by Coigne and Livery.
But when the English had learned it, they used it with more insolency, and
made it more intolerable; for this oppression was not temporary, or limited
either to place or time; but because there was every where a continual War,
either Offensive, or Defensive; and every Lord of a Country, and every Marcher
made War and Peace at his pleasure, it became universal and perpetual; and was
indeed the most heavy oppression, that ever was used in any Christian, or
Heathen Kingdom. And thefore Vox Oppressorum, this crying sin, did draw down as
great, or greater plagues upon Ireland, than the oppression of the Israelites
did draw upon the Land of Egypt. For the plagues of Egypt, though they were
grievous, were but of a short continuance. But the plagues of Ireland, lasted
four hundred years together. This Extortion of Coigne and Livery, did produce
two notorious effects. First, it made the Land waste; Next, it made the people
idle. For, The cause of idleness in the Irish.
when the Husbandman had labored all the year, the Soldier in one night, did
consume the fruits of all his labor, Longique perit labor irritu^ anni. Had he
reason then to manure the Land for the next year? Or rather might he not
complain as the Shepherd in Virgil: Impius haec tam culta novalia miles habebit?
Barbarus has segetes? En quo discordia cives
Perduxit miseros? En queis consevimus agros?


AND hereupon of necessity came depopulation, banishment, and extirpation of
the better sort of Subjects: and such as remained, became idle, and looke^s on,
expecting the event of those miseries and ev^l times: So as this extreme
Extortion and Oppression, has been the true cause of the idleness of this
Irish Nation; Why the Irish are Beggars in foreign Countries
and that rather the vulgar sort have chosen to be Beggars in Foreign
Countries, than to manure their own fruitful Land at home.

Lastly, Why the Irish are reputed a crafty people.
this oppression did of force and necessity make the Irish a crafty people: for
such as are oppressed and live in slavery, are ever put to their shifts;
Ingenium mala saepe movent; And therefore, in the o^d Comedies of Plantus and
Terence, the Bondslave does always act the cunning and crafty part. Besides,
all the common people have a whining tune or Accent in their speech, Why the
Irish are inquisitive after news.
as if they did still smart or suffer some oppression. And this idleness,
together with fear of imminent mischiefs, which did continually hang over their
heads, have been the cause, that the Irish were ever the most inquisitive
people after news, of any Nation in the World. As S. Paul himself made
observation upon the people of Athens; that they were an idle people, and did
nothing but learn and tell news. And because these News-carriers, did by their
false intelligence, many times raise troubles and rebellions in this Realm, the
Statute of Kilkenny, does punish News-tellers) by the name of Skelaghes) with
fine and ransom.

This Extortion of Coigne and Livery, was taken for the maintenance of their
men of War; but their Irish exactions extorted by the Chieftains and Tanists,
by color of their barbarous Seignory, were almost as grievous a burden as the
other; Cosherings.
namely Cosherings, which were visitations and progresses made by the Lord and
his followers, among his Tenants: wherein he did eat them (as the English
Proverb is) Out of House and home. Sessings.
Sessings of the Kern, of his family, called Kernety, of his Horses and
Horse-boys; of his Dogs and Dog-boys, and the like: And lastly, Cuttings,
Cuttings.
Tallages, or Spendings, high or low, at his pleasure; all which, made the Lord
an absolute Tyrant, and the Tennant a very Slave and Villain; and in one
respect more miserable than Bondslaves. For commonly the Bondslave is fed by
his Lord, but here the Lord was fed by his Bondslave.

Lastly, there were two other Customs proper and peculiar to the Irishry, which
being the cause of many strong Combinations and Factions, do tend to the utter
ruin of a Commonwealth: The one, was Fostering; the other, Gossipred; both
which have ever been of greater estimation among this people, than with any
other Nation in the Christian World. For Fostering, I did never hear or read,
that it was in that use or reputation in any other Country, Barbarous or
Civil, as it has been, and yet is, in Ireland: where they put away all their
children to Fosterers: the potent and rich men Sellings; the meaneri sort
Buying, the alterage of their Children; and the reason is, because in the
opinion of this people, Fostering has always been a stronger alliance than
Blood; and the Foster-Children do love, and are beloved of their
Foster-Fathers, and their Sept, more than of their own natural Parents and
Kindred; and do participate of their means more frankly, and do adhere unto
them in all Fortunes, with more affection and constancy. And though Tully in
his Book of Friendship does observe, that children of Princes being sometimes
in cases of necessity, for saving of their lives delivered to Shepherds to be
nourished and bred up, when they have been restored to their great fortunes,
have still retained their love and affection to their Fosterers, whom for many
years they took to be their Parents: yet this was a rare case, and few examples
are to be found thereof.

But such a general custom in a Kingdom, in giving and taking children to
Foster, making such a firm alliance as it does in Ireland, was never seen or
heard of, in any other Country of the World besides.

THE like may be said of Gossipred, Gossipred
or Compaternity, which though by the Canon Law, it be a Spiritual affinity,
and a Juror that was Goship to either of the parties, might in former times
have been challenged, as not indifferent by our Law, yet there was no Nation
under the Sun, that ever made so Religious account thereof, as the Irish.

Now these two Customs, which of themselves are indifferent in other Kingdoms,
became exceeding evil and full of mischief in this Realm, by reason of the
inconveniences which followed thereupon. For, they made (as I said before)
strong parties and factions, whereby the great men were enabled to oppress
their Inferiors* and to oppose their Equals: and their followers were born out
and countenanced in all their lewd and wicked actions: For Fosterers and
Gossips by the common custom of Ireland; were to maintain one another in all
causes lawful, and unlawful; which as it is a Combination and Confederacy
punishable in all well-govern Commonweals, so was it not one of the least
causes of the common misery of this Kingdom.

I omit their common repudiation of their Wives; their promiscuous generation
of Children; their neglect of lawful Matrimony; their uncleanness in Apparel,
Diet, and Lodging; and their contempt and scorn of all things necessary for the
civil life of man.

How the English Colonies beca^^e degenerate.
These were the Irish Customs, which the English Colonies did embrace and use,
after they had rejected the Civil and Honorable Laws and Customs of England,
whereby they became Degenerate and Metamorphosed like Nebuchadnezzar: who
although he had the face of a man, had the heart of a beast; or like those who
had drunk of Circes Cup, and were turned into very Beasts; and yet took such
pleasure in their beastly manner of life, as they would not return to their
shape of men again: Insomuch, as within less time than the age of a man, they
had no marks or differences left amongst them of that Noble Nation, from which
they were descended. For, as they did not only forget the English Language,
and scorn the use thereof, but grew to be ashamed of their very English Names,
though they were Noble and of great Antiquity; and took Irish Sirnames and
Nicknames. Namely, the two most potent Families of the Bourks in Conaght
(after the House of the Red Earl failed of Heirs males) called their Chiefs,
Mac William Fighter, and Mac William Oughter. In the same Province, Bremingham,
Baron of Athenrie, called himself Mac Yoris. Dexecester or De'exon, was called
Mac Jordan. Mangle, or de Angulo, took the name of Mac Costelo. Of the Inferior
families of the Bourkes, one was called Mac Hubbard, another Mac David. In
Munster, of the great Families of the Geraldines planted there; one was called
Mac Morice, chief of the House of Lixnaw; and another, Mac Gibbon, who was also
called the White Knight. The chief of the Baron of Dunboynes house, who is a
branch of the House of Ormond, took the Sirnames of Mac Pheris. Condon of the
County of Waterford, was called Mac Maioge and the Archdeacon of the County of
Kilkenny, Mac Odo. And this they did in contempt and hatred of the English Name
and Nation; whereof these degenerate families became more mortal enemies, than
the mere Irish. And whereas the State and Government being grown weak by their
defection, did to reduce them to Obedience, grant them many Protections and
Pardons (The cheapness whereof, in all ages, has brought great dishonor and
damage to this Commonweal) they grew so ungrateful and unnatural, as in the end
they scorned that grace and favor, because the acceptance thereof, did argue
them to be s^bjects, and they desired rather to be accounted Enemies, than
Rebels to the Crown of England.

Hereupon was that old Verse made, Alb. libr. Scacc. Dubl.
which I find written in the White Book of the Exchequer, in a hand as ancient
as the time of King Edward the third.

By granting Charters of peace,
To false English withouten les,
This Land shall be mich undoo.
But Gossipred, and alterage,
And leesing of our Languge,
Have mickely holp theretoo.
And therefore, in a Close Roll in the Tower, bearing this title, Articuli in
Hibernia observandi: we find these two Articles among others. 1. 5 Ed. 3. m.
25.
Justiciarius Hiberniae non concedat perdonationes de morte hominis, nec de
Roberiis, seu incendiis, and quod de caetero certificet dominum regem de
nominibus petentium. 2. Item, Quod nec Justiciarius nec aliquis Magnas
Hiberniae concedat protectiones alicui contra pacem Regis existent. etc. But
now it is fit to look back and consider when the old English Colonies became so
degenerate; and in what age they fell away into that Irish Barbarism, rejecting
the English Laws and Customs. When and how the English Colonies became
degenerate.
Assuredly, by comparing the ancient Annals of Ireland, with the Records
remaining here, and in the Tower of London, I do find that this general
defection, fell out in the latter end of the Reign of King Edward the second,
and in the beginning of the Reign of King Edward the third. And all this great
Innovation, grew within the space of thirty years: within the compass of which
time, there fell out diverse mischievous accidents, whereby the whole kingdom
was in a manner lost. The Scots overrun Ireland.
For first, Edward de Bruce invaded Ireland with the Scottish Army, and
prevailed so far, as that he possessed the Maritime parts of Vlster, marched up
to the walls of Dublin, spoiled the English Pale, passed thorough Leinster and
Munster, as far as Limerick, and was Master of the field in every part of the
Kingdom.

This happened in the tenth year of King Edward the second, at what time the
Crown of England was weaker, and suffered more dishonor in both Kingdoms, than
it did at any time since the Norman Conquest. Annals Hiberniae in Camden*
Then did the State of England send over John de Hotham to be Treasurer here,
with commission to call the great Lords of Ireland together; and to take of
them an Oath of Association, that they should loyally join together in life and
death to preserve the right of the King of England, and to expel the common
enemy. But this Treasurer brought neither men, nor money, to perform this
service.

At that time, though Richard Bourk Earl of Vlster (commonly called the Red
Earl) were of greater power than any other Subject in Ireland, yet was he so
far stricken in years, as that he was unable to manage the martial affairs, as
he had done during all the reign of King Edward the first: having been General
of the Irish forces, not only in this Kingdom, but in the Wars of Scotland,
Wales, and Gascoign. Desmond chief commander in the war against the Scots.
And therefore, Maurice Fitz-Thomas of Desmond, being then the most active
Noble man in this Realm, took upon him the chief command in this War: for the
support whereof, the Revenue of this Land was far too short, and yet no supply
of Treasure was sent out of England.

Then was there no means to maintain the Army, When and how the extortion of
Coign and Livery began among the English.
but by Sessing the Soldiers upon the Subject, as the Irish were wont to impose
their Bonaught. Whereupon, grew that wicked Extortion of Coigne and Livery
spoken of before, which in short time banished the greatest part of the
Freeholders out of the County of Kerry, Limerirk, Cork, and Waterford; Into
whose possessions, Desmond and his Kinsemen, Allies, and Followers, which were
then more Irish than English, did enter and appropriate these Lands unto
themselves, Desmond himself taking what scopes he best liked for his demeasnes
in every Country, and reserving an Irish Seigniory out of the rest. And here,
that I may verify and maintain by matter of Record, that which is before
delivered touching the Nature of this wicked Extortion, called Coigne and
Livery; and the manifold mischiefs it did produce, I think it fit and pertinent
to insert the preamble of the Statute of 10. of Henry seventh, c. 4. not
printed, but recorded in Parliament Rols of Dublin, in these words: At the
request and supplication of the Commons of this Land of Ireland, that where of
long time there has been used and exacted by the Lords and Gentlemen of this
Land, many and diverse damnable customs and usages, which been called Coigne and
Livery, and Pay; that is, Horse meat and Man's meat, for the finding of their
Horsemen and Footmen; and over that, 4. d. or 6. d. daily to every of them to
be had and paid of the poor Earth Tillers, and Tenants, inhabitants of the said
Land, without any thing doing or paying therefore. Besides, many Murders,
Robberies Rapes, and other manifold extortions and oppressions by the said
Horsemen and Footmen, daily and nightly committed and done; which been the
principal causes of the desolation and destruction of the said Land, and has
brought the same into ruin and Decay, so as the most part of the English
Freeholders and Tenants of this Land been departed out thereof, some into the
Realm of England, and other some to other strange Lands; whereupon the foresaid
Lords and Gentlemen of this Land, have intruded into the said Freeholders and
Tenants inheritances; and the same keeps and occupies as their own
inheritances; and setten under them in the same Land the Kings Irish Enemies,
to the diminishing of Holy Churches Rites, the disherison of the King, and his
obedient Subjects, and the utter ruin and desolation of the Land. For
reformation whereof, be it enacted, That the King shall receive a Subsidy of
26. s. 8. d. out of every 120. acres of arable land manured, etc. But to return
to Thomas Fitz-Maurice of Desmond; By this extortion of Coigne and Livery, he
suddenly grew from a mean, to a mighty estate; insomuch as the Baron Finglas
in his discourse of the decay of Ireland, affirms; that his ancient
inheritance being not one thousand marks yearly, he became able to dispend
every way, ten thousand pounds, per annum.

These possessions being thus unlawfully gotten, could not be maintained by the
just and honorable Law of England, which would have restored the true Owners
to their Land again. And therefore, this Great man found no means to continue
and uphold his ill-purchased greatness, but by rejecting the English Law and
Government, and assuming in lieu thereof, the barbarous customs of the Irish.
And hereupon, followed the defection of those four shires, containing the
greatest part of Munster, from the obedience of the Law.

In like manner (says Baron Finglas) the Lord of Tipperary (perceiving how
well the house of Desmond had thrived by Coigne and Livery, and other Irish
exactions) began to hold the like course in the Counties of Tipperary and
Kilkenny; whereby he got great scopes of Land, especially in Ormond; and raised
many Irish exactions upon the English Freeholders there; which made him so
potent and absolute among them, as at that time they knew no other Law, than
the will of their Lord. Besides, finding, that the Earl of Desmond excluded the
ordinary Ministers of Justice, under color of a Royal liberty, which he
claimed in the Counties of Kerry, Cork, and Waterford, by a grant of King
Edward the first, (as appears in a Quo warranto, brought against him, Anno
12. Edw. 1.) the Record whereof, remains in Breminghams Tower, among the
common Plea-Rolls there.

This Lord also, in the third of Edward the third, obtained a Grant of the like
liberty in the County of Tipperary, whereby he got the Law into his own hands,
and shut out the Common Law and Justice of the Realm.

And thus we see that all Munster fell away from the English law and
Government, in the end of King Edward the second, his reign; and in the
beginning of the reign of King Edward the third. Again, about the same time,
(viz.) in the 20. year of King Edward the second, when the State of England was
well-ny ruined by the Rebellion of the Barons, and the Government of Ireland
utterly neglected, there arose in Leinster, one of the Cavanaghes, The rising
Mac Murrogh and O M^re in Leinster. Annals hiberniae in Camden.

Annals Johan. Clynne. Manus. The defect and loss of a great part of Leinster.


named Donald Mac Art, who named himself Mac Murrogh, King of Leinster, and
possessed himself of the County of Catherlogh, and of the greatest part of the
County of Wexford. And shortly after Lisagh O Moore, called himself O Moore,
took eight Castles in one Evening, destroyed Duamase the principal house of the
L. Mortimer in Leix, recovered that whole Country, De servo Dominus, de
subjecto princeps effectus, says Friar Clynn in his Annalls.

Besides the Earl of Kildare, imitating his Cousin of Desmond, did not omit to
make the like use of Coigne and Livery in Kildare, and the West part of Mead,
which brought the like Barbarism into those parts. And thus a great part of
Leinster was lost, and fell away from the Obedience of the Crown, near about
the time before expressed.

Again, in the seventh year of King Edward the Third, the Lord William Bourke,
Earl of Vlster, and Lord of Conaght, The Earl of Vlster murdered.
was treacherously murdered by his own Squires at Knockfergus, leaving behind
him, Vnicam and unius anni filiam (says Friar Clinne.) Immediately upon the
murder committed, Annals Johan, Clynne, Manus.
the Countess with her young daughter fled into England; so as the Government
of that Country, was wholly neglected, until, that young Lady being married to
Lionel Duke of Clarence, that Prince came over with an Army, to recover his
Wives inheritance, and so reform this Kingdom, Anno 36. of Edward the third.
But in the mean time, what became of that great inheritance both in Vlster and
Conaght? Assuredly, The Earldom of Vlster recovered by the Irish.
in Vlster, the Sept of Hugh Bog O Neal, then possessing Glaucoukeyn and
Killeightra in Tyrone, took the opportunity; and passing over the Banne,
Abridgement of Salus populi mascript. Baron Finglas, Manus.
did first expel the English out of the Barony of Tuscard, which is now called
the Rout; and likewise, out of the Glynnes and other Lands up as far as
Knockfergus, which Country or extent of Land, is at this day called, the lower
Clan Hugh-Boy. And shortly after that, they came up into the great Ardes; which
the Latin writers call, Altitudines Vltoniae, and was then the inheritance of
the Savages; by whom, they were valiantly resisted for diverse years: but at
last: for want of Castles and fortifications (for the saying of Henry Savage
mentioned in every Story, is very memorable; That a Castle of Bones, was better
than a Castle of Stones.) the English were overrun by the multitude of the
Irishry: Annals Hiberniae in Camden.
So as about the thirtieth of King Edward the third, some few years before the
arrival of the Duke of Clarence, the Savages were utterly driven out of the
Great Ardes, into a little nook of Land near the River of Strangford; where
they now possess a little Territory, called the little Ardes; and their greater
patrimony took the name of the upper Clan Hugh-Boy, from the Sept of Hugh Boy O
Neale, who became Invaders thereof.

The defection of Conaght.
FOr Conaght, some younger branches of the Family of the Bourkes, being planted
there by the Red Earl and his Ancestors, seeing their chief to be cut off, and
dead without Heir-male, and no man left to govern or protect that Province,
intruded presently into all the Earls Lands, which ought to have been seized
into the Kings hands, by reason of the minority of the heir. And within a short
space, two of the most potent among them, divided that great Seigniory betwixt
them the one taking the name of Mac William Oughtier; Baron Finglas, Manus.
and the other of Mac William Fighter; as if the Lord William Bourke the last
Earl of Vlster, had left two Sons of one name behind him to inherit that
Lordship in course of Gavel-kind. But they well knew, that they were but
Intruders upon the Kings possession during the minority of the heir; they knew
those Lands were the rightful inheritance of that young Lady; and
consequently, that the Law of England would speedily evict them out of their
possession; and therefore, they held it the best policy to cast off the yoke
of English Law, and to become mere Irish: and according to their example, drew
all the rest of the English in that Province, to do the like; so as from
thenceforth they suffered their possessions to run in course of Tanistry and
Gavel-kinde. They changed their names, language, and apparel, and all their
civil manners and Customs of living. Lastly, about the 25. Annals Hiberniae in
Camden.
year of King Edward the third, Sir Richard de Clare was slain in Thomond, and
all the English Colonies there utterly supplanted.

Thus in that space of time, which was between the tenth year of King Edward
the second, and the 30. year of King Edward the third, (I speak within compass)
by the concurrence of the mischiefs before recited, all the old English
Colonies in Munster, Conaght, and Vlster; and more than a third part of
Leinster, became degenerate, and fell away from the Crown of England; so as
only the four shires of the English Pale, remained under the Obedience of the
Law; and yet the Borders and Marches thereof, were grown unruly, and out of
order too, being subject to Black-Rents and Tribute of the Irish; What courses
have been taken to reform this Kingdom, since the English Colonies became
degenerate. Edw. 2.
which was a greater defection, than when ten of twelve Tribes departed, and
fell away from Kings of Juda.

But was not the State of England sensible of this loss and dishonor? Did they
not endeavor to recover the Land that was lost, and to reduce the Subjects to
their Obedience?

Truly King Edward the Second, by the incursions of the Scottish Nation, and by
the insurrection of his Barons, who raised his Wife and his Son against him,
and in the end deposed him, was diverted and utterly disabled to reform the
disorders of Ireland. K. Edw. the third did first endeavor a reformation.
But as soon as the Crown of England was transferred to King Edward the third,
though he were yet in his minority, the State there began to look into the
desperate estate of things here. And finding such a general defection, Letters
were sent from the King, to the great men and Prelates, Archiu. Tur. 2. E. 3^
clau. pers. 1. m. 16. Sir Anthony Lucy.
requiring them particularly to swear feal^y to the Crown of England.

Shortly after, Sir Anthony Lucy, a Person of great authority in England in
those days, was sent over to work a reformation in this Kingdom, by a severe
course; and to that end, the King wrote expressly to the Earl of Vlster, and
others of the Nobility to assist him, as is before remembered; presently upon
his arrival, he arrested Maurice Fitz-Thomas Earl of Desmond; and Sir William
Bremingham, and committed them prisoners to the Castle of Dublin: Annals
Hiberni^ in Camden.
where Sir William Bremingham was executed for Treason, though the Earl of
Desmond were left to Mainprize, upon condition, he should appear before the
King by a certain day, and in the mean time to continue loyal.

AFter this, the King being advertised, that the over-large Grants of Lands and
Liberties, made to the Lords of English blood in Ireland, made them so
insolent, as they scorned to obey the Law, and the Magistrate, did absolutely
resume all such Grants, Resumption of liberties.
as is before declared. But the Earl of Desmond above all men, found himself
grieved with this resumption, or Repeal of Liberties; and declared his dislike
and coffeehouse: insomuch, as he did not only refuse to come to a Parliament
at Dublin, summoned by Sir William Morris, Deputy to the Lord John Darcy the
Kings Lieutenant: But (as we have said before) he raised such dissension
between the English of blood, and the English of birth, as the like was never
seen, from the time of the first planting of our Nation in Ireland. And in this
factious and seditious humor, he drew the Earl of Kildare, and the rest of the
nobility, Annals Hiberniae in Camden.
with the Citizens and Burgesses of the principal Towns, to hold a several
Parliament by themselves, at Kilkenny; where they framed certain Articles
against the Deputy, and transmitted the same into England to the King.

Hereupon, Sir Raphe Vfford, Sir Raphe Vfford. Annals Jo^an. Manus. Clynn.
who had lately before married the Countess of Vlster; a man of courage and
severity, was made Lord Justice: who forthwith calling a Parliament, sent a
special Commandment to the Earl of Desmond, to appear in that great Council;
but the Earl wilfully refused to come. Whereupon, the Lord Justice raised the
Kings Standard, Annale Hibern^ in Ca^de^.
and marching with an Army into Munster, seized into the Kings hands, all the
possessions of the Earl, took and executed his principal followers, Sir Eustace
le Poer, Sir William Grant, and Sir John Cotterell; enforced the Earl himself
to fly and lurk, till 26. Noblemen and Knights, became Mainpernors for his
appearance at a certain day prefixed: But he making default the second time,
the uttermost advantage was taken against his sureties. Besides at the same
time, this Lord Justice caused the Earl of Kildare to be arrested and committed
to the Castle of Dublin, indicted and imprisoned many other disobedient
Subjects, called in and cancelled such Charters asw ere lately before resumed;
and proceeded every way so roundly and severely, as the Nobility, which were
wont, to suffer no controulment, did much distaste him; and the Commons, who in
this Land have ever been more devoted to their immediate Lords here, whom they
saw every day, than unto their Sovereign Lord and King, whom they never saw;
spoke ill of this Governor, as of a rigorous and cruel man, though in troth he
were a singular good Justicer; and, if he had not dyed in the second year of
his Government, was the likeliest person of that Age, Maurice Fitz-Thomas the
first Earl of Desmond, the author of the great oppressions and dissentions
which destroyed the English Colonies.
to have reformed and reduced the degenerate English Colonies, to their natural
obedience of the Crown of England.

THus much then then we may observe by the way, that Maurice Fitz-Thomas, the
first Earl of Desmond, was the first English Lord that imposed Coign and Livery
upon the Kings Subjects; and the first that raised his Estate to immoderate
greatness, by that wicked Extortion and Oppression; that he was the first that
rejected the English Laws and Government, and drew others by his example to do
the like; that he was the first Peer of Ireland that refused to come to the
Parliament summoned by the Kings Authority; that he was the first that made a
division and distinction between the English of blood, and the English of birth.

AND as this Earl was the only Author, The fortune of the house of Desmond.
and first Actor of these mischiefs, which gave the greatest impediment to the
full Conquest of Ireland; So it is to be noted, that albeit others of his rank
afterward offended in the same kind; whereby their Houses were many times in
danger of ruin, yet was there not ever any Noble house of English race in
Ireland, utterly destroyed and finally rooted out by the hand of Justice, but
the house of Desmond only; nor any Peer of this Realm ever put to death
(though diverse have been attainted) but Tho: Fitz-James the Earl of Desmond
only, and only for those wicked customs brought in by the first Earl, and
practiced by his posterity, though by several Laws they were made High Treason.
And therefore, though in the 7 of Edward the 4. during the Government of the
Lord Tiptoft, Earl of Worcester, both the Earls of Desmond and Kildare were
attainted by Parliament at Droghedah, for alliance and fostering with the
Irish; and for taking Coigne and Livery of the Kings Subjects, yet was Desmond
only put to death; for the Earl of Kildare received his pardon. And albeit the
son of this Earl of Desmond, who lost his head at Droghedah, were restored to
the Earldom; The Council-book of Ireland* 32 H. 8.
yet could not the Kings grace regenerate obedience in that degenerate house,
but it grew rather more wild and barbarous than before. For from thenceforth
they reclaimed a strange privilege, That the Earls of Desmond should never
come to any Parliament or Grand Council, or within any walled Town, but at
their will and pleasure. Which pretended Privilege, James Earl of Desmond, the
Father of Girald the last Earl, renounced and surrendered by his Deed, in the
Chancery of Ireland, in the 32 of Henry the eighth. At what time, among the
mere Irishry, he submitted himself to Sir Anthony Saint-Leger, then Lord
Deputy; took an Oath of Allegiace, Covenanted that he would suffer the Law of
England to be executed in his Country; and assist the Kings Judges in their
Circuits: and if any Subsidies should be granted by Parliament, he would permit
the same to be levied upon his Tenants and followers. Which Covenants, are as
strange as the privilege it self, spoken of before. But that which I conceive
most worthy of Observation, upon the fortunes of the house of Desmond, is this;
that as Maurice Fitz-Thomas, the first Earl, did first raise the greatness of
that house, by Irish exactions and oppressions; so Girald the last Earl, did at
last ruin and reduce it to nothing, by using the like extortions. For certain
it is, that the first occasion of his Rebellion, grew from hence, that when he
attempted to charge the Decies in the County of Waterford, with Coigne and
Livery, Black Rents and Coshe^ies, after the Irish manner, he was resisted by
the Earl of Ormond, and upon an encounter, overthrown and taken prisoner; which
made his heart so unquiet, as it easily conceived Treason against the Crown,
and brought forth actual and open Rebellion, wherein he perished himself, and
made a final extinguishment of his house and honor. Oppression and extortion
did maintain the greatness: and oppression and extortion, did extinguish the
greatness of that house. Which may well be expressed, by the old Emblem of a
Torch turned downwards, with this word, Quod me alit, extinguit.

NOw let us return to the course of Reformation, held and pursued here, after
the death of Sir Raphe Vfford, which happened in the twentieth year of King
Edward 3. After which time, a^be^t all the power and Council of England was
converted toward the conquest of France, yet was not the work of Reformation
altogether discontinued. For, in the 25 year of King Edward the third, Sir
Thomas Rookeby, another worthy Governor (whom I have once before named) held a
Parliament at Kilkenny, wherein many excellent Laws were propounded and enacted
for the reducing of the English Colonies to their obedience; which Laws we
find enrolled in the Remembrancers Office here; and differ not much in
substance, from those other Statutes of Kilkenny, The course Reformation
pursued by Lio^ Duke Clare^
which not long after (during the Government of Lionel Duke of Clarence) were
not only enacted, but put in execution. This noble Prince having married the
Daughter and Heir of Vlster; and being likewise a Coparcener of the County of
Kilkenny, in the 36 year of King Edward the third, came over the Kings
Lieutenant, attended with a good Retinue of Martial men, as is before
remembered, and a grave and honorable Council, as well for peace, as for war.
But because this Army was not of a competent strength to break and subdue all
the Irishry, although he quieted the borders of the English Pale, and held all
Ireland in awe with his name and presence. The principal service that he
intended, was to reform the degenerate English Colonies, and to reduce them to
obedience of the English Law, and Magistrate. To that end, in the fortieth year
of King Edward the third, he held that famous Parliament at Kilkenny; wherein
many notable Laws were enacted, which do show and lay open (For the Law does
best discover enormities) how much the English Colonies were corrupted at that
time, and do infallibly prove that which is laid down before; That they were
wholly degenerate, and fallen away from their obedience. For first, it appears
by the Preamble of these Laws, that the English of this Realm, before the
coming over of Lionel Duke of Clarence, were at that time become mere Irish in
their Language, Names, Apparel, and all their manner of living, and had
rejected the English Laws, and submitted themselves to the Irish, with whom
they had many Marriages and Alliances, Archiu. in Castro Dublin. Statutes of
Kilkenny.
which tended to the utter ruin and destruction of the Commom-wealth.
Therefore alliance by Marriage, Nurture of Infants, C. 2.
and Gossipred with the Irish, are by this Statute made High Treason. Again, C.
3.
if any man of English race, should use any Irish Name, Irish Language, or
Irish Apparel, or any other guise or fashion of the Irish; if he had Lands or
Tenements, the same should be seized, till he had given security to the
Chancery, to conform himself in all points to the English manner of living. And
if he had no Lands, his body was to be taken and imprisoned, till he found
Sureties, as aforesaid.

Again, it was established and commanded, C. 4.
that the English in all their Controversies, should be ruled and governed by
the Common Law of England: and if any did submit himself to the Brehon Law, or
March Law, he should be adjudged a Traitor.

Again, C. 10.
because the English at that time, made War and Peace with the bordering Enemy
at their pleasure; they were expressly prohibited to levy War upon the Irish,
without special Warrant and Direction from the State.

C 12.
Again, it was made paenal to the English, to permit the Irish to Creaght or
graze upon their Lands: C. 13.
to present them to Ecclesiastical Benefices; C. 15.
to receive them into any Monasteries, or Religious Houses, or to entertain any
of their Minstrels, Rimers, or News-tellers: to impose or sess any Horse or
Foot upon the English subjects against their wills, C. 17.
was made felony. C. 22.
And because the great Liberties or Franchises spoken of before, were become
Sanctuaries for all Malefactors, express power was given to the Kings Sheriffs,
to enter into all Franchises, and there to apprehend all Felons and Traitors.
C. 24.
And lastly, because the great Lords, when they levied Forces for the Public
Service, did lay unequal burdens upon the Gentlemen and Freeholders, it was
ordained, that four Wardens of the Peace in every County, should set down and
appoint what Men and Armor every man should bear, according to his Freehold, or
other ability of esate.

THese, and other Laws, The Statutes of Kilkenny did much, reform the
degenerate English*
tending to a general reformation, were enacted in that Parliament. And the
Execution of these Laws, together with the Presence of the Kings Son, made a
notable alteration in the State and Manners of this people, within the space of
seven years, which was the term of this Princes Lieutenancy.

For all the Discourses that I have seen of the Decay of Ireland, do agree in
this, that the presence of the Lord Lionel, and these Statutes of Kilkenny, did
restore the English Government, in the degenerate Colonies, for diverse years.
And the Statute of the tenth of Henry the seventh, Stat. 10 H. c. 8.
which reviveth and confirms the Statutes of Kilkenny, does confirm as much.
For it declares, that as long as these Laws were put in ^ure and execution,
this Land continued in prosperity and honor: and since they were not executed,
the Subjects rebelled and digressed from their Allegiance, and the Land fell to
ruin and desolation. And withal, we find the effect of these Laws in the
Pipe-Rolls, and Plea-Ro^ls of this Kingdom: For, from the 36 of Edw. 3. when
this Prince entered into his Government, till the beginning of Richard the
second his Reign, we find the Revenue of the Crown both certain and casual in
Vlster, Munster, and Conaght, accounted for; and that the Kings Writ did run*
and the Common Law was executed in every of these Provinces. The presence of
the Kings son, did much advance the reformation.
I join with these Laws, the personal presence of the Kings Son, as a
concurrent cause of this Reformation: Because the people of this Land, both
English and Irish, out of a natural pride, did ever love and desire to be
governed by great persons. Absence of our Kings and great English Lords, a
chief cause why the Kingdom was not reduced.
And therefore, I may here justly take occasion to note, that first the absence
of the Kings of England; and next, the absence of those great Lords, who were
inheritors of those mighty Seigniories of Leinster, Vlster, Conaght^, and
Mead, have been main causes why this Kingdom was not reduced in so many ages.

TOuching the absence of our Kings, Abse^^ of o^^ King
three of them only since the Norman Conquest, have made Royal journeys into
this Land; namely, King Henry the second, King John, and King Richard the
second. And yet they no sooner arrived here, but that all the Irishry (as if
they had been but one man) submitted themselves; took Oaths of fidelity, and
gave pledges and hostages to continue loyal. And, if any of those Kings had
continued here in person a competent time, till they had settled both English
and Irish in their several possessions, and had set the Law in a due course
throughout the Kingdom; these times wherein we live, had not gained the honor
of the final conquest and reducing of Ireland. For the King (says Solomon)
dissipat omne malum intuitu suo. But when Moses was absent in the Mount, the
people committed Idolatry: and when there was no King in Israel, every man did
what seemed best in his own eyes.

And therefore, when Alexander had conquered the East part of the World, and
demanded of one what was the fitest place for the seat of his Empire, he
brought and laid a dry hide before him, and desired him to set his foot on the
one side thereof; which being done, all the other parts of the hide did rise
up: but when he did set his foot in the middle of the hide, all the other parts
lay flat and even: Which was a lively demonstration, that if a Prince keep his
residence in the border of his Dominions, the remote parts will easily rise and
rebel against him: But if he make the Center thereof his Seat, he shall easily
keep them in peace and obedience.

The absence of the great English Lords.
TOuching the absence of the great Lords: All Writers do impute the decay and
loss of Leinster, to the absence of these English Lords, who married the five
Daughters of William Marshal Earl of Pembroke, Baron. Finglas, Manusc.
(to whom that great Seigniory descended) when his five Sons, who inherited the
same successively; and during their times, held the same in peace and
obedidence to the Law of England, were all dead without issue: which happened
about the fortieth year of King Henry the third: for the eldest being married
to Hugh Bigot Earl of Norfolk, who in right of his wife, had the Marshalship of
England; The second, to Warren de Mountchensey, whose sole Daughter and Heir
was match to William de Valentia half Brother to King Henry the third, who by
that match, was made Earl of Pembroke; the third, to Gilbert de Clare, Earl of
Gloucester; The fourth, to William Ferrers, Earl of Darby; The fifth, to
William de Bruce, Lord of Brecknock: These great Lords, having greater
inheritances in their own right in England, than they had in Ireland in right
of their Wives (and yet each of the Coparceners, had an entire County allotted
for her purparty, as is before declared) could not be drawn to make their
personal residence in this Kingdom; but managed their Estates here, by their
Seneschals and Servants. And to defend their Territories against the bordering
Irish; they entertained some of the Natives, who pretended a perpetual Title to
those great Lordships. For the Irish after a thousand conquests and Attainders
by our Law, would in those days pretend title still, because by the Irish Law
no man could forfeit his Land. These natives taking the opportunity in weak and
desperate times, usurped those Seigniories; and so Donald mac Art Cavanagh,
Baron Finglas, Manusc.
being entertained by the Earl of Nolfork, made himself Lord of the County of
Catherlough: And Lisagh O Moor, being trusted by the Lord Mortimer, who married
the Daughter and Heir of the Lord Bruce, made himself Lord of the lands in
Leix, in the latter end of King Edward the seconds Reign, as is before declared.

Again, the decay and loss of Vlster and Connaught, is attributed to this; that
the Lord William Bourk, the last Earl of that name, died without issue male;
whose Ancestors, namely, the Red Earl, and Sir Hugh de Lacy, before him, being
personally resident, held up their greatness there; and kept the English in
peace, and the Irish in awe: But when those Provinces descended upon an Heir
Female, and an Infant, the Irish overran Vlster, and the younger branches of
the Bourkes, usurped Connaught. And therefore, Arch Tur ^ parli^ n. 42.
the Ordinance made in England, the third of Richard the second, against such
as were absent from their Lands in Ireland; and gave two third parts of the
profits thereof unto the King, until they returned, or placed a sufficient
number of men to defend the same, was grounded upon good reason of State: which
Ordinance was put in execution for many years after, as appears by sundry
seizures made thereupon, in the time of K. Richard the second, Henry the
fourth, Henry the fifth, and Henry the sixth, whereof there remain Records in
the Remembrancers Office here. Among the rest, Arch in O^ Rem^ Dubl^
the Duke of Norfolk himself was not spared, but was impleaded upon this
Ordinance, for two parts of the profits of Dorburies Island, and other Lands in
the County of Wexford, in the time of King Henry the sixth. And afterward,
upon the same reason of State, all the lands of the house of Norfolk, of the
Earl of Shrewsbury, the Lord Barkley and others, who having lands in Ireland,
kept their continual residence in England) were entirely resumed by the Act of
Absentees, Act of Absentees, 28 H. 8.
made in the 28 year of King Henry the eigth.

But now again, let us look back and see, how long the effect of that
Reformation did continue, which was begun by Lionel Duke of Clarence, in the
fortieth year of King Edward the third, and what courses have been held, to
reduce and reform this people by other Lieutenants and Governors since that
time.

The English Colonies being in some good measure reformed by the Statutes of
Kilkenny, did not utterly fall away into Barbarism again, till the Wars of the
two Houses had almost destroyed both these Kingdoms; for in that miserable
time, the Irish found opportunity, without opposition, to banish the English
Law and Government, out of all the Provinces, and to confine it only to the
English Pale: Howbeit, in the mean time, between the Government of the Duke of
Clarence, and the beginning of those Civil Wars of York and Lancaster, we find
that the State of England did sundry times resolve to proceed in this work of
reformation.

For first, King Richard 2. The reformation intended by K. Ric^ 2. Archi^ Tur.
3 Rich. claus. 3. Ri^ 2. Rot^ Parl^ 11.42 9 Ri^ 2. cl.
sent over Sir Nicholas Dagworth, to survey the possessions of the Crown; and
to call to account the Officers of the revenue; Next to (draw his English
Subjects to manure and defend their lands in Ireland) he made that Ordinance
against Absentees, spoken of before. Again, he showed an excellent example of
Justice, upon Sir Philip Courtney, being his Lieutenant of that Kingdom, when
he caused him to be arrested by special Commissioners, upon complaint made of
sundry grievous oppressions and wrongs, which during his Government, he had
done unto that people.

After this, Walsiham ^ Rich 349.
the Parliament of England did resolve, that Thomas Duke of Gloucester the Kings
Uncle, should be employed in the reformation and reducing of that Kingdom: the
Fame whereof, was no sooner bruted in Ireland, but all the Irishry were ready
to submit themselves before his coming: so much the very Name of a great
personage, specially of a Prince of the blood, did ever prevail with this
people. But the King and his Minions, who were ever jealous of this Duke of
Gloucester, would not suffer him to have the honor of that service. But the
King himself thought it a work worthy of his own presence and pains: and
thereupon, Himself in person, made those two royal journeys mentioned before:
At what time, he received the submissions of all the Irish Lords and Captains,
who bound themselves both by Indenture and oath to become and continue his
Loyal Subjects. And withal, laid a particular project, for a civil plantation
of the Mountains and Maritime Counties, between Dublin and Wexford; by removing
all the Irish Septs from thence, as appears by the covenants between the Earl
Marshal of England, and those Irish Septs: which are before remembered, and are
yet preserved, and remain of Record in the Kings Remembrancers Office at
Westminster. Lastly, this King being present in Ireland, took special care to
supply and furnish the Courts of Justice with able and sufficient Judges; And
to that end, he made that Grave and Learned Judge, Sir William Hankeford, Chief
Justice of the Kings Bench here (who afterward for his service in this Realm,
was made chief Justice of the Kings Bench in England, by King Henry 4. Plac.
coram. Reg^ in Hibernia. Hillar. 18. Rich^ 2.
) and did withal, associate unto him, William Sturmy, a well Learned man in
the law; who likewise came out of England with the King, that the legal
proceedings, which were out of order too (as all other things in that Realm
were) might be amended, and made formal, according to the course and Presidents
of England. But all the good purposes and projects of this King, were
interrupted and utterly defeated, by his sudden departure out of Ireland, and
unhappy deposition from the Crown of England.

HOwbeit, King Henry the fourth, The reformat^on int^^ded by Hen. ^
intending likewise to prosecute this Noble work in the third year of his
reign, made the Lord Thomas of Lancaster, his second son, Lieutenant of
Ireland: Who came over in person, and accepted again the submissions of diverse
Irish Lords and Captains, as is before remembered; and held also a Parliament,
wherein he gave new life to the Statutes of Kilkenny, and made other good Laws
tending to the Reformation of the Kingdom. But the troubles raised against the
King his Father in England, drew him home again so soon, as that seed of
reformation, took no root at all, neither had his service in that kind, any
good effect or success.

After this, the State of England had no leisure to think of a general
reformation in this Realm, till the civil dissentions of England were appeased,
and the peace of that Kingdom settled, by King Henry the seventh.

For, albeit, in the time of King Henry 6. Richard Duke of York a Prince of the
blood; of great wisdom and valor, and heir to a third part of Kingdom at
least, being Earl of Vlster, and Lord of Conaght and Mead, was sent the Kings
Lieutenanr into Ireland, to recover and reform that Realm where he was resident
in person for the greatest part of ten years, yet the troth is, he aimed at
another mark, which was the Crown of England. And therefore, he thought it no
policy to distaste either the English or Irish, by a course of Reformation, but
sought by all means to please them, and by popular courses to steal away their
hearts, to the end, he might strengthen his party, when he should set on foot
his Title (as is before declared.) Which policy of his took such effect, as
that he drew over with him into England, the Flower of all the English
Colonies, especially of Vlster and Mead, whereof many Noblemen and Gentlemen
were slain with him at Wakefield (as is likewise before remembered.) And after
his death, when the wars between the Houses were in their heat, almost all the
good English blood, which was left in Ireland, was spent in those civil
dissentions: so as the Irish became victorious over all, without blood or
sweat. Only, that little Canton of Land, called the English Pale, containing
four small Shires, did maintain a bordering was with the Irish, and retain the
form of English Government.

But out of that little Precinct, there were no Lords, Knights, or Burgesses,
summoned to the Parliament, neither did the Kings Writ run in any other part of
the Kingdom: and yet upon the Marches and Borders, which at that time were
grown so large, as they took up half Dublin, half Mead, and a third part of
Kildare and Lowth; there was no law in use, but the March-Law, which in the
Statutes of Kilkenny, is said to be no law, but a lewd Custom.

So as upon the end of these civil wars in England, the English Law and
Government was well nigh banished out of Ireland, The course of reformation held
by Sir Edward Poynings, in the time of K. Hen 7.
so as no foot-step or print was left, of any former Reformation.

THen did King Henry 7. send over Sir Edward Poynings to be his Deputy, a right
worthy servitor both in war and peace. The principal end of his employment, was
to expel Perkin Warbecke out of this Kingdom; but that service being performed,
that worthy Deputy finding nothing but a common misery, took the best course he
possibly could, to establish a Commonwealth in Ireland: and to that end, he
held a Parliament no less famous, than that of Kilkenny; and more available for
the reformation of the whole Kingdom. For whereas all wise men did ever concur
in opinion, that the readiest way to reform Ireland, is to settle a form of
Civil Government there, conformable to that of England: To bring this to pass,
Sir Edward Poynings did pass an Act, whereby all the Statutes made in England
before that time, were enacted, established, and made of force in Ireland.
Neither did he only respect the time past, but provided also for the time to
come. For he caused another Law to be made, that no Act should be propounded in
any Parliament of Ireland, but such as should be first transmitted into
England, Poynings Act.
and approved by the King and Council there, as good and expedient for that
Land, and so returned back again, under the Great Seal of England. This Act,
though it seem Prima facie to restrain the liberty of the Subjects of Ireland;
yet was it made at the Prayer of the Commons, upon just and important cause.

For the Governors of that Realm, specially such as were of that Country Birth,
had laid many oppressions upon the Commons: and amongst the rest, they had
imposed Laws upon them, nor tending to the general good, but to serve private
turns, and to strengthen their particular factions. This moved them to refer
all Laws that were to be passed in Ireland, to be considered, corrected and
allowed, first by the State of England, which had always been tender and
careful of the good of this people, and had long since made them a Civil,
Rich, and Happy Nation, if their own Lords and Governors there, had not sent
bad intelligence into England. Besides this, he took special order, that the
summons of Parliament should go into all the shires of Ireland; and not to the
four shires only; and for that cause specially, he caused all the Acts of a
Parliament, lately before holden by the Viscount of Gormanston to be repealed
and made void. Moreover, that the Parliaments of Ireland, might want no decent
or honorable form that was used in England, he caused a particular Act to pass,
that the Lords of Ireland should appear in the like Parliament Robes, as the
English Lords are wont to wear in the Parliaments of England. Having thus
established all the Statutes of England in Ireland, and set in order the great
Council of that Realm, he did not omit to pass other Laws, as well for the
increase of the Kings Revenue, as the preservation of the public peace.

To advance the profits of the Crown; First he obtained a Subsidy of 26
shillings eight pence out of every six score acres manured, payable yearly for
five years. Next, he resumed all the Crownland which had been aliened (for the
most part) by Richard Duke of York: and lastly, he procured a Subsidy of
Pondage, out of all Merchandises imported and exported, to be granted to the
Crown in perpetuity.

To preserve the public peace, he revived the Statutes of Kilkenny. He made
wilful Murder High Treason; he caused the Marchers to book their men for whom
they should answer; and restrained the making War or Peace, without special
Commission from the State.

These Laws, and others as important as these, for the making of a Commonwealth
in Ireland, were made in the Government of Sir Edward Poynings. But these Laws
did not spread their Virtue beyond the English Pale, though they were made
generally for the whole Kingdom. For the Provinces without the Pale, which
during the War of York and Lancaster, had wholly cast off the the English
Government, were not apt to receive this seed of Reformation, because they were
not first broken and mastered again with the sword. Besides, the Irish
Countries, which contained two third parts of the Kingdom, were not reduced to
Shire-ground, so as in them the Laws of England could not possibly be put in
execution. Therefore these good Laws and provisions made by Sir Edward
Poynings, were like good Lessons set for a Lute, that is broken and out of
tune; of which Lessons, little use can be made, till the Lute be made fit to be
played upon.

And that the execution of all these Laws, had no greater latitude than the
Pale, is manifest by the Statute of the thirteenth of Henry the eighth, cap. 3.
which recites, that at that time, the Kings Laws were obeyed and executed in
the four shires only; and yet then was the Earl of Surrey Lieutenant of
Ireland, a Governor much feared of the Kings Enemies, and exceedingly honored
and beloved of the Kings subjects. And the Instructions given by the state of
Ireland, The Co^^ Boo^ Irel^ 16 ^
to John Allen Master of the Rolls, employed into England near about the same
time, do declare as much; wherein among other things, he is required to
advertise the King, that his Land of Ireland was so much decayed, as that the
Kings Laws were not obeyed twenty miles in compass: Whereupon, grew that
Byword used by the Irish, (viz.) That they dwelt Bywest the Law, which dwelt
beyond the River of the Barrow, which is within thirty miles of Dublin. The
same is testified by Baron Finglas, in his Discourse of the decay of Ireland,
which he wrote about the twentieth year of King Henry the eighth. And thus we
see the effect of the Reformation which was intended by Sir Edward Poynings.

The Reformation intended by the L. Leonard Gray, 28 H. 8.
THE next Attempt of Reformation, was made in 28 year of King Henry the eighth,
by the Lord Leonard Gray, who was created Viscount of Grane in this Kingdom,
and held a Parliament, wherein many excellent Laws were made. But to prepare
the minds of the people to obey these Laws, he began first with a Martial
course: For being sent over to suppress the Rebellion of the Giraldines, (which
he performed in few months) he afterward made a victorious Circuit round
about the Kingdom; Annal^^ Hiber^^ Manu^
beginning in Offaly, against O Connor, who had aided the Giraldines in their
Rebellion; and from thence passing along through all the Irish Countries in
Leinster, and so into Munster, where he took pledges of the degenerate Earl of
Desmond, and thence into Conaght, and thence into Vlster; and then concluded
this Warlike Progress with the Battle of Belahoo, in the borders of Mead, as
is before remembered. The Coun^^ Book^ (...) Irela^^ 2^ ^^


The principal Septs of the Irishry being all terrified, and most of them
broken in this journey, many of their chief Lords upon this Deputies return
came to Dublin, and made their submissions to the Crown of England; namely, the
O Neals, and O Relies of Vlster, Mac Murrogh, O Birn, and O Carrol of Leinster,
and the Bourks of Conaght.

This preparation being made, he first propounded and passed in Parliament
these Laws, which made the great alteration in the State Ecclesiastical;
namely, the Act which declared King Henry the eighth to be supreme head of the
Church of Ireland. The Act prohibiting Appeals to the Church of Rome: the Act
for first fruits, and twentieth part to be paid to the King: the Act for
Faculties and Dispensations: And lastly, the Act that did utterly abolish the
usurped authority of the Pope. Next, for the increase of the Kings Revenue; by
one Act, he suppressed sundry Abbeys and Religious Houses; and by another Act,
resumed the Lands of the Absentees, (as is before remembered.)

And for the Civil Government, a special Statute was made, to abolish the
Black-rents and Tributes, exacted by the Irish, upon the English Colonies; and
another Law enacted, that the English Apparel, Language, and manner of living,
should be used by all such, as would acknowledge themselves the Kings Subjects.
This Parliament being ended, the Lord Leonard Gray, was suddenly revokt, and
put to death in England, so as he lived not to finish the work of Reformation,
which he had begun: which notwithstanding was we^l pursued by his Successor,
Sir Anthony Saint Ledger; The c^urs^ Refor^^tion ^sued Sir A^thony S. L^ Four
nera^ subm^ons the I^
unto whom, all the Lords and Chieftains of the Irishry, and of the degenerate
English throughout the Kingdom, made their several submissions by Indenture
(which was the fourth general submission of the Irish, made since the first
attempt of the Conquest of Ireland) whereof the first was made to King Henry
the second; the second to King John; the third to K. Richard the second, and
his last to Sir Anthony Saint Ledger, in 33 H. 8.

IN these Indentures of Submission, The Cou^ Boo^ Irel^ 32, 3^ 34 ^
all the Irish Lords do acknowledge King Henry the eighth to be their Sovereign
Lord and King, and desire to be accepted of him as Subjects. They confess the
Kings Supremacy in all causes and do utterly renounce the Popes Jurisdiction,
which I conceive to be worth the noting, because, The and gen^ Ea^ ren^ the
when the Irish had once resolved to obey the King, they made no scruple to
renounce the Pope. And this was not only done by the mere Irish, but the chief
of the degenerate English Families did perform the same: as Desmond, Barry, and
Roche, in Munster; and the Bourks, which b^re the title of Mac William, in
Conaght.

These Submissions being thus taken, the Lord Deputy and Council for the
present Government of those Irish Countries, made certain Ordinances of State,
not agreeable altogether with the Rules of the Law of England; the reason
whereof, is expressed in the Preamble of those Ordinances; The Council Book of
Ireland, 33 H. 8.
Quia nondum sic sapiunt leges and Jura, ut secundum ea jam immediate vivere
and regi possint: The chief points or Articles of which Orders registered in the
Council Book are these: That King Henry the eighth, should be accepted,
reputed, and named King of Ireland, by all the Inhabitants of the Kingdom; that
all Archbishops and Bishops should be permitted to exercise their Jurisdiction
in every Diocese throughout the Land: that Tithes should be duly set out, and
paid: that Children should not be admitted to Benefices; that for every
Man-s^aughter, and theft above fourteen pence, committed in the Irish Countries,
the offender should pay a fine of forty pound, twenty pound to the King, and
twenty pound to the Captain of the Country; and for every theft under fourteen
pence, a fine of five marks should be paid, forty six shilling eight pence to
the Captain, and twenty shillings to the Tanister: that Horsemen and Kearn
should not be imposed upon the common people, to be fed and maintained by them:
that the Master should answer for his servants, and the Father for his
children. That Cuttings should not be made by the Lord upon his Tenants, to
maintain war with his neighbors, but only to bear his necessary expenses, etc.

These Ordinances of State being made and published, there were nominated and
appointed in every Province, certain Orderers or Arbitrators, who instead of
these Irish Brehons, should hear and determine all their Controversies. In
Conaght, the Archbishop of Tuam, the Bishop of Clonfert, Captain Wakeley, and
Captain Ovington. In Munster, the Bishop of Waterford, the Bishop of Cork and
Ross, the Mayor of Cork, and Mayor of Youghal. In Vlster, the Archbishop of
Ardmagh, and the Lord of Lowth. And if any difference did arise which they
could not end, either for the difficulty of the cause, or for the obstinacy of
the parties, they were to certify the Lord Deputy and Council, who would
decide the matter by their Authority.

Hereupon, the Irish Captains of lesser Territories, which had ever been
oppressed by the greater and mightier; some, with risings out, others, with
Bonaght, and others, with Cuttings, and spendings at pleasure, did appeal for
Justice to the Lord Deputy; who upon hearing their complaints, did always
order, that they should all immediately depend upon the King; and that the
weaker should have no dependancy upon the stronger.

Lastly, he prevailed so much with the greatest of them; namely, O Neal, O
Brien, and Mac William, as that they willingly did pass into England, and
presented themselves to the King, who thereupon was pleased to advance them to
the degree and honor of Earls, and to grant unto them their several Countries,
by Letters Patent. Besides, that they might learn Obedience and Civility of
manners, by often repairing unto the State, the King upon the motion of the
same Deputy, gave each of them a house and lands near Dublin, for the
entertainment of their several trains.

This course, did this Governor take to reform the Irishry; but withal, he did
not omit to advance both the honor and profit of the King. For in the
Parliament which he held the 33 of Hen. the eighth, he caused an Act to pass,
which gave unto K. Henry the eighth, his Heirs and Successors, the Name, Style,
and Title of King of Ireland; whereas before that time, the Kings of England
were styled but Lords of Ireland: albeit indeed, they were absolute Monarchs
thereof, and had in right all Royal and Imperial Jurisdiction and power there,
as they had in the Realm of England. And yet because in the vulgar conceit the
name of King, is higher than the name of Lord; Assuredly, the assuming of this
Title, has not a little raised the Sovereignty of the King of England in the
minds of this people: lastly, this Deputy brought a great augmentation to the
Kings Revenue, by dissolving of all the Monasteries and Religious Houses in
Ireland, which was done in the same Parliament: and afterward, by procuring Min
and Cavendish, two skilful Auditors, to be sent over out of England. Who took
an exact survey of all the possessions of the Crown, and brought many things
into charge, which had been concealed and subtracted for many years before.
And thus far did Sir Anthony Saint Ledger proceed in the course of Reformation;
which though it were a good beginning, yet was it far from reducing Ireland to
the perfect obedience of the Crown of England. For all this while, the
Provinces of Conaght and Vlster, and a good part of Leinster, were not reduced
to Shire-ground. And though Munster were anciently divided into Counties, the
people were so degenerate, as no Justice of Assize durst execute his Commission
amongst them. None of the Irish Lords or Tenants were settled in their
possessions, by any Grant or Confirmation from the Crown, except the three
great Earls before named; who notwithstanding, did govern their Tenants and
Followers, by the Irish or Brehon Law; so as no treason, murder, rape, or
theft, committed in those Countries, was inquired of, or punished by the Law of
England; and consequently, no Escheat, Forfeiture, or Fine; no Revenue (certain
or casual) did accrue to the Crown out of those Provinces.

The next worthy Governor that endeavored to advance this Reformation, The
course of reformation prosecuted by Tho. Earl of Sussex, in the time of Queen
Mary. Li^x and Offaly made two Counti^s, 3. and 4. Phil. and Mariae.
was Thomas Earl of Sussex; who having thoroughly broken and subdued the two
most rebellious and powerful Irish Septs in Leinster; namely, the Moors and O
Connors, possessing the Territories of Leix and Offaly, did by Act of
Parliament, 3. and 4. Phil. and Mariae, reduce those Countries into two several
Counties; naming the one, the Kings, and the other, the Queens County; which
were the first two Counties that had been made in this Kingdom, since the
twelfth year of King John; at what time the Territories then possessed by the
English Colonies, were reduced into twelve Shires, as is before expressed.

This Noble Earl, having thus extended the Jurisdiction of the English Law into
two Counties more, was not satisfied with that addition, but took a resolution
to divide all the rest of the Irish Countries un-reduced, into several Shires;
and to that end, he caused an Act to pass in the same Parliament, authorizing
the Lord Chancellor, from time to time, to award Commissions to such Persons,
as the Lord Deputy should nominate and appoint, to view and perambulate those
Irish Territories; and thereupon, to divide and limit the same into such and so
many several Counties as they should think meet; which being certified to the
Lord Deputy, and approved by him, should be returned and enrolled in the
Chancery, and from thenceforth be of like force and effect, as if it were done
by Act of Parliament.

Thus did the Earl of Sussex lay open a passage for the Civil Government into
the unreformed parts of this Kingdom, but himself proceeded no further than is
before delared.

HOwbeit afterward, The course of reformation followed by Sir Henry Sidney, in
the time of Queen Elizabeth.
during the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Sir Henry Sidney, (who has left behind
him many Monuments of a good Governor in this Land) did not only pursue that
course which the Earl of Sussex began, in reducing the Irish Countries into
Shires, and placing therein Sheriffs, and other Ministers of the Law; (for
first he made the Annaly a Territory in Leinster, possessed by the Sept of
Offerralles, one entire Shire by it self, and called it the County of Longford;
and after that he divided the whole Province of Conaght into six Counties more;
namely, Clare (which contains all Thomond) Gallaway, Sligo, Mayo, Roscomon,
and Leytrim:) But he also had caused diverse good Laws to be made, and performed
sundry other services, tending greatly to the reformation of this Kingdom. For
first, to diminish the greatness of the Irish Lords, and to take from them the
dependancy of the Common people, in the Parliament which he held 11. Eliz. He
did abolish their pretended and usurped Captain-ships, and all exactions, and
extortions incident thereunto. Next, to settle their Seigniories and
possessions in a course of inheritance, according to the course of the Common
law, he caused an Act to pass, whereby the Lord Deputy was authorized to accept
their Surrenders, and to regrant estates unto them, to hold of the Crown by
English tenures and services. Again, because the inferior sort were loose and
poor, and not amesuable to the law; he provided by another Act, that five of
the best and eldest persons of every Sept, should bring in all the idle persons
of their surname, to be justified by the law. Moreover, to give a civil
education to the Youth of this Land in the time to come, provision was made by
another Law, that there should be one Free school, at least, erected in every
Diocese of the Kingdom. And lastly, to inure and acquaint the people of Munster
and Conaght, with the English Government again (which had not been in use among
them, for the space of 200. years before:) he instituted two Presidency Courts
in those two Provinces, placing Sir Edward Fitton in Conaght, and Sir John
Perrot in Munster.

To augment the Kings Revenue in the same Parliament, upon the attainder of
Shane O Neale, he resumed and vested in the Crown, more than half the Provinne
of Vlster: He raised the customs upon the principal commodities of the Kingdom:
He reformed the abuses of the Exchequer, by many good orders and instructions
sent out of England; and lastly, he established the composition of the Pale, in
lieu of Purveyance and Sess of Soldiers.

These were good proceedings in the work of Reformation, but there were many
defects and omissions withal; for though he reduced all Conaght into Counties,
he never sent any Justices of Assize to visit that Province, but placed
Commissioners there, who governed it only in a course of discretion; part
Martial, and part Civil. Again, in the Law that does abolish the Irish
Captain-ships, he gave way for the reviving thereof again, by excepting such,
as should be granted by Letters Patents from the Crown; which exception did
indeed take away the force of that law. For no Governor during Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, did refuse to grant any of those Captain-ships, to any pretended Irish
Lord, who would Desire, and with his thankfulness Deserve the same. And again,
though the greatest part of Vlster were vested by Act of Parliament, in the
actual and real possession of the Crown; yet was there never any seizure made
thereof, nor any part thereof brought into charge, but the Irish were permitted
to take all the profits, without rendering any duty or acknowledgement for the
same; and though the Name of O Neale were damned by that Act, and the assuming
thereof made High Treason; yet after that, was Tirlagh Leynnagh suffered to
bear that Title, and to intrude upon the possessions of the Crown, and yet was
often entertained by the State with favor. Neither were these lands resumed,
by the Act of II of Elizabeth neglected only (for the Abbyes and religious
Houses in Tyrone, Tirconnell, and Fermanagh, though they were dissolved in the
33. of Henry 8. were never surveyed nor reduced into charge, but were
continualy possessed by the religious persons) until His Majesty that now is,
came to the Crown: and that which is more strange, the Donations of
Bishoprics, being a flower of the Crown (which the Kings of England did ever
retain in all their Dominions, when the Popes usurped Authority was at the
highest.) There were three Bishoprics in Vlster; namely, Derry, Rapho, and
Clogher, which neither Queen Elizabeth, nor any of her Progenitors did ever
bestow, though they were the undoubted Patrons thereof. So as King James was
the first King of England that did ever supply these Sees with Bishops, which
is an argument either of great negligence, or of great weakness in the State
and Governors of those times. And thus far proceeded Sir Henry Sidney.

(...) re^^^mati^^ ad^^^ced (...) Sir ^ohn ^errot.
AFter him, Sir John Perrot, who held the last Parliament in this Kingdom, did
advance the Reformation in three principal points. First, in establishing the
great composition of Conaght, in which service the wisdom and industry of Sir
Richard Bingham did concur with him: next, in reducing the unreformed parts of
Vlster into seven shires; namely, Adrmagh, Monahan Tirone, Colerain, Donagall,
Fermannagh, and Cavan; though in his time the law was never executed in these
new Counties by any Sheriffs or Justices of Assize, but the people left to be
ruled still by their own barbarous Lords and laws: And lastly, by vesting in
the Crown, the Lands of Desmond and his Adherents in Munster, and planting the
same with English, though that plantation were imperfect in many points.

AFter Sir John Perrot, The service of William Fitz-Williams, tending to
reformation.
Sir William Fitz-Williams did good service in two other points. First, in
raising a composition in Munster; and then, in settling the possessions both of
the Lords and Tenants in Monahan, which was one of the last Acts of State,
tending to the reformation of the civil Government that was performed in the
reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Thus we see, by what degrees, and what policy and success the Governors of
this Land from time to time, since the beginning of the reign of King Edward
the third, have endeavored to reform and reduce this people to the perfect
obedience of the Crown of England; And we find, that before the Civil Wars of
York and Lancaster, they did chiefly endeavor to bring back the degenerate
English Colonies to their Duty and Allegiance, not respecting the mere Irish,
whom they reputed as Aliens or Enemies of the Crown. But after King Henry 7.
had united the Roses, they labored to reduce both English and Irish together*
which work, to what pass and perfection it was brought in the latter end of Qu.
Elizabeth's reign, has been before declared.

Whereof sometimes when I do consider, I do in mine own conceit compare these
later Governors, who went about to reform the Civil Affairs in Ireland, unto
some of the Kings of Israel, of whom it is said; That they were good Kings, but
they did not cut down the Groves and High places, but suffered the people still
to burn Incense, and commit Idolatry in them: so Sir Anthony Saint-Leger, the
Earl of Sussex, Sir Henry Sidney, and Sir John Perrot, were good Governors, but
they did not abolish the Irish Customs, nor execute the Law in the Irish
Countries, but suffered the people to worship their barbarous Lords, and to
remain utterly ignorant of their Duties to God and the King.

AND now I am come to the happy Reign of my most Gracious Lord and Master K.
James; in whose time, as there has been a concurrence of many great
Felicities: How the Defects and errors in the government of Irel. have been
supplied and amended since the beginning of his Majesty's Reign.
so this among others may be numbered in the first rank; that all the Defects in
the ^overnment of Ireland spoken of before, have been fully supplied in the
first nine years of his reign. In which time, there has been more done in the
work and reformation of this Kingdom; than in the 440. years which are past
since the Conquest was first attempted.

Howbeit, I have no purpose in this Discourse, to set forth at large all the
proceedings of the State here in reforming of this Kingdom, since his Majesty
came to the Crown, for the parts and passages thereof are so many, as to
express them fully, would require a several Treatise. Besides, I for my part,
since I have not flattered the former times, but have plainly laid open the
negligence and errors of every Age that is past, would not willingly seem to
flatter the present, by amplifying the diligence and true Judgment of those
Servitors, that have labored in this Vineyard since the beginning of his
Majesty's happy reign.

I shall therefore summarily, without any amplification at all, show in what
manner, and by what degrees, all the defects, which I have noted before in the
Government of this Kingdom, have been supplied since his Majesty's happy Reign
began; and so conclude these observations concerning the State of Ireland.

Errors ^n the carriage of the martial affairs amended.
FIrst then, touching the Martial affairs, I shall need to say little, in regard
that the War which finished the Conquest of Ireland, was ended almost in the
instant, when the Crown descended upon his Majesty; and so there remained no
occasion to amend the former errors committed in the prosecution of the War.
Howbeit, sit hence his Majesty has still maintained an Army here, as well For
a Seminary of Martial men; as to Give strength and countenance to the civil
Magistrate; I may justly observe, that this army has not been fed with Coign
and Livery, or Sess (with which Extortions the Soldier has been nourished in
the times of former Princes) but has been as justly and royally paid, as ever
Prince in the world did pay his men of war. Besides, when there did arise an
occasion of employment for this Army against the Rebel Odoghertie; neither did
his Majesty delay the re-inforcing thereof, but instantly sent supplies out of
England and Scotland; neither did the Martial men dally or prosecute the
Service faintly, but Did forthwith quench that fire, whereby themselves would
have been the warmer, the longer it had continued, as well by the increase of
their entertainment, as by booties and spoil of the Country. And thus much I
thought fit to note, touching the amendment of the Errors in the Martial
affairs.

SEcondly, How the defects in the Civil Government have bin supplied.
For the supply of the Defects in the Civil Government, these courses have been
pursued since His Majesty's prosperous Reign began.

First, ^. By establishing the public peace.
albeit upon the end of the War, whereby Tyrones universal Rebellion was
suppressed, the minds of the people were broken and prepared to Obedience of the
law; yet the State upon good reason, did conceive, that the public peace could
not be settled, till the hearts of the people were also quieted, by securing
them from the danger of the Law, which the most part of them had incurred one
way or other, in that great and general confusion.

Therefore, first by a general Act of State, called the Act of oblivion,
published by Proclamation under the Great-Seal; All offenses against the Crown,
and all particular Trespasses between Subject and Subject, done at any time
before His Majesty's Reign, were (to all such as would come in to the Justices
of Assize by a certain day, and claim the benefit of this Act) pardoned,
remitted, and utterly extinguished, never to be revived or called in question.
And by the same Proclamation, all the Irishry (who for the most part, in former
times, were left under the tyranny of their Lords and Chieftains, and had no
defense or Justice from the Crown) were received into his Majesty's immediate
protection. This bred such comfort and security in the hearts of all men as
there upon ensued, the calmest, and most universal peace, that ever was seen in
Ireland.

The public peace being thus established, 2 By establishing the public
Justice in every part of the Kingdom.
the State proceeded next to establish the public Justice in every part of the
Realm. And to that end, Sir George Carry (who was a prudent Governor, and a
just, and made a fair entry into the right way of reforming this Kingdom) did
in the first year of His Majesty's Reign, make the first Sheriffs that ever
were made in Tyrone and Tirconnel; and shortly after, sent Sir Edmund Pelham
Chief Baron, and my self thither, the first Justices of Assize that ever sat in
those Countries: and in that Circuit, we visited all the shires of that
Provinces besides; which Visitation, though it were somewhat distasteful to the
Irish Lords, was sweet and most welcome to the common people; who, albeit they
were rude and barbarous, yet they quickly apprehended the difference between
the Tyranny and Oppression under which they lived before, and the just
Government and Protection which we promised unto them for the time to come.

The Law having made her Progress into Vlster with so good success, Sir Arthur
Chichester (who with singular Industry, Wisdom, and Courage, has now for the
space of seven years and more, prosecuted the great work of Reformation, and
brought it well-neer to an absolute perfection) did in the first year of his
Government, establish two other New Circuits for Justices of Assize; the one in
Conaght, and the other in Munster. I call them New Circuits, for that, although
it be manifest by many Records, that Justices Itinerant have in former times
been sent into all the shires of Munster, and some part of Conaght; yet certain
it is, that in two hundred years before (I speak much within compass) no such
Commission had been executed in either of these two Provinces. But now, the
whole Realm being divided into Shires, and every bordering Territory, whereof
any doubt was made in what County the same should lie, being added or reduced
to a County certain (among the rest, the Mountains and Glyns on the South side
of Dublin, were lately made a Shire by it self, and called the County of
Wicklow; whereby the Inhabitants, which were wont to be Thorns in the side of
the Pale, are become civil and quiet Neighbors thereof,) the streams of the
Public Justice were derived into every part of the Kingdom; and the benefit
and protection of the Law of England communicated to all, as well Irish as
English, without distinction or respect of persons; by reason whereof, the work
of deriving the public Justice, grew so great, as that there was Magna messis,
sed Operarii pauci. And therefore, the number of the Judges in every Bench was
increased, which do now every half year (like good Planets in their several
Sphaeres or Circles) carry the ^ight and influence of Justice, round about the
Kingdom; whereas the Circuits in former times, went but round about the Pale,
like the Circuit of the Cinosura about the Pole.

Quae cursu interiore brevi convertitur orb. UPon these Visitations of
Justice, whereby the just and honorable Law of England was imparted and
communicated to all the Irishry, The good effects which followed the execution
of the Law throughout the Kingdom
there followed these excellent good effects:

First, the common people were taught by the Justices of Assize, that they were
free Subjects to the Kings of England, and not Slaves and Vassals to their
pretended Lords: That the Cuttings, Cosheries, Sessings, and other Extortions
of their Lords, were unlawful, and that they should not any more submit
themselves thereunto, since they were now under the protection of so just and
mighty a Prince, as both would and could protect them from all wrongs and
oppressions: They gave a willing ear unto these Lessons; and thereupon, the
greatness and power of those Irish Lords over the people, suddenly fell and
vanished, when their Oppressions and Extortions were taken away, which did
maintain their greatness: Insomuch, as diverse of them, who formerly made
themselves Owners of all (by Force;) were now by the Law reduced to this point;
That wanting means to defray their ordinary charges, they resorted ordinarily
to the Lord Deputy, and made Petition, that by License and Warrant of the
State, they might take some aid and contribution from their people; as well to
discharge their former debts, as for competent maintenance in time to come: But
some of them being impatient of this diminution, fled out of the Realm to
foreign Countries. Whereupon, we may well observe, That, as Extortion did
banish the old English Freeholder, who could not live but under the Law; So
the Law did banish the Irish Lord, who could not live but by Extortion.

Again, these Circuits of Justice (did (upon the end of the War) more terrify
the loose and idle persons, than the execution of the Martial Law, though it
were more quick and sudden: and in a short time after, did so clear the the
Kingdom of Thieves, and other Capital Offenders, as I dare affirm, that for the
space of five years last past, there have not been found so many Malefactors
worthy of death in all the six Circuits of this Realm (which is now divided
into thirty two shires at large) as in one Circuit of six shires; namely, the
Western Circuit in England; for the truth is, that in time of Peace, the Irish
are more fearful to offend the Law, than the English, or any other Nation
whatsoever.

Again, whereas the greatest advantage that the Irish had of us in all their
Rebellions, was, Our Ignorance of their Countries, their Persons, and their
Actions: Since the Law and her Ministers have had a passage among them, all
their places of Fastness have been discovered and laid open; all their paces
cleared; and notice taken of every person that is able to do either good or
hurt. It is known, not only how they live, and what they do, but it is
foreseen what they purpose or intend to do: Insomuch, as Tyrone has been heard
to complain, that he had so many eyes watching over him, as he could not drink
a full Carouse of Sack, but the State was advertized thereof, within few hours
after. And therefore, those allowances which I find in the ancient Pipe Rolls,
Pro guidagio, and spiagio, may be well spared at this day. For the
Under-Sheriffs and Bailiffs errant are better Guides and Spies in the time of
Peace, than any were found in the time of War.

Moreover, these Civil Assemblies at Assizes and Sessions, have reclaimed the
Irish from their Wildness, caused them to cut off their Glibs and long Hair; to
convert their Mantles into Cloaks; to conform themselves to the manner of
England in all their behavior and outward forms. And because they find a
great inconvenience in moving their suits by an Interpreter; they do for the
most part send their Children to Schools, especially to learn the English
Language: so as we may conceive and hope, that the next generation, will in
tongue and heart, and every way else, become English; so as there will be no
difference or distinction, but the Irish Sea betwixt us. And thus we see a good
conversion, and the Irish Game turned again.

For heretofore, the neglect of the Law, made the English degenerate, and
become Irish; and now, on the other side, the execution of the Law, does make
the Irish grow civil, and become English.

Lastly, these general Sessions now, do teach the people more obedience, and
keep them more in awe, than did the general Hostings in former times. These
Progresses of the Law, renew and confirm the Conquest of Ireland every half
year, and supply the defect of the Kings absence in every part of the Realm; In
that every Judge sitting in the Seat of Justice, does represent the person of
the King himself.

These effects, has the establishment of the Public Peace and Justice
produced, since his Majesty's happy Reign began.

Howbeit, 3. The settling of the states and possessions of the Irishry, as well
as of the English.
it was impossible to make a Commonweal in Ireland, without performing another
service; which was, the settling of all the Estates and Possessions, as well of
Irish, as English, thoroughout the Kingdom.

For, although that in the twelfth year of Queen ELIZABETH, a special Law, was
made, which did enable the Lord Deputy to take Surrenders, and regrant Estates
unto the Irishry (upon signification of Her Majesty's pleasure in that behalf;)
yet were there but few of the Irish Lords that made offer to surrender during
her Reign; and they which made Surrenders of entire Countries, obtained Grants
of the whole again to themselves only, and to no other, and all in Demesne. In
passing of which Grants, there was no care taken of the Inferior Septs of
people, inhabiting and possessing these Countries under them, but they held
their several portions in course of Tanistry and Gavelkinde, and yielded the
same Irish Duties or Exactions, as they did before: So that upon every such
Surrender and Grant, there was but one Freeholder made in a whole Country,
which was the Lord himself; all the rest were but Tenants at Will, or rather
Tenants in Villenage, and were neither fit to be sworn in Juries, nor to
perform any Public service: And by reason of the uncertainty of their Estates
did utterly neglect to build, or to plant, or to improve the Land. And
therefore, although the Lord were become the Kings Tenant, his Country was no
whit reformed thereby, but remained in the former Barbarism and Desolation.

Again, in the same Queens time, there were many Irish Lords, which did not
surrender, yet obtained Letters Patent of the Captain-ships of their
Countries, and of all Lands and duties belonging to those Captainships: For the
Statute which does condemn and abolish these Captain-ries, usurped by the
Irish, does give power to the Lord Deputy to grant the same by Letters Patents.
Howbeit, these Irish Captains, and likewise the English, which were made
Seneschalles of the Irish Countries, did by color of these grants, and under
pretense of Government, claim an Irish Seigniory, and exercise plain tyranny
over the Common people. And this was the fruit that did arise of the Letters
Patents, granted of the Irish Countries in the time of Queen Elizabeth, where
before they did extort and oppress the people, only by color of a lewd and
barbarous custom; they did afterward use the same Extortions and oppressions
by warrant, under the great Seal of the Realm.

But now, How the commissions for Surrenders, and defective Titles have been p^
in execution.
since his Majesty came to the Crown, two special Commissions have been sent
out of England, for the settling and quieting of all the possessions in Ireland;
The one, for accepting Surrenders of the Irish and degenerate English, and for
regranting Estates unto them, according to the course of the common Law; The
other, for strengthening of defective Titles. In the Execution of which
Commissions, there has ever been had a special care, to settle and secure the
under-Tenants; to the end, there might be a repose and establishment of every
Subjects Estate; Lord and Tenant, Freeholder and Farmer, thoroughout the
Kingdom.

Upon Surrenders, this course has been held from the beginning; when an Irish
Lord does offer to surrender his Country, his surrender is not immediately
accepted, but a Commission is first awarded, to enquire of three special
points. First, of the quantity and limits of the Land whereof he is reputed
owner. Next, how much himself does hold in demeasne, and how much is possessed by
his Tenants and Followers. And thirdly, what customs, Duties, and services, he
does yearly receive out of those lands. This Inquisition being made and
returned, the Lands which are found to be the Lords proper possessions in
demeasne, are drawn into a Particular; and his Irish duties; as Cosherings,
Sessings, Rents of Butter and Oatmeal, and the like; are reasonably valued and
reduced into certain sums of money, to be paid yearly in lieu thereof. This
being done, the surrender is accepted; and thereupon a grant passed, not of the
whole Country, as was used in former times, but of those Lands only, which are
found in the Lords possession, and of those certain sums of Money, as Rents
issuing out of the rest. But the Lands which are found to be possessed by the
Tenants, are left unto them, respectively charged with these certain Rents
only, in lieu of all uncertain Irish exactions.

In like manner, upon all grants, which have past by virtue of the commission,
for defective Titles, the Commissioners have taken special caution, for
preservation of the Estates of all particular Tenants. No gran^ of Irish
Captain-ships, o^ S^nescha^ships, since ^i^ Majesty Reign.


And as for Grants of Captain-ships or Seneschal-ships, in the Irish Countries;
albeit, this Deputy had as much power and authority to grant the same, as any
other Governors had before him; and might have raised as much profit by
bestowing the same, if he had respected his private, more than the public
good; yet has he been so far from passing any such in all his time, as he has
endeavored to resume all the Grants of that kind, that have been made by his
Predecessors; to the end, the inferior Subjects of the Realm, should make
their only and immediate dependency upon the Crown. And thus we see, how the
greatest part of the possessions, (as well of the Irish as of the English) in
Leinster, Conaght, and Munster, are settled and secured since his Majesty came
to the Crown: whereby the hearts of the people are also settled, not only to
live in peace, but raised and encouraged to build, to p^ant, to give better
education to their children, and to improve the commodities of their Lands;
whereby the yearly value thereof, is already increased, double of that it was
within these few years, and is like daily to rise higher, till it amount to the
price of our Land in England.

LAstly, The plantation on of Vlster.
the possessions of the Irishry in the Province of Vlster, though it were the
most rude and unreformed part of Ireland, and the Seat and Nest of the last
great Rebellion, are now better disposed and established, than any the Lands in
the other Provinces, which have been past and settled upon Surrenders. For, as
the occasion of the disposing of those Lands, did not happen without the
special providence and finger of God, which did cast out those wicked and
ungrateful Traitors, who were the only enemies of the reformation of Ireland:
so the distribution and plantation thereof, has been projected and prosecuted,
by the special direction and care of the King himself; wherein his Majesty has
corrected the errors before spoken of, committed by King Henry 2. and K. John,
in distributing and planting the first conquered Lands. For, although there
were six whole Shires to be disposed, His Majesty gave not an entire Country,
or County, to any particular person; much less did he grant Jura Regalia, or
any extraordinary Liberties. For the best British undertaker, had but a
proportion of 3000. Acres for himself, with power to create a Manor, and hold
a Court Baron: Albeit, many of these undertakers, were of as great birth and
quality, as the best Adventurers in the first conquest. Again, his Majesty did
not utterly exclude the Natives out of this plantation, with a purpose to root
them ou^, as the Irish were excluded out of the first English Colonies; but
made mixed plantation of British and Irish, that they might grow up together in
one Nation: Only, the Irish were in some places transplanted from the Woods and
Mountains, into the Plains and open countries, that being removed (like wild
fruit trees) they might grow the milder, and bear the better and sweeter fruit.
And this truly, is the Masterpiece, and most excellent part of the work of
Reformation, and is worthy indeed of His Majesty's royal pains. For when this
plantation has taken root, and been fixed and settled but a few years, with the
favor and blessing of God (for the Son of God himself has said in the Gospel,
Omnis plantatio, quam non plantavit pater meus, eradicabitur) it will secure
the peace of Ireland, assure it to the Crown of England for ever; and finally,
make it a civil, and a Rich, a Mighty, and a Flourishing Kingdom.

I omit to speak of the increase of the Revenue of the Crown, both certain and
casual, which is raised to a double proportion (at lest) above that it was, by
deriving the public Justice into all parts of the Realm; by settling all the
possessions, of both of the Irish and English, by re-establishing the
compositions; by restoring and resuming the customs; by reviving the Tenures in
Capite, and Knights-service; and reducing many other things into charge, which
by the confusion and negligence of former times, became concealed and
subtracted from the Crown. I forbear likewise to speak of the due and ready
bringing in of the Revenue, which is brought to pass by the well ordering of
the Court of Exchequer, and the authority and pains of the Commissioners for
Accounts.

I might also add hereunto, the encouragement that has been given to the
Maritime Towns and Cities, as well to increase their Trade of Merchandise, as
to cherish Mechanical Arts and Sciences; in that all their Charters have been
renewed, and their Liberties more enlarged by His Majesty, than by any of his
Progenitors since the Conquest. As likewise, the care and course that has been
taken, to make Civil Commerce and intercourse between the Subjects; newly
reformed and brought under Obedience, by granting Markets and Fairs to be
holden in their Countries, and by erecting of corporate Towns among them.

Briefly, the clock of the civil Government, is now well set, and all the
wheels thereof do move in Order; The strings of this Irish Harp, which the
Civil Magistrate does finger, are all in tune (for I omit to speak of the State
Ecclesiastical) and make a good Harmony in this Commonweal: So as we may well
conceive a hope, that Ireland (which heretofore might properly be called the
Land of Ire, because the Irascible power was predominant there, for the space
of 400. years together) will from henceforth prove a Land of Peace and Concord.
And though heretofore it has been like the lean Cow of Egypt, in Pharaohs
Dream, devouring the fat of England, and yet remaining as lean as it was
before, it will hereafter be as fruitful as the land of Canaan; the
description whereof, in the 8. of Deutronomy, does in every part agree with
Ireland; being Terra Rivorum, aquarumque and fontium; in cujus Campis, and
Montibus, erumpunt fluviorum abyssi; Terra frumenti, and hordei; Terra lactis,
and mellis; ubi absque ulla penuria comedes panem tuum, and rerum abundantia
perfrueris.

And thus I have discovered and expressed the defects and Errors, as well in
the managing of the Martial Affairs, as of the civil; which in former Ages gave
impediment to the reducing of all Ireland, to the Obedience and Subjection of
the Crown of England. I have likewise observed, what courses have been taken;
to reform the Defects and Errors in Government, and to reduce the People of
this Land to obedience, since the beginning of the reign of King Edward 3. till
the latter end of the reign of Queen Elizabeth.

And lastly, I have declared and set forth, How all the said errors have been
corrected, and the defects supplied under the prosperous Government of His
Majesty; So as I may positively conclude in the same words, which I have used
in the Title of this Discourse; That until the beginning of His Majesty's
Reign, Ireland was never entirely subdued, and brought under the Obedience of
the Crown of England. But since the Crown of of this Kingdom, with the
undoubted right and Title thereof, descended upon His Majesty; The whole Island
from Sea to Sea, has been brought into his Highness peaceable possession; and
all the Inhabitants, in every corner thereof, have been absolutely reduced
under his immediate subjection. In which condition of Subjects, they will
gladly continue, without defection or adhaering to any other Lord or King, as
long as they may be Protected, and justly Governed, without Oppression on the
one side, or impunity on the other. For, there is no Nation of people under the
Sun, that does love equal and indifferent Justice, better than the Irish; or
will rest better satisfied with the execution thereof, although it be against
themselves; so as they may have the protection and benefit of the Law, when
upon just cause they do desire it.

FINIS.

