A MEMORIAL FOR THE LEARNED: OR, MISCELLANY of choice Collections from most
Eminent Authors.

IN History, Philosophy, Physic, and Heraldry.

By J. D. Gent.

Ex paucis plurima concipit Ingenium. Licensed.

LONDON:Printed for George Powell and William Powle, over against Lincoln's Inn
Gate in Chancery Lane and in Holborn-Court in Gray's Inn 16(...)

(...) To the Right Honorable HENRY Lord GRAY, BARON of RUTHYN, etc.
My Lord,
THE ensuing Treatise being sent me from a concealed Author, with permission to
make it public, I soon had my Opinion of it confirmed by better Judgments;
that as it discovered vast labor in the Compiling, so it would prove of equal
Use and Advantage to the Reader. Hereupon I found a double Care incumbent upon
me, both to secure it from Errors of the Press, and procure its Recommendation
to the World, by the Patronage of some Honorable Person, which the Author's
Modesty has rendered more needful. Whither therefore should I betake my self
for protection of this Performance, but where (...) and Generosity are united;
and where is this Union more illustrious than in your Lordship, who are blessed
with such Endowments of Art and Nature, as even adorn your Quality, and bring
access of Honor to your Family, already famous for a long Race of Ancestors.
This were a sufficient Glory, when your Lordship had arrived to years of
perfection; but your early Genius disdains the slower methods of Time, and
makes you mature in Knowledge in the blossom of your Age. Beside the sweetness
of Disposition and acquaintance with the Muses, your Lordship has already
brought home the Improvement of Travel, to that eminent degree, as must soon
render you an Ornament to our Court, and Blessing to our Country. Illud demum
absolutum esse Ingenium quod ad Rempublicam simulque scientias factum sit.
This, in the opinion of Barclay, is the Perfection of a Gentleman, and a
Character whereof your Lordship has already given signal Instances. It must
never be forgotten, how early your Lordship (like another Scipio) was concerned
for the Public, and (in our late Trouble) with generous Loyalty raised a Troop
of Horse for his Majesty's and your Countries Service. This single Specimen
were enough to create that vast Expectation, which your Lordship will
questionless make good. Wherefore that the present Age may long enjoy your
Virtues and Aceomplishments, and Posterity your Example, is the zealous Prayer
of

My Lord, Your Lordships most devoted humble Servant, N. Tate.

The Author's PREFACE.
THE true design of a Preface (according to my Apprehension) being to explain
the meaning of the Title, and to give the Reader a more copious Notion of the
ensuing Treatise, with its Design, I must first tell you, why we call this, A
Memorial for the Learned. A Memorial implies something that reminds us of what
we have known before; but the Memory has almost lost it, or some part of it,
which makes our Notion imperfect, till it be recol^cted by this means. And by A
Memorial for the Learned, we mean, a succinct Account of those things,
wherewith the studious have been unacquainted by large and learned Tracts,
which being apt to be forgotten, are presently remitted to memory by this small
Treatise. The Propriety therefore of this part of our Title, I suppose no body
will deny. As to the Books we have chosen to epitomize, they are certainly the
best that could be thought on; the fame of whose Authors will certainly remain
to the Worlds Ne plus ultra. It remains therefore, that we acquaint you with
our Proceedings, and justify our Method.

First then, You have a short Memorial of English History, beginning before the
Invasion of Britain by Julius Caesar, and from thence continued to September,
1682. wherein you have, The Length and Breadth of England; an Account of its
first Inhabitants; the Romans Invasion of it; its Division into Parishes; the
Dane and Saxon Invasions; the Foundation of Universities and Colleges; with
all remarkable Passages before the Conquest: And from thence an Account of the
Life and Death of each King; his most notable Acts, Coronation, Heirs and
Issues, to the Death of King Charles the Second, of ever blessed memory;
abstracted from the best Chronicles, and from thence continued, with the
notable Passages of our present blessed Monarch's Reign, till the beginning of
September, 1685.

Secondly, You have a Collection of the most remarkable Occurrences,
Adventures, notable Exploits, and wonderful Casualties, in Sir Richard Baker's
Chronicle, discoursed with all possible Brevity. So that having had the
material Remarks of a Chronicle before, Both together make One perfect; whereby
you have in this small Treatise, what is most worthy notice in the largest
Volumes.

Thirdly, You have an Epitome of the most eminent Lord Bacon's Works; being
Abstracts from his History of Life and D^^ath; the length and shortness of Life
in living Creatures; length of Life in Man; Medicines for long Life, and the
Porches of Death: In all which, we have scarce omitted any thing, though
expressed here with much Brevity. We (...) deseend to his Centuries; wherein
there is much curious Learning, but most part fit only for Chemists and
Physicians, that dive into the most hidden Secrets of Nature. Those Experiments
that are either pleasant, or practicable, or of use, we have taken; wherein are
many admirable Curiosities of Nature, especially fit for Countrey-Gentlemen to
practice, and others to discourse of.

Fourthly, You have the Epitome of Vulgar Errors; wherein we found a vast
number, such as are most worthy Notice, or not publicly known. All which
things our Author has handled with so curious a Pen, that every Sentence
carries with it something that is extraordinary. Wherefore we have all along
followed his Sail as close as we could, omitting (to the best of our judgment)
nothing that is remarkable or pleasant.

Fifthly, An Abridgment of Honor; wherein you have, first, The Privileges due
to Gentility; and afterward all the several Titles of Honor, and Privileges
due to the female Sex; and lastly, the Precedence amongst the Nobility and
Peers of the Land, with their Issues; extracted chiefly from Carter's Analysis
of Honor, and other Treatises on that Subject. Wherefore this Compendium, if
truly looked into, we question not, but the ingenious Reader will find it to
answer its proposed Ends, in being a Memorial for the Learned, or Miscellany of
Learnings most useful Parts. And that it may accordingly prove of Advantage to
all that peruse it, is the only Hope and Aim of him, who will ever endeavor to
prove himself, (as every Man ought)

A true Servant of his Country, J. D.

AN ALPHABTICAL Table TO THE Historical Part.
A.
Aurelius Ambrosius's Arrival. Page 4 Arthur King. ibid Armada Spanish. 34
Argile. 44 Athelstone his Miracle. 48 Archbishops their Superiority. 52
Auricular Confession and Transubstantiation. 58 Aldermen first in London. 60
Atheists first burnt. 73 Annals forbidden to be paid to Rome. 90 No more
Appeals. ibid A strange Apparition. 101 A sad Accident. 107 Armies in the Air.
108
B.
BRitains Length and Breadth. Page 1 Boadicea. 2 Bonds first sealed. 10 Becket
Tho. 14 Black Prince. 21 A Bishop's Chastity. 49 Blasphemy. 51 London Bridge.
53. and finished. 53 Shower of Blood. 53 Barons. 63 Barons first executed. 64 A
Bishop rescued from the King by force. ibid Shower of Blood. 78 A miraculous
Birth. 95 Last Banneret in England. 99 A Pond of Blood. 108
C.
CAractecus. Page 4 Cadwallader. ibid Constantine. ibid Cambridge founded. 7
Church-Rights sold. 10 Charles the I. 36 Charles the II. 37 Committee of
Safety. 39 Canutus. 48 Scotch Custom. 49 Children born with Horse-tails. 52 A
barbarous Cruelty. 57 Common-Councel-men first in London 58 Charters confirmed.
59 A false Christ. 60 Richard Clare his Valor. 61 Coronation-Chair brought
from Scotland into England. 62 The Value of Calice. 66 Clergies Tax. ibid
Chaucer. 68 A noble Citizen of London. 69 Combat between Katrington and
Annesley. ib Character of King Henry the V. 75 A wonderful Cock. 78 Cap of
Maintenance. 89 King Henry the VIII. supreme Head of the Church. 90 First
Registers in Churches. 92 Cranmer Archbishop, his Heart not burnt. 96
East India Company. 100 First Master of Ceremonies. 103 A monstrous Child. 105
King Charles murdered. 108
D.
DAnes first invade England. Page 6 Second Invasion of Danes. ibid Drake
Captain. 34 Dangerfield. 45 A Dwarf. 63 A great Dearth. 65 First Dauphin of
France. 66 Dukes first created. 67 An Appearance of the Devil. 74 ^^fender of
the Faith Title. 90 Dolphins. 95 Captain Drake. 99 English first Drunkards.
ibid Dublin-University. 100 A great Drought. 101 Deer-killers Penalty. 104
Duels restrained. 105 Countess of Derby's Resolution. 108 Lady Eleanor Davis.
109
E.
ENgland's Length and Breadth. Page 2 Its first Inhabitants. ibid Their Wives.
ibid England when so called, and why. 6 Divided into Parishes. ibid King's Evil
first cured. 7 A dreadful Example. ibid Divided into Circuits. 14 Edward the I.
surnamed Long-shanks. 17 Edward Caernarven. ibid Edward the III. Crowned. 19
Edward the IV. 26 Edward the V. 27 Edward the VI. 32 Elizabeth Queen. ibid
Ethelred. 48 Strange Earthquake. 49, 53 Elephant first seen in England. 60
Emperor takes Pay of King Henry. 88 A prodigious Earthquake. 100 Another. 101
F.
FIre in London. Page 39 Great Fire in London. 49 A bountiful Feast. 59 Vast
Expenses in France. 60 A great Frost. 68 4000 French frighted at the Name of
Salisbury. 76 A Fort taken by one Man. 99 A monstrous Fish. 100
G.
GOspel first preached in England. Page 3 First publicly professed here. ibid
Gaviston. 18 Garter first instituted. 21. and 54 Lady Jane Gray. 32 Gunpowder
Plot. 35 Guns first used. 66 Knights of Garter first. ibid Guns first invented.
72 First Garter King at Arms. 74 Gold paid by Weight. 75 King's Guard first
ordained. 85 Granada won by the Spaniards. 86 An uncourteous Guest. 94
H.
HEptarchy. Page 4, and 5 Henry the I. Crowned at Westminster. 11 His Death and
Issue. 12 Henry the II. Plantagenet. 13 Henry the III. Crowned. 16 Henry the
IV. 22 Henry the V. 23 Henry the VI. 24 Henry the VII. 28 Henry the VIII. 29
Hell Kettles. 40 First Burning in the Hand. 87 Large Hailstones. ibid
Ceremonies of Cutting off the Hand for Courtstriking. 91 John Hopkins. 97
Hacket's strange Reconciliation. 99 King James presented with 70 Teams of
Horses. 103
I.
IReland conquered. Page 14 John King Crowned at Westminster. 15 First Justice
of Peace. 21 Joan de Lorrain. 24 James the I. King. 35 James the II. King. 40
Installation at Windsor. 45 First Lord of Ireland. 50 Johannes de Temporibus.
ibid Ireland first entered by the English. 51 Submits to King Henry. 52 King of
Jerusalem's Title whence. 54 Laws first in Ireland. 58 A devout Jew. 60
Man-Island conquered. 66 A noble Justing. 70 An Image made to speak. 72 King
Edward the IV. sits as Judge. 79 A melancholy Judge. 80 A magnificent
Interview. 89 King Henry his Justing. ibid Viscount Lisle dies of Joy. 92 St.
James's built. 93 English Laws in Ireland. 95 A wonderful Journey. 104
K.
THe Kingdom interdicted by the Pope. P. 58 Knighthood compelled. 60
Knights-Templers imprisoned. 64 Earl of Kent beheaded. 65 Manner of Knighting.
70 Obligations of Knighthood. 91 Knights-Baronets first created. 104
L.
A Learned Man became an Idiot. Page 59 Laws first pleaded in English. 67
Legitimacy by Parliament. 71 Barons first made by Letters Patents. ibid Lions
die in the Tower. 77 Judge Littleton. 82 Wonderful Lightning at Whitecomb. 108
M.
FIrst Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of London. Page 15. and 55 Magna Charta. 17 Evil
May Day. 29 Man hanged for his Master. 32 Mary Queen. ibid Monmouth lands at
Lyme. 42 Defeated and beheaded. 43 A Lord devoured by Mice. 49 Miracles. 58
Maid of Leicestershire. 61 Montfort's Audacity. ibid Sir John Mandevil. 65
Judgment on King Edward's Murderers. 83 Name of Merchant-Taylors first given.
87 Masking first used in England. 88 Meat sold by Weight. 93 Mass restored. 96
A strange Mortality. 98
N.
NUns of Codington. Page 48 French Navy of 1287. 7 Necromantick Art. 76 Last
Nuncio in England. 98
O.
Oswald. Page 6 Oxford-University founded. 7 Oliver Usurper. 37 Oats his Plot.
40 Perjury and Punishment. 41 Oath of Allegiance. 105
P.
AN Englishman elected Pope. Page 15 Peterkin and Symnel. 28 Protestancy
founded. 32 Abolished. 33 Old Parr his Age. 37 Plague in London. 39 First
Parliament in England. 49 Two Popes at once. 53 A Bondsman came to be Pope. ibid
King John resigns his Crown to the Pope. 48 A wonderful Preservation. 63 First
Coronation-Pardon. 65 A wonderful Pestilence. 67 Great Plenty. 68 A King
obliged to attend the Parliament. 70 A strange sort of general Pardon. 71
Prince Henry made a Prisoner. 73 King Henry the 5ths. Prophecy. 74 Printing
first used in England. 77 A wonderful Prodigy. ibid The Fickleness of
Parliaments. 80 First suing in forma Pauperis. 86 Popes Authority abolished. 91
First Gentlemen-Pensioners. 93 Priests Children legitimated. 95 A Plague. 105
R.
ROmans first enter England. Page 2 Their Departure. 3 Rosamond. 14 Richard
Coeur de Lion. 15 Robin Hood and Little John. ibid. and 55 Richard the II. 22
Richard the III. 28 King Richard's Reply to the Priest. 56 A ^^ot of Sheep. 64
A strange Rainbow. 96 A vast Rain. ibid Rain of Fire from Heaven. 110
S.
SAxons Invasion. Page 4 Stephen Earl of Blois Crowned at Westminster. 12 His
Valor, Death, Issue. 13 Salisbury Church built. 16 Scotland subjected. 17
Spencers. 18 Scots invade England. 20 Straw and Tyler. 22 A wonderful
Sorceress. 53 William King of Scots does Homage to King John. 57 Sterling
Money. ibid. 58 King of Scots does Fealty to King Edward. 62 Title to Scotland
surrendered. 65 Defrauding Soldiers punished. 66 A Subsidy granted without
asking. 74 Scriptures ordered to be in Latin. 75 A wonderful Slaughter. 79 King
Edward marries his Subject. 80 Sheep sent to the King of Arragon. ibid Strange
Examples of Severity. 81 Length of Shoos Noses. 82 Inundation of the Severn. 84
Sweating Sickness. 85 A Carver made Sheriff. ibid A Just at Sheens. 86
Sanctuaries abrogated. 87 Stews put down. 93 A great Sleeper. ibid Serges made
in England. 100 A Star at Noon at King Charles the 2ds. Birth. 107
T.
ORders of Templers. Page 49 Wonderful Accident of Thunder. 51 Thames almost
dry. 50 Decrease of Teeth in Men. 68 1500 executed for Treason. 69 Five M^^n
hanged at Tyburn, yet lived after. 77 A wonderful Tempest. 97 Tobacco brought
into England. 99
U.
UTer. Page 4 A strange Vision. 89 A miraculous Victory. 94
W.
WIlliam surnamed Rufus. Page 10 His Expedition into Normandy. 11 Death and
Burial. ibid Wales subdued. 17 Woolsey Cardinal. 30 Woolston's Miracle. 48
Westminster first built. 49 Prince of Wales whence first. 59 Wales and England
united. Apparel for Whores. 67 King Edward and the Widow. 81 A large Whale
taken. 101 (...) brought to London 104
Y.
YEomen of the Guard first instituted. Page 86
Collections of Life and Death.
NAture durable and not durable in Stones, Metals. Page 111 In Herbs and
Fruit Trees. 112 Length and shortness of Life in Creatures, viz. The Elephant,
Camel, Dog, Sow, Vultures. ib Birds, Fishes, Crocodiles, tame Animals. 113 Of
Nourishment. 114 To make large Fruit. ibid Where Men live longest. ibid To try
Healthfulness of Air: Signs of long Life: Medicines for long Life:
Blood-letting: Strong Liquors and Spices: Spare Diet: Exercise. 115 Of Joys,
Grief and Fear, Anger and Envy, Pity and Shame, Love and Hope, Admiration. 116
Chief Promoters of Longaevity; Deserts and Mountains, Anointings, Sweatings,
Woollen Clysters, Bathing, Meats, etc. 117, and 118
The Porches of Death.
SUdden Death, Poisons, Extreme Passions, Strangling. Page 119 To recall Life,
if possible. 120
Collections of Natural History, containing many choice Experiments, viz.
PErcolation, Separating Bodies by weight, etc. To make Vines fruitful: Meats
and Drinks most nourishing: An admirable Drink: To keep long under Water: To
prolong Life: Make Drink fresh: Keep Fruit green: Ripen Apples: To make Gold:
Accelerate Growth: Make Whelps little: Preserving Rose-leaves: Candles long
last: To make a hot Bed: Fruit grow into shape: To make Inscriptions on Trees:
Fruit without Core, or Stone: To try Seeds if good: When to gather Fruits:
Easiest Death: Of Drunkenness: Prognostics of unwholsom Years: Induration of
Quicksilver: Apples without Core: Raise Water by Flame: Of Sneezing: Audacity:
Food beneficial to the Brain: To help Courage and Ingenuity: Infallibly to take
away Warts. From Page 121. to Page 132.

Vulgar Errors.
First Book.
THeir Causes. Page 132 A further Illustration, 133 Second Cause. 135 Nearer
and more immediate Causes in wise and common sort of People, viz.
Misapprehension, Fallacy, Credulity, Supinity, Adherence to Authority,
Antiquity and Tradition. 137 Brief Enumeration of Authors. 141 Of the same. 143
The last Promoter of Common Errors, Satan. 144
Second Book.
OF Crystal. Page 145 Of the Loadstone. 148 Of Bodies Electrical. 149 Tenants
of Vegetables. 151 Insects, and Properties of Plants. 153
Third Book.
OF the Elephant. Page 154 Of the Horse. 155 Of the Dove. 156 Of the Bever. 157
Of the Badger. 158 Of the Bear. ibid Of the Basilisk. 159 Of the Wolf. 160 Of
the Deer. 161 Of the Kingfisher. 163 Of Griffins. 164 Of the Phoenix. 165 Of
Frogs, Toads, and Toadstone, 166 Of the Salamander. 167 Of the Amphisbaena. 168
Of the Viper. 169 Of Hares. 170 Of Moles. 171 Of Lampries. 172 Of Snails. 173
Of the Chameleon. 174 Of the Ostrich. 175 Of the Unicorns Horn. 176 That all
Animals of the Land are in the Sea. 177 Common course of Diet, and choice, or
abstinence from sundry Animals. 178 Of Sperma Ceti. 179 Tenants of Animals,
false or dub^^. 180 Swans Melody. ibid The Peacock. ibid Of the Stork, Toad,
Spider, Lion, Cock, Snakes. 181
Fourth Book.
Of the Erectness of Man. 182 Of the Heart. 184 Of Plurisies, and 185 the
Ring-finger. 185 Of the right and left Hand, 186 Of Swimming and Floating. 187
Of Weight. 188 Passages of Meat and Drink. 189 Of Sneezing. 190 Of the Jews.
191 Of Pigmies. 193
Fifth Book:
OF Pictures. First, Of the Pelican. Page 194 Picture of the Dolphin. 195
Serpent and Eve. 196 Pictures of Eastern Nations, etc. 197
Sixth Book.
OF the Beginning of the World. 199
Seventh Book.
HIstorical Tenants. Of the forbidden Fruit. 199 That a Man has one Rib less
than a Woman. 203 The Death of Aristotle. 204
Abridgment of Honor.
Privileges due to the Gentry. 205 Of the Esquire. 206 Of Knighthood in
general, and the Knight-Batchelor. 207 Of the Knight of the Bath. 208 Of
Bannerets. 209 Of Baronets. 210 Of Barons. 211 Of a Bishop. 212 The Viscount.
213 Count or Earl. 213 The Marquess. 213 Of the Duke. 214 Of the Archbishop.
ibid The Prince. 215 The King. 216 Of Women. 217 ^^edence amongst the Peers of
England. 218
A short MEMORIAL OF English History, Beginning before the Invasion of Britain
by Julius Caesar, and from thence continued to the year 1686.
BRITAIN.
THE length of Britain, from Length and breadth of Britain.
the Luzard-point Southward, in Cornwall, to the Straithy-head in Scotland,
contains 624 miles: The breadth, from the Landsend in Cornwall in the West,
unto the Island Tenet in the East, contains 340 miles.

A Place so well stored with all necessary Commodities for this Life, that our
English Lucan thus sings; The fairest Land, that from her thrusts the rest,
As if she cared not for the World beside;
A World within her self with Wonders blessed.


England's Dimension in length, from Length and breadth of England.
Barwick to the Lands-end, is 386 miles: In breadth, from Sandwich to the
Lands-end, 279. In compass, about 1300 miles.

The first Inhabitants of this Island were The first Inhabitants.
derived from the Gauls, and anciently few, and those of the better sort only
did wear any sort of Clothing.

Their Wives were 10 or 12, which they Their Wives.
held common amongst Parents and Brethren; yet was the Issue reputed his only,
who first married the Mother when she was a Maid.

It is observable in the time of the Romans, A valiant Queen.
of one Boadicea, Queen to Pratiosagus, after her Husband's Death receiving
Incivilities from the Romans, opposed her self against them, and in one Battle
slew 80000 of them, and got several other great Victories; but at length she
was vanquished in Battle; when rather than live subject to her Foes, she
poisoned her self.

The Romans were opposed 100 years; nor were the Britains then subdued but by
their own Divisions.

An. Mun. 3913. Julius Caesar first took Romans first ^^ed Britain.
Footing in Britain about Deal; besore Christ 54.

In the year of Redemption 67. Domitius Nero reigning the 6th. Emperor, Joseph
of Arimathea was sent by Philip the Apostle, to First Preacher of the Gospel in
Britain.
plant the Gospel in Britain, who laid the foundation of the Christian Faith at
a Place then called Avalon, now Glastenbury, where he died, and was buried.

A. D. 181. Aurelius Commodus being Emperor, The first public profession
thereof.
was the Christian Faith in Britain first professed by public Authority under
King Lucius, the first Christian King in the World.

After 500 years that the Romans had Romans Departure.
swayed in Britain, they took their final farewell of it, A. D. 446.

In this year the Saxons were called in, under 450.
the Conduct of Hengist and Horsa; they came 9000. with their Wives and
Children, to assist the Britains against the Scots, which succeeded. Hengist
afterward inviting Vortigern (a British King) to a Feast, married his fair
Daughter Rowenna to him: Upon which Hengist aspired to make this Island his
Inheritance, sending for greater Forces over hither; but by the Britains are
defeated in three set Battles, in the last whereof the Saxons were forced to
flee England. However by the Practices of Rowenna, and relying on his Son
Vortigern's Love, Hengist once more comes over to England, but pretends only to
fetch away his Daughter, and on pretense of friendly Conference, appoints a
Meeting on Salisbury-Plain: The well-meaning Britains came unarmed, according
to Agreement; but the fraudulent Saxons, with Skeans under their Cassocks, with
which they set upon the Britains, at a Watchword killing 3, or as some say,
500 of the Nobility, taking the King Prisoner.

^^relius Ambrosius, a Roman born, but Aurelius Ambrosius.
well affected to the Britains, arrives to their Relief.

To him succeeded Uter (his Brother, or Uter.
as others say, a Britain) surnamed Pendragon, from his Banner, on which was a
golden Dragon's Head, which to this day, in our English Camps, is the imperial
Standard.

To him succeeded his valiant Son Arthur. King Arthur.
Amongst other famous Acts, he instituted the Order of the Knights of the round
Table, to prevent Disputes of Precedence.

To him succeeded Constantine; and then Constantine.
Aurelius Conanus, Nephew to Arthur; then Caractecus; and then Cadwallar, in
whose Caractecus. Cadwallar.
time the Doctrine of Mahomet was broached in the East; a Famine happening,
that drove Cadwallar over to France to his Cousin Saxon Invasion.
Alan. The Saxons taking advantage thereof, came over in great swarms, and
possessed themselves of the whole Island.

The first Kingdom of the Saxons begun First.
by Hengist, in the year 455, containing all Kent, and continued 372 years,
during the Reign of 17 Kings.

The second Kingdom of the Heptarchy Heptarchy. Second.
was of the South Saxons, begun by Ella, in the year 488, containing ail
Sufsex, and continued 435 years, under five Kings Reigns successive.

The third Kingdom of the Heptarchy Third.
was of the West Saxons, begun by Credric, in the year 519. containing Cornwall,
Devonshire, Somersetshire. Wiltshire, Hampshire, Barkshire, and continued 561
years, during the Reigns of 19 Kings.

The fourth Kingdom of the Heptarchy Fourth.
was of the East Saxons, began by Erchenwyn, in the year 527. containing Essex
and Middlesex, and continued 281 years, during the Reigns of 14 Kings.

The fifth Kingdom was of Northumberland, Fifth.
so called because it lay North of the River Humber, began by Ella and Ina, in
the year 547. containing Yorkshire, Durham, Lancashire, Westmorland,
Cumberland, and Northumberland, continued 370 years, during the Reigns of 23
Kings.

The sixth Kingdom was of Mercia, and Sixth.
began in Crida, in the year 522. containing Huntington, Rutland, Lincoln,
Nottingham, Warwickshire, Leicestershire, Northampton, Derby, Oxfordshire,
Cheshire, Shropshire, Gloucestershire, Staffordshire, Buckinghamshire,
Bedfordshire, Hartfordshire, and continued 222 years, during the Reigns of 20
Kings.

The seventh Kingdom was of the East Angles, Seventh.
and began by Uffa, in the year 575. containing Suffolk, Norfolk,
Cambridgshire, and the Isle of Ely: continued 353 years, under the Reigns of 15
Kings.

The Saxon Kings striving with each other for Sovereignty, gained upon each
other, till at last in the year 818. Ecbert, King of the West Saxons, reduced
them all under subjection, causing all the South of This Isle first called
England, and why.
the Island to be called England, according to the Angles, from whom himself
came, after whom they were no longer properly called Saxon Kings, but Kings of
England. Then ensued the Race of Saxon Kings, who reigned sole Kings of this
Island: The first Danes first invade England.
whereof was Egbert; the second Ethelwolph; the third Ethelbald; the fourth
Ethelbert, in whose time the Danes first invaded England.

Ethelbald married Judith incestuously, the Widow of his Father; from this
Judith, afterward married to the Earl of Flanders, after diverse Descents, came
Maud, the Wife of William the Conqueror, from whom are descended all our
English Kings ever since.

Oswald's-tree in Shropshire was so called Oswald's-tree, whence named.
from Oswald, a very godly Christian King, who reigned the fifth over the
Deira, A. D. 633. and was there slain by Penda, King of Mercia, who tore his
Body piecemeal.

This Oswald being at Dinner upon Easter Day, His Charity to the Poor.
hearing of a great company of Poor in the Street that asked Alms of him, he
commanded the Meat, prepared for his own Table, to be carried to them, and
brake a silver Platter to pieces, and sent it amongst them.

An. Dom. 636. Honorius, Archbishop of England divided into Parishes.
Canterbury, first divided England into Parishes.

A. D. 866. the Danes made the first great The Danes invade England.
Invasion of England, under the Command of those cruel Captains, Inguar and
Habba, who burnt down the City of York, and at last killed King Ethelred in a
pitched Battle, who was then King of England.

It is said, that King Elfred of England, 872. The University of Oxford founded.
A. D. 872. founded the University of Oxford, and therein University-Colledge.

Baliol College was founded, by John Baliol, King of the Scots, A. D. 1263.

Merton College, by Walter de Merton, Bishop of Rochester, 1274.

Exeter College, by Stapleton, Bishop of Exeter, 1316.

Oriel College, by King Edward the II. 1327.

Queens College, by Eglesfield, Chaplain to Queen Philip, Wife to Edward the
III. 1340.

New College, by William of Wickam, Bishop of Winchester, 1379.

Lincoln College, by Rich. Flemming, Bishop of Lincoln, 1420.

All Souls, by H. Chichely, Archbishop of Canterbury, 1437.

Magdalen, by W. Winiflet, Bishop of Winchester, 1459.

Brazen-nose College, by W. Smith, Bishop of Lincoln, 1513. but finished by R.
Sutton.

Corpus Christi, by R. Fox, Bishop of Winchester, 1516.

Christ-Church, begun by Cardinal Wolsey, 1546. and by King Henry the Eighth
ordained the Cathedral Church of the Sea of Oxford.

Trinity, by T. Hatfield, Bishop of Durham, 1518.

St. John's, by H. Chichely, Archbishop of Canterbury, 1437.

Jesus College, by Dr. Hugh Price, 1562.

Wadham, by Nich. Wadham, 1613.

Some report that Cambridge was built by Cambridge Founded.
Cantabar, a Spaniard, 375 years before Christ. But as some contend, Cambridge
began not to be an University, till Hugh Balsham, Bishop of Ely, founded the
College of Peter-House, in A. D. 1256.

Clare-Hall, by Eliz. de Bourgo, Countess of Clare, 1347.

Pembroke-Hall, by Mary, Widow to the Earl of Pembroke, 1347.

Corpus Christi College, by the Aldermen, 1351.

Trinity College, by Dr W. Bateman, 1353.

Gonvil College, by Edm. de Gonvil, 1353. Repaired by J. Caius, Dr. of Physic,
1557.

Kings College, by King Henry the Sixth, 1441.

Queens College, by Margaret his Wife, in the same Year.

Katharine-Hall, by R. Woodlark, Provost of Kings College, 1475.

Jesus College, by J. Alcock, Bishop of Ely, 1497.

Christ's College, by Mar. Countess of Derby, where the College of Gods House
stood, 1505.

St. John's College, by the same, 1508.

Magdalen College, by T. Audley, Lord Chancellor of England, 1542.

Trinity College, by Henry the Eighth, 1546.

Emmanuel College, by Sir Walter Mildmay, 1584.

Sidney Su^^ College, by Frances, Countess of Su^^, Daughter of Sir William
Sidney, 1598.

There is a story of King Edward the He Reigned A. D. 1042.
Confessor, that as he lay in his Bed in an Afternoon with his Curtains drawn,
a Courtier came into his Chamber, where finding the Kings Casket open (which
Hugoline his Chamberlain had forgot to shut) he took out as much Coin as he
could conveniently carry, and went away; and came again a second, and a third
time; when the King spoke to him, and bad him speedily be packing whilst he
was well, for if Hugoline should take him, he should not only lose all he had,
but stretch an Halter: And when Hugoline came, and missing it, was troubled,
the King said, be not troubled, for the man that had it, has more need of it
than we have.

This King Edward was the first that The King's Evil first Cured.
cured the King's Evil.

Earl Godwin (whose Daughter this King married) took Bread and eat it, in
witness that he was not guilty of the death of A dreadful Example.
Prince Alfred; but as soon as he had received the Bread, he was choked at the
Table before the King at Windsor.

WILLIAM the Conqueror, was the A. D. 1066.
base Son to Robert Duke of Normandy. He began his Reign October. 14th. A. D.
1066. He was very cruel to the English, and took part of every man's Estate, and
also exacted very great Taxes. He died at Roan in Normandy, A. D. 1087.
forsaken of all his Courtiers: his Body was left unburied, till one Harluims, a
poor Country Knight, at his own charge conveyed it to Caen. His Issue were,
Robert, Richard, William, Henry, and six Daughters.

In his time it was decreed at Rome, That the Sea of York should be styled
Primas Angliae; and that of Canterbury, Primas totius Angliae.

The setting Seals to Bonds and Writings First use of sealing Bonds.
was now first used in England, there being before only Witnesses to them.

WILLIAM, Surnamed Rufus, though A. D. 1087.
not eldest Brother, gained the voices of the Council, and was Crowned A. D.
1087.

This King fairly promised to abolish the over-hard Laws made by his Father.

He set to Sale the Rights of the Church, The Church Rights sold.
preferring those therein that would give the most. He was wont to say, that
Christ's Bread was sweet, dainty, and most delicate for Kings.

When Duke Robert had mortgaged Normandy to him, hearing, as he sat at meat,
the Main in Normandy was straightly Besieged, and his Subjects distressed, he
swore his wonted Oath, By St. Luke's Face, that His Expedition into Normandy.
he would not turn his back till he was with them; and thereupon commanded the
Wall of the House to be broke down, that he might go the next way, leaving
orders for his Nobles to follow him; but the Winds being contrary, and the Seas
raging, his Pilot desired him to stay, till they were appeased; to whom the
King said, Have thou ever heard that a King has been drowned? Therefore hoise
up thy Sails, I charge thee, and be gone: Which accordingly being done, the
King making such haste, relieved the City, before it was expected, and settled
all things in a short time; and being returned into England, as he was Hunting
in New Forest, Sir Walter Tyrrel, a French Knight, shooting at a Stag, the
Arrow glanced against a Tree, and struck the King into the Breast, with which
he immediately died, August 1. A. D. 1100. His Death.
His Body, laid in a Colliers Cart, was drawn with one poor Jade, till the Cart
broke, where for a while the Corpse was laid in the dirt; but afterward was
conveyed to Winchester, and there buried in Burial.
the Cathedral Church.

There did several strange Wonders happen in this Kings Reign; as Earthquakes,
Blazing-stars, and the like.

HENRY, for his Learning styled Beauclerk, A. D. 1100.
promising many good things, was with the general liking of the People Crowned
at Westminster, in A. D. 1100. He constituted many good Laws, and rejected
those that were formerly too severe, by which he wholly gained the hearts of
the People.

Robert being returned from the Holy Land, claimed the Kingdom; but at length
the difference between these two Brethren was reconciled, on these terms: That
Henr^^ should enjoy the Crown during his life, paying to Robert 3000 Marks by
the year.

After this King had taken pleasure in Hunting in Normandy, he made a great
repast of Lampreys, upon which he fell exceeding sick, and after seven days
sickness, died, A. D. 1135. at the Town of St. Denis. His Death.
His Body was brought to Reading, and there buried in the Abbey which himself
had founded.

Besides his Lawful Issue, William and His Issue.
Maud, he is said to have had fourteen illegitimate.

In the Year 1111. at Dunmow in Essex, the Lady Juga Founded a Priory for black
Nuns, which afterward became a House of Monks; who ('it is said) did allow a
Gammon of Bacon to such married couples, as repented not of their bargain a
year and a day after their Marriage, nor made any Nuptial transgression in word
or deed. This they were to make a solemn Oath of.

STEPHEN, Earl of Blois, Son to A. D. 1135.
Adelicia, Daughter to the Conqueror, was admitted King, by the working of his
Brother Henry, Bishop of Winchester; but chiefly through the means of Hugh
Bigot, who took this Oath, That King Henry upon his Deathbed had dis-inherited
his Daughter, and appointed Stephen to succeed him. He was Crowned at
Westminster on St. Stephen's day, in A. D. 1135.

His entrance was peaceable, but by little and little civil discords increased,
with which, and the incursions of the Welsh, Scots, and Maud the Empress, he
was continually disturbed.

He was a very valiant King, as was shown His Valor.
by his encounter with Robert, Earl of Gloucester, and Ranulph, Earl of
Chester: where after a long Fight, his Horse and Foot flying, and leaving him
almost alone, he, with his Battle-Ax, drove back whole Troops assailing him,
with an undaunted courage, till his Battle-Ax broke; and after that, till his
Sword flew in pieces; but was knocked down and taken, and carried to the
Empress. So the Empress for a while ruled all; but Stephen, by the diligence of
the Bishop of Winchester, after a while gained it again.

He died at Dover, being troubled with His Death.
the Iliack Passion and the Hemorrhoids, A. D. 1154. and was buried at
Feversham in Kent.

He had Issue, Baldwin, Eustace, William, Issue.
Maud, Mary.

HENRY the Second Plantaginet, the A. D. 1154.
Son of Maud, and Earl Geoffrey of Anjou, was Crowned at Westminster.

This King went in Person against Lord Hugh de Mortimer, and other Rebels,
where in the Siege of Bridgenorth he had been shot with an Arrow, had not
Hubert de St. An Example of true Loyalty.
Clare interposed, and took the Arrow in his own bosom.

Tho. Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury, made great disturbances in this Kings
Reign, he was at last murdered in the Cathedral at Canterbury, and this was his
Epitaph: Quis moritur? Praesul. Cur? Pro grege. Qualiter? Ense.
Quando? Natali. Quis locus? Ara Dei.


This King effected the Conquest of Ireland, Ireland conquered.
and reformed the Irish Church.

This Kings Queen Eleanor and his Sons rose in Rebellions against him, and were
assisted by the French and Scotch Kings, but he overcame them all.

He died in the Church at Chinon, A. D. His Death.
1189. and was buried at Font Everard.

His Issue were, William, Henry, Richard, Issue.
Jeoffrey, Philip, John, Maud, and Eleanor.

He had to his Concubine fair Rosamond, Rosamond.
who was poisoned by the Queen in her Labyrinth at Woodstock, which the King
had built for her. She had this Epitaph upon her Tomb; Hic jacet in Tumba
Rosamundi, non rosa munda,
Non redolet, sed olet, quae redolere solet.


King Henry divided England into Circuits, England divided into Circuits.
appointing that two of his Judges should twice in a year, in each Circuit,
administer Justice.

In the beginning of his Reign, one Nicholas An English man elected Pope.
Breakspear, an Englishman, was elected Pope, by the name of Adrian the IV.

RICHARD, from his exceeding Valor, A. D. 1189.
surnamed Coeur de Lion, was Crowned at Westminster.

He spent great time in the Wars at the Holy Land, where he did many noble
exploits; and as he was going, conquered Cyprus, where he solemnly took to Wife
his beloved Lady Berengaria.

He died of the wound of an Arrow, received His Death.
at the Siege of the Castle of Chaluz, belonging to the Viscount of Limoges,
April 6th. 1199. and was buried at Charron.

In the first year of his Reign he appointed First Lord Mayor.
Henry Fitz-Alwin to be the first Lord Mayor of London, being formerly governed
by Portgraves.

Now lived Robin Hood and Little John.

JOHN, by the assistance of his Mother A. D. 1199.
Eleanor, was by the great Council of the Realm admitted King, and was Crowned
at Westminster. His Reign throughout was attended with great Troubles; either
with the King of France, Scotland, or by Rebellion of his own Subjects.

He was at last poisoned at Swinshed Abbey His Death,
by an envenomed Cup, presented to him by a Monk, tasting first thereof
himself, so becoming the wicked Instrument of his own and Sovereign's death,
October. 19. 1216. He was buried at Worcester.

His Issue were, Henry, Richard, Joan, Issue.
Eleanor, and Isabel.

Now lived one Simon Thurvey, who for Example.
his Pride in Learning, especially for his Blasphemies against Moses and
Christ, became so utterly ignorant, that he could hardly read a letter in a
Book.

HENRY the Third, at about ten years A. D. 1216.
of Age was Crowned King the ninth day after his Father King John's decease:
The Noble Earl of Pembroke being by common consent of Peers and Prelates,
constituted Guardian of him during his Nonage.

This King was almost always at dissension His Troubles.
with his Barons.

He lost all his Rights beyond the Seas to His Losses.
the French King.

There were now at Oxford 15000 Students, The number of S tudents now at Oxford.
whose names were in the Metriculation Book.

After he had gone through very many troubles, he fell grievously sick at the
Abbey of St. Edmund in Suffolk, and there died. His De ath and Issue.
A. D. 1272. whose Issue was, Edward, Edmund, Richard, John, William, Henry,
Margaret, Beatrice, and Catharine.

Richard Beor, then Bishop of Sarum, The bu ilding of Salisbury Ch^^rch.
built that stately Church at Salisbury, which has in it as many Windows as
are days in the year, as many Marble Pillars as hours, as many Doors as Months.

Magna Charta, containing the sum of Magna char^^ first instituted
all the written Laws of England, was ordained in the ninth year of his Reign.

EDWARD the First, surnamed Longshanks, A. D. 1272.
at his Fathers Death was employed in the Holy Wars, where he behaved himself
very valiantly. He grieved much at his Fathers death. At his arrival into
England, he was most joyfully welcomed, and with his dearest Eleanor was
Crowned at Westminster.

The first of this Kings exploits, was the Wales subdued.
subduing of Wales, and made his Son Edward, born at Caernarvan, Prince thereof.

He was mighty inde^^tigable and successful in all his exploits. He brought
Scotland Scotland subjected.
wholly in subjection, and was ever very well beloved of his Subjects.

This Heroic King died of a Dysentery His. Death.
at Burgh upon Sands, A. D. 1307. and was buried at Westminster.

His Issue were, John, Henry, Alphonso Issue.
(who died before him) Edward, Thomas, Edmund, and ten Daughters.

EDWARD, called Caernarvan, so soon A. D. 1307.
as his Father was dead, repealed Pierce Gaveston, who in his Fathers time, for
abusing the Prince's years with wicked vanities, by common Decree was banished.

He sailed into France, where at Bolein he was married to young Isabella,
Daughter to Philip the Fair.

This Gaveston forementioned caused many His Dissensions, with the Death of
Gaveston.
dissensions, being a very debauched man, and the King wholly ruled by him. He
was thrice banished by Parliament, the King still re-calling him; but at last
was Beheaded at Warwick Castle, by Guy Earl of Warwick, as an open Traitor to
the Kingdom, which caused a lasting hatred between the King and Nobles.

This opportunity Bruce, King of Scotland, took to set his Kingdom at liberty;
and at Bannoxburn gave King Edward the greatest overthrow that ever they gave
the English, and gained great spoils, the English The English beaten by the
Scots.
coming as for a Triumph, having adorned themselves with all sorts of riches,
whereon the Scots made these Rhymes, Long Beards, heartless, painted Hoods,
witless,
Gay Coats, graceless, make England thriftless.


Then in Pierce Gaveston's place the King advanced the Spencers, Father and
Son, The Spencers advanced.
whose intolerable insolences seemed to exceed the others, and caused more
Civil Dissensions, and Civil Wars, in which, One Earl and fourteen Lords
suffered death. After which, the Spencers behaved themselves so exceeding
Lordly, that the Queen and discontented Nobles resolve to clear the World of
them; and the King found but few Friends, because of the Mortal hatred that the
People generally did bear to the Spencers; so that his part proving the weaker,
Spencer the elder was taken at the Siege of Bristol, and there cut up alive,
and quartered. The younger was taken with The death of the Spencers.
the King at the Abbey of Neath in Wales; which Spencer was ignominiously
hanged. The distressed King being now shut up in Prison, at last yielded to
resign the Crown The resignation of his Crown.
to his Son Edward; whereupon Sir William Trussel, in behalf of the whole
Realm, renounced all Allegiance to him, A. D. 1327. His Issue were, Edward,
John, Joan, and His Issue.
Eleanor.

EDWARD the Third was Crowned A. D. 1327.
upon Candlemas-day. Soon after, Tho. de Gourney, and John Mattrevers conveyed
the old King from Kenelworth to Berkley Castle, and there Murdered him, by
running a Death of Edward the Second.
burning Spit into his Body, as he was easing Nature, Sept. 22. 1327. His Body
was buried at Gloucester. To animate these Regicides, Adam de Torleton, Bishop
of Hereford, sent them this ambiguous Phrase by Mortimer, Edwardum occidere
nolite timere bonum est.



This King made Edw. Baliol King of Scots, who did him Homage.

In the year 1327. died Charles the Fair, King of France, by whose death the
Crown Edward the Third his Title to France.
devolved to Edward, King of England, in right of his Mother Queen Isabel, who
was Daughter to Philip the Fair, and Sister to Charles the Fair. But the French
pretending a Fundamental Law, by which no Woman was inheritable to France,
sought to debar King Edward of his right, receiving to the Crown Philip of
Valois, whose Father was younger Brother to Philip the Fair, advancing the
Brothers Son before the Daughters Son. Whereupon King Edward went into France
with a puissant Army, His Expedition for his Right in France.
and overran all places in his way; at last, the French Army met him at Cressy
in Ponthio, lying between the Rivers of Some and Anthy, being above 100000 men.
A bloody Fight ensued, where the Black Prince, King Edward's Son, without the
help of the Battle wherein his Father was, which stood idle, won so great a
Victory of the French, A great Victory.
that they slew of their party 11 great Princes, and of Barons, Knights, and
men of Arms, above 1500. and of the Commons about 30000. Of the English not one
man of Note or Honor was slain.

The Scots taking this Opportunity, in Scots invade England.
favor of the French invaded England, but were soon stopped, their King David
taken Prisoner, and their chiefest Nobles slain.

After the King had taken many great places in France, at last there was a
Peace concluded, though it continued not long ere the French broke the
Agreement: In revenge whereof, King Edward entered His second Journey into
France.
France with an Army, and spoiled it where he came; and after his return home,
he bestowed the Duchy of Aquitain on the Black Prince, commanding him to
defend his right. The Prince, furnished with a gallant Army, went to the chief
City Bourdeaux, and John, King of France, encountered him with a great Army,
having the odds of six to one; notwithstanding the Victorious Prince
discomfited the French, Another great Victory by the Black Prince.
took Prisoners the King and his youngest Son, and many great Lords, and about
2000 Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen, bearing Armories, slew 52 Lords, and
1700 Knights and Gentlemen, besides common Soldiers 6000. Shortly after he
returned home with his Prisoner King John, and a while after these Conditions
were agreed The Agreement.
upon: That King John and his Heirs should have the Crown of France, and Duchy
of Normandy; and King Edward and his Heirs Aquitain and Santain, and King John
pay for his Ransom 500000 l. Sterling.

Not long after this, the Martial Prince The death of the Black Prince.
Edward died on Trinity Sunday, 1376. about his age 46, and was buried at
Canterbury: And his Father died soon after at Shene in The Kings Death and
Burial. His Issue.
Surrey, A. D. 1377. and was buried at Westminster. His Issue were, Edward the
Black Prince, William, Lionel, John of Gaunt, Edmund, William of Windsor,
Thomas, Isabel, Joan, Blanch, and Margaret.

He was the founder of the Noble Order The first Order of the Garter.
of the Garter; so entitled, from the Garter he took up of the Countess of
Salisbury's, which slipped off in a Dance. Also in his First Justices of the
Peace.
first year was the Original of Justices of the Peace.

RICHARD the Second, the Son of A. D. 1377.
the Black Prince, was Crowned King in the eleventh year of his Age; but ere
the Crown was settled on his Head, the French braved it on the English Coasts,
and the Scots set fire on the Tower of Roxborough; and through want of care in
such who had the charge of State-matters in the Kings behalf, things were
declined to a shameful change; and the glorious Achievements of the two late
Edwards fell under an Eclipse. Jack Straw and Wat Tyler caused Straw and Tyler.
great Rebellions, but were suppressed at last.

King Richard married the Lady Ann, His Marriage.
Daughter to the Emperor Charles the IV. and a Truce was concluded with France.

After a great many Troubles by Civil Wars and Dissensions, he was caused to
His resignation of the Crown.
resign the Crown to the Duke of Lancaster.

Queen Ann, Wife to King Richard, first Women's first riding on sidefaddles.
taught English Women to ride on side-saddles; before they rode astride: and
long train^^ Gowns for Women.

HENRY the Fourth, the Son of John A. D. 1399.
Duke of Lancaster, the fourth Son of King Edward the Third, was Crowned at
Westminster. All that the old King said, was, I look not after such things, but
my hope is, that after all this, my Cousin will be my good Lord and Friend.
Many did strive to re-place Richard, but to no purpose: Death of King Richard.
And he at last died at Pontfract Castle by Hunger, Cold, and great Torments,
and was buried at Langley in Hartford-shire. There was a great many
Conspiracies afterward against King Henry, but they all came off with the
worst, and the Plotters thereby only hastened their own ruin. The King died at
London, A. D. His Death and Issue.
1413. His Issue were, Henry, Thomas, John, Humphrey, Blanch, and Philippa.

HENRY the Fifth, of Monmouth, whilst A. D. 1413.
he was Prince, did many things very incongruous to the greatness of his Birth;
yet when he had attained the Crown, to begin a good Government, he began at
home, banishing from Court those unruly Youths that had been his Consorts. He
began his Reign in all things very advisedly. He sent into France to demand his
Right; and the Dauphin in derision sent him a Ton of Paris Tennis Balls: But
the King returned for Answer, that he would shortly send him London Balls,
which should shake Paris Walls. And soon after went with an His Expedition into
France.
Army into France, and first of all took Harflew, Sept. 22. 1414. Then went to
Agencourt on October. 24. where the French had pitched with six, some say ten
times the number of the English; whereupon the King offered to part, and
surrender what he had won: but the French would not yield, making sure account
of Victory, had prepared a Chariot for the Captive King, and all other things
for that purpose. The Battle beginning, King Henry encouraged his Soldiers,
and with their small company the English won the day, having every man his
Prisoner. Of the English A wonderful Victory.
were slain the Duke of York, Earl of Suffolk, two Knights, one Squire, and 28
private Soldiers. Of the French were slain 4000 Princes, Nobles, Knights, and
Esquires, and 10000 common Soldiers, and more than these taken. After which,
he came home, and in a short time returned there with another Army, where at
last he was Proclaimed Regent of France, and had He is Proclaimed Regent of
France. His Marriage.
Homage sworn to him; and his Marriage with the Lady Catharine was with all
Solemnity celebrated at Troyes. After which he hastes into England with his
Queen, and in a short time after he went into France again, where he had not
been long before His Death, Burial, and Issue.
he fell sick of a burning Fever and Flux, whereof he died, Aug. 31. 1422. and
was buried at Westminster. His Issue was only Henry of Windsor.

HENRY the Sixth, of Windsor, was A. D. 1422.
Crowned about the eighth Month of his Age. The Government of England was
committed to Humphrey Duke of Gl^^ucester, and the Regency of France to John
Duke of Bedford, under whom things succeeded very prosperously. In his time was
that Famous French Shepherdess, Joan of Lorrain, Joan de Lorrain.
who put on Man's Apparel, and opposed the English with great success, but was
at last taken, and was burnt for Sorcery.

A. D. 1435. that Famous Patriot and General, John Duke of Bedford, died at
Paris, after which, the English began to change their Affairs there for the
worse, and lost most of their strong Holds. At last there was a Peace concluded
between the two Kings.

A. D. 1444. was King Henry married His Marriage.
with Margaret, Daughter to the Duke of Anjou and Lorrain; after which, the
Kings Fortune declined both in England and France. The Queen ruling all,
contrived the death of Duke Humphrey, who was the only man that had hitherto
kept things in His Troubles.
order by his Prudence. By this time were all the English Fortunes in France
lost. The Duke of York raising many Rebellions in England, and at last in a
great Battle at St. Albans, the Kings greatest Friends were most slain, and
himself taken. After which, York created himself Protector of England, and by
degrees works out the Kings ancient Counselors; yet many stood up for the
King, and many great Battles were fought, Fortune favoring sometimes one, and
then another; at last the Duke himself was slain by the Queens Forces near
Wakefield. And now his Son Edward, Earl of March, maintains his Quarrel. The
Queens Forces recover the King again; howbeit, the L^^ndoners Proclaimed the
Earl Earl of March Proclaimed King. His Issue.
of March King of England. King Henry's Issue was only Edward. He was a Prince
free from Pride, very devout, chaste, and modest. He built Eaton College, and
Kings College in Cambridge.

The Art of Printing was found out in Printing first in England.
Germany, by John Guttenburg, and brought into England, by Will. Caxton, a
Mercer of London, who first practiced the same in the Abbey at Westminster, A.
D. 1471.

EDWARD the IV. eldest Son to Richard A. D. 1461.
Duke of York, began to reign in the 20th. year of his Age; at which time Henry
had many Friends, who sought to re-settle him on his Throne. On June the 28th.
was His Coronation.
Edward crowned; and soon after King Henry and his Son Edward dis-inherited of
their Claim to the Crown by Act of Parliament. He takes to Wife the Lady
Elizabeth Marriage.
Gray, the Relict of his mortal Enemy Sir John Gray, slain at the Battle of St.
Albans, who was crowned at Westminster, May 26. 1465. But this his Marriage
below himself was much to his disadvantage, by making the Earl of Warwick,
formerly his very good Friend, a strong Rebel against him, who took the King
Prisoner; but the King made his Escape again. But afterward the Earl of
Warwick drove him out of the Land, and made Henry again King: After which King
Edward returns, and in a Battle upon Gladmore, the Great Warwick fighting
courageously, was slain, Death of the Earl of Warwick.
and King Henry again put into the Tower. Afterward Queen Margaret was
defeated, and King Henry's Son Edward taken and brought before the King, where
he speaking boldly was knocked down and murdered. Soon after Queen Margaret was
taken; and not long after the crook-back'd Duke Death of King Henry.
of Gloucester stabbed harmless King Henry to the heart, whose Body was buried
at Chertsey in Surrey.

A. D. 1483. King Edward fell into a His Death, and Burial.
dangerous and deadly Sickness, whereof April the 9th. he died, and was buried
at Windsor, in the new-Chappel, whose Foundation himself had laid. It Is said of
him, that he was just and merciful in Peace, fierce in War, and very familiar
with his Subjects. His Issue were Edward, Richard, His Issue.
George, Elizabeth, Cicely, Ann, Briget, Mary, Margaret, and Catharine.

EDWARD the V. the eldest Son of King A. D. 1483.
Edward the IV. being but 12 years of Age when his Father died, was committed
to the government of his Uncle Sir Anthony Woodville, a worthy Person; which
much troubled Richard Duke of Gloucester his Enemy, who sought his Life, that
thereby he might come to the Crown. By evil Suggestions he wrought upon the
greatest Men to take his part against the old Queen; and as the King was coming
to London to be crowned, with a small Company he seized those about him, and
imprisoned Sir Anthony Woodville amongst the rest: Then brought the King to
London, pretending to be his Friend, and there was made his Protector; after
which he got the Duke of York, the King's Brother, out of Sanctuary from the
Queen, and caused many of the chief Nobles to be barbarously massacred, and
instead of King Edward, caused himself to be crowned King.

RICHARD the III. Son of Richard, Duke A. D. 1683.
of York, was born with all his Teeth, and Hair to his Shoulders, which
foreshew'd his monstrous Proceedings. July the 6th. he was crowned King at
Westminster; soon after which he caused the young King and Edward the V. and
Brother murdered.
his Brother to be most inhumanely massacred: But King Richard lived most
miserably ever after, being without the least quiet of Conscience; and soon
after the Duke of Buckingham, his greatest Favorite, proved his greatest
Enemy, raising Rebellions against him; but was overthrown, and hiding himself
in one Banister's House by Shrewsbury: He for hope of gain betrayed his Master
the Duke, who was thereupon taken and beheaded; but Banister was justly
punished from Heaven. Henry Earl of Richmond afterward came into England,
where he raised a small Army, and met King Richard near Market-Bosworth in
Leicestershire, where King Richard was slain, King Richard slain.
and his Army discomfited, Aug. 22. 1485.

HENRY the VII. Earl of Richmond, was Son to Margaret, Countess of Richmond and
A. D. 1485.
Derby, Daughter to John Duke of Somerset, Son to John Earl of Somerset, Son to
John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, 4th. Son of Edward the III. October. 30. he was
Crowned at Westminster.

A. D. 1486. Jan. 18th. he married the His Marriage.
Lady Elizabeth, eldest Daughter of King Edward the IV. and so joined the two
Families of York and Lancaster. Yet by this means Peace was not so well
secured, but that there were several Rebellions by Lambert Symnel, and others;
amongst whom Symnel, and Peterkin.
was one Peterkin, under the Name of Rich. Plantaginet, second Son of King
Edward the IV. But this Impostor was at last taken and executed at Tyburn.

The King falling sick of a consuming His Death. Issue.
Disease, died April 22. A. D. 1509. His Issue, Arthur, who died before
himself, Henry, Edmund, Margaret, Elizabeth, Mary. King Henry left at his death
1800000 l. in His Riches and Buildings.
ready money; he built the Palace at Richmond, and the Chapel at Westminster.

HENRY the VIII. was born at Greenwich, A. D. 1509.
June 22. 1491. His Youth was so trained up in Literature, that he was
accounted the most learned Prince in Christendom. June 25. 1509. he was crowned
at Westminster with his Queen Catharine.

This King went with an Army into His Expedition into France.
France, and recovered many of his Rights; but at last by the procurement of
the Pope, there was a Peace concluded.

A. D. 1571. was Evil May Day, wherein Evil May Day.
the Prentices of London made an Assault upon the Strangers and Foreigners;
John Lincoln, being the chief of them, was hanged, and the rest pardoned.

About A. D. 1528. King Henry began to call in question the lawfulness of his
Marriage with Queen Catharine, who was Daughter to Ferdinand, King of Spain,
and ha^^ been married to P. Arthur, his elder Brother; and soon after she was
divorced from him. Also soon after the haughty Cardinal Woolsey was deposed of
his Dignities; Woolsey.
he died at Leicester-Abby.

After this, King Henry took upon him the Pope's Authority and Supremacy in
England, and all persons were prohibited from appealing or making any Payments
to Rome.

A. D. 1533. November. 14. was King Henry His 2d. Marriage.
married to Ann Bullen, Daughter to Sir T. Bullen, Earl of Wiltshire; and on
September. Lady Eliz. born.
7th. following, was born the Princess Elizabeth.

And A. D. 1535. the Queen was accused of Incest and Adultery with her own
Brother, George Lord Rochford: And May The Queen beheaded.
19. 1536. the Queen was beheaded upon a Scaffold erected on the Green within
the Tower. It Is with good ground thought, that the Queens death was procured by
Popish Instruments, because she much favored His 3d. Marriage.
the Protestant Divines. The next day the King was married to the Lady Jane
Seymour, Daughter of John Seymour Knight.

About this time began to flourish, Tho. Cromwell, a Blacksmiths Son of Putney,
who in a short time was ordained Vicar General over the Spirituality. This
Great Cromwell procured it to be enacted in Parliament, That the Lords Prayer,
Creed, and Ten Commandments, should be read in the English Tongue. He also
caused the Churches to be purged of Images, and the Monasteries to be
suppressed to the King's use: for which Reasons there arose several Rebellions,
but were all suppre^^ed.

A. D. 1540. Jan. 6th. was King Henry His 4th. Marriage.
married to the Lady Ann, Sister to the Duke of Cleve, but they were soon after
divorced.

Now was the Great Cromwell attainted for Treason and Heresy, and beheaded on
Tower Hill.

Then did the King marry the Lady Catharine His 5th. Marriage.
Howard, who was beheaded afterward for Adultery. And now likewise were very
many great Men put to death for Religion.

A. D. 1547. and Jan. 28th. King Henry His Death.
yielded to death's imperial stroke, whose Body with great solemnity was buried
at Windsor. His Wives were Catharine, Ann Wives.
Bullen, Jane Seymour, Ann of Cleve, Catharine Howard, and Catharine Parr.

His Issue Henry, which lived not two Issue.
months; another Son not named, and Mary; these by Catharine of Spain:
Elizabeth, and a Son still-born, by Ann Bullen; Edward, by Jane Seymour. His
natural Issue, Henry Fitz-Roy.

King Henry by Act of Parliament assumed First King of Ireland.
the Title of King of Ireland, former Kings of England bearing only the style
of Lords thereof.

It Is said that now Turkey, Carps, Hops, Pickarel, and Beer, came into England
all in a year.

EDWARD the 6th. was born, (but not A. D. 1547.
without the death of his Mother) A. D. 1537. October. 12.

A. D. 1547. Feb. 20. he was crowned at Westminster; Edward Lord Seym^^ur, his
Uncle, was made Protector over his Minority.

The first thing that was done, was the purging all Churches of Images, for
which Commissioners were appointed. This caused Rebellions, but they were soon
suppressed: One of these Rebels being a Miller, he willed his Man to be Master in
his turn, The Man that was hanged for his Master.
and when the King's Officer, Sir Anthony Kingston, called for the Master of
the House, the Man in his Name presented himself, whom Sir Anthony straight
commanded to the Gallows, which the Man hearing, would be Master no longer; but
Sir Anthony said, Well, thou can never do thy Master better service than to
hang for him; and so he was trussed up on the next Tree.

This King was a great Enemy to Popery, Protestancy founded.
and was the first Founder of the true Protestant Religion in England. He died
His Death and Burial.
of a Consumption, July 6th. 1553. and was interred in St. Peter's Chapel at
Westminster. He was a Prince of great Learning, and of a vast Memory, very
merciful, and zealous for the Reformed Religion.

The Lady JANE GRAY was now by the A. D. 1553.
last Will of Edward, proclaimed Queen But the Tide soon turned, and Queen Mary
succeeded to the Crown, promising to embrace the Gospel as King Edward had
established it; but afterward being petitioned to perform her promise herein,
she both punished the Writer, and answered, they should one day well know, that
they being but Members, should not direct her their Head. She removed the
Protestant Protestancy again abolished.
Bishops, placing Papists in their Places; she was crowned at Westminster: The
Lady Jane Gray was beheaded on Tower Hill, and many more great Men, for the
reformed Religion. The proposal of her Marriage with Philip of Spain, caused
great Insurrections, and great Troubles, and Sir Thomas Wiat, one of the chief,
was beheaded. These caused great suspicions of the Lady Elizabeth's having a
hand in it; whereupon she was committed to the Tower, and then removed to
Woodstock, where Stephen Garner (thinking to ensnare her Life) asked her the
meaning of those words of Christ, Hoc est Corpus meum; to which the Princess
answered, Christ was the Word that spoke it,
He took the Bread and brake it;
And what the Word did make it,
That I believe and take it.


A. D. 1555. Several Bishops were burnt Bishops burnt.
at Oxford, for the testimony of the Truth.

A. D. 1554. July 25th. was the Marriage Her Marriage.
solemnized with Philip of Spain. King Philip proved a great Friend to the Lady
Elizabeth. 'Twas thought that the Queen was with Child, and her delivery
expected, but it proved otherwise. The English now lost their strong Holds in
France.

The Queen died of a burning Fever, HerDeath and Burial.
November. 17. 1558. and was buried at Westminster.

Queen ELIZABETH, the Restorer and A. D. 1558.
Defender of the public profession of the Apostolical Religion in England,
begun her Reign November. 17. 1558. Jan. 15. she was crowned; she soon put all
things in the order as King Edward had left them. There were several Rebellions
in the Land, but were all suppressed; several likewise attempted to murder the
Queen, but were all taken, and suffered death.

A. D. 1577. November. 15. Captain Drake Captain Drake
set Sail from Plymouth, and in three years, wanting twelve days, he
encompassed the Earth.

A. D. 1588. the invincible Armado of the Spanish Armado.
Spaniards came against England; but the English played their parts so well,
that they wearied out the Spaniards at Sea, so that they were forced to return
home with great loss, and the English received a blessed deliverance.

Octogesimus octavus, mirabilis annus.
Clade Papistarum, faustus ubique piis.
The Queen now sent Forces against Spain, which had very great success, and
annoyed them exceedingly.

And now again there were several attempts to Murder the Queen by Poison and
otherwise, but all being discovered, they received their deserts.

There were likewise great Troubles in Ireland, which continued a long time.

On the 24th. of March, 1602. died this Her Death and Burial.
most renowned Queen, and was buried in Henry the Seventh's Chapel at
Westminster. It Is said she was, Spain's Rod, Rome's ruin, Netherland's relief,
Earth's joy, England's Gem, World's wonder,
Nature's chief.


King JAMES his Title to the Crown A. D. 1602.
of England sprung from Henry the Seventh, whose Male Issue failing in Queen
Elizabeth, the Offspring of Margaret his eldest Daughter, married to James the
Fourth, King of Scotland, by him had Issue James the Fifth, whose only Daughter
and Child, Queen Mary, was Mother to James the Sixth, King of Scotland: who
hearing of Queen Elizabeth's death, came into England, and was received with
great joy, and His Co^^onation.
July 21. 1603. King James and Queen Ann were Crowned at Westminster by John
Whitguift, Archbishop of Canterbury. There were some now that plotted against
the Kings Person, but were taken and Executed. He then caused himself to be
styled by Proclamation, King of Great Britain.

A. D. 1604. Nov. 5. was that horrid Gunpowder Plot.
Popish Plot, of blowing up the Parliament House.

A. D. 1612. Nov. 6. Prince Henry died of a Fever; who was very much lamented,
being a very hopeful Prince.

A. D. 1625. March 27. this Politic and His Death and Burial.
Peaceable Monarch died of an Ague at Theobalds, and was buried at Westminster.

His Issue were, Henry, Charles, Elizabeth; His Issue.
and Mary, and Sophia, who both dyed young.

CHARLES the First was born at Dunferling A. D. 1625.
in Scotland, Nov. 19. 1600. No sooner had he celebrated his Father's Funerals,
but he hastened the coming over of his dearest Consort, the Princess Henrietta
Maria, Daughter to Henry the Fourth, King of France. He was Crowned at
Westminster, His Coronation.
Feb. 2. 1626.

A. D. 1630. May 29. was Prince Charles Prince Charles born.
born.

The sad accidents in this Kings Reign, have been the Thesis of so many Pens,
that I think the inserting of it in this place to be needless; only some short
notes.

The first Blood that was spilt in this unhappy The beginning of the Civil Wars.
War, was near Hull, between the Kings Forces and Sir J. Hotham, Aug. 24. 1642.
The first remarkable Battle, at Edgehill in Warwickshire, where His Majesty's
Forces had something the better of the day.

A. D. 1648. Jan. 30. was this most Christian His Death and Burial.
and right worthy King beheaded, and Feb. 9. was buried at Windsor by some of
his Servants. His Issue were, Charles-James, His Issue.
who died almost as soon as born, Charles the Second, James the Second (whom
God preserve) Henry, Mary, Elizabeth, Ann, Katharine, Henrietta Maria.

1635. Tho. Parr died, aged 152 years. Tho. Parr.


CHARLES the Second was then in Holland 1648.
when his Father was murdered; and the then Parliament, instead of Proclaiming
him King, resolved to assume the Government unto themselves; nevertheless he
was Proclaimed in Scotland and Ireland. This Parliament, that made such a stir,
were not above fifty Persons.

Jan. 1. King Charles the Second was Crowned in Scotland.
Crowned at Scoon in Scotland. The English Parliament had very great success in
all their attempts: They beat the Marquess of Ormond in Ireland, and overcame
the Scots; beat the Dutch by Sea: In all which time, Oliver Cromwell was General
of the Landforces. And A. D. 1653. April the 20. Oliver put a period to those
long-winded Members at Westminster, and constituted a Oliver's height
Council of State of those he liked best, and takes the Supreme Power to
himself.

A. D. 1658. June 25th. the Town of Dunkirk was rendered by the Spaniards to the
French, and from them to the English. September. 3d. died that aspiring Usurper,
Oliver's death.
and great Politician, Oliver, of an Ague, at Whitehall. He was courted or
feared by most of the Princes of Europe.

In Oliver's stead Richard his eldest Son was proclaimed Protector: But he
wanting the Politic Head of his Father, the Army did what they pleased, and
called a Parliament of their own choosing, to which Richard soon submitted. And
now the Parliament rules all again. There were several Insurrections for the
King, but suppressed. General Lambert, disliking the Parliament, goes with his
Army and displaces it; and for a while he rules all, and makes a Committee of
Safety, as he styled them. Committee of Safety.
And now there were more discontented men than ever, being murmuring in all
places; and George Monk, a General in Scotland, comes into England with his
Army, where he was received very graciously, being caressed by the Gentry all
along his Journey, and Lambert's Fortune changed apace, most of his Friends
forsaking him; and General Monk coming to London, was received with much joy,
and every one had great hopes of a peaceable Government. Then he ordered a free
Parliament to be chose, who A. D. 1660. April 20. assembled at Westminster; on
May 1. voted, Votes for the Kings return.
That, according to the Ancient and Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, Charles
the Second is the Lawful King of these Nations; which caused a general
rejoicing over all England: And His Majesty from his Court at Breda, wrote very
graciously to the General and Parliament, who then sent him 50000 l. for a
Present; and the City, to show their gratitude, sent him 10000 l. And May the
8th. by Order of Parliament, Charles the Second was at London Proclaimed at
London.
with very great Solemnity Proclaimed King of England, Scotland, etc. May 22.
General Monk set forth of London to meet His Majesty, who landed at Dover, whom
the King, for his excellent Service, was pleased to dignifie with the Honor of
Knight of the Garter, Master of his Horse, Duke of Albemarle, Earl of
Torrington, Baron Monk of Botheridge, etc. chief General of all his Landforces
in the three Kingdoms, and one of his Privy Council. And now was the general
Joy so great, that it cannot be expressed. The Regicides and chief Offenders
punished, and Loyalty truly recompensed.

A. D. 1661. on St. George's day, was the His Coronation.
Magnificent Coronation of Charles the Second at Westminster, by Dr. Juxton,
Archbishop of Canterbury. And now was the Book of Common Prayer restored again
to the Church. May 14. Katharine, the Infanta of Portugal, arrived at
Portsmouth, His Marriage.
where she was married to Charles the Second, King of England. A. D. 1664. the
War began with the Dutch: And 1665. in May began the Great Plague in London,
Plague.
whereof died near 100000 Persons. Upon the second of September began that
dreadful Fire.
Fire in London, the total Loss sustained by these devouring Flames was valued
to be 9900000 l. Sterling.

In Feb. 1674. after many great Conflicts Peace with Holland.
between the Dutch and England, was there a Peace concluded. A. D. 1677. was
the Marriage between the Lady Mary and His Highness the Prince of Orange
celebrated at St. James's by the Bishop of London.

Anno Dom. 1679. began the sham-discovery Popish Plot.
of the Popish Plot, for which so many Persons suffered, and which plainly
appeared to be afterward a contrivance of the Non-conformists, from whom our
gracious Monarch was wonderfully preserved, by a Fire at New Market, which
occasioned him to leave that place sooner than he designed, and by that means
escaped the designed Ambuscado that was to have destroyed him at Hodsdon. The
extraordinary occurrences of his Reign about these times, are printed by
themselves, and therefore here omitted.

Feb. 6. 1684. At Whitehall died our most His Death.
gracious King Charles the Good and Just, which not only almost deluged England
with Tears for so great a loss, but he was generally lamented through all the
Christian World. He had no Legitimate Issue.

Feb. 14. He was Interred in Henry the His Funeral.
Seventh's Chapel at Westminster.

JAMES the Second, the only Royal A. D. 1684.
Brother to King Charles the Second, and his undoubted Heir, was on the sixth
of February Proclaimed at London, to the unexpressible joy and satisfaction of
all Loyal Proclamation.
Subjects; having the same day been graciously pleased to declare in Council,
That he would maintain the Protestant Religion, as by Law established.

And truly, we can attribute it to no less than the Divine Goodness and Mercy
of Almighty God to these Kingdoms, that notwithstanding the late strange and
unreasonable Animosities against our now gracious Sovereign, yet his coming to
the Crown was received by his Subjects in all his Dominions, with the greatest
expressions of content and satisfaction imaginable.

April 23d. being St. George's day, he was His Coronation.
with very great State and Magnificence Crowned at Westminster, with his
dearest Consort Mary, by Dr. Sancroft, and Dr. Dolben, the two Archbishops;
and Dr. Turner, Bishop of Ely, Preached the Coronation-Sermon.

May the 16th. Titus Oats (the chief Titus Oats his Sentence for Perjury.
Evidence to the Popish Plot) being convicted upon two Informations of Perjury,
received Sentence, That he should pay a Fine of one thousand Marks for each
Perjury; should stand in the Pillory at Westminster Hall Gate, and at the
Royal Exchange; be whipped twice, viz. from Aldgate to Newgate, and from
Newgate to Tyburn; all this was to be done in that week. But besides, for an
Annual commemoration of his admirable faculty of Swearing, it was ordered, that
four times every year (upon the days on which he fathered his horrid falsities)
so long as he lived, he should stand in the Pillory, and the places to be The
Royal Exchange, Temple-Gate, Charing Cross, and Tyburn.

May the 19th. the Parliament met, and Parliament met.
unanimously chose Sir John Trevor Speaker, who was also approved of by His
Majesty.

June the 11th. the Duke of Monmouth The Duke of Monmouth his Landing at Lyme.
(having Caballed with the Earl of Argyle, to put their rebellious Designs in
practice in England and Scotland at the same time) landed at Lyme in
Dorset-shire, with about 150 Men, after an Hostile manner, where many, of the
like rebellious Principles, flocked to him; so that in few days he left Lyme,
and took the Field, and marched with his Forces to Taunton and Bridgewater, His
first Repulse.
and from thence near Bristol to Canisham-Bridge, where they were repulsed by a
party of 100 of His Majesty's Horse, Commanded by Colonel Oglethorp, who there
cut off two of Monmouth's best Troops of Horse: From thence the Rebels marched
near to Bath, but His Majesty's Forces being joined there, they marched in much
fear and confusion backwards toward From, and from thence to Philipsnorton,
where the Duke of Grafton encountered them very smartly; in which Engagement,
Mr. May, a Voluntier, was killed, with many common Soldiers. From thence they
went to Shepton-Mallet, from thence to Wells, and so to Bridge-water, His
Majesty's Forces, commanded by the Earl of Feversham, all the while pursuing
them; on ^^uly the 5th. came to Weston, within three ^^iles of the Rebels,
where they placed ^^hemselves in a very advantageous Post, ^^ronting a spacious
Plain, having a Ditch before them; in which posture next Morn^^ng the late Duke
of Monmouth resolved to attack them; and to that end, had with all possible
silence in the Night, drawn his Forces out of Bridge-water, to the number of
about 6000 Foot, and 1200 Horse, and toward Morning formed them in Battle, and
marched so with design to surprise the Earl of Feversham, but he having advice
of it by his Scouts, was prepared to receive them, though the number of his
Soldiers was but small, in comparison of the Rebels, having but 2000 Foot, and
700 Horse; but here God Almighty showed his Justice, declaring, as it plainly
appeared, against such horrid Rebellions; for though they were so vastly
numerous, in comparison of the Kings Forces, besides took them upon the
surprise, and so had the advantage of the onset; yet they were so bravely
received, that first their Horse were routed by ours, who coming in afterward
upon the Foot, had so absolute a Victory, that they The Defeat of the Rebels.
killed 2000 upon the place, and took a vast number of Prisoners, so that they
were not able to make the least head again. The next day the Lord Gray was
taken, who was Commander of the Rebels Horse; and on the 8th. of July, the late
Duke of Monmouth was also taken, The Duke of Monmouth Beheaded.
and on the 15th. Beheaded on Tower Hill. So that by the Divine Blessing of
Almighty God, not only this rebellious attempt brought the deserved vengeance
upon its common promoters, but even the very Root and Foundation is extirpated;
so that it is to be hoped, that we shall never again be acquainted with such
Domestic strifes, but may even forget what a Rebel means.

The Loyal Party and the Kings Forces Argyle in Scotland taken, his Party
routed, and he Executed.
in Scotland were beforehand with us; for they took Argyle on the 18th. of
June, and ruined his Forces, and on the 30th. of the same Month he was Beheaded
at Edinburgh; by which means there is so absolute and serene a Peace and
Concord amongst His Majesty's Subjects, and Affairs are in so happy a posture
in all his Dominions, that perhaps England hardly ever knew the like.

June the 29th. Mr. Richard Baxter was Mr. Baxter Fined.
Fined 500 Marks, and bound to his Good Behavior for seven years, for
publishing his seditious Annotations on the New Testament. And at the same
time, Mr. Tho. Dangerfield, who the Term before was convicted Dangerfield's
Sentence.
upon an Information, for writing and publishing a Scandalous Libel, received
Sentence at the Kings-Bench-Bar, That he should stand in the Pillory at
Westminster Hall Gate, and the Royal Exchange, be whipped from Aldgate to
Newgate, and from Newgate to Tyburn, and that he should pay a Fine of 500 l.
and find Sureties for his Good Behavior during life. This man, after having
received the last of these Punishments, viz. (his whipping from Newgate to
Tyburn) was returning in a Coach, when being met by a Gentleman, to whom he
gave a saucy Answer to an impertinent Question, the Gentleman being nettled,
made at him with a small Bamboo Cane, which so unfortunately hit the Sufferer
in Killed by a strange Accident.
the Eye, that it pierced to his Brain, and soon deprived him of Life; which
being upon Trial judged Murder, the Gentleman was executed for it at Tyburn.

On July the 2d. the Parliament was adjourned Parliament Adjourned.
till the 4th. of August, after the enacting of many good Statutes; and being
met on the 4th. of August, they were farther adjourned till the 9th. of
November.

On July 22th. there was an Installation An Installation at Windsor.
at Windsor of three Knights of the Garter; Henry, Duke of Norfolk,
Earl-Marshal of England, Henry, Earl of Peterborough, Groom of the Stool to His
Majesty, and Lawrence, Earl of Rochester, Lord High Treasurer of England. It
was performed in the Royal Chapel of St. George, within the Castle, by the
Dukes of Ormond and Beaufort, two Knights of the said Order, Commissioned
thereunto by the Sovereign, with all the accustomed Ceremonies; after which,
the new Installed Knights Entertained the Commissioners, and the other Noblemen
and Persons of Quality there present, at a splendid Feast in the Kings great
Guard-Chamber, within the said Castle.

His Majesty, for all the foresaid wonderful Blessings of Almighty God to
himself, and all his happy Subjects, was pleased by Proclamation to order an
Universal A General Thanksgiving.
Thanksgiving on July the 26th. throughout the Kingdom, to that All-wise and
powerful King of Heaven and Earth; by whom all Earthly Monarchs Rule, and are
preserved from the horrid Machinations and rebellious Designs of all Barbarous
Caballers, and Seditious Plotters whatsoever. Wherefore what remains now, but
that all True and Loyal Subjects unite their Prayers to Almighty God, for the
long Life, and happy Reign of our most Wise, most Powerful, and most Excellent
Monarch, And say, God Save King JAMES the Second.



A COLLECTION Of the most remarkable Occurrences, Adventures, notable Exploits,
and wonderful Casualties, mentioned in Sir Richard Baker's Chronicle.
I Shall first take notice of the admirable A. D. 516. Arthur of Britain his
great Deeds.
Arthur, Son to Uter, and King of Britain, who in twelve set Battles
discomfited the Saxons; and in one, his Sword Callibourn, managed by his own
invincible Arm, gave Death to 800 of his Enemies; which is but one, and perhaps
not the greatest of his wonderful Deeds.

'Twas he instituted the Order of Knights of the Round Table.

Cadwalladar about the year 687, going Cadwalladar.
against the Saxons, and praying to God for good success, was informed by an
Angel, That it was God's pleasure that the Britains should not rule this Land
any longer; whereupon he desisted from his Enterprise, and so England became a
Colony of the Saxons; anon England was made into an Heptarchy.

Etheldred, Daughter to Anna, King of Etheldred.
the East Saxons, was twice married, and yet continued a Virgin, and afterward
turned Nun.

When the Danes first invaded England, A. D. 866. Nuns of Coldington.
the Nuns of Coldington to keep themselves from being polluted by the Danes,
deformed themselves, by cutting off their upper Lips and Noses.

King Athelstone going to encounter the A. D. 924. A Miracle.
Danes, prayed to God to show some sign of his rightful Cause; whereupon
striking with his Sword, he struck it an ell deep into a hard Stone.

Canutus, the first Danish King of England, A. D. 1017. A precious Jewel.
gave to the Church of Winchester a precious Jewel, in form of a Cross, valued
at as much as the yearly Revenues of all England. 'Twas he that convinced his
Flatterers of his small Power, by his endeavoring to command the Tides of the
Sea at Southampton.

Bishop Wolston, in King William the Conqueror's A. D. 1066. A strange Wonder.
Time, being commanded by the King to leave his Bishopric; Wolston answered, A
better than thou, O King, gave me these Robes, and to him I will restore them;
and thereupon went and struck his Staff upon St. Edward's Monument, (who had
made him a Bishop) where it stuck so fast, that by no strength it could be
removed, till himself removed it with ease, which so terrified the King, that
he entreated him again to accept of his Bishopric.

In this King's Time there happened the A Fire.
greatest Fire that ever was in London, by which the Cathedral of Paul's was
utterly destroyed.

A great Lord sitting at a Feast, was set A Lord devoured by Mice.
upon by Mice, and though he were removed from Land to Sea, and from Sea again
to Land, yet the Mice still followed him, and at last devoured him.

In William the Conqueror's Time, a private A brave Soldier.
Norwegian Soldier, alone upon a Bridge, resisted the whole Army of the
English, slew 40, and maintained the Place for several hours, till one getting
under the Bridge, found means to thrust up a Spear into his Body, and killed
him.

Till the Time of Malcolme, King of Scots, A Scots Custom.
(who was Co-temporary with William, the 2d. of England) it was the custom
among the Scots, that when any Man married, his Lord should lie the first night
with his Wife. This Law was abrogated by Margaret, then Queen, and was altered
to a payment in Money.

Westminster Hall was built by King William Westminster Hall built.
the II. being 270 Foot long, and 74 broad.

The High Court of Parliament was first First Parliament.
instituted by Henry the I.

And in his Time the Order of the Templers Order of Templers.
began.

In this King's Time the Archbishop of A worthy Bishop.
York being desperate sick, was told, that nothing would cure him but to lie
with a Woman; but he answered, That the Remedy was worse than the Disease, and
so died a Virgin.

In the Time of Henry the I. the River Thames almost dry.
Thames was so low, that between the Tower and the Bridge men walked over on
foot for the space of two days.

At this time in Lombardy there was an A strange Earthquake.
Earthquake that continued 40 days, and removed Towns and Houses far from their
former residence.

Raynerus, a wicked Minister, in the Reign of King Stephen, going over Sea with
his Wife, the Ship in the midst of the Sea stood still, and could not be moved,
till he was cast out of it.

In this King's Time lived Johannes de An old Man.
Temporibus, of whom it is recorded that he lived 361 years.

Ireland first submitted it self to Henry the First Lord of Ireland.
II. who was first Lord thereof.

In this King's days, in the Territory of Hell Kettles.
Derlington, in the Bishopric of Durham, the Earth lifted up her self in the
manner of a high Tower, and so continued all day, being Christmas Day, and at
night fell with a most horrible noise, and the Earth swallowed it up, that the
Holes are to be seen at this day, and are called by the Name of Hell Kettles.

At this time near Orford in Suffolk, was taken a Fish that had the shape of a
Man in all parts.

King Henry the II. caused his Son Henry King Henry causes his Son to be
Crowned.
to be Crowned in his Time, and carried the first Dish to the Table; whereupon
the Archbishop Roger said merrily to the new King, What a wonderful Honor is
this to have so noble a Waiter: Why ( says he) what great Honor is it for him
that is but the Son of a Duke, to do service to me that am the Son of a King
and Queen.

King Lewis, now of France, did the like by his Son.

Henry the II. was so troubled for the loss King Henry's Blasphemy.
of Mentz, that he said, He should never hereafter love God any more, that had
suffered a City so dear unto him to be taken from him.

It is memorable, and worth observing, A wonderful Accident of Thunder.
That when Philip, King of France, and King Henry, had a Meeting between Turwyn
and Arras, for reconciling of Differences, there suddenly happened a Thunderbolt
to light just between them, with so terrible a crack, that it forced them for
that time to break off their Conference. And afterward at another Meeting, the
like Accident of Thunder happened again, which so amazed King Henry, that he had
fallen off his Horse, if he had not been supported by those about him.

Robert Fitz-Stephen was the first of all Ireland first entered by the English.
Englishmen, after the Conquest, that entered Ireland, the first day of May, in
the year 1170, with 390 men, and there took Wexford, in the behalf of
Der^^tius, Son of Merclerdach, called Mac Murg, King of Leymster. In September
following, Richard Earl of Chepstow, surnamed Strongbow, sailed into Ireland
with 1200 men, where he took Waterford and Dublin, and married Eve, the
Daughter of Dernutius, as he was promised.

From these beginnings, King Henry being The Irish submit to King Henry.
then at rest from all hostile Arms, both at home and abroad, takes into his
consideration the Kingdom of Ireland, as a Kingdom which oftentimes afforded
assistance to France; and therefore purposing with himself by all means to
subdue it, he provides a mighty Army, but to little purpose; for without any
Action the Irish soon submitted to him, all but Roderick, King of Connaght, who
then stood out: But after some time he also submitted, and all the Irish,
together with the Popes, have agreed that King Henry and his Heirs shall be
their King.

This King left behind him in his Coffers Henry the II. his Riches.
900000 l. besides Plate and Jewels.

In his 21st. year he divided England into Beginning of the Law Cir^^uits.
Circuits, and appointed Judges, three for every Circuit, to go twice a year,
to hear and determine Causes between Man and Man.

It Is for certain said, That some Persons Children born with Horses Tails.
cutting off the Horses Tails of Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury, their
Children for several Generations were born with Horses Tails.

In this King's Time there was contention Superiority in the Archbishopricks.
for Superiority in the two Archbishopricks, and the Pope gave it to Canterbury.

In this King's Reign there were two Two Popes at once.
Popes at once, who continued for almost 20 years.

In this Time a Bondman of Langley in A Bondman came to be Pope.
Hertfordshire, came to be Pope, by the Name of Adrian the IV.

This King began the Foundation of the London-Bridg.
Stone Bridge over Thames.

In the 11th. year of this King's Reign, A greatEarthquake.
there was so great an Earthquake in Ely, and Norfolk, and Suffolk, that it
overthrew those that stood on their feet, and made the Bells to ring in the
Steeples.

In the 23d. year, a shower of Blood reigned A shower of Blood.
in the Isle of Wight for two hours together.

Morgan, base Son to this King, rather An Honor to be a King's Bastard.
than disown his Father, and be a true Son accounted of a Knight, refused the
Bishopric of Durham.

As King Henry was carried to be buried, his Son Richard coming near the Corpse,
it fell a bleeding at the Nose afresh.

There was a Princess in the Family of A wonderful Sorceress.
Anjou, Ancestors to this King, who being desired to take the blessed
Eucharist, she suddenly flew out at the Church-window, and was never seen after.

NOTABLE EVENTS In the Reign of King RICHARD the First.
IT IS thought that the Order of the Garter A. D. 1189. Order of the Garter
whence.
began from blue Ribbons, that King Richard the I. gave to his Noblemen, with
an Oath to be true to him, when he was going his Expedition into the holy Land.

When King Richard was in the holy A City that was built before theFlood
Land, he took particular care of Joppa, and put a Colony in it of Christians,
for that it is a City of Palestine, that was built before the Flood, and has
belonging to it a Haven of great convenience.

After this Expedition of King Richard's Whence the Title of Kings of Jerusalem.
into the holy Land, the Kings of England for a long time were styled Kings of
Jerusalem. A worthy Servant.


Once when the King was hawking in the holy Land, he was set upon by several
Turks, and had not escaped, but that one of his Servants, named William de
Batrellis, cried out in the Saracen Tongue, That himself was King, and so to
save his King, let himself be taken.

King Richard sitting once at Dinner in His strange haste to relieve Vernoil.
his little Hall, was advertised, that King Philip had besieged Vernoil: He was
so moved at it, that he presently caused (...) Wallbefore him to be beat down,
and swore a great Oath, that he would not turn his face, until he were
revenged. Thus in haste he goes to Vernoil, whither he was no sooner come, but
the King of France made as much haste to be gone, not without some loss, and
more disgrace.

In this Time there was a Trouble at Robin Hood and little John
home, though not to the King, yet to the Kingdom: For Robin Hood, accompanied
with one little John, and a 100 stout Fellows more, molested all Passengers
upon the Highway; of some it is said, that he was of noble Blood, at least
made noble, no less than an Earl, for some deserving Services; but having
wasted his Estate in riotous Courses, very Penury forced him to take this
course; in which yet it may be said, that he was honestly dishonest; for he
seldom hurt any Man, never any Woman, spared the Poor, and only made prey of
the Rich; till the King setting forth a Proclamation to have him apprehended,
it happened he fell sick at a certain Nunnery in Yorkshire, called Berkleys, and
desiring there to be let Blood, was betrayed, and bled to death.

This King granted the City of London to Mayor and Sheriffs first of London.
be governed by two Sheriffs and a Mayor, as now it is, and to give the first
of these Magistrates the Honor to be remembered: The Names of the Sheriffs were
Henry Cornhill, and Roger Reyner; and the Name of the first Lord Mayor was
Henry Fitz-Alwin, who continued Mayor during his Life, which was 24 years.
Fabian only says, these were Bailiffs, and that there was no Mayor or Sheriffs
of London, till the 10th. year of King John.

A certain Priest told King Richard, that King Richard's Daughters how disposed.
he had three Daughters, viz. Pride, Covetousness, and Leachery; which the King
taking merrily, called the Company about him, and said, I am told by a Priest
here, that I have three Daughters, and I desire you to be witness how I would
have them bestowed: My Daughter Pride upon the Templers and Hospitalers; my
Daughter Covetousness upon the Monks of the Cistercian Order, and my Daughter
Leachery upon the Clergy.

NOTABLE EVENTS In the Reign of King JOHN.
ABout this Time, William King of Scots, A. D. 1199.
came to London, to visit King John, William, King of Scots, did Homage to King
John.
and there did Homage to him, for his Kingdom of Scotland; though some say, but
only for the Counties of Northumberland and Cumberland.

King John divorced his Wife Avis, for King John divorceth his Wife.
being akin to him in the 3d. degree, and marries another.

This King being at variance with his Nobles, they sent to Lewis, the French
King's Son, to head them, who came over, and was kindly received at London.

This King made very hard Taxations of Barbarous Cruelty.
all Persons, especially of the Jews; amongst whom there was one that would not
be ransomed, till the King caused every day one of his great Teeth to be pulled
out, by the space of seven days; and then he was content to give the King 10000
Marks of Silver not to pull the other out, having but one left.

King John was the first that caused Sterling Sterling Money.
Money to be coined.

In his Time the English Laws were first Laws first in Ireland.
planted in Ireland; and he enlarged the Royal Style with the Title of Lord of
Ireland.

This King surrendered his Crown to Pandulphus, King John surrendered his Crown
to the Pope.
the Pope's Legate, to be disposed of as the Pope should think fit. Pandulphus
kept the Crown several days, before he restored it; and did not then, but upon
condition that he and his Successors should hold the Kingdom of the Sea of
Rome, at the annual Tribute of a 1000 Marks.

About this Time the Kingdom was interdicted The Kingdom interdicted.
by the Pope for six years; in which Time there was no public Exercise of
Religion, no Churches open, nor no Sacrament administered.

The Later an Council was now held, under Auricular Confession, and
Transubstantiation.
Pope Innocent the III. in which was established the Pope's Power over Princes;
and in Matters of Faith, Auricular Confession, and Transubstantiation.

In this King's Time the Stone Bridge of London Bridge finished.
London was finished by the Merchants.

By this King, 35 of the most substantial Common-Council-men first in London.
Citizens of London were chosen out for the Common Council of the City.

In this King's Time were great Thunders and Lightnings, and Showers, with
Hailstones as big as Eggs; Fishes taken armed with Helmets and Shields, like
Knights, but much greater in proportion. In Suffolk a Fish was taken that was
like a Man.

Simon Turvey, a wonderful Scholar both A learned Man becam^^ an Idiot.
for Parts and Reading, became so dull, that he could scarce read; it was
thought a Judgment upon him for his Pride in Learning.

NOTABLE EVENTS In the Reign of King HENRY the Third.
KIng Henry the III confirmed the Charters A. D. 1216. Charters confirmed.
of Magna Charta, and Charta de Forestis, granted by King John.

This King keeping his Christmas at York, A bountiful Feast.
the Marriage was solemnized between Alexander King of Scots, and Margaret his
Daughter; to the Feast of which Solemnity, it is said the Archbishop gave 600
fat Oxen, which were all spent at one Meal; and besides the Feast cost him 4000
Marks.

This King's Son Edward, marrying Eleanor, Prince of Wales whence first.
the King of Spain's eldest Daughter, was invested by his Father with the
Dukedom of Aquitain, Ireland, Wales, Bristow, Stamford and Grantham; and from
hencesorward, the King's eldest Son was immediately upon his Birth, Prince of
Wales, and Earl of Chester.

This King in his Journey to France spent Vast Expenses in France.
2700000 l. which was more then, than ten times so much now.

In the 25th. year of this King, Aldermen Aldermen first in London.
were first chosen within the City of London, who then had the rule of the
City, and of the Wards of the same, and were then yearly changed, as now the
Sheriffs are. The City of London was now allowed to present their Mayor to the
Barons of the Exchequer to be sworn, which before was to be presented to the
King, wherever he were.

In this King's Time a Proclamation was Who obliged to be Knighted.
set forth, That all such as might dispend 15 l. a year in Land, should receive
the Order of Knighthood; and those that would not or could not, should pay
their Fines.

There was a Man now that took upon A false Christ.
him to be Christ, and had five Wounds made in his Body, in resemblance of our
Savior's; and continuing obstinate in this humor, he was taken and immured
between two Walls.

A certain Jew chancing to fall in a Privy A devout Jew.
on a Saturday, would not that day be taken out because it was the Sabbath; the
Earl of Gloucester would not suffer him to be taken out the next day, because
it was the Christian Sabbath; and on the third day he was taken out dead.

In this King's Reign, there was sent by An Elephant first in England.
the King of France, the first Elephant that was ever seen in England.

Matthew Paris relates of a Maid now in A Miracle of Nature.
Leicestershire, that being exactly watched, was found in seven years together,
neither to eat nor drink, but only that on Sundays she received the Communion,
and yet continued fat and in good liking.

Also in this Time, a Child born in the A Dwarf.
Isle of Wight, at 18 years of Age was but three Foot high, who being brought
to the Queen, she kept him for a Monster of Nature.

Richard de Clare, Earl of Gloucester, in a A valiant Earl
Battle against Baldwin de Gisnes, a valiant Flemming, employed by King Henry,
himself alone encountered 12 of his Enemies; and having his Horse slain under
him, he pitched one of them by the Leg out of the Saddle, and leapt into it
himself, and continued the Fight without giving ground, till his Army came to
rescue him.

Simon Montford was a Man of so audacious The strange Audacity of Montford.
a Spirit, that he gave King Henry the Lie to his face; and in presence of all
his Lords, the King feared him strangely, for being frighted off the Thames by
Thunder, and meeting Montford, who bid the King not fear, for the danger was
past; the King said, No, Montford, I fear not the Thunder so much as thee.

NOTABLE EVENTS In the Reign of King EDWARD the First
IN King Edward the First's Time, Leolin, A. D. 1274. Leolin the last Welsh
Prince.
being the last Prince of Welsh Blood, for Rebellion was slain, and his Head
set upon the Tower of London.

This King, by the Statute of Rutland, in Wales and England united.
the 12th. year of his Reign, united the Government of Wales to England.

At this time there were ten Competitors Baliol, Scots King, does Fealty to K.
Edward.
for the Scotch Crown; at last King Edward determined the Business, and Baliol
was chosen, who did Homage, and swore Fealty and Allegiance to King Edward, as
his liege Lord.

King Edward caused the fatal Chair, The Coronation-Chair brought into England.
wherein the Kings of Scotland used to be inaugurated, to be brought into
England, and put in Westminster-Abbey amongst the Monuments, where it still
remains.

All the Scots swore Allegiance to this The Scots swear Allegiance to King
Edward.
King, except William Walleys, who of a private Gentleman came to be their
Guardian Angel.

In his Time, three Men for rescuing of a Prisoner, had their right Hands cut
off at their Wrists.

In this King's Time, the Title of Baron Barons.
was confined to such only, as were called by Writ to serve in Parliament.

In this King's Time, there was a Rot of A Rot of Sheep.
Sheep, which continued for 25 years together, which 'twas thought began by a
Ship of incredible greatness brought out of Spain.

In his 16th. year, it chanced in Gascoin, A wonderful Preservation.
that as the King and Queen sat in their Chamber upon a Bed talking together,
a Thunderbolt coming in at the Window behind them, passed betwixt them, and
slew two of their Gentlemen that stood before them.

NOTABLE EVENTS In the Reign of King EDWARD the II.
THis King going toward Scotland, to A. D. 1307. King Edward beaten by the
Scots.
raise the Siege of Striveling, with an 100000 Men, was defeated by the Scots,
who had but 30000 Men.

This King being always at dissension First noble Blood shed since the Conquest.
with his Barons, and they rebelling against him, there was many of them taken
and executed, being the first that suffered in this manner in England since
William the Conqueror.

This King was persuaded in his own Edward the II: deposed.
Lifetime, to surrender his Crown to his Son, and all Persons renounced
Allegiance to him.

In this King's Time, an Ordinance was Knights-Templers imprisoned.
made against Knights-Templers, accused of Heresy, and other Crimes; and they
were all apprehended, and committed to diverse Prisons.

The Bishop of Hereford being by this A Bishop rescued from the King by force.
King arrested for High Treason, the other Bishops came and rescued him by
force.

In this King's 8th. year, was so great a A greatDearth
Dearth, that Horses and Dogs were eaten, and Thieves in Prison plucked in
pieces those that were newly brought in amongst them, and eat them half alive;
which continuing three years, brought in the end such a Pestilence, that the
living scarce sufficed to bury the dead.

In this King's Time lived John Mandevile, Sir John Mandevile.
the great Traveller, a Doctor of Physic, and a Knight.

NOTABLE EVENTS In the Reign of King EDWARD the III.
AT the Coronation of Edward the III. A. D. 1327. The first Coronation-Pardon.
a general Pardon was proclaimed, which was the president and foundation of the
Custom since used by all Kings; that at their first coming to the Crown, a
general Pardon is always granted.

This King surrendered all his Title to Title to Scotland surrendered.
Scotland, which his Grandfather had obtained there.

Edmond, Earl of Kent, this King's Uncle, Edmond, Earl of Kent, beheaded.
being condemned for High Treason, was so generally beloved, that he stood on
the Scaffold, from one a Clock till five before any one could be found to
execute him.

In this King's Time, the Isle of Man was Man-Island conquered.
conquered by William M^^ntacute, Earl of Salisbury; for which Service, King
Edward gave him the Title of King of Man.

It Is said, that this King at the Siege of Guns first used.
Callice, first made use of Guns.

About this Time, Philip, King of France, First Daulphin of France.
died, leaving his Son John to succeed him; in the beginning of whose Reign,
Humbert, Prince of Daulphin, dying without Issue, made him his Heir; and
thereupon Charles, King John's Son, was made first Daulphin of France.

Sir John Midsterworth Knight, about this Defrauding Soldiers punished.
Time, was hanged, drawn, and quartered, at Tyburn, for Treason by him
committed, in defrauding Soldiers of their Wages.

There was an Offer made to King Edward, The Value of Callice.
to leave him 1400 Towns, and 3000 Fortresses in Aquitain, upon condition he
would render Callice, and what he held in Picardy.

In the 45th. year of this King, in a Parliament The Clergy grant a Tax.
at Westminster, the Clergy granted him 50000 l. to be paid the same year, and
the Laity as much; which was levied, by setting a certain rate of 5 l. 15 s.
upon every Parish, which were found in the 37 Shires, to be eight thousand six
hundred.

Some say, this King instituted the Order Knight of the Garter first.
of Knight of the Garter.

This King caused all Pleas in Law, Law first pleaded in English.
which were before in French, now to be made in English, that the Subject might
understand the course of the Law.

In this Time, at the instance of the Londoners, Apparel for Whores.
an Act was made, That no common Whore should wear any Hood, except striped
with diverse colors; nor Furs, but Garments reversed the wrong side outward.

This King also was the first that created Dukes first created.
Dukes, of whom Henry of Bullingbrook, Earl of Lancaster, created Duke of
Lancaster, in the 27th. year of his Reign, was the first; but afterward he
erected Cornwall into a Duchy, and conferred it upon the Prince: after which
Time, the King's eldest Son used always to be Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall,
and Earl of Chester.

In the 22d. year of his Reign, a contagious A wonderful Pestilence.
Pestilence arose in the East and South Parts of the World, and spread it self
all over Christendom; and coming at last into England, it so wasted the People,
that scarce the 10th. Person of all sorts were left alive. There died in
London, (some say, in Norwich) between the 1st. of January, and the 1st. of
July, 57374 Persons. In Yarmouth, in one year, 7052 Men and Women; before which
Time, the Parsonage there was worth 700 Marks a year, and afterward was scarce
worth 40 l. a year. This Plague began in London about Alhollantide, in the year
1348, and continued till the year 1357, where it was observed, that those who
were born after the beginning Decrease of Teeth in men.
of this Mortality, had but twenty eight Teeth, whereas before they had two and
thirty.

In this King's Time, a Frost lasted from A great (...).
the midst of September, to the Month of April.

In the 11th. year of his Reign, there was Plenty of all things.
so great Plenty, that a quarter of Wheat was sold at London for two Shillings;
a fat Ox for a Noble; a fat Sheep for Sixpence; five Pigeons for a penny; a
fat Goose for Twopence; a Pig for a penny; and other things after that rate.

In this King's Time lived the so much Chaucer.
famed Sir Geoffry Chaucer, the famous English Poet.

NOTABLE EVENTS In the Reign of King RICHARD the II.
IN the beginning of this King's Reign, A. D. 1377. A noble Act of a Citizen of
London.
one Mercer, a Scottish Pirat, committing many Outrages upon the Seas, against
the English Merchants, a Citizen of London, one John Philpot, at his own
Charges set forth a Fleet, and in his own Person encountering Mercer, took him
and all his Ships.

About this Time, one Sir John Annesley A Combat between Katrington and
Annesley.
Knight, accused Thomas Katrington Esquire for betraying the Fortress of St.
Savior to the French; which Katrington denying, at the suit of Annesley, a
solemn Combat is permitted to be between them; at which Combat, the King and
all the great Lords were present: The Esquire Katrington was a man of a mighty
stature, the Knight Annesley a little man; yet through the justness of his
Cause, after a long Fight, the Knight prevailed, and Katrington the day after
the Combat died.

After the Rebellion of Wat Tyler and (...) executed for Treason.
Jack Straw, in this King's Time, Sir Robert Tresilian, Lord Chief Justice,
being appointed to sit in Judgment against the Offenders, 1500 being found
guilty, were all executed.

The manner of Knighting in these days Manner of Knighting.
thus: They caused him to put a Basenet upon his Head, and then the King with a
Sword in both his Hands struck him strongly upon the Neck. This King added the
Dagger to the Arms of London.

This King for a considerable time kept the Great Seal in his own hands.

The French, in this King's Time, designing The French prepare a Navy of 1287
Ships.
to invade England, presuming no less than to make a Conquest of it, prepared
1287 Ships; but the Attempt, as it was impertinent, signified nothing.

A Parliament, in this King's Time, declared The King obliged to attend the
Parliament.
to the King, That by an old Ordinance it was enacted, that if the King should
absent himself 40 days, not being sick, from his Parliament, the Houses might
lawfully break up and return home.

This King being at dissension with his Lords, could procure none to fight
against them.

It Is almost wonderful what is related of A strange Accident in a Family.
the Family of the Hastings, Earls of Pembroke, that for many Generations the
Sons never saw the Fathers, the Fathers being always dead before the Sons were
born.

In this King's 13th. year, a Royal Just A noble Justing.
was proclaimed to be holden within Smithfield in London; which being
published, many Strangers came hither, of the most noble Families of Europe: At
the day appointed there issued out of the Tower, about three a Clock in the
afternoon, 60 Coursers apparelled for the Justs, and upon every one an Esquire
of Honor riding a soft pace; after them came forth almost 40 Ladies of Honor,
mounted on Palfreys, and every Lady led a Knight with a Chain ofGold; and so
they came riding through the Streets of London to Smithfield, where the Just
held 24 days.

At this Time, in a Parliament, the Duke A Bastard legitimated by Parliament.
of Lancaster caused to be legitimated, the Issue he had by Catharine Swinford,
before he married her; of whom Thomas Beaufort was created Earl of Somerset.

In a Parliament, about this Time, the What Articles first to be handled in
Parliament.
Judges gave their opinions, that when Articles are propounded by the King to
be handled in Parliament, if other Articles be handled before those are
determined, that it is Treason in them that do it.

A general Pardon was now granted for A strange sort of general Pardon.
all Offenses, to all the King's Subjects, but only 50, whose Names he would
not express, but reserved them to his own knowledge, that when any of the
Nobility offended him, he might at his pleasure name him to be one of the
number excepted, and so keep them still within his danger.

In his 11th. year, King Richard created Barons first made by Letters Patents,
John Beauchamp of Holt, Baron of Kiderminster, by his Letters Patents, the
first that was so made; for before this Time, Barons were always made, by
calling them to Parliaments by the King's Writ.

In a Parliament, in this King's Time, An Image made to speak
there was a certain Image of Wax made by Necromancy, which at an hour
appointed spoke these words: The Head shall be cut off; the Head shall be lift
up aloft; the Feet shall be lift up above the Head.

About the year 1280, the making of Guns first invented and used.
Guns was found by a German; who having beaten Brimstone in a Mortar to powder,
and covering it with a Stone, it happened that as he struck Fire, a spark chanced
to fall into the Powder, which caused a Flame of such force, that it raised the
Stone a great height; which after he perceived, he made a Pipe of Iron, and
tempered the Powder with some other Ingredients, and fo finished that deadly
Engine. The first that used it were the Venetians, against the Inhabitants of
Genoa.

NOTABLE EVENTS In the Reign of King HENRY the IV.
THis King Henry fighting against the A. D. 1399. This King's Valor.
Nobles that rebelled, slew 36 with his own hands.

Prince Henry, this King's Son, being very Prince Henry made a Prisoner.
disorderly, and keeping ill Company, one of his Companions being arraigned for
Felony before the Lord Chief Justice, he went to the King's Bench-Bar, and
offered to take the Prisoner away by force; but being withstood by the Lord
Chief Justice, he stepped to him, and struck him over the Face; whereat the Judge
nothing abashed, rose up and told him, That he did not this Astrint to him, but
to the King his Father, in whose Place he sat; and therefore to make him know
his Fault, he commanded him to be committed to the Fleet: The Prince quietly
submitted to the Sentence, and suffered himself to be led to Prison.

In this King's days, Burning and Execution Burning Atheists when first.
by Fire, for Controversies in Religion, was first put in practice.

In the 3d. year of this King, at Danbury An Appearance of the Devil.
in Essex, the Devil appeared in likeness of a gray Friar; who entering the
Church, put the People in great fear, and the same hour, with a Tempest of
Whirlwind and Thunder, the top of the Steeple was broken down, and half the
Chancel scattered abroad.

NOTABLE EVENTS In the Reign of King HENRY the Fifth.
THE first Parliament, in this King's A. D. 1412. A Subsidy granted without
asking.
Time, grant him a Subsidy without asking for it; the like of which was never
known before nor since, the Kings being in capacity to ask.

At the Siege of Seyns in France, King First Garter-King at Arms.
Henry created an Officer of Arms, to be King of Heralds over the Englishmen,
and entitled him Garter.

This King having notice of his Son's The King's Prophetical Saying.
Birth and Christning, Prophetically said, Good Lord, I Henry of Monmouth,
shall small time reign, and much get; and Henry born at Windsor, shall long
time reign, and lose all; but God's Will be done.

In his 9th. year, in a Parliament holden Gold paid by weight.
at Westminster, it was ordained, That no man should offer Gold in payment,
unless it were weight; and thereupon were appointed Balances and Weights.

In a Synod at Rochester, in this King's The Scriptures ordered to be in Latin,
for which a just Judgment falls on the Bishop of Canterbury.
Time, Sir John Oldcastle was pronounced to be an Heretic, by the Archbishop
of Canterbury; who then enacted a Decree, That the holy Scriptures ought not to
be translated into the English Tongue: But mark the Judgment that fell upon his
Tongue, whose Roots and Blade soon after grew so big in his Mouth and Throat,
that he could neither speak, nor swallow down Meat, but in horror lay
languishing, till at last starved by Famine, he died.

This King was perhaps the greatest that King Henry the V. his Character.
ever reigned in England: It Is said, he was so temperate in his Diet, and so
free from Vainglory, that 'twas truly said, he had something in him of
Caesar, that Alexander the Great had not, that he would not be drunk; and
something of Alexander, that Caesar had not, viz. that he would not be
flattered.

NOTABLE EVENTS In the Reign of King HENRY the Sixth.
IN King Henry the Sixth's Time, the A. D. 1422. 40000 French frighted with the
Name of Salisbury.
Earl of Salisbury got so great a Name in France, that only naming of him was
enough to fright 20000 French; as appeared, when the French Constable with
40000 Men, besieged the Town of St. James de Benuron, and having made a breach
fit for Assault, whilst his Captains stood straining of courtesy, which of
them should first enter, Sir Nicholas Burdet with all his Forces sallied forth,
crying aloud, A Salisbury, A Salisbury; which Name-struck such a Consternation
in the Besiegers, that they all stood like men amazed; of whom 600 were slain,
200 drowned in the Ditches, 50 taken Prisoners, with 18 Standards, and the
Constable was glad to quit the Place, and desert the Siege.

It Is said, that Roger Bullingbrook, a Necromancer, A Necromantick Art.
and Margery Jordan, the Witch of Eye in Suffolk, devised a Picture of Wax, in
proportion of the King, by Sorcery, that had such effect on the King's Body,
that as the Wax consumed, so the King's Body consumed; for which they were both
condemned.

Soon after the good Duke of Gloucester Five Men hanged at Tyburn, yet lived
after.
was secretly murdered, five of his menial Servants, viz. Sir Roger
Chamberlain Knight. Middleton, Herber, Artzis, Esquire and John Needham Gent. were
condemned to be hanged, drawn, and quartered; and hanged they were at Tyburn,
let down quick, stripped naked, marked with a Knife to be quartered; and then the
Marquess of Suffolk brought their Pardon, and delivered it at the Place of
Execution, and so their Lives were saved.

It was observed of this King, that no His Misfortune in War.
Enterprise of War ever prospered when he was present.

In the 32d. year of this King, the Lord Lord Mayor goes by Water to take his
Oath.
Mayor of London first began to go by Water to Westminster, to take his Oath,
where before they used to go by Land.

In this King's Time, the Art of Printing Printing first in England.
was found out at Mogunce in Germany, by a Knight called John Guttenburg, and
brought into England by William Caxton, a London Mercer, who first practiced
the same in the Abbey at Westminster, A. D. 1471.

In the 18th. year of this King, all the The Lions died.
Lions in the Tower died.

In his 22d. year, on New-years-day, near A wonderful Prodigy.
unto Bedford, a very deep Water, which ran between the Towns of Swelstone and
Harlsewoad, stood suddenly still, and divided it self, so that by the space of
three miles, the bottom remained dry.

In the three and thirtieth year of his A wonderful Cock.
Reign, besides a great Blazing-star, there happened a strange Sight; a monstrous
Cock came out of the Sea, and in the presence of a multitude of People at
Portland, made a hideous Crowing three times, each time turning about and
clapping his Wings, and beckning toward the North, the South, and the West; as
also many prodigious Births.

In his six and thirtieth year, in a A shower of Blood.
Town in Bedfordshire, it rained Blood.

In this King's Time, Richard Nevil, The Valor of the Earl of Warwick.
Earl of Warwick, was so brave a Soldier, that he could make whom he pleased
K. ing.

NOTABLE EVENTS In the Reign of King EDWARD the IV.
IN the beginning of this King's Reign, A. D. 1460. A wonderful Slaughter.
there was so bloody a Battle fought between his Forces, and those of the late
King Henry, that there was on both sides 38000 Men slain, all Englishmen, which
perhaps was a greater Slaughter, than at one Encounter has been known for many
Ages.

In the 4th. year of King Edward the IV. The Mayor of London offended.
there were made eight Sergeants at Law, who held their Feast at the Bishop of
Ely's Place in Holborn, where the Lord Gray of Ruthin, then Lord Treasurer of
England, was placed before the Lord Mayor of London, being invited to the
Feast; which gave such a distaste to the Mayor, that he presently departed with
the Aldermen and Sheriffs, without tasting of their Feast; and it was registered
to be a President in time to come.

This King, in Michaelmas Term, in the This King sirs as Judge.
2d. year of his Reign, sat three days together publicly, with his Judges, on
the King's Bench, in Westminster Hall, to observe what needed Reformation in
it, either at Bench or at Bar.

This King falling desperately in Love King Edward marries his Subject.
with the Lady Elizabeth Gray, Widow of Sir John Gray of Groby, not being able
to prevail upon her Chastity, was forced to marry her; he was the first King
since the Conquest that married his Subject.

This King sent a score of Cotsal Ewes, Sh^^ep sent to the King of Arragon.
and five Rams, to John King of Arragon, for a Present; which how small soever
the Present appeared, was great in effect, by their increase there to
admiration.

Sir John Hawksford, one of the Chief A Judge strangely melancholy.
Justices about this Time, grew so melancholy, that one day he called to him
the Keeper of his Park, charging him with negligence, in suffering his Deer to
be stolen; and thereupon commanded him, that if he met any man in his
Night-circuit that would not stand or speak, he should not spare to kill him,
whosoever he were: The Knight having thus laid his foundation, and meaning to
end his doleful days, in a certain dark Night secretly conveyed himself out of
the House, and walked alone in his Park: The Keeper hearing one stirring and
coming toward him, asked, Who was there? but no Answer being made, he
commanded him to stand; which he refusing to do, the Keeper shot, and killed
him.

Here was a great Example of the Fickleness The Fickleness of Parliaments.
of the Minds of Parliaments; for in the space of half a year, one Parliament
proclaimed King Edward an Usurper, and King Henry a lawful King, and another
proclaiming Edward a lawful King, and King Henry an Usurper: So that we may
see, in humane Affairs there is nothing certain.

In this King's Time, one Walter Walker, Strange Examples of Se^^rity.
living at the Crown in Cheapside, was hang ed, for only saying to hi^^ Child
when it cried, That if it would be quiet, he would make it Heir of the Crown.
And Thomas Burdet Esquire of Arrow in Warwickshire, having a Buck killed by the
King that he much esteemed, wished it Horns and all in the Belly of him that
counseled the King to kill it; and because none counseled the King to kill it
but himself, it was thought those words were not spoken, without a malignant
reflecting on the King; and thereupon Burdet was arraigned, condemned, and
beheaded at Tyburn.

In Edward the Fourth's Time, there was A merry Passage between the King and an
old Widow.
used a way for raising Money, called a Benevolence; and it is memorable of an
old rich Widow, to whom King Edward calling among others, merrily asked, What
she would willingly give toward his great Charges? By my troth, (quoth she)
for thy lovely Countenance thou shalt-have twenty pounds: The King not looking
for half the Sum, thanked her, and lovingly kissed her; which so wrought with
the old Widow, that she presently swore, He should have twenty pounds more; and
paid it willingly.

Whereas before this King's Time, the The length of the Noses of Shoes.
Noses or Beaks of Shoes were so long, that they were fain to be tied, some
with Chains, and some with Silk, to their Knees, their length was now by
Proclamation contracted to two inches.

In this King's Time lived Thomas Littleton, Judge Littleton.
a Reverend Judge of the Common Pleas, who brought a great part of the Law into
method, which lay before confusedly dispersed, and composed his Book of Tenures.

The most Notable EVENTS In the Reign of King EDWARD the V, AND RICHARD the III.
THE most notable thing that happened A. D. 1483. King Edward murdered, and
God's Judgment on his Executioners.
about this Time, was the murdering of King Edward the V. and his Brother, in
the Tower, by the Order of their Uncle, the Duke of Gloucester, who being
appointed their Protecto^^, usu^^ped the Kingdom; sure the most horrid Villainy
that was ever perpetrated, and must needs excite the divine Revenge, to make
Examples of such villainous Miscreants, as durst attempt the Lives of two such
Royal Infants: which indeed was not very slow; for Miles Forest, one of these
damnable Executioners, rotted away piecemeal: Dighton, another, lived at
Callice a long time after, but detested of all men, died in great misery: Sir
James Tyrrel, the chief Engine, was beheaded afterward on Tower Hill for
Treason: and King Richard had never after a quiet Mind, being forced by his
frightful Dreams, often to start out of Bed, and run about his Chamber, as if
all Hells Furies were tormenting him; so that it was truly verified in him,
Ultrix Tisiphone vocat agmina saeva sororum. An Inundation of the River Severn.




In the second year of King Richard the Third, when the Duke of Buckingham
meant to pass with his Army over Severn, there was so great an Inundation of
Water, that Men were drowned in their Beds, Houses were over-turned, Children
were carried about the Fields, swimming in Cradles, Beasts were drowned on
Hills: Which rage of Water continued ten days, and has been ever since called,
The Duke of Buckingham's Water.

The most NOTABLE EVENTS In the Reign of King HENRY the VII.
KIng Henry the VII. whether doubting A. D. 1485. The King's Guard first
ordained.
any sudden Attempt upon his Person, or whether he d^^d it to follow the
Example of France; ^^ the ^^ery beginning of his Reign, he ordered a Band of
tall personable Men to be attending upon him, which was called the King's
Guard; which no King before, and all Kings since have used.

In this King's Time was the sweating-Sickness The Sweating Sickness its Cure.
in London, of which two Lord Mayors and six Aldermen died in eight days time:
The Cure for it was, If it took them in the day, to lie down in their Clothes
for 24 hours, and not stir; if in the night, not to stir out of Bed for the
like time, and to keep themselves from motion as much as could be.

In the 2d. year of King Henry the VII. A Carver made Sheriff of London.
John Persival, the Mayor of London's Carver, waiting at his Table, was chosen
one of the Sherifss of London, only by Sir John Collet's, then Mayor, drinking
to him in a Cup of Wine, (as the custom is to drink to him whom he list to name
Sheriff) and forthwith the said Persival sat down at the Mayor's Table, and
covered his Head, and was afterward Mayor himself.

In the 6th. year of Henry the VII. th^^ Granada won by the Spaniards.
Spaniards won the great and rich City and Country of Granada from the Moors;
and thereupon the King of Spain was entitled, The Catholic King.

In the Month of May was holden a solemn A Justs at Sheen.
Justing, at the King's Palace of Sheen, now called Richmond, which continued
the space of a Month; in which Justs, Sir James Parker, running against a
Gentleman named Hugh Vaughan, by reason of a faulty Helmet, was hit in the
Mouth at the first Course, so that his Tongue was born to the hinder part of
his Head; so that he died upon the Place.

This King, by his good Husbandry, and His Riches at his Death.
oppression of his Subjects, by those hated Persons Empson and Dudley, left
behind him at his Death 1800000 l.

This King was the first that ordained a Yeomen of the Guard when first
instituted.
Company of tall strong men, (naming them Yeomen of the Guard) to be attending
about the Person of the King, to whom he appointed a Livery by which to be
known, and a Captain by whom to be chosen.

In this Time was made that excellent First suing in forma pauperis.
Law, for admission of poor Suitors, in forma Pauperis, without paying Fee to
Councellor, Attorney, or Clerk.

Another, That Murderers should be First Burning in the Hand.
burnt on the brawn of the left Hand with the Letter M. and Thieves with the
Letter T. so that if they offended a second time, they should have no mercy,
but be put to death; and this to reach to all Clerks convict.

In his 18th. year, King Henry being himself The Name of Merchant-Taylors first
given
a Brother of the Tailors Company, as diverse Kings before had been, viz.
Richard the III. Edward the IV. Henry the VI. Henry the V. Henry the IV and
Richard the II. also 11 Dukes, 28 (...), and 48 Lords; he now gave to them the
Name and Title of Merchant-Taylors, as a Name of Worship to endure for ever.

In this King's Time, the Privilege of Sanctuaries abrogated.
Sanctuaries was very much abated with permission of the Pope.

In his 1^^th. year, on Bartholomew-day, Large Hailstones.
at the Town of St. Needs in Bedfordshire, there fell Hailstones, that were
measured 18 inches about.

The most notable and extraordinary EVENTS In the Reign of King HENRY the VIII.
AMongst many of King Henry the A. D. 1509. Masking first in England.
Eighth's jovial Devices, he at Greenwich, with II more, was disguised, after
the manner of Italy, called A Mask, a thing not seen before in England: They
were apparelled all in Garments long and broad, wrought all with Gold, with
Vizards and Caps of Gold; and after the Banquet done, these Maskers came in,
with six Gentlemen disguised in Silk, bearing staff-Torches, and desired the
Ladies to dance; and after they had danced and communed together, took their
leave and departed.

In a War that King Henry the VIII. had The Emperor takes Pay of King Henry.
with France, the Emperor Maximilian took Pay of King Henry as his Soldier; an
Honor never done before to any King of Europe.

It is a strange thing what George Buchanan relates, as being present, of James
now King of Scotland, who intending to have a A strange Vision.
War with England, a certain old Man of venerable Aspect, and clad in a long
blue Garment, came to him, and leaning familiarly on the Chair where the King
sat, said, I am sent to thee, O King, to give thee warning, that thou proceed
not in the War thou art about, for if thou do, it will be thy ruin: And having
so said, he pressed through the Company, and vanished out of sight, for by no
enquiry it could be found what became of him.

Pope Julius the II. sent to King Henry a Henry the VIII. had the Title of
Christianissimus.
Cap of Maintenance and a Sword, and being angry with the King of France,
transferred, by Authority of the Lateran Council, the Title of Christianissimo,
from him upon King Henry. Soon after which, King A Justing.
Henry had a Justs, wherein himself and the Duke of Suffolk were Defendants
against all comers; who having the Duke of Longueville, and the Lord of
Clermont, to be Spectators, spread the Fame of their Chivalry into foreign
Nations. He used a new kind of Justing, in manner volant, as fast as one could
follow another, which was very delightful to the Beholders.

This King, and Francis King of France, A magnificent Interview.
had an Interview, which was so magnificent, that the Vale of Audrea where they
met, is since called, The Camp of Cloth of Gold: The Particulars are too
tedious for this place, so that he that would see more, may find it at large in
Page 266.

This King, for writing against Luther, The Title of Defender of the Faith
given.
had by the Pope the Title given him, of Defender of the Faith.

In this King's Time, Sir William Fitz-Williams, A noble Action.
landing in the Haven of Tr^^pert, with 700 Men, he beat 6000 French, that
sought to impeach his Landing, took their Bulwarks, and much Ordnance in them,
burned the Suburbs of the Town of Treport, and all in five hours, and then
returned.

A. D. 1531. An Act was made, That Annats forbidden to be paid to Rome.
Bishops should pay no more Annats, or Money for Bulls, to the Pope, forasmuch
as it was proved, there had been paid for Bulls of Bishops, since the 4th. year
of H^^nry the VII. an 160000 l. besides what had been paid for Pardons, and
other Dispensations.

Another Act was also then made, That No more Appeals to Rome.
no Person should appeal for any Cause out of this Realm to the Court of Rome,
but from the Commissary to the Bishop, and from the Bishop to the Archbishop,
and from the Archbishop to the King, and all Causes of the King to be tried in
the Upper House of the Convocation.

The Clergy of England, being now charged King Henry supreme Head of the Church
by the King's Council, to be in a Praemunire, for maintaining the Cardinal
Woolsey's Legantine Power, in their Convocation concluded an humble Submission
in writing, and offered the King an 100000 l. to have their Pardon by
Parliament: Which Offer, after some labor, was accepted, and their Pardon
promised; in which Submission, the Clergy called the King, The supreme Head of
the Church.

About the Time that this King married Obligations of Knighthood.
Ann Bullen, all men that had 40 l. a year Land, were either obliged to be
Knighted, or to pay a Fine.

In the 26th. year of this King, there was The Pope's Authority abolished.
an Act made, which authorized the King to be supreme Head of the Church of
England, and the Pope's Authority to be utterly abolished.

On the 10th. of June, 1541. Sir Edmund The Manner and Ceremony of cutting off
the Hand of one that strikes in the King's Court.
Knevet of Norfolk Knight. was arraigned before the Officers of the Green-cloth,
for striking Mr. Clear of Norfolk, within the Tennis-Court of the King's House.
Being found guilty, he had Judgment to lose his right Hand, and to forfeit all
his Lands and Goods: Whereupon there was called to do Execution, First, The
Serjeant-Surgeon, with his Instruments pertaining to his Office; then the
Sergeant of the Wood-yard, with a Mallet, and a Block to lay the Hand upon;
then the King's Master-Cook, with a Knife to cut off the Hand; then the
Sergeant of the Larder, to set the Knife right on the Joint; then the
Serjeant-Farrier, with fearing Irons to fear the Veins; then the Sergeant of
the Poultry with a Cock, which Cock should have his Head smitten off on the
same Block, and with the same Knife; then the Yeomen of the Chandry with
Searcloths; then the Yeomen of the Scullery, with a Pan of Fire (...) heat the
Irons, and two Forms for all Officers to set their Stuff on; then the Sergeant
of the Cellar, with Wine, Ale, and Beer; then the Sergeant of the Ewery, with
Basin, Ewer, and Towels. All things being thus prepared, Sir William Pickering
Knight-Marshal, was commanded to bring in his Prisoner, to whom the Chief
Justice declared his Offense; which the said Knevet confessed, and humbly
submitted himself to the King's mercy; only he desired, the King would spare
his right Hand, and take his left; Because, said he, if my right Hand be
spared, I may live to do the King good service. Of whose Submission, and reason
of his Suit, when the King was informed, he granted him to lose neither of his
Hands, and pardoned him also of his Lands and Goods.

A. D. 1542. About this Time, Arthur Vicount Lisle dies of excess of Joy.
Plantagenet, Vicount Lisle, base Son to King Edward the IV. having been
imprisoned upon suspicion of a Practice, for betraying of Callice to the
French, whilst he was the King's Lieutenant there, was found to be innocent of
the Fact: And thereupon the King to make him some reparation for his Disgrace,
sent him a Ring, and a very gracious Message; whereat the Vicount took so great
Joy, that the night following, of that very Joy he died.

In the 30th. year of this King, it was ordained First Registers in Churches.
by Cromwell, the King's Vicar General, That in all Churches there should be
kept a Register of every Wedding, Christning, and Burial, within the same
Parish for ever.

In his 31st. year, the King first instituted First Gentlemen Pensioners.
and appointed 50 Gentlemen, called Pensioners, to wait upon h^^s ^^erson,
assigning to each of them 50 l. a year, for the maintenance of themselves and
two Horses.

In his 37th. year, the Brothel-houses, Stews put down.
called the Stews on the Bank-side in Southwark, were put down by the King's
Commandment; and it was done by Proclamation, and sound of Trumpet.

In his 23d. year, it was enacted, That Meat sold by weight.
Butchers should sell their Meat by weight; Beef for a half penny the pound,
and Mutton for three farthings.

King Henry in his 24th. year, built his St. James built.
Mansion House of St. James, where he made a fair Park.

In this King's Time, one Foxley, Potmaker A great Sleeper.
to the Tower of London, fell asleep, and could not be wakened at 14 days.

In this King's Time also l^^ved Anthony Anthony Fitz-Herbert.
Fitz-Herbert, who has writ (...) learnedly of the Law.

The most NOTABLE EVENTS In the Reign of King EDWARD the Sixth.
THE Reign of King Edward the VI. A. D. 1547. A miraculous Victory.
was ushered in with a miraculous Victory over the Scots, the Duke of Somerset,
the Protector of England, being General of the English Forces; in which Battle
there were of the Scots slain above 14000, and on the English Party, only 50
Horsemen, and one Footman.

After some Rebellions in the West, in An uncourteous Guest.
this King's days, Sir William Kingston being Provost-Marshal, one Boyer, Mayor
of Bedwin in Cornwall, had been amongst the Rebels, but enforced: The Provost
sent him word, he would come and dine with him; the Mayor hereupon made great
Provision: A little before Dinner, the Provost took the Mayor aside, and
required him to put up a pair of Gallows against Dinner was done; which the
Mayor did: Presently after Dinner, the Provost taking the Mayor by the Hand,
entreated him to lead him to the Gallows; where being come, he asked the Mayor,
If they were strong enough: Yes, (said the Mayor:) Well then, said the Provost,
get you up speedily, for they were provided for you; and the Mayor was hanged
accordingly.

A. D. 1551. In the Reign of King Edward English Laws in Ireland.
the VI. the charge was given, that Ireland should be governed by English Laws.

In a Parliament, in the 4th. year of this Priests Children legitimate. A
Miraculous Birth.
King, Priests Children were legitimate.

In his 6th. year, at Middleton-stony, 11 miles from Oxford, a Woman brought
forth a Child which had two perfect Bodies from the Navel upwards, the Legs for
both the Bodies grew out at the middle, where they both were joined, and had
but one Issue for the Excrements of them both. They lived 18 days, and were
Women-Children.

This year also were taken at Quinborough Dolphins.
three Dolphins, and at Black-wall six more, the least of which was bigger than
any Horse.

EXTRAORDINARY EVENTS In the Reign of Queen MARY.
QUeen Mary, soon after her coming to A. D. 1553. Mass restored.
the Crown, introduced Mass again, which had been abolished by her Brother.

It is remarkable in this Queens Reign, A Judgment on Judge Morgan.
that Judge Morgan, who gave the Sentence upon the Lady Jane Gray, shortly
after s^^ll mad, and in his raving, cried continually to have the Lady Jane
taken from him, and so ended his miserable Life.

It was very remarkable of Cranmer, Cranmer's Heart not burnt with his Body.
Archbishop of Canterbury, who being burnt at Oxford in this Queens days, his
Heart remained in the midst of the Fire, untouched by that devouring Element.

In this Queens Time, there died for Religion How many died for Religion.
in all, two hundred threescore and seventeen.

In her 2d. year, on the 15th. of February, A strange Rainbow.
there appeared in the Sky a Rainbow reversed, the Bow turning downwards, and
the two ends standing upwards.

In her 5th. year, within a mile of Nottingham, A wonderful Tempest
so mavelous a Tempest of Thunder happened, that it beat down all the Houses
and Churches in two Towns thereabouts, cast the Bell to the outside of the
Churchyard, and some Webbs of Lead, 400 Foot into the Field; the River of
Trent running between the two Towns, the Water, with the Mud in the bottom, was
carried a quarter of a Mile, and cast against Trees, with the violence whereof,
the Trees were pulled up by the Roots, and cast twelvescore off; five or six
Men thereabouts were slain, and neither Flesh nor Skin perished; also a Child
was taken out of a man's hand, and taken two Spears length high, and then let
fall 200 Foot off.

Also this year, on the last of September, A vast Rain.
fell so great store of Rain, that Westminsterhall was full of Water, and Boats
were rowed over Westminster-bridge into Kingsstreet.

About this Time, John Hopkins translated John Hopkins.
many of David's Psalms into English Meeter, which are to be found amongst
those appointed to be sung in the Church.

EXTRAORDINARY EVENTS In the Reign of Queen ELIZABETH.
QUeen Elizabeth was Crowned by the A. D. 1558. The last Nuncio in England
Bishop of Carlisle.

This Queen re-introducing Protestancy, the Abbot Mortinengi was the last
Nuncio thatever was sent by the Pope into England, and Sir Edward Carne, now
dying at Rome, was the last Leiger that was ever sent to the Pope by the Kings
of England.

In the 19th. year of this Queen, at the A strange Mortality.
Assizes at Oxford, suddenly, the Court sitting at the Crown-bar, they were
surprised with a pestilent Savor; from whence it came, is uncertain, but all
that were there present, within 40 hours died, except Women and Children, and
the Contagion went no farther: There died the Lord Chief Baron, with many
Knights and Justices of the Peace, and others, to the number of 300.

A. D. 1580. Captain Drake returned Captain Drake
from his Voyage about the World, being the first that succeeded in that
Attempt.

In the Dutch Wars, in this Queens Time, English first Drunkards.
the English (who of all Dwellers in the Northern Parts of the World, were
hitherto the least Drinkers, and deserved praise for their Sobriety) learned to
be Drunkards.

About 1585. one Ralph Lane, who came Tobacco brought into England.
with Captain Drake from Virginia, brought the first Tobacco into England,
which the Indians take against Crudities of their Stomach.

The Earl of Leicester assaulting Zutphen, A Fort taken by one Man.
and there setting upon a Fort, one Edward Stanley (of the Stanleys of Elford)
catching hold of a Spaniard's Lance, that was brandished at him, held it so
fast, that by it he was drawn into the very Fort; whereupon the Spaniards being
affrighted, (thinking all the Enemies were coming up, forsook the Place.

A. D. 1587. died Sir Ralph Sadler, Last Banneret of England.
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, the last Banneret of England, with
which Dignity he was adorned at the Battle of Musselborough in Scotland.

At this Time was memorable the prodigious Hacket's strange Reconciliation.
Carriage of one Hacket, a mean Fellow, of no Learning; who when in show of
Reconciliation to one with whom he had been at variance, he embraced him, he
bit off his Nose, and the Man desired to have his Nose again, that it might be
sewed on while the Wound was green, he most villainously eat it up, and
swallowed it down before his face. This Man was afterward executed, for taking
upon him to be Christ, without Recantation.

This Queen made the College at Dublin Dublin made an University.
in Ireland, an University, which was formerly the Monastery of All Saints,
endowing it with Power to confer Scholastical Dignities.

This Queen was the first that allowed Judges.
the Judges any thing upon their Circuits.

She first ordained the Company of East India East India Company.
Merchants.

The Stone called, Lapis Calaminaris, Lapis Calaminaris.
which is of great use in Brass-works, was first brought into England at this
Time, and in plentiful manner.

Likewise this Queen was the first that Gunpowder made in England.
caused Gunpowder to be made in England, which before was had from foreign
Parts, and at dear Rates.

In her 6th. year, in the Month of December, A monstrous Fish.
at Grimsby in Lincolnshire, was driven on shore a monstrous Fish: in length 19
yards, his Tail 15 foot broad, and 6 yards between the Eyes; 12 Men stood
upright in his Mouth to get the Oil.

In her 10th. year, the Dutch brought into Serges made in England.
England, the Art of making Bays, Says and Serges, and all woven Stuffs, both
woollen and linen.

In her 13th. year, a prodigious Earthquake A prodigious Earthquake.
happened in the East Parts of Herefordshire: The Earth opened, and a Hill with a
Rock under it (making at first a hideous noise) lifted it self up a great
height, and began to travel, bearing along with it the Trees that grew upon it,
the Sheep-folds, and Flocks of Sheep: in the Place from whence it was first
moved, it left a gaping distance 40 Foot broad, and 80 Else long; the whole
Field was about 20 Acres. Passing along, it overthrew a Chapel in the way,
removed an Yew-tree planted in the Churchyard, from the West into the East;
with the like force it thrust before it Highways, Sheep-folds, Hedges and
Trees, made tilled Ground Pasture, and Pasture fit for Tillage. Having walked
in this sort from Saturday Evening, till Monday Noon, it stood still.

In her 17th. year, a vast mighty Whale A large Whale taken.
was cast upon Thanet-Isle in Kent, 20 Else long, and 13 Foot broad from the
Belly to the Backbone, and 11 Foot between the Eyes, one of his Eyes being
taken out of his Head, was more than a Cart with six Horses could draw; the Oil
being boiled out of his Head, was Parmacittee.

In her 22d. year, a strange Apparition A strange Apparition.
happened in Somersetshire: 60 Personages all clothed in black, a Furlong
distance from those that beheld them: then another like Number and Company
appeared; these encountered one another, and then vanished away: and again they
appeared all in bright Armor, and encountered one another, and so vanished
away. This was examined before Sir George Norton, and sworn by four honest Men
that saw it, to be true.

In her six and twentieth year, being Another Earthquake.
the year 1588, in Dorsetshire, a Field of three Acres in Blackmore, with the
Trees and Fences, moved from its Place, and passed over another Field,
traveling in the Highway that goes to Herne, and there stayed.

In her five and thirtieth year, many A great Drought.
Cattle died for want of Water, and the River of Thames did so fail, that a
Horseman might ride over at London Bridge.

EXTRAORDINARY EVENTS In the Reign of King JAMES.
AS King James, coming first to London, A. D. 1603. King James presented with
70 Teams of Horses.
at Godmanchester, near Huntington, the Bailiffs of the Town presented him with
70 Team of Horse, all traced to tail new Plows: At which the King wondering,
they said, It was the ancient Custom so to do, when any King of England passed
through the Town, and by which, as being the King's Tenants, they held their
Land.

King James, having now Ambassadors The first Master of the Ceremonies.
sent to congratulate his coming to the Crown from all Parts, first erected the
Place of Master of the Ceremonies, allowing 200 l. a year Fee; and the first
that had the Place, was Sir Lewis Lewkenor, a Gentleman, who besides other good
Parts, was very skilful in the neighboring Languages.

In the year 1612, King James began Knights-Baronets first created.
the Order of Knights, called Baronets, because they take place next to Barons
younger Sons; and he appointed certain Laws, to make them capable that should
be admitted. First, That they should maintain the number of 30 Foot-Souldiers
in Ireland for three years; then that they should be Gentlemen of Blood of
three Descents; and lastly, should have Land of Inheritance, in po^^ession, or
immediate reversion, to the value of a 1000 l. per annum: And to keep the
number from swarming, he confined it to 200; and as the Issue should fail, the
Order to cease.

In this King's Time, Mr. Hugh Middleton, Water brought to London.
a Goldsmith of London, brought Water to the City; from the two great S^^rings
of Chadwel, and Amwel in Hertfordshire, having cut a Channel from thence to a
Place nea^^ Islington, whither he conveyed it to a large Pond, and from thence
in Pipes of young Elms, to all Places of the City.

In the 17th. of this King, Bernard Calvert A wonderful Journey.
of Andover, rode from St. Georges-Church in Southwark to D^^ver, from thence
passed by Barge to Callice in France, and from thence returned back to St.
Georges-Church the same day, setting out about Three in the morning, and
returned about Eight at night, fr^^sh and lusty.

This King set forth a Proclamation, restraining Penalties for Deer-killers.
all Persons under great Penalties for killing of Deer, or any kind of Fowl
used for Hawking.

In a Parliament holden the third year The Oath of Allegiance.
of his Reign, the Oath of Allegiance was devised and ordained, and soon after
ministered to all sorts of People.

By this King's Appointment, a strict Duels restrained.
Decree passed in the Star Chamber, against Duels, or single Combats; and a
strict Law against Stabbing.

This King added one Judge to every Five Judges in every Court.
Court, which made them five; and increased the number of Gentlemen-Pensioners
to 200.

In his first year, in London, there died in A Plague.
one Week 3090 Persons.

In the year 1613, on the 17th. of April, A monstrous Child.
in the Parish of Standish in Lancashire, a Maiden Child was born, having four
Legs, four Arms, two Bellies joined to one Back, one Head with two Faces, the
one before, the other behind, like the Picture of Janus.

This year also, in the Parish of Christs-Church, A Man and Child burnt to
death by Lightning.
in Hampshire, John Hitton lying in Bed with his Wife, and a young Child by
them, was himself and Child burnt to death with Lightning, no Fire appearing on
them, though they continued burning three days, till they were consumed to
ashes.

EXTRAORDINARY EVENTS In the Reign of King CHARLES the I.
THE first year of King Charles's Reign, A. D. 1625. A Term at Reading.
the Term, because of the Plague in London, was kept at Reading, and special
Instructions were given to the Judges, to put the Laws in execution against
Recusants.

About the Month of July, 1629, there A Fray in Fleerstreet.
happened a great Fray in Fleetstreet, upon the rescue of Captain Bellingam,
which was attempted by some Students of the Temple, wherein some were hurt, and
carried to Prison. This drew together about 500 Gentlemen, who beat the
Sheriffs Officers, and released their Friends; then the Lord Mayor and
Trained-Bands coming, the Trained-Bands fired only with Powder; at this the
Gentlemen having Pistols, engaged very fiercely in earnest, and killed five of
the Trained-Bands, but were by number at last overcome, and Ashurst and
Stamford, two of their Captains, taken, who were afterward for the Murder
executed at Tyburn.

Leighton, a Scotch-man, for writing a seditious A strange Punishment.
Book, called Zi^^ns Plea, was sentenced in the Star Chamber, to be whipped, and
stigmatized, to have his Ears cropped, and Nose slit; which Sentence was soon
after inflicted upon him.

About the year 1630, Sir Giles Allington Sir Giles Allington marries his Niece.
married his Niece; for which in a Court consisting of eight Bishops, and four
other Commissioners, he was sentenced to be fined to the King 12000 l. to stand
obliged in the Penalty of 20000 l. never to co-habit or come near his Niece
more; and to be committed to Prison, or put in sufficient Bail, till both he
and his Niece shall have done Penance at Pauls-Cross, and at Great St. Mari^^s
at Cambridge, at a day appointed by the Court. The Judges offering to proceed
in this Business, received a Check from the King.

In the 7th. year of this King, May the A Star seen at Noon, at the Birth of
King Charles the II.
29th. a Star appeared visibly at Noon, the Sun shining clear; at which Time
the King rode to St. Paul's Church, to give thanks for the Queens safe delivery
of her 2d. Son Prince Charles.

In his 16th. year, the Earl of Haddington A sad Accident.
in Scotland, having recovered some Pieces of Ordnance, which the Garrison of
Berwick had seized at Dunce, returned back to Dowglass, where sitting merry at
Dinner, with about 20 Knights and Gentlemen, on a sudden the Magazin of Powder
that lay in a vaulted Room, took Fire by Accident, whereby the Earl and his
Company were blown up.

The same year, a Pond in Cambridge became A Pond of Blood.
red as Blood, the Water whereof being taken up in Basins, retained still the
same Color. Many Sights were seen in Armies in the Air.
the Air, as Armies fighting one against another, which were looked upon as sad
Presages of the future Wars.

In the 14th. year of his Reign, at Whitecomb, A wonderful Lightning at
Whitecomb.
in the County of Devon, a Ball of Fire was seen to come into the Church in the
time of Divine Service, whereby three Persons were killed, and 62 hurt, diverse
of whom had the linings of their Clothes burnt, though their outward Garments
were not so much as singed, and most of the Seats were turned upside down, and
the Pillars, Steeple and Church, more endamaged, than the expense of 300 l.
could repair.

On Tuesday, the 30th. of January, 1648, King Charles murdered.
was perpetrated that horrid and damnable Murder of the most Gracious of
Kings, Charles the I. an Act so wicked and diabolical, so unjust and cruel,
that possibly the whole World since the Creation, cannot produce its Parallel.

The most wonderful Remark of Courage, The wonderful Resolution of the Countess
of Derby.
in the Troubles of this King, was showed by the Noble Earl of Derby, and his
Renowned Lady; which Lady, by her admirable Courage and Magnanimity, maintained
her House of Latham for the King, against the Parliaments Forces, who besieged
it, from Feb. 28. 1644, till the 27th. of May following, when the Siege was
raised by Prince Rupert.

EXTRAORDINARY EVENTS In the first 13 Years of the Reign of King CHARLES the
Second.
ANno 1652. This year died the Lady A. D. 1648. The Lady Eleanor Davis.
Eleanor Davis, Wife to Sir John Davis, the King's first Sergeant at Law in
England, who was a Lady that has the greatest Character for Piety, Virtue, Wit
and Prudence, that I ever read; and her Predictions most wonderful: Of the
death of the Duke of Buckingham long before: In the most flourishing condition
of the Nation, she foretold its unparalled Troubles; and in the depth of
those Troubles, she foretold that happy Restoration to Peace and Settlement,
which we at this day (through the mercy of God) enjoy under our most Gracious
Sovereign; and in every one she long before prefixed the Time of their
Accomplishment.

Anno 1656. It was related by the young Rain of Fire from Heaven.
Marquess Francisco de Lopez, who with his Brother and Sisters was brought up
to London, being lately come from Peru, that the Cities of Luma and Calao in
Peru, were destroyed by an Earthquake, and Fire raining from Heaven, in which
Ruin perished 11000 Spaniards, and about 100 Indians.

As for the other Events occurring in the late King's, and this happy Monarch's
Reign, I shall omit them here, being so extraordinary and innumerable, that
they cannot be comprised but in large Volumes, of which upon that occasion we
have many extant.

SHORT COLLECTIONS OF Life and Death.
Nature durable and not durable.
MEtals at last decay by Rust only, Gold excepted; Quicksilver decays only by
Fire.

Stones at last decay by a kind of Nitre; Precious stones and Crystals grow
less orient by age. Metals.


It Is observed, that Stones lying toward the North, decay sooner than toward
the South; but Iron the contrary, as may be Stones.
seen in all Buildings.

Glass and Bricks, having passed the fire, last very long; Gums, Wax and Honey,
last very long.

Note, that these continue longest, being always wet, or always dry.

Colder Herbs die yearly, both in Root and Stalk; but hot Herbs bear their age
better.

The Vine and Rosemary attain to 60 Herbs and Fruit Trees.
years, White Thorn and Ivy above 100.

The Oak and Elm do commonly come to 800 years: Most Fruit Trees attain to
about 60 years; but the sowrer the Fruit, the longer-lived is the Tree.

All sorts of Fruits and Flowers might be long kept in earthen Vessels close
stopped, and much longer, if the Vessels, whether earthen or glass, be sunk in
the Water, or buried in the Earth.

Fruits closed in Wax, or any the like Case, keep green very long.

Length and shortness of Life in Living Creatures.
THE Elephant grows till 30, and lives Elephant.
commonly till 200 years.

The Camel sometimes attains to 100 Camel.
years.

The Dog or Fox seldom reach 20 years. Dog.


The Sow lives 15 years; the Cat about 8. Sow. Vultures.


Vultures live to near 100 years; as also all Birds that eat Flesh and Prey,
live long.

The Swan and Goose commonly reach Birds.
100 years.

The Parrot also lives long; Ring-doves reach 20 years, but Doves or Turtles
not above 8.

Of Fishes, the Dolphin is said to live 30 years.

Lampreys were found in Caesar's Fishponds Fishes.
to live 60 years.

The Pike, longest liver of fresh Fish, reaches 40. Carp, Bream, Tench and Eel,
reach 10 years.

Crocodiles grow as long as they live, and Crocodile.
are very long-lived.

It is generally observed, that there are Birds and Beasts.
more Birds long-lived than Beasts, though most come to their full growth in a
year: The Reason is thought to be, because they partake more of the substance
of the Mother than of the Father, and so are not so hot; and also their mixed
and easy motion is a great help.

Upon this account it is noted, that those What men live longest.
Men who more resemble the Mother than Father, live longest, as most
participating of her substance, and thereby the cooler.

Feeders on Grass are shorter-liv'd, than those that feed on Flesh, Seeds, or
Fruits.

Good Clothing helps much to long Life.

Tame Animals by degenerating are Tame Animals.
much shorter-liv'd.

Of Nourishment.
The Slip of any Tree grafted on a Stock, comes on most kindly.

To make an Onion very large, place To make Fruit large.
the Seed in another Onion under ground.

Length of Life in Man.
Before the Flood Men lived many hundred When men lived long.
years, though none reached 1000; and it is observed, that those of the holy Line
did not live so long as the Line of Cain, there being of these but 8
Generations, and of the other 11 Generations before the Flood. But soon after
the Flood, Man shorterliv'd.
Man was brought down to a 4th. part of his primitive Age. Here the Lord Bacon
numbers up many long livers since the Flood; and here also he observes, that
though Virgil divined, and men are wholly Of man's Decay.
carried away with an opinion, that there is a continual decay by succession of
Ages, as well in the term of man's Life, as in the stature and strength of his
Body, yet within these last 3000 years, a time whereof we have sure memory,
there has been no sensible alteration.

It is also observed, that in cold Countries Where men live longest.
men live longer commonly than in hot, and in Islands, than in the Continent.

Places observed for long livers are, Arcadia, Aetolia, India, Brasil,
Taprobane, Britain, and Ireland, the Orcades and Hebrides.

To try the healthfulness of Air: Take To try the healthfulness of Air.
a lock of Wool, and expose it to the open Air a few days, if the weight-be not
much increased; another by a piece of Flesh, if it corrupt not too soon. Of
these enquire further.

Fair in Face, or Skin, or Hair, are shorter Signs of long Life.
livers: Black, red, or freckled, longer: A pale color in Youth betokens long
Life; so also a hard Skin, and hard curled Hair: Gray Hairs for Baldness
signify nothing; much Hairiness in the upper Parts betokens short, but in the
lower Parts long Life.

A broad Breast, somewhat crooked Shoulders, a Hand large, etc. are signs of a
long Life.

Medicines for long Life.
Often letting of Blood is certainly beneficial Blood-letting.
for long Life; as also emaciating Diseases, if well cured.

Saffron often taken in Meat, is a great Strong Liquors and Spices.
help: Spices, Wine, and strong Drinks, must be used very moderately, for they
yield a predatory heat unto the Spirits.

There conduce to the robust heat of the Venus.
Spirits, Venus often excited, rarely performed.

A spare Diet, as is approved by Experience, Spare Diet.
renders a man long lived.

Exercises, wherein the Strength is too Exercise.
much extended, hurts much; but used moderately, benefit.

Great Joys attenuate the Spirits; familiar Joys.
Cheerfulness strengthens them.

Joy communicated sparingly, comforts Grief and Fears.
the Spirits; Grief and Sadness, if void of Fear, and not too violent, prolong
Life; but great Fears injure much.

Anger suppressed is an Enemy to Longevity, Anger and Envy.
but let loose, it helps it; but of all Passions, Envy is the greatest
Abbreviator of Life.

Pity without Fear is good, otherwise Pity and Shame.
dangerous; light Shame hurts not, but much and of long continuance is
pernicious.

Love, if not too unfortunate and violent, Love and Hope.
has good effects; and Hope, if not too much frustrated, is the most
beneficial of all Affections.

Admiration and light Contemplation, Admiration.
are very powerful to the prolonging of Life.

Note, that all these produce their Effects, by the several operations on the
Spirits.

It is a very great advantage to Longevity, The chief pr^^moters of Longevity.
when the Spirits are in a placid and healthful state, (that which will be seen
by the tranquillity of their mind, and cheerful disposition) that they cherish
them, and not change them. Now the Spirits are contained in the same state, by
a restraining of the Affections, temperateness of Diet, abstinence from Venus,
moderation in Labor, indifferent Rest and Repose.

Certainly living in Caves and Dens, Deserts and Mountains.
where the Air is not heated with the Sun, helps length of Life, as has been
always observed: Also living upon Mountains, as those in Barbary, produces the
same effect.

But that which has the most potent operation Anointing the Skin.
to long Life, is the anointing the Skin very finely every morning, either with
Oil of Olives, or sweet Almonds, which stops the Pores, and exceedingly
refreshes and advantages the Spirits. And it is certain, that Sweats commonly
advances Sweats.
Health, but derogateth much from long Life.

But note, that Anointing is very subject to many Inconveniences.

Woollen worn next the Body, is likewise Woollen.
very advantageous.

The next thing for the advancement of Clysters and Bathings.
long Life, is the keeping of the Blood cool, which is done by often taking
Clysters, and in the Summertime Bathings.

To keep the juice of the Body somewhat hard, which much conduces to long Meats.
Life, these Meats are necessary: Beef, Swines-flesh, Deer, Goat, Kid, Swan,
Goose, Ring-dove, especially a little poudered; Fish likewise salted and dried,
old Cheese, and the like; and for Bread, any Corn makes more solid Bread than
Wheat.

Generally all Fish-eaters are long lived; Fish-eaters.
likewise little and dry Aliment is very advantageous.

Pure Water usually drunk, benefits Water.
much; but more, if you add a little Nitre.

Cold Baths are much better than hot; Swimming.
and Swimming, as all other Exercises abroad are, very good.

For Liquors, very old Beer or Wine is Liquors.
very profitable, especially if you put Swinesflesh or Deers-flesh well boiled
in the Vessel, that the sharp Spirits feeding upon these might lose their
mordacity.

Likewise Ale would be very useful for Ale.
long Life, if it were made not only of Grain, but that it were mixed with a
third part of sweet Roots, as Potado-roots, and the like.

Such things as are good for the Stomach, Simples for the Stomach.
above other Simples are these: Rosemary, Elecampane, Mastick, Wormwood, Sage,
Mint.

And note, that nothing is worse than in Note.
a morning fasting to put any thing into the Stomach which is purely cold.

It is altogether requisite to long Life, Motion.
that the Body should never rest long in one posture, but that every half hour
at least it change the posture, save only in Sleep.

Great variety of Meat without doubt is Variety of Meat.
a great prolonger of Life; as also good and well chosen Sawces.

Roast and baked Meats be much better than boiled.

It is certain that Diets that are now in Changing the Juice.
use, as Guaiacum, Sarsaperilla, China, and Sassafras, if they be continued for
any time, do first attenuate the whole Juice of the Body, and after consume it
and drink it up, and thereby is very useful and beneficial in Age to alter the
old Juice, and after to place new Juice, which must needs be a great promoter
of long Life; for it is apparently manifest, that men who by these Diets are
brought to be extreme lean, pale, and as it were Ghosts, will soon after become
fat, well colored, and apparently young again.

We do confidently affirm, that often Purges,
Purges, and made even familiar to the Body, do much conduce to long Life; but
the best Purges for this intention are those, which are taken immediately
before Meat, because they dry the Body less, and therefore they must be of
those Purges which do least trouble the Belly.

The Porches of Death.
If Blood or Phlegm get into the ventricles Sudden Death
of the Brain, it causes sudden Death; as also a great Blow on the Head.

All Poisons presently expel the Spirits; Poisons.
also extreme Drunkenness, or Feeding, sometimes cause sudden Death.

Extreme Grief or Fear, cause the like; Extreme Passions.
as also Joys excessive and sudden, have bereft many of their Lives.

Strangling or stopping the Breath, cause Strangling.
Death, for want of refrigeration to the Heart; if it were possible that Pulse
beating, or Systole and Diastole of the Heart, could be stopped, without
stopping the Breath, Death would follow more speedily thereupon than by
Strangling.

For reviving those again which fall into How to recall Life, if possible
sudden Swooning, and Catalepsis of Astonishment, these things are used:
Putting hot and cordial Waters into their Mouths, bending the Body forwards,
stopping the Mouth and Nostrils hard, wringing the Fingers, pulling the Hairs
of the Beard, or Head, rubbing of the Parts, etc.

SHORT COLLECTIONS OF Natural History.
Century I.
DIG a Pit upon the Seashore, somewhat 1. Experiment Percolation.
above the High Water Mark, and sink it as deep as the Low Water Mark, and as
the Tide comes in, it will fill with Water fresh and potable; which is caused
by its being strained through the Sands, by which the saltness is clearly taken
away.

Take a glass Bottle, fill the belly (in 14. Exper. Separating Bodies by Weight.
part) with Water; take also a large Drinking-glass, whereinto put Claret Wine
and Water mingled; reverse the first Glass, stopping the Neb with your Finger;
then dip the mouth of it within the second Glass, and remove your Finger;
continue it in that posture for a time, and it will unmingle the Wine from the
Water; and Wine ascending and settling in the upper Glass, and the Water
descending: And so of all other Liquors, if they differ in weight, the heavier
being set uppermost.

Take a small Wax-candle, and set it upright 31. Exper. Concerning the Flame of
a Candle.
in a Porringer full of spirit of Wine heated; then set both on fire, and you
shall see the flame of the Candle open it self, and become four or five times
bigger than otherwise it would have been, and appear in figure Globular, and
not in Pyramid; which shows that Flame would still ascend upwards in one
greatness, if it were not quenched by the pressure of Air on the sides.

Take an Arrow, and hold it in the 32. Exper. Of the different force of Flame
on the sides and in the middle.
Flame for the space of ten Pulses, and you shall find those parts which were
on the outside of the Flame, more blackt and burnt than the part held in the
midst; which shows, that Heat or Fire is not violent or furious, but when it is
checked or pent; and also that, as the Peripateticks held, the pure Elemental
fire, in his own place, and not irritated, is but of a moderate heat.

It is certainly affirmed, that a lump of 33. Exper. The decrease of the motion
of gravity deep in the Earth, as well as removed a distance from the Earth.
Ure, in the bottom of a Mine, will be moved by two men, which above ground is
hardly moved by six; so that the opinion of all dense Bodies moving to the
Center, is a mere vanity.

It is reported of credit, that if you lay 35. Exper. Solitary Touching making
Vines more fruitful.
good store of Kernels of Grapes, or other Kernels, about the root of a Vine,
it will make the Vine come earlier, and prosper better, because the Kernels
draw out of the Earth Juice fit to nourish the Tree; but the root being of
greater strength, robs and devoureth the nourishment. 45. Exper. In consort,
touching Meats and Drinks that are most nourishing. 46. Exper. An admirable
Drink.


In Vegetables, Grains and Roots nourish more than Leaves; Marrow is more
nourishing than fat; the yolks of Eggs are clearly more nourishing than the
whites.

Take two large Capons, perboyl them upon a soft fire, till in effect all the
blood be gone; add in the Decoction the Pill of a sweet Lemmon, and a little
Mace; cut off the Shanks; then mince them Bones and all as small as ordinary
minced Meat; put them into a large neat Boulter; then take a Kilderkin sweet
and well seasoned, of four Gallons of Beer of 8 s. strength, new as it comes
from the tunning; make in the Kilderkin a great Bung-hole on purpose; then
thrust into it the Boulter with the Capons; let it steep in it three days and
three nights, the Bung-hole open to work; then close the Bung-hole, and so let
it continue a day and a half; then draw it into Bottles, and you may drink it
well after three days bottleing; it will last six weeks (approved;) it drinks
very pleasant and fresh, and is an admirable Drink for a Consumption.

Century II. and III.
LET a man take a Pail, and put it Exper. the 155. How to keep long under Water.
over his Head, going into a Bath, and so douk, keeping the mouth of the Pail
level with the water, that the Air might not get under the sides, and he may
take his breath freely a great while; and if he then speak, he may be heard to
those above, but it will seem very remote and exile.

It is observed (and a very strange thing) 205. An Observation of sight.
that to men standing below on the ground, those that be on the top of Paul's,
seem much less than they are, and cannot be known: but to men above, those
below seem nothing so much lessened, and may be known; yet it is true, that all
things to them above seem also somewhat contracted, and better collected into
figure.

It much conduces unto long Life, that 292. Touching prolongation of Life.
men's actions be free and voluntary, and secundum genium, or that men's actions
be full of regulation, and commands within themselves, the performance whereof
gives a good disposition to the Spirits, and hinders them from consuming the
juice of the Body.

Century IV. V. and VI.
IT is tried, that the burying of Bottles of drink well stopped, either in dry
315. To make Drink fresh and quick.
Earth a good depth, or in the bottom of a Well within Water; and best of all,
the hanging them in a deep Well somewhat above the Water, for some fortnights
space, is an excellent means of making drink fresh and quick.

Take an Apple, and enclose it in Wax, 318. Keeping Fruit green and fresh.
and you will find, that after several mo^^hs (if the Apple was green before)
you cannot perceive any alteration, either in color or taste.

Hang an Apple in the smoke, it will 319. Quick maturation of Apples.
turn like an old mellow Apple, wrinkled, dry, soft, sweet, and yellow within,
in a very short time.

Let there be a small Furnace made of a 327. To make Gold.
temperate heat, let the heat be such as may keep the Metal perpetually moiten,
and no more, for that above all imports to the work. For the material, take
Silver (next which, Copper is the best) put in also with the Silver a tenth
part of Quicksilver, and a twelfth part of Nitre by weight, and so let the work
be continued by the space of six Months at the least. I wish also, that there
be sometimes an insection of some oyled substance, such as they use in the
recovering of Gold, which by vexing with Separations, has been made churlish;
and this is, to lay the parts more close and smooth, which is the main work.

For the nature of the Nourishment, it 354. Experiment touching the
Acceleration of Growth.
may not be too dry, and therefore Children in Dairy Countries do wax more
tall, than where they do feed more upon Bread and Flesh. Secondly, the
Nourishment must be of an opening nature; for that attenuateth the Juice, and
furthereth the motion of the spirits upwards. Sitting much in Youth is a great
Enemy to growth. This has been tried, that a Whelp that has been fed with
Nitre in Milk, has become very little, but extreme lively; To make Whelps
little.
Nitre being of a very cold nature.

Take Damask Roses, and pull them, 365. Experiment solitary, touching
preserving of Rose-leaves both in color and smell.
then dry them upon the top of an House, upon a Lead or Tarras in the hot Sun,
in a clear day, between the hours (only) of twelve and two, or thereabouts:
Then put them into a sweet dry earthen Bottle or Glass, stuffing them close
together, but without bruising; stop the Bottle close, and these Roses will
retain, not only their smell perfect, but their color fresh for a year at
least. Note, that nothing does so much destroy any Plant, or other Body, either
by putrefaction or arefaction, as the adventitious moisture which hangs loose
in the Body, if it be not drawn out. 371. To make Candles continue long.


It is observed, that laying Candles, whether of Wax or Tallow, in Bran or
Flower, by which they are much hardened, makes them last longer in burning by
half in half.

Take Horse-dung, old and well rotted, 401. To make a hot Bed.
lay it upon a bank half a foot high, supported round about with Planks, and
upon the top cast sifted Earth some two fingers deep; and then theSeed
sprinkled upon it, having been steeped all Night in Water, mixed with Cow Dung.
This will bring forward any sorts of Plants or Seeds four times sooner than
otherwise.

Here the Lord Bacon sets down very many useful Experiments, for those that
employ themselves in Gardens; as Acceleration, Retardation of Germination;
Melioration of Fruits and Plants, making Herbs and Fruits Medicinable; with
very many more. Also, to make Apples, or 502. To make fruit grow into any shape
desired.
other Fruit, into any shape desired; which is done by making a mould for it in
your desired shape, which must be placed conveniently over the Fruit whilst it
is young, and as it increases it will fill the concave, and so turn into the
desired Figure.

So you may have Inscriptions in Fruit 503. To make Inscriptions in Fruit or
Trees.
or Trees, by writing with a Needle or Bodkin, when the Fruit or Trees be
young; for as they grow, so the letters will grow more large and Graphical.

Take a Cions or shoot fit to be set in the 514. Tomake fruits without core or
stone.
Ground, out of which take the Pith finely, not all, but leave some of it, the
better to save life; it will bear Fruit with little or no core, or stone. It is
also reported, that 517.
watering Trees perpetually with warm Water, will produce the like effect.

To try Seeds, if they be good or not, 520. To try good Seeds.
put them into Water gently boiled, and if they be good, they will sprout
within half an hour.

Century VII. VIII. IX. and X.
SUCH Fruits as you appoint for long 626. When to gather Fruits.
keeping, you must gather before they be full ripe, and in a fair dry day,
toward Noon, and when the Wind blows not South, and when the Moon is under
the Earth, and in decrease.

The death that is most without pain, 643. The easiest Death.
has been noted to be upon the taking of a Potion of Hemlock; which in
Humanity was the form of Execution of Capital Offenders in Athens. The cause
is, because these Vapors quench the spirits by degrees, like the death of an
extreme old man.

Men are sooner drunk with small 726. Of Drunkenness.
draughts than with great. And again, Wine, or any Liquor sugared, inebriateth
less than Wine pute; and it is thought to be some Remedy against inebriating,
if Wine sugared be taken after Wine pure. And the same effect is wrought either
by Oil or Milk taken upon much drinking.

The Wind blowing much from the South 801. Prognostics of unwholesom years.
without Rain; as also plenty of all Animals bred of Putrefaction, does portend
pestilential years.

Great and early Heats in the Spring, 802. 803.
(and namely in May) without Winds, portend the same; and generally so do years
with little Wind or Thunder: As also great Droughts, lasting till toward the
end of August, and then some gentle Showers, and then dry weather again, do
portend a pestilent Summer the year following.

A dry March, and a dry May, portend 807.
a wholesome Summer, if there be a showring April between; but otherwise it is a
sign of a pestilential year.

Generally a moist and cool Summer, 813.
portendeth a hard Winter: The Cause is, for that the Vapors of the Earth are
not dissipated in the Summer by the Sun, and so they rebound upon the Winter;
and an 815.
open and warm Winter, portendeth a hot and dry Summer.

Take Lead and melt it, and in the midst 847. Induration of Quicksilver.
of it, when it begins to congeal, make a little Dint or Hole, and put
Quicksilver wrapped in a piece of Linen into that Hole, and the Quicksilver
will fix, and run no more, and endure the Hammer; which is caused by Sympathy,
and the motion of Excitation to imitate.

It is reported, That a Cions of an Apple, 854. Apples without a Core.
grafted upon a Colewort-stalk, sends forth a great Apple without a Core: We
add also, That if the Cions be grafted the small ends downwards, it will make
Fruit have little or no Cores, or Stones.

Take a Glass, and set a Candle lighted 889. Rise of Water by means of Flame.
in the bottom of a Basin of Water, and turn the mouth of the Pot or Glass over
the Candle, and it will make the Water rise; which appears plainly to be by
the motion of Nexe, which they call, Ne detur vacuum.

It has been a practice to burn Guiney-Pepper, 903. Of Sneezing.
which has such a strong Spirit, that it provokes a continual Sneezing in
those that are in the Room.

Audacity and Confidence does, in civil 943. Of Audacity and Confidence.
Businesses, so great Effects, as a man may (reasonably) doubt, that besides
the very daring, and earnestness, and persisting, and importunity, there should
be some secret binding and stopping of other men's Spirits to such Persons.

It has been observed, That the Diet of 977. Exper. Touching Food beneficial
to the Brain.
Women with Child, does work much upon the Infant: As if the Mother eat Quinces
much, and Coriander-seed, (the nature of both which is, to repress Vapors that
ascend to the Brain) it will make the Child ingenious. And on the contrary
side, if the Mother eat much Onions or Beans, or such vaporous Food, or drink
Wine or strong Drink immoderately, or fast much, or be given to much musing,
(all which draw Vapors to the Head) it endangereth the Child to become
Lunatic, or of imperfect Memory. And I make the same Judgment of Tobacco,
often taken by the Mother.

It is reported, That the Heart of any 978. Of helping Courage and Ingenuity.
bold Animal worn near the Heart, comfort the Heart, and increases
Audacity: As also the Heart of any witty Beast worn near the Head, helps the
Wit; of which Beasts the chief are, The Ape, Fox, Lion, and the Cock, with
several others.

Take a piece of Lard with the Skin on, 997. Exper. How infallibly to take away
Warts.
and rub the Warts all over with the Fatside, then nail the piece of Lard any
where, with the Fat toward the Sun, full South, and they will certainly wear
away in a short time.

AN EPITOME OF VULGAR ERRORS.
CHAP. I. Of the Causes of Common Errors.
THE first and Father-cause of Common Error, is the common Infirmity of humane
Nature; which may well be excused in us, by the depravity of those Parts, whose
Traductions were pure in our first Parents, who committed the first and
greatest Error.

Yea, his Error is so much the greater, in that he is supposed by some, to have
been the wisest Man that ever was; and as others have conceived, he was not
ignorant of the Fall of the Angels, and had thereby Example and Punishment to
deter him.

But Man was not only deceivable in his Integrity, but the Angels of Light in
all their Clarity. He that said, he would be like the Highest, did err, if in
some way he conceived himself so already; whereby vainly attempting not only
Insolences, but Impossibilities, he deceived himself as low as Hell. In brief,
there is nothing infallible but God, who cannot possibly err.

CHAP. II. A further Illustration of the same.
BEing thus deluded before the Fall, it is no wonder if their Conceptions were
deceitful, and could scarce speak without an Error after: For what is very
remarkable, (and what few have as yet observed) in the Relations of Scripture
before the Flood, there is but one Speech delivered by Man, wherein there is
not an erroneous Conception; the Pen of Moses having recorded but six: The
first that of Adam, when upon the Expostulation of God he replied, I heard thy
Voice in the Garden, and because I was naked, I hid my self. In which Reply
there is a capital Error, in infringing the Omnisciency and essential Ubiquity
of his Maker, who as he created all things, so is he beyond, and in them all.

The second is that Speech of Adam unto God: The Woman whom thou gave me to
be with me, she gave me of the Tree, and I did eat. Wherein there is involved a
very impious Error, in accusing his Maker of his Transgression; as if he had
said, If thou had not given me a Woman, I had not been deceived.

The third was that of Eve: The Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. In which
Reply, there is an erroneous translating her Offense upon another, to excuse
the Fact; much more upon the suggestion of a Beast, which was before in the
strictest terms prohibited by her God.

The fourth was that Speech of Cain, upon the demand of God, Where is thy
Brother? and he said, I know not. In which Negation, beside the open Impudence,
there was implied a notable Error, for returning a Lie unto his Maker, and
denying the Omnisciency of God. The Answer of Satan, in the case of Job, had
more of Truth, Wisdom, and Reverence, than this: Whence come thou Satan? and
he said, From compass^^g the Earth.

The fifth is another Reply of Cain, upon the denouncement of his Curse: My
Iniqiry is greater than can be forgiven. The Assertion was not only desperate,
but the Conceit erroneous, overthrowing that glorious Attribute of God, his
Mercy, and conceiving the sin of Murder impardonable.

The last Speech was that of Lamech: I have slain a man to my wounding, and a
young man to my hurt: If Cain he avenged sevenfold, truly Lamech seventy and
sevenfold. Now herein there seems to be a very erroneous Illation, concluding
a regular Protection from a single example: he despaired of God's mercy in the
same Fact, where this presumed it; though the sin was less, the error was as
great.

Thus may we perceive, how weakly our Fathers did err before the Flood; how
continually and upon common discourse they fell upon Errors after; it is
therefore no wonder we have been erroneous ever since.

CHAP. III. Of the second Cause of popular Errors; the erroneous disposition of
the People.
HAving thus declared the infallible Nature of Man, even from his first
Production, we have beheld the general Cause of Error. But as for popular
Errors, they are more nearly founded upon an erroneous Inclination of the
People; the sensitive quality most prevailing upon vulgar Capacities. Thus they
conceive the Earth to be far bigger than the Sun; the fixed Stars lesser than
the Moon, their Figures plain, and their Spaces from the Earth equi-distant;
for thus their Sense informs them.

And their individual Imperfections being great, they are moreover enlarged by
their Aggregation; and being erroneous in their single Numbers, once hudled
together, they will be Error it self. By this means, Thudas an Impostor was
able to lead away 4000 in the Wilderness, and the Delusions of Mahomet almost a
fourth part of Mankind.

Now how far they may be kept in Ignorance, there is a great example in the
People of Rome, who never knew the true and proper Name of their own City; for
beside that common Appellation received by the Citizens, it had a proper and
secret Name concealed from them; lest the Name thereof being discovered unto
their Enemies, their Penates and patronal Gods might be called forth by Charms
and Incantations: For according to the Tradition of Magicians, the tutelary
Spirits will not remove at common Appellations, but at the proper Names of
things, whereunto they are Protectors.

CHAP. IV. Of the nearer and more immediate Causes of popular Errors, both in
wiser and common sort; Misapprehension, Fallacy, or false Deduction, Credulity,
Supinity, Adherence unto Antiquity, Tradition and Authority.
THE first is a Mistake, or a Mis-conception of things, either in their first
Apprehensions, or secondary Relations. So Eve mistook the Commandment, either
from the immediate Injunction of God, or the secondary Relation of her Husband.
Thus began the Conceit of Centaurs, in the mistake of first Beholders, as is
declared by Servius: When some young Thessalians on Horseback were beheld afar
off, while their Horses watered, they were conceived by the first Spectators to
be but one Animal; and answerable hereunto have their Pictures been drawn ever
since.

Next there is the Fallacy of Equivocation and Amphibology, which conclude from
the ambiguity of one Word, or the ambiguous Syntaxis of many put together. By
this way, many Errors crept in, and perverted the Doctrine of Pythagoras,
whilst men received his Precepts in a different sense from his intention,
converting Metaphors into Proprieties, and receiving as liberal Expressions,
obscure and involved Truths: So he commands to deface the print of a Cauldron
in the Ashes, after it has boiled; which strictly to observe, were condemnable
Superstition. But hereby he covertly advises us, not to persevere in Anger,
but after our Choler has boiled, to retain no impression thereof; and the like
in several others.

CHAP. V. Of Credulity and Supinity.
A Third Cause of Common Errors, is the Credulity of men; that is, an easy
Assent to what is obtruded, whereby men often swallow Falsities for Truths,
without examination assenting unto things, which from their Natures and Causes
do carry no Persuasion. Thus many wise Athenians so far forgot their
Philosophy, that they descended to a Belief, that the Original of their Nation
was from their great Mother, Earth.

The fourth is a Supinity, or Neglect of Enquiry, even of Matters whereof we
doubt, rather doubting with ease, than believing with difficulty. Had our
Forefathers sat down in these Resolutions, the face of Truth had been obscure
to us, whose luster in some part their Industries have revealed.

CHAP. VI. Of Adherence unto Antiquity.
BUT the mortalest Enemy unto Knowledge, has been a peremptory Adhesion unto
Authority; and more especially, the establishing our Belief upon the Dictates
of Antiquity, whereby many times we manifestly Some remarkable Mistakes among
the Ancients.
delude our selves, and widely walk out of the Track ofTruth. For how many
Falsities do we find in Antiquity? As their conceiving the Torrid Zone to be
inhabitable; St. Austin.
their denying the Antipodes: Both which the Experience of our enlarged
Navigations, can now assert beyond all Dubitation. And the so famed Aristotle
in his Problems enquireth, Why a Man does cough, and not an Ox or Cow? whereas
the contrary is often observed by Husbandmen; so he has the like in several
others: So that surely it is unreasonable to adhere to them in all things, as
if they were infallible, or could not err in any.

CHAP. VII. Of Authority.
TO speak generally an Argument from Authority to wiser Examinations, is but a
weaker kind of proof, it being but (...) topical Probation, depending upon a
naked Asseveration, not carrying with (...) any reasonable Inducements of
Knowledge; without which, our advanced Beliefs are not to be built upon
Dictates, but upon the surer Base of Reason. So though Ptolomy affirm, That the
Sun is bigger than the Earth, yet Astronomers will not assent thereto, without
convincing Arguments, or a demonstrative Proof thereof. What wise man will rely
upon the Antidote delivered by Pierius in his Hieroglyphics, against the Sting
of a Scorpion? That is, to sit upon an Ass with ones Face toward the Tail; for
so the Pain leaves the Man, and passes into the Beast. As likewise that which
is delivered in Riranides; That the left Stone of a Weasel, wrapped up in the
Skin of a she-Mule, is able to secure Incontinency from Conception.

Such as these, with Swarms of others, have men delivered in their Writings,
whose Verities are only supported by their Authorities; but being neither
consonant to Reason, nor correspondent unto Experiment, their Affirmations are
no Axioms, and are accounted but in the List of Nothing.

CHAP. VIII. A brief Enumeration of Authors.
THE first in order, is Herodotus of Halicarnassus, an excellent and very
elegant Historian, termed by Cicero, Historiarum Parens; yet he received from
some, the style of Mendaciorum Pater: And truly he has delivered many things
fabulously, and not to be accepted as Truths; whereby nevertheless if any man
be deceived, the Author is not so culpable as the Believer; for he confesses
he writes many things by Hearsay.

2. In the second place is Ctaesias the Cnidian, who wrote the History of
Persia, and many Narrations of India; whose Writings were many of them (...) by
our Countryman Sir John Mandevil Knight, and Doctor in Physic, but surely to
be read with great suspicion.

3. There is a Book, De (...), ascribed to (...): Another, De mirabilibus
narrationibus, to Antigonus: Another of the same Title, by Plegon Trallianus,
translated by (...) All which may be read with Caution.

4. Dioscorides Anaxarbeus, wrote many Books in Physic; an Author of good
Antiquity and use, yet all he delivers is not to be conceived Oraculous. It
were a strange effect, and Whores would forsake the Experiment of Savin, if
that were a Truth which he delivers of Brake, or female Fern, That only
treading over it, it causes a sudden Abortion.

5. Plinius Secundus of Verona; a Man of great Eloquence, and Industry
indefatigable, who collected his Natural History out of 2000 several Authors:
There is scarce a popular Error passant in our days, which is not either
directly expressed, or diductively contained in this Work.

6. Claudius Aetienus, an elegant and miscellaneous Author; he left two Books,
His History of Animals, and his Varia Historia.

7. Athenaeus, a delectable Author, and of excellent use.

8. Julius Solinus.

9. Nicander, a Poet of good Antiquity.

10. Philes, who in Greek Iambicks delivered the Proprieties of Animals.

11. Basil and Ambrose.

12. Albertus, Bishop of Ratisbone; for his Learning, surnamed Magnus. Likewise
Jeronimus Cardanus, a famous Physician. All which Authors, though of excellent
advantage, yet in the perusing thereof we must use very great Caution.

CHAP. IX. Of the same.
THERE are besides these Authors, and such as have positively promoted Errors,
diverse others which are in some way accessory; in which account are many holy
Writers, Preachers, Moralists, Rhetoricians, and Poets; wherein although their
Intention be sincere, and that course not much condemnable, yet does it
notoriously strengthen common Errors, and authorize Opinions injurious to Truth.

Thus have Divines drawn into Argument the Fable of the Phoenix; made use of
that of the Salamander, Pelican, and Basilisk, and diverse Relations of Pliny,
deducing from thence most worthy Morals; and even upon our Savior, which is
often occasion of Error to vulgar Heads.

CHAP. X. Of the last and common Promoter of false Opinions, the Endeavors of
Satan.
BUT beside the Infirmities of humane Nature, there is an invisible Agent,
whose Actions are undiscerned, the professed Opposer of Truth, the Devil; whose
Endeavors cease not to persuade Man, there is no God at all; introducing into
men's Minds the Notions of Fate, Destiny, Fortune, Chance, and Necessity, with a
thousand more Delusions; the Examples whereof are so common to all sorts of
People, that it is not worth while in this place to proceed to Particularities.

The End of the First Book.
The Second Book. Of sundry popular Tenants concerning mineral and vegetable
Bodies, generally held for truth; which examined, prove either false or dubious.
CHAP. I. Of Crystal.
HEreof the common Opinion has been, That Crystal is nothing else but Ice, by
duration of Time congealed beyond Liquation; of which, if the numerosity of
Assertors were a sufficient Demonstration, it would pass for an unquestionable
Truth; Pliny, Seneca, Basil, and Austin, being positive in this Opinion.

Nevertheless it is with much more Reason denied, than is as yet affirmed, and
that likewise by very learned Authors; as Diodorus, who says, Crystallum esse
lapidem ex aqua pura concretum, non tamen frigore, sed divini caloris vi.
Solinus, who transcribed Pliny, has in this Point dissented from him, with
several others.

Now besides Authority, there are very strong Reasons to the contrary: For if
it be a Stone, as it is confessedly received, it must have lapidifical
Principles of its own; therefore whilst in a fluid Body, 'twas very unfit for
Conglaciation; for mineral Spirits do generally resist, and scarce submit
thereto.

But whether this Congelation be simply made of Cold, or by the operation of
any nitrous Coagulum, or Spirit of Salt; (whereby we observe, that Ice may be
made with How to make Ice at any time of the year.
Salt and Snow by the Fireside, as is also observable from Ice made of
Saltpeter and Water, duly mixed and strongly agitated at any time of the
year;) were a considerable Enquiry.

But as Ice is several ways dissolvable, this is only one, and that with very
great difficulty; which is by reducing it by Art to a subtle Powder, and then
with a vitreous Commixture, it will be dissolved by a violent dry Heat.

Again, It differs from Ice, in that Ice will swim in the thinnest Water that
can be, and this will sink, be it never so thick; which shows that there is in
it a greater Ponderosity.

Ice is likewise of a homogeneous Creation, whose Material is properly Water,
and but accidentally exceeding the simplicity of that Element: But the body of
Crystal is mixed, and its Ingredients many; for besides the Spirit and
Mercurial Principle, it contains a sulphurous, or inflamable part, and that
in no small quantity, and upon Collision with Steel will actively send forth
its Sparks, not much inferiourly unto a Flint.

It contains also a Salt, and that in some plenty, which may occasion its
Fragility; as is also observable in Coral. Briefly, it consists of Parts so
far from an icy Dissolution, that powerful Menstruums are made for its
Emollition. As for its Color, when reduced to powder, it has a vail and
shadow of Blue.

They have also contrary Qualities elemental; for Ice is cold and moist, and
Crystal cold and dry, according to the condition of Earth.

Having thus declared what Crystal is WhatChrystal is.
not, it may afford some satisfaction to manifest what it is. To deliver
therefore what with the Judgment of approved Authors, and best Reason
consists: It is a mineral Body in the difference of Stones; transparent, and
resembling Glass or Ice, made of a lentous Percolation of the Earth, drawn from
the most pure and liquid Juice thereof, owing to the coldness of the Earth some
Concurrence or Co-adjuvancy, but not immediate Determination and Efficiency;
which are wrought by the hand of its concretive Spirit, the seeds of
Petrifaction and Gorgon of its self: As sensible Philosophers conceive of the
Generation of Diamonds, Iris, and Beryls.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Loadstone.
AND first the Earth is conceived to be a magnetical Body, having not only a
Power attractive, but naturally disposing its self to an invariable and fixed
Situation. And such is the magnetical virtue o^^ the Globe of the Earth, that
if it were violently removed, yet would it not forgo its natural Points, nor
pitch in the East or West, but return to its polary Position again.

But to leave this: It is observable that Steel and good Iron, though not
excited by the Loadstone, have a polary Faculty, whereby being conveniently
placed, they do septentrionate at one Extreme, and australize at another. And a
Needle untouched, being hanged above a Loadstone, will convert into a parallel
Position thereto. Likewise Iron being heated in the Fire red hot, and cooled in
the Meridian from North to South, will presently contract a polary Power; and
being poised in Air or Water, convert that part unto the North, which respected
that Point in its Refrigeration.

Likewise if a Loadstone be made r^^d hot, it loses its former magnetical
Vigor, and acquires another from the Earth in its Refrigeration.

It is observed, that Attraction is reciprocal between a Loadstone and Iron, by
several Experiments. For if a piece of Iron be fastened in the side of a Bowl or
Basin of Water, a Loadstone swimming freely in a Boat of Cork, will presently
make unto it, as a Needle does to a Loadstone. Again, if a Loadstone be finely
filed, the attoms or dust thereof will adhere to Iron that was never touched,
even as the filings of Iron does also to a Loadstone.

CHAP. III. Of Bodies Electrical.
BY Electrical Bodies, we understand all such, as being rightly prepared, and
conveniently placed unto their Objects, attract all Bodies palpable whatsoever,
so they be not too ponderous; only excluding Fire, which consumes its
Effluctions by which it should attract. In which number we place Diamonds,
Sapphires, Carbuncles, Iris, Opals, Amethysts, Beryl, Crystal, Bristol-stones,
Sulphur, Mastick, hard Wax, hard Rosin, Arsenick, Sal-Gem, Roach-Allum, common
Glass, Stibium, or Glass of Antimony, white Wax, Gum-Elemi, Gum Guaica, Pix
Hispanica, and Gipsum; also Gum-Anime, Benjamin, Talcum, Chinadishes,
Sandaraca, Turpentine, Styrax-liquida. All which discover a sufficient power to
stir the Needle, settled freely upon a well-pointed Pin, and so as the Electrick
may be applied unto it without all disadvantage.

But their Attraction is very different; for refinous or unctuous Bodies, and
such as will flame, attract most vigorously, as Anime, Benjamin, and most
powerfully good hard Wax, which will convert the Needle almost as actively as
the Loadstone, but most of the other but very weakly.

The manner hereof Cabeus wittily attempteth, affirming, That this Effluvium
attenuateth and impelleth the neighbor Air, which returning home in a
Gyration, carries with it the obvious Bodies unto the Electrick.

CHAP. IV. Of sundry Tenants concerning Vegetables or Plants, which examined,
prove either false or dubious.
MANY Molas and false Conceptions there are of Mandrakes: The first from great
Antiquity, conceiving the Root thereof resembles the shape of a Man; which is
a Conceit not to be made out by ordinary inspection, any more than what
accidentally happens to Carrots, Parsnips, etc.

But the main Axis which supported this Opinion, was daily Experience, and
visible Testimony of Sense; there being many who carry about Roots, which
handsomely make out the shape of a Man or Woman. But these are not Productions
of Nature, but Contrivances of Art, as Mathiolus plainly detected, and learnt
the way to make them of one of those Cheaters; which is thus: They take the
Roots of Canes, Briony, and other Plants, and in these, yet fresh and virent,
they carve out the Figures of Men and Women, sticking Grains of Barley or
Millet, where they intend the Hair should grow; then bury them in Sand, till
the Grains shoot forth their Roots. All which, like other Impostures once
discovered, is easily effected, and in the Root of white Briony may be
practiced every Spring.

Some assert, That it naturally grows under Gallows, and Places of Execution,
arising from Fat or Urine that drops from the Body of the Dead.

Another affirms, That Roots of Mandrakes do make a noise, or give a Shriek,
upon Eradication. Both which are indeed ridiculous, and false, below Confute.

The last was, That some evil Fate pursues those that pull it up, and they live
not long after; which were to introduce a second forbidden Fruit.

2. That Cinnamon, Ginger, Clove, Mace, and Nutmeg, are but the several Parts
and Fruits of the same Tree, is the common belief of those which daily use
them; whereof to speak distinctly, Ginger is the Root of no Tree, but of an
herbaseous Plant, resembling the Water-flower Deluce, very common in many Parts
of India.

Cinnamon is the inward Bark of a Cinamon-tree; whereof the best is brought from
Zeilan.

Clove is likewise the Fruit it self growing upon a Clove-tree, found but in
few Countries; the best in the Isles of Molucca.

Nutmeg is the Fruit of a Tree differing from all these, growing in diverse
Places, but fructifying in the Isle of Banda, the covering whereof is that we
call Mace. Now because they are all from the East Indies, they are all
precipitately supposed to be but one Plant.

CHAP. V. Of some Insects, and the Properties of several Plants.
FEW Ears have escaped the noise of the Dead-watch; that is, a little clicking
Sound heard often in many Rooms; and this is conceived to be of an evil Omen,
or Prediction of some Person's Death. Now this noise is only made by a little
sheathwinged gray Insect, found often in Wainscoat, Benches, and Wood-work, in
the Summer, which knocks against the Wood with a little Trunk, (like a
Woodpecker against a Tree) and strikes 10 or 11 strokes at a time.

He that has a desire to see farther into the Properties of Plants, and all
these things, more at large, may view Sir Tho. Brown's Vulgar Errors.

The End of the Second Book.
The Third Book. Of diverse popular and received Tenants concerning Animals,
which examined, prove either false or dubious.
CHAP. I. Of the Elephant.
OF the Elephant, there generally passes an Opinion, that it has (...)
Joints; being a very ancient Error, as bein^^ related by Aristotle, and several
other learned Men: But we have had sure eviden to the contrary, even by our own
sight.

But otherwise it stands contrary to al^^ Reason, that so large an Animal could
move without Joints; though every day we see some small Animals, which have
their Progression only by their Trunk, (...) Serpents, Worms, and Leeches; but
these are of a contrary form. They forget what is delivered by Xiphilinus and
Suetonius, in the Lives of Nero and Galba, That Elephants have been instructed
to walk on Ropes: And also that memorable Show of Germanicus, wherein 12
Elephants danced unto the sound of Music, and after laid them down in the
Tricliniums, or Places of festival Recumbency.

CHAP. II. Of the Horse.
THE second Assertion is, That an Horse has no Gall, and that very general,
and received by good Veterinarians. It is also very ancient, being plainly set
down by Aristotle and Pliny, and yet repugnant to Experience and Reason: First
calling in question the provision of Nature; also Experience, in that we have
found it placed in the Liver, but not so large as usually in other Beasts;
which causes the Horse to dung more often than many other Creatures; the
overflowing of the Gall being a strong Purgation, and a natural Glyster.

CHAP. III. Of the Dove.
THE third Assertion is, That a Dove or Pigeon also has no Gall; which has
its Antiquity from Pierius, and averred by many holy Writers: But the contrary
is averred by Aristotle, Pliny, and Galen.

This is also contrary to Experience; for Anatomical Enquiry discovers them
to have a Gall, and that adhering unto the Guts.

The ground of this Conceit, is partly like the former; the obscure situation
of the Gall, and out of the Liver; wherein it is commonly enquired. But this is
a very unjust Illation, not well considering, with what variety this Part is
seated in Birds.

CHAP. IV. Of the Bever.
THAT a Bever to escape the Hunter, bites off his Testicles or Stones, is a
Tenent very ancient: For it is found in the Hieroglyphics of the Egyptians,
touched by Aristotle in his Ethics, and seriously delivered by Aetian, Pliny,
and Solinus. Yet many wise Men have deserted this opinion; and it is also
refuted by Sestius a Physician, (recorded by Pliny;) also by Dioscorides, who
plainly affirms the Tradition is false.

But otherwise it is impossible to eunuchate or castrate themselves; their
Testicles, properly so called, being of a small magnitude, and seated inwardly
upon the Loins; but he has a Bag called Castorcum hanging lower, which may
well be taken for the Stones. But Logic will not permit this Illation, that
is, from things alike, to conclude a thing the same.

CHAP. V. Of the Badger.
THAT a Brock or Badger, has the Legs on one side shorter than on the other,
is a very general Opinion; which notwithstanding upon enquiry is sound
repugnant unto the three Determinators of Truth, Authority, Sense, and Reason:
For first Aldrovandus affirms, there can be no such Inequality observed;
likewise upon our Observation we can discover no difference.

CHAP. VI. Of the Bear.
THAT a Bear brings forth her Young informous, which she fashioneth after, by
licking them over, is a very ancient Opinion, and was an Hieroglyphick with the
Egyptians; Solinus, Aetian, and Pliny, affirm it: Which is not only repugnant
to the sense of Enquirers into it, but the exact and deliberate Experiment of
three (...) Philosophers; 1. Mathiolus. 2. us Scaliger; And lastly,
Aldrovandus. All which affirm it from their own sight, (...) young ones ta^^en
out of old Bears that were killed, being perfectly shapen, and complete in
every part.

Some give this Reason for it, That the slender time of the Bears Gestation, or
going with her Young, being but a Month, the Exclusion becomes precipitous, and
the young ones consequently informous.

CHAP. VII. Of the Basilisk.
MANY Opinions are passant concerning the Basilisk, or little King of Serpents,
commonly called, the Cockatrice. It cannot be denied, but there is such an
Animal; but certainly that which we vulgarly call a Cockatrice, is not the
Basilisk of the Ancients, of which such Wonders are delivered. For this of ours
is A description of a Cockatrice.
generally described with Legs, Wings, a serpentine and winding Tail, and a
Crist or Comb somewhat like a Cock; but the The description of a Basilisk.
Basilisk of elder Times was a proper kind of Serpent, not above three Palms
long, as some account; and differenced from other Serpents, by advancing his
Head, and some white Marks or coronary Spots upon the Crown, as all authentic
Writers have delivered.

Nor is the Cockatrice only unlike the Basilisk, but of no real shape in
Nature, but a mere Hieroglyphical Fancy.

The Existency only of a Basilisk is not considerable, but many things
delivered thereof, particularly its Poison and Generation. Concerning the
first, it is affirmed, That it kills at a distance, and by priority of
Vision; of which there is no high improbability in the Relation, no more than
that of the Torpedo's delivering their Opium at a distance, and stupifying
beyond themselves.

But as for the Generation of the Basilisk, that it proceeds from a Cock's
Egg, hatched under a Toad or Serpent, it is a Conceit as monstrous as the Brood
it self.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Wolf.
SUCH a Story as the Basilisk, is that of the Wolf, That a Man becomes hoarse
or dumb, if a Wolf have the advantage first to eye him; which Pliny affirms.
Thus the Proverb is to be understood, When during a Discourse, there ensues a
sudden Silence, it is usually said, Lupus est in Fabula. Which Conceit being
already convicted, not only by Scaliger, Riolanus, and others, but daily
confutable almost every where out of England, we shall not further refute.

The Original hereof, was probably the Amazement, the unexpected appearance of
Wolves, do often put upon Travelers, not by a venomous Emanation, but a
vehement Fear, which naturally proceeds from Obmutescence.

CHAP. IX. Of the Deer.
THE common Opinion is, That the Deer may live hundreds of Years; which we
crave liberty to doubt, from these ensuing Reasons.

The first is that of Aristotle, drawn from the Increment and Gestation of the
Animal; that is, its sudden arrivance to Growth and Maturity, and the small
time of remainder in the Womb: Neither of which afford an Argument of long Life.

And as Scaliger says, Of Animals viviparous, such as live long, go long with
Young, and attain but slowly to maturity of Stature. So the Elephant, that
lives an 100 years, bears its Young above a year, and arriveth unto
perfection at 20. On the contrary, a Sheep or Goat, which live but 8 or 10
years, go but five months, and attain to their perfection at two years. And so
the Deer that endures the Womb but 8 months, and is complete at 6 years,
cannot in a proportionable allowance live much more than 30.

The next Reason is, its unparalled excess of Venery, which is supposed to
shorten the Lives of Cocks, Partridges, and Sparrows; certainly an undeniable
Enemy unto Longaevity. Hence it is observable, that castrated Animals in every
species, are longer lived than they which retain their Virilities.

A third Reason is, the Marks of Age, of which betwixt 20 and 30 years of Age
they have several; as is observed here in England in losing their Teeth, and
their Horns growing less branched, with several other Marks of Age.

The Ground and Authority of this Conceit was first Hieroglyphical, the
Egyptians expressing Longaevity by this Animal.

Another Ground might be that Poetical passage of Hesiod: Ter binos deciesque
novem super exit in annos,
Just a senescentem quos implet vita virorum.
Hos novies superat vivendo garrula cornix,
Et quater, ^^greditur cornicis saecula cervus,
Alipidem cervum ter vincit corvus. --
To ninety six the Life of Man ascends,
Nine times as long that of the Chough extends.
Four times beyond the Life of Deer does go,
And thrice is that surpassed by the Crow.


A Conceit so hard to be made out, that many have deserted the common and
literate Construction. So Theon in Aratus would have the number of Nine not
taken strictly, but for many years.

Another Reason was, the defect of a Gall: Which Assertion is defective in the
verity concerning the Animal alleged; for though it has no Gall in the Liver
like other Beasts, yet has it that Part in the Guts.

CHAP. X. Of the King-fisher.
THAT a King-fisher hanged by the Bill, shows in what Quarter the Wind is, by
an occult and secret Propriety, is a received Opinion, and very strange, but
not made out by Reason, or Experience.

Unto Reason it seems very repugnant, that a Body disanimated should be so
(...) with every Wind; though in sundry Animals there is a natural Meteorology,
or innate presention both of Wind and Weather; yet that proceeds from Sense,
cei^^ing Impressions from the first mutation of the Air.

CHAP. XI. Of Griffins.
THAT there are Griffins in Nature, that is, a mixed and dubious Animal, in the
forepart resembling an Eagle, and behind the shape of a Lion, with erected
Ears, four Feet, and a long Tail, many affirm, and most, I perceive, deny it
not. The same is averred by Aetian, Solinus, Mela, and Herodotus, and was an
Hieroglyphick of the Egyptians.

Nevertheless by diligent Enquiry we find a contrary Assertion, by Albertus,
Pliny, and the learned Aldrovandus. Matthias Michovius, who writ of those
Northern Parts, wherein men place these Griffins, has positively concluded
against it.

Now for the word (...) or Gryps, sometimes mentioned in Scripture, properly
understood, it signifies some kind of Eagle or Vulture.

CHAP. XII. Of the Phoenix.
THAT there is but one Phoenix in the World, which after many hundred years
burns it self, and from the Ashes thereof arises up another, is a Conceit of
great Antiquity, and frequently expressed by holy Writers; by Cyril,
Epiphanius, Ambrose, and Tertullian. All which notwithstanding, we dare not
affirm there is any Phoenix in Nature; for though many Writers have much
enlarged hereon, yet is there not any ocular Describer; and primitive Authors
herein deliver themselves very dubiously. So Herodotus in his Euterpe,
delivering the Story hereof, presently interposes, (which account seems to me
improbable;) and much after the same manner conclude several others.

As for that in the Book of Psalms, Vir justus ut Phoenix florebit, it was only
a mistake upon the Homonymy of the Greek word Poenix, which signifies also a
Palmtree.

But were the Existence of this Animal granted, yet many things are
questionable which are ascribed thereto; its Unity, long Life, and Generation.
As for its Unity, it is repugnant to holy Scripture; which plainly affirms,
There went two of every sort into the Ark of Noah; and other Places.

CHAP. XIII. Of Frogs, Toads, and Toad-stone.
THAT the Toad by pissing diffuseth his Venom, is generally received in all
Parts. So Scaliger observes, and Mathiolus, That it communicates its Venom not
only by Urine, but by the Slaver of its Mouth. As for pissing, we may as well
ascribe that action to Crows and Kites, which have but one Vent, and common
Place of Exclusion.

As for the Stone, commonly called the Toad stone, there is no substantial
Reason, why in a Toad there may not be found such lapideous Concretions; for
the like is observed in Cods, Carps, and Pearches.

Though a thing not impossible, yet a Rarity, that by our Enquiry may be
doubted, Whether there be really such a Stone in the Head of a Toad at all; for
Writers of Minerals conceive the Stones that bear this Name, to be of a mineral
Concretion. When Brassavolus after a long search had discovered one, he
affirms, it was rather the Forehead-bone petrified, than a Stone within the
Crany; and of this belief was Gesner, and several others. But to conclude, some
of these Stones may be mineral, and few animal, to be met with in Toads, and in
substance not unlike the Stones in Crabs Heads.

Concerning the Generation of Frogs, he tells us nothing but what is vulgarly
known.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Salamander.
THAT a Salamander is able to live in Flames, is an ancient Assertion, and
confirmed by frequent, and not contemptible Testimony; affirmed by very famous
Authors: All which notwithstanding, there is on the negative, Authority and
Experience. Sextius and Dioscorides affirmed it a point of folly to believe it.
Galen says, That it endures the Fire a while, but in continuance is consumed
therein. Mathiolus affirms, That he saw a Salamander burnt in a very short
time; and several others that have experienced it.

The ground might be, Some sensible Resistance of Fire, observed in the
Salamander; being cold in the fourth, and moist in the third degree, may
thereby a while endure the Flame.

Nor is this Salamander's Wool, so called, desumed from any Animal, but a
mineral Substance, metaphorically so called, from this received Opinion; though
it is very remarkable what the Ancients called Asbeston, whereof were weaved
Napkins, Shirts, and Coats, inconsumable by Fire.

CHAP. XV. Of the Amphisboena.
THAT the Amphisboena, being a smaller kind of Serpent, which moves forward
and backward, has two Heads, was affirmed first by Nicander; and afterward by
Galen, Pliny; and most confidently by Aetian.

But were there really such a natural kind of Animal, it would be hard to make
good those six Positions of Body, which according to the three Dimensions, are
ascribed unto every Animal; that is, infra, supra, ante, retro, dextrosum,
sinistrosum: For the Senses being placed at both Extremes, does make both ends
anterior, which is impossible; and the Poets Geryon or Cerberus, would be less
monstrous than the Amphisboena.

And therefore we must crave leave to doubt of this double-headed Serpent,
until we have the advantage to behold, or have an iterated ocular Testimony
concerning it.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Viper.
THAT the young Vipers force their way through the Bowels of their Dam, or that
the female Viper, in the act of Generation, bites off the Head of the male, is
a very ancient Tradition; affirmed by Herodotus, Plutarch, Jerome, Basil, and
several others: Notwithstanding which Authorities, upon enquiry we find the
same repugnant unto Experience and Reason.

And first this seems not only injurious unto the Providence of Nature, but it
frustrates the great Benediction of God: God Genesis 1.
blessed them, saying, Be fruitful and multiply. Now if these be the Fruits of
fructifying in the Viper, it cannot be said that God did bless, but curse this
Animal. Again, it overthrows the paternal provision of Nature, whereby the
young ones newly excluded, are sustained by the Dam.

For the Experiment, it is found otherwise by worthy Enquirers, as Apollonius,
Scaliger, and several others.

It is here observed, That a Viper contains no Humor or Part, which either
eat or drank is able to kill any: That the Remorsores, or Dog-teeth, are two;
and though they bite or prick therewith, yet are they not venomous, but only
open a way and entrance unto the Poison, which notwithstanding is not
poisonous, except it attain unto the Blood.

CHAP. XVII. Of Hares.
THAT every Hare was both male and female, was the affirmative of Archelaus,
Plutarch, Philostratus, and many more.

As for the mutation of Sexes, or transition into one another, we cannot deny
it in Hares, it being observable in Man; but that it is natural in all Hares,
Experience shows the contrary.

Here Sir Tho. Brown makes a very large and learned Discourse of
Hermophrodites, in several Creatures.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Moles, or Molls.
THAT Moles are blind, and have no Eyes, is an Opinion received with much
variety. Some affirm, That they have Eyes and no Sight; some, neither Eyes nor
Sight; as Albertus, Pliny, and the vulgar Opinion; some, both Eyes and Sight,
as Scaliger, Aldrovandus, and some others. Of which, the last with some
restriction is most consonant to Truth: For that they have Eyes in their Head,
is manifest to any, that wants them not in his own; but that they be
comparatively incomplete, we need not to deny, being they are not perfectly
blind, nor yet distinctly see.

CHAP. XIX. Of Lampries.
WHether Lampries have nine Eyes, as is received, we durst refer it unto
Polyphemus, who had but one to judge it. An Error concerning Eyes, occasioned
by the Error of Eyes, deduced from the appearance of diverse Cavities or Holes
on either side, not only refutable by Experience, but also repugnant unto
Reason. It were a thing superfluous, for the two Extremes might behold as much
as all the rest together.

Again, They are placed from the Head, and have no Communication with the
Brain; without which they are useless.

CHAP. XX. Of Snails.
WHether Snails have Eyes, some learned Men have doubted: For Scaliger terms
them, but Imitations of Eyes; and Aristotle denies them. But this now seems
sufficiently asserted by the help of exquisite Glasses, which discover those
black and atramentous Spots to be their Eyes.

That they have two Eyes, is the common Opinion: But if they have two Eyes, we
may grant them to have no less than four, that is, two in the longer Extensions
above, and two in the shorter Horns below. And this number may be allowed in
these inferior and exanguious Animals, since we observe the articulate and
latticed Eyes in Flies, and nine in some Spiders; and in the great Phalangium
Spider of America, we plainly number eight.

But in sanguineous Animals, quadrupedes, bipedes, or Man, no such number can
be regularly verified.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Chamelion.
COncerning the Chamelion, there generally paffeth an Opinion, That it lives
only upon Air, and is sustained by no other Aliment; which is affirmed by
Solinus, and Pliny, and others: Yet upon enquiry I find the Assertion
controvertable.

And first for its Verity; some have positively denied it, as Augustinus,
Niphus, with very many more. Others have experimentally refuted it, as namely
Johannes Landius, who observed a Chamelion to lick up a Fly from his Breast;
and Belionius, upon Exenteration, found these Animals in their Bellies: And the
Experiments of the worthy Peireschius, and learned Emanuel Vizzanius, in that
Chamelion, which had been often observed to drink Water, and delight to feed on
Meal-worms.

Likewise this Animal has all Parts official unto Nutrition; which were its
Aliment the empty reception of Air, their Provisions had been superfluous.

It has likewise a Tongue; for which there is two Ends, Either the formation
of Voice, or for Taste. It cannot be used for the first, it being a mute
Animal. As for Taste, if their Nutriment be Air, neither can it be an
instrument thereof, for the body of that Element is ingustible. His Tongue also
seems contrived for Prey, for in so little a Creature it is at least a Palm
long; and it has in this Part a very great Agility, and has in the Tongue a
mucous and slimy Extremity, whereby upon a sudden Emission, it inviscates and
tangleth those Insects.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Ostrich.
THE common Opinion of the Ostrich, Struthiocamelus, or Sparrow-camel,
conceives that it digests Iron; which is confirmed by the Affirmations of many
learned Authors: Yet the Negative pleads with more Reason; for Pliny, Aetian,
and Leo Africanus, who lived in those Countries wherein they most abound, only
say, The Digestion is wonderful in this Animal; and Riolanus in his Comment
thereof, positively denies it. Some have experimentally refuted it, as Albertus
magnus; and most plainly Ulysses Aldrovandus, who observed an Ostrich to
swallow Iron, but yet to exclude it undigested again: and beside Experiment, it
is in vain to attempt against it by Philosophical Argument.

The ground of this Conceit is, its swallowing down fragments of Iron, which
men observing, have therefore conceived, it digested them. Just as men swallow
Cherry-stones, which conceive a durable and strong Heat in the Stomach, and so
help Digestion, and prevent the Crudities of the Fruit; but they themselves
came out undigested. And to the same purpose do other Animals swallow small
Stones; and thus may the Ostrich swallow Iron.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Unicorns-horn.
GREAT account and much profit is made of that which bears the Name of
Unicorns-horn; wherein many suspect an Imposture: For that which is used under
that Name is white, whereas all agree, that have had a sight of that Animal,
that his Horn is red. Briefly, many of those commonly received, and whereof
there be so many Fragments preserved in England, are not only no Horn, but a
Substance harder than a Bone, that is, parts of the Tooth of a More or
Seahorse; in the midst of the solider part contained a curled grain, which is
not to be found in Ivory.

CHAP. XXIV That all Animals of the Land, are in their Kind in the Sea.
THIS, though received as a Princ^^ple, is a Tenent very questionable, and will
admit of Restraint. For some in the Sea are not to be matched by any Enquiry by
Land, and hold those Shapes which terrestrious Forms approach not; as may be
observed in the Moon-fish, or Orthrageriscus, the several sorts of Raia's,
Torpeda's, Oysters, and many more. And some there are in the Land, which were
never maintained to be in the Sea, as Panthers, Hyaena's, Camels, Sheep, Molls,
and others, which carry no Name in Icthyology, nor are to be found in the exact
Descriptions of Rondoletius, Gesner, or Aldrovandus.

CHAP. XXV. Concerning the common course of Diet, in making choice of some
Animals, and abstaining from eating others.
WHY we confine our Food unto certain Animals, and totally reject some others:
Whether this Practice be built upon solid Reason, or chiefly supported by
Custom or Opinion, may admit Consideration.

And first, there is no absolute necessity of eating any: For before the Flood,
our Fathers from vegetable Animals, preserved themselves unto longer Lives; and
it was after the Deluge, when for the present the nature of Vegetables was
destroyed or infirmed. It is delivered, Every moving thing Genesis 9. 3.
that lives, shall be Meat for you.

But when ever it be acknowledged, that men began to feed on Flesh; yet how
they betook themselves after to particular Kinds thereof, is a Point not
clearly determined. Whether Moses's distinction before the Flood, were not only
in regard of Sacrifices, as that after was in regard of Food, is not yet
resolved.

If we will give credit to Authors, we shall understand, that there is no kind
of Animal, but one time or other has been used for Food in some Parts; and
many refuse not to eat of that, which is more impure than what they reject.

But to conclude, Without doubt there is an ample sufficiency, without all
Flesh, in the food of Honey, Oil, and several sorts of Milk; and also in
Vegetables, which would be very beneficial unto Health, and much prolong our
days.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Sperma Ceti, and the Sperma Ceti Whale.
WHAT Sperma Ceti is, and that it was not the Spawn of a Whale, Philosophers
have always doubted. That it proceeds from a Whale, it is indubitably
determined, by a Sperma Ceti Whale cast on our Coast of Norfolk; which
contained A description of a Whale.
no less than 60 Foot in length; the Head somewhat peculiar, with a large
Prominency over the Mouth; Teeth only in the lower Jaw, received into fleshly
Sockets in the upper, the weight of the largest about two pound; the Eyes but
small; the Pizel large and prominent; out of the Head of this Whale, flowed
streams of Oil, and Sperma Ceti. This many conceive was the Fish which
swallowed up Jonas.

CHAP. XXVII. Compendiously of sundry Tenants concerning other Animals, which
examined, prove either false or dubious.
1. AND first; From great Antiquity, and The Melody of Swans.
before the Melody of Sirens, the musical Notes of Swans have been commended,
and that they sing sweetly before their death; for thus we read in Plato: Thus
was it the Bird of Apollo; and has never wanted Assertors.

All which notwithstanding, it is doubtfully received by famous Authors, and
some expressly have refuted it.

That which probably confirms this, is the strange and unusual length of the
Windpipe, or conformation of the vocal Organ in this Animal. But this is
thought only to be contrived, to contain a larger stock of Air, that they might
the longer space detain their Heads under Water.

2. That there is a special property in Of the Peacock.
the Flesh of Peacocks, roast or boiled, to preserve a long time incorrupted,
has been the Assertion of many: and the same by Experiment we can confirm our
selves, if so hanged up by a Thread, that they touch no place whereby to
contract a moisture.

3. That Storks will only live in free Of the Stork.
States, is a petty Conceit, and a vulgar Error; the contrary being known in
many Parts of the World.

4. The Antipathy between a Toad and Of an
a Spider; and that they poisonously destroy each other, is very famous; and
solemn Stories have been written of their Combats, wherein most commonly the
Victory is given to the Spider: But we having included a Toad in a Glass with
several Spiders, observed him to swallow them down to the number of seven.

5. Whether a Lion be afraid of a Cock, Os a Lion and a Cock.
is related and believed by most: although how far they stand in fear of that
Animal, we may sufficiently understand, from what is delivered by Camerarius,
whose words are these: In our Time, in the Court of the Prince of Bavaria, one
of the Lions leaped down into a Neighbor's Yard, where nothing regarding the
crowing of the Cocks, he eat them up, with many other Hens.

6. That Snakes and Vipers do sting, or Of Snakes.
transmit their Mischief by the Tail, is a common expression, not easily to be
justified; and a determination of their Venoms into a Part, wherein we could
never find (...), the Poison lying about the Teeth, and communicated by Bite,
in such as are destructive.

The End of the Third Book.
The Fourth Book. Of many popular and received Tenants concerning Man, which
examined, prove false or dubious.
CHAP. I. Of the Erectness of Man.
THAT only Man has an erect Figure, and for to behold and look up toward
Heaven, according to that of the Poet, Pronaque cum spectant animalia caetera
terram,
Os homini sublime dedit coelumque tueri
Jussit, and erectos ad sydera tollere vultus.


Is a double Assertion; whose first Part may be true, if we take Erectness
strictly, and so as Galen has defined it: For they only, says he, have an
erect Figure, whose Spine and Thigh Bone are carried in right Lines: and so
indeed of any Animal, yet known, Man only is erect.

But for the end of this Erection to look up to Heaven, is not so readily to be
admitted. It was anciently rejected by Galen, who determines, That Man was
erect, because he was made with Hands, and was therewith to exercise all Arts,
which in any other Figure he could not have performed.

And as to looking up to Heaven, Man has a notable advantage in his Eyelid;
whereof the upper is far greater than the lower, which abridgeth the sight
upwards; contrary to those of Birds, who herein have the advantage of Man:
Insomuch that the learned Plempius is bold to affirm, That if he had had the
formation of the Eyelid, he would have contrived it quite otherwise.

CHAP. II. Of the Heart.
THAT the Heart of a Man is seated in the left side, is an Assertion, which
strictly taken, is refutable by Inspection; whereby it appears, the Base and
Center thereof is in the midst of the Chest, though the Mucro or Point
inclines toward the left: Nevertheless we cannot properly say, it is placed in
the left.

That Assertion also, That Man has the largest Brain, is a thing much doubted;
but upon trial is found very true; the Brains of a Man weighing 4, and
sometimes 5 pound: If therefore a Man weigh 140 pound, and his Brains 5, his
weight is 27 times as much as his Brain. Now in a Snipe, which weighed 4 ounces
2 drachms, the Brains weigh but half a dram; so that the weight of the Body
exceeded the weight of the Brain 67 times and / m?/. A Sparrow in the total we
found to weigh 7 drachms and 24 grains, whereof the Head a dram, but the
Brain not 15 grains; which answers not fully the proportion of the Brain of
Man.

CHAP. III. Of Plurisies.
THAT they are only on the left side, is an absurd and dangerous Tenent. The
Membrane, which is inflamed, and causes the Pain, is properly called the Plura,
(whence the Disease has its Name) and investeth not only one side, but
overspreadeth the whole Cavity of the Chest.

CHAP. IV. Of the Ring-finger.
A Common Opinion there is, that presumes therein a cordial Relation; but it
is a common Error, men only making use of that, as most convenient for that
purpose.

CHAP. V. Of the right and left Hand.
THAT men naturally make use of the right, and that the use of the other is a
digression or aberration from that way, which Nature generally intends;
though it is preferred before the other in almost all Parts of the World, yet
in submission to future Information, we are unsatisfied to great dubitation.

For did it arise from a constant Root in Nature, we might expect the same in
other Animals, wherein we can discover no complying account.

Again, Were it so, why have they not the same difference in their Senses,
which we find equal on both sides? As for their dextral Activity, it proceeds
only from the more use.

And likewise that a Woman upon a masculine Conception advances her right Leg,
will not be found to answer strict Observation and that Males are conceived in
the right side of the Womb, Females on the left, (though supported by ancient
Testimony) will make no infallible account. It is also suspicious what is
delivered concerning the right and left Testicle, That Males are begotten from
one, and Females from the other: and therefore that way which is delivered for
masculine Generation, to make a strait Ligature about the left Testicle,
thereby to intercept the Evacuation of that Part, deserves Consideration.

CHAP. VI. Of Swimming and Floating.
THAT Men swim naturally, if not disturbed by Fear; that Men being drowned and
sunk, do float the ninth day when their Gall breaks; that Women drowned, swim
prone, but Men supine; are popular Affirmations, whereto we cannot assent. And
first, That Men swim naturally, as other Animals, we are not forward to
conclude; for other Animals swim in the same manner as they go, without
alteration in the stroke of their Legs, or position of their Bodies.

But Man alters his natural Posture, and swimmeth prone, whereas he walks
erect. Likewise to support and advance the Body, is a point of Art, and such,
that some in their young and docile years could never attain; though it has
somewhat more of Nature than other Arts, for being once obtained, there is not
any who from disuse did ever yet forget it.

Secondly, That Persons drowned, arise and float the ninth day, when their Gall
breaks, is questionable both in the Time and Cause. For the time of Floating
is uncertain, and according to the time of Putrefaction; which is soonest in
fat Bodies, and not to be imputed to the breaking of the Gall; of which
Experiment has informed us.

CHAP. VII. Concerning Weight.
THAT Men weigh heavier dead than alive, if Experiment has not failed us, we
(...) reasonably grant. A Man will weigh lighter when he sleeps, than when he
waketh; as also he is by many pounds lighter by Transpiration, in Summer, than
in Winter. Likewise we have convicted that Opinio^^ by Experiment, of Men being
lighter after Meals than before; but a Man in the Morning is lighter in the
Scale, because in Sleep some pounds have perspired.

And to speak strictly, a Man that holds his Breath, is weightier while his
Lungs are full, than upon Expiration.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Passages of Meat and Drink.
THAT there are different Passages for Meat and Drink, is a popular Tenent in
our days, and the Assertion of learned Men of old: For the same was affirmed by
Plato, Eustathius, and Eratosthenes, and several others. But here they
contradict Experience, not well understanding Anatomy; for it is an Error to
think, that Drink should descend by the Weason, it being only inservient to the
Voice and Respiration.

Besides we have an Epiglottis, or Flap, on the opening of the Larinx, or
Throttle, which opens for the admission of Air, but always closes when we
swallow; and when either Meat or Drink get in thereat, it occasioneth a Cough,
until it be ejected: and this is the Reason why a Man cannot breath and drink
at the same time.

CHAP. IX. Of Sneezing.
THE Custom of blessing People upon their Sneezing, is generally believed to
have its Original from a Disease, wherein such as sneezed died: But though it
has been much used both amongst the Graecians and Romans, yet is it no
Argument that this was the first Rise of it.

Now the Reason of this might be, because Sternutation is taken as a very good
sign: For Sneezing being properly a motion of the Brain, suddenly expelling
through the Nostrils what is offensive unto it, it cannot but afford some
evidence of its Vigor; and therefore, says Aristotle, Those that hear it,
honor it, as a sign of Sanity in the diviner Part. And this he illustrates
from the Practice of Physicians, who in Persons near their Death, do use such
Medicines as provoke unto Sneezing; and if that Faculty awaketh, they conceive
hopes of Life, and with Gratulation receive the signs of Safety.

CHAP. X. Of the Jews.
THAT the Jews stink naturally, that is, that in their Race and Nation there is
an evil Savor, is a received Opinion we know not how to admit: Though we will
acknowledge, that certain Odours attend on Animals, no less than certain
Colors and pleasant Smells are found in diverse Animals; and in some more
richly than in Plants, as the Parde, the Civet-cat, Gazela, and many sorts of
Monkeys.

Upon the Consult of Reason, there will be found no easy assurance to fasten a
material or temperamental Propriety upon any Nation; much more will it be
difficult to make out this Assertion in the Jews, whose Race however pretended
to be pure, must needs have suffered inseparated Commixtures with Nations of
all sorts.

But should we concede, there were such a National Unsavouriness in any People,
yet should we find the Jews less subject hereto than any; for they observe a
spare and simple Diet, whereby they prevent the generation of Crudities, which
should be the chief Cause of it.

Likewise they avoid all Copulation, either in the Uncleanness of themselves,
or Impurity of their Women; which not so much being observed amongst us, many
times causes the Offspring to be weak and sickly: From which likewise learned
Men derive the Cause of Pox and Meazles.

Lastly, It is not in the least observable by those that traffic with them, or
have been amongst great Assemblies of them.

CHAP. XI. Of Pigmies.
THAT there is a dwarfish sort of People, called Pigmies, whose Stature is
comprehended in one Cubit, or as some will have it, two Foot, or three Spans,
not singly, but nationally considering them; though hereof Affirmations be
many, and Testimonies frequent; yet that there ever was such a Race or Nation,
upon exact and confirmed Testimonies, o^^ strictest Enquiry receives no
satisfaction.

For though many learned Men speak hereof, yet were they (...) Relators, and
the primitive Author (...) Homer, who made this, ^ Fancies, for Similies to
delight the Ear.

Again, Many professed Enquirers have rejected it, as Strabo, Julius Scaliger,
Eustathius, and several others: All which conclude the Story fabulous, and a
poetical Account of Homer.

The End of the Fourth Book.
The Fifth Book. Of many things questionable, as they are commonly described in
Pictures.
CHAP. I. Of the Picture of the Pelican.
THE Pelican is in every place pictured, opening her Breast with her Bill, and
feeding her young ones with Blood distilled from her; as likewise it is set
forth in the Crest and Escutcheon of many noble Families.

Notwithstanding upon Enquiry we find no mention hereof in ancient
Zodiographers, and such as have particularly discoursed upon Animals, as
Aristotle, Aelian, Pliny, Solinus, and many more, who never leave out
Proprieties of such a nature.

They also much differ in the Picture, by an erroneous Representation; for in
its proper Color it is inclining to white; about the bigness of a Swan, with a
A description of a Pelican.
long flat Bill, palmipedous like a Swan; lastly, it has under its Bill, a
Chowl, or Bag, of Capacity almost beyond credit, wherein it receives Oysters,
Cockles, Scollops, and other testaceous Animals; which being not able to break,
it retains until they open, and vomiting them up, takes out the Meat contained.

CHAP. II. Of the Picture of Dolphins.
THAT they are crooked, is a common conceived Tenent, to be their natural and
proper Figure.

But to speak strictly: In their natural Figure they are straight, as Scaliger
plainly affirms, and ocular Enquiry informs.

CHAP. III. Of the Picture of the Serpent tempting Eve.
HErein the Serpent is often described with humane Visage, as it is delivered
by Beda, and others: But nevertheless it is a Conceit not to be admitted, and
the plain and received Figure is that, which better Reason embraced.

And whereas it is thought, she would be amazed to hear a Serpent speak; some
conceive, she might not yet be certain, that only Man was privileged with
Speech.

CHAP. IV.
ANother Mistake there might be, in the delineating our first Parents; as their
Posterity with Navels: Which is observed in many old Draughts; which cannot be
allowed, except the Creator affected Superfluities, or ordained Parts without
Use or Office.

For the use of the Navel is, to continue the Infant unto the Mother, and by
the Vessels thereof, to convey its Aliment and Sustention, which after Birth,
the Midwife cutteth off, from whence ensues that complicated Nodosity we
usually call the Navel: So that it cannot be well imagined, at the Creation of
Adam, who immediately issued from the Artifice of God.

CHAP. V. Of the Pictures of Eastern Nations, and the Jews at their Feasts,
especially our Savior at the Passover.
COncerning the Pictures of the Jews, and Eastern Nations, at their Feasts;
concerning the Gesture of our Savior at the Passover, who is usually described
sitting upon a Stool or Bench, at a square Table, in the midst of the Twelve,
may make great doubt; (and though they concede a Table Gesture) will hardly
allow this usual way of Session.

It is very certain, that many Nations used the way of Accubation at Meals; as
the Persians, and Parthians, with several others; and likewise formerly the
Romans.

As for their Gesture or Position: The The ancient Position of the Body at
Feasts.
Men lay down, leaning on their left Elbow, their Back being advanced by some
Pillow; the second lay so, with his Back toward the first, that his Head
attained about his Bosom; and the rest in the same order. For Women, they sat
sometimes distinctly with their Sex, sometimes promiscuously with the Men,
according to Affection or Favor, as is delivered by Juvenal, -- Gremio jacuit
nova nupta mariti.



That this Discumbency at Meals was in use in the days of our Savior, is
probable from several Speeches of his expressed in that phrase, as Luke 14. Cum
invitatus fueris ad huptias, non discumbas in primo loco; and beside many more.

The End of the Fifth Book.
The Sixth Book. Of sundry common Opinions, Cosmographical and Historical.
CHAP. I. Concerning the beginning of the World, that the time thereof is not
precisely to be known, as men generally suppose.
COncerning the World, and its temporal Circumscriptions, who ever shall
strictly examine both Extremes, will easily perceive, there is not only
Obscurity in its end, but its beginning; that as its Period is inscrutable, so
is its Nativity indeterminable.

For first: The Histories of the Gentiles afford us slender Satisfaction; for
some thereof (and those the wisest amongst them) are so far from determining
its beginning, that they opine and maintain it never had any at all, as
Epicurus and Aristotle declare.

Thus the Heathens afford us no satisfaction herein; for the Account of their
ancientest Records, arise no higher than 95 years after the Flood.

Now what is delivered in holy Scripture, is most likely to manifest the truth;
and what is set down in the sacred Chronology of Moses, who distinctly sets
down this Account. But amongst the Christians, this Account has received many
Interpretations, and many have differed much herein: But that which agrees to
most learned Men, and most inquisitive herein is; wherein ours was 1645, it is
from the year of the World, 7154; which Account they reckon by at
Constantinople, and by the Muscovite, and many more. Thus seeing the wide
Dissent of men's Opinions; the Hebrews not only dissenting from the Samaritans,
the Latins from the Greeks, but every one from another: Insomuch that all can
be in the right, it is impossible; that any one is so, not with assurance
determinable.

The End of the Sixth Book.
The Seventh Book. Concerning many Historical Tenants, generally received, and
some deduced from the History of holy Scripture.
CHAP. I. Of the forbidden Fruit.
THAT the forbidden Fruit of Paradise was an Apple, is commonly believed and
confirmed by Tradition; and some from thence have derived the Latin word Malum,
because that Fruit was the first occasion of Evil; wherein notwithstanding
Determinations are presumptuous, and many are of another belief; for some have
conceived it a Vine, others a Fig. Again, Some Fruits pass under the Name of
Adam's Apples, which in common acceptance admit not that Appellation;
described by Mathiolus to be a very fair Fruit, and not unlike a Citron, but
somewhat rougher, chopped and cranied, vulgarly conceived the Marks of Adam's
Teeth. But yet we cannot from hence infer, they were this Fruit in question; no
more than Arbor Vitae, so called, to obtain its Name from the Tree of Life in
Paradise, or Arbor Judae, to be the fame which supplied the Gibbet unto Judas.

Again, There is no Determination in the Text; wherein is only particularized,
that it was the Fruit of a Tree good for Food, and pleasant unto the Eye, in
which regards, many excel the Apple; and therefore learned Men do wisely
conceive it inexplicable; and Philo puts Determination unto Despair, when he
affirms, the same kind of Fruit was never produced since.

Now the Ground or Reason that occasioned this expression by an Apple, might be
the Community of this Fruit, and which is often taken for any other: And to
speak strictly, in this Appellation, they placed it more safely than any other;
for beside the great variety of Apples, the word in Greek comprehends
Oranges, Lemmons, Citrons, Quinces; and as Ruellius defines, (...) Fruits as
have no Stone within, and a soft Covering without.

Since therefore after this Fruit, Curiosity (...) enquireth, we shall surcease
our Inquisition; rather troubled that it was tasted, than troubling our selves
in its Decision. Here many likewise strive to (...) the species of the Serpent
that deceived, but to the same purpose.

CHAP. II. That a Man has one Rib less than a Woman.
THAT a Man has one Rib less than a Woman, is a common Conceit, derived from
Genesis, wherein it stands delivered, that Eve was framed out of the Rib of
Adam.

But this will not consist with Reason or Inspection; for if we survey the
Skeleton of both Sexes, and therein the Compage of Bones, we shall readily
discover, that Men and Women have 24 Ribs, that is, 12 on each side, 7 greater
annexed unto the Sternon, and (...) lesser, which come short thereof.

CHAP. III. Of the Death of Aristotle.
THAT Aristotle drowned himself in Euripus, as despairing to resolve the cause
of its Reciprocation, or Ebb and Flow 7 times a day, with this Determination,
Si quidem ego non capio te, tu capies me, was the Assertion of learned Authors,
and is generally believed among us. Now an Euripus is any Strait, Fret, or
Channel of the Sea, running between two Shores.

But to pass this over: Diogenes Laertius tells us, That being accused of
Impiety, he withdrew into Chalcis, where drinking Poison, he died: And
Apollodorus, That he died there of a natural Death, in his 63d.or great
Climacterical year.

It is likewise false what is said of this Euripus, of its Ebb and Flow 7 times
a day; for as we have it from very good Evidence, it ebbeth and flows by 6
hours; as it does at Venice.

Primus sapientiae gradus est, falsa intelligere.

AN ABRIDGMENT OF HONOR.
Privileges due to Gentility.
FROM the word Gentil-homme, or Gentleman unde.
Gentil-hombre, (which we received from the French, for till the Normans we had
it not) we made out this word Gentleman, which was before called Aedel.

But this word Generosus has been in use Generosus.
amongst us but since the Time of Henry the Eighth, since when it has been
constantly used for a Gentleman, of what sort soever, if he had no Title above
it.

Some of the Privileges to Gentlemen are these:

1. In Crimes of equal Constitution, His Punishment.
(provided not capital) a Gentleman shall be punished with more favor than a
common Person.

2. In giving Evidence he has much Evidence.
the precedence; as also in Elections by Vote.

3. The Clow^^ may not challenge a Combat.
Gentleman to Combat, quia condition impares.

Many others there he, but it would be too tedious to insert them; I refer the
(...) Sir John Fern, his Glory of Generosi^^.

To the making of which Gentleman A complete Gentleman.
perfect, in his Blood, was required, a lineal descent of the part of his
Fathers side, from Atavus, Abavus, Proavus, Avus, and Pater: And as much on the
Mothers Line; then he is not only a Gentleman of Blood perfect, but of
Ancestors too.

Of the Esquire.
THE division of these Dignities of Honor, Titles of Honor.
by the addition of a Knight-Baronet, is into 13 parts. The first 5 only Noble,
as the Gentleman, Esquire, Knight-Batchelor, Knight-Banneret, and
Knight-Baronet. The other 8 Princely, and are allowed Coronets, as the Baron,
Viscount, Earl, Marquess, Duke, Prince, King, and Emperor.

The Esquire, or Escuyer, (...) called in (...) The Esquire.
Armiger, but more anciently Scaliger, (...) the Office of bearing a Shield, as
(...) upon a Knight, and were ( (...) ordinis) Candidati in the Field.

Of these there are 4 sorts: By (...), by Birth, by Dignity, and by Office.

The Esquire by Creation, are the Heralds By Creation.
and Sergeants at Arms, and are sometimes made by Patent: The King gives them a
silver Spur, from whence they are called White-spurs.

His paternal Coat is also bettered, and the eldest Son of that Coat Armor is
ever an Esquire.

Esquires by Birth are the younger Sons By Birth.
of the Nobility, as of Earls, Viscounts, and Barons; and the eldest Sons of
Knights, their eldest Sons successively.

Those by Office are the Sergeants at By Office.
Law, Sheriffs, Escheators, the Sergeant of every Office in the Court; but
these Dignities die with themselves and their Offices.

Of Knighthood in general, and of the Knight-Batchelor.
OF the Distinctions by Knighthood, Distinctions of Knights.
there are many in other Parts of the World, but in England only these,
Knights-Batchelors, Knights of the Bath, Knights-Bannerets, Knights-Baronets,
and Knights of the Garter.

This Titl^^ coming to be a Reward (...) Degree of Honor, is thought to be in
imitation of the Equestris Order in Rome, to which men were only advanced for
extraordinary Virtue, and notable Merit, who only were admitted to beautify
the Caparisons of their Horses and their Armor with Gold; from whence they
were called Equites aurati.

The usual Ceremony of late in Dubbing The Ceremony in Dubbing.
a Knight, is a stroke over the Shoulder with a Sword, with these words, Sois
Chivaler (...) nom de Dieu; by the King, or some by his Commission; though the
Spur has lately been observed also.

Landfrank, Archbishop of Canterbury, made William the 2d. a Knight in his
Fathers Time; but the Name of Bachelor Knight Batchelors when first.
added to it, seems not to have been till the 33d. of Henry the 3d.

Of the Knight of the Bath.
IT is ever to be observed, that when the word Knight is found without any
addition of Distinction, it is meant by the Knight-Batchelor. Of the Order of
the Bath, the first that are taken notice of, is in Froissart, who gives an
account of 46 When first.
made by Henry the 4th. but Mr. Seldom is of an opinion they were long before.

The Honor is invested with a great deal of noble Ceremony, too tedious to
insert.

They are distinguished ordinarily by the Their Distinction.
(...) of a red Ribbon cross the left (...), as Knights of the Garter by the
(...); and have this Privilege above all (...), their Sons are free from
Wardship.

Of Bannerets.
THIS was anciently an Order in France, Manner of the Creation.
and (except that in England, they are not created by Patent, nor the Title
hereditary) the same: The Creation is almost the same with theirs, by the
solemn delivery of a Banner, charged with the Arms of (...) that is to be
created, and cutting off the end of a Pennon or Streamer, to make it square
into the shape of a Banner, are called by some, Equites vexilliarii.

This Knight is only made (by the King By whom.
if present, otherwise by the General) only for his Deserts in the Field.

This Order was of so great estimation, that diverse Knights-Batchelors and
Esquires served under them; and by Decree of King James it is established, That
such as were made, the King being personally present, under his Standard,
displayed in an Army Royal, in open War, should take place before all Baronets.

Of Baronets.
THE Title of Baronet was erected by When first.
King James, in the 9th. year of his Reign. He made diverse on the 22d. day of
May, the Proem or Argument being for to what end.
the propagating a Plantation in Ulster in Ireland, to which the Aid of these
Knights was ordained, which was the Maintenance of 30 Soldiers in that
Province for three years. Their Titles were to descend to the Heirs male of
their Body, and to take place before all Knights-Batchelors, Knights of the
Bath, and Knights Bannerets; and that the Name of Baronet in all Writs,
Commissions, and Styles, should be added to his Surname; and that the addition
of Sir: should precede in all mentionings of his Name, (as the Title of Lady or
Madam to the Wives of them) and their Successors; and that they should take
place according to the date of their Patents inter se, and so to their
Successors. They are created by Patent.

Of Barons.
THIS word Baron is most properly derived Whence.
from the word Baria in Greek, which signifies Authoritas gravis.

This Honor of Baronage is of three The several kinds.
kinds: By Tenure, by Creation, and by Writ.

Those by Tenure, are Peers of the Land, By Tenure.
and are the Barons spiritual.

Those by Writ, are such as the King is By Writ.
pleased to summons to Parliament, though but Gentlemen or Knights, and is by
some esteemed only temporary, pro termino (...); but this cannot be, by reason
of the great Ceremony at their Creation. The Title is also allowed to be
hereditary.

Since these two sorts of Barons in the Time of Richard the 2d. has another
been established, which is Barons by Patent, and By Patent.
indeed more usual in our later Times than those by Writ.

Thus in case there want Heirs male, it many times descends to the Heirs
female, though not to her Husband, but to their Issue.

This Dignity, though the youngest, has Privilege.
also the Privileges belonging to all the Lords of th^^ Parliament. As first,
in all Trials of criminal Causes, he is tried by the Bench of Peers, who all
give Verdict not upon the^^ Oaths, but upon their Honor; with a great many
more Privileges.

But note that Marquesses and Earls Sons, their Fathers living, have not these
Privileges.

A Baron must go after the Ancientry of His (...).
his Ancestors Creation, and the Baroness his Wife must go after the same.

A Barons eldest Son shall have the Place of the Banneret, their younger Sons
precede Knights-Batchelors, and their Daughters go according to their Fathers
Creation.

The form of their Creation is too tedious.

Of a Bishop.
THEY are with us three ways Barons of the Realm: By Writ, by Patent, and by
Consecration. They precede all under the degree of Viscount in the Parliament
House, always placed on the King's right Hand.

They cannot be indicted for any Crime, without special license from the King;
they have likewise very many Privileges.

The Viscount.
THE word in Latin is Vice-comes, and it is a degree between an Earl and Baron.

The Count or Earl.
HE is the same that in Germany they call Grave, as Palsgrave, Landgrave, etc.

The Dignity is of diverse kinds, for an Earl acknowledging no Superior, is
equal to a Prince.

The Marquess.
THIS word Marquess at first was used Whence first.
to all Earls and Barons, that were Lords Marchers, or Lords of the Frontiers,
and came afterward into a special Dignity, between that of Duke and Earl: The
Ceremony of Creation much the same with that of an Earl, and the Title
Hereditary.

Of the Duke.
(...) is said to be called Duke, a ducendo, Whence so called.
from his leading an Army (...) There is not any Creation required (...) this
Honor; and note, that in all (...) degrees of Honor, where a lesser degree is
conferred on a Person of a (...), there needs nothing but mere Patent, without
any Ceremony of Creation.

Of the Archbishop.
HE is so highly honored, that he is made the first Peer of the Realm, next to
the Royal Family, and precedes all Dukes not of the Blood.

The Coronation of the King belongs to His Prerogative.
him. He has the Prerogative to consecrate all Bishops; and besides these
great Privileges, has very many more.

The Archbishop of York takes place next him, and has many of the same
Privileges. He has the Privilege of crowning the Queen; and he is styled
Primate of England, as the other is styled Primate of all England.

The Prince.
THE next, and first, immediately subordinate to the Crown, amongst these
radiant Stars is, The Prince; though in England only is the Prince of Wales,
the first born of the King.

And unless he were King, it is unpossible HisPriviledges
he should enjoy more Privileges; for it is High Treason to imagine the Death
of his Person, as also to v^^olate his Wife.

He does only acknowledge a Reverence, His Motto.
not only as to a Father, but Sovereign; and to that purpose continues that
Motto, which the Black Prince took up, (Ick dien) I serve.

The first that we read of in England, The first in England.
was Edward, eldest Son to Henry the 3d. and after him, the eldest Son of the
King has been ever by Patent, and Ceremonies of Instalment, created Prince of
Wales, Earl of Chester, and Flint, being born Duke of Cornwall.

Of these Titles, the Duke, Marquess, Princely Titles.
and Earl, are esteemed Princely, especially the two last. These also are
allowed to hear their Crests with Helmets, the Bever directly forward; whereas
a Gentleman, Knight, and Baron, bear them with half the Bever seen.

The King.
THE King is the next, and in our Nations the highest, being subordinate to no
sublunary Power, as those of Spain, Portugal, and other Kingdoms of Europe, and
other Parts of the World are. He is the true Fountain, from whence all these
Rivulets and swelling Streams of Honor spring,

He is God's Vicegerent, and to be obeyed accordingly, both in Church and
State; good, he is a Blessing; if bad, a (...).

The Ceremonies at his Coronation are Ceremonies at his Coronation.
any, and in England more than any other ountreys; as the anointing with Oil,
(...) sacred Consecration, and his Crown (...) on his Head with many religious
(...): Besides the Ensigns of Regality, (...) are, A Ring, to signify his
(...); a Bracelet, for good Works; a (...), for Justice; a Sword, for (...);
purple Robes, to attract Reverence; and a Diadem triumphant, to blazon his
Glory.

Of Women.
ALthough Women are not allowed to sit in Parliament, yet do they enjoy (...)
all the Privileges due to the other Sex.

The Honorable feminine Dignities are, Dignities.
Princess, Duchess, Marchioness, Countess, Vicountess, and Baroness; which are
either by Creation, by Descent, or by Marriage.

By Creation, it is very rare, though we By Creation.
have had several Examples of it.

By Descent, we have continual Examples: By Descent.
When any Daughter of an Earl or Vicount shall continue a Virgin, or marry an
Esquire, she shall retain that Honor that springs from her Father's Blood,
take Place accordingly, and be saluted by the Title of Lady.

The Heirs females of any Count or ^^icount, shall enjoy both the Estate
divided and Titles too, if they be to be divided and they shall be enjoyed by
their Husbands, if they marry, in the right of their Wives.

A Woman who received Honor by a By Marriage.
former Husband, if she then marry an ignoble Person, her Honors are (...),
And thus much of Honor.

Precedence amongst the Peers of England.
IT is to be observed, That (after the Kings, and Princes of the Blood, viz.
the Sons, Grandsons, Brothers, Uncles, or Nephews of the King, and no farther
Dukes amongst the Nobility, have the firs Place; then Marquesses, Dukes eldest
Sons, Earls, Marquesses eldest Sons, Dukes younger Sons, Vicounts, Earls eldest
Sons, Marquesses younger Sons, Barons, Vicounts eldest Sons, Earls younger
Sons, Barons eldest Sons, Vicounts younger Sons, Barons younger Sons; the
younger Sons of Vicounts and Barons shall yield precedence to all Bannerets,
and Knights of the Garter, quatenus tales, etc.

FINIS.

